TMC worker shot dead in West Bengal, party calls 12-hour bandh

Local TMC leader Dilip Ram was shot dead on the railway tracks at Bandel station in Hooghly district, West Bengal. (Photo: ANI)

A local Trinamool Congress leader was shot dead on the railway tracks at Bandel station in Hooghly district, West Bengal. The ruling TMC blamed BJP-backed miscreants for the incident and asked locals to observe a 12-hour bandh in protest.

The party has called a 12-hour shutdown in Chinsurah on Sunday to protest against the incident, reported news agency PTI.

TMC leader Dilip Ram, 40, was rushed to a nearby hospital from where he was referred to a hospital in Kolkata, which was about 45 kilometres away. He died on the way, said Akhilesh Chaturvedi, Commission of Chandernagore Police.

The officer said Ram, who was a railway employee, was shot while he was on his way to catch a train to Naihati station to reach office.

A case of murder has been lodged and investigations are being conducted to track the culprits.

West Bengal: Dilip Ram, a local TMC leader & husband of a Gram Panchayat Pradhan in the dist, was found with bullet injuries at Hooghly''s Bandel junction railway station today. He later died while being taken to a hospital in Kolkata. TMC alleges that BJP is behind the incident. pic.twitter.com/zLawXxccia ANI (@ANI) June 29, 2019

While TMC has blamed BJP for the murder of the party worker, Hooghly BJP MP Locket Chatterjee and the party's Bengal president Dilip Ghosh rubbished the claims. They also said that "cut-money" and faction fight in TMC were the reasons behind the killing.

Chinsurah TMC MLA Asit Mazumdar said Dilip Ram and wife Ritu were the main organisers for the TMC.

He also mentioned that Ram had received a number of threat calls since May 23-the day when the results of the Lok Sabha polls were announced.

"The BJP which has won the Hooghly Lok Sabha seat is trying to create a Bhatpara-like situation here. It is often threatening and driving out our party leaders. We had informed the Chandernagore Police commissioner and Chinsurah inspector-in-charge several times but no action was taken," Mazumdar alleged.

The situation in Bengal over the past month has been tense over repeated clashed between local BJP and TMC workers. Bhatpara, a TMC citadel for long and home to migrant jute factory labourers, has been witnessing frequent incidents of violence between the two parties.

The fight has intensified ever since Arjun Singh crossed over from TMC to BJP and won the Barrackpore Lok Sabha seat, under which Bhatpara falls. Two persons have also been killed there.

(With inputs from PTI)
