Why the pleas for justice made by Yasin Malik’s wife deserve no sympathy

30 years on, martyred IAF officials to get justice as trial against Yasin Malik is set to begin

Name of IAF officer who was killed by Yasin Malik to be added to War Memorial

IAF hero gets justice: Why it is time up for Yasin Malik

First Yasin Malik, now Javed Mir: Our martyred IAF heroes are getting justice at last

Why the pleas for justice made by Yasin Malik’s wife deserve no sympathy

India

oi-Vicky Nanjappa

New Delhi, July 01: Over the past one week, the wife of Yasin Malik has made several pleas on her social media accounts regarding the safety of her husband.

"My Husband is in Tihar Jail without any counsel access, not allowed to meet family, very weak health, chronic heart patient, kidney patient, blood clots in the eye, he went on hunger strike against the torturous attitude of Indian investigating agencies," she said.

"I demand that his passport should be given him back so as he could go abroad for the best medical treatment as his life at very high risk, as he is being treated worse than a terrorist," she said in another tweet.

Malik has without a doubt been one of the notorious players in Kashmir. His cases date back to several decades back and over the years, he has successfully dodged the law until recently.

Yasin Malik admits to collecting funds and causing economic shutdown at Kashmir

The cases against him are not ordinary. They range from acts of terror, causing unrest. In fact a 30 year old case, in which he was accused of killing Indian Air Force Officials was also re-opened.

My Husband is in #TiharJail without any counsel access, not allowed to meet family, very weak health, chronic heart patient, kidney patient, blood clots in the eye, he went on hunger strike against the torturous attitude of Indian investigating agencies. #FreeYasinMalik #Kashmir — Mushaal Hussein Mullick (@MushaalMullick) June 27, 2019

His name has cropped up in terror funding cases since 1995. Moreover he is also an accused in the abduction of Mehbooba Mufti's sister.

Malik, whose organisation JKLF was banned a couple of months back by the Centre, is also facing two CBI cases. These relate to the kidnapping of Rubaiya Saeed, daughter of then Union home minister Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, in 1989, and the killing of four IAF personnel in 1990.

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) registered a case on May 30, 2017 against separatist and secessionist leaders, including unknown members of the Hurriyat Conference, who have been acting in connivance with active militants of proscribed terrorist organisations Hizbul Mujahideen, Dukhtaran-e-Millat, Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and other outfits and gangs.

Indian authorities are scared of the rising popularity of Yasin Malik that is why he has been put behind bars & his party has been banned. #FreeYasin #Kashmir pic.twitter.com/EDmSOl22Nd — Mushaal Hussein Mullick (@MushaalMullick) June 24, 2019

The case was registered for raising, receiving and collecting funds through various illegal means, including hawala transactions, for funding separatist and terrorist activities in J&K and for causing disruption in the Valley by way of pelting stones on the security forces, burning schools, damaging public property and waging war against India, the probe agency said in the FIR.

Hafiz Saeed, the Pakistan-based chief of the Jamaat-ud-Dawa, the front for the banned LeT, has also been named as an accused in the FIR.

Yasin Malik and ten others were chargesheeted by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) under the Terrorist and Disruptive Act. The CBI named Yasin Malik as the main accused in both these cases.

Yasin Malik set to face trial for killing IAF personnel, abduction of Rubiya Sayeed

The CBI moved the J&K high court seeking vacation of the stay and also shifting of the proceedings to Jammu. In 2009, the Srinagar bench had granted an interim stay of the trial before the special anti-terror court.

The HC held that the Srinagar bench had no jurisdiction to decide a case that is being tried in a Jammu special court. Justice Gita Mittal further held that the petitions filed by Malik and others at the Srinagar wing could not have been taken up for consideration.

The JKLF is also responsible for illegal funnelling of funds for fomenting terrorism. The JKLF is actively involved in raising of funds and its distribution to Hurriyat cadres and stone-pelters to fuel unrest in Kashmir Valley as well as for subversive activities.

A total of 37 FIRs have been registered by the J&K Police against JKLF and two cases, including that of murder of IAF personnel, were registered by the CBI.

The organisation was also involved in the kidnapping and killing of Ravindra Mhatre, an Indian diplomat posted the UK, in 1984. A week later, India executed Maqbool Bhat, a JKLF activist, who had been sentenced to death.
