100 yrs old Durga Mata Mandir in Delhi’s Chandni Chowk vandalised by Jihadi Muslim mob.

100 yrs old Durga Mata Mandir in Delhi’s Chandni Chowk vandalised by Jihadi Muslim mob.

Jihadi Mob Vandalises 100 Yrs Old Temple In Delhi’s Chandni Chowk While Shouting‘Naara E Takbeer – Allah Ho Akbar’….

Not in Pakistan, Shiv, Durga, Ram, Ganesh, Saraswati Deities vandalised in Delhi’s Durga Mata Temple complex (Lal Kuan-Chwari Bazar area in Old Delhi) one by one. Minority Hindus under Islamic attack in Delhi. Is Indian Capital is under the grip of Jihadis?

Sumedha Singh | HENB | New Delhi | July 1, 2019:: A temple in Chandni Chowk in Central/Old Delhi was allegedly vandalised by a fanatic mob last night. According to reports being posted on social media by locals, the Durga Mata Mandir in Lal Kuan-Chawri Bazar locality in Hauz Qazi area became the target of vandalism by a Muslim mob of 300-400 people on the night of June 30, 2019.

According to locals who posted videos of the temple on social media, at around 12 am, the Durga Mandir was attacked by 300-400 fanatic people belonging to the Muslim community. Along with the temple, the houses belonging to Hindus in the neighbourhood were also targeted by the Jihadi mob, the locals alleged.

A video shared by ruling AAP (Aam Admi Party) MLA in Delhi, Kapil Mishra shows youths storming into the temple with Islamic slogans like “Naaray E Takbeer – Allah Ho Akbar’, and also surrounding the Hauz Qazi police station in the area. Mishra tweeted that before the incident, a rumour was spread that a Muslim boy was lynched by a mob, forcing him to say Jai Shree Ram. But the whole incident happen out of a dispute involving car parking between two families.

According to police sources, this was triggered by a skirmish caused by an argument over parking. When the argument over parking in the area became intense, some people started pelting stones. Later in the night a mob entered the temple and vandalised it. The police have confirmed that Muslim youths in the area attacked the temple.

The photos and videos shared on social media show that the statues, fixtures, glass panes etc in the temple were smashed, curtains etc were burnt by the mob. According to locals, the population of Hindus in the area is just around 5%, and the rest 95% are Muslims, who mercilessly smashed the entire temple.

A team of Delhi police, comprising senior officials, arrived soon after they were informed about the incident, and they prevented further damage. The arrival of police also ensured that nobody was harmed in the incident. The police have so far been tight-lipped and we are awaiting a statement regarding the incident.

Many eminent Hindutva personalities took their twitter handle to protest against the Delhi Temple attack by Jihadi mobs near Chandni Chowk.

Prof Hari Om tweeted+ sarcastically: “Dear PM @ narendramodi , HM @ AmitShah , @ drharshvardhan MP from Chandni Chowk is right when he condemns Hindus as anti-social for condemning Muslim invasion on Hindu temple in Delhi’s Chandni Chowk. Please order action against communal Hindus/save secularism # TempleTerrorAttack“

Hindutva interlocutor and Hindu Existence web editor, Upananda Brahmachari tweeted+: Chawri Bazar Durga Mata Temple Complex Vandalized.. Is Central Delhi areas under the Jihadi grip of Paki Mobs?

India TV reports:

100-year-old Chandni Chowk temple vandalise; What we know so far

A brawl that started over bike parking developed into full-fledged communal clash in Delhi’s Chandni Chowk area. Several injuries were reported when a group of men forced their way through a 100 year old Durga temple, completely vandalizing it.

There was stone-pelting which in turn added to chaos and scuffle which resulted in further injuries.

Here’s what happened in Hauz Qazi, Chandni Chowk:

The issue began over space for parking of a bike outside a temple.

Arguments between two individual turned physical when group of men from one side bashed up the other.

This group then went on to vandalise the temple around 10:00 PM on Sunday.

The locals who saw their temple vandalised protested against this and called for strong action against those responsible.

The protest carried on till the Monday morning.

A group of people from another community gathered and started pelting stones at the protesters.

This was the moment when the protesters also turned violent and there was a scuffle between the two groups where several people where injured.

The police has since tried to maintain calm in the area by increasing the security.

The investigation into what happened is on-going and will soon see the culprits punished.

A source conveyed that the police intervened in time. Otherwise, the nearby Muslims provoked by different Mosques near and far areas were planning to attack the Hindus in different areas of Delhi on that night of Jihadi action.

Police are looking into the matter and have tightened security in the area to ensure no untoward incident happens.

Hindus in the related areas of disturbance are only 5% and Muslims are 95%, as reports came in.

MUST SEE THIS UPDATES IN ORGANISER (RSS MOUTH PIECE):: Major twist in Chandni Chowk temple vandalism case: Muslim mob abducts 17-year-old Hindu boy from the spot after desecrating idols and attacking Hindu households!+

Hindu Existence appeals to all people in the area to maintain peace & order and cooperate with the law enforcement agencies.

__Agencies/ OppIndia/ Twitter/ Mind Game/
