BMC drive to prevent monsoon diseases

Bhubaneswar: The Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation ( BMC ) has geared up to counter possible outbreak of dengue, diarrhoea and malaria during the monsoon. Massive cleanliness drive will be taken up in all 67 wards every Saturday and Sunday.The decision was taken at the city-level convergence meeting with officials of National Urban Health Mission (NUHM). BMC commissioner Prem Chand Choudhury has directed officials to spread awareness among people and take preventive steps.BMC deputy commissioner (sanitation) Srimanta Mishra said the first phase awareness drive is over. It was carried out by Accredited Social Health Activists (Asha), anganwadi workers, public health managers and sanitary inspectors. “The commissioner has directed Asha and anganwadi workers to visit every household and educate them on ways to check mosquito breeding and take preventive steps. The people will also be sensitized on how to wash their hands. The health workers will demonstrate it in different wards,” added Mishra.In 2018, Odisha recorded 5,198 dengue positive cases with five deaths. The capital city alone recorded close to 1,000 cases. Given the rise in positive cases last year, the BMC had issued strict instruction to sanitary workers to oversee littering of coconut waste that contains stagnant water and abandoned tyres.BMC sources said there will be daily surveillance at the community level to detect early signs of fever and diarhhoea. This will be done by Asha. Besides, they have been asked to distribute packets of oral rehydration to the households to contain diarrhoea. “We have planned to put up hoardings and display boards at strategic locations to reach out to the masses. The banners will contain the dos and don’ts,” an officer said.The BMC commissioner has instructed officers in the education department to sensitize schoolchildren on malaria, dengue and diarrhoea every day. Besides, sanitary workers have been asked to prune and cut bushes, clear tyres with stagnant water and coconut piles. With the help of health workers, they will take sample of stagnant water to see whether they contain larva of the Aedes mosquito.The BMC has also decided to use a new chemical spray called “pyrethrum” to kill mosquot larva. Earlier, the anti-malaria cell had been recommending Temephous, a less effective chemical that is available at several places, including private outlets.
