JD(S) workers protest Vishwanath’s resignation, accuse him betraying party and people

MYSURU: The ramifications of the en masse resignation of 13 MLAs of the ruling coalition government in Karnataka – 11 of the legislators resigned on Saturday – have been manifold. The sudden decision of as many legislators to part ways with the ruling dispensation in Karnataka disrupted many personal plans, besides upending political equations in the state and beyond. Locally, however, reactions to their resignation have been varied, and anything but uniform. While workers of some of the Congress and JD(S) legislators who have resigned from the government have supported the decision of their leaders, activists have launched a no-holds barred attack on a few others. One of the legislators at the receiving end of the workers’ ire is Hunsur MLA Adagooru H Vishwanath.JD(S) workers at the grassroots are particularly incensed with Vishwanath, who until recently was the Karnataka president of the JD(S) – he had been associated with the Congress for decades before joining the JD(S) around two years ago. Anger against the senior leader spilled over to the streets with the activists holding a demonstration on Sunday to express their disappointment. Charging Vishwanath with betraying the trust reposed in him by both the JD(S) party and the people. More than 50 members of the JD(S) Hunsur unit held a protest in front of the party’s office in the taluk. Yogananda and Satish Kumar, both of whom have served as president of the Hunsur City Municipal Council, were among those who participated in the agitation. Besides condemning the leader for abandoning the party that helped him at a critical juncture in his career, the protesters hurled insults at Vishwanath.The protesters said that they were particularly hurt by Vishwanath’s failure to consult them before tendering his resignation. “We worked tirelessly to ensure his victory in Hunsur. He was in need of our services during the election, but forgot to consult us before deciding to resign as an MLA,” they said.The JD(S) activists said that they would not allow Vishwanath to enter Hunsur taluk again. “He can go wherever his heart desires. We will pray to God to keep him in good health. He is free to make money by supporting the party of his choice. His claims of being a leader of the backward communities have fallen flat, and he has been shown to be someone who is more interested in making money. He is like a Russell’s Viper snake,” the protesters said.Suspense looms over GTD’s next course of actionMinister for higher education GT Devegowda, who found himself drawn into a debate with former chief minister and senior Congress leader Siddaramaiah, in the wake of his remarks wherein he praised Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah, is another legislator, whose actions are being closely watched. His perceived proximity to the BJP has set the rumourmill churning, and speculations of Devegowda throwing in his lot with the rebel MLAs have been doing the rounds. However, the minister, who left for Tirupati on Saturday, repudiated reports of leaving the JD(S), adding that he would head directly to Bengaluru from the hill shrine on Monday, and hold a discussion with the party top brass.Vishwanath, now in Mumbai along with the other disgruntled MLAs, however is confident that Devegowda will submit his resignation. “His relationship with tourism minister and JD(S) leader SR Mahesh has soured, and he will leave the government,” Vishwanath said.‘Being in the govt suffocated legislators’BJP’s Mysuru MP Pratap Simha on Sunday attributed the decision of the 13 MLAs to leave the government to the oppressive atmosphere prevailing in their respective parties, which had come together with the sole objective of keeping the BJP out of power. Reiterating the party’s stance of not having a role in the desertion of the MLAs of the ruling coalition, Simha added, “Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and Union home minister Amit Shah have their hands full. Development of the country is foremost on their minds. They should not be blamed for the developments in the state.”Simha also expressed his desire to see BS Yeddyurappa reclaiming the chief minister’s post.
