Karnataka political crisis highlights: ‘Want to go by my conscience,’ says Karnataka Speaker on rebel MLAs

‘It won’t be just if I hurriedly decide on disqualification petition’: KR Ramesh Kumar

On the disqualification petition against Ramesh Jarkiholi and Mahesh Kumathahalli, the Karnataka Assembly Speaker said, “Though resignation and disqualification are similar, in cases of disqualification, they cannot enter the house for the rest of the term of the house. Therefore, if I hurriedly decide on this, I will not do justice. I am in a fix, I want to go by my conscience.”

‘Advise disqualification petitioners to follow the rules’: KR Ramesh Kumar

“In the case of the JD(S) disqualification petition, the rule is clear. A member or the leader of the legislature party has to submit the petition. In this case, the person who filed the petition was none of the above. I have advised them to follow the rules,” said KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘Haven’t granted time to MLAs in regard to disqualification petitions’: KR Ramesh Kumar

“I have sent my response to the Supreme Court . I have granted the MLAs an audience and taken their resignations. I have not yet granted them time in regard to their disqualification petitions. I will do so in due course,” said KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘Some MLAs I had asked to meet did not come’: KR Ramesh Kumar

“I have looked into the disqualification petitions and I have asked them to submit the required documents. I had asked some people to meet me, but unfortunately, they have not done so. ,” said Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘Only 3 days have elapsed since MLAs resigned’: Karnataka Speaker

“Only 3 working days have elapsed since the MLAs resigned but they behave like an earthquake has occurred,” said Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘MLAs said they were threatened, went to Mumbai out of fear’: Karnataka Assembly Speaker

“The Supreme Court has asked me to take a decision. I have videographed everything and I will send it to the court. They told me that some people had threatened them and they went to Mumbai out of fear. But I told them that they should’ve approached me and I would’ve given them protection,” said the Karnataka Assembly Speaker.

‘MLAs submitted resignations in a proper format’: KR Ramesh Kumar

“Yes the MLAs came and they submitted their resignations in a proper format. They asked me if I will accept them but I cannot do that...I have to think about it for a night and take a decision after making sure these resignations are voluntary and genuine,” says KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘MLAs did not communicate with me, rushed to Governor’: KR Ramesh Kumar

“The MLAs did not communicate with me and rushed to the Governor. What could he do? They approached the Supreme Court before they met me,” said KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘Not acting in haste as I love this land’: Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar

“Should I have worked at lightning speed? For whose sake? What about the rules, the people? I only live by the Constitution. I am delaying because I love this land. I am not acting in haste. My obligation is to the people of this state and Constitution of this republic,” said Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘Obliged to see if resignations are voluntary, genuine’: Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar

“I am obliged to look into whether the resignations are voluntary and genuine,” said Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar.

‘Reports saying MLAs approached SC because I ran away false’: Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar

“Some news reports have hurt me. They said the MLAs approached the Supreme Court because I delayed the process. On July 6, I was in my chamber till 1.30 pm. The MLAs came there at 2 pm and didn’t even take prior appointment. So, it’s untrue that I ran away because they were coming,” said Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar.

Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar addresses media

Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar has begun addressing the media at Vidhana Soudha after meeting the rebel MLAs. :ANI

Congress MLA Munirathna also present in Speaker’s chamber

Another Congress MLA, Munirathna, is in the speaker’s chamber. However, he is not one of the rebel MLAs.

Rebel Congress MLA Byrathi Basavaraj runs into Speaker’s office

Rebel Congress MLA Byrathi Basavaraj ran into the Speaker’s office in Vidhana Soudha, Bengaluru. :ANI

#WATCH: Rebel Congress MLA Byrathi Basavaraj runs into the Speaker's office in Vidhana Soudha, Bengaluru. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/L6zrzPqCub — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

‘Party moved disqualification motion against 3 MLAs who resigned’: JD(S) Spokesperson

JD(S) spokesperson Ramesh Babu said that the party has also moved disqualification motion against 3 JD(S) MLAs who resigned. AH Vishwanath, K Gopalaiah and Narayana Gowda resigned last week. “We had given a petition on Wednesday and now we have given documents to support this petition,” Babu said.

Three MLAs were called for meeting by Speaker

Out of the MLAs who have arrived at Vidhana Soudha today, the Speaker had called three for a meeting - Pratapgouda Patil, K Gopalaiah and Narayana Gowda.

Meeting between rebel Karnataka MLAs, Speaker begins

Meeting between the rebel Karnataka MLAs who flew in from Mumbai and Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar has begun at the Speaker’s chamber.

Rebel Karnataka MLAs arrive at Speaker’s chamber

MLAs Ramesh Jarkiholi, ST Somashekhar, BC Patil, Pratapgouda Patil, H Vishwanath, K Gopalaiah, Mahesh Kumathahalli, BA Basavaraj, Shivaram Hebbar and Narayana Gowda have arrived at the Speaker’s chamber.

Speaker to address press conference over Karnataka issue at 7 pm

Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar is going to address a press conference over the Karnataka political issue at 7 pm today.

Other MLAs expected to reach Bengaluru shortly

The other MLAs are expected to reach Bengaluru shortly in a second flight.

6 rebel Karnataka MLAs land, get police escort for meet with speaker

Six rebel Karnataka MLAs have landed from Mumbai in Begaluru. Police is escorting them for 6 pm meet with the speaker.

‘There might be change in CM but government will be safe’: Cong legislator

“There might be a change in CM but the government will be safe,” said Congress Legislator from Harihar constitutency, S Ramappa.

‘Rebels unlikely to withdraw resignations’, says agriculture minister NH Shivashankar Reddy

“The rebels are unlikely to withdraw their resignations. Naturally, if we do not have a majority we should let BJP stake a claim,” said Agriculture minister NH Shivashankar Reddy.

‘BJP has right to call for division of votes on Finance bill’: Krishna Byre Gowda

“The BJP has the right to call for a division of votes on the Finance bill. We will not curtail that. They are free to move such a motion in the session, which begins on Friday,” said minister Krishna Byre Gowda.

‘Will brave BJP’s assault, convince MLAs to save govt’: Krishna Byre Gowda

“Government is in a precarious position. This was discussed in the Cabinet. This is the seventh assault by the BJP on the state government. So far we’ve withstood such efforts but this time it is more precarious, I agree. But we have decided to brave this and try and convince the MLAs who resigned and do everything possible to save the government,” said minister Krishna Byre Gowda.

‘My lawyers will speak about SC direction in court’: KR Ramesh Kumar

“My lawyers will speak about the Supreme Court direction in the court. I cannot discuss that here. Let the MLAs come and meet me. Everything will be done according to the rules,” said Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar.

Karnataka cabinet okays slew of programmes amid crisis

The Karnataka cabinet has okayed a slew of programmes amid the Karnataka crisis. Minister Krishna Byre Gowda said that the Cabinet has authorised deputy chief minister to set up a Commission to look into the increase in Scheduled Tribe reservation.

CM HDK, DK Shivakumar inspect security arrangement at Vidhana Soudha

Karnataka: CM HD Kumaraswamy, Congress leader DK Shivakumar and others inspected the security arrangement at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru. :ANI

Rebel Congress MLAs leave for Bengaluru

The 10 rebel Karnataka MLAs that were staying in a Mumbai hotel left for Bengaluru on Thursday afternoon to meet the state Assembly Speaker in the evening.

Youth Cong workers protest in Kolkata over Karnataka political crisis

West Bengal: Members and workers of Youth Congress staged protest on the streets of Kolkata over political situation in Karnataka. They were later detained by police. :ANI

Members and workers of Youth Congress staged protest on the streets of Kolkata over political situation in Karnataka. ( ANI Twitter )

Mumbai: Rebel Congress MLAs reach Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport

Mumbai: Rebel Congress MLAs reach Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport. They have been directed by the Supreme Court to meet the Karnataka Assembly Speaker at 6 pm today and submit their resignations if they so wish.

Mumbai: Rebel Congress MLAs reach Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport. They have been directed by the Supreme Court to meet the Karnataka Assembly Speaker at 6 pm today and submit their resignations if they so wish. pic.twitter.com/1gUDE7lzCD — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

This is the seventh assault by the BJP on the state government: Minister Krishna Byregowda

Minister Krishna Byregowda: Government is in a precarious position. This was discussed in the Cabinet. This is the seventh assault by the BJP on the state government. So far we’ve withstood such efforts but this time it is more precarious, I agree. But we have decided to brave this and try and convince the MLAs who resigned and do everything possible to save the government.

Supreme Court refuses to take up the Speaker’s application today

Supreme Court refuses to take up the Speaker’s application today, says will take up the matter tomorrow.

Karnataka Cabinet okays a slew of programmes amid crisis

Karnataka Cabinet okays a slew of programmes amid crisis.

Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar moves Supreme Court seeking more time to deal with the resignation issue of rebel MLAs

Karnataka Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar moves Supreme Court seeking more time to deal with the resignation issue of rebel MLAs. Supreme Court refused to give a hearing in the matter today. Supreme Court said, ‘In the morning we have fixed the matter for hearing tomorrow’, reports news agency ANI.

As per law they have to act. Speaker will also go as per rule: Mallikarjun Kharge

Mallikarjun Kharge,Congress on Supreme Court asking 10 rebel Karnataka MLAs to meet the Karnataka Assembly Speaker at 6pm today & submit their resignations if they so wish: The Court has ordered, naturally that will be followed. As per law they have to act. Speaker will also go as per rule.

10 MLAs departing from Mumbai say there is no change in decision

10 MLAs departing from Mumbai say there is no change in decision. They will meet the Speaker and reiterate their decision to quit , says Byrathi basvaraju one of the rebel MLA. He seeks protection and says BJP has had no role in their decision to quit.

We don’t need this government: ST Somashekar

ST Somashekar: Since last 3 days they became active to solve our issues. Why did they not care about us before? You imposed an IAS officer on Bengaluru Development Authority to scrutinise me as I am the BDA president. When you (government) take such decisions, we don’t need this government, reports news agency ANI.

Our support is there with this government: Rebel Karnataka Congress MLA ST Somashekar

Rebel Karnataka Congress MLA ST Somashekar: Our support is there with this government, to respect our leader Rahul Gandhi. But commitment made by the coalition government couldn’t satisfy us. We didn’t taken this decision all of a sudden, we had even informed earlier, but they did not care.

Rebel K'taka Congress MLA ST Somashekar: Our support is there with this govt, to respect our leader Rahul Gandhi. But commitment made by the coalition govt couldn't satisfy us. We didn't taken this decision all of a sudden, we had even informed earlier, but they did not care. pic.twitter.com/drxINzQN4b — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

DCP (Crime) will escort MLAs from HAL airport

Security arrangements have been made. Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime) S Girish will escort the MLAs from the HAL airport. They are flying by a chartered aircraft.

Two more Karnataka MLAs join dissidents at Mumbai hotel

Two more rebel MLAs from Karnataka joined their dissident colleagues, who are staying at a hotel in Mumbai, on Thursday, a source said.

With this, the number of rebel legislators from the southern state put up at the Renaissance Hotel in Powai here went up to 14, including nine of the Congress, he added, reports PTI.

Karnataka MLAs camping in Mumbai may fly back to Bengaluru at 2 pm

Karnataka MLAs camping in Mumbai may fly back to Bengaluru at 2 pm: Sources, reports news agency PTI.

Cabinet meeting starts in Karnataka

Cabinet meeting starts in Karnataka.

Karnataka CM rejects BJP’s demand for his resignation

Karnataka Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy on Thursday rejected the opposition BJP’s demand for him to quit as his coalition government has been reduced to ‘minority’ after 16 legislators of the ruling Congress-JD-S submitted their resignations to Assembly Speaker K.R. Ramesh Kumar.

“Why should I resign? What is the necessity?,” retorted Kumaraswamy in Kannada when asked amid speculation that he would submit his resignation to state Governor Vajubhai Vala after a cabinet meeting in the afternoon, reports IANS.

Siddaramaiah, G Parameshwara, Dinesh Gundu Rao meet Karnataka Speaker

Former chief minister Siddaramaiah, Deputy chief minister G Parameshwara and Karnataka Congress president Dinesh Gundu Rao meet Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar to revive disqualification petition against MLAs Ramesh Jarkiholi and Mahesh Kumathahalli.

The petition was filed in February after four MLAs disobeyed the whip and absented themselves from the session. It has chosen not to pursue the complaint against B Nagendra, who has not resigned. The fourth person in that complaint, Umesh Jadhav, is now the Gulbarga MP of the BJP.

Congress leaders protest in Parliament over Karnataka, Goa crisis

Congress MPs held a protest against the ruling BJP in Parliament on Thursday over the political crisis which has hit the party in Karnataka and Goa.

A number of top Congress leaders, including Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and Anand Sharma, protested near the Gandhi statue in the Parliament complex and shouted slogans. They also carried placards with messages like “Save Democracy”, reports PTI.

We have confidence that the MLAs will be with us: DK Shivakumar

Karnataka Minister and Congress leader DK Shivakumar in Bengaluru: We have confidence that the MLAs will be with us. I hope they will come back and withdraw their resignation.

Karnataka Minister and Congress leader DK Shivakumar in #Bengaluru: We have confidence that the MLAs will be with us. I hope they will come back and withdraw their resignation. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/qmfqPsPRee — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Supreme Court says Karnataka Speaker has to take a decision in remaining part the day

The Supreme Court says Karnataka Speaker has to take a decision in remaining part the day. The Court also ordered the DGP of Karnataka to provide protection to all the rebel MLAs and adjourned the hearing for tomorrow (July 12)., reports news agency ANI.

Supreme Court permits rebel MLAs to place request for security

The Supreme Court says the rebel MLAs If they so wish and inclined shall intimate about their decision to resign in respect of which the Speaker will decide in the remaining course of the day. Order of the speaker will be placed before us.

The Supreme Court also permits the rebel MLAs, most of them are in Bombay, to place a request to DGP, Karnataka, to provide them with adequate security once they reach Bangalore. Asks DGP Karnataka to consider the same.

SC asks 10 MLAs to appear before Karnataka assembly Speaker at 6 pm today in Bangalore

Supreme Court asks ten MLAs to appear before Karnataka assembly speaker at 6 pm today in Bangalore.

I will have to take a legal remedy to protect my rights: DK Shivakumar

Karnataka Minister and Congress leader DK Shivakumar at Kumara Krupa Guest House in Bengaluru: Since the hotel people in Mumbai yesterday rejected my reservation after making me stand for hours together,I have asked my legal people to look into it. I will have to take a legal remedy to protect my rights.

#Karnataka Min&Congress leader DK Shivakumar at Kumara Krupa Guest House in Bengaluru: Since the hotel ppl in Mumbai y'day rejected my reservation after making me stand for hrs together,I've asked my legal ppl to look into it. I'll have to take a legal remedy to protect my rights pic.twitter.com/dDXxpWQKbH — ANI (@ANI) July 11, 2019

Karnataka Cabinet meet today amid political tension, ban orders in place

All eyes are on Bengaluru today, where beleaguered Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy has called a Cabinet meeting in the wake of a spate of resignations threatening the existence of the coalition government in Karnataka. As the stage is set for a major political showdown, police have issued prohibitory orders around the state assembly.

The police commissioner issued the orders to clamp Section 144, restricting the gathering of more than five persons and any form of protests within the two-km area around the Vidhana Soudha, taking into account intelligence inputs.

Prohibitory orders around Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru in view of crucial cabinet meet

As the stage is set for a major political showdown starting Thursday in the wake of a spate of resignations threatening the existence of the coalition government in Karnataka, Bengaluru Police Commissioner Alok Kumar has issued prohibitory orders under section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code, restricting the gathering of more than five persons and any form of protests within the two-km area around the Vidhana Soudha.

The police commissioner issued the orders on Wednesday night, taking into account intelligence inputs, reports PTI.
