Railway unions protest against privatisation plans

All India Railwaymen’s Federation

National Railway Mazdoor Union

Byculla Railway Station

Byculla Printing Press

Western Railway Mazdoor Sangh

Railway Minister Piyush Goyal

Railway workers march from Byculla Railway Station to Byculla Printing Press on Monday

Workers intensify agitation as they organise rallies in the city.Calling it the “first move towards privatisation”, railway unions have threatened to go on strike to protest against the government’s plans to hand over passenger trains to private operators and corporatise production units of the railways.“Theand its affiliate,, have consistently opposed these retrograde decisions of the Ministry of Railways and have held several protest movements against them. The matter has been brought to the notice of higher ups, including the chairman of the Railway Board, on various occasions. To express our anger and anguish, AIRF and its affiliates observed a week-long ‘Black Day’ from July 1to July 6 and submitted a memorandum,” said a union leader of Central Railway.As part of its agitation plan, NRMU (CR) organised a protest rally of railway workers on Monday fromto. Shivgopal Mishra, general secretary of AIRF, and Venu P Nair, general secretary of NRMU (CR), led the protest.“There is widespread anger and frustration among all sections of railway employees against the proposal of the railways ministry to corporatise production units of Indian Railways and handing over passengers trains to private operators under public-private partnership,” said Nair. “We never allow this. If needed we are ready to stop the trains.”The, the zonal union of the National Federation of Indian Railwaymen, also organised protests at Churchgate last Friday. WRMS and NFIR are also pressing for the withdrawal of a national pension system, a halt in outsourcing of activities, and a stop in handing over of railway assets and colonies to private parties.“With privatisation of the railways, trade unions fear that moving people and goods will become more expensive, and this would affect the entire country,” said Ajay Singh, working president of WRMS.“We are also opposing the handing over of mail and express passenger trains to private parties who will exploit the travelling public and earn huge profits without rendering good service. The goal of contractors or agencies who run the trains would be to maximise the profits without maintaining the expected quality,” added Singh.However,has already clarified that there is no question of privatising the public and goods carrier “There is no question of privatisation of railways. The railways cannot be privatised. However, if we have to increase the facilities in the railways, then obviously we need investments for it… We should invite investment in national interest if there are new projects and lines,” he said in the Lok Sabha last week.
