Ravan gang leader arrested in Akurdi by anti-gunda squad

Known for looting and assaulting businesspersons and traders, the accused was externed in Jan 2019



Pimpri-Chinchwad police’s anti-gunda squad on Tuesday arrested a dreaded criminal and leader of the infamous Ravan gang from Akurdi. Sasa alias Sagar Rajkumar Waghmode (26), a resident of Walhekarwadi in Chinchwad, had kept police on their toes with several cases against him.



After the death of the former gang leader, Aniket Jadhav, who was allegedly shot dead in a gang war, Sasa had risen the ranks in the Ravan gang. The gang is known for alleged looting, thefts, riots, assault, attempt to murder and disturbing law and order in the Pimpri-Chinchwad area.



Sasa was externed back in January 2019 for two years by deputy commissioner of police (zone 1) Smartana Patil. However, the gang allegedly kept operating in the twin towns and police had received several tip-offs that Sasa was camping in the area.



The anti-gunda squad was specially formed by Pimpri-Chinchwad police commissioner R Padmanabhan to keep a close watch and control the gangs in the area. Sasa was under their scanner for several months before he was nabbed on Tuesday.



Talking to Mirror, inspector Rajendra Nikalje of the anti-gunda squad said, “Sasa and his gang members were on our radar for several months. He has escaped several times but this time he was caught in our trap. The gang is known for dreaded loots and assaults on several businessmen and traders.”



The gang had become popular as ‘Ravan gang’ as Jadhav fancied the mythological character, Ravan. Inspector Nikalje added, “The gang was called Ravan as Jadhav loves the character Ravan as a negative connotation for power. He even introduced himself as Ravan. The gang members fondly call Sagar ‘Sasa’ — a rabbit in Marathi as he is overweight and looks like a rabbit.”



Back in July 2018, Sasa had allegedly ransacked dozens of vehicles in Pimpri-Chinchwad area creating an atmosphere of fear among citizens.



Police also recovered a countrymade pistol and live cartridges from Sasa when he was arrested. The accused has over 20 cases registered against him. He has also been booked under the Arms Act after this arrest.


