Puttur College firm on rule to keep gate locked

New rules

MANGALURU: Regular classes at a private college in Puttur are expected to commence only after students sign a consent letter in the presence of their parents, agreeing to adhere to the rules laid down by the management.On Wednesday, during lunch break, undergraduate students protested a rule whereby students would not be allowed outside the college campus after classes begin, even for lunch, introduced by the management recently.After a video showing three boys sexually assaulting a girl student went viral, based on the victim’s complaint, a case was registered, and five boys, who were all undergraduate students, were arrested.The accused students were rusticated from the college soon after the incident was reported, forcing the college to have a re-look at the security measures taken by them. As per the new rules , students will have to remain inside the campus during working hours from 9am to 4pm. Students are demanding relaxation of the rule during lunch breaks, because the canteens get overcrowded. Those living in paying guest accommodations said that they had already paid fees, which include meals, for the entire year, and they will not get a refund.The principal of the college told TOI, “When we announced the new rule, all the students agreed to it. On Wednesday, all of a sudden, students protested and classes were suspended for the rest of the day. The college has two canteens and students have been requested to carry tiffin boxes for lunch. Lunch is also being arranged in the hostels for day scholars too. The management has decided to implement strict measures after the unfortunate rape case happened.”Following the protest, the college has decided to keep the parents informed on developments. During the next two days, students will have to come to the college with their parents and meet faculty members. Students will have to sign a consent letter agreeing to the new rules. “Parents are in favour of this rule,” the principal said. The college has about 2,700 students.New rules for vehicles have also been introduced. Students are now allowed to bring only two-wheelers inside the campus, and have to submit vehicle documents to the office.The gates of the college will remain closed during working hours. In case of an emergency, after obtaining permission from the head of the institution, students will have to sign the movement register, and after a slip is issued, they can leave the campus. The campus has about 8,000 students in four of its institutes. For undergraduate students, college begins at 9am, and students are expected to be present on the campus by 8.45am. Classes are held up to 4pm. “As per the guidelines of the State Women’s Rights Commission, a committee has been constituted, which includes Puttur police and women staff members, to address the problems of women students. A woman SI and circle inspector are part of the committee. In addition, girls and boys were addressed separately on various issues; staff members of our institute and other institutes in our campus were also addressed. The awareness drives on crimes against women will continue,” the principal said.Meanwhile, based on the directions of National Women’s Rights Commission, the victim has decided to change her college. The college has already provided an NOC to her, but she is yet to come and collect her TC. The commission will look after the victim’s education.For almost a decade, the college has been following a system, wherein an academic advisor is appointed to each class. “We also have a mentoring system. Nearly 2,700 students are divided into groups of 30, and teachers are assigned for counselling. Six student welfare officers are there on the campus. In case a student has a problem, they first need to consult the class teacher or academic adviser, then the mentor or counsellor and student welfare officer. In case they are not satisfied, they can contact the principal,” the principal said. Mobile phones are banned inside the campus since four years.
