TMC mega rally Highlights: Central agencies threatening TMC leaders to join BJP, says Mamata Banerjee

TMC Mega rally: West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee said that she would request the Election Commission to conduct the upcoming Panchayat and Municipal elections through ballot paper.

West Bengal Chief Minister and TMC chief Mamata Banerjee on Sunday alleged that central agencies are threatening her party leaders and the elected representatives with prison in chit fund scam cases if they don’t get in touch with the BJP. The Trinamool Congress held a mega rally in Kolkata to mark the Martyrs Day. TMC observes Martyr Day every year on July 21 to commemorate the 13 people who were killed in police firing when Mamata Banerjee, then a Youth Congress leader in 1993, was leading a protest to the secretariat demanding that the voters’ card be the only document needed to cast a vote.

TMC Chief took to Twitter to mark the day of the protest and said this year the TMC has given a call to ‘Restore Democracy. No Machines, Bring Ballots Back’. Banerjee has been a vocal critic of the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) and has raised questions on the machine’s credibility from time to time.

Sunday’s rally comes at a time when the party is facing a major crisis after the BJP’s impressive performance in the state during the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections. The saffron party won 18 of the 42 seats in West Bengal, just four less than the ruling TMC. Party workers from across the state attended the rally in Kolkata. The party made elaborate arrangements to provide for food and accommodation to all the TMC workers coming to attend the rally.

Live Blog Highlights TMC mega rally: Would request EC to conduct panchayat polls through ballot paper, says Mamata West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee said that she would request the Election Commission to conduct the upcoming Panchayat and Municipal elections through ballot paper. Mamata Banerjee alleges BJP won 2019 elections by cheating In Lok Sabha elections they won by cheating- by using EVMs, CRPF and Central Police & Election Commission They just got 18 seats, by getting few seats they are trying to capture our party offices and beating our people. 2019 elections is not a history, but a mystery: Mamata Banerjee Addressing the rally at Kolkata, West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee referred to the BJP making inroads in the 2019 elections a mystery. She also pitched for the use of ballot boxes instead of EVMs. TMC Martyrs’ Day rally: Party workers arrive in Kolkata TMC workers from across the state arrived in Kolkata on Saturday. TMC Diamond Harbour MP Abhishek Banerjee went to Central Park on Sarutday evening to take stock of the preparations and interact with party workers. Replace EVMs with ballot papers, demands Mamata TMC chief Mamata Banerjee said that electoral reforms were needed in India to save democracy in India. “Do not forget that the EVMs were earlier used in England, France, Germany and America. But they have now stopped using them…. So why cannot we bring the ballot papers back?” she said. TMC accuses BJP of trying to ‘foil’ rally The Trinamool Congress on Saturday accused the BJP of trying to disrupt their mega rally. The party also filed an FIR against state president Dilip Ghosh for threatening to drag TMC leaders out of buses while on their way to the rally, if they did not return the ‘cut money’ they had taken from people. Ahead of mega rally, Mamata calls for ‘restoration of democracy’ Mamata Banerjee tweeted on Sunday urging people to fight for the restoration of democracy in India. She also paid tribute to the 13 people who were killed in police firing on Jule 21, 1993. Today is the historic #21JulyShahidDibas. On this day, 26 years ago, 13 youth workers were killed in police firing. Since then, we observe this day as #ShahidDibas. My heartfelt tribute to all the martyrs who were killed during the 34 years of Left rule 1/2 — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) July 21, 2019 The main demand of the protest on #21stJuly 1993 was ‘No ID Card, No Vote’. This year, we have given a call for ‘Restore Democracy. No Machines, Bring Ballots Back’. Let us pledge to fight for the restoration of democracy in our great nation #21JulyShahidDibas 2/2 — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) July 21, 2019 TMC mega rally: Elaborate arrangements made for worker’s accomodation TMC has made arrangements in Kolkata to accomodate its workers coming from different parts of the state. Four camps have been set up in the city – in Gitanjali Stadium in south Kolkata, Khudiram Anushilan Kendra in central Kolkata, Uttirna in Alipore and Central Park in Salt Lake a report in the Indian Express said. Prashant Kishor to attend TMC’s show of strength Poll strategist Prashant Kishor will attend the Trinamool Congress’ mega rally in Kolkata on Sunday. Read full story here
