Bravo Zomato: Delivery startup sets an excellent example for service companies by calling out bigotry

The way we eat, travel, select a holiday destination, find romance, negotiate different languages, get exercise, so much of our lives are being transformed by the app economy today. Urbanisation has helped break down the social walls of caste and religion; the app economy is expected to push this process. It is against this backdrop that Jabalpur’s Amit Shukla sprang an unpleasant shock on Tuesday night, by telling Zomato that his delivery person should be changed as he “did not need delivery from a Muslim fellow”.

Part of the immense difficulty of doing business in India these days is the way netas promote bigotry for the sake of their identity politics. In this polarised atmosphere, weak-kneed companies might feel they have to succumb to demands of the above kind or else risk the wrath of trolls and zealots. Zomato deserves our praise for refusing this craven path. Not only did it refuse to switch the rider, founder Deepinder Goyal stood firmly behind him, plus the diversity of the company’s partners, customers and workforce. He tweeted firmly, “We aren’t sorry to lose any business that comes in the way of our values.”

Sure, #IStandWithAmit and #boycottZomato trended for a while. But there has also been a huge outpouring of appreciation for the food aggregator. People have mocked that by the logic provided by Amit, he should live life without oil imported from Muslim countries, or reading Indian history where he is bound to encounter Mughals, or watching the Khan films and so on. Communal profiling of workers would lead us down dark alleyways of discrimination. In choosing to appeal to the silent but fair majority over the bigoted minority, Zomato has provided an excellent example other corporates should follow, in a manner which may be good for their bottom lines too.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
