India's move to revoke special status for Kashmir could lead to major protests

NEW DELHI - The Indian government on Monday (Aug 5) announced that it had decided to scrap the special status given to the trouble-torn state of Jammu and Kashmir, which it has struggled to integrate into the country. It also plans to bifurcate the state in a wide-ranging set of decisions that are widely expected to invite a backlash.

Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday announced the changes for Kashmir, which has been in lockdown in anticipation of possible violent protests over the government's gameplan.

Residents of Muslim-majority Kashmir have long opposed the scrapping of Article 370, which was a condition on which the princely state of Kashmir agreed to join India during the partition of India from Pakistan in 1947. Different states were then allowed to choose which country to join.

"Jammu and Kashmir was already a part of India much before Article 370; it was accepted with the idea that it (the Article conferring special status) will eventually be removed but no political party had the will to do it,'' Mr Shah told the Upper House of Parliament amid protests by opposition parliamentarians.

Article 370 allows the state to have its own Constitution and gives exclusive rights to the state's residents to secure government jobs, own land and in matters other than the areas of foreign affairs, security and finance.

Scrapping Article 370 means Kashmir will be subject to the laws governing the rest of India, which is a key poll promise of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

The government also announced that it was bifurcating the state of Jammu and Kashmir into the Union territory of Ladakh, which will not have a legislature, and the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, which will have one. The change from state to union territory means that the federal government will have a greater say in Kashmir, said analysts.

The decision needs to be passed by both houses of parliament and will likely be taken up on Monday for a vote. The decision on Article 370 also kicked up a debate on whether the government's move is legally tenable and would hold up if challenged in the Supreme Court.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has a majority in the Lower House and has managed to scrape together a majority in the Upper House with the help of regional parties.

Kashmir has been on the edge after the government on Friday asked all tourists and Hindu pilgrims, who were taking part in the annual pilgrimage to the Amarnath cave, to leave Kashmir. An additional 25,000 security personnel were also mobilised. Reports said that an additional 8,000 troops had been mobilised following the announcements. The government had cited a terror threat to the pilgrimage but did not at the time reveal the reason for its other extraordinary measures.
