Road ahead: Government must sensitively handle likely protests in Kashmir once lockdown is lifted

Kashmir is in lockdown today, but restrictions on everyday activity will need to be removed soon. People in Jammu and Ladakh are likely to welcome the change of Jammu & Kashmir’s status with the Narendra Modi government’s nullification of Article 370 of the Constitution; the same cannot be said of Kashmir. Over the last week the Centre had massively boosted security presence in Kashmir, curtailed the annual Amarnath yatra and even put Kashmiri leaders under house arrest. Clearly, the Centre felt that the security situation could get out of hand with its big Kashmir move.

And that threat remains as there could still be big protests in the Kashmir Valley as restrictions there are gradually removed. In fact, there has been a pattern of cyclical violence in Kashmir where large-scale upheavals take place after a period of radicalisation. We saw this in the case of militant Burhan Wani’s death in 2016 which sparked widespread violent protests across Kashmir. Those protests could recur, perhaps on a bigger scale. Supporters of Article 370 would point to its nullification as the reason. Opponents will claim it was going to happen anyway, given that Islamabad feels its time to push a Kashmir jihad is now, following its success in getting the US to wind down in Afghanistan without leaving a stable government in place.

But either way, New Delhi will have to find a way of dealing with another round of radicalisation in the Valley. To counter this, the government should sensitively deal with protesters demonstrating against the nullification of special status. One way out could be to offer a path back to statehood for J&K. Union home minister Amit Shah alluded to this in Parliament when he said that J&K can regain its statehood once the situation there normalises.

Facilitating development of Kashmir has been cited by government as one of the reasons for nullifying Article 370. Theoretically, now that outsiders can buy property, live and work in Kashmir, this can bring in greater business investment. While its tourism sector could be made world class tax benefits, loosening of regulations, and building of new infrastructure could see modern industries like IT relocate to the region. That’s the Kashmir dream. In real life, the security situation must be stabilised and the government must arrive at a modus vivendi with locals. That looks like being a long haul.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
