CWC meeting: Rahul's resignation accepted, Sonia Gandhi becomes Congress interim president

Congress's top decision-making body, the Congress Working Committee (CWC), has finally ended Congress's leadership dilemma after 77 days. Sonia Gandhi has been selected as the interim Congress chief till the time regular elections are held. Meanwhile, the CWC has also accepted Rahul Gandhi's resignation as the leader refused to continue as the party's chief.

Earlier in the day, the top decision-making body of the Congress party divided themselves into five groups to hold discussions for picking Rahul Gandhi's successor. While there were several requests for Gandhi to stay on, the committee finally decided to nominate Sonia Gandhi as the party's interim chief.

The decision was taken at a second meeting of the CWC, which started at 8 pm on Saturday.

CWC meeting updates:

23:31 pm: CWC expressed serious concerns over the situation in Jammu and Kashmir including reports of the clampdown, news blackouts, arrests and detentions of Indian political leadership of J&K. CWC calls upon govt to act in a transparent fashion and permit a delegation of opposition parties in J&K: KC Venugopal

23:12 pm: In a press conference after the CWC meeting, Congress leader Randeep Surjewala and KC Venugopal said the committee thanked Rahul Gandhi leadership and thanked him for his untiring efforts to lead the party. Surjewala went on to say how Gandhi had fought for the rights of common people. Surjewala said the Committee requested Rahul Gandhi to stay on as president but he was adamant on his decision.

As the situation stand, Sonia Gandhi will take over as interim Congress chief till the next election for a regular president.

#UPDATE K C Venugopal, Congress: Congress Working Committee (CWC) unanimously resolved to request Sonia Gandhi to take over as the Interim President, pending the election of a regular president by the AICC. pic.twitter.com/24FhY0FFct ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

22:53 pm: Sonia Gandhi to become Congress interim president. The development has been confirmed by senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad.

22:38 pm: Rahul Gandhi also slammed the government and demanded answers on what is going on Kashmir. "We are extremely concerned, govt need to tell the country what is going wrong, the meeting was stopped, it was reported that the situation in J&K is worsening. PM and govt must tell the country with transparency about what is happening."

#WATCH Rahul Gandhi, Congress: I was called by the Working Committee because between the work that they were doing, to choose next Congress president, some reports have come that things in Jammu&Kashmir are going very wrong...so we stopped our deliberation... pic.twitter.com/5WgtRahH7Y ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

22:30 pm: Congress president Rahul Gandhi came out of the CWC meeting and told reporters that the deliberation to select the new president was cut short as there was an important briefing on the Kashmir situation. He said, "I was called by the CWC as some reports came about violence in Jammu and Kashmir.

9:35 pm: Rahul Gandhi has arrived to attend the CWC meeting.

9:20 pm: After the discussion of all five groups, Rahul Gandhi might take part in the CWC meeting.

9:19 pm: Former prime minister Manmohan Singh is presiding over CWC meeting in the absence of Rahul Gandhi.

9:14 pm: Its old guard versus new guard in CWC. Sources tell India Today TV that the senior members of the CWC want Mukul Wasnik to take over as president while the younger fraction wants faces like Milind Deora or Sachin Pilot to represent the party. However, there is no official confirmation of the same.

Delhi: Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting underway at All India Congress Committee (AICC) office. pic.twitter.com/CxnhE4QvHo August 10, 2019

9:06 pm: Sources tell India Today TV that the CWC is likely to accept Rahul Gandhi's resignation as he is sitting firmly on his decision to resign. The five sub-committees may recommend Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's name as a replacement, but it is unlikely that she would accept the offer. The CWC could either select an interim president or form a five-member panel to select a new president.

8:30 pm: Sonia Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra have arrived at the All India Congress Committee (AICC) office for the second round of the CWC meeting.

#Delhi: UPA Chairperson Sonia Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi Vadra arrive at All India Congress Committee (AICC) office for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting. pic.twitter.com/iTKsqHtTaP ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

8:28 pm: What could be the final outcome?

Even though reports suggest that the five sub-groups are likely to propose Rahul Gandhi's name to stay on as Congress president, there are several possibilities.

Rahul Gandhi's resignation could be accepted as he is adamant on his decision to not continue as party president.

The consultation committee may submit a report before the CWC regarding their views on who can replace Rahul Gandhi.

Sources tell India Today TV that Priyanka Gandhi's name could be recommended but other names can be discussed as well. There is no clarity on the same at the moment.

Congress could select a young face for the post of president.

There is a possibility that no name may be announced today and a five-member committee can be formed to solve the leadership crisis. In such a scenario, the selection of the new president could take some time.

8:10 pm: Top Congress leaders including former prime minister Manmohan Singh and Congress leaders AK Antony, Mallikarjun Kharge and Jyotiraditya Scindia have arrived at All India Congress Committee (AICC) office for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting.

#Delhi: Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh & Congress leaders AK Antony, Mallikarjun Kharge and Jyotiraditya Scindia arrive at All India Congress Committee (AICC) office for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting. pic.twitter.com/0SZn3QlXi1 ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

7:54 pm: Several Congress leaders have reached the headquarters to attend the all-important meeting where the next Congress president is likely to be announced. In the morning, five groups of zonal leaders were formed to consult and choose a leader.

Sources said that almost all the leaders have demanded Rahul Gandhi to continue as president but he has clearly declined. However, it is likely that the CWC members will once again try to convince Rahul Gandhi to withdraw his resignation.

7:25 pm: The Congress Working Committee (CWC) has completed the consultations with five different zonal groups comprising Congress leaders of different states. It is likely to take a final call on a new party president after Rahul Gandhi rejected its unanimous appeal to reconsider his May 25 resignation.

4:40 pm: Former Rajya Sabha MP Santiuse Kujur has resigned from the Congress party.

Former Rajya Sabha MP Santiuse Kujur has resigned from the Congress party. pic.twitter.com/mu7U58hqLR ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

3:15 pm: Three names of frontrunners for the Congress president's post emerge- Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi and Mukul Wasnik.

2:00 pm: Rahul Gandhi's resignation as Congress chief still under consideration, CWC to take decision in evening, says Randeep Surjewala.

1:55 pm: The CWC argued that Rahul Gandhi is best person to lead Congress when government attacking institutions, but he refused saying he will fight with workers, says Randeep Surjewala.

1:50 pm: The CWC asked Rahul Gandhi to remain party chief, but he refused, says Congress chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala.

1.31 pm: Adhir Ranjan Chaudhary after Congress Working Committee(CWC) meeting ends: We will meet again at 8.30 pm, it [name of new party chief] is expected to be finalised by 9 pm today itself.

1.08 pm: Congress workers protest, demand Priyanka Gandhi as Congress chief

Scores of Congress workers protested outside the party headquarters demanding Priyanka Gandhi Vadra be made the party president, amid the crucial Congress Working Committee meet. "Priyanka Gandhi should be made the party chief as she has the capability to keep the party together," said Jagdish Sharma, the worker who led the protesters. (IANS)

1.04 pm: CWC meet to resume on Saturday evening.

12.49 pm: On leaving Congress Working Committee meeting, Sonia Gandhi says, "Now consultation [to decide next party chief] is going on and naturally Rahul ji and I cannot be a part of it."

12.43 pm: Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi leave CWC meet. Say can't be part of the process.

Sonia Gandhi on leaving from Congress Working Committee meeting: We(She and Rahul Gandhi) will not be a part of the consultation process(to decide next party chief) and that is why we are leaving. pic.twitter.com/TstLb3MkZ9 ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

12.05 pm: The CWC has decided to have consultations with leaders from across the country and the party's top decision-making body then was divided into five groups for different regions -- northeast, east, north, west and south. READ FULL REPORT

11.30 am: CWC meet underway

11.10 am: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi at the CWC meet. Besides Rahul Gandhi, several state unit chiefs of the party, including Congress' Rajasthan president Sachin Pilot, were also present in the meeting.

Delhi: Congress leaders Rahul Gandhi, Randeep Surjewala and KC Venugopal arrive at party office for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting. pic.twitter.com/sPoQvqufuc ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

11.02 am: UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi arrives at Congress office for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting.

10.30 am: Senior Congress leaders arrive for CWC meet

Delhi: Senior Congress leaders Harish Rawat, Meira Kumar and Ahmed Patel arrive at party office for Congress Working Committee (CWC) meeting. pic.twitter.com/kC0BYSmhOG ANI (@ANI) August 10, 2019

10.05 am: Congress Working Committee(CWC) will shortly meet first, then will be divided into five groups, and discussions(on next party chief) will be held with state unit leaders according to regions

WHY THE CWC MEETING?

The meeting came after several senior party leaders such as Shashi Tharoor and Karan Singh voiced concerns over lack of clarity on the leadership issue.

The top Congress leadership held a meeting on Friday with its state unit chiefs, leaders of its state legislature parties, general secretaries and in-charges, where they were told by Rahul Gandhi that the new party chief would be appointed within the next few days after wider consultations, sources said.

The meeting was held at the party's Gurdwara Raqab Ganj Road "war room" to discuss the government's decision to abrogate the provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution in Jammu and Kashmir and divide the state into two Union territories.

"Some frank talking marked @incIndia consultative meet with a wide range of party leaders last evening. Convened on Kashmir, the comments went beyond and urged the party to be more pro-active in anticipating major issues and seizing the initiative. Commendable exercise; should be repeated," Tharoor tweeted.

Senior Congress leaders also met Sonia Gandhi at her residence here on Friday. Sources said senior leaders Ahmed Patel, AK Antony and KC Venugopal were learnt to have discussed with Gandhi certain names of probables, one of whom could be made the interim president of the party.

WHO ARE THE FRONTRUNNERS?

The names of senior Congress leaders Mukul Wasnik, Mallikarjun Kharge, as well as younger leaders Jyotiraditya Scindia and Sachin Pilot are doing the rounds for the top post. Mumbai Congress chief Milind Deora earlier this week batted for either Scindia or Pilot to succeed Rahul Gandhi.

A number of partymen have expressed their opinion in public, saying the delay in selecting the new Congress chief is harming the party.

Last Sunday, Tharoor had said the CWC should appoint an interim president immediately and then hold polls for the party chief's post as a leader elected by workers will be empowered and have more credibility. Interestingly, after Rahul Gandhi ruled out the possibility of a family member succeeding him, several leaders voiced support for Priyanka Gandhi Vadra.

The party now hopes to resolve the leadership issue and move forward quickly with assembly elections in Maharashtra, Jharkhand and Haryana coming up.

(With PTI inputs)
