Celebrations and protests in Australia on unfolding Kashmir situation

From contentment to resentment- the Indian government’s decision to revoke Article 370 that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir, has received a mixed reaction from the Indian community living in Australia.

Whilst there is widespread support for the government’s move, there are also those who see it as a “human rights violation." SBS Punjabi spoke to various members and community representatives to gauge their reactions.

'Long overdue'

Bawa Singh Jagdev, the secretary of the National Sikh Council of Australia told SBS Punjabi that abrogation of Article 370 was a decision that was “long overdue.”

“I am in clear support of the government’s decision. Kashmir is a part of India, whether you accept it or not. I am totally against Article 370. It is good that they have finally revoked it,” said Mr Jagdev.

Also in support of the decision were members of the Kashmiri Pandits Cultural Association of Melbourne (KPCA), many of whom gathered at the Federation Square in Melbourne over the weekend, to express their jubilation.

Supplied

Rakhil Razdan, who is also a member of KPCA said he wholeheartedly supports the government’s decision to revoke Article 370 and all clauses associated with it.

“The whole article was discriminatory. Our greatest happiness is that Kashmir is now part of India. Earlier there was a thread hanging that gave people of Kashmir a false sense of alienation from the rest of India, a sort of special status.

“Now everything is going to be under the central government, all the laws of the land will apply to them, which is only going to make the situation better,” said Mr Razdan.

'Unlawful and gross violation of human rights'

However, not far away from where KPCA members were celebrating, there was a group of demonstrators, raising slogans against the government’s decision, calling their actions “unlawful,” and a “gross human rights violation.”

SBS

Leading a small group of protestors was Shubhkarmanjit Singh, who told SBS Punjabi that he was there along with his Sikh brothers to express “solidarity with the Kashmiri community," and also to put forth the demand for a separate Sikh homeland.

“Sikhs have always stood up against injustice and that is exactly why we are here today. We will never stand with the oppressors and their unabated human rights abuses,” said Mr Singh.

Standing next to him, holding a rather unmissable slogan that read ‘Dear Kashmiris, we Sikhs stand with you,’ was Gurvinder Singh, who said he felt it was his duty as a Sikh to support his Kashmiri brothers.

Meanwhile, Jasbir Singh, the chairman of the Sikh Interfaith Council of Victoria told SBS Punjabi that "Sikhs have always stood up against injustice and this is no different."

“These protests are not about religion and are more about humanity. Sikhs have always stood up against human injustice and this is what they seem to be doing,” said Mr Singh, who added that everyone is entitled to express their opinion.

Listen to SBS Punjabi Monday to Friday at 9 pm. Follow us on Facebook and Twitter.
