Sindh united in condemnation of Indian atrocities in Kashmir

PEOPLE attend a multi-party rally held in Sukkur on Thursday to condemn India on its independence day.—Dawn

HYDERABAD: Activists of religious and political parties and members of civil society, minority communities and general public observed India’s independence day as a black day in solidarity with people of occupied Kashmir by taking out rallies and torching effigies of Indian premier across the province on Thursday.

Activists of Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI), Sunni Tehreek, Jamaat-i-Islami took out rallies and held demonstrations outside the Hyderabad Press Club where the parties’ local leaders delivered speeches highlighting the fact that India stood exposed today before entire world.

They said that Indian government had been committing inhuman excesses against people of occupied Kashmir. Pakistan government needed to play a decisive role in the crisis and not allow sacrifices of Kashmiris to go waste, they said.

Bishop Kalim John, diocese of Hyderabad, Church of Pakistan, said at a gathering of Christian community that Indian government must end atrocities in occupied Kashmir. Pakistani Christians had always stood against oppression and tyranny, he said.

Political parties, individuals rise above differences to observe black day against Indian occupation of Kashmir

SUKKUR: Workers of political and religious parties and traders’ bodies took out rallies and staged demonstrations in Sukkur, Ghotki, Jacobabad and Kandhkot-Kash­more districts to observe black day.

In Sukkur, a large rally was taken out by workers of PPP, Pakistan Muslim League-Functional, PTI and various social and religious organisations.

PPP MNA Syed Khursheed Ahmed Shah said at the rally that since Muslims were divided they were being victimised in Palestine and Kashmir. Pakistani nation could help Kashmir by forging unity among its ranks, he said.

Federal Minister for Privatisation Muhammadmian Soomro and MPA Nusrat Sahar Abbasi said that all parties stood by Kashmiris and they would fight shoulder to shoulder against Indian atrocities.

Mukhi Eshwar Lal, Father Usman and Sardar Mahesh Singh said that minorities stood by their Pakistani brethren and army.

Similar rallies were brought out in Kandhkot, Jacobabad and Mirpur Mathelo.

MIRPURKHAS: Several social and religious organisations as well as education department took out rallies in which participants waved black flags and wore black armbands to observe black day against Indian aggression in occupied Kashmir.

The participants in the rally marched on main roads of the city before converging on local press club where the leaders made speeches and strongly condemned India for its cruel actions in occupied Kashmir.

BADIN: Hundreds of workers of religious parties, citizens and members of civil society staged a long march from Tando Bago to Badin to record protest against Indian atrocities in occupied Kashmir.

The rally led by Maulana Abdullah Sindhi, central leader of Sunni Tehreek Rabita Council, reached in front of Aiwan-i-Sahafat where the participants held a demonstration. The maulana said that Indian government had unleashed the worst kinds of atrocities against Kashmiris.

SANGHAR: Several rallies were organised across the district in response to national call for observance of black day against Indian brutalities and human rights violations in occupied Kashmir.

The main rally was led by deputy commissioner which was attended by members of business community, members of Hindu community and others. Similar rallies were brought out in Tando Adam, Shahdadpur, Khipro and other towns.

NAUSHAHRO FEROZE: Government departments, political parties and NGOs staged rallies in different parts of the district to mark black day and express solidarity with Kashmiris.

The participants in the rallies condemned Indian brutalities in occupied Kashmir and imposition of curfew and said that Kashmir issue must be resolved as per resolutions of United Nations.

Similar rallies were taken out in Moro, Kandiaro, Halanai, Mehrabpur and Padidan.

MITHI: People from different walks of life took out rallies and staged demonstrations in Mithi, Islamkot, Chhachhro, Nagarparkar, Diplo, Kaloi and other towns of Tharparkar to condemn Indian atrocities in occupied Kashmir.

The protesters’ leaders urged world bodies to play their role to save Kashmiris. Later, charged protesters torched effigies of Indian prime minister to vent their anger against Indian brutalities.

DADU: At least 15 big and small rallies were taken out in the city to observe black day and express solidarity with people of occupied Kashmir.

The main rally was taken out by members of general public, social activists, writers and journalists, which marched on different roads before ending up at press club.

Similar protests were held in Mehar, Khairpur Nathan Shah, Johi, Sehwan, Sann, Manjhand and Kotri towns.

NAWABSHAH: Activists of PPP, PML-F and PTI and staff of district government took out rallies to express solidarity with people of occupied Kashmir.

The rallies marched on the city’s roads before ending up in front of local press club. The protesters’ leaders condemned Indian aggression in the occupied valley.

Published in Dawn, August 16th, 2019
