Want to protest? Pay a fee first, say Mangaluru cops

MANGALURU: Want to register your grievance in public? Pay first, protest later, say Mangaluru police.According to activists, the fee ranges from Rs 500 for simple protests without the use of loudspeakers to over Rs 1 lakh for processions. Police said they’re just following a government order.A receipt, issued by police sub-inspector, law and order, Mangaluru South police station, to the Democratic Youth Federation of India for payment of Rs 500 to hold a simple protest without the use of loudspeakers, indicates that the fee is collected as per the order number HD 224 2018 issued by the government on October 10, 2018 and HD 56 EFS 2018 dated November 27, 2018. Permission to conduct private meetings, functions and processions will be granted only after payment of the fee (in addition to loudspeaker fee). The letter adds that action will be taken if they go ahead with the protest without acknowledging the letter.The letter specifies that charges are to be levied for private programmes. However, the DYFI protest against alleged resort politics by state leaders was for a public cause, said Muneer Katipalla, state president, DYFI.“Earlier, we had to pay a fee of Rs 75 for use of loudspeakers on the first day of the protest. If it continued, we could use loudspeakers by paying an extra Rs 15 per day. Under no other circumstances were we expected to make any payment,” he said. Muneer alleged this is an attempt to subjugate dissenting voices seeking justice TR Suresh, Mangaluru police chief, said the fee is being collected as prescribed by the government. Regarding confusion over fee collection for a public cause, Suresh said the police official concerned may have erred in writing and that will be verified. He, however, stood his ground regarding collection of payment.SDPI slams government circular The Social Democratic Party of India condemned the government circular, terming it anti-democratic. It has threatened to stage a protest if police continue to charge a fee for protests.
