Campus molestation gets college principal sacked

Navi Mumbai college

molestation incident

Yuva Sena

social media

women’s harassment committee

Students at the protest. The agitation took a political turn with ABVP and Yuva Sena jumping into the fray

Student molested by alumnus, triggering a political row that led to the sacking.The principal of awas sacked on Friday after students protested over his handling of athat took place on campus.While the accused, Vinod Pandit Phad, 30, was arrested for molesting a student, the incident triggered protests from students, who were already upset with the facilities at the college. The agitation also took a political turn with Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) andjumping into the fray.After the victim and some students raised an alarm on Thursday, a group of faculty members locked up the accused in a room before police came, Darshan Babre, an ABVP member, told Mirror. But when the students went to the principal, he said he would look into the matter later and left for a programme, Babre said, adding soon word spread onand the protests began.On Friday Yuva Sena members met the college management and demanded immediate removal of the principal.“The principal did not handle the issue sensitively. College authorities did not discuss the issue with female students,” said Rupesh Patil, national joint secretary of Yuva Sena.Patil said the students were facing issues such as poor condition of toilets and lack of security for female students in the evening.To placate the students and parties, the management issued a letter of termination to the principal, a copy of which is with Mirror.Trustees of the college did not respond to Mirror’s calls and messages. Deputy Commissioner of Police Ashok Dudhe, however, confirmed that the principal had been removed.The principal told Mirror he was not aware of the letter and was not in college on Friday, as he was attending a higher education summit. Later in the day, he sent a message to the students explaining the sequence of events. He clarified that the institute immediately contacted the victim’s parents, but they were unwilling to lodge a police complaint. Themet the students and assured support. The police were called around 5.30 pm.“The student along with 15 faculty members, myself and the security chief were present at the police station. Around 8 pm, after the officers had been apprised, the case was handed over to them,” he said.Phad was a former student of the college. He has been booked under Section 354 (outraging modesty) of the India Penal Code.
