BJYM-backed students panel sweeps GU Students Council election

NT NETWORK

Panaji

The Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM)-backed panel of students swept the election for the Students Council of the Goa University (GU), conducted on Monday by 63:22 votes, defeating the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) panel.

Khemal Prabhu Shirodkar of the BJYM has been elected as the president of the Students Council.

The BJYM has dedicated the victory to the veteran BJP leader Arun Jaitley who passed away on August 24.

Ironically, Jaitley served as the president of the Delhi University Students Union in 1974 as a member of the Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP).

The GU election was held in a tense situation with the deployment of heavy police force. Loud protests were also heard outside the university campus during the election period. There were allegations of physical assaults, including that on girls during the conduct of the election.

Later, the BJYM representatives alleged that the Congress-backed National Students’ Union of India (NSUI) was supporting the ABVP panel. NSUI, congratulating the winners, stated that the election, however, does not represent the voice of the students.

“It’s an internal election between the A and B teams of the BJP, as conducted by a member of the BJP, Ramarao Wagh, who also happens to be the university professor and director of students’ welfare,” it retorted.

The NSUI, state president, Ahraz Mulla maintained that only 80 university faculty representatives, who were nominated individuals, participated in voting and therefore, the election was not a democratic exercise.

He also informed that the NSUI members were arrested by the police for protesting at the GU campus.

Refuting the allegations that the NSUI had supported the ABVP panel, Mulla said that NSUI believes in the Gandhian ideology and not the Sawarkar ideology as followed by the ABVP, and therefore, it would neither support the ABVP nor stand with the BJYM.

It may be recalled that the particular election was rescheduled to August 26 after the ABVP and the BJYM supporters clashed on August 16, the original date of the election. Both the groups had allegedly attacked the Vice Chancellor Varun Sahani during this clash.
