Online fraud: Delhi Police joint commissioner duped of Rs 28,000 while attending work at HQ

If you think being a top cop in the national capital and having an office at the Delhi Police headquarters is a deterrent for fraudsters from looting your hard-earned money, you may be slightly mistaken. The police uniform and the high rank may act as deterrents on ground, but in the world of cyber crime, the rules may not be the same.

An officer of the rank of Joint Commissioner of Police (JCP) in the Delhi Police has been defrauded of Rs 28,000. This happened at a time when he was attending work at his office at the Delhi Police headquarters.

On August 9, JCP Atul Katiyar filed a complaint with the cyber crime cell that someone has duped him of Rs 28,000 using his credit card credentials, saying he never used his credit card.

Police sources told India Today TV that Katiyar was at work and suddenly received two back-to-back messages of amount being deducted from his card. He then approached the cyber crime branch, which asked him to file a formal complaint.

Several teams of the cyber crime cell are working round-the-clock to trace the fraudster, The Indian Express reported.

The report said that even after JCP Atul Katiyar filed a police complaint and blocked his credit card, the fraudster tried to make another transaction of Rs 20,000.

"The incident took place at 10.47 am when the complainant was sitting in his office at the Delhi Police headquarters. He received two transaction messages on his phone. The first was for Rs 10,000, made at PhonePe, an Indian e-commerce payment system, and second payment was for Rs 18,150, made at Instamojo. Both the transactions were made within four minutes," a senior officer was quoted as saying by the Indian Express.

Delhi Police has registered a case of cheating and probe is on to nab the fraudster.

This matter comes weeks after Punjab Chief Minister captain Amarinder Singh's wife was duped of Rs 23 lakh after someone took her debit card credentials by posing as a bank official.

(With inputs from Chirag Gothi.)

ALSO READ | How a Jharkhand man duped Punjab CM's wife Preneet Kaur by getting her ATM PIN, password
