Decision to merge Narayan Rane’s party with BJP will be taken after talks with Shiv Sena: Devendra Fadnavis

Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Narayan Rane is likely to join the BJP with his politician-sons Nitesh and Nilesh Shiv Sena is reportedly miffed with Rane joining the BJP Rane will join the BJP on September 1 in Solapur in presence of BJP president Amit Shah

Mumbai: Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis has said that Narayan Rane is close to BJP and the only thing that has to be decided is whether his party will merge with the saffron party or not.

He further said that the final decision will be taken after discussions with ally Shiv Sena.

At the press conference, Fadnavis also lashed out at Congress and NCP saying that the reason why both the parties are in opposition now is that they have not been able to do that job in a proper manner adding that this was the main reason why people have lost confidence from both Congress and NCP.

The Maharashtra Chief Minister further added that Sharad Pawar's NCP has been reduced to a district-level party.

Sena is reportedly miffed with Rane joining the BJP and speaking on this development senior Sena leader and Minister of State for Home Deepak Kesarkar said that Rane joining BJP is akin to mixing salt with sweet milk.

Making the announcement Rane had said, “I will join the BJP on September 1 in Solapur in the presence of BJP President Amit Shah who will address a rally.”

Rane, who became the Chief Minister of Maharashtra in the Sena-BJP government in 1999 after the incumbent Manohar Joshi was forced to vacate the CM’s chair by party patriarch, the late Bal Thackeray.

After the Sena-BJP alliance was ousted out of power by Congress-NCP coalition in 1999, Rane became the Leader of Opposition. However, he was expelled from Sena by Thackeray for revolt against Uddhav Thackeray.

He then tried to join the BJP but his plans were thwarted by Sena after which he formed his own party Maharashtra Swabhiman Paksha which became part of the ruling National Democratic Alliance but the party did not contest the May 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

Later, he went to Rajya Sabha with BJP’s support. Rane, 67, is likely to join the BJP with his politician-sons Nitesh and Nilesh.

He joined the Congress in 2005 and hold key portfolios when Vilasrao Deshmukh, Ashok Chavan and Prithviraj Chavan were CMs. However, he was constantly sidelined for the top post due to intra-party power struggles.

After losing the Assembly elections in 2014, he was made a Legislative Council Member in 2016, but he left the Congress next year as the grand old party had not kept its promise of making him either Chief Minister or state party President.
