‘Memories and moments’: PM Modi’s déjà vu moment from Russia visit in 2001 as Gujarat chief minister [PHOTOS]

Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Russia as part of the Atal Bihari Vajpayee delegation in 2001. | @narendramodi | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights PM Modi shared a series of photographs from his 2001 visit on social media platform Twitter, including two from his trip this year In the photograph shared from 2001, Modi was seen signing a book sitting next to Vajpayee In the next, he can be seen standing adjacent to the then defence minister Jaswant Singh

Vladivostok: It was a déjà vu moment for Prime Minister Narendra Modi when he visited Russia for the 20th India-Russia Annual Summit on Wednesday. Around 19 years ago, when veteran leader Atal Bihari Vajpayee was the Prime Minister of India, Modi was part of the high-profile delegation that went to Russia for the annual summit.

Back then, Modi was the chief minister of Gujarat when the Vajpayee delegation visited Russia in 2001. Interestingly, Vladimir Putin was the President of Russia back then as well.

PM Modi shared a series of photographs from his 2001 visit on social media platform Twitter, including two from his trip this year. While one photograph showed him sitting next to Vajpayee and Putin, the other showed him standing behind the two leaders.

“Memories and moments, from 2001 and 2019! While participating in the 20th India-Russia Summit today, my mind also went back to the India-Russia Summit of November 2001 when Atal Ji was PM. That time, I was honoured to be a part of his delegation as Gujarat CM,” Prime Minister Modi tweeted.

Memories and moments, from 2001 and 2019!



While participating in the 20th India-Russia Summit today, my mind also went back to the India-Russia Summit of November 2001 when Atal Ji was PM. That time, I was honoured to be a part of his delegation as Gujarat CM. pic.twitter.com/G9vHMkagfR — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) September 4, 2019

In the photograph shared from 2001, Modi was seen signing a book sitting next to Vajpayee. In the next, he can be seen standing adjacent to the then defence minister Jaswant Singh.

“I had the opportunity to meet President Putin for the first time in 2001. I came to Moscow with then-Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. I was the chief minister of Gujarat and that was our first meeting... However, Putin did not make me feel less important, or that I was from a small state or that I am new. He treated me amicably, as a friend. This opened the doors of friendship,” Modi said earlier in the day, according to news agency PTI.

The efforts of President Putin, glimpses of which are clearly seen in a platform like Eastern Economic Forum, are commendable. India fully supports this effort, as demonstrated by the high level participation from India, be it in the form of business leaders or state CMs. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) September 4, 2019





Today’s talks with President Putin were aimed at finding new horizons of India-Russia cooperation. This includes opportunities in trade, security, maritime cooperation and working together to protect the environment. @KremlinRussia_E — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) September 4, 2019

PM Modi shared the photographs after the bilateral talks concluded. He will attend the Eastern Economic Forum on Thursday as the chief guest. Modi, notably, became the first Indian PM to visit the Russian Far East Region on Wednesday.
