Delhi Police Metro Unit arrests 2 for cheating, looting people

Two accused men cheated a man traveling in Delhi Metro. The victim on Saturday was coming from Palwal, Haryana in Violet Line Delhi Metro and when he was changing the line at Mandi House Station for Uttam Nagar to go home, the two accused tricked him into buying their fraud scheme. The fraudsters took away his tools and mobile phone.

In another incident, one more man fell for the accused's fraudulent scheme. The incident took place on September 24 when the fraudsters cheated the victim at Jhandewalan Metro Station. The fraudsters took away his bag containing mobile phone and documents.

When the Metro staff analysed the CCTV footages, they learnt that both the incidents were the result of the same two accused men. Soon the two accused were kept under surveillance and before they could cheat anybody else they were apprehended on Sunday at Mandi House Metro Station by Delhi Police Metro Unit.

THE SCHEME

The accused revealed that they operated at Metro stations, bus stands and railway stations. They used to target gullible passengers.

The two accused used to showed victims a bundle of currency notes. The bundle used to be wrapped in a handkerchief. However, the bundle only had one Rs 500 note on top and rest was stacked with paper cuttings of the same size.

Then, one of them would first get familiar with the victim and then the other would show the bundle to the victim in order to cheat him.

The accused persons usually told the victim that the said bundle of notes was stolen from their owner's house and the owner is searching for them. After taking the victim into confidence, the accused persons would lure the victim to give to them all the belongings such as bag containing money, mobile phones, etc in exchange of the said bundle of notes in the garb of leverage.

The duo used to target gullible, innocent persons at metro stations, railway stations and bus stands, and dupe them of their personal belongings.

Further details are being verified and investigation into the cases is in progress.
