Citizenship Amendment Bill has become necessity for those left out of NRC: Assam BJP president Ranjeet Das

Guwahati: Assam BJP unit president Ranjeet Kumar Dass said that bringing Citizenship Amendment bill (CAB) has become more pertinent for over 19 lakh people are excluded in the final national register of citizens (NRC) published on August 31.He said that the bill will benefit large number of Indians who did not make it to the NRC. BJP has been alleging that not accepting refugee certificate issued prior 1971 has resulted in the exclusion of large number of Bengali Hindu, Koch Rajbonshi and Buddhist people from final NRC.Dass said, “Many Indian were exluded from NRC now they will have to appear before Foreigners Tribunal for further claim despite the fact that they are genuine India citizens. This is a matter of one’s swabhiman (self-esteem) as Indian. Once CAB is passed, this situation will not arise. From this perspective, we feel CAB is a necessity,” Dass said on the sidelines of Mahatma Gandhi ’s 150th birth anniversary event here.Dass said people of the state gradually understand the importance of CAB. This is the reason opposition to the bill has lessened now.Early this year several organisations in North eastern states including Assam held bitter protest against the CAB. “Dass said that despite opposition to CAB we won Panchayat polls and later Lok Sabha Polls. This clearly shows that common people are coming to terms with the necessity of CAB,” Dass argued.BJP’s ally Asom Gana Parishad (AGP) president and state agriculture minister Atul Bora has stated that CAB should be resolved through dialogue and attempt must be made to reach to a consensus.Dass said, “Central leaders are in touch with all stakeholders to allay doubts on the proposed legislation. At one time AGP was one of the strong opponents of CAB. Now when it says of consensus, we feel that confidence is building up among the stakeholders. Our central leaders will have consultations with all stakeholders on CAB.”Eleven political parties of the Northeast India several of BJP’s allies opposed the Bill. AGP severed ties with the government after the bill was passed in Lok Sabha. The NDA government did not table the bill in Rajya Sabha . However just before Lok Sabha AGP renewed its ties with the BJP and came back to the government.The Bill is aimed at making minority communities such as Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan eligible to apply for Indian citizenship was passed in Lok Sabha during the Narendra Modi-led government’s earlier tenure.BJP had promised in its manifesto for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, “We are committed to the enactment of the Citizenship Amendment Bill for the protection of individuals of religious minority communities from neighbouring countries escaping persecution.”
