Bihar: Angry locals protest outside Deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi’s house over water-logging, floods

Angry locals of Rajendra Nagar area protested outside the residence of Deputy Chief Minister of Bihar Sushil Kumar Modi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights This is the same house from where Sushil Kumar Modi was rescued by NDRF personnel after flood water entered the place Bihar CM Nitish Kumar lost his cool when journalists questioned him over the flood situation in the state saying floods were happening all over India and even in the US Kumar blamed climate change for floods in the state

Patna: Angry locals of Rajendra Nagar area protested outside the residence of Deputy Chief Minister of Bihar Sushil Kumar Modi over recent water-logging and floods in the city.

The protest was carried out by protestors angry about the presence of filth and the dengue outbreak in the locality. This is the same house from where Modi was rescued by NDRF personnel after floodwater entered the place. Flood water also entered into the residences of former Chief Ministers Satendra Narayan Singh and Jitan Ram Manjhi, as well as BJP MP and former Union minister Rajeev Pratap Rudy.

Apart from Patna, the flood water also entered houses, shops and hospitals at many places in the state.

While Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar blamed climate change for floods in the state, Union minister Giriraj Singh slammed Kumar and his deputy Sushil Modi for the worst waterlogging the state capital has faced after last week's heavy rainfall. He further attacked the state officials saying despite IMD prediction and warning, no precautionary measures were taken and called for action against the guilty officers.

Speaking at an event in Patna, Kumar had said that climate change led to drought and sudden heavy rainfall.

The Bihar CM lost his cool when journalists questioned him over the flood situation in the state, saying floods were happening all over India and even in the US.

The CM had to face angry protestors when he was visiting waterlogged residential localities in Patna to personally take stock of the situation.

"I am asking in how many parts of the country and across the world have there been floods? Is water in some parts of Patna the only problem we have? What happened in America?” he said.

Blasting Kumar for his insensitive statement the opposition RJD said that after being exposed the CM was not ready to face the reality.

Cornering the government over the situation, Tejashwi Yadav said that Bihar was not suffering from a natural disaster, but the Nitish government-made calamity.

"After (mis)rule of 14 years can a Chief Minister, worth any shame, blame weather for complete absence of drainage system," news agency IANS quoted Tejashwi as saying.

He also demanded a white paper on expenditures made in the last 15 years in the name of urban development, sewerage system, drainage infrastructure and disaster management.

Heavy rainfall in Bihar this July led to flash floods in 12 to 13 districts due to which water level in river Ganga increased.
