PMC Bank swindle: Ex-Jet Airways staffer with Rs 90 lakh deposit dies of cardiac arrest after protest

PMC Bank scam: For the third time, the Reserve Bank of India has increased the withdrawal limit for Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative Bank (PMC) customers. The PMC depositors can now withdraw Rs 40,000 instead of Rs 25,000 that was allowed earlier. The announcement was made ahead of the Diwali.

PMC Bank swindle: Sanjay Gulati, who had deposits of over Rs 90 lakh, in the Oshiwara branch of the crisis-hit Punjab and Maharashtra Cooperative Bank (PMC), died due to a cardiac arrest hours after taking part in a protest rally by depositors in Mumbai on Tuesday. A recently laid-off Jet Airways staffer, Gulati was 51. The police said he was a resident of Taporewala Gardens in Mumbai’s Oshiwara and he was in the middle of a crisis after Jet Airways fired him in April this year.

PMC Bank account holders are protesting against the criminal negligence of the bank authorities for quite some time. The protesters are demanding the safe return of their hard-earned money after the Reserve Bank of India froze most of their accounts and imposed restrictions on cash withdrawal which was initially Rs 10,000 and then was increased to Rs 25,000 and , yesterday, depositors were allowed to withdraw Rs 40,000.

The announcement came ahead of the Diwali festivities. Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman had met RBI Governor Shaktikanta Das and informed him of the plight of the PMC account holders. Sitharaman had assuaged depositors after meeting them in Mumbai recently.

On October 3, the RBI had increased the withdrawal limit to Rs 25,000. The RBI has said that the move would allow around 77 per cent depositors to withdraw their whole balance. Last month, the RBI had hiked the withdrawal limit to Rs 10,000 from Rs 1,000 after massive protests by PMC customers.

Dozens of PMC depositors protested outside the BJP office in Mumbai last week. They also staged a protest outside the Metropolitan Magistrate Court where the police brought PMC Bank scam accused seeking their remand. At the time of the protest, Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman was inside the BJP office at Nariman Point in Mumbai. The minister had assured the protesters that the withdrawal limit would be increased.

The Mumbai Police had earlier filed an FIR against the PMC officials and promoters of Housing Development and Infrastructure Limited (HDIL) in the case. The complaint was lodged after the RBI raised concerns over the PMC’s financial irregularities of over Rs 4,355 crore. The FIR was filed by Jasbir Singh, the RBI-appointed administrator. The case was taken over by the Economic Offences Wing of Mumbai police.

Last week, according to reports, the EOW attached assets worth Rs 4,000 crore. More than Rs 3,000 crore belonged to the HDIL and its promoters Rakesh Wadhawan and son Sarang Wadhawan. Also, the Enforcement Directorate has conducted several raids at properties of Wadhawans and seized movable property. Reports suggest that the ED seized private jets and luxury cars of the father-son duo. During the raids, the ED found pictures of unnamed politicians and Bollywood celebrities. The agency is investigating if the father-son duo had gifted properties to them.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
