Congress govt did no justice to victims of 1993 bomb blasts: PM Modi in Mumbai

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today held a rally at the Bandra Kurla Complex (BKC) area in Mumbai, Maharashtra. Hitting out at the previous Congress-NCP regime, Modi said that the victims of 1993 bomb blasts were not given justice.

Modi blasted the then regime saying it was weak and not being able to catch the masterminds.

"Mumbai and the entire country cannot forget 1993 bomb blasts. The then government did no justice to victims. The perpetrator ran away and now we are getting to know the reason why," said Modi. PM Modi also charged the previous Congress-NCP alliance of being corrupt which didn't allow many projects see the light of the day.

PM Modi:'93 Mumbai bomb blasts ke ghaav hum bhool nahi sakte. Dhamake mein maare gaye logon ke parivaaron ke saath uss samay ki sarkaron ne nyay nahi kiya. Uski wajah ab samne aa rahi hai,doshiyon ko pakadne ke bajai unke saath kabhi mirchi ka vypaar kabhi mirchi ke saath vyapar. https://t.co/qP1dt2dyAK pic.twitter.com/BXOFWZZtdc ANI (@ANI) October 18, 2019

He referred to Mumbai Trans Harbour Link project and Mumbai Metro project which were delayed for a long time.

Modi also referred to a certain politician in the previous regime of having business links with Dawood aid Iqbal Mirchi.

Modi blamed the Congress regime for the bad state of economy and, referring to P Chidambaram, said that those who did wrong today are in Tihar. Addressing a big crowd at the BKC grounds, PM said, "Mumbai is a land of opportunities where in the last five years venture capital, human capital and strong financial capital had worked wonders for the people."

PM Modi started his Maharashtra election campaign on October 13 with rallies at Jalgaon and Sakoli.

Thank you Mumbai!



Today's rally, like the others across Maharashtra, indicates the people's mood.



We seek another term based on our work in the last five years. We want to continue building infrastructure, boost agriculture and farmer welfare, ensure water for every home. pic.twitter.com/wcFLwRrxte Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) October 18, 2019

On Friday, in Mumbai, the PM yet again hit out at the Opposition for opposing abrogation of Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir. "Who are they supporting and advocating?" he asked.

Referring to Veer Savarkar, Modi said, "Many heroes in history have reminded unsung."

Modi even raised the issue of the Shivaji statue in Arabian Sea stating that the work on the same would be started once there was a green signal from the courts.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has made the abrogation of Article 370 as the main poll issue for the Maharashtra Assembly elections.

The issue of whether Vinayak Damodar Savarkar be conferred the highest civilian award -- Bharat Ratna -- or not too is being debated ever since the Maharashtra BJP proposed the name of Veer Savarkar in its election manifesto.

"There was a time when bomb blasts used to take place any time. But now things have changed. Now those who harbour terrorists know they will pay the price. Surgical strikes and Balakot aren't just words, they are the identity of our policies," Modi said.

In the end, PM Modi urged people to vote on October 21. October 19 is the last day of campaigning for the elections in Maharashtra.

Polling for Maharashtra Assembly elections will take place on October 21 in a single-phase poll and the results of the same would be declared on October 24.
