BJP Election result: Wake up call for BJP, return of regional satraps: Quick takeaways from Maharashtra, Haryana polls

The state election results in Maharashtra and Haryana have proved almost all exit polls wrong. Contrary to expectations, and exit poll predicting a landslide victory for the BJP, the saffron party still faced a big decline in seats in both states, compared to its 2014 poll tally.In Maharashtra, the BJP looks well set to form a government with the help of ally Shiv Sena, but its numbers fell to 105 seats, compared to the 122 seats in 2014 in Maharashtra. In Haryana, BJP ended up with 40 seats, well short of the majority mark and much below the party's call for 70+ seats.1.The state polls happened under the shadow of economic slowdown and weak consumer demand. The results indicate that the slowdown has finally started to hurt the ruling party. BJP fought the election on the nationalism issue including Article 370 and NRC, but the results indicate that voters, especially in the rural areas, may have voted more on local issues. Depending mostly on the personal image and charisma of PM Narendra Modi may have its limits in state elections.2.From Bhupinder Singh Hooda to Sharad Pawar, this election has once again shown that regional leaders can't be totally ruled out in Indian politics. Considering the BJP's strong performance in the recent Lok Sabha elections, where almost all the regional strongmen like Hooda, Pawar, Mulayam Singh, Mayawati and Lalu Prasad were wiped out, the improved performance of Congress in Haryana and NCP in Maharashtra has clearly showed that regional leaders still have a big role in state elections.3.Initial analysis shows people are voting differently for the Lok Sabha and state elections. National issues like Balakot and nationalism may have been the main narrative in the general elections. But state polls have to be won on local issues like lack of jobs, farm distress, rural issues along with economic slowdown on the ground, which are gaining more prominence.In last several elections, BJP has successfully followed a policy of consolidation of non-dominant castes and polarisation in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Assam and West Bengal elections. But the backlash of Jat votes in Haryana and Marathas in Maharashtra have hit the party hard.In Haryana, Jat votes may have consolidated with the Congress in a much bigger way than in the 2014 Lok Sabha, assembly elections and the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. BJP made a non-Jat leader, Manohar Lal Khattar, the chief minister and denied the traditional dominance of the Jats in the state.Similarly in Maharashtra, a large chunk of the BJP-Sena’s losses have come from the Maratha heartland of West Maharashtra.5.Towering central leaders may make a difference in Lok Sabha elections but for state elections, it demands strong local leadership. In past few years, BJP only faced challenges in elections where it faced challenges from strong leaders like Captain Amarinder Singh in Punjab, Naveen Patnaik in Odisha, Nitish Kumar in Bihar, Arvind Kejriwal in Delhi, Kamal Nath-Scindhia in Madhya Pradesh and Ashok Gehlot-Sachin Pilot in Rajasthan.Similar trends were seen in these elections too, BJP's Modi-led election campaign was countered by strong state leaders like Bhupinder Singh Hooda, his son Deependra Hooda, JJP chief Dushyant Chautala and NCP supremo Sharad Pawar.6.After Lok Sabha elections several local opposition bigwigs, including state party chiefs and former ministers, switched their sides to BJP. This led to big discontent among the BJP leaders and many turned rebels. The rebels have hit the party's fortune as many rebels fought elections as independents against the BJP.7.Wherever Congress lacks strong local leadership, the party has faced a downward slide. In Maharashtra, Congress finished below its regional ally NCP. This is in line with party's recent history in regional elections. From Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal, Odisha to now Maharashtra, Congress has now slipped to third or fourth position, falling well below the regional parties.8.Despite weak opposition and no strong challenge, the BJP found it tough to improve its tally in both the states. It is important to remember that BJP swept these two states with over 50% vote share just six months ago. BJP was hoping for a repeat, and was publicly setting targets of 200+ seats in Maharashtra and 70+ seats in Haryana.But the results have clearly shown that people are voting differently for the general elections and state elections. The trend was also visible during Lok Sabha as voters in Odisha gave mandate to Naveen Patnaik's BJD for ruling in the state and BJP for Lok Sabha.9.After the Lok Sabha poll debacle, Rahul Gandhi resigned from the party president post. Since then party is grappling with leadership crisis with Sonia Gandhi being the interim president.Rahul Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi held very few rallies in Haryana and Maharashtra, but surprisingly, the party performed well in the state. There has always been a fear among the Congressmen that the party may fall apart if Gandhis leave the party, but the Haryana elections show that party may still perform well even without the central leadership of Gandhis.10.Last but not the least, lower voter turnout in both the states may have also impacted the election results amid wider anticipation that BJP may return to power with very little challenge from the opposition. Both the states registered lower voter turnout than previous occasions.
