Sindh observes black day in support of the Kashmiri people

Citizens, traders, teachers, students, social workers and government officials took to the streets across Sindh on Sunday to observe Kashmir black day. Hundreds of rallies were taken out across the province, echoing the demand for freedom of Indian-occupied Kashmir and an end to the ongoing state atrocities in the valley where eight million people have been kept hostage in their homes.The people condemned India's forceful annexation of IoK and the unremitting curfew which has so far completed 12 weeks. "India is a terrorist state," asserted Pakistan Patriotic Youth's Dr AG Baladi at a rally in Hyderabad.National Human Rights Foundation's Muhammad Suhail Khan said India's over 70 years rule in IoK has been a story of atrocities, deceit and suppression. Abdul Waheed Inqalabi of the Sindh Citizens Rights Council said Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi is a personification of Germany's Adolf Hitler. "But he is confronted with the brave and courageous people of Kashmir who haven't given up their struggle for over seven decades."Hyderabad Commissioner Muhammad Abbass Baloch and Hyderabad DIG Naeem Ahmed Shaikh led a demonstration in the bureaucracy's regional headquarters Shahbaz Building. "The international community should ensure implementation of the United Nation's resolutions for plebiscite in Kashmir," Baloch said. Shaikh asserted that only Kashmiris have the right to decide about the fate of the valley.Sukkur Deputy Commissioner Ghulam Murtaza Shaikh, who led a rally in his district, deplored the silence of the world powers in the face of Indian barbarity in IoK. The district administration, Jamaat-e-Islami and many other parties and local groups organized demonstrations in Mirpurkhas district.Hundreds of protesters gathered at Kashmir Chowk in Mithi town of Tharparkar, chanting slogans in support of Kashmiris and denouncing the India's crimes against humanity. Dozens of rallies were taken out in Larkana. "The Kashmiri people have exposed the Indian lies and bragging about being the largest democracy to the world," said National Peace Council's chairman Ghulam Mustafa Ansari.
