Goodwin Jewellers shut branches, go missing with customers' deposits

criminal breach of trust

Goodwin Jewellers

chairman A M Sunilkumar

managing director A M Sudheeshkumar

manager Manish Kundi

Untitled Carousel PMC account holders say they have no means to celebrate festivals With their money stuck in the bank, it’s subdued Gurupurab and Diwali for members of the Sikh and Hindu communities.

Chairman A M Sunilkumar and MD A M Sudheeshkumar

Palava City

Untitled Carousel On Dhanteras, 'Ghar ki Laxmi Raste par laye' say PMC Bank depositors; protesters detained Many bank depositors on Friday on the occasion of Dhanteras gathered outside a PMC branch in Andheri East.

Manoj Sawant, one of the victims (Photo by Prashant Narvekar)

Economic Offences Wing

Untitled Carousel Twitter slams Sunil Grover for his insensitive remark on PMC depositors, actor deletes tweet Popular comedian Sunil Grover to delete a tweet that got called out by social media users for being insensitive. He wished PMC depositors a happy Dhanteras.

Customers outside the Dombivali, Thane and Vashi branches on Saturday.

Watch: Angry PMC women customers to protest outside CM's house 00:30

All 12 Indian branches have been shut since October 22; absconding chairman, MD and manager booked for cheating,, common intention.The Dombivli police have registered a case againstafter itsandshut down the firm’s 12 branches and allegedly disappeared with customers’ deposits.Sudheeshkumar had been arrested by the Navi Mumbai police in 2016 for allegedly attacking his wife, and booked for attempt to murder and subjecting a woman to cruelty.Around 300 people protested outside the Dombivli branch on Saturday, after which about 150 of them approached the local police station to register a case. The police said the alleged scam already amounted to almost Rs 2 crore and that this number was likely to go up as more people were approaching them with complaints. They said that prima-facie they have learnt that the firm has 14 branches in all – 12 in India and two in Dubai. All 12 branches in India – in Dombivli, Ambernath, Chembur, Vashi, Thane, Thrissur and three in Pune - have been shut since October 22.On October 22, a notice was posted outside the Dombivli branch, telling customers that the store would be closed for two days. However, when they returned two days later, the store was still shut. Some of them put up a notice asking other customers who had been duped to gather there at 10.30 am on Saturday.The first complainant was Sanjay Biswas, who lost Rs 9.81 lakh. He said, “I had several small fixed deposits with the jeweller. They would promise me good returns, saying that if I deposited Rs 1 lakh they would give me Rs 1.17 lakh at the end of the year. They also used to run jewellery schemes, asking people to deposit a fixed sum over nine to 10 months towards the purchase of jewellery, and promising to pay the last two EMIs,” said Biswas, who runs a fabrication shop in. He claimed that Sunilkumar called him on WhatsApp on Saturday night and said that he wanted to return to his shop but was afraid of what investors would do to him. “He told me he would arrange for security and then come back,” Biswas added.Jobby Thomas, another investor who had deposited lakhs with the jeweller, said, “Most customers are from Kerala. They were attracted by the promise of 17 per cent interest on FDs. I had approached the police several times but they never registered a case.”An official at Dombivli police station said, “The Chairman, MD and manager would promise customers good returns. They would organise huge functions to inaugurate various branches and invite celebrities like Shilpa Shetty, Pankaj Udhas and Aftab Shivdasani.”SP Aaher, senior inspector at Dombivli police station, said they had registered a case of cheating, criminal breach of trust, and common intention. He added, “So far we have recorded the statements of 29 victims, who have been cheated of Rs 1.8 crore. We expect more to come forward as people have told us there are around 700 to 800 victims. We believe that he cheated people of Rs 10 crore in Dombivli alone.” He added that Thane police commissioner Vivek Phansalkar was likely to transfer the case to the Thane police’s
