Kashmiris observed Black Day in Vienna – Voice Of Vienna

VIENNA: A protest demonstration was organised by Pakistan Community Forum Austria (PCFA) in front of famous Opera Building and Indian Embassy in Vienna to mark Black Day on the eve of Accession of the state of Jammu & Kashmir with India.



There were hundreds of Demonstrators along with women and children holding placards and banners to express their solidarity with their Kashmiri brethren in Indian part of Kashmir. The raised slogans and distributed brochures and leaflet to the local Austrian people who were gathered there in large number.



Its pertinent to mention that 26th October is a National Day of Austria and the Austria Government has opend the door of different institutions like Foreign Office and Presidency for common people to have a look on the official work of Austrian Government institutions.



This Black day protest was attended by Speaker of AJK Assembly Shah Ghulam Qadir, Dr Muhmmad Najeeb Naqi minister of finance and health, Miss Noureen Arif minister of industry and women empowerment, Masood Khalid minister of Agriculture, Javed Akhtar minister of social welfare, Basharat Hussain secretary of AJK Assembly and Mohi uddin Dewan MLA.



The speakers highlighted the recent uprising for the freedom of the state and the state of human rights in the valley of Kashmir. The criticized the decision of Indian government to revoke section 370 of Indian constitution and 35A of Kashmir constitution. They also criticized the ongoing curfew since last 78 day in the valley of Kashmir and demand the implementation of UN resolution on this longstanding issue.



A day before the above mentioned delegation meet with the head of human rights department to express their concern on the rights violations in the valley of Kashmir and urged the Austrian government to play her vital role for the restoration of fundamental human rights in Kashmir.



on 25th they attended a Seminar which was organised by Wienerbildungsakademie and Kashmir Culture Centre Vienna. This event was attended by above mentioned delegation and the representative of the Mayor of Vienna Miss Astrid and she conveyed the message of Mayor of Vienna. Mr Senol Grasl-Akkilic, program manager of the WBA open the event with greetings. He conveyed the message of Miss Bettina VOLLATH who was unable to attend the event due to some personal issue. In her message she expressed the measures in detail against India and she invited the Speaker and delegates of AJK in EU Parliament by their next visit.



The local and international NGOs along with parliamentarians attended this event with a due interest and raised specific questions for the restoration of peace and fundamental rights in the valley of Kashmir. They unanimously expressed their support with the people of the state of Jammu and Kashmir and express their solidarity in this crucial time of the history.
