China urges Nepal, India to resolve Kalapani issue through talks

Rejects allegations of Chinese encroachment of Nepali territory

KATHMANDU, Nov 15: While urging Nepal and China to resolve the Kalapani issue through dialogue and mutual consultations, China has said that the allegations made by a section of media that China also has encroached Nepali land were “baseless” and aimed at diverting public attention.

Responding to a media query, a spokesperson at the Chinese embassy in Kathmandu said on Thursday that China wishes to see Nepal and India settling their outstanding border issues through mutual consultations. “The Chinese side wishes Nepal and India could solve their territory disputes on Kalapani through friendly consultations and negotiations,” said the spokesperson.

This is the first time China has commented on the Kalapani issue after a new political map released by India on October 31, 2019 by including Kalapani and surrounding areas inside the Indian border courted a series of protests across Nepal. Various political parties and their sister organizations and civil society bodies have been taking to the streets against India's latest political map, urging the government to resolve the issue through diplomatic initiatives.

While stating that the Chinese side always respected sovereignty and territorial integrity of Nepal, China has also taken strong exception to the allegations that China has also encroached on the Nepali territory. “We have also noticed some irresponsible media and individual groups claiming China also encroached [upon] Nepali land. These accusations are baseless and totally aim to confuse right and wrong and divert public attention,” the spokesperson said.

The Embassy's spokesperson clarified that Nepal and China signed the Boundary Treaty in 1961 and the boundary has been delimited and demarcated and the two sides have over the years a good cooperation in matters such as boundary and dry port issues. “During the visit [of President Xi Jinping], the two sides signed the Agreement on the Boundary Management System,” the spokesperson further said.
