Punjab horror: Dalit organisations launch stir after man, who was thrashed and forced to drink urine, dies

PATIALA: A number of dalit organisations have launched stir after a 37-year-old dalit man, who was thrashed and forced to drink urine in Changaliwala village of Sangrur district of Punjab, died at Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research ( PGIMER ) in Chandigarh on Saturday.According to the villagers, victim Jagmel Singh (37) was mentally not sound and had an altercation with one Rinku and his father Amarjeet Lucky and Jinder Singh on October 21. During the altercation, Rinku and others slapped and punched Jagmel Singh following which the matter reached the village panchayat which took a sympathetic view and asked the four to apologize to Jagmel.Nursing a grudge against him, Rinku and Lucky met Jagmel on November 7 and promised to get him medication for his mental health. Jagmel accompanied them to the house of Rinku where his father Amarjeet Singh and Jinder Singh tied him up and broke both his legs by repeatedly hitting him with iron rods and wooden sticks.When Jagmel requested for water, the four gave him urine to drink. The villagers have also alleged that the four poured acid on his legs and even tried to pull off his skin using some tools.Jagmel was then referred to Civil Hospital at Lehra from where he was referred to Civil Hospital Sunam. There he developed gangrene and was referred to Rajendra Hospital Patiala. As his condition deteriorated, he was taken to PGI Chandigarh, where both his legs had to be amputated on Friday. He could not recover from these injuries and died on Saturday morning.The villagers said the altercation had been triggered by the use of abusive language by Jagmel Singh, but the kind of torture that he had to go through was inhumane.According to senior superintendent of police Sangrur Dr Sandeep Garg , the police team working on the case has reported that Jagmel worked as a labourer and was mentally not sound. The police were still investigating the matter.He said while Rinku, his father Amarjeet and Lucky were arrested on Friday, their associate Binder Singh was nabbed on Saturday.While the incident occurred on November 7, the police registered a formal case in this regard on November 13. The SSP said the case was registered as soon as the matter was reported to the cops.Meanwhile, a large number of dalit organisations in Changaliwala village protested against the incident demanding adequate compensation for the family of the victim.The SSP said Section 302 of the IPC has been added to the FIR registered against the four accused. They had earlier been charged with abduction, wrongful confinement and certain sections of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act at the Lehra police station in Sangrur.The SC Commission has also already taken note of the incident and has sought a detailed report from SSP Sangrur. Chairperson Tejinder Kaur said after taking a suo moto notice of the media reports, they had sent a notice the Sangrur SSP and sought a detailed report from him on Friday.
