TSRTC JAC convenor begins indefinite fast as police try to detain him before protests

TSRTC JAC convenor begins indefinite fast as police try to detain him before protests

The police reached the residence of TSRTC JAC Convenor Ashwathama Reddy at 3 am on Saturday to take him into preventive custody.

news Protest

High drama was witnessed in Hyderabad after the police landed at the residence of TSRTC JAC Convenor Ashwathama Reddy at 3 am on Saturday to take him into preventive custody. The TSRTC employees had planned a ‘bus roko’ protest on Saturday in the city and the police planned to take Reddy into preventive custody citing a law and order issue.

However, Ashwathama Reddy locked himself inside the house and started an indefinite fast condemning the police crackdown on the RTC employees. Several other employees and activists were also detained by the police.

Hundreds of RTC employees then flocked to Reddy's residence in BN Reddy Nagar, as well as Raji Reddy's house at Reddy colony at Sagar Ring Road as news of their impending detention spread. Several police personnel were deployed at residences of both the leaders to take them into custody.

Speaking with the media on Saturday after launching his indefinite fast, Ashwathama said, “There have never so much police excesses, even during the movement for Telangana. The police are now taking JAC members and leaders to unknown locations. The police are violating all the rules and we condemn this action. Our struggle will continue in a democratic method."

He further added, "Ministers should pressurize the Chief Minister to initiate the dialogue process. If the Chief Minister claims to be a democratic leader, if he loves people and if he cares for the lives of labourers, he should make the effort to start a dialogue."

Meanwhile, on Saturday, the Hyderabad city police imposed Section 144 of CrPC upto 500 metres around each bus depot in the city, as well as at the Bus Bhavan in Hyderabad. Similar restrictions are also in place across the state to prevent the obstruction of day-to-day activities.

Some RTC employees and members of civil society groups who on Saturday took part in the ‘bus roko’ protests in front of depots and stations across the city were also detained. The TSRTC strike entered its 43rd day on Saturday amidst the protests. Opposition parties in the state have condemned the detentions of RTC leaders by the police.

Earlier this week, the TSRTC staff kept aside its demand for a merger with the government but remains adamant on its other demands, seeking a dialogue with the government.
