Congress alleges women MPs ‘manhandled’ in Lok Sabha while protesting over Maharashtra; files complaint

Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi leads protest over Maharashtra | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The power tussle in Maharashtra spilled over into Parliament in New Delhi on Monday with Congress alleging that its MPs, including women parliamentarians, were manhandled by security personnel while protesting against the ‘murder of democracy’ in the western state.

Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury alleged that Lok Sabha marshals (security personnel) “manhandled” women MPs when they were protesting in the Well of the House against the formation of government in Maharashtra by Devendra Fadnavis and Ajit Pawar.

Congress interim president Sonia Gandhi even went to Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla’s chamber to complain against the behaviour meted out to women Congress MPs.

When the Congress MPs carrying placards entered the Well of the Lok Sabha to protest, the security personnel physically tried to evict them, alleged Congress leader Manish Tewari. The MPs jostled with the marshals before the House was adjourned.

"Security personnel manhandled our women parliamentarians. We have never experienced this inside Parliament. We will be waiting to see what action is been taken against responsible people," Chowdhury told reporters.

It has been learned that no female marshals were present in the House when all this happened.

“Everyone has the right to protest whether it is female MP or a male MP. The Congress president went to the Speaker’s chamber and fought like a tigress,” one of the female Congress MPs said.

“We had raised a very genuine issue (Maharashtra) in LS and protested in a democratic manner. Unfortunately, we were taken out by marshals who tried to push us forcefully. We've filed a complaint with the Speaker,” Congress MP Hibi Eden said. "We were in the Well of the House, there is no contact with Marshals unless they enter the well. They tried to get banners from us and our colleagues tried to resist it, our women colleagues were manhandled too," he added.

The ruling BJP condemned Congress for the 'unruly' behaviour of its MPs in Lok Sabha today. Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said, “all parties should maintain the sanctity and great traditions of Lok Sabha”. The House cannot be a place of unruly behaviour, he added.

The Congress, not the BJP, 'murdered' democracy in Maharashtra by stealing the people's mandate in league with the Shiv Sena, the Union minister added.
