Despite protest, GPCB to hold public hearings in Padra industrial cluster

Vadodara: Despite activists expressing concern over environment public hearings held in the industrial cluster of Padra taluka of Vadodara last month, Gujarat Pollution Control Board (GPCB) is going ahead with more such public hearings.

After conducting a public hearing for a firm, which had applied for expansion of its existing facility in Ekalbara and another for a firm dealing in pharmaceuticals in Dhobikuva, GPCB will be organizing another hearing on Tuesday for a dyes and dye intermediary firm in Luna, 16km from Vadodara. Activists had warned GPCB against holding such hearings which they say are not only against the state pollution watchdog’s own directive whereby a moratorium was placed in 2016 but also in violation of Supreme Court’s order.

GPCB had imposed restrictions on expansion of existing industries or setting up of new industries in Padra industrial cluster in 2016 after severe groundwater contamination had come to the light. “It was on May 7, 2004 that through its interim order the Supreme Court had directed the district administration to provide portable water to seven villages of effluent channel project (ECP) cluster in Padra. The grave groundwater contamination was mentioned in that order,” said activist Rohit Prajapati.

Later, there were four reports of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and three of GPCB about groundwater contamination in and around Luna village.

“These reports of CPCB and GPCB had led to filing of PIL in the Supreme Court in 2012. It was then that the final order of the apex court had come in February 22, 2017,” he said.

“Given this background and the fact that GPCB itself has not lifted the moratorium that is in place since 2016, conducting such public hearings is very dangerous,” he said.

As per Padra policy framed by GPCB in 2016, it was decided that no fresh no objection certificates will be issued to new industries or expansion to present industries will be allowed in the ‘vegetable bowl’ of Gujarat as the zone was put in the red. GPCB Vadodara’s officials have maintained that they are not a decision-making body and their role is restricted to proceedings only.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
