XLRI Delhi Admission 2020: Final Result Out; Gets AICTE XLRI Delhi NCR Commences First PGDM-BM Batch 2020 with 72 Students

Xavier School of Management (XLRI), Delhi NCR campus has inaugurated its first PGDM-Business Management (PGDM-BM) 2020-22 batch of students and has commenced classes on August 10, 2020 for the maiden batch in Online Mode.

A total of 477 students joined the XLRI both at XLRI Jamshedpur and XLRI Delhi NCR campuses, out of which 72 students have been offered admission at Delhi NCR campus. The welcome ceremony which was also conducted in virtual mode, was addressed by Fr. P. Christie S.J., Director of XLRI Jamshedpur; Fr Sebastian George, SJ, Director, XLRI Delhi-NCR Campus and the Dean (Academics), Prof.Ashis Pani.

The AICTE has given formal approval to start the operations of the XLRI Delhi-NCR campus. It is the first branch of XLRI, Jamshedpur. On the launch of XLRI Delhi NCR campus, Fr.George Sebastian, S.J, Director of XLRI I Delhi-NCR Campus said, “Nearly 95,000 students appear for the entrance examination of XLRI every year. With the commencement of the Delhi-NCR campus, the institute would augment the intake of students to 600 students. XLRI Delhi-NCR and Jamshedpur campus will have the same pedagogy and curriculum. Both campuses will share a pool of highly qualified XLRI faculty members. We shall follow one admission process i.e., XAT and one placement process as well.”



XLRI Delhi NCR Campus: Key Highlights of PGDM-BM 2020-22 Batch

XLRI Delhi NCR campus will offer PGDM-BM program in its inaugural 2020-22 batch. Batch size is as under:

PGDM-Business Management (PGDM-BM) 2020-22 Batch size is of 72 Students given the rigorous selection process. The sanctioned strength of students for the first batch is 120 students at XLRI Delhi NCR campus

Classes for the first semester have started in online mode from 10th August

Due to COVID-19 Pandemic, XLRI has dropped its compulsory Village Exposure Programme for this year

Students of XLRI Delhi Campus and Jamshedpur campus have a standard curriculum, syllabus, pedagogy, e-library, and a common admission & placement process and would get the same opportunities and privileges

The faculty from the Jamshedpur campus will also, be taking classes at the new Delhi NCR campus

Orientation in Virtual Mode

The new students of XLRI are taken through a Special Orientation Programme drawn up by XLRI to update their knowledge before regular classes commence. This year the Orientation program is conducted on a virtual platform.

Welcoming the new students, Fr. P. Christie S.J., Director, XLRI Jamshedpur emphasized on the four essential hallmarks of Jesuit education – Excellence, Integrity & Ethics, Whole person growth across quotients and Social Consciousness, as these four themes have guided the growth of XLRI for last seven decades.

While addressing the students Fr. P. Christie S.J., Director, XLRI-Xavier School of Management, Jamshedpur said, “One of the reasons for going to Delhi is the growing demand for more business leaders triggered by the economic growth in India. These extension campuses, from its very inception, were conceived as ‘an integral part’ of XLRI Jamshedpur. Our two campuses remain part of the same registered society, the same governing board, and have the same treasurer for all the campuses. Our institutional strategy visualizes both Jamshedpur and Delhi campuses as two entities of the same XLRI institutional brand, and the students of both the campuses belong to the one and only XLRI”.

XLRI Delhi NCR: Present & Proposed Management Programs

Apart from the present PGDM-BM offered at its campus, the XLRI Delhi-NCR campus proposes to offer a broad portfolio of courses in the as follows:

2 year full time post graduate programme in Business Management (PGDM-BM): Existing Programme

2 Year full time post-graduate programs in Human Resource Management (PGDM-HRM): Proposed

15-months Executive General Management Programme for the executives having experience of more than five years – Executive PGDM GMP: Proposed

Fellow Program in Management – FPM: Proposed

Corporate Programmes and Certificate Programme in Entrepreneurship and other industry-relevant short and long term programs to be launched in a phase-wise manner: Proposed

XLRI Delhi Intake: Actual and Sanctioned

XLRI Delhi campus has a sanctioned intake of 120 students for its PGDM-BM programme. However, due to its stringent selection process, 72 students have been offered at the XLRI Delhi NCR campus.

XLRI Delhi PGDM Fee 2020-22

XLRI Delhi PGDM program fee for 2020-22 batch has not yet been officially announced. However, XLRI fee for its PGDM program conducted at Jamshedpur is as under and it is expected that except for a few different charges, more or less the XLRI Delhi fee may also remain the same:

XLRI Delhi Porgramme Name Fee (Rs. in Lakhs) PGDM (BM) 23.60

XLRI announced the results for the admission of the two-year post-graduate program in Human Resource Management & Business Management for Jamshedpur Campus on 20 May 2020. The results for Executive PGDM (GM) program have also been announced and orientation classes are underway.

XLRI Delhi is the first top B-school in Delhi NCR which accepts only XAT exam score for admission. Other top MBA colleges in Delhi NCR like FMS, MDI, IIM-R, IMI, accept only CAT scores while IMT Ghaziabad accepts both CAT and XAT scores. IIFT Delhi conducts its own entrance exam.

Delhi NCR, one of the most sought after MBA destination due to the presence of top MBA colleges of India and high placement opportunities, has got shot in arm with XLRI campus in Delhi NCR.

XLRI Delhi: Learning Experience similar to XLRI Jamshedpur

XLRI’s new campus in New Delhi will have the same pedagogy and curriculum as XLRI - Xavier School of Management, Jamshedpur and the faculty from the main campus will also be taking classes at the new campus. Students who are able to get the admission to XLRI’s Delhi-NCR campus will get the 70 years of XLRI experience.

36.34 Acre Campus to House XLRI Delhi

The new XLRI Delhi campus is spread over an area of 36.34 acres. The campus is ready with infrastructure required for 240 students in the first phase. The new XLRI campus has earned a Gold-level Green Building Certification.

XLRI Delhi-NCR campus is located in Jhajjar District, at Aurangpur, which is 25 km from Gurugram and is centrally connected to the main districts like Delhi, Gurgaon, and Rewari. The new state-of-the-art campus is spread over an area of 36 acres, has been designed to promote eco-friendly living and to foster climate consciousness. The orientation of the campus buildings has been planned using detailed sun studies and applying concepts of solar-passive architecture. The areas that receive harsher sunlight have a second skin in the form of ventilated cladding. The new campus has earned a Gold-level Green Building Certification, and it has been designed using IGBC guidelines to be able to achieve a platinum rating from IGBC in the future.

The foundation stone for the XLRI Delhi-NCR campus in Jhajjar District was laid on 16 January 2017. Shri Om Prakash Dhankar, Cabinet minister, Government of Haryana unveiled the plaque of the foundation stone, and Rev. Anil Couto, Archbishop of Delhi, blessed the foundation stone.

XAT 2021: Mandatory Exam for Admission 2021

XLRI Delhi admission criteria and the process for PGDM 2021 is based on XAT 2021 scores for domestic candidates and on XAT 2021 or GMAT (Taken between December 1, 2018 and December 31, 2020) scores for NRI and foreign nationals.

It is mandatory to score well overall and section wise in XLRI XAT 2021 exam which will be held on Sunday, January 3, 2021 as a computer based test in single session across the country. One lakh candidates register and apply for admission to XLRI through XAT exam. Read More on XAT 2021 Exam

XLRI Delhi Application 2021: Important dates

The first step to participate in XLRI Delhi 2021 Admission process is to apply for XAT 2020 and to apply simultaneously to XLRI Delhi through the same application form. Following are the expected key dates to apply for XLRI admission 20201

XLRI Delhi Admission Application 2021 Start date August 23, 2020 Apply online only Last date to apply for XLRI Delhi Admission 2021 November 30, 2020 Apply without paying Late Fee XLRI Delhi Short List Announcement for final selection round 2021 January 31, 2021 After Declaration of XAT 2021 Result

Xavier School of Management (XLRI) Delhi admission process involves two stages namely shortlisting for final admission round on the basis of your XAT 2021 score immediately after the XAT result is declared by January 31, 2021 and the final XLRI admission round 2021 comprising GD-PI-WAT.

The application for XLRI Delhi admission 2021 should be submitted online. The process can be completed in a few minutes time. XLRI is the XAT 2021 exam conducting authority and also provides the facility to apply for XAT 2021 for the management programs of XLRI with a common application form.

XAT & XLRI Application Fee

You can apply for XAT 2021 and XLRI Delhi Admission 2021 using the same online common application form by making payment of XAT application fee-Rs.1700 and XLRI Delhi application fee which is Rs.300/- per program. There will be late fee charges both for XAT 2021 and XLRI application if you choose to apply after November 30, 2020.

6 Steps of XLRI Delhi 2021 Admission Procedure

XLRI Delhi Admission process 2021 has six main stages:

Register and apply for XAT 2021 Use the common Application form to apply for XLRI Delhi Admission 2021 Take XAT 2021 exam and score well section wise and overall XLRI will announce Shortlist for next phase of selection round based on XAT exam score Final Admission Round comprises Group Discussion, Written Ability Test and Personal Interview which will be held in the months of February & March 2021 in Bangalore, Delhi, Mumbai and Jamshedpur Final Admission offer will be made in the month of April/May 2021 on the basis of XAT score, GD-PI-WAT score, academic profile, work experience among other parameters

XLRI Delhi Eligibility Criteria for Admission 2021

XLRI Delhi has prescribed admission eligibility criteria for the PGDM 2021-23 program, commencing in June 2021. To meet the XLRI Delhi eligibility criteria, an applicant must possess a strong and consistent academic background.

For 2 years full time PGDM (BM) 2021-23 batch, the candidate must hold a recognized bachelor's degree of minimum three years duration or equivalent in any discipline. No minimum percentage of marks in graduation has been prescribed for XLRI admission 2021 and to apply for admission to PGDM (BM) All Indian candidates can appear and apply for XAT 2021 NRI and Foreign candidates may apply either through GMAT (Taken between December 1, 2018 and December 30, 2020) or through XAT 2021. Those applying through XAT 2021 must submit the common application form for XAT 2021 and for XLRI Admission 2021 before December 10, 2020 A candidate appearing for the final year bachelor's degree/equivalent qualification examination and those who have completed the degree requirements and are awaiting results can also apply. However, their final examination should be completed by June 10, 2021. It is mandatory for a final year student, who is provisionally considered eligible by XLRI Delhi and offered admission, to submit the mark-sheet and degree certificate of the final year bachelor's degree examination at a later date as decided by XLRI If the candidate is awarded grades/CGPA instead of marks, the equivalence would be based on the equivalence certified by the institution/university from where the bachelor's degree is obtained. In case the institution/university does not have any scheme for converting the CGPA into equivalent marks, the equivalence would be established by XLRI Delhi by dividing the obtained CGPA by the maximum possible CGPA and multiplying the resultant by 100 Work experience is not mandatory for PGDM (BM) program. Fresh graduates and those with work experience can apply. Relevant work experience after graduation will only be considered.

XLRI Delhi Admission: XAT Score Cut Off

XLRI Delhi XAT 2021 cut offs for PGDM program commencing 2021 are expected to remain different than the XLRI Jamshedpur campus. Besides, XLRI gives higher emphasis on other quality parameters in its admission process. Following cut offs are expected to be applied for XLRI Delhi admission 2021:

Programme Name Overall XAT 2020 Cut off Section-1: Verbal & Logical Ability Section-2: Decision Making Section-3: Quantitative Ability & Data Interpretation PGDM (BM) 85 Percentile 75 70 75

Xavier School of Management (XLRI) is a premier, private management institute in India founded in 1949 by Fr Quinn Enright, S.J. in the Steel city of Jamshedpur, Jharkhand. Over the last seven decades, XLRI has helped shape responsible business leaders who serve organizations of repute across the globe. As an institution, XLRI continually strives to contribute its mite to the professional growth and management of innumerable organizations that serve the public - especially organized industry sectors, labor welfare, service agencies engaged in rural development, education, health and other public systems.

XLRI is one of the very few B-schools in India with two prestigious International Accreditations, viz., AACSB - The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business and AMBA - Association of MBAs. XLRI has also earned the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) accreditation.

Stay tuned to MBAUniverse.com for more updates on XLRI Jamshedpur
