Nirbhaya to Cyberabad case: The malignant psychology of a rapist

There are several parallels between rape cases in India and the West | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Despite deep outrage against Nirbhaya case, rape remains a common crime There are studies on the psychology of rapists There are several parallels between rape cases in India and the West

Seven years ago on a cold wintery morning of December, Nirbhaya was gang-raped. The dread of the ugly act of sexual violence was not enough for the perpetrators; they demonstrated unheard-of brutality as they mauled the young woman and diced her organs.

As India read and heard of all the viciousness, millions paraded in solidarity and out of a real sense of outrage. New laws were enacted and funds were demarcated to provide for the better safety of women.

Yet, in 2019, the incidents in Cyberabad and Buxar remind us that we have many miles to traverse on the path of justice for Nirbhaya. Not only are the funds, meant for better protection of women, lying unutilised, similar reports continue to make headlines in discomforting regularity. Month after month, the terror of rape lurks in the dark corners of our cities as prowlers hunt for new victims, who remain vulnerable and precarious to designs of these brutes.





(Members from The All India Democratic Students' Organization hold posters as they protest after the Delhi gangrape case | Pic Credit- BCCL)

What after all leads these men to commit the act of rape, particularly gang-rape, when there is a group of predators? What propels this psychology?

One of the prime reasons why news of beastly rape cases refuses to leave front pages of newspapers is because most of the accused are unbridled by law. In India, particularly, there is a reluctance to disclose that one has been sexually violated. Several times the act of rape is found during investigation and post mortem, in cases that the victim is also killed.

Secondly, the course of law is tedious and takes too long to deliver. The accused often go scot-free and at other times the victim faces harassment at police stations and during intrusive questioning in court.

But besides these, there is a deeper psychology that reveals the crop of our underbelly.

Researcher Madhumita Pandey met nearly 100 convicted rapists in Delhi’s Tihar Jail and spent weeks talking to them to delve into layers of their mind-set.

“When I went to research, I was convinced these men are monsters. But when you talk to them, you realise these are not extraordinary men, they are really ordinary. What they’ve done is because of upbringing and thought process.”





(Pic Credit- Getty Images)

As far as the background is concerned, the accused in India had a remarkably similar upbringing to rape convicts in the West.

As per well-known American activist and author Gloria Steinem, rape stems from a consciousness that is linked with the “cult of masculinity", the reason why rape has been used historically in war as a tool to inflict humiliation on the losing side.

Marcia Cohen and Sherrie H McKenna in their paper ‘Rape: Psychology, Prevention and Impact’ published by Yale have tried to debunk the myth that rape is primarily a sexual act and emphasised that rather it is a crime of violence.

According to the studies they cited, most rapists belong to the lower economic strata. Startlingly, they plan before raping, so it is not necessarily a spur of the moment occurrence, especially when the crime is done in a pair or as a gang. The choice of victim is often “left to chance and circumstance”.

Madhumita Pandey in her study in India also found that most of the men in jail for these crimes were uneducated, school dropouts and belonged to the margins of society.

The Yale paper reveals that “more widely accepted theory is that most rapists seem to come from a subculture of violence whose values may be different from those of the dominant culture. Therefore these adolescents and young men may be demonstrating their toughness and masculinity in a more violent and anti-social manner”.

According to Nicholas Groth, author of ‘Men Who Rape’, gang-rapes are predominantly committed by young men, who wish to be held in high esteem amongst peers and thus demonstrate sexually aggressive behaviour. They sometimes try to show their act to be a legitimate one by supposedly enforcing a code or punishment on women they perceive not fitting their ideal notion and seemingly immoral in some way.

Interviewed offenders in the Yale study, therefore predictably, “believed that the prevention or avoidance of rape was the responsibility of the women.”

Pandey also found that the rape accused in Tihar were mostly in denial mode while others did not understand that consent is required for a sexual act. “There were only three or four who said we are repenting. Others had found a way to put their actions into some justification, neutralise, or blame action onto the victim.”

Clearly, then in India, the grey areas emerge. Not only is there increased overexposure and easy access to porn content, particularly on mobile phones, but there is also a lack of sexual education.

In terms of the society as a whole, there is both a lack of sexual freedom and an enforcement of syndrome of 'male superiority'.

Those men particularly who hail from villages and small towns may also suffer low self-esteem as they enter metropolitan cities and are jolted to find women who are strong and independent.
