Delhi Factory Fire: Workers, Activists Accuse Labour Ministry of Corruption, Negligence

New Delhi: Workers and trade union activists marched to the office of the Delhi Labour Commissioner on Tuesday morning in a demonstration of rage on the recent death of at least 43 workers in a factory fire in Delhi’s Anaj Mandi area.

The protesters had gathered under the banner of the Mazdoor Adhikar Sangharsh Abhiyan. They carried placards demanding strict action against factory owners and administrative officers who they accused of violating labour laws.

In a memorandum addressed to the Delhi labour minister, they said it was obvious that violation of labour laws that frequently lead to such accidents at the workplace would not be possible without the collusion of officials from the labour department and the ruling government. The memorandum mentioned that most of those who died in the Anaj Mandi fire were young, and many were minors as well.

Also read: Court Sends Anaj Mandi Property Owner, Manager to 14-Day Police Custody

Workers say that such fires have become a predictable pattern now and no lessons have been learnt from similar accidents in Bawana, Narela, Sultanpuri and Peeragarhi areas of the capital city.

The memorandum claims that there are many such factories in Delhi where workers are locked inside while working, and are hence trapped with no place to escape to in case of accidents. It says these factories do not follow any labour laws, pay half the minimum wages and do not adhere to any safety regulations either.

The first in a list of five demands calls for strict punishment for the factory owner and officials of the labour department who they accuse of allegedly overlooking labour laws in exchange for the payment of bribes. The second demand is strict implementation of labour laws and safety regulations at workplaces.

Protesters also demanded that families of all the workers who died be paid Rs 50 lakh each as compensation and government jobs be provided to dependants of these workers. For those who were injured, they demanded Rs 20 lakhs each as compensation, along with free healthcare.

Citing that children were also injured and killed in the fire, the workers in the protest demanded a total ban on child labour. Most of these workers were migrants from other states and the protesters demanded that effective laws be formed for registration and safety of such workers.

Their final demand is a broader appeal to stop “anti-workers” amendments to labour laws. They were referring to the Modi government’s attempt at the streamlining of 44 labour laws into four labour codes. Several workers have been protesting against this codification, calling it “pro-employer”.
