20,000 visitors already in for Jan 1 tribute at Bhima Koregaon pillar

Despite last year’s horrific turn of events on January 1 — when lakhs of visitors come to pay tribute to the victory pillar — around 20, 000 visitors have already gathered at Bhima Koregaon. However, unlike the last time when amidst the tension, all the shops in nearby villages were closed, this time, villagers are seen welcoming the visitors with roses and offering free food in the presence of heavy police deployment.

According to police, the visitors have been camping in nearby villages including Sanaswadi and Loni Kand. On Monday, the police also carried out the route march in the adjoining village to maintain law and order.

Ashok Athawale, a villager from Sanaswadi, whose house and fabrication workshop was set on fire during the riots, welcomed visitors. “We lost our house in the riots and had to leave our village. However, this time again, we are offering free food to nearly 500 visitors.”

The government is also taking extra precautions this year in terms of giving permission to various leaders to hold public rallies. In fact, no one has been allowed to hold a rally near the victory pillar itself and all will be held nearly 500 m away from the pillar.

CM Devendra Fadnavis said every year, the state allowed different leaders to hold rallies there. “But if anyone is trying to spoil the law and order situation, then no permissions will be given,” he added.

Minister of state for home (rural) Deepak Kesarkar said they would deploy 5,000 police constables, 12 platoons of the SRPF, 1,200 home guards under the inspector general of police will oversee security measures.

Meanwhile, Bhim Army chief Chandrashekhar Azad who landed in Pune city on Monday, could not hold a public rally after his plea was rejected by the Bombay High Court. Azad said, “We respect the constitution and therefore after the high court rejected our plea, we did not go against the order. However, no one can stop me from visiting and so I will visit the victory pillar on Tuesday.”
