Citizenship Act Protest: Agitation reaches Delhi, Bengal; Amit Shah cancels Shillong visit as situation in Meghalaya, Assam worsens

Guwahati | Jagran News Desk: The massive protest in the northeastern states of India entered its fourth straight day with thousands of protesters in Assam, Meghalaya and other states in northeast raged on roads against the amended Citizenship Act, which got its assent from the President on Thursday night after passing the Parliament test on Wednesday.

Amid the protest, mobile internet and SMS services were suspended in Meghalaya for two days and an indefinite curfew was imposed in parts of Shillong.

The protest also reached West Bengal where the Beldanga railway station complex in Murshidabad district was set on fire and RPF personnel deputed there were thrashed by thousands of people, protesting against the amended Citizenship Act on Friday.

While the number of casualties increased to three after another person, who was among the protesters lathi-charged by the police on Thursday succumbed to his injuries today.

Also Read: ‘States have no powers’: Home Ministry official as five CMs refuse to implement Citizenship Act

Here are the latest updates:

Assam:

Three people among the protesters succumbed to their injuries after the police lathi-charged and shelled tear gas at them. The protesters torched several vehicles and burnt railway stations and bus stands.

The curfew which was in force in Dibrugarh municipal area was relaxed for 5 hours on Friday even as a large number of people gathered in the Chandmari area of Guwahati to observe a fast called by the AASU to protest against the Citizenship Act.

Incidents of police firing were reported from several places in Guwahati including Hatigaon, Lachitnagar, Bashishta, Downtown, Ganeshguri, and Lalungaon, reported news agency PTI.

Meanwhile, internet services -- which are suspended in the state -- were also extended for another 48 hours from 12 noon on Thursday and several flights and to and from Dibrugarh and Guwahati were halted. Several trains were also canceled in the state. The Army also conducted a flag march in Guwahati and in three districts of Assam.

Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal has warned of taking action against those involved in arson and violence, saying vandalism has no place in any democratic process. Sonowal also asserted that he was committed to protect the rights of the indigenous people of the state and urged parents of students to persuade them not to join any agitation which turns violent.

Also Read: As Assam engulfs in massive protests, Mamata Banerjee announces mega rally in Kolkata against Citizenship Act

Meghalaya:

A massive crowd protesting against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Meghalaya's capital Shillong was tear-gassed and lathi-charged by the police this evening after they reportedly threw stones at the police near the Raj Bhavan.

On Friday, internet and SMS services were suspended in Meghalaya for two days and an indefinite curfew was imposed in parts of Shillong. The state police, on its Twitter handle, has appealed to the people not to spread false information and internet and mobile services have been suspended.

“Curfew under section 144 Cr PC has been promulgated in certain areas of Shillong city w.e.f. 12/12/2019 from 10:00 pm onwards,” it said.

Home Minister Amit Shah also canceled his trip to Shillong where he was scheduled to visit North East Police academy on Sunday. He will instead visit Jharkhand tomorrow and on Monday.

According to an NDTV report, video shot from cellphones showed people being brought in to Shillong’s Civil Hospital with injuries to their legs and bodies.

Chief Minister Conrad Sangma was also heckled by protesters, as he landed from a chopper to take part in an event marking the death anniversary of a freedom fighter. Slogans of the protesters were filmed raising banners of ‘Conrad go back’.

West Bengal

Train services were affected in the Sealdah division of the Eastern Railway on Friday, as people protesting against the amended Citizenship Act blocked tracks at several places, leaving thousands stranded, officials, said as reported by PTI.

In the Krishnanagar-Lalgola section, tracks were blocked at Beldanga and Rejinagar stations around 3.20 pm and also near Murshidabad station at 4.30 pm, a spokesman said. The Beldanga railway station complex in Murshidabad district was also set on fire and RPF personnel deputed there were thrashed, officials said. Train services were, however, on between Sealdah and Krishnanagar, he said.

In the Baruipur-Diamond Harbour section, railway tracks were obstructed at Basuldanga around 2.55 pm, affecting train movement in the stretch, the official said.

Also Read: Japanese PM Shinzo Abe's visit to India postponed amid protests over Citizenship Act in northeast

New Delhi:

Meanwhile, the raging fire against the contentious act also reached the national capital where hundreds of students from Jamia Millia Islamia turned the varsity campus into a battlefield on Friday after a students' march to Parliament House, to protest the Citizenship Amendment Act, was interrupted by police.

There was a clash between police and students after the protesters were stopped at the varsity gate. The students, who were baton-charged by police personnel, alleged that the police also used tear gas to quell their march. The students also resorted to stone-pelting. Videos circulated by students on social media showed police caning the protesters.

The police had cordoned off the road and protesters were seen climbing onto the barricades. The University's gate was later closed. As a precautionary measure, the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC) closed the entry and exit points at Patel Chowk and Janpath metro stations following Delhi police's advisory.

"As advised by Delhi Police, entry & exit at Patel Chowk and Janpath have been closed. Trains will not be halting at these stations," DMRC said on twitter

Arunachal Pradesh

Students' unions in Arunachal Pradesh on Friday boycotted their examination to hit the streets across cities, seeking immediate revocation of the legislation. Thousands of protesters, led by Rajiv Gandhi University Students' Union (RGUSU) and Students' Union of NERIST (SUN), marched from the university to Raj Bhavan to submit a memorandum to Governor BD Mishra, stressing that the amended Act would not be implemented in the state.

Also Read: After Mamata Banerjee, Kerala and Punjab CMs declare not to allow Citizenship Act in their states

What is Citizenship act?

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2019 -- which has been given a nod by President Ram Nath Kovind -- seeks to grant Indian citizenship to people of Hindu, Sikh, Jain, Parsi, Christian and Buddhist communities who have come from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan till December 31, 2014, and facing religious persecution there will not be treated as illegal immigrants.

The Act says the refugees of the six communities will be given Indian citizenship after residing in India for five years, instead of earlier requirement of 11 years.

The bill was passed in Lok Sabha on Monday while in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday. According to the legislation, the bill will not be applicable in tribal areas of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram, and Tripura as included in the Sixth Schedule of the Constitution.

Posted By: Talib Khan
