Congress to hold 'Bharat Bachao' rally today; will highlight BJP's 'divisive and disruptive' politics

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Congress will highlight the "divisive and disruptive" politics of BJP and Modi government Bharat Bachao rallies will be held in New Delhi, Dublin, London, New York and Syndey

New Delhi: Congress will hold 'Bharat Bachao' rally on Saturday to highlight the "divisive and disruptive" politics of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government in the country. The rally will be held at Ramlila grounds in New Delhi and a host of top Congress leaders including interim party chief Sonia Gandhi, former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, Wayanad MP Rahul Gandhi will participate in it.

Several tall leaders of the Congress will address the rally and highlight the "divisive" nature of the BJP government and "failures" of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Even the party cadres abroad will carry out demonstrations against the BJP in New York, London, Sydney and Dublin.

Delhi: Preparations underway at Ramlila Maidan where Congress is organising 'Bharat Bachao' rally tomorrow. (Earlier visuals) pic.twitter.com/EtnPXyYDBG — ANI (@ANI) December 13, 2019

"Members of the Congress Overseas will join the Bharat Bachao Rally by demonstrating around the world. Our message to save India from divisiveness, arrogance and incompetence will be spread worldwide," tweeted the Congress.

Delhi Congress president Subhash Chopra has claimed that over 50,000 people are likely to attend the rally tomorrow. Lakhs of party workers from across the country will also take part in the protest, said party spokesperson Mukesh Sharma.

Since August this year, BJP-led Central government has abrogated Article 370 that granted special status to the now-defunct state of Jammu and Kashmir, ended the long-standing Ayodhya dispute which went into the favour of Hindu parties and amended the Citizenship Act to grant citizenship to "non-Muslim" refugees living in the country.

The 'Bharat Bachao' rally has come in the wake of the historic decisions and judgements passed in the past couple of months.

Meanwhile, BJP working president JP Nadda has asked his party MPs in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha to speak to the Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain and Christian refugees from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, in their constituencies and inform them about Citizenship Amendment Act, from December 14 to 31.
