Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests: Agitation intensifies in Bengal, internet suspended

Will make Assam govt party to case against CAA in SC if voted Congress to power: Gaurav Gogoi

Citizenship (Amendment) Act protests: Agitation intensifies in Bengal, internet suspended

India

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Kolkata, Dec 15: Sporadic incidents of violence were reported from Nadia, North 24 Parganas and Howrah districts of West Bengal which is witnessing protests against the amended Citizenship Act, police said on Sunday. Protesters have blocked various important roads in Amdanga and Kalyani areas of North 24 Parganas and Nadia districts. They also blocked roads and railway tracks in various stations of the districts, the police said.

Earlier in the day, state BJP delegation met Prime Minister Narendra Modi apprised him of the law and order situation in West Bengal, amid violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act.

Challenge to Citizenship (Amendment) Bill to be heard by SC on December 18

NEWS AT 3 PM, DECEMBER 15th

The delegation, led by party state general secretary Biswapriya Roy Chowdhury, met Modi at Andal airport in Paschim Bardhaman district where he had a stopover on his way to Jharkhand's Dumka for an election rally.

"We had a very short time. But we briefed him about the ongoing violence and arson in the state for the last three days. We have told PM Modi, how the state government is doing nothing to control the situation," Roy Chowdhury said.

Protests continued in various parts of the state for the third consecutive day as incidents of violence were reported from Nadia, Birbhum, North 24 Parganas and Howrah districts.

Three railway stations were set on fire on Saturday and at least 25 buses have been torched. Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who resolutely opposed the amended Citizenship Act, has appealed for peace and warned of stern action against those indulging in violence.

2019: Paving the way for the persecuted and passage of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill

Meanwhile, Internet services were suspended in five districts of West Bengal, amid violent protests against the amended Citizenship Act across the state, a senior government official said.

According to the official, the government has decided to shutdown Internet services in Malda, Murshidabad, Howrah, North 24 Parganas and parts of South 24 Parganas districts to prevent rumour-mongering and circulation of fake news, especially on social media.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Sunday, December 15, 2019, 15:39 [IST]
