Bengal mobs set ablaze rail stations

KOLKATA: Railway properties were set ablaze, employees attacked, houses randomly torched and highways blocked across West Bengal on Sunday as vandalism coursed through the veins of the agitation against the citizenship law. The state government, which has struggled to contain the violence raging since Saturday, responded with suspension of internet services in three districts and four subdivisions.Bhaluka Road railway station in Malda district witnessed the day’s worst attack, with a 15,000-strong mob setting fire to the ticket counter and vandalising the offices of the stationmaster and his colleagues. Some in the crowd allegedly targeted the employees without provocation before making a bonfire of furniture and other items on the tracks.Sources said railway police could do little to keep the vandals at bay until a police team arrived. “The station burned for several hours,” an official said. At Akra in South 24 Parganas , a mob blocked rail tracks, ransacked a train and vandalised the ticket counter. In another part of town, police fired tear gas to disperse a group of protesters that had stopped a peace procession.Road and rail traffic were also hit in North 24 Parganas, while BJP’s Barrackpore MP Arjun Singh claimed he came under attack at Jagaddal. Traffic came to a halt for several hours in several parts of the state. Singh accused “local criminals backed by TMC” of waylaying his car and damaging it. “The gang was led by local TMC leader Ganesh Singh. The men were armed with bamboo sticks and iron rods, with which they smashed the windscreen,” Singh said.Buses set ablaze at Karandighi in North Dinajpur. The toll plaza at Baishnabnagar was ransacked, too. While movement of trains through the Azimgunj-Katwa line had been disrupted on Saturday, trains between Rampurhat and Malda and beyond had to be cancelled on Sunday.Murshidabad remained the epicentre of the agitation. A BJP office at Bairagipara was set ablaze. Another group ransacked an office of the party at Rejinagar. Protesters also blocked NH-34 at the Siddikali crossing in Sagardighi. Later, a mob attacked Manigram railway station and set fire to a portion of the building. A Railway Protection Force bus was attacked, too. Large RPF contingents were deployed at Beldanga, Behrampore, Sargachhi and Murshidabad stations, although no train has passed by since five of them were attacked on Saturday.Police and Rapid Action Force teams opened fire to disperse a mob in Murshidabad that torched several houses at Chhabghati, Dafarhat and Jagtai. At Baishnabnagar, some protesters attempted to vandalise the toll plaza on NH-34. A team from Baishnabnagar police station resorted to lathicharge to disperse the mob.The internet ban notified by the state government took effect in the three districts of Malda, Murshidabad and North Dinajpur, besides Basirhat and Barasat subdivisions of North 24-Parganas and Baruipur and Canning in South 24-Parganas.
