IIT Bombay, TISS students protest against police violence against students of Delhi's Jamia University

IIT Bombay

Mumbai

Aligarh Muslim University

Jamia University

Citizenship Act: TISS students protest against police action on Jamia students 00:57

Citizenship Amendment Act

#CABProtests: TISS students marched from their campus to Ambedkar Garden in Chembur to stage a protest against the… https://t.co/7gLXzqD1DZ — Mumbai Mirror (@MumbaiMirror) 1576483727000

Untitled Carousel Violence, arson as locals, students clash with police 4 buses, 2 police vehicles torched; Jamia authorities allege Delhi police entered campus by force, beat up staff, students; schools closed today.

Amid the violence over the citizenship law that swept campuses across the country, police allegedly barged into the Jamia Millia Islamia University and its library on Sunday and clashed with the students. Tear gas were used by the police in the hostel rooms and library and bullets are also fired.As soon as the news of police crackdown on the Jamia campus spread across the country, students fromand TISS, among other universities from across the country, joined in solidarity with the Jamia students.Late night on Sunday, around 100 students of IIT Bombay organised a march in solidarity with Jamia and(AMU) students. They also protested against the police clampdown and brutality which took place in the North East.APPSC IIT Bombay condemned the attacks by armed police on Jamia and AMU students and in a statement, it demanded the suspension of the police personnel responsible.“The students were protesting peacefully andofficials have confirmed and issued a statement that the police had entered the campus without permission from the University administration and lathi charged the staff and students. They have also been firing tear gas shells inside the university. Many of the students were paraded outside the university as criminals and 100s were injured. Police have also been attacking students of Aligarh who marched in solidarity with protests in Jamia. These attacks are a stark reminder to the democratic and progressive citizens of our country and it calls for a collective effort in registering our protest against the attacks on our democratic rights,” the full statement reads.Even on December 11, IIT Bombay students gathered at its campus in solidarity with the protest against the passing of the controversial CAB, 2019.Students of West Bengal’s Jadavpur University also organised a protest on Sunday and raised Azadi slogans from the University to Park Circus. They were joined by AMU students.More than 60 students were injured when the AMU students, protesting against the(CAA) clashed with police on Sunday at a campus gate. The clashes started after an agitation by Jamia students against the legislation turned violent and police used batons and tear gas to disperse them. The AMU students then gathered at the Babey Sir Syed Gate and raised slogans against the police action on the demonstrators in Delhi.
