[GROUND REPORT] Standoff at old Delhi Police HQ that led to release of detained Jamia Millia Islamia students

The cloud of demonstrators outside the former Delhi Police HQ in ITO (Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora) | Photo Credit: People

Key Highlights Supporters of Jamia Millia Islamia university students came out in large numbers. Police finally released 35 students from Kalkaji police station and 15 students from New Friends Colony police station Towards the end of the standoff, private buses were used to ferry demonstrating students back to their respective hostels

New Delhi: Hours after the police action in the national capital's Jamia Millia Islamia University made its way to instant messaging apps and social media platforms on December 15, a clarion call was made for a demonstration outside the former Delhi Police Headquarters which stands on the opposite end of the Income Tax Office (ITO). The impasse that ensued lasted for almost seven hours and resulted in the release of as many as 50 students of Delhi's Jamia Millia Islamia University.

Here's a sequence of events as they unfolded between 9.00 pm and 4.00 am on the intervening night of December 15 and December 16:

9.30 pm: A faction of less than a hundred demonstrators gathers outside the main gate of the old Delhi Police HQ in Delhi's ITO area. Among those who are demanding the release of the detained boys and girls is a middle-aged woman carrying a placard that said 'I am a mother, I support the students'. Within minutes, Delhi Police personnel create a perimeter around the demonstrators as is standard procedure.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)

9.45 pm: The demonstrators take to slogans to echo a collective cry for the safety of the detained students. It was clear from the get-go that the demonstrators were united in their condemnation for the police's approach in dealing with the protests that rocked the Jamia Millia Islamia campus earlier that day.

10.15 pm: "They were taken away from the library and locked up," a student of Jamia Millia Islamia yells at a policeman, a sense of anguish in her voice. However, one can see several small batches of citizens or students interacting with police personnel in riot gear. They patiently discuss the events that conspired in the Jamia Millia Islamia campus on Sunday evening, with many policemen and policewomen even expressing sympathy with the students.

10.45 pm: Groups of students climb on top of the barricades used to create a perimeter around the demonstrators. They hold up pictures of Mahatma Gandhi and Dr BR Ambedkar. By this time, hundreds have gathered at the main gate of the old Delhi Police HQ. Swarms of people, of all ages, stand on both sides of the Indraprastha Marg that houses the Public Works Department (PWD) HQ, the Institute of the Chartered Accountants of India and the main branch of the Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)

11.15 pm: As time passes, the slogans grow louder and begin to address the Citizen (Amendment) Act which was the subject of the demonstrations held in Jamia Millia Islamia that led to the detention of students in the first place. I see a student passing bottles of water to the demonstrators offer one to a policeman who refuses politely but thanks the student. This highlights the complexity and irony of this standoff between the citizens of India's capital city and their protectors.

11.45 pm: "Why are we doing this to them, after all, they are our own children, are they not?" says a gentleman in his 50s, a resident of Malviya Nagar. A senior officer with the Delhi Police tells me, "The police have no part in policy-making and yet bear the first brunt of any public opposition to any legislation."

12.00 am: An announcement is made that a total of 52 students have been detained and are being kept at two police stations, namely Kalkaji and New Friends Colony.

(Photo Courtesy: Amrtansh Arora)

1.00 am: Demonstrators continue to shout slogans and state that they will not leave unless the police free all the detained students, and ensure that no FIRs are filed against any of them. Hundreds voicing their dissent also demand that action be initiated against the policemen who can be seen thrashing Jamia Millia Islamia students in videos that are going viral.

2.00 am: What was barely a crowd of fewer than 100 five hours ago has now turned into a flock comprising hundreds of people, students, parents, and concerned citizens who are seeking accountability for the actions of their sentinels. Meanwhile, a wall of male and female police personnel, clad in riot-gear, form a human chain around the demonstrators.

3.00 am: Deputy Commissioner of Police (South Delhi) MS Randhawa informs media persons and demonstrators that 50 of the detained students have been released on the orders of the Delhi Minorities Commission. Despite minor episodes of hostility on the part of demonstrators, the Delhi Police personnel exercise restraint and allow DCP Randhawa to address the grievances of concerned citizens.

3.45 am: An announcement is made about the release of the detained students. Demonstrators begin to disperse. "I hope I get home in time to drop my son off to school," says one of the hundreds of policemen who were deployed at the spot and maintained their calm throughout this standoff which lasted for nearly seven hours on a cold December night.

In the end, the words of noted American historian Mary Frances Berry come to mind. "When you have police officers who abuse citizens, you erode public confidence in law enforcement. That makes the job of good police officers unsafe."
