Cops refuse rally permission to Fergusson College students, cite law and order issues

Scholars to protest on campus instead; SPPU students hold meet to show solidarity with protesters of Jamia



In line with student protests erupting across the country against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and National Register of Citizens (NRC), scholars of Fergusson College (FC) also applied for permission to peacefully demonstrate on Monday morning, but were denied the same by police. Meanwhile, pupils of Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU) gathered at the varsity on Monday evening in solidarity with students of Jamia Millia Islamia and other institutions, amid reports of police violence against them.



At the rally planned by FC students, they sought to launch a signature campaign to oppose legal steps of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government at the Centre. However, late on Sunday evening, a day prior, applicants received a letter from Deccan police station (PS) claiming permission was declined to avoid a law and order situation from arising. A notice was sent to the students, refusing permission to come together for a rasta roko, instructing them not to burn effigies or posters of any political leaders, saying this could hurt sentiments of people from other castes and religions.



~~72778540~~

Now, students plan to conduct their protest within the college campus instead on Tuesday.



Second-year Bachelor of Arts (BA) student Santosh Rasave shared, “We are against these steps of the government and wish to conduct a signature campaign to involve others who believe in the same, but as police have denied permission, we will do so inside the hostel and college campus. We do not wish to hurt anyone’s feelings or criticise any leader. We are just against CAA and NRC. We want to protest about the same silently and gather as much signatures as possible.” SY Bachelor of Science (BSc) student Vishal Dabhade added, “The government is going against the Constitution. The United Nations (UN) has also criticised their moves. India has always been known as a secular country, but these new legalities are throwing that into question. There are also many petitions filed in the Supreme Court against it all. We as students oppose it and wish to collect signatures of other students who feel the same way.”



Meanwhile, the college principal claimed they have not been approached for permission. “Students have not come to us for any such permission to stage a protest. If police has denied it to them, students must have written to the police directly,” said FC principal Dr Ravindrasinh Pardeshi.



Elaborating on the cops’ refusal, senior police inspector Deepak Lagad of Deccan PS said, “We denied permission for the protest taking into consideration the law and order situation. This was done as per the higher authority’s orders.”



Solidarity shown at SPPU



Students from various departments of SPPU came together at the varsity’s Aniket Canteen on Monday evening in solidarity with students protesting across the country, especially in lieu of violence against Jamia Millia Islamia students, and sloganeered against CAA and NRC. Permission for the meet was granted by the SPPU’s security department.



Commerce student Kamalakar Shete told Mirror, “While the Act and register go against the Constitution, the attack on protesting students also goes against the very tenets of democracy. Students opposing and sharing their concerns, only to be beaten by police — how is this the solution? We stand with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and oppose laws against secularism. We have the right to speak out.” From the English department, Satish Gore said, “This is an assault on the Constitution, which is the nation’s soul. We will not bear any attack on India’s secular fabric. CAA is divisive and hews the country on the basis of religion. We oppose the treatment meted out to Jamia students. It is our right to question the government.”


