CAB Bill Latest News: IISc researchers protest; IIMB students, faculty write to Prime Minister Narendra Modi

Hundreds of people assemble near Town Hall, Mysuru, to urge the Centre to withdraw the Act and drop the NRC proposal

BENGALURU: Resentment against the Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019 echoed on campuses of two premier educational institutions of Bengaluru, besides sparking symbolic protests elsewhere in the state capital, Mysuru, Shivamogga and Mangaluru.While anti-CAA protests were held at the Indian Institute of Science (IISc) campus, Indian Institute of Management-Bangalore (IIMB) students shot off an open letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi condemning the alleged police crackdown on students in New Delhi.In Mysuru, there was a symbolic stir after police stopped protesters from going ahead with the programme on a larger scale. However, in Shivamogga, a huge column of Congress supporters turned up for the party’s event, prompting cops to arrest the protesters and clear the venue. In Mangaluru, scores of protesters blocking traffic movement in the heart of the city were arrested after a mild lathi-charge.The otherwise apolitical IISc saw some passionate activity with student organising a peaceful, sit-in and protest march against CAA.Scientists from other institutions in the city also joined the IISc protest.From morning, a floating population of around 50 students sat in front of the institute’s main building, making posters and discussing the turn of events in the country. The students were supported by a few faculty members and scientists, who dropped by to express their solidarity with the students.“I am from Assam. There are students from various parts of the country here. You cannot distinguish us based on our religion. Neither can the government snatch away our freedom to voice our concerns. We are a democracy and they need to understand that the basis of democracy is in being open to criticism,” said an IISc student. “The country is burning, not shining,” said another researcher.Manmohan, a retired scientist, said, “I’m here to show my sympathy with students. The intellectual class in this country is students and if they are attacked, nobody will be left to raise questions tomorrow,” he said.Suvrat Raju, associate professor, International Centre for Theoretical Sciences, said: “Many scientists feel use of religion as a criterion for citizenship is absurd. The manner in which the government has sought to repress criticism of its policies, through police action, is shocking.”United Mysuru, an umbrella body of various Muslim, Dalit and like-minded organisations, postponed its protest against CAA and NRC near Town Hall, Mysuru, after police denied them permission. Social Democratic Party of India leaders, however, held a symbolic stir for 20 minutes at the same place.In Mangaluru, activists of the Campus Front of India blocked traffic on Collectors Gate Road without prior police permission. Cops resorted to a mild lathi-charge and arrested 38 agitators.In Shivamogga, former Congress MLA KB Prasanna Kumar faced the wrath of police as hundreds of demonstrators flooded the protest venue at Mahatma Gandhi Park. The huge turnout of Congress workers caught police unawares. They detained several party workers and got the venue vacated.Meanwhile, students of National Law School of India University, Bengaluru and seven other premier law schools of the country in a statement condemned the use of force against students of Aligarh Muslim University and Jamia Millia Islamia.
