Violence erupts as Modi denies turning India into Hindu homeland

Modi's government has responded with troops, internet shutdowns and curfews, just as it did when it clamped down on Kashmir.

In New Delhi, police officers beat unarmed students with wooden poles, dragging them away from stunned colleagues and sending scores to the hospital, many with broken bones. In Assam, they shot and killed several young men.

India's Muslims had stayed relatively quiet during the other setbacks, keenly aware of the electoral logic that has pushed them to the margins.

Loading

India is about 80 per cent Hindu, 14 per cent Muslim, and Modi and his party, which espouses a Hindu-centric world view, won a crushing election victory in May and handily control Parliament.

They want a theocratic state like Pakistan or Israel ... this is pushing the country to the brink of chaos. — BN Srikrishna, former supreme court judge

Advertisement

But Indian Muslims are feeling increasingly desperate, and so are progressives, many Indians of other faiths, and those who see a secular government as fundamental to India's identity and its future.

The world is now weighing in, too. United Nations officials, US representatives, international advocacy groups and religious organisations have issued scathing statements saying the law is blatantly discriminatory. Some are even calling for sanctions.

A religious state

Critics are deeply worried that Modi is trying to wrench India away from its secular, democratic roots and turn this nation of 1.3 billion people into a religious state, a homeland for Hindus that will discriminate against others.

"They want a theocratic state like Pakistan or Israel, where they give rights to one religion and the other religions aren't given anything," says BN Srikrishna, a former judge on India's Supreme Court. "This is pushing the country to the brink, to the brink of chaos.

"This is how waves of communal violence start in the country."

Advertisement

Protests broke out across a growing list of cities as people reacted to the new citizenship law. AP

Modi is no stranger to communal violence. The worst bloodshed that India has seen in recent years exploded on his watch, in 2002, in Gujarat, when he was the top official in the state and clashes between Hindus and Muslims killed more than 1,000 people – most of them Muslims.

Modi was widely blamed for not doing enough to stop it. Courts have cleared him, but many people believe he was at least partly responsible for the brutality that unfolded.

His grip on power is still firm, even with a weakening economy. The political opposition, including the once-dominant Indian National Congress party, has been disorganised and shaky compared with the juggernaut he and his right-hand man, Amit Shah, the home minister, have built in their Bharatiya Janata Party.

But this contentious citizenship law, which paves a special path for non-Muslim migrants in India to become citizens, has galvanised the opposition.

Rival opposition leaders who usually cannot agree on anything are planning protests together. Students from across the country are rallying to each other's defence.

Advertisement

Each episode of harsh police action captured by mobile phone and beamed around cyberspace catalyses more sympathy, more protests – and more prospects for violence.

On December 16, Modi called for calm, saying on Twitter the law "does not affect any citizen of India of any religion" and "the need of the hour is for all of us to work together".

Indians shout slogans as they protest in Gauhati on Monday against the new law, which gives citizenship to non-Muslims who entered India illegally. AP

Existential tensions

This citizenship law was a campaign promise and a special wish of Modi's Hindu base. His supporters see a future India as a place that emphasises its Hindu heritage and eliminates special legal protections for Muslims and other minorities.

Some analysts say Modi's party is charting a course that could lead to an India dominated by one faith and one viewpoint, where existential tensions hold back the economy and hamstring politics – as embodied by Pakistan, India's struggling, Islamic archenemy next door.

Advertisement

"We're chasing a failed dream," says Yogendra Yadav, a political commentator.

The new citizenship legislation, the Citizenship Amendment Act, expedites Indian citizenship for migrants from some of India's neighbouring countries if they are Hindu, Christian, Buddhist, Sikh, Parsee or Jain. Only one major religion in South Asia was left off: Islam.

Indian officials deny any anti-Muslim bias and say the measure was intended purely to help persecuted minorities migrating from India's predominantly Muslim neighbours — Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh.

The legislation follows a divisive citizenship test conducted this summer in one state in northern India and possibly soon to be expanded nationwide.

All residents of Assam, along the Bangladesh border, had to produce documentary proof that they or their ancestors lived in India since 1971.

Advertisement

Around two million of Assam's population of 33 million – a mix of Hindus and Muslims – failed to pass the test and now risk being rendered stateless. Huge new prisons are being built to house anyone determined to be an immigrant in the country illegally.

Across religious lines

A widespread belief is that the Indian government will use the citizenship tests and the new citizenship law to strip away rights from Muslims who have been living in India for generations.

Many Muslim Indians fear they will not be able to produce the old birth certificates or property deeds necessary to prove citizenship. And while Hindu residents in the same situation would now seem to be given a pass, Muslim residents would have no legal protection.

The protests started last week in Assam, led by Hindus and joined by Assamese Muslims and Christians. Many Hindus in Assam do not like the new law either: They fear it could open the floodgates to poor migrants who will settle in Assam and take their land. And so, despite the legislation's potential to drive a sectarian wedge across India, in Assam it backfired, unifying protesters across religious lines.

Protestors set fires to block traffic in Gauhati, where police arrested dozens of people and enforced a curfew. AP

Advertisement

Witnesses said that security forces fired live ammunition into a crowd, killing a 17-year-old Christian student as he walked home. Outraged demonstrators then burned down train stations and attacked police.

Struggling to maintain control, the central government sent in the army and shut down the internet. The angry crowds only grew.

On Sunday, the protests spread to Delhi. Students of Jamia Millia Islamia University, a predominantly Muslim institution, gathered peacefully, witnesses said. But chaos broke out after a separate group of violent protesters joined the fray and began clashing with police, witnesses said.

The police response was swift and indiscriminate, according to witnesses, and videos widely circulated on social media showed officers beating students.

In one video, a group of female students tries to rescue a young man from the grasp of the police. A squad of officers in riot gear tears him away and knocks him down with heavy blows. Even after the women form a protective circle around him, officers can be seen jabbing the young man with their wooden poles.

Observers said that while police brutality was common in poorer, more rural areas of India, it was extremely unusual to see it explode on such a scale in the capital.

Advertisement

Waqar Azam, a 26-year-old student, was studying in the university library when students burst in and yelled that the police were coming. The students locked the doors. Moments later, tear gas canisters crashed through the windows, filling the library with choking smoke.

"What is happening to Indian Muslims today did not happen overnight," Azam says. "If we don't protest against it now, we will end up living like slaves."

Modi's supporters have dismissed the protesters as being exclusively Muslim, or from a die-hard political opposition. But in Assam, many protesters said they had voted for the Bharatiya Janata Party and now regretted it.

Earlier this week, some 5,000 protesters, of many faiths, gathered in central Guwahati, Assam's capital. One chant echoed across town: "Down with Modi!"
