Did Sharad Pawar take a dig at ally Rahul Gandhi?

NAGPUR: NCP chief Sharad Pawar on Wednesday said anti-BJP sentiments were “on the rise in parts of the country” and that people needed “an alternative that stays in India”.While Pawar did not explain what he meant by “that stays in India”, it triggered speculation about a dig at Rahul Gandhi , who had said on Tuesday that he met South Korea Prime Minister Lee Nak-yon during a visit to that country.Asked about the Citizenship (Amendment) Act and BJP’s plans for an NRC in every state, Pawar said: “There is a debate on whether the CAA can pass judicial scrutiny. There are people on either side of the debate who are convinced otherwise, so we will have to see,” he said.On whether states could refuse to implement the new citizenship law and the planned NRC exercise, he prodded party colleague Praful Patel to speak. “The law is mandated by the Centre. States can probably delay it for quite some time, but I don’t know whether it can be avoided all together. Implementation has to be done through state machinery only, which is where the state government can call the shots,” Patel said.Pawar dismissed talk of President’s rule being imposed on any state that refuses to comply as “ambitious speculation”. “For that (President’s rule), Article 356 comes into play. It will be tough,” he said.The NCP president said that it was clear that largely non-minorities were participating in protests against the CAA that had spread across the country.Reacting to Congress chief Sonia Gandhi and members of other political parties meeting President Ramnath Kovind over the new citizenship law, Pawar said, “It does seem that the non-BJP political class is coming together on the issue. More time is needed to form a more organised structure to counter the ruling government.”On the upcoming state elections, Pawar said reposing faith in regional parties would be the way forward.He also put at rest speculation about disgruntled BJP member Eknath Khadse joining his party within the next few days.“Khadse had sent a message that he wanted to meet me. But I was also busy and it did not happen. Regardless, I have always believed that in politics, dialogue must never cease,” he said.
