[UPDATES] Delhi-Gurugram jam: Police remove barricades on NH-48, traffic expected to move smooth

Traffic is also affected on the Subhash Marg, Peeli Kothi, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Marg | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights The Delhi-Gurugram route has been chocked with vehicles as the Delhi police have barricaded the entire route The Delhi Police have placed barricades and are checking vehicles coming from Gurugram to Delhi Protestors have gathered at Red Fort and Mandi House in Delhi

New Delhi: Massive protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act have resulted in traffic snarls across the national capital region on Thursday morning during the peak hours. The Delhi Police has now removed barricades on Gurugram-Delhi stretch. Earlier in the day, the route was chocked with vehicles due to police barricading.

In a recent tweet, the Gurugram traffic police alerted the commuters, "Now traffic is normal on NH -48 in Gurugram."

Traffic Alert



Now traffic is normal on NH -48 in Gurugram. pic.twitter.com/LdAwpa8xsH — Gurugram Traffic Police (@TrafficGGM) December 19, 2019

#Breaking | Delhi-NCR comes to a standstill. Heavy traffic jam at Gurugram border due to barricading by @DelhiPolice. pic.twitter.com/2mSMl6yvVB — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 19, 2019

Traffic Alert :-

Traffic congestion has been reported at Delhi-Gurugram border on NH 48 due to barricading by Delhi Police. @TrafficGGM is on the spot to facilitate the traffic. Inconvenience caused is highly regretted. @gurgaonpolice . pic.twitter.com/5R0TcHf8Rc — Gurugram Traffic Police (@TrafficGGM) December 19, 2019

The Gurugram Traffic Police tweeted "Traffic Alert:- Traffic congestion has been reported at Delhi-Gurugram border on NH 48 due to barricading by Delhi Police. The Gurugram police are on the spot to facilitate the traffic. Inconvenience caused is highly regretted.

Traffic congestion has been reported at NH-48 towards Delhi and Jaipur (both carriageway) due to heavy vehicle diversion. The police said they will not allow any demonstrations against the controversial law which aims to provide Indian citizenship to religious minorities of three neighbouring states.

Traffic Alert :-

Traffic congestion has been reported at NH-48 towards Delhi and Jaipur(Both carriageway) due to heavy vehicle Diversion . @TrafficGGM is on the spot to facilitate the traffic. Inconvenience caused is highly regretted. @gurgaonpolice pic.twitter.com/07IvvNjgUi — Gurugram Traffic Police (@TrafficGGM) December 19, 2019

According to media reports, the traffic is heavy in the carriageway from Delhi Gate to GPO due to Swabhiman Rally. Traffic is also affected on the Subhash Marg, Peeli Kothi, Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Marg, Red Fort and Old Delhi Railway Station. Regular updates on the traffic situation are being posted on micro-blogging website Twitter. Restrictions are being imposed even when the protestors are showing no sign of violence. The police said they will not allow any demonstrations against the controversial law which aims to provide Indian citizenship for non-muslims.

Delhi: Entry & exit gates of Mandi House metro station closed, due to ongoing protests against #CitizenshipAct. pic.twitter.com/ox4NntSuGP — ANI (@ANI) December 19, 2019

In the national capital, despite prohibitory orders issued by the Police, protestors have gathered at Red Fort and Mandi House. Police have already detained scores of protesters from these areas.

Meanwhile, taking cognizance of the heavy traffic in the city, Vistara airlines has informed the commuters that the customers who miss their flight will be accommodated on the next Vistara flights for no extra fee or charges. The airline also stated that they will offer free changes and cancellations for those who are booked to travel from the national capital today.

Vistara tweeted "Due to heavy traffic congestion on Delhi-Gurugram Highway, customers who miss their flight due to this will be accommodated on the next Vistara flights for no extra fee or fare on the basis of the seat availability from Delhi."
