CAA Protest Hyderabad: Anti-CAA protests swell, Hyderabad boils over

HYDERABAD: The People’s Plaza in Necklace road resonated with slogans of ‘Azaadi’, on Thursday, as more than 500 people converged there to protest against Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), 2019. Students, teachers, civil society members, representatives from women and human rights groups, along with common citizens, participated in the demonstration organised by ‘Citizens Against CAA and National Register of Citizens (NRC)’. Holding up posters that read, ‘Reject CAA/NRC’ and ‘Save our Constitution’, they demanded that Centre immediately scrap the Act and not “gag the voices of dissent”.“Centre has violated the Constitution by passing the CAA. Every attempt is being made to divide people based on religion,” said Rama Melkote, a retired professor from Osmania University seen at the protest rally. While the Hyderabad city police denied permission to two other rallies proposed at Charminar and Exhibition Grounds (Nampally), it granted permission to the one at People’s Plaza. Protesters were given one-and-half hours.“We skipped college to be here to express our solidarity with every student who is raising his/her voice against the CAA/NRC across the country,” said Mehrunisa Abbasi, a student. Several others from the University of Hyderabad, Maulana Azad National Urdu University, English and Foreign Languages University, Tata Institute of Social Sciences etc were also seen at the rally.During the event, participants read the Preamble and tore a copy of CAA. Some members of the group also offered Namaz at the protest site, once demonstration was over.462 taken into custody: As many as 462 people — 349 from central zone, 63 from south zone and 50 from Cyberabad — were taken into preventive custody by police on Thursday.At Charminar as well, the police took scores of people in preventive custody who came to participate in the protest rally. Heavy security was deployed at Charminar following the police’s refusal to a rally in Old City. Those detained were released by early evening. No cases were filed.
