All you wanted to know about these 'sheros' of Jamia

A video of two hijab-clad women trying to save a male friend from getting beaten up has been going viral

Protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act have turned violent in parts of the country, with Delhi too facing the heat. Authorities had to suspend internet services and impose prohibitory orders in sensitive areas to stem the violence.

Jamia Millia Islamia has become the centre of anti-CAA stir in the capital after violence broke out inside as well as in the vicinity of the campus. On December 15, protestors had set three buses on fire, following which police barged into the university and allegedly roughed up some students.

Following the police action, a video of two hijab-clad women trying to save a male friend from getting beaten up has been going viral. The girls -- Ladeeda Sakhaloon and Aysha Renna N -- have since become the face of the Jamia protests.

While the girls have been receiving both bouquets and brick-bats on social media, all sorts of unverified things are being said. Here is all you wanted to know about them.

WHO IS LADEEDA SAKHALOON

Ladeeda Sakhaloon is a first year student of Bachelors in Arabic at Jamia Millia Islamia University

Ladeeda Sakhaloon is a first year student of Bachelors in Arabic at Jamia Millia Islamia University. She hails from the coastal city of Kannur in Kerala.

According to her Facebook profile, which is not publicly available any more, she studied at Sir Syed College in Taliparamba, Kannur, and got an undergraduate degree in economics. She is now pursuing her second undergraduate degree in Arabic from Jamia.

LADEEDA SAKHALOON'S FAMILY

Speaking to India Today on phone from Kerala, Ladeeda told us that her father Md Sakhaloon is a salesman. Her surname is actually Farzana and she has recently created a Twitter account "@ladeedafarzana" after her "original Facebook account was blocked".

She has now created a new Facebook profile.

Ladeeda's mother is a madarsa teacher but she has studied in an English medium school. She did her schooling from Deenul Islam Sabha Girls Higher Secondary School in Kannur city. This is a girls only English medium school.

Ladeeda has been quite active in social movements even before moving to Delhi and has been associated with the Students' Islamic Organisation (SIO) in Kerala.

According to the SIO website, it is "an ideological organisation working in the country for preparing students and youth for the reconstruction of society in the divine guidance".

Ladeeda is married and according to an interview she gave to "The News Minute", her husband is an official member of SIO. She has always been quite active and vocal about issues related to Islam and education. Back in 2017, she had presented a paper in a public discourse in Ponnani, Malappuram, organised by SIO.

The subject of the paper was "Conversion: Religion in controversies and limits of liberal discourses". The speeches in Malayalam are available on YouTube.

Another such speech can be seen here.

FACEBOOK AS BATTLEGROUND OF IDEAS

Ladeeda has been quite active on Facebook (Facebook ID 1790012747919686). But now, her earlier Facebook account has been deactivated.

Her earlier Facebook account has been deactivated

Looking into her earlier posts on Facebook, which have now been deleted, it can be said that her views have been radical.

One of her earlier posts on Facebook which have now been deleted

POWER OF HIJABI WOMEN

In a post on December 13, she justified her slogans of "Allah Hu Akbar" during the protest at Jamia and retorted to people objecting to it, saying, "You might be in a hurry to prove your secular loyalty, but we are not... We have abandoned your secular slogans long before."

In a post on December 13, she justified her slogans of "Allah Hu Akbar" during the protest at Jamia

When we asked Ladeeda about the radical posts that she has deleted now, she tried to defend them. She, however, disconnected our call and did not respond when we asked how she can justify opposing secularism living in a secular country.

Interestingly, in 2017, she posted a picture on Facebook of a woman in hijab holding an automatic rifle and said, "Don't underestimate the power of HIJABI."

In 2017, she posted a picture on Facebook of a woman in hijab holding an automatic rifle

Many of her deleted and archived Facebook posts which are doing rounds on social media can be seen here.

Another news report based on the deleted Facebook posts of Ladeeda and Ayesha Renna can be seen on this Facebook page of "Punjab Kesari Haryana".

WHO IS AYSHA RENNA N

Aysha Renna N

Like Ladeeda, Aysha Reena N also hails from Kerala. She comes from Kondotty, a small town, in Malappuram district. She is pursuing a Masters in History from Jamia.

As per her now deleted Facebook profile, Aysha did her graduation from Farook college in Malappuram in 2018. She has studied all along in English medium schools.

Screenshot of Aysha Renna N's deleted Facebook profile

Aysha completed her high school education from Markazul Uloom Higher Secondary School, Kondotty. Earlier, she went to St Gemma's Girls' Higher Secondary School.

MARRIED TO A JOURNALIST

Aysha is married to journalist Afsal Rahman CA.

Aysha with Afsal Rahman CA

Aysha and Afsal got married last year. Her husband is also from Kerala and has earlier worked for a private TV channel in Noida. As per Afsal's Facebook profile, he is currently working with a portal called "India Tomorrow English". He has chosen to use a picture of Babri Masjid as the cover photo on his Facebook profile.

Afasl Rahman CA has chosen to use a picture of Babri Masjid as the cover photo on his Facebook profile

SOFT CORNER FOR AFZAL AND YAKUB

On January 12 last year, when news came about Afzal Guru's son passing Class 12 with distinction, Afsal Rahman posted on Facebook that remembrance of Afzal Guru and Yakub Memon becomes a duty. This post has now been deleted.

Afsal Rahman CA's post in 2018

Like her husband, Aysha also felt sorry for the hanging of Mumbai blasts convict Yakub Memon. She had then posted on Facebook that she felt helpless in this fascist country and "regrets like a doll".

Like her husband, Aysha also felt sorry for the hanging of Mumbai blasts convict Yakub Memon

This post, put up on July 31, 2015, was deleted but the archived version can be seen here.

Aysha has been fiercely critical of the Modi government and calls it "fascist".

Aysha Renna N's post on December 14

Aysha is associated with a Kerala-based NGO called 'Yes India' since 2016 which works for "educational development of students belonging from marginalised sections".

Like Ladeeda, she too has been very active on Facebook but did not post anything after December 16. A tweet posted from the handle "@AyshaRenna" claimed that her Facebook account has been blocked and she is not being able to post anything on Facebook. This Twitter account has been created a few days ago.
