Consider fresh protest requests in 3 days: Karnataka high court

Police deployed in front of Jumma masjid near City market during the ongoing protest against CAA, in Bengaluru on Friday (File photo)

BENGALURU: The Karnataka high court has told the state government to consider within three days fresh applications — if any — filed by individuals or organizations that want to express their views on the controversial Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019.

The court passed the order on Friday while hearing a batch of PILs challenging the imposition of prohibitory orders under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code by the Bengaluru city police commissioner on Wednesday. A division bench headed by Chief Justice Abhay Shreeniwas Oka posted the PILs for further consideration on January 7.

The state has to file objections by January 6. The court will consider whether permission granted under Licensing and Controlling of Assemblies and Processions (Bangalore City) Order, 2009, can be nullified by imposing prohibitory orders without passing a reasoned order.

During the hearing, advocate-general (AG) Prabhuling K Navadagi told the court suspicious elements from Kerala had infiltrated Karnataka and caused trouble in Mangaluru, where two persons died during the violence.

The AG said prohibitory orders were issued in Bengaluru city based on information the police received over the past 10 days on the possibility of anti-social elements causing trouble during protests. He also said permission for two protests, both planned by activists in favour of CAA, was not granted.

However, counsel for the petitioners argued the order passed by the police commissioner suffered from “non-application of mind” as no reasons have been recorded for imposing prohibitory orders. They argued that the said decision is also opposed to various orders of the Supreme Court upholding citizens’ fundamental right to hold peaceful protests.

The bench clarified it is not concerned about the subject of the protests, but wants to test the decision making process. It also said passing such drastic orders / preventive measures under section 144 (1) of CrPC deprives petitioners/citizens of their fundamental rights.


