CAA: From Daryaganj to ITO, the protest night that was

Police personnel trying to douse a vehicle set ablaze during anti-CAA protests in Delhi, on December 20, 2019. (Photo: PTI)

Water cannons. Lathis. Allegations of stone-pelting and police brutality. A car engulfed in a bright blaze right in front of an office sign that read: "Delhi Police".

It was Jamia Millia Islamia on Sunday. Seelampur on Tuesday. Last evening, violent scenes were witnessed once again in the capital, this time in the Old Delhi area, as protests against the amended Citizenship Act intensified across India.

Several people have been killed in recent weeks during demonstrations against the controversial new law, which fast-tracks naturalisation for illegal immigrants from six non-Muslim minority religious groups who fled persecution in Pakistan, Afghanistan or Bangladesh.

The government has refuted the charge that the law is anti-Muslim, and has made repeated appeals for calm.

This story revisits the events of Friday evening as they unfolded in the Chandni Chowk and Daryaganj areas.

'WE WILL NOT BACK DOWN'

Demonstrators at Jama Masjid. (Photo: Reuters)

The protest began after Friday prayers at the Jama Masjid, an iconic mosque located in the old, walled city near the banks of the Yamuna, and just a short walk away from the southern gate, known as Delhi Gate.

The crowd, teeming and dense, was monitored by drones. There were chants of "Remove Modi". The Delhi Metro closed station after station as the afternoon progressed.

"We will fight till this law is rolled back," Shamim Quresishi, 42, told Reuters outside the mosque. "We will not back down."

The Delhi Police said senior officers persuaded the demonstrators not to march towards Jantar Mantar in New Delhi -- a monument often used as a protest venue -- for two reasons: it was meant for smaller gatherings, plus the protesters didn't have permission.

Chandrashekhar Azad, chief of the Bhim Army, had earlier been denied permission to hold a march from Jama Masjid to Jantar Mantar.

The trouble began later, when protesters gathered at Delhi Gate in Daryaganj, just down the road from the mosque.

'SEND HELP'

Barricades were installed at Daryaganj Chowk. Crowd control measures, including water cannons, were in place.

Then, "anti-social elements" began breaking barricades and threw stones as they tried to march to Jantar Mantar in defiance of the police's advice, the Delhi Police said.

The water cannons were deployed.

The police claimed they had tried to persuade the crowd to disperse from Delhi Gate and that they used minimum force.

But a woman students' organisation, Pinjra Tod, said in tweets posted between 6 and 6.30 pm that the police "brutally lathi-charged" the gathering, and beat protesters and children. "There are people bleeding in the streets," they said. "Children are severely injured."

"Send help."

Photos show injured civilians and police wielding lathis.

Journalists relayed disturbing reports on social media: a 14-year-old in blood-soaked clothes; a 17-year-old with horrific injuries to his face; a release document showing that a teenager had suffered lathi injuries on his back, leg, forearm and elbow; a friend who had seen "boys as young as 15...beaten so badly that their white kurtas were red".

A woman whose son was missing was not allowed to file a report, a lawyer said.

Twitter users claim that unverified videos doing the rounds on social media show the Delhi Police targeting locals.

IndiaToday.in could not independently verify these reports.

"A lot of chaos at Daryaganj..." - Eyewitness

A parked car was set ablaze right outside the office of the Deputy Commissioner of Police. The police scrambled to extinguish the fire. The vehicle was wrecked.

Senior officers and other police personnel suffered injuries when they were hit with stones, the police said.

Forty-two people who were injured, "including eight policemen, got medical treatment at Lok Nayak Hospital. Two people admitted to the hospital have been seriously injured but their condition is not life-threatening at present," Dr Kishore Singh, MS, Lok Nayak Hospital told PTI.

"One person who has suffered a fracture in his leg is admitted in a ward," he said.

'FLAGRANT VIOLATION OF LAW'

An injured man being detained. (Photo: Reuters)

As many as forty people were detained. (Police said on Saturday that ten of them had been arrested. Further arrests, including that of Chandrashekhar Azad, brought the total number to 16.)

Protesters gathered outside the Delhi Police headquarters, located at ITO, and asked that the detainees be released.

"There was a lot of chaos when I was at Daryaganj. Lawyers were outside and they were not being allowed inside to meet the detainees," an eyewitness said.

Prashant Bhushan, a Supreme Court lawyer and government critic, said this was "totally illegal".

I am told that many student protestors today have been detained at Daryagang police station. Lawyers are not being allowed to meet them. This is totally illegal @DelhiPolice Prashant Bhushan (@pbhushan1) December 20, 2019

A Delhi court stepped in.

Chief Metropolitan Magistrate Arul Verma ordered the police to allow lawyers to meet the detainees and reminded them that detaining minors in a police station was "a flagrant violation of law".

Eight minors have been released, the police said.

The people who were arrested were charged with rioting and using force to deter policemen from doing duty, the police said.

Their demonstration at ITO ended only in the early hours of Saturday morning.

Protesters were held in several other parts of Delhi on Friday, including India Gate, where Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra joined a demonstration by students.

Inputs from agencies
