Congress to hold flag rally

Panaji: The Congress party will hold a flag rally to celebrate 134th years of its establishment on December 28 under the banner of ‘Save India, Save Constitution,’ from old Goa Medical College building to Azad Maidan, informed the president of Goa Pradesh Congress Committee Girish Chodankar.

Chodankar, addressing the media, along with Amarnath Panjikar, Trojan de Mello and others, revealed that on Sunday, GPCC office-bearers held a meeting wherein discussion on various issues were held, and a resolution was taken to celebrate the founding year.

He said that the party was formed in the national interest to fight against the British Rule, by roping in members from all religions and achieved success, and added that “under present circumstances, there is a threat to the nation and Constitution too, hence this march.”

He said that throughout the capital cities of the nation, ‘Save India, Save Constitution,’ flag rally will be held. In Goa, Seva Dal will hoist the flag at 10 am while the Congress party will hold flag rally from old GMC building at 3.30 pm and converge at Azad Maidan.

“On the occasion, we want to bring before the public the issues of unemployment due to demonetisation and GST, economic slowdown, price rise, and atrocities against women,” he added,

“Mass protests are going on against CAA, and the Home Minister Amit Shah is trying to crush protesters by using the police force, and this will be highlighted. Faith which the voters had in Prime Minister Narendra Modi is eroding,” he said.

The GPCC office-bearers held a discussion on CAA, and resolved to demand its withdrawal “as it is unconstitutional and will affect the poor class. They do not have any documents, especially, those who are illiterate, advasis, and living in forests, even though they are all of Indian origin.”

“SC/STs and OBCs will face lot of difficulties, and there are lot of tribals without proper documents. On the basis of any religion, you cannot change the Constitution,” he said, and appealed to the people “not to fall prey to such BJP’s nefarious designs.”

While Trojan de Mello said that “the CAA is toothless without NRC, and NRC is useless without CAA.”
