We Will Oppose Citizenship Law Even If Muslims Are Included, Say NE Students At Jantar Mantar

Amid nationwide protests and reports of violence, people from the north-east gathered at Jantar Mantar in India's national capital on Sunday, claiming that the protests against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) were given a Hindu-Muslim colour and the voices from the region fighting for the rights of indigenous people ignored.

BCCL

The protesters, including students and civil society members, said they were deeply hurt and distressed by the police "brutality" on those against the CAA, but "our protest is about our rights".

"We will not let others hijack our agenda. We are here to speak about our people. You cannot always ask one to take more people," Tripura's royal scion Pradyot Deb Barman, who is also present there, said.

BCCL

"We respect their protest. We sympathise with the students of Jamia Millia Islamia and Aligarh Muslim University. It does not matter if you are a Hindu or a Muslim, the CAA is going to trigger a massive demographic change in the north-east," a protester said.

"I am sure if Muslims are included in the list of communities to be granted citizenship through CAA, they will not protest. But we will protest anyway," she added.

Ningthem Meitei, 23, said the movement against the CAA started from Assam, but "it has been hijacked in a way. We are not being represented".

BCCL

"We condemn the violence against students and unarmed protesters. We stand with all those protesting against the CAA. But our protest is also about the demographic challenges confronting us," he said.

For the people of the north-east, the issue of CAA goes beyond Hindus and Muslims, Denis (25) said.

"In Tripura, indigenous people account for only 30 per cent of the population. People from other regions and neighbouring countries are migrating to the state," he said.

A group of North East Students sang beautifully rendition of "we shall over come" protesting against #CAA_NRC_Protest at Jantar Mantar. pic.twitter.com/7ilR0cTbTJ — Saurabh Trivedi (@saurabh3vedi) December 22, 2019

The protesters also demanded that police release RTI activist Akhil Gogoi and others arrested for demonstrating against the CAA.

At least 23 have died so far as violent protests against the controversial citizenship law that excludes Muslim immigrants continues to sweep the country despite the government's ban on public assembly and suspension of internet services in many parts.



The resentment against the bill that has been outrightly rejected by quite a significant proportion of the Indian population, including the governments in at least five states and noted personalities from the fields of arts, culture and the sciences, first surfaced itself in the form of violent clashes that erupted in the northeastern flank of the country while the bill was tabled in the Parliament by Home Minister Amit Shah.


