Andhra Pradesh: Jagan Mohan Reddy to announce shifting capital to Vizag on December 27

Hyderabad

shifting

capital

Amaravati

Vizag

Andhra Pradesh

Kurnool

Chandrababu Naidu

: Arrangements are underway for the announcement ofof Andhra Pradeshfromto Visakhapatnam.Chief minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy has directed the officials to arranged for the cabinet meeting inon December 27. This is the first time the cabinet is being held outside Amaravati, ever since it was declared the capital ofin 2015.It may be mentioned that Jagan Mohan Reddy has hinted at decentralizing capital by having the executive capital in Vizag, legislature in Amaravati and judiciary in. An expert committee headed by retired IAS officer GN Rao also recommended the same.Vizag, the port city will be the core capital with CM and ministers along with the bureaucracy staying there. Amaravati will lose all its significance, as only two sessions of the Assembly will be held here and the Raj Bhavan will continue to be here. Kurnool will have the high court but, there will be benches at Vizag and Amaravati.The thousands of farmers in Amaravati, who had parted with their fertile lands for the capital under the unique land pooling scheme duringregime in 2015, have been staging protests for the last one week demanding against shifting the capital. They contend that they had given the lands hoping better future for their children.Chandrababu Naidu visited the agitation camps on Monday and extended support to the farmers. He questioned the legal sanctity of the GN Rao panel.The state government, according to sources, is contemplating an Ordinance to declare Vizag as the core capital. Such Ordinance may be promulgated after the Dec 27 cabinet meet. There will be a decision to scrap the Amaravati Capital Region Development Authority (CRDA), which was constituted through a legislation in the Assembly for developing Amaravati as the capital.Legal professionals say the move to shift capital will face legal hurdles as the government had raised more than Rs 2,000 crore through capital bonds, showing Amaravati as the capital.While the TDP is vehemently opposing shifting the capital from Amaravati, the BJP is insisting on continuing legislature and executive in Amaravati, while moving High Court to Kurnool. Actor Pawan Kalyan’s Jana Sena Party chose not to react till the cabinet takes a decision. Pawan’s eldest brother and former Union Minister Megastar Chiranjeevi welcomed Jaganmohan Reddy’s decision saying decentralized capital would trigger balanced development of all regions.Urban development minister Botsa Satyanarayana assured that the government would stand by the farmers in Amaravati. He called upon the farmers to end agitation.
