More than 2,000 people gather at Kadapa Maidan in Dharwad, say ‘no’ to CAA

Dharwad: More than 2,000 people assembled at Kadapa Maidan in Dharwad on Thursday to express their opposition to the Citizenship Amendment Act CAA ) that was recently passed by the central government, and the proposal to conduct the National Register of Citizens (CRS) across the country.Students from institutions under the Anjuma-e-Islam umbrella were among those who participated in the agitation. Police personnel were deployed in large numbers at Kadapa Maidan as a result of which the demonstration passed off without incident. Hubballi-Dharwad police commissioner R Dileep supervised the arrangements made for security at the protest site.Senior Congress leader and former MP VS Ugrappa , who participated in the demonstration, chargedthe central government with adopting divisive policies. “India has always been a home for refugees from Pakistan, Afghanistan and Bangladesh. Now, with the amendment to this act, the government appears to be planning on sending these refugees to detention centres,” said Ugrappa, adding that such attempts to divide the country would not succeed since Indians were peace-loving people, existing in perfect harmony with everyone regardless of faith.Targetting Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union home minister Amit Shah, the former MP said, “They are trying to inject bad blood into our social fabric. This amendment will divide our society along the lines of religion.”Echoing the sentiments voiced by his party colleagues, Ugrappa questioned the haste with which the Centre had rolled out CAA amid a growing economic crisis. “More people are losing jobs every day, and the economy is in a terrible shape, and these burning issues are being neglected,” he added.Former MLA and JD(S) functionary Hanumantappa Alkod, former chiefs of the Anjunman-e-Islam Jafarsab Maniyar, IM Javali and Dalit leader Laxman Bakkai were among the prominent personalities who addressed the protesters on Thursday.Public apology sought from SuryaIn Hubballi, members of the Dharwad District SC/ST Pourakarmikara-Noukarara Sangh(R), and activists of other organisations on Thursday assembled at Sangolli Rayanna Circle to protest remarks made by BJP MP for Bengaluru(South) Tejasvi Surya. The protesters burnt an effigy of the Lok Sabha MP for his remarks, which they said insulted the working class.At a gathering in Bengaluru, Surya had alleged that those protesting against CAA and NRC were illiterate and uneducated, who worked in puncture shops. “This is a statement we condemn strongly, seeing as how people from all walks of life are opposing CAA and NRC,”said Vijay Guntral, a member of the sangha.The protesters sought a public apology from the MP, and further demanded the BJP national president to expel Surya from the party. “He should be suspended from the Parliament for hurting the feelings of members of the working class and the poor,” they said.
