Rahul Gandhi to lead anti-CAA protest in Guwahati on Saturday

Rahul Gandhi will pay tributes to the five persons who lost their lives during the anti-CAA protest in Assam. (India Today File Photo)

Congress is all set to march on its foundation day on Saturday to take its 'Save Constitution-Save India' message to the people of the country.

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi will lead a protest rally against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act in Assam's Guwahati on Saturday.

Former Chief Minister of Uttarakhand and senior Congress leader Harish Rawat on Friday said Rahul Gandhi will visit Guwahati on Saturday and address a protest rally in the city.

The protest rally will be held at Khanapara veterinary college playground in Guwahati.

"Rahul Gandhi will join the protest rally as the people of Assam continued their protests against the new citizenship law. He will also pay tributes to the five persons who lost their lives during the anti-CAA protest in Assam and will meet the family members," Harish Rawat said while addressing a press conference in Guwahati.

According to the Assam Pradesh Congress Committee (APCC), the protest rally will start at 11 am. Rahul Gandhi will join the rally at around 1 pm, APCC president and Rajya Sabha MP Ripun Bora said.

After the rally, Rahul Gandhi is scheduled to meet the family members of two deceased persons at Hatigaon area in Guwahati and Chhaygaon area in Kamrup district.

Five people died and several others were injured in the violent incidents during the anti-CAA protests in Assam.

"Rahul Gandhi will also meet the family members of two deceased persons named 17-year-old Sam Stafford and Dipanjal Das during his Guwahati visit. Rahul Gandhi will fly back to Delhi by 5-20 pm," Ripun Bora said.

Assam Congress to launch mass signature campaign against CAA

Ripun Bora said the Assam Pradesh Congress Committee will also launch a mass signature campaign against the new law during the protest rally.

"Our aim is to collect at least 20 lakh signatures and will send the same to the President of India," Ripun Bora said.
