Dharmendra Pradhan says only those who chant 'Bharat Mata ki Jai' will be allowed to stay in India

Union Minister Dharmendra Pradhan | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Dharmendra Pradhan said that only those people will be allowed to stay in the country who chant 'Bharat Mata ki Jai' His comments have come in the wake of massive nationwide protests against NRC and CAA

Pune: Union Minister Dharmendra Pradhan on Saturday stoked controversy when he said that only those people will be allowed to stay in the country who chant "Bharat Mata Ki Jai". He stressed that Bhagat Singh and Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose did not sacrifice their lives so that we could turn Indian into a 'dharamshala'.

While speaking at the 54th state conference of the Akhil Bhartiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) in Pune, Dharmendra Pradhan said, "Whether the sacrifice given by Bhagat Singh and Subhas Chandra Bose will go waste? People have fought for freedom not because we have to count after 70 years who all are citizens. Whether we will make this country a Dharamshala?"

"Whosoever comes will stay here? We have to accept the challenges on this issue. We have to make this thought clear. In Bharat, it's mandatory to say 'Bharat Mata ki Jai', only such type of people will stay." added the Union Petroleum Minister.

Dharmendra Pradhan's comments have come amid massive protests against National Register of Citizens (NRC) and Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) across the country. The protesters have been vehemently demanding the Centre to revoke the recently-amended citizenship law calling it communal as it grants citizenship to refugees living in India on the basis of religion.

Opposition parties have also trained guns at the BJP-led Centre over the contentious CAA and NRC with many state leaders asserting that they will not allow the implementation of the CAA and NRC in their states.

Even allies of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) like Janata Dal United (JDU), Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) and friendly parties like Biju Janata Dal (BJD) have urged the Central government to bring certain changes in the citizenship law.
