'Intolerance' touches new low, Tamil orator Nellai Kannan calls for HM Amit Shah's murder during SDPI rally

Tamil orator Nellai Kannan said that Home Minister Amit Shah is acting as the brain behind PM Modi | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights If Amit Shah's 'story' is finished, then the 'story' of the PM would also be over, Kannan said The BJP state unit filed a case against Kannan for inciting violence Nellai Kannan, the Tamil scholar and orator was speaking at a Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) rally against CAA in Tirunelveli on Saturday

Chennai: In a shocking case of inciting violence, a Tamil scholar, on Monday, called for the murder of Home Minister Amit Shah. In a meeting organised by the Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA), Tamil orator Nellai Kannan said that Home Minister Amit Shah is acting as the brain behind PM Modi and that if his story was 'finished', that of the PM would also be over too.

"If his story is finished, then the story of the PM would also be over. I was expecting something to happen, but no Muslim is doing it," Kannan said during the gathering, Times Now channel reported. Nellai Kannan, the Tamil scholar and orator was speaking at a Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) rally against CAA in Tirunelveli on Saturday

According to a Times Now report, BJP spokesperson Narayanan Thirupathy has filed a complaint against Kannan claiming that the speech was inciting hatred and urged the police to file a case against abetment to murder. Several organisations and individuals have slammed Kannan and called for a ban against SDPI.

Professor Srinivasan, Official Spokesperson, State Secretary - Tamil Nadu BJP, also said that strong action should be taken against Kannan. "Nellai Kannan who is seen as Congressperson in public perception instigates violence against our Hon Home minister. People of Tamilnadu are shocked. TN police should take strong action against Nellai Kannan (sic)," he said in a tweet.

SHOCKER: 'Intolerance' touches a new low. Tamil scholar makes a highly controversial statement & calls for the murder of Home Minister Amit Shah during a SDPI rally.



More details by TIMES NOW’s Shilpa. pic.twitter.com/MhSJs1CDwi — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) December 30, 2019

The statement was condemned by many from the political circles. "Everybody is entitled to their views but you should not forget the limits," CR Saraswathi, AIADMK told Times Now.

The inciting comments from Kannan come at a time when massive protests have rocked the country against the Citizenship Amendment Act (CAA) and National Register of Citizens (NRC). The Act, which was passed by the Parliament early this month, grants Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Christians, Jains and Parsis who have fled Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh due to religious persecution.
