There’s no place for revenge in Hinduism: Priyanka to Yogi

Targetting Chief Minister Minister Yogi Adityanath for his warning that rioters damaging public property will have to pay, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Monday sought to remind Adityanath that there was no place for vengeance, violence or revenge in Hindu religion.

Priyanka’s remarks prompted a counter from Adityanath in the evening, stating that anyone interrupting a sanyasi’s “relentless efforts for public welfare” will be “punished”.

In successive tweets, the CM’s official Twitter handle stated that Adityanath has taken to “bhagwa (saffron)”, and represents it, to work for public welfare after sacrificing everything. Without naming Priyanka, the second tweet stated, “Sanyasi ki lok sewa aur jan kalyan ke nirantar jaari yagna mein jo bhi baadhaa utpanna karega ussey dandit hona hi padega. Wirasat mein rajniti paane waley aur desh ko bhulakar tushtikaran ki raajniti karne waley lok sewa ka arth kya samjhengey (Anyone interrupting a sanyasi’s relentless efforts for public welfare has to be punished. How will those who inherit politics and forget the country while indulging in politics of appeasement understand the meaning of public welfare).”

Addressing the media in Lucknow earlier in the day, Priyanka demanded a judicial probe into the deaths and arrests made in UP during protests against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act (CAA) and NRC, and an immediate ban on further alleged attachment of properties of people the government deems to have resorted to violence during the protests.

“This for the first time in the country that a Chief Minister has talked about revenge, and it appears through various incidents that the administration and police are working on the lines of his statement,” she said.

Priyanka said: “Uttar Pradesh ke mukhyamantri ne Yogi ke vastra dharan kiye hain, bhagwa dhaaran kiya hai. Yeh bhagwa aapka nahi hai. Yeh bhagwa Hindustan ki dharmik, adhyatmik parampara ka hai; Hindu dharma ka chinha hai. Uss dharma ko dhaaran kariye. Uss dharma mein ranj, hinsa, badle ki bhaavna ki koi jagah nahi hai (The UP CM wears saffron clothes of a Yogi, but this saffron does not belong to him. This saffron is India’s religious, spiritual tradition; a symbol of Hinduism. Imbibe that religion. There is no place for anger, revenge and violence in that religion).”

The Congress leader also gave details of people arrested as part of protests against the CAA and NRC, such as retired IPS officer S R Darapuri, Congress worker and social activist Sadaf Jafar, and activist Deepak Kabir.

Soon after Priyanka’s press conference, Deputy CM Dinesh Sharma said, “It appears (from Priyanka’s remarks) that saffron has become the symbol of violence and the reason for starting a fight. It appears that a saffron-clad Chief Minister is a follower of some wrong religion. At a time when there is peace in the state, Akhilesh (Yadav, Samajwadi Party leader), Priyanka, or sometimes (Congress’s) Rahul Gandhi are spreading misinformation to disturb that peace.”

Sharma said the way followers of one particular religion are being targeted by Congress leader, it appears Priyanka has not been taught about “Hindu dharma” properly at home.

While senior Congress leader Salman Khursheed said that the Congress has decided to extend a helping hand to those being “harassed” in the name of action against protesters, a delegation led by Congress state president Ajay Kumar Lallu met Governor Anandiben Patel and handed her a memorandum, detailing those arrested, and sought her intervention to stop attachment of properties of alleged protesters without following legal procedures.

Priyanka said her party has put forward four demands before the Governor: that the Home Department of UP and the DGP should issue orders to immediately stop illegal and criminal action; ordering a probe under monitoring of a sitting or retired High Court judge into allegations of violent protests; to stop te process of attachment of properties without completing all legal formalities; and to stop the action against students who were protesting peacefully.

Priyanka said she has submitted a comprehensive document about the incidents and deaths to the Governor. In her missive, she alleged that innocent people were killed during the protests and the police later pressured families of the victims against lodging complaints.

She cited two examples from Bijnor, where she had met families of those killed. “In Lucknow, I met the family of 77-year-old retired IPS officer Darapuri-ji. He was arrested from home, where his 75-year-old wife is bedridden, fighting illness. I also met the family of Congress worker Sadaf Jafar. Her 10-year-old son and 16-year-old daughter are now on their own and wondering what crime their mother has committed.”
