Hafiz Saeed's Lahore rally: India registers strong protest, sends note verbale to Islamabad

India has strongly raised the matter of 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed's rally in Lahore on 5th February. India sent a note verbale to Pakistan on 6th of February, a day after the rally happened in Pakistan.

Hafiz Saeed who is the co-founder of Lashkar-e-Taiba(LeT) and the chief of Jama'at-ud-Da'wah (JuD) had taken part the rally as part of the so-called Kashmir solidarity day. During the rally, he was even showered with rose petals.

In the note verbale sent by Ministry of External Affairs to Pakistan High Commission India registered its "strong protest at the continued use of Pakistan controlled territory by extremist and terrorist elements" to "freely propagate and promote violence and terror against India."

Further, India "once again" called upon the "government of Pakistan to fulfill its international obligations" and "abide by its bilateral committment to not allow any territory under its control to be used for terrorism against India in any manner"

India has been raising the issue of Hafiz Saeed roaming freely in Pakistan number of times. Last year at the United Nation, India slammed Pakistan for its support to terror & asked how is that a "UN-designated terrorist Hafiz Saeed enjoys a free run inside Pakistan and spews venom and sets up candidates for electoral office?"

JuD is a UN-designated terrorist organisation with a $10 million dollar bounty by the US on its founder Hafiz Saeed.

Despite Islamabad saying it wants peace with India, Pakistani ministers have been sharing the dais with Hafiz Saeed. On 30th September 2018 Pakistan's Religious Affairs and Inter-faith Minister Noor-ul-Haq Qadri had shared a platform with Hafiz Saeed, with both making anti-India statements.

In December 2018, a video surfaced in which Pakistan's Minister of State for Interior Shehryar Khan Afridi had openly expressed the support of current Pak government to Hafiz Saeed and his organization. JuD has also opened centres in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir in collaboration with a prominent leader of Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf(PTI), the party in power in Pakistan.

JuD and Hafiz Saeed's NGO Fala-e-Insaniyat are no longer in the list of Pakistan’s banned organizations after the Pakistan ordinance which proscribed them lapsed. Note verbale is a form of protest a country gives to another country when it is annoyed by something or some issue that undermines it in the country concerned. In January, India sent a number of Note Verbales to Pakistan on the issue of Indian Diplomats harassment, killing of Indian fisherman & stopping of Indian cargo flights to Afghanistan.
