Kerala Assembly passes resolution demanding revocation of CAA

Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights CM Pinarayi Vijayan said that the CAA has dented India's image among international community The resolution was opposed by a lone BJP MLA in the Assembly who called the resolution a 'narrow mindset' of the ruling party

Thiruvananthapuram: The Kerala Assembly on Tuesday passed a resolution demanding revocation of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act. The resolution was moved by ruling CPI(M) and supported by Congress-led UDF in the Assembly. BJP's lone MLA O Rajagopal was the only entity inside the House who opposed the resolution against the contentious citizenship law.

Earlier in the day, Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan tabled the resolution demanding the withdrawal of the CAA. While presenting the resolution, he said, "Kerala has a long history of secularism, Greeks, Romans, Arabs, everyone reached our land. Christians and Muslims reached Kerala in the very beginning. Our tradition is of inclusiveness. Our Assembly needs to keep the tradition alive."

Highlighting the nationwide protests against the Act, Vijayan said that the citizenship law has dented India's image in front of the international community. He went on to assert that no detention centres will come up in Kerala.

CPI(M) MLA James Matthew extended his support to the resolution moved by the CM while Congress' VD Satheesan also gave his support saying, "NRC and CAA are the two sides of the same coin. CAA is a clear violation of Article 13, 14 and 15 of the Constitution."

Supporting the anti-CAA resolution in the Assembly, CPI's C Divakaran said, "Assembly is forced to move such a resolution. India is witnessing series of protest that we haven't witnessed before. By moving this resolution, Assembly is sending out a message to the world."

However, lone BJP MLA and former Union Minister O Rajagopal was the only dissenting voice in the house today. Before stressing that the resolution displays narrow political mindset of the ruling party, he went on to call it illegal saying it has already been passed by both the Houses of Parliament.

Earlier on Saturday, the Congress-led United Democratic Front (UDF) had demanded the Left government in Kerala to convene a special session and pass a resolution against the CAA. The decision was taken during an all-party meeting chaired by Pinarayi Vijayan to discuss the issue of CAA and NRC.
