Gujjar quota stir: Five trains cancelled, one diverted

Gujjars block railway tracks in Rajasthan | Photo Credit: ANI

Jaipur: In the wake of the ongoing reservation stir by the Gujjar community in Rajasthan, five trains were cancelled and one was diverted in Kota division of West Central Railway zone on Saturday.

Meanwhile, members of Gujjar community, who have been agitating on railway tracks in Rajasthan, demanding reservation, appealed to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot to pay heed to their demands.

Accompanied by his supporters, Gujjar leader Kirori Singh Bainsla on Friday started an agitation on the railway tracks in Rajasthan's Sawai Madhopur district, seeking five per cent reservation in state jobs and educational institutions.

A member of Gujjar community, sitting on the railway track in Maksudanpura village of Sawai Madhopur said, "We have good Chief Minister and a good Prime Minister. We want that they listen to the demands of the Gujjar community. It isn't an uphill task for them to provide reservation."

On Friday, four trains were cancelled, and seven others diverted following the reservation movement between Sawai Madhopur and Bayana railway stations, as per CPRO West Central Railway. The protest also affected the train movement on the Delhi-Mumbai line.

A support booth with helpline number 220-1043 has been set up at Jaipur station for information about diversion and cancellation of trains.

In December, Gujjar leader Bainsla had given a 20-day "ultimatum" to the Rajasthan government to make its stand clear on quota to five communities, including Gujjar, failing which he threatened of beginning the quota stir.

Since the deadline lapsed on Friday and the Rajasthan government did not make any announcement, Bainsla staged the protest along with his supporters.

"Things are changing fast. I have not come here but the crowd has brought me on the railway tracks. People cannot be fooled all the time. It is a fight to do or die. State government should stand on its promise. It will be a peaceful protest. I will lead the protest and the youths will support," Bainsla told the media.

"We want five per cent for our community, the way the Centre has given 10 per cent to the Economically Backward Classes. The government did not respond to our demand, neither did anyone come to talk to us, so we were forced to take this step, he added.

At present, Gujjar community are getting one per cent separate reservation as part of the legal limit of 50 per cent.
