Gurjars block rail traffic on Jaipur-Sawai Madhopur route

As if blocking the Mumbai-Delhi track was not enough for the agitating Gurjars as they have now blocked the Jaipur Swai Madhopur Railway tracks. This disruption may affect movement of close to 50 trains which run on this track on a daily basis if the agitation continues for long.

Currently the Gurjar agitators are sitting on the tracks between Isarda and Chauth Ka Barwara, disrupting the movement of trains between Jaipur and Swai Madhopur. The same track connects Jaipur with Mumbai.

This happened on Wednesday afternoon at the time when the Assembly was discussing the bill brought to give reservation to the Gurjars .

Due to this blockade on this track, the Jaipur-Mumbai superfast express train number 12956 which had left Jaipur was brought back to Jaipur from Niwai while disrupting the journey plans of the passengers in the train who were shocked to know about the development.

As of now by, Wednesday evening, NWR informed that two trains have been cancelled. Railways has cancelled both train number 12976 Jaipur Mysore Express and train number 12980 Jaipur Bandra terminus.

It has also diverted five trains by Wednesday evening to various routes so that the trains don’t pass the section on which the Gurjars are squatting on tracks.

Meanwhile, West Central Railways has also cancelled 20 trains which were to start journey on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. Routes of a dozen trains have also been changed. Everyday several trains are being cancelled on the Mumbai Delhi track. Now since the agitators have also blocked Jaipur Swai Madhopur track, its effect will be felt on trains which run between Jaipur and Mumbai.

However, its expected that the Gurjar agitation will soon end as the bill promising 5% quota to the Gurjar community and other nomadic tribes was passed unanimously in the Assembly and it is now hoped that passengers waiting for trains will get to board them.

The situation of bus movement especially to Uttar Pradesh continues to be paralyzed. Sources informed that bus connectivity to UP was reduced by about 80% with most routes still occupied by agitators on various highways.

JPR-Mumbai train returns midway

Due to this blockade on this track, the Jaipur-Mumbai superfast express train number 12956 which had left Jaipur was brought back to Jaipur from Niwai while disrupting the journey plans of the passengers in the train who were shocked to know about the development.

West Central Rlys Cancels trains

West Central Railways has cancelled 20 trains which were to start journey on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday. Routes of a dozen trains have also been changed. Now since the agitators have also blocked Jaipur Swai Madhopur track, its effect will be felt on trains which run between Jaipur and Mumbai.
