Pulwama attack: Two Kashmiri students suspended for social media activities

Yesterday’s attack in Pulwama has sparked outrage across India. The protests against the attack have been doing rounds in the country. After the violent mob protest in Jammu, a Kashmiri, pursuing a diploma in paramedical studies in Dehradun’s Shridev Suman Subharti University was suspended on Friday after his WhatsApp chat in context of Pulwama attack went viral.

Allegedly the student wrote, ‘aaj to inke sath real PUBG ho gaya’ (Today, PUBG happened with them) in a WhatsApp group. According to the reports, hundreds of Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and Bajrang Dal members gheraoed the university and demanded immediate arrest of the student. Following it, the police force has also been deployed at the spot.

The university administration has claimed to have received multiple screenshots of the chat that the accused student sent to a couple of groups. The admin has also initiated an internal investigation in the matter and the student has been asked not to enter the university campus.

SSP Dehradun, Nivedita Kukreti, told a media house, Times of India, that police are investigating the source of the WhatsApp chat and the student is absconding.

Also Read: ‘#PulwamaRevenge’ will only turn Kashmir more bloodied

In another similar incident from Aligarh Muslim University, a Kashmiri student was suspended for “highly objectionable tweet”.

Omar Saleem Peerzada, Public Relation Officer (AMU) said, “We have come to know of the highly objectionable tweet,. Which read “How the Jaish? Great Job.” Taking immediate cognizance the student has been suspended by the university administration,” he said.

Peerzada said that the university has zero tolerance for such issue and won’t let the University be discredited, news gathering agency ANI reported.

“The student hails from Kashmir and was a BSc Mathematics student.” The report said that an FIR has been registered against Basim Hilal for his tweet. “He has been booked under section 153A IPC and Section 67A of the IT Act.”
