Pulwama attack: Shops down shutters as part of national trade body strike

GUWAHATI: Business establishments remained closed in different parts of the state on Monday in response to the shutdown called by the Confederation of All India Traders (CAIT) to express solidarity with the families of security personnel killed in the Pulwama attack. The bandh evoked a response from traders’ bodies in other states of the northeastern region as well.In Guwahati, there was a total shutdown of wholesale and retail markets in most parts of the city. In many areas, traders took to the streets, shouting slogans against terror and holding anti-Pakistan placards. The CAIT and its affiliated traders’ bodies had called the nationwide bandh on Monday, calling for a stop to business activities during the day.CAIT national vice-president Rupam Goswami, who is also the chairman of the Assam Chamber of Commerce, said, “We have tried to rope in all traders to show solidarity with the nation. Our humble appeal to them was to donate generously towards the fund for the martyrs’ families and we have got a positive response.” Traders from across the entire northeast supported the bandh, he added.From marginal to big traders in the city, response to the bandh was spontaneous. The All Guwahati Traders Association (AGTA) and All Assam Traders Association (AATA) extended full support to the bandh call. However, commuters faced no inconvenience, as transporters continued to function as usual.Condolence meetings were convened by the AGTA and AATA in several parts of the city since morning, with condemnations pouring in for Pakistan for sheltering terror outfits.AGTA general secretary Prantosh Roy demanded that the Centre impose sanctions on trade with Pakistan and China. “China is backing Pakistan in all kinds of nefarious activities. This has encouraged Pakistan to spread the tentacles of the jihadis on Indian soil. Government of India should stop import of Chinese goods for the time being. This will force Pakistan to change their hostile strategy towards India,” said Roy.
