US-based Indians protested outside the Pakistan Consulate in New York against the terror attack

NEW YORK: On Friday hundreds of US-based Indians protested outside the Pakistan Consulate in New York against the terror attack which was carried out by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) on February 14 in South Kashmir`s Pulwama in which at least 40 CRPF troopers were killed and several injured. Waving the tricolour, protesters raised slogans like "Pakistan Murdabad," "Global terror Pakistan, LeT Pakistan," "9/11 Pakistan," "26/11 Pakistan and ''Osama bin Laden Pakistan," amongst others. They also held posters which read "Pakistan - a terrorist nation" and "Pakistan Progress the country not Terrorism" at the demonstration.

also read Pakistan Army Chief visited troops at the LoC in PoK, ordered them to be prepared to face any situation

In New Jersey, a majority of organisations of the Indian Diaspora and the members of the Indian community, came together on Friday and held a candlelight vigil in the Royal Alberts Palace in Woodbridge in protest against Pulwama suicide attack on the CRPF convoy. The Overseas Friends of BJP (OFBJP) US was among the groups that participated in the protest. Indian communities across the United States have been holding protest marches denouncing the role of Pakistan in the attack which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF personnel. Along with non-resident Indians, the global community has stood in solidarity with India against terrorism.

Trump said, adding that his administration was talking to authorities in both countries."India is looking at something very strong. India just lost almost 50 people in the attack. I can understand that too,"

also read "very, very bad situation between Pakistan and India, Donald Trump says on Pulwama attack

Pulwama terror attack has earned global condemnation and the international community has mounted pressure on Pakistan to act against terrorist outfits. The UN Security Council has also condemned in the strongest terms the "heinous and cowardly" February 14 terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir. Reacting to the tension between Indian and Pakistan, US President Donald Trump has said that the situation between the two sides is very, very bad.

The US President was responding to questions on last week's terrorist attack in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir in which 40 Indian security personnel were killed. Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) has claimed responsibility for the attack.
