Sushma Swaraj to attend Islamic meet as guest of honour in Abu Dhabi

Sushma Swaraj's address at the inaugural plenary of the OIC in Abu Dhabi will be another sign of Pakistan's global isolation. (Photo: Twitter/@MEAIndia)

In a major development, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) today invited External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj as the guest of honour for the 46th session of the Council of Foreign Ministers of Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) that will be held on March 1 and 2.

The invitation for the event was extended by HH Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan, Foreign Minister of the UAE, and accepted by Sushma Swaraj. She will be addressing the inaugural plenary in Abu Dhabi.

Extending the invitation, the UAE Foreign Ministry said the "friendly Republic of India" had been invited as the guest of honour for "all its international political weight and diverse cultural heritage and an important Islamic component."

Responding to the invitation, Indian Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement, "We see this invitation as the desire of the enlightened leadership of the UAE to go beyond our rapidly growing close bilateral ties and forge a true multifaceted partnership at the multilateral and international level."

It added, "We see this invitation as a milestone in our comprehensive strategic partnership with the UAE. We also see this invitation as a welcome recognition of the presence of 185 million Muslims in India and of their contribution to its pluralistic ethos, and of India's contribution to the Islamic world."

This is the first time India has been invited as the guest of honour at an Organisation of Islamic Cooperation meeting. The OIC is an international organisation founded in 1969 and works towards protecting and safeguarding the rights of the Muslim world.

This invitation is also a major snub for Pakistan, which had blocked India's attendance at the OIC in 1969 despite the country's Muslim population being larger in number than that of Pakistan's. Then Pakistan President Gen Yahya Khan had objected to former Indian Agriculture Minister Fakhruddin Ali Ahmed's attendance at the foundation programme of the OIC in Morocco's Rabat and the other member nations had to bend to Pakistan's whims.

Sushma Swaraj's address at the inaugural plenary of the OIC in Abu Dhabi will be another sign of Pakistan's global isolation, as also India's growing ties with nations like UAE in the backdrop of the recent extraditions of AgustaWestland middleman Christian Michel and other fugitives.
