Government will teach terrorists a lesson: Amit Shah

BJP president Amit Shah on Sunday said the martyrdom of the 40 CRPF personnel in the Pulwama terrorist attack would not go in vain, and the government would teach the terrorists a lesson.

“The BJP stands firmly with families of the soldiers killed in the Pulwama terror attack. I can assure that the martyrdom will not go in vain. The BJP government will teach these terrorists such a lesson that their ability to do something will be finished for a long time,” said Mr. Shah, addressing a Karyakarta Sammelan in Amritsar.

He hit out at the ruling Congress government in Punjab,accusing it of betraying the farming community on the issue of farm loan waiver and other promises made during the 2017 Assembly poll. “Since Capt. Amarinder Singh led Congress has come to power they have stopped several public welfare schemes that were started by the presivous BJP-SAD government. The current Congress government only believes in stopping the development work,” he alleged.

“I would like to ask Capt. Amarinder where's the complete loan waiver you promised? What about the promise you made to make Punjab drugs-free in one-month after coming to power? Where's the employment and what about the unemployment allowance of Rs. 2500? Neither people are getting employment nor anyone had got the smart phone as promised during the Assembly poll campaing,” alleged Mr. Shah.

Mr. Shah alleged that AICC president Rahul Gandhi had promised complete farm loan waiver in Punjab during the Assembly polls, but after assuming power in Punjab, the Congress was now deceiving farming community in the name of waiving the farm loans, said Mr. Shah.

Evoking the 1984 anti-Sikh riots, Mr. Shah said that “The NDA government established a SIT to investigate 1984 anti-Sikh riots cases and result is that today Sajjan Kumar is behind bars in an anti-Sikh riots case ,” he said.

Mr. Shah also took a dig at Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu and said “By hugging Pakistan's Army Chief, who has bee killing our soldiers everyday you (Sidhu) have lowered the dignity of the country.”
