NDA Rally in Patna: Modi attacks Congress, Opposition parties for asking proof of air strike

New Delhi :

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will kick start NDA’s election campaign in Bihar from the historic Gandhi Maidan in Patna on Sunday. During his rally in Patna, Modi will share the stage with Bihar Chief Minister and JD-U president Nitish Kumar for the first time since May 2009. This will also be the first joint rally of the NDA after more than years 13 years. Besides Modi, the ruling coalition’s Sankalp rally at Gandhi Maidan will be addressed by Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and Union minister Ramvilas Paswan. The three tall leaders of the NDA would blow the bugle for the upcoming Lok Sabha polls in the politically important Bihar having a total of 40 Parliamentary seats.

Below are the live updates:

13:37 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi in Patna: Now they have even started asking for proof of the Air Strike. Why are Congress and its allies demoralizing our forces? Why are they giving statements which are benefiting our enemies?

13:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Our government is engaged in ensuring that 'Panchdhara of development' in Bihar i.e. Education for Children, Earning for youth, Medicines to the elderly, Irrigation to farmer and people's hearing: PM Modi

13:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Narendra Modi in Patna: These days a competition is underway to abuse the 'Chowkidaar', but you be assured, this 'Chowkidaar' of yours is as alert as ever.



PM Narendra Modi in Patna: These days a competition is underway to abuse the 'Chowkidaar', but you be assured, this 'Chowkidaar' of yours is as alert as ever. pic.twitter.com/uK1iNR0nuw

— ANI (@ANI) March 3, 2019



13:35 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Everyone knows what happened in Bihar in the name of fodder. Only we have dared to end the culture of corruption and middlemen which had been a normal practice in the country for decades: Modi targets Lalu Yadav at NDA's Sankalp Rally in Patna.

13:17 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "Nitish Kumar has given a new direction to Bihar. The development has found new speed in Bihar due to NDA government at the Centre and in the state," says PM Modi.

13:17 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Narendra Modi in Patna: I salute the martyrs of Pulwama, the whole nation is standing with the families of the jawans.



PM Narendra Modi in Patna: I salute the martyrs of #Pulwama, the whole nation is standing with the families of the jawans pic.twitter.com/p8wDSGtPUx

— ANI (@ANI) March 3, 2019



12:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "Our alliance (BJP and JDU) was formed for the development of Bihar. We worked for the development of all the sections of society. We connected all the villages by road," says Nitish Kumar.

12:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bihar CM Nitish Kumar is on stage now. "After Pulawama attack, the swift action by our military under the leadership of Modiji is commendable. I salute the forces, the martyrs of Pulwama attack and IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman for their bravery."

12:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In After air strike on terrorist camp in Pakistan, Prime Minister Narendra Modi's chest has increased to 156-inch from 56-inch, says Ram Vilas Paswan.

12:35 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In People want chef food. In the last five years, we didn't let the prices of food grains increase. People are getting rice at Rs 2/kg. Farmers have been given Rs 6 thousand per year: Ram Vilas Paswan

12:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Ram Vilas Paswan is speaking. "We are happy that you have done in just five years what could not be done in the past 70 years. You have built homes for the poor, toilets in every household, distributed 6 crore gas connection and electrified all the remaining 18 thousand villages. What else one needs to live."
