Trevor Noah slammed for saying India Pakistan war would be the 'most entertaining ever'

Trevor Noah has been slammed as 'racist' for saying that a war between Pakistan and India would be 'the most entertaining ever' then impersonating Indian soldiers on The Daily Show after dozens of people were killed in violent clashes between the two countries.

Noah made the joke on his Comedy Central show on Wednesday night after Indian jet fighters bombed a Pakistani facility that it claimed was training terrorists, and Pakistan captured an Indian pilot in retaliation for the strike.

Tensions in Kashmir have been a source of conflict since the Partition Of India in 1947, and the two countries have come to blows over in the past. In addition to Pakistan and India having a stake in the mountainous region, militant groups which have been there since the 80s have also contributed to bloodshed.

In the most recent clashes, at least six civilians and 40 soldiers have been killed.

Scroll down for video

Trevor Noah joked on Wednesday that a war between India and Pakistan would be 'the most entertaining ever' then impersonated an Indian soldier by performing a Bollywood song and dance while pretending to hold a machine gun

Noah, who is South African, tried to explain the escalating situation to viewers by compared it to a war between rappers Cardi B and Nicki Minaj.

'If you're not familiar with the situation between India and Pakistan, just think of it this way. Imagine Cardi B and Nicki Minaj, now imagine they both have nuclear weapons. This is slightly less dangerous than that. That's what I'm saying,' he said.

He continued: 'And obviously, I hope India and Pakistan don' go to war. But if they did go to war, it'd probably be the most entertaining war of all time.'

Noah then impersonated an Indian soldier on the battlefield by saying they would likely perform a Bollywood song.

'The Indian soldiers would run out onto the battlefield and be like, "Time for you to die!"' he sang, before acting out a Bollywood dance while pretending to hold a rifle.

'It would also be the longest war of all time,' he continued, joking: 'Another dance number?!'

The joke was admonished around the world and labeled 'racist', 'crass' and 'f*****g disgusting'.

Noah said the conflict between India and Pakistan was 'slightly less dangerous' than if 'Cardi B and Nicki Minaj had nuclear weapons'

Noah prefaced his jokes by saying: 'Obviously I don't want India and Pakistan to go to war. But if they did, it would be the most entertaining war ever.'

Noah was slammed online for his 'racist' joke which was also dubbed 'shockingly unintelligent'

'I don't f*****g understand how ANYONE can find this funny. He said it would be "entertaining"...the entire world has to mourn for the loss of an American life but it's funny when it's for brown people?' said one Twitter user.

'War isn't funny or entertaining. Hindi is not gibberish. Ur (sic) stereotype of indo-pak is ignorant & racist. Ur (sic) set smacks of essentialism & patronising generalisation & and is v #FirstWorld.

'Human lives were lost and at stake. SO disappointing,' said the actress Swara Bhaskar.

Piers Morgan labeled the joke 'despicably crass & racist' while Indian gender-equality activist Trisha Shetty said: 'This is so disappointing.

'Here we are worrying about war, about the escalating tensions and lives being lost and you choose to lean on apathy and jokes laced with racism.

Noah ignored much of the criticism but responded to one user to defend himself. He said he was 'sorry' that the joke hurt her and others

Minutes later, he claimed his joke 'trended' more than the conflict itself

'Surely you and your writers can come up with better content to entertain and get laughs.'

Actress Malika Dua called it 'shockingly unintelligent and tone deaf'.

Noah did not reply to much of the criticism but he did hit back when one user asked how he would feel if jokes were made about his mother being shot in the head by his stepfather.

'@Trevornoah 's mother was shot in the head by her husband(Trevor's stepfather).Imagine someone making fun of it with a Xhosa stereotype - the tribe his mum belongs to,' writer Zainab Zikander wrote.

In response, Noah quipped: 'Actually if you watch my stand up you'll see that I did make jokes after my mother was shot in the head.

'As a comedian I use comedy to process pain and discomfort in my world but I am sorry that this hurt you and others, that's not what I was trying to do.'

He then claimed that his joke received more attention than the conflict itself which inflamed followers' fury.

His claim that the joke 'trended more' than the conflict was equally admonished

'It's amazing to me that my joke about the conflict in India and Pakistan trended more than the story of the actual conflict itself. Sometimes it seems like people are more offended by the jokes comedians make about an issue than the issue itself,' he said.

Indian and Pakistani followers were quick to point out that the conflict had been trending on Twitter in the region for weeks before he mentioned it in his show.

'Mate, your racist joke was criticised by a small section of people on social media.

'Don’t be under the impression that it mattered more than the conflict itself.

'Most people don’t even know you here. People have lost lives,' said one user.

At least 46 people have died since tensions erupted in Kashmir on February 14. Pictrured, Al-Badr Mujahideen protest against India in Peshawar

Civilian Mohammed Younis is pictured in the hospital after being injured in cross-border fighting on March 2, three days after Noah's joke

''This is a seriously s***y take. Also factually incorrect. In the nations that were involved in potential conflict, the soldiers trended far more than your joke. It's surprising to see that racist stereotypes aren't a problem for you when it comes to other cultures,' another replied.

Indian pilot Abhinandan Varthaman was captured by Pakistan after having his plane show down. He has since been freed

'So you're going to continue being a d**k about it. Cool,' was another user's comment.

Comedy Central has not commented on the controversy. Representatives for Noah and the show did not immediately respond to DailyMail.com's inquiries on Monday morning.

Noah is not the only public figure to come under fire for wading in on the subject.

Indian actress Priyanka Chopra was criticized for praising India's air strikes against Pakistan on Twitter.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, the Indian pilot who was captured by Pakistan last week, was released on Wednesday to a hero's welcome.

He ate sensitive documents while in captivity so they would not fall into Pakistan's hands.

The exact death toll from the most recent conflict is unknown but at least six civilians and around 40 soldiers have died as a result of the clashes.

Tensions appear to have calmed for the moment, with both Pakistan and India reopening commercial air spaces and resuming train travel between the two nations.

While the conflict is not fresh, the most recent stand-off is particularly alarming because it is the first time both countries have been equipped with nuclear weapons.
