Biju Janata Dal: Bhubaneswar: BJD protests ECoR bifurcation

BHUBANESWAR: The BJD on Monday staged a demonstration in front of the rail auditorium here protesting against the bifurcation of East Coast Railway (ECoR), Waltair division. It coincided with minister of state for railways Manoj Sinha ’s entry into the auditorium to inaugurate several projects.The party’s students’ wing took out a motorcycle rally in the city opposing Sinha’s Odisha visit. Senior BJD leader and MLA Sanjay Kumar Das Burma, who was leading the protest, sat in front of the meeting venue and raised slogans. Due to the vehement protest, Sinha and Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan entered the venue through the second gate amidst heavy security.Das Burma said the BJP-led Centre has announced the formation of South Coast Railway (SCoR) without consulting Odisha. As the Centre has created the SCoR considering the geographical area of Andhra Pradesh, similar demand of Odisha should be considered and Jharsuguda, Rourkela and some other areas should be brought under ECoR, he added. He said people of the state will resort to economic blockade if the Centre does not reconsider Odisha’s demand.Sinha clarified that not even a single inch of railway line in Odisha has been given to the newly-created zone of SCoR. “Odisha part of the Waltair division is with ECoR. We are creating a new railway division at Rayagada by taking Waltair division’s 585 km rail line and adding 363 km rail line of other existing divisions of ECoR. This division will look after the development of railway lines in the backward areas of the state,” he added.When Sinha was asked about inclusion of Rourkela and Jharsuguda part of the state in ECoR, the railway minister said, “Keeping the requirement of Odisha in mind, we will discuss the issue in the future,” he added.He said the Centre has sanctioned Rs 27,000 crore in five years for development of railways in Odisha. Some projects like Khurda-Balangir project are moving slowly due to delay in land acquisition by the state government. “Our work gets affected if land is provided in parts. We still need around 327 acres in Nayagarh district , 2,059 acres in Boudh district, 528 acres in Sonepur district and around 39 acres in Balangir district for the 289-km long Khurda-Balangir new line project,” he added.
