Protesters march to raise awareness of unsafe situation for women in India

Indian women shout slogans as they take part in a march on women's safety issues in New Delhi, India, 06 March 2019. EPA/RAJAT GUPTA

Swati Maliwal (L), Chairperson of the Delhi Commission for Women, speaks during a march on women's safety issues in New Delhi, India, 06 March 2019. EPA/RAJAT GUPTA

Indian women hold placards reading 'break the silence on rape' as they take part in a march on women's safety issues in New Delhi, India, 06 March 2019. EPA/RAJAT GUPTA

With pavements and street lamps few and far between across much of New Delhi, the Indian capital can feel unsafe for women, activists say.

Dozens of activists on Wednesday took to the streets of the city in order to highlight the problem as part of a 13-day-long march that has so far covered a distance of 300 kilometers (nearly 186 miles).

"Any woman who lives in Delhi feels very unsafe," said Swati Maliwal, chairperson of the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW). "What I have seen is that whether it is broad daylight or whether it is night or whether it is at home, women are feeling unsafe almost everywhere, and that is the challenge."

India, frequently thrown into the international spotlight over the gruesome rapes of women and children, became the focus of media attention in 2012 following the violent gang rape and subsequent death of a 23-year-old student on a bus, which led to widespread protests.

Maliwal and dozens of activists set out to march on Feb. 24 and would continue their action until Friday, International Women's Day.

Their route covers some of the most unfriendly areas in the capital for women, and has seen them handing out leaflets, talking with residents and documenting the challenges faced by women on a daily basis.

"There are not proper lighting up of the streets, there are not toilets," Maliwal continued.

Activists, both men and women, on Wednesday marched through the cramped streets of old neighborhoods of a city where five rape cases are reported on average every day, according to police data.

Maliwal said that 31,446 crimes against women were reported between 2012-14, of which less than 150 led to convictions.

"We just got the data that between 2012 and 2018 there were around 15,000 domestic cases of violence that were reported and less than 5,000 have been investigated," she said.

The goal of the initiative was to bring the issues to the forefront of the political debate, but it was not limited to safety on the roads.

On Tuesday, Maliwal was accompanied on the march through the city by acid attack survivors and DCW urged the local authorities to ban the use of substances that are readily available and used to disfigure the faces of victims.

Sanitary towels were also the focus of the debate the day before, and according to the organization, the recent elimination of goods and services tax on them has not been reflected in their final price.

"The Lok Sabha elections are approaching and the main issues of women are not really finding any place anywhere. Because those are not election issues," said Maliwal.

The elections were expected to be held in April, although no official announcement has been made regarding which day.

In recent weeks, political attention has centered around India-Pakistan tension following an attack on Feb. 24 that killed at least 42 paramilitary troopers in India-administered Kashmir.

By David Asta Alares
