Change that to: Bengal film industry controlled by ruling party: Anil Dutta

Kolkata, March 16 : Welcoming the Supreme Court's verdict on his film "Bhobishyoter Bhoot" (Ghosts of the Future), filmmaker Anik Dutta on Friday said everyone should know that Bengal's administrative head's portrayal of democracy is absolutely grandstanding.

The apex court on Friday directed the government of West Bengal and its departments, including the Department of Home Affairs, and the Kolkata Police Commissioner to refrain from causing any obstruction to the unhindered exhibition of the film that was mysteriously taken off most theatres and multiplexes in the state a day after its release.

"The head of the state's administration is quite a fascist leader and tries to project that she champions democracy, but that is absolute grandstanding," Dutta said without naming West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

"Bhobishyoter Bhoot", a political satire, released on February 15 but it was taken off the screens the next day by the hall owners allegedly due to the instructions from the "higher authority".

"I think freedom of speech is a very basic thing which must not be violated. Also, something like this has never happened before in the whole country and people should get to know what is going on in Bengal," Dutta said.

The filmmaker said the judiciary upholding the right to freedom of speech and expression is a sign of victory and he was happy that the constant protests bore good results.

"The field of performing arts and almost the entire film industry in the state is controlled by the ruling party. The stars are seen walking in their rallies," he said.

"The film has already lost on huge revenues in the first two weeks. Now the film's producer will take care of the whole process and the steps for screening the film again," he said.

Asked about his opinion on the ruling Trinamool Congress' decision to field two young Bengali actresses -- Nusrat Jahan and Mimi Chakraborty -- in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, Dutta said, "It is so ridiculous for me to even comment. I don't know them personally but as they are from my fraternity, I wish them luck."
