Kaun hain Jhooth ka Chowkidar?: Kapil Sibal attacks PM Modi over ‘false promises’; calls him ‘Lie Lama’

Kapil Sibal | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Senior Congress leader Kapil Sibal on Tuesday took to Twitter to mount an attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha election, calling the Prime Minister a “Lie Lama”. Sibal took a dig at the “Main Bhi Chowkidar” campaign promoted by PM Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) ahead of the national elections, and termed the Prime Minister as “Jooth ka Chowkidar”.

In his tweet on Tuesday morning, Sibal mentioned a list of alleged "false promises, false claims, false data and false statements" made by PM Modi. Interestingly, Sibal did not directly refer to Modi's name in the tweet, though the reference to "Chowkidar" was evident.

The former Union Minister wrote in his tweet, “Kaun hai: Jhooth ka Chowkidar? False promises ( 15lakhs each ) False claims ( No Congress leader met Bhagat Singh ) False data ( Saved 90000cr of Government money ) False statements ( About former Indian Army Chiefs ) The Lie Lama is now our Chowkidar !”

In the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha election, a war of words has erupted between the BJP and the Congress over the latter’s usage of the slogan “Chowkidar Chor Hain” to attack PM Modi for supposedly looting people’s money. During the 2014 Lok Sabha election campaign, PM Modi had referred to himself as “chowkidar” who would guard the nation’s wealth and work towards eradicating corruption.

Kaun hai :



Jhooth ka Chowkidar ?



False promises ( 15lakhs each )

False claims ( No Congress leader met Bhagat Singh )

False data ( Saved 90000cr of Government money )

False statements ( About former Indian Army Chiefs )



The Lie Lama is now our Chowkidar ! — Kapil Sibal (@KapilSibal) March 19, 2019

However, in a bid to reclaim the narrative from Congress, BJP has initiated a social media campaign where all senior BJP leaders, including PM Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah, have added “Chowkidar” before their names on their Twitter handle. Over the weekend, "Chowkidar" was one of the top trending words on Twitter in India, with hashtags like #MainBhiChowkidar (I too am a watchman) and #ChowkidarPhirSe (watchman, once again) ruling the Twitter chart on Saturday and Sunday, respectively, a report said.

Notably, Sibal had attacked PM Modi on Twitter on Sunday as well, where he had taken a dig at the BJP campaign 'Modi hain toh Mumkin hain'. Mocking the ruling party, Sibal said that maintaining the politics of truth and respect was not possible if Modi remains in power. He said in the tweet, " Bin Modi hi mumkin hoga. Politics of truth, civility, respect and elections without manipulation. Modi hai to namumkin hai!"

The hashtag #ChowkidarChorHai reportedly got 1,60,000 mentions on Twitter, as per a report by India Today. On the other hand, the BJP initiated hashtags #MainBhiChowkidar received nearly 14,60,000 mentions on the social media site. The hashtag #ChowkidarPhirSe was used for nearly 3,00,000 times, the report claimed.

The Lok Sabha election is scheduled to take place in seven phases beginning from April 11 and ending on May 19. The counting of votes will be held on May 23, the Election Commission had announced earlier this month.


