Rural youth trained on organic agriculture

Dimapur, March 20 (EMN): About 26 rural youth in Phek district have successfully undergone a six-day skill training for rural youth (STRY) on organic agriculture held from March 14 to 20 at Porba village.

The training was conducted by KVK Phek, ICAR-NRC on Mithun and sponsored by MANAGE, Hyderabad.

An oral presentation on introduction to organic agriculture was delivered by Dr T Esther Longkumer, ACTO-soil science, where she emphasised on importance, principle and steps involved for organic agriculture. She stressed on the importance of soil health management in organic agriculture. A video on production of different organic inputs was shown to the participants.

Dr. Hannah Krujia Asangla, ACTO agronomy, delivered a lecture on importance of organic farming and explained that organic farming is a form of agriculture that relies on techniques such as crop rotation, green manure, compost and biological pest control.

Awareness on the implementation of Paramparagat Krishi VikasYojana (PKVY) scheme was also made known to the participants. Cropping system approaches for organic farming was delivered where she elaborated on the cropping pattern that utilises all resources like land, water and solar radiation for maintaining stability in production and obtaining higher net returns.

A film on different cropping systems followed in India in general and Northeast India in particular was shown to the participants.

Liza Barua Bharali, ACTO-plant protection, spoke on the organic approaches to integrated pest and disease management in fruits and vegetables where she explained about different IPM modules. She delivered lecture on integrated pest management for cereal crops and their different control measures like biological control by using trichocards, Bt, Pseudocon L etc. A film on effect of pesticide on human health was also shown.

There was interaction programme wherein the participants interacted and put queries on different topics covered during the whole week programme.

Veduta Dzudo, president of Porba youth organisation, expressed gratitude to KVK Phek for organising the six-day programme and also thanked the sponsoring agency MANAGE, Hyderabad, in particular. The programme concluded with distribution of certificates to the participants.
