Indian troops martyr 7 Kashmiris including minor boy in two days

SRINAGAR (Web Desk): In occupied Kashmir, Indian troops in a fresh massacre have martyred seven Kashmiris including a twelve-year-old boy, Atif Mir, in Bandipora, Baramulla and Shopian districts.



The troops martyred these Kashmiris during violent cordon and search operations in Hajin, Kalantra and Gadapora areas.



A house was destroyed while bodies of two youth and minor Atif were charred beyond recognition due to the explosive material used by the troops during the operation in Hajin. Several people were injured in Ratnipora area of Shopian, today, after Indian forces’ personnel fired bullets, pellets and teargas shells on demonstrations against the killing of the youth.



Thousands of people attended the funeral prayers of one of the martyred youth, Aamir Rasool, in Sopore. Complete shutdown was observed in Sopore town and its adjoining areas against the killing of the youth.



The Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani, senior APHC leader, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, and the Hurriyat forum led by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq in their statements in Srinagar condemned the killing of youth by troops. They said that the people of occupied Kashmir continued to suffer massively due to the unresolved Kashmir dispute for the past several decades.



Meanwhile, Indian authorities have banned Muhammad Yasin Malik-led Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front for its pro-freedom activities in occupied Kashmir. This is the second organization in the occupied territory which has been banned in a month. Earlier, India had banned Jamaat-e-Islami of occupied Kashmir.



The occupation authorities imposed restrictions in downtown Srinagar to prevent people from staging anti-India demonstrations. The Joint Resistance Leadership comprising Syed Ali Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Yasin Malik had called for the demonstrations after Juma prayers against the custodial killing of a school principal, Rizwan Asad.



Juma prayers could not be held at Srinagar’s historic Jamia Masjid due to the restrictions. The authorities also placed Mirwaiz Umar Farooq under house arrest while Syed Ali Gilani had been under house detention since 2010. Muhammad Yasin Malik is illegally detained at Kot Bhalwal Jail in Jammu. Indian police arrested Hurriyat leader, Bilal Siddiqi, from a court in Srinagar. Despite restrictions, a large number of Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front leaders and activists staged a demonstration at Madina Chowk in Srinagar against the killing of Asad Rizwan and other Kashmiris.



On the other hand, Hurriyat leaders, Mir Shahid Saleem, Imtiaz Reshi and Khawaja Firdous, in their statements greeted the people and government of Pakistan on the eve of Pakistan Day, the 23rd March, being observed tomorrow.



People staged forceful demonstrations in Tral area of Pulwama district against the illegal arrest of more than a dozen youth from various areas by Indian police and troops.
