JNU students barge into VC residence, allegedly hold his wife captive for hours

New Delhi (India), Mar 25 (ANI): Hundreds of JNU students allegedly barged into the residence of Vice Chancellor Prof Mamidala Jagadesh Kumar on Monday evening and allegedly “confined his wife” inside the residence for hours before she was “safely rescued by security staff and others.”

Vice Chancellor Prof Kumar told ANI: “I was not at home at that time. I was in an official meeting outside the campus.”

The incident took place when about 200 students marched towards the VC residence but were stopped by the security staff. The protesters smashed the gate and allegedly barged into the residence after having a confrontation with security guards.

It is worth mentioning that the university students under the banner of JNU Student’s Union (JNUSU) had been on hunger strike for nearly 8 days against the “admission policy” being followed by the JNU administration.

On Monday the students had called for a march to the VC house.

“I was in an official meeting outside the campus. At about 6 pm in the evening, I came to know that the protesting students have barged into my residence. My wife was alone at home at that time and she was confined by the protesting students,” said Prof Kumar.

“She was alone and traumatized. Some housewives including wives of professors who reside within the campus took initiative and went there. They freed my wife. She is undergoing treatment at Fortis Hospital, Vasant Kunj,” Prof Kumar told ANI.

Though JNUSU president N Sai Balaji cannot be reached for his comment when called, his aide picked up his mobile and said: “We were in hundreds. Once we reached the Vice-Chancellor residence, we called him to have talks with us. We were unaware of the fact that he is not inside. However, the guards started provoking us. In the fray, Balaji got hurt.”

“Naxal attack on JNU VC’s residence in the absence of VC. They have broken the gate of residence and gheraoed VC’s wife. Hundreds of urban Naxals present at the residence of VC and trying to sabotage the residence. This is the real face of red terrorists on the campus,” tweeted Saurabh Sharma, former JNUSU joint secretary and member of ABVP.

Delhi Police said that the situation has been brought under control and most of the students have gone back to their hostels.

“There was a call for a march to the JNU VC house today. Students reached his house and tried to get inside. They were stopped by the security staff. By now most of the students have gone back to their hostels. A few of them are still there. The situation is under control,” said a Delhi Police official. (ANI)
