Bharat Bandh: Postal services, public sector banks affected in Mumbai

Shutting down the services on a weekday morning is inconvenient for lakhs of people in Mumbai. | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: Little impact of the nationwide 48-hour strike called by the central trade unions (CTUs) could be seen in Mumbai. As many as ten central trade union workers from mills, banks and small factories are expected to hold out a mass protest from Azad Maidan, Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminal, today.

The postal services remain affected in the city as the employees have adhered to not go to work. Public sector unit banks such as Punjab National Bank, Allahabad Bank remain affected due to Bharat Bandh.

A resident from Tilak Nagar came to the post office an hour early but he could not avail to its services. When the senior citizen reached, only the postmaster was available. He was asked to wait as the staff was not there. He complained that arrangement should be made for senior citizens. Shutting down the services on a weekday morning is inconvenient for lakhs of people in the city.

The CTUs are demanding the government to deal with growing economic crisis, tackle price rise and acute unemployment, amend Trade Union (Amendment) Bill 2018 and scrap the new pension scheme. At least 20 crore workers are expected to join the strike.

It seems to be a bad day for Mumbaikars as the BEST bus transport union worker have are also protesting for the release of their pending salaries. Lakhs of commuters are affected by the strike as they had no information regarding the strike.

However, life goes on as usual in Bengaluru as no impact of Bharat Bandh was seen. Businesses were running normally in the city.

Also Read: Bharat Bandh: Life goes on as usual in Bengaluru, citizens unaffected

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
