Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016: Congress walks out, Rajnath Singh vows to 'deal with illegal immigrants'

Home Minister Rajnath Singh speaking on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016/ Twitter: Lok Sabha TV | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Amid protests in Assam over the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill 2016, Home Minister Rajnath Singh, on Tuesday, said that the government is committed to 'deal with illegal immigrants'. The Congress staged a walkout even as the Trinamool Congress (TMC) claimed that the bill was 'divisive' and would disturb 'peace' in West Bengal.

"We are committed toward NRC. There will be no discrimination in NRC. All the necessary steps will be taken to deal with illegal migrants," Home Minister Rajnath Singh said. "I want to clarify that the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill is not for Assam alone or for the betterment of migrants coming from a particular country. This bill is also for migrants who have come from the Western borders and have settled down in Rajasthan, Punjab, Delhi and Rajasthan," Singh said.

All India Trinamool Congress (TMC) MPs protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill, 2016 in the Parliament premises. pic.twitter.com/jlww8BjFfO — ANI (@ANI) January 8, 2019

The Leader of Opposition (LoP) Mallikarjun Kharge said that the bill does not 'respect Assam accord' and demanded that it be referred to a select committee. Students unions in Assam had called for an 11-hour-bandh to protest against the decision to table the bill in the Parliament. Tyres were burnt, vehicles were torched and trains were blocked as protests turned violent in parts of Assam. Earlier today, TMC MPs also protested against the bill by staging an act inside the Parliament premises.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
