Karnataka statewide I-T raids; Cong, JD(S) protest

Bengaluru (Karnataka) [India], Mar 28 (ANI): Income Tax (I-T) department on Thursday said it has seized Rs 1.66 crore cash in raids across Karnataka.

A total of 24 premises were searched said the I-T department who said that locations of 13 contractors and four engineers are being searched.

In a statement it also said that no MP, MLA or minister have so far been covered in the searches, which are underway.

" Certain searches are being carried out by the income tax department in Karnataka Goa on contractors and connected persons. No MP, MLA or minister have so far been covered in the searches. These searches are being carried out on the basis of credible information received, the I-T department said in a statement.

Stating that the department is committed to carrying out its functions in a professional and fearless manner and will act on credible information regardless of political affiliations, the statement said "We also request that the activities of the income tax department should not be politicised, personalised or trivialised. In particular statements which sound like an incitement to physical violence issued by persons holding very responsible posts are deeply deplorable."

Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy, Deputy chief minister G Parameshwara and other senior leaders from the JD (S) and Congress staged a protest outside the I-T department office. JD(S) supporters also protested on Masuru Road against the Centre and raised slogans against the BJP government.

Kumaraswamy on Thursday accused the Income Tax department of working on the directions of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah.

The Chief Minister alleged that the BJP government was behaving like dictators.

“Income Tax Department has to work independently but it is working on the instructions of Narendra Modi and Amit Shah. After BJP came to power, it has become like a dictatorship. Do you think the IT Director in Bengaluru is innocent? I also have lot of records,” the Chief Minister alleged.

Former Prime Minister H D Deve Gowda claimed that the raids were political vendetta as the BJP wanted Kumaraswamy to form the government with their (BJP) support but he (Kumaraswamy) refused.

“They (BJP) tried to persuade Kumaraswamy to form the government with the support of BJP. Before the election, they extended huge money for the expenditure of JD(S). They tried to persuade him to meet them in Mumbai where money was kept but Kumaraswamy refused to budge,” he claimed. (ANI)
