Real Brides: This Indian Blogger’s Wedding Was A Instagram-Worthy Celebration | VOGUE India

Like the rest of us, Trishala Sikka is obsessed with Instagram. “It's a place for inspiration for my travels, for food and everything in between,” she says. Of course, it's also part of the Mumbai-based 27-year-old business student-turned-fashion and beauty blogger's job. So obviously, when Sikka tied with knot with long-time beau, 29-year-old businessman Riken Vora in March 2019, she decided to curate a double-tappable wedding celebration, and most importantly, make sure her almost 69,000 followers could be part of the biggest day of her life.

A tale of two cities

The couple's first encounter can be touted as modern day serendipity, “We met about six years ago in Ibiza around 2013. I was travelling through Spain with a common friend during my time studying In Italy, and Riken was on a cousin's bachelor trip. Our mutual friend decided to combine plans one night for all of us to go out, and that's how we first met,” she recalls. “We instantly connected because we got the chance to know each other at a place far away from home, away from everyday worries, and in a completely care-free environment.” The two parted ways when she went back to pursue her education, and he returned to India, and it was only until three years ago when Vora decided to randomly reconnect with Sikka and ask her to catch up over dinner and drinks. “The rest, as they say, is history,” she laughs.

The whirlwind planning

After three years of dating, the duo decided to get married. “We only had approximately a six-month gap between the engagement and wedding. We didn't start planning until November 2018. Word of advice to all brides-to-be, save yourself the stress and please plan in advance!” While he suggested simply signing a few papers to seal the deal, Sikka had envisioned a big affair with friends and family. As a middle ground, the couple worked out a wedding that was intimate in its guestlist, with six functions in total. “We didn't have a wedding planner, and it turned out to be one of the best decisions for me. I think the most amount of family bonding between both sides happened when everyone was involved in the wedding planning,” she adds.

The pre-wedding celebrations

The festivities kicked off with a traditional puja at the bride-to-be's house in February 2019. This was followed by the first big event, haldi and mehandi on March 7. The bride-to-be chose a custom yellow lehenga by JADE by Monica and Karishma, with zari work and complemented it with bespoke earrings by Mrinalini Chandra.

“This was my little pet project, right from the super girly decor to customised bridesmaids presents. It included a cherry blossoms-clad archway, lots of fairy lights, a pastel floral floor, pop pink chairs and even a swing, a beer pong table and life-sized jenga.”

The wedding ceremony

“Literally, the happiest day of my life,” she reinstates. Held The Taj Mahal Palace Mumbai, the traditional ceremony on March 8 saw the venue dressed in ivory and gold accents—an all-white floral mandap with dangling bells and crystals. “I had a classic phoolon ki chadar for my entry, while the instrumental version ‘Girls like You' by Maroon 5 played in the background,” Sikka says. Her vermilion Anita Dongre lehenga with the couturier's signature gota patti work stood out against the achromatic backdrop. A polki choker, earrings and a maang tikka by Anmol Jewellers completed her look.

Her makeup artist for the wedding, Namrata Soni kept her bridal look minimal—nude lips, subtle brown smoky eyes and braids. The groom opted for a timeless ivory sherwani by Sabyasachi.

The post-wedding celebrations

The subsequent day, they hosted a cocktail and sangeet party, which “started off as a brunch, and lasted for over eight hours and included music, dances, surprise speeches and a whole lot of champagne.” With a monochrome theme, the design included pops of red and a neon signage that read “Drunk in Love”. The venue was on the 34th floor of the Trident Hotel with sweeping views of the Arabian Sea and the Queen's Necklace.

Sikka decided to switch things up for her look as she chose a blush pink chikankari Tarun Tahiliani lehenga, embellished with intricate pearl and crystal work. The highlight was the crystal kamarband she sported along with trinkets from Begani Jewels. Her makeup artist for the night, Vardan Nayak kept her makeup glamorous for this event—luscious pink lips, smoky eyes and side-swept waves. Vora wore another ivory outfit—a bandhgala and kurta set from menswear designer Kunal Rawal.

Scroll ahead to take a look at this bride's wedding album:

Also read:

Inside Anita Dongre's son, Yash Dongre's intimate Mussoorie wedding

This Indian influencer's wedding was as beautiful as her Instagram feed

Inside Keshav Suri and Cyril Feuillebois' multi-city wedding celebrations
