900 families benefit from Gadvasu’s ‘Farmers First’ project

Ludhiana: To make the knowledge of farmers rich, an exposure visit-cum-farmer scientist interface of a group of more than 180 farmers from the operational area of Farmers First Project was arranged on Wednesday. Dr HK Verma, director Extension Education-cum-nodal officer revealed that Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR), New Delhi, had sanctioned a research project entitled ‘Integrated Approaches for Livestock Development: Farmer’s Context’ to Guru Angad Dev Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (Gadvasu), Ludhiana, in 2016 under ‘Farmers First’ as part of Krishi Vigyan Kendra scheme.

In this project, five villages were selected under the cluster approach after conducting baseline/benchmark survey, the knowledge and adoption of different scientific livestock, and farming management practices. These activities helped in identification of actual problems faced by farmers. He apprised that after an extensive survey, they formulated various interventions such as trainings (on-campus, off-campus, and vocational), frontline demonstration, on-farm testing, demonstrations, scientist-farmer interactions, field visits, survey and data collection, exposure visits, and infertility camps in the operational area.

The project is operational in five villages — Channanwal, Moom, Kalala, Mehal Kalan, and Dhaner of Mehal Kalan block in Barnala district. Under this project, 900 farm families having 4,000-5,000 large and small animals were benefitted through integrated approaches. Farm families rearing milch animals were selected under the project as beneficiary families.

Dr SK Kansal, principal investigator of this project, informed that farm families were provided various farm inputs, such as maize seeds, napier hybrid bajra saplings, silo bags, vegetable kits, mineral mixture, uromin licks, farm literature, deworming medicine etc for trial basis. Initially, the project was sanctioned for two years, but after positive results of the project, ICAR extended it for two more years. During the visit, farmers also visited the Central Institute of Post-Harvest Engineering and Technology (Ciphet) and College of Fisheries in Gadvasu.

The scientists of Ciphet demonstrated different types of machines for post-harvest interventions in farm produce. Dr Prabhjeet Singh of Fisheries College deliberated different techniques of value addition and processing of fish. Dr Rajesh Kasrija, Dr Jaswinder Singh, Dr JS Hundal, and Dr Balwinder Kumar from Gadvasu, delivered information on different topics of livestock and farming. PAU and Agricultural Technological Application Research Institute (Atari) are also playing a significant role in the project.

Different farmers said after joining the project, they were rearing livestock in different ways with scientific inputs. Their agriculture produce was also better in quality and quantity, and so was their socio-economic level. They said Gadvasu was doing remarkable work through the project.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
