Elections 2019 updates: FIR against Prakash Ambedkar for saying 'will jail EC for two days if our govt forms'

Prakash Ambedkar | Photo Credit: ANI

Wayanad/ Amethi: Bharatiya Janata Party national president Amit Shah categorically stated on Thursday that there was no possibility of allowing Telugu Desam Party chief N Chandrababu Naidu back into the National Democratic Alliance fold. Addressing a rally in Andhra Pradesh's Guntur district, Shah said Naidu may try to rejoin the NDA after the Narendra Modi government comes back to power.

"Mr Chandrababu Naidu, I want to make one thing clear. There is no question of allowing you back into the NDA. The doors are shut for you permanently,” Shah said.

Earlier in the day, Congress president Rahul Gandhi filed his nomination papers from Wayanad in Kerala for the Lok Sabha elections. He will be contesting from Wayanad, in addition to his family bastion of Amethi in Uttar Pradesh, from where the BJP has fielded Union Minister Smriti Irani for a second consecutive time. Gandhi's decision to contest from Wayanad has been criticised by the BJP as a move out of a fear of losing against Irani.

Gandhi has, however, justified the move saying South Indian feels 'hostility' from PM Modi and he intends to be with them to send out a message that he is with South India. "I have come to Kerala to send a message that India is one, be it North, South, East or West. My aim is to send a message, there is a feeling in South India that the way Centre, Modi ji and RSS are working, it's like an assault on culture and languages in South," he later said.

Gandhi, who held election rallies in Assam and Nagaland on Wednesday, was accompanied by his sister and newly-appointed Congress General Secretary for UP East Priyanka Gandhi Vadra while filing the nomination. Also on Thursday, Smriti Irani began her two-day election tour of Amethi.

Lok Sabha Election 2019 UPDATES:

10:20 pm: An FIR has been registered against Prakash Ambedkar, leader of the Vanchit Bahujan Aaghadi alliance and president of the Bharip Bahujan Mahasangh, by the Election Commission for saying he will jail the EC if their government comes to power. "...Let our government come to power, we will not spare the EC. We will keep them in jail for two days. The Commission is no more neutral. It is functioning as a BJP aide."

9:30 pm: Ram Niwas Rawat will be Congress' candidate from Morena parliamentary constituency in Madhya Pradesh for the upcoming Lok Sabha Elections 2019.

8:45 pm: PM Narendra Modi has reacted to veteran BJP leader LK Advani's blog. The PM said: "Advani Ji perfectly sums up the true essence of BJP, most notably the guiding Mantra of ‘Nation First, Party Next, Self Last.’ Proud to be a BJP Karyakarta and proud that greats like LK Advani Ji have strengthened it."

7.55 pm: Congress president Rahul Gandhi said while addresing a rally in Nagpur, Maharashtra: "Congress party is about to do a surgical strike on poverty, Narendra Modi ji had promised Rs 15 lakh. Rs 72,000 annually implies, Rs 3,60,000 in 5 years. No matter what, I don't care, my aim is clear."

7.30 pm: BJP president Amit Shah on Thursday said that the doors of the NDA have been permanently shut for TDP chief and Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu. Addressing a rally in the state's Guntur district, Shah speculated that since the Modi government is going to come back to power, Naidu may try to rejoin the National Democratic Alliance. "There is no question of allowing you back into the NDA. The doors are shut for you permanently,” Shah said, as per a report in Hindustan Times.

7.20 pm: Election Commission of India has seized Rs 399.50 crore in cash, Rs 162.892 crore worth liquor, Rs 708.549 crore worth drugs, precious metals worth Rs 318.49 crore and freebies/other items worth Rs 29.342 crore till date in the run-up to Lok Sabha elections.

7.10 pm: Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath has reacted on the Enforcement Directorate move to call his nephew Ratul Puri to join AgustaWestland money-laundering probe. "He's independent, he has nothing to do with politics and I have nothing to do with his business. Whatever there is, it must be investigated but how these issues come up during elections only?" Nath said.

6.30 pm: BJP veteran Lal Krishna Advani, who was dropped from the party list of candidates for the Lok Sabha Elections 2019, on Thursday put out a message ahead of the party's foundation day on April 4. "Nation first, party next, self last," Advani wrote.

"This is an important occasion for all of us in the BJP to look back, look ahead and look within. As one of the Founders of the BJP, I deem it to be my duty to share my reflections with the people of India, and more specifically with the millions of workers of my Party, both of whom have indebted me with their affection and respect," he further wrote.

6.20 pm: Maharashtra: Dhanshri Patil- wife of BJP candidate from Ahmednagar LS Constituency, Sujay Vikhe Patil has also filed nomination from the constituency. His office says,' It's just a precautionary measure if any technical objection comes in Sujay Vikhe Patil's nomination.'

4.59 pm: Producer of film 'PM Narendra Modi', Sandeep Singh tweets: This is to confirm, our film 'PM Narendra Modi' is not releasing on 5th April. Will update soon.

4.32 pm: Congress workers create ruckus at the party office in Patna, Bihar over denial of ticket to former party MP Nikhil Kumar from Aurangabad parliamentary constituency. Grand alliance has fielded Upendra Prasad of Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) as its candidate from Aurangabad.

#WATCH Congress workers create ruckus at party office in Patna, Bihar over denial of ticket to former party MP Nikhil Kumar from Aurangabad parliamentary constituency. Grand alliance has fielded Upendra Prasad of Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) as its candidate from Aurangabad. pic.twitter.com/ITwiVHt0ja — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

4.18 pm: Rashtriya Loktantrik Party (RLP) joins hands with BJP in Rajasthan, gets Nagaur Lok Sabha seat. The BJP will contest 24 seats, whereas RLP will contest on one seat in the 25-seater state.

3.27 pm: "Rahul ji ne aaj tak kis ka sath nibhaya? Mahagathbandhan ne unka sath chhod diya, Mamata ji unko tawajo nahi deti, aaj Left ki peeth pe chhura bhonk diya, jin ke sahare vo satta ka sukh bhog chuke hain, to Rahul Gandhi na apno ke huye na parayon ke," says Smriti Irani in Raebareili.

3.25 pm: Congress releases a list of 12 candidates from Madhya Pradesh. CM Kamal Nath's son Nakul to contest from Chhindwara, Ajay Singh Rahul to contest from Sidhi and Arun Yadav to contest from Khandwa.

Congress releases list of 12 candidates from Madhya Pradesh. CM Kamal Nath's son Nakul to contest from Chhindwara, Ajay Singh Rahul to contest from Sidhi and Arun Yadav to contest from Khandwa #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/XQOW381zYt — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

3.08 pm: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee in Cooch Behar on PM Modi: "Why will people watch your film? If people want to watch films they will watch films on Gandhiji, Ambedkar ji, why Modi? What contribution he has made to India?"

3.00 pm: "Amit Shah sahab, Mehbooba Mufti aap se keh rahi hai, jis din aap 370 ko khatam karoge, you will be an occupational force in Jammu & Kashmir, jis tarah Palestine pe Israel ka kabza hai usi tarah Jammu & Kashmir main Hindustan ka kabza hoga, agar aapne 370 ko khatam kiya," says Mehbooba Mufti.

1.59 pm: "My brother, my truest friend, and by far the most courageous man I know. Take care of him Wayanad, he won't let you down," tweets Priyanka Gandhi.

1.24 pm: "I have come to Kerala to send a message that India is one, be it North, South, East or West. My aim is to send a message, there is a feeling in South India that the way Centre, Modi ji and RSS are working its like an assault on culture and languages in South... I understand that my brothers and sisters in CPM will now speak against me and attack me, but I am not going to say a word against the CPM in my entire campaign," Rahul Gandhi said.

12.48 pm: Delhi: Nishad Party leader and Gorakhpur (UP) MP Praveen Nishad joins Bharatiya Janata Party. Nishad Party to support BJP in Uttar Pradesh in upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

12.30 pm: Congress President Rahul Gandhi holds a roadshow in Wayanad after filing nomination. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and Ramesh Chennithala also present.

#WATCH Congress President Rahul Gandhi holds a roadshow in Wayanad after filing nomination. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and Ramesh Chennithala also present. #Kerala pic.twitter.com/lVxKhDxGrZ — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

12.14 pm: Kerala: Congress President Rahul Gandhi holds a roadshow in Wayanad after filing nomination. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and Ramesh Chennithala also present.

Kerala: Congress President Rahul Gandhi holds a roadshow in Wayanad after filing nomination. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and Ramesh Chennithala also present pic.twitter.com/kAW08X22u0 — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

11.43 am: Congress President Rahul Gandhi files nomination from Wayanad parliamentary constituency.

Kerala: Congress President Rahul Gandhi files nomination from Wayanad parliamentary constituency. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/abn2g9ahQE — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

11.14 am: Congress President Rahul Gandhi and General Secretary UP-East Priyanka Gandhi Vadra arrive at Wayanad, Kerala.

#WATCH Congress President Rahul Gandhi and General Secretary UP-East Priyanka Gandhi Vadra arrive at Wayanad, Kerala. pic.twitter.com/Xqcskiaoaj — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

10.54 am: Supreme Court agrees to hear on April 8, a fresh petition seeking direction to defer the release of the biopic 'PM Narendra Modi'. Senior advocate Abhishek Manu Singhvi mentioned the matter for an urgent hearing of the plea before a bench headed by Justice SA Bobde who posted the case for Monday, April 8 - reports news agency ANI.

10.31 am: At a rally in Yavatmal Prakash Ambedkar says, "EC says we shouldn't talk of Pulwama. We will talk we have been given the right by the Constitution. If we come to power we will jail EC for 2 days at least."

10.02 am: Union Minister Smriti Irani on Congress President Rahul Gandhi: "He enjoyed a position of power for 15 years because of the support from Amethi, but now he is going to file nomination from elsewhere. This is an insult of Amethi and people here will not tolerate this."

Union Minister Smriti Irani on Congress President Rahul Gandhi: He enjoyed a position of power for 15 years because of the support from Amethi, but now he is going to file nomination from elsewhere.This is an insult of Amethi and people here will not tolerate this. pic.twitter.com/qbadbPCrW1 — ANI (@ANI) April 4, 2019

9.53 am: Body of a 42-year-old man was found hanging at BJP booth office in Siliguri early morning today; Police investigation is underway.
