Finally, Raj Thackeray gets a role as Cong-NCP star campaigner

Raj Thackeray

Congress-NCP

Urmila Matondkar

Ashok Chavan

The candidates Raj will campaign for

It’s a win-win for both. While Cong-NCP gets somebody who can cut Sena votes, Raj can use the opportunity to revive his party.Politics, they say, is the art of possibilities. And nowhere does this little gem of wisdom apply more aptly than in the emergence of Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chiefas a star campaigner for thecombine.Consider this – the MNS does not have a single candidate contesting in this election. Also, the party now has no representation in the state assembly and it has just one corporator in BMC. Yet, the Congress-NCP alliance has roped him in to campaign extensively in Mumbai and also address rallies in other parts of the state.While Raj is looking at this as an opportunity to pull his party out of oblivion and set the stage for making a comeback in the assembly elections due later this year, the Congress-NCP wants to use him to cut into Sena votes. Also, in the long-term the Congress-NCP would like to keep MNS alive, a card to be used as and when required against the Sena and the BJP. So, Raj, who was written off by political pundits, finds himself in the thick of things suddenly.Raj, sources said, is scheduled to address rallies in South Mumbai for the Congress candidate Milind Deora; in north-central Mumbai for Priya Dutt; in north Mumbai forand for Sanjay Dina Patil in north-east Mumbai.He will stay away from northwest Mumbai where deposed Mumbai Congress chief Sanjay Nirupam is a candidate. Obviously, Raj’s anti-north Indians stance is still fresh in people’s memory and Nirupam would not want his core constituency disturbed.Outside Mumbai, Raj is likely to hold rallies in Maval, where NCP leader Ajit Pawar’s son Parth is a candidate; in Nanded, where state Congress chiefis contesting; Solapur, where former chief minister Sushil Kumar Shinde is hoping to regain his lost turf; Baramati, where NCP chief Sharad Pawar’s daughter is contesting; and in Nashik, where senior NCP leader Chhagan Bhujbal’s nephew Sameer is a candidate.Sources in the both MNS and NCP confirmed that Raj’s role as a star campaigner for the Congress-NCP alliance has Pawar’s blessings. According to the arrangement worked out between Raj and Pawar over several rounds of meetings, the rallies the former will address will be exclusive MNS rallies – meaning the stage at these meetings will only have MNS flags. However, Congress-NCP candidates could join him on stage and the message will be stridently anti-BJP and anti-NDA.In February, Raj created a stir by suggesting the Pulwama attack was stage managed. He said the truth would come out if the National Security Advisor Ajit Doval was questioned. And last month, Raj said something similar to Pulwama can happen closer to the elections. MNS sources said that Raj can get away with such statements, while something similar said by a Congress or an NCP candidate would invite a great amount of scrutiny.Raj also is great fit for the Congress because it does not have a big Marathi face in Mumbai.While the MNS’s presence in the state assembly and municipal corporations is near zero now, numbers suggest the party retains pockets of influence. “If we look at the votes polled by the MNS in the 2009 and the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, we have considerable presence in Mumbai, Nashik, Pune and Aurangabad. In 2009, the MNS polled 15 lakh votes, while in 2014, it polled 8 lakh votes,” said a senior party leader who did not wish to be identified.In 2014, when the Modi wave flattened everything in its way, the MNS garnered a vote share of 9 per cent. Within the party, there is a sense that this vote share can be converted into afew assembly seats and trigger a revival. The plan is to seek 20-25 seats from the Congress-NCP in the assembly elections due later this year. “There are 30-35 seats in Mumbai Metropolitan Region (MMR) and some other parts of the state where the Congress or NCP finished third or fourth in 2014. We want these seats,” said the leader quoted above.But for now, the target is Modi. The MNS has already held over 40 meetings with workers across the state to guide them on how to strategically work for the Congress-NCP combine and ensure that MNS voters vote against the BJP-Shiv Sena.On Saturday, MNS spokesperson Sandeep Deshpande welcomed Congress candidate from Mumbai south-central Eknath Gaikwad at Shivaji Park and the two spoke to morning walkers. Later in the day, MNS leader and Raj’s sister-in-law declared her support for Urmila Matondkar.Raj and Matondkar go a long away. They are both students of Ruparel college. Once her candidature was announced, Urmila had reached out to Thackeray, seeking his support. Raj, sources said, will depute a team of MNS leaders to help Urmila.But then to his credit, Raj and politics go a long way too. And this is his time to prove that he still has the stomach for a fight.
