Congress only comes to power to loot: PM Modi

Junagadh (Gujarat) [India], Apr 10 (ANI): Calling the Congress a party of corrupt people, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday said that the party only comes to power to loot money while referring to the Income Tax (IT) department raids across the country.

"A new scandal has been linked to Congress scandals, and with proof. That is the 'Tughlaq Road Chunavi Ghotala'. Congress has snatched food away from poor children and is feeding its own leaders. Congress is looting money designated for pregnant women," the Prime Minister said while addressing an election rally here.

"People have seen in the media that stacks of notes are being recovered from people related to the Congress. The party first created Karnataka as its ATM, now Madhya Pradesh has become the Congress ATM. And maybe fate is same in Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh as well. Congress only comes to power to loot money," he said.

Referring to IT raids at the residence of Praveen Kakkar, Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath's Officer on Special Duty (OSD), Modi said, “MP is a trailer. If they get to form the government in the picture, you will be left with empty hands.”

Modi charged the Congress of insulting leaders of Gujarat including India's first deputy prime minister Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and former prime minister Morarji Desai.

"Can people of Junagadh and Somnath followers forget Sardar Sahab? Just think where would Junagadh be if there was no Sardar Saheb. What would be the condition of Somnath if he were not there,” he asked.

"When Morarji bhai emerged, their family (Gandhi family) started hating him. They threw him behind bars and invoked Emergency. They hatched a conspiracy to remove his government within two years. Now it is my turn. They have trouble with me now, that how a 'chaiwala' ruled for five years. On the Congress tape recorder, the only song that plays is ‘Modi hatao, Modi hatao’," Modi said.

Gujarat will witness polling for its 26 Lok Sabha seats in the third phase on April 23. (ANI)
