Junagadh MP faces people’s ire in Sutrapada village

Rajkot: Sitting MP and Junagadh BJP candidate Rajesh Chudasama , had to beat a hasty retreat after facing stiff opposition from people during campaigning in a village of Sutrapada in Gir-Somnath district on Tuesday night.Videos of people protesting against Chudasama’s presence were doing the rounds on social media on Wednesday.Chudasama had come to attend religious function in Bhuvatimbi village that was to be followed by the traditional Lok Dayro programme by local artistes. The programme was organized by Karadiya Rajput community and chief priest of the temple. However, as soon as Chudasama arrived on the stage, people started shouting slogans. Some of them even hurled a water bottle and pillows on the dais.In the video, the announcer is seen desperately pleading to the people to take their seats and refrain from unruly behaviour. At one point of time, the frustrated announcer is also heard invoking local deity Bhawani Mata asking people to maintain calm. But his pleas fell on deaf ears.Sources said members of Karadiya Rajput community are opposed to Chudasama’s renomination for Junagadh seat. Before Chudasama, the seat was held by tainted former MP Dinu Solanki, who also belongs to Karadiya Rajput community.Eyewitnesses said that nearly 5,000 people had gathered at the venue and resorted to the protest. Ultimately, local BJP leaders had to take Chudasama out from the back side of the stage.Talking to mediapersons later, Chudasama said, “It’s a very unfortunate incident. I went there as I was invited by the organizers. I have also used my grant for the development work of the temple.”According to sources, the protest sparked tension in some villages as Kolis started grouping against Karadiya community members. While Karadiyas are against Chudasama, Kolis are staunch supporters of the MP.This is the not the first time that Chudasama had to face people’s ire. Before few days, people in Shepa village of Mangrol taluka also protested against the MP when he had gone there to campaign and address a public gathering. Shepa residents had complained that the MP had not visited village in the past five years and didn’t fulfil his promises.
