Delhi's Ridge Forests To Now Get More Protection As Rs 19 Cr To Be Spent On 150 Private Guards

Delhi’s green cover has seen a rampant decline in the recent years. Last year in July, citizens of the national capital protested against an order that approved the felling of at least 14,000 trees for the redevelopment of south Delhi neighbourhoods.

Recently, the Supreme Court even warned the Haryana government to not touch the green lungs of Delhi-NCR, an ecological sensitive zone for construction.

The Haryana Assembly had on February 27, passed amendments to the Act opening up thousands of acres of land in Gurgaon, Faridabad, Nuh, Mahendragarh and Rewari to real estate and other non-forest activity in the area that was protected under it for over a century.

The Delhi Ridge’s importance in the capital is supreme. It is known for its vast faunal diversity. The British Indian Government had also put in place robust statutory framework by way of notifications in 1913, declaring an area of 796.25 hectares in eight villages of Delhi as a Reserved Forest under the provisions of Indian Forest Act, 1878.

Photo: BCCL

To protect the ridge, around 150 private guards will now be employed to bolster patrolling and monitoring in one of the worst affected areas. The Ridge management board approved the initiative due to problems in effective patrolling of the green cover.

Times of India reported that 147 guards will be deployed at a cost of Rs 13.6 crore. Six new porta cabins and 31 patrolling cars and bikes will also be added to the patrolling squad.

The board understood that 77 guards for entire Delhi along with 15 deputy range officers and three rangers were not enough to ensure effective patrolling. The guards will be deployed on a daily basis and paid minimum wages.

Reportedly, there is also a plan to get tractors for plantation and hiring project associates for Ridge demarcation.

Photo: BCCL

A board member named Vimlendu Jha said that the board has unused funds worth Rs 200 crore and the total cost of hiring more guards as well as equipment will cost around Rs 19 crore.

According to board officials, the south deputy conservator of forests has been asked to prepare maps of the entire Ridge boundary to clearly show the boundary walls and encroachments.

The national capital has been undertaking several initiatives to save its green cover. The Delhi Metro Rail Corporation has also invested in eco-friendly projects like construction of a park in east Delhi with construction debris.

Photo: BCCL

It has also taken the initiative to install a solar power plant at one of the Metro stations. The plant, which has come up at the Dwarka Sector 21 Metro station, is producing about 500 kWp of power. The power produced from this plant is being used to cater to the requirements of DMRC.

The South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) has also opened a new theme park with sculptures of the seven wonders of the world made of industrial and other kinds of waste. Beautification of railway stations is also underway to make them convenient for passengers. It also has modern facilities such as LCD displays, escalators, LED lights etc.

The Delhi Jal Board has even introduced purification islands on the periphery of Rajokri lake to soak up pollutants and purify the water in the wetland. By purifying the water through hormone-treated plant, they make the water suitable for fish.

At a time when the capital is cooking with pollution and losing its green cover rapidly, these steps will help the city to restore its biodiversity.
