Citizenship Bill: Protests errupt in Tripura, Sec 144 imposed in several areas; mobile internet suspended

Prohibitory orders were issued by the Tripura administration on Wednesday anticipating further deterioration in the law and order situation.

Section 144 CrPC imposed in West Tripura district for an indefinite period. “We have imposed Section 144 CrPC in Madhabbari, Dasharambari and adjoining areas of West Tripura district until further orders. This decision has been taken to prevent any assembly of people further leading to violence,” said a senior official of Tripura Police.

Mobile internet and sms services were suspended by the state administration from Tuesday 3pm onwards for 48 hours.

This decision comes in the wake of six youths suffering bullet injuries amidst a protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill at Madhabbari yesterday.

Members of the North East Students' Organization and Twipra Students Federation had put up a blockade at the Assam-Agartala National Highway at Madhabbari when they clashed with the police and CRPF jawans. Police had to charge batons and resort to firing to disperse agitators when six tribal youths suffered bullet injuries.

Later, all the injured were rushed to the hospital for treatment.

On the other hand, trouble is brewing for the Tripura BJP after its electoral ally – Indigenous People’s Front of Tripura (IPFT) also opposed the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

IPFT chief and a cabinet minister in Chief Minister Biplab Deb’s cabinet, NC Debbarma said that his party will continue to protest against the Bill.

“We had opposed the bill earlier and will continue to protest against it. It is unfortunate that six youths were shot at today. It is extremely unfortunate that the police resorted to firing as they were protesting against the Citizenship Amendment Bill,” said Debbarma.

Three Assam Gana Parishad (AGP) ministers – Atul Bora, Keshab Mahanta and Phani Bhushan Choudhury submitted their resignation to AssamChief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal on Wednesday.

The resignation of the three leaders of AGP – an electoral ally of the BJP in Assam and a part of North-East Democratic Alliance comes in the wake of the Union cabinet approving and Lok Sabha passing the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

The party had announced its decision to pull out of the Assam government and BJP’s alliance on Monday when the AGP President Atul Bora met the Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh in New Delhi.

“The bill has made the Assam Accord meaningless. We were against the bill and now that it has been passed in Lok Sabha, there is no question of being an alliance partner of the BJP. We have been fighting against the bill and will continue to do so to protect the Assamese community. Unfortunately, the Centre approved the bill without even thinking about the people of Assam,” said Bora.

The three ministers in Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal’s cabinet met him at 5pm and submitted their resignation.

Earlier in the day, the members and AGP ministers had met at the party headquarters Ambari to discuss the strategy ahead.

Parts of Assam saw widespread violence as All Assam Students Union (AASU) called an 11-hour bandh to protest against the Citizenship Amendment Bill.

Agitators resorted to vandalism of vehicles at Guwahati Club, Noonmati, Beltola, Maligaon and in several places of Guwahati. Some Guwahati airport-bound vehicles and cabs were also attacked by bandh supporters.

Bandh supporters resorted to vandalism at the BJP office at Golaghat, torched banners of Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal and other leaders.

Sarupathar BJP party office was forcibly shut down by a section of bandh supporters.
