Vishal moves HC against Special Officer appointed to manage Film Producers Council

Vishal moves HC against Special Officer appointed to manage Film Producers Council

Meanwhile, Special Officer N Sekar, has now announced that the general body meeting on May 1 will not be held as planned by the former office-bearers.

news Controversy

Tamil Film Producers Council President Vishal has filed a writ petition in the Madras High Court challenging a government order that appointed a Special Officer to manage the affairs the council. The petition also prayed for permission to the existing, duly elected office-bearers and executive committee members of the council to perform their functions until the next elections.

Justice K Ravichandrabaabu, who heard the writ petition on Tuesday, issued a notice to the government on the writ petition filed by TFPC and adjourned the hearing to May 8.

Meanwhile, Special Officer N Sekar, who took over the affairs of TFPC on April 26 following the Government Order, has now announced that the general body meeting scheduled to take place on May 1 will not be held as planned.

According to a report in the Hindu, Sekar had said in an announcement, “Having taken over to manage the affairs of the TFPC, it is not possible to hold a general body meeting called by the former office-bearers of the Tamil Nadu Film Producers’ Council.”

In March this year, a special officer was appointed by the Registration Department after Inspector General of Registration conducted an inquiry into allegations and found that TFPC had violated a few provisions of the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act.

Tamil Nadu government also issued a show cause notice to Tamil Film Producers’ Council regarding irregularities within the council and mismanagement of its funds.

The notice issued by the Commercial Taxes and Registration Department calls for a response from the council within 30 days from the date of its receipt and is addressed to its President actor Vishal, Vice President Prakash Raj, Secretaries S Kathiresan and SS Durairaj and Treasurer SR Prabhu.

TFPC had an internal fall out last year with a few members quitting and a few more protesting against its president Vishal. Allegations of fund misappropriation and general dissent within the council have been raised time and again.
