Girl contradicts suicide note

The University College student had alleged campus politics led her to attempt suicide

A student from the University college who allegedly attempted to commit suicide on the campus on Friday by slitting her wrist, has now in a statement to the police said she has penned a note and taken the drastic step due to her stressful state of mind at that point of time.

In her statement to the Attingal police, she said she did not have any complaints against anyone, contradicting a note recovered from her, in which she blamed frequent events and political protests on the campus that had affected her studies.

The 18-year-old girl, a first-year degree student of the college, was reported missing from her home in Alamcode on Thursday. The Attingal Police had registered a case in this regard. On Friday, she was found in the waiting room in the college with her wrist slit. She was discharged from hospital on Friday evening.

“In her statement, she has denied the things that she has written in the note. She said that she wrote that in a stressful state of mind and that she did not want any action taken against anyone,” said Attingal SHO Sibichan Joseph.

Meanwhile, the Cantonment Police will register a case against her for attempt to suicide, after recording her statement on Sunday. “She was produced before the Court today, when she said that she does not have complaints against anyone. We will certainly look into the things said in the note after recording her statement. The first-year students were having vacation for the past few weeks. Also, no student organisation has organised marches in the past two months,” said Cantonment SHO M. Anilkumar.

Students Federation of India (SFI) district secretary Riyas Vahab said the initial reports accusing the SFI’s protests as being responsible for the suicide attempt were attempts at tarnishing the organisation.

“We have not organised any protest march in recent months. The last one was on March 10, for which we had members from 20 area committees participating. No one would be coerced to join our protests,” he said.

Opposition Leader Ramesh Chennithala demanded stringent action against the student leaders responsible for the girl’s plight. KPCC President Mullappally Ramachandran in a press note said that the incident exposed the “face of terror” of the SFI.

‘Left terror’

KSU State president K.M. Abhijith also demanded action against the “Left terror” in campuses. He said that the SFI was forcing students to take part in protests in its strongholds.

The State Human Rights Commission (SHRC) has registered a case following the alleged attempt to suicide by the student. The Commission has asked the Directorate of Collegiate Education and the College Principal to submit a report within one month.
