Two BU professors may be in trouble over statue row

Bangalore University has resolved the controversy over the placement of Buddha and Saraswati statues by deciding to install both of them next to each other on the Jnana Bharathi campus. However, trouble may be brewing for two BU professors who were allegedly part of the movement to install the Buddha statue in the location that was originally slated for the Saraswati statue.

The university has submitted a report to the State government and the Governor’s office on the recent events that disrupted the campus. The spot had earlier been occupied by a statue of Saraswati, which broke by accident last year. While a new statue was being commissioned, students and professors installed the Buddha statue without the Vice-Chancellor’s permission, triggering the controversy. Sources said the students were led by professors B.C. Mylarappa and T.H. Murthy.

“The entire event had been captured on CCTV cameras,” said a BU source.

At the time, students justified the move on the grounds that they felt Buddha was a symbol of secularism. The university later resolved the controversy by deciding to install both statues side by side.

‘V-C has to take a call’

B.H. Anil Kumar, Additional Chief Secretary, Higher Education Department, said the V-C would have to decide on whether to initiate disciplinary action as he is the deciding authority.

Both Mr. Mylarappa and Mr. Murthy were unavailable for comment.

University authorities said they would take a decision after placing the report in the Syndicate meeting. The Syndicate is the highest decision-making body of the university. “We want to ensure that we follow protocol and take a unanimous and democratic decision,” said a senior official of the university.

A section of the students, however, said they would protest if any action was initiated against the faculty members. “If the university initiates action, it will send a message that it is acceptable to keep a Saraswati statue but not a Buddha statue. It has wider ramifications and we will protest against this,” said a student who took part in the event of installing the Buddha statue.
