Iron Lady Irom Sharmila Has Twin Baby Girls On Mother's Day

Irom Sharmila, the iconic activist who became famous for her 16-year-long hunger strike to protest the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) in Manipur, has given birth to two baby girls. What’s even better is that she delivered her twin daughters on Mother’s Day.

She told a leading daily that she and her husband Desmond Coutinho, who reside in Kodaikanal, are pleased to have the girls in their life despite both Irom and Desmond having health issues: “This is a new life, a new beginning for me. I am very happy. Neither Desmond nor I had any preference, we just wanted healthy children.”

The pregnancy and birth were reportedly further proof of her strength and resilience

In case you’re unaware, Irom was fasting for more than a decade, during which she was force-fed through an IV. That, coupled with her being well past what medical practitioners call a woman’s prime reproductive age, meant potential complications in her pregnancy.

According to her doctor, Sriprada Vinekar, though, both Irom and her husband patiently waded through the tough waters: “When she first came to me, I was a bit apprehensive, if I could help her through the whole process. Given her age, issues like diabetes or hyper-tension are common. However, Sharmila is truly an ‘iron lady’ and had no complications.”

While not everyone is that lucky, cases of women giving birth to healthy babies regardless of “being past their prime” is a heartening thing to hear, because the pressure to have babies by a certain age is inescapable for a large number of women. To know that it’s not too late to live one’s life, achieve one’s goals, and still have a family, gives a lot of women hope in a world where we’re pressured to do it all according to the deadline set by our ticking biological clocks.

Why these babies deserve as much love as Ziva Dhoni and Taimur Ali Khan

In a nation, nay, world, where celebrity babies are fussed and obsessed over, newborns Nix Sakhi and Autumn Tara deserve as much love as carriers of Irom Sharmila’s legacy.

Irom began her protest in 2000 after a massacre by the army allegedly killed 10 people. After 16 long years, she ended her fast in 2016 and contested elections in the region not long after that. Even though she didn’t win and AFSPA still hasn’t been repealed, the attention her struggle brought to the oft-ignored region of India and its people there is undeniable.

So, while it’s important to give Irom and her husband Desmond the privacy they have requested during this special time, it’s also good to send love and good wishes to their family, in order to remember that her daughters are more than famous babies: they’re the children of a national hero.
