Citizenship Bill protests continue is Assam, Section 144 imposed in Guwahati

If this bill is finally accepted people of Assam will no more be with Indian state: Gogoi | File photo from PTI

Assam continues to be on the boil due to the Citizenship Bill as protests continued for the third consecutive day on Thursday (January 10) by various student bodies. Amid heightened security in state capital Guwahati, members of the Krishak Mukti Sangram Samiti (KMSS) held a demonstration outside the state secretariat against the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government with 'gamosas' (traditional Assamese scarf of honour) in hand.

The police have imposed prohibitory orders under CrPC Section 144 in parts of the state capital.

KMSS leader Akhil Gogoi mentioned greater movement if the Bill was not withdrawn.

"If this bill is finally accepted the people of Assam will no more be with the Indian state, we shall definitely declare ourselves sovereignty of Assam. We shall fight tooth and nail against the BJP," Gogoi told India Today TV.

Protesters vowed that PM Narendra Modi and his Union ministers will not be allowed entry into Assam unless their demands were met. Protests were held across most districts in the Brahmaputra valley.

PROTESTS AND POLICE

Curbing down on the protests, the Assam Police has pressed sedition charges against renowned Assamese author and Sahitya Akademi awardee Dr Hiren Gohain alongwith Akhil Gogoi and others.

They have been booked under IPC Sections 121 and 123 for 'trying to wage war against the state'. Gohain had addressed a public meeting organised by civil society members to oppose the Citizenship Bill on Monday (January 7).

SONAWAL SPEAKS

Breaking his silence, Assam Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal made an emotional appeal, harping on his Axomiya identity to allay all fears.

"I have taken charge to protect the indigenous people of Assam. No other government had tried to implement the Assam Accord earlier. But we will do it. We are going to provide constitutional safeguard to the indigenous people which will protect their lands, culture and languages," Sonowal said, speaking to reporters in Guwahati.

ULFA(I)

Meanwhile, the banned rebel outfit ULFA(I) has lent its support to the ongoing agitation.

Issuing a press statement, ULFA(I) chairman Abhijit Asom said, "The indigenous people of Assam have come out in protest against the Centre and the state government in order to safeguard the state. Now it's time to show solidarity and sympathy."
