Shutdown against killing spree cripples life in Occupied Kashmir

Shutdown against killing spree cripples life in Occupied Kashmir

In Occupied Kashmir, normal life was crippled, today, due to complete shutdown against the ongoing killing spree by Indian troops in the territory.

Call for the shutdown was given by the Joint Resistance Leadership. All shops and business establishments were closed in Srinagar and all other major cities and towns of the occupied territory while traffic was off the road.

The occupation authorities imposed restrictions in parts of downtown Srinagar to thwart any protest in the area against the killing of youth. Juma prayers could not be held at historic Jamia Masjid in Srinagar as the authorities locked down the mosque. The authorities also continued to suspend class work in all educational institutions in the Kashmir valley for the third consecutive day, today, to prevent students’ protests against the stepped up Indian state terrorism in the territory. Train service in the valley was also suspended.

The APHC Chairman, Syed Ali Gilani, and other Hurriyat leaders and organizations including Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, Shabbir Ahmed Dar, Muhammad Iqbal Mir, Imtiaz Ahmed Reshi, Ghulam Nabi War, Ghulam Nabi Waseem, and Islami Tanzeem-e-Azadi in their statements in Srinagar paid glowing tributes to the youth martyred by Indian troops in Pulwama, Shopian and Baramulla districts.

Meanwhile, curfew remained imposed in Doda district of Jammu region for the second day, today. The curfew was clamped in the town following massive protests against the coldblooded murder of a Muslim, Nayeem Ahmed Shah, by Hindu extremists on Wednesday night.

On the other hand, Kashmir Council Europe has organized one-day camp in connection with its widespread awareness movement on the Kashmir dispute titled ‘One Million Signature Campaign’ in Warsaw.

Speaking on the occasion, the KCEU Chairman, Ali Raza Syed said, the Council has already organized successful camps in connection with the signature campaign in different EU countries.

The KCEU Chairman urged the international community particularly the United Nations and European Union to impress upon India to stop its state terrorism in occupied Kashmir and take steps to settle the Kashmir dispute in accordance with the Kashmiris’ aspirations.
