Court sends three female doctors accused of abetting Dr Payal's suicide to police custody until May 31

Agripada Police personnel with Dr | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: Amidst country-wide protests over the alleged suicide of second-year medical student Dr Payal Tadvi, personnel with the Agripada Police in Mumbai on Tuesday night arrested the second out of three senior female doctors accused of abetting the suicide. The arrest of Dr Bhakti Mehare on Tuesday afternoon was followed by the arrest of Dr Hema Ahuja later on the same night. As per the latest reports, the team of officials investigating the matter arrested Dr Ankita Khandelwal in the early hours of Wednesday. All three have been sentenced to police custody till May 31.

A second-year student of Gynaecology at the BYL Nair Hospital, 26-year-old Dr Payal Tadvi was found hanging inside her hostel room on May 22. Preliminary investigation revealed that the junior doctor who hailed from a tribal family in Jalgaon was frequently harassed by three female senior doctors over her caste. In a letter she wrote to the Dean of the Medical College, Dr Tadvi's mother claimed that her daughter was constantly hounded by the accused who hurled casteist slurs at her and even embarrassed her on a WhatsApp group.

#UPDATE Medical student Payal Tadvi suicide case: Third accused doctor Ankita Khandelwal has also been arrested by Police. Details awaited. https://t.co/ql7qxkanWu — ANI (@ANI) May 29, 2019

Addressing the media on Tuesday, the deceased's husband, Dr Salman Tadvi alleged that his wife may have been 'killed'. Demanding justice for his wife, Dr Salman, a doctor at the RN Cooper Hospital alleged that the hospital did not entertain the family's repeated pleas to change Payal's unit and failed to act even after her mother wrote a letter to the dean on May 13 of this year. Agripada Police later registered a complaint in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), SC/ST Atrocities Act, Anti-Ragging Act and Information Technology Act, 2000.

Meanwhile, the BYL Nair Hospital management suspended Head of the Gynaecology department, Dr SD Shirodkar until further notice. An anti-ragging committee was also formed to look into allegations of casteism against the three accused doctors. However, neither of the accused showed up for the hearing on Tuesday which prompted hospital authorities to place them under suspension for failure to show up for their duty. The committee has recorded the statements of over 30 staff members, including doctors, heads of department (HODs), and Dr Tadvi's three roommates among other employees.

(Dr Payal Tadvi)

The junior doctor's suicide sparked massive protests by the Student Federation of India (SFI), the Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi, All India Democratic Association, and the Democratic Youth Federation of India. Agitators staged demonstrations against the injustice done to Dr Tadvi owing to her caste and tribal background while demanded speedy prosecution of the accused female doctors. The case is still under active investigation and more developments are likely to emerge in the coming days in this regard.
