Lawyers take to the streets in protest against citizenship bill

GUWAHATI/DIBRUGARH: Dressed in their usual black and white, lawyers across the state, under the banner of All Assam Lawyers’ Association (Aala) hit the road and shouted slogans against the Centre’s attempt to bring in the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016 on Friday.The lawyers’ body labelled the amendment bill as ‘undemocratic’ and ‘unconstitutional’ in nature. “The bill has been prepared to facilitate citizenship to people on the basis of religion. It’s a direct attack on the secular structure of our constitution,” Aala general secretary Dipak Kumar Das said.In Dibrugarh, hundreds of lawyers, under the banner of the Dibrugarh Bar Association, took out a protest rally in the town, demanding repeal of the bill. Holding placards and banners, the protesting lawyers shouted slogans against the bill and the BJP government during their procession from the Court Building to Thana Chariali and back. In Tinsukia too, members of the Tinsukia Bar Association staged a protest rally against the bill on Friday.Dibrugarh Bar Association secretary Satyabrata Sarma said, “We have come out to register our protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. The proposed amendment is detrimental to the people of Assam and if it is passed in the Parliament, we will approach the Supreme Court. We are totally against the bill. It is an irony that when the people of the state are demanding detection and deportation of illegal migrants, the Centre is trying to legalise these illegal migrants.”On Wednesday, the Aala had announced that it would move the Supreme Court if the bill is passed in Parliament. It termed chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal as ‘Dhritarastra’, the blind king from Mahabharata, for allegedly turning a blind eye to the sentiments of the people of the state.Meanwhile, the Prabajan Virodhi Manch (PVM) countered BJP’s claims that no illegal Bangladeshi has entered India in the last 10 years. PVM convenor and Supreme Court lawyer Upamanyu Hazarika said, “It seems like BJP is panicking. When their own minister of states Kiren Rijiju on November 16, 2016, said that of the two crore Bangladeshi infiltrators in the country, Assam has some 80 lakhs, the state BJP has claimed that there is no infiltration. The tragedy is people of Assam voted out Congress believing BJP’s promises of making Assam influx-free and now they are in favour of the infiltrators.”On Thursday, BJP spokesperson Swapnanil Barua said there has been no infiltration in the last decade as people from across the border now migrate to Gulf and European countries for better job opportunities.The Paresh Baruah-led faction of Ulfa (Independent) on Friday once again advocated its agenda of a sovereign Assam, saying that its ‘independent Assam’ will be based on secularism. The militant group’s chairperson, Abhijeet Asom, alleged that people in the ruling government have created divisions among people on the lines of religion.In a statement, the chairperson said, “Ulfa (I) respects all religion and in our dream country everyone would enjoy their religious and other beliefs freely. The people of the state who have been acting on religious lines should rethink.”Members of the All Assam Tai Ahom Students’ Union (Aatasu) also took out a semi-naked protest rally in Dibrugarh on Friday, demanding withdrawal of the bill. The agitators blocked the NH-37 near Dibrugarh University for nearly 40 minutes. Locals and students of Dibrugarh University expressed their solidarity with the agitators and participated in the protest. Before calling off the protest, the agitators submitted a memorandum to the circle officer of Dibrugarh west revenue circle, Tarali Das.Students of several colleges and schools across Dibrugarh also took out a protest rally against the bill in the town on Friday. The students also formed a human chain at Thana Chariali area as a mark of protest against the bill.
