Anger spills over as two-year-old still in borewell after 100 hrs

NDRF digs tunnel after tunnel, can’t get to toddler

PATIALA: An operation that could have been finished in 24 hours, has gone beyond 100 hours as the rescuers took up pseudoscientific drilling and tunnelling to bring out 2-year-old Fatehveer Singh, who had fallen in a 150-feet deep borewell on Thursday evening.Angry over the delay in rescuing the toddler, on Monday thousands of angry protesters blocked the road leading to Bhagwanpura village of Sangrur , where the incident occurred.The protesters alleged that the operation had been carried out without any planning due to which the retrieval of the child had been delayed.The protesters also attacked a car. The National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) team and rescuers are being blamed for having resorted to pseudoscientific drilling and tunnelling.The rescue team of NDRF assisted by Dera Sacha Sauda volunteers had dug a parallel shaft of 36 inches' diameter to reach the child. However, it was executed beyond the depth at which the child was stuck and had to be refilled with sand to bring it to the same level. Local residents alleged that NDRF had failed to deploy any technology due to which they failed to locate the child at a depth of 125 feet.When the NDRF team should have employed the latest drilling techniques to rescue the child at the earliest, it depended on manual digging. The operation was repeatedly marred by lack of expertise. Initially, the NDRF dug up the area around the borewell up to a depth of 60 feet with heavy earth-moving machines but had to stop as further digging could have endangered the structures of the houses in the vicinity.Then, without any proper calculations or using any scientific methodology, the rescuers started digging a parallel borewell mechanically which was hit by a snag. Following this, the digging was carried out manually by the volunteers of Dera Sacha Sauda, while the NDRF team stepped back.Moreover, the rescuers did not have any specialized equipment to identify borewell drilling points. Dr Yadvinder Singh, an expert from Punjabi University said those engaged in the rescue operations could have conducted a geomagnetic survey, geoelectric survey or a low-frequency resonance of the ground to pinpoint the depth and direction which could have helped the rescuers in locating and reaching the child without delay.However, the vertical of the borewell deviated from 2 feet at the top to 3 feet at a depth of 135 feet leaving a 12 feet gap between the new borewell and the place where the child was stuck. The tunnelling between the new borewell and existing one was done with the support of bricks and when NDRF finally hit the borewell in which the child was stuck, they got miffed over not finding the child and announced that there was a second borewell in the ground. However, there is only one borewell in the area.Professor Singh said that experts failed to use appropriate tools to locate the child and instead banked on nascent techniques. The diggers even failed to use the basic pendulum technique to maintain the borewell’s vertical. He said that instead of the parallel bore, a wide bore of 48-inches could have been dug around the existing shaft that could have saved the time wasted to making the underground tunnels to reach the child. The NDRF team has dug at least three tunnels and still failed to reach the child which further delayed the operation.
