Debris Of AN-32 Found In AP, SC Orders Release Of Journalist + More Top News

The AN-32, with 13 personnel onboard had last contacted ground sources from Arunachal Pradesh on June 3. IAF chopper teams were part of the mission which made the discovery. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) This Is Not A Murder Case, Says Supreme Court, Orders Release Of Journalist Arrested For 'Defaming' Yogi Adityanath

The SC noted that Kanojia who was arrested on Saturday for sharing a post on Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath did not commit a crime like murder and cannot be sent to jail for a social media post. Read more

2) 'Sacred Hill' Of Chhattisgarh Tribes Is Being Destroyed By Miners & Govt Is Turning A Blind Eye

Representational Image/PTI

Close to 10,000 tribals are protesting in scorching heat against an iron ore mine on a hill allotted to NMDC in Bailadila area of the Moaist affected Dantewada district of Chhattisgarh. The tribals claim the hill is their deity. Read more

3) Locals Clear Tonnes Of Dead Fish In Chennai Lake After Authorities Fail To Perform Their Duty

IANS

As people in Chennai wait for monsoon to arrive, most water bodies in the city have gone dry with tonnes of fish rotting in dry lakes. The stench of dead fish is another cause of worry for the distressed residents who have approached the town municipality for assistance and clean up. Read more

4) 37% Hate Speech On Facebook Is About Islamophobia, Followed By Fake News, Castiest Slurs In India

AFP

Digital hatred is growing leaps and bounds across social media platforms. Fake news, Islamophobia and xenophobia encapsulate most part of hate speech on social media across the world and India is no exception. Read more

5) Extreme Heat Takes A Toll As Four Train Passengers On Kerala Express Die In Jhansi

BCCL/Representational Image

Four passengers on the Kerala Express have died in Jhansi due to extreme heat while one passenger has been hospitalised in a critical condition, an official said. Read more
