Didi vs Doctors Live Updates: NRS Hospital's junior docs call off strike, to join duty tomorrow

1/10

Junior doctors of NRS Medical College & Hospital, Kolkata: We extend our heartfelt gratitude to all seniors, juniors, patients, common people, intelligentsia and medical fraternity of the country who spontaneously extended their support and made this movement possible. We hope to maintain this unity in future.

Junior doctors of NRS Medical College & Hospital, Kolkata: We extend our heartfelt gratitude to the CM. After an enormous movement, the meeting and discussions with our CM met a logical end. Considering everything we expect the govt to solve the issues as discussed in due time.

Doctors delegation: We will go to NRS and then announce our withdrawal. We are satisfied.

CM to junior doctors: Once you withdraw the strike, I will visit Paribaha (Assaulted doctor)

>>> West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has accepted the proposal of doctors to set up Grievance Redressal Cell in Government Hospitals.

West Bengal: Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's meeting with representatives of doctors was held at Nabanna, earlier today. She accepted the proposal of doctors to set up Grievance Redressal Cell in Government Hospitals. Doctors to announce their decision later. pic.twitter.com/zWbaZCXJ73 — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

>>> West Bengal Mamata Banerjee directs Kolkata Police commissioner Anuj Sharma to deploy a nodal police officer in every hospital



Junior doctors asking CM to visit the assaulted doctor, Mamata responds: Leave that for me to decide when I’ll go and when not. On the first day, I tried to speak to the junior doctors, you didn’t respond and did not speak to me.

Mamata asks officers to set up grievance cell at all hospitals in three languages - Hindi, English and Bengali. It should be visible during the night too. If any patients party have a complaint, they may go to this cell without resorting to violence.

Docs: We are often made to work in an environment of fear. We request humbly please ensure exemplary punishment against culprits, hence you are our guardian.

We came here for discussion because we want a solution and end the deadlock and resume services. We believe that you have all good intention if possible please take appropriate action against the unwanted incidents that have taken place.

Mamata: Off course we will address this. Rajiv Sinha (State Health Secretary), Chief Secy will address these demands

Rajiv Sinha: The details of action taken are available. Kolkata Police will also help with the names of the accused persons.

Mamata: Please give the details to the doctors as well

Rajiv Sinha: Will ensure infrastructural development. Will jointly visit and look after the problems with the doctors

Mamata: Please ensure that the news of demise or update be communicated via proper channel and in a most humble manner.

Hence, see if a third person can be involved who can absorb the information from the doctors and pass it to the patient party. That would minimise extra pressure on doctors as well

Kolkata Police Commissioner, Anuj Sharma: We had police forces posted in hospitals but now we need to streamline the entry of patient party in the hospital, hence we can minimise the chance of eventualities

Mamata: One officer from police should be made nodal officer responsible for all hospitals. Emphasis should be given on night time security.

Bus carrying 31 representatives of medical colleges and hospitals reaches Nabanna for meeting with CM Mamata Banerjee.
