Supreme Court defers petition seeking law for safety, security of medical staff

Doctors and IMA members stage protest at MY Hospital campus in Indore, Madhya Pradesh on Monday | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The Supreme Court of India, while hearing a petition on Tuesday, said that there is no absolute urgency to bring in a legislation for the protection of medical professionals. The country's highest judicial body was hearing a petition filed by doctors, seeking a law to deter violent attacks on the medicos by disgruntled patients or their relatives.

For the time being, a bench headed by Justice Deepak Gupta hearing the matter deferred the hearing for an appropriate bench once the SC reconvenes after the vacations which are due to end on June 30 of this year. Despite listing the matter for hearing in the first week of July, Justice Gupta acknowledged the rising instances of attacks on doctors.

The petition garnered the support of medical professionals across the length and breadth of India in the wake of country-wide strikes by junior resident doctors. The 'cease-work' protest was triggered after an assault on a junior doctor at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata, the state capital of West Bengal. The junior doctor was thrashed by kin of an elderly patient and sustained severe injuries.

In less than 72 hours after doctors of the state-run hospital in Kolkata launched a strike last week, residents of major medical establishments such as the All India Institute of Medical Sciences and Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi along with the Sion Hospital in Mumbai among others followed suit. The strike, which caused major chaos at cities across India and led to patients being left high and dry outside government hospitals, was called off on Monday.

Several representations, including the Resident Doctors Association, met Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan and sought to bring legislation to deter the attacks on medical professionals. West Bengal Chief Minister Mamta Banerjee also met the protesting doctors and heard their demands. However, the Trinamool Congress supremo did not issue any assurances to the protesting resident doctors in this regard.
