Pulwama terror attack: Twitter calls for surgical strike 2.0

A suicide bomber rammed his SUV packed with explosives into a CRPF bus in Pulwama district, killing 44 CRPF jawans.

At least 42 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed and scores were injured after an SUV laden with 200 kilograms of explosives rammed into a CRPF bus on the Srinagar-Jammu highway in Pulwama district on Thursday.

Infuriated over the terror attack, Twitterati called out to the Narendra Modi government to avenge the attacks with another surgical strike across the border.

"Internal surgical strike needed this time, because incident happened well within LOC. From Srinagar to down south there are countless support system exists in many forms. This is modern time warfare and it has to fought inside first absolute ruthlessness," a Twitter user tweeted.

"This is the time I request not to be political but stand with the govt and help them to take bigger step. It may be the economic and financial surgical strike," said another.

We need another surgical strike #Pulwama — Hashmi ahrar (@AhrarHashmi) February 14, 2019

Once again time to Surgical Strike Sir g ,,, Otherwise youth never believe in ur Govt. .... Jai Hind Jai Jawan — Madhav Jindal (@MadhavJ23095119) February 14, 2019

Khoon k bdle khoon sir... we need one more surgical strike..... bigger

than Uri strike February 14, 2019

Soldiers martyred & injured in #PulwamaAttack weren't representing the ruling govt party or the opposition, they were Indian Soldiers sacrificing their lives for our nation. Politicing them for personal propaganda is an insult to them.

Surgical Strike again please @narendramodi ! — De (@ibeingdevil) February 14, 2019

Today 18 CRPF Jawans martyred in an IED blast in Awantipora, Srinagar!



The act was done by Terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed!



This is the time to hit back and finish off Pakistan from world's Map!



Enough of bloodshed, India needs Revenge!



Time for Second Surgical Strike! — Mahesh Vikram Hegde (@mvmeet) February 14, 2019

The Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) claimed responsibility for the terror attack and released a video clip of the suicide bomber, identified as Adil Ahmed Dar, brandishing guns in front of the group's flags.

The terror group claimed that the video was shot before Adil Ahmad Dar carried out the attack in Lethpora.

Jaish-e-Mohammed is also responsible for the 2016 Uri terror attack that killed 19 armed forces personnel and prompted the Modi government to conduct surgical strikes on terror launchpads in Pakistan.
