“They could have killed me…”, Kashmiri student assaulted in Bengaluru

BENGALURU: The attacks on innocent Kashmiris are continuing post-February 14 Pulwama attack in which 49 CRPF personnel were martyred.

In the latest, a 24-year-old civil engineering student was brutally assaulted allegedly by some youths in southeast Bengaluru on March 20.

According to Deccan Herald reported, Absar Zahoor Dhar, a resident of Srinagar, was attacked in AECS Layout near Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) in the city. Dhar suffered grievous injuries to his head, face and hand in the assault,

Absar Zahoor Dhar, 24-yr-old Kashmiri student has been beaten up in Bengaluru. Dhar, who funds his studies by modelling, says “They could have killed me… I’m living in fear, not attending college as the assailants roam free in front of my house as if nothing happened.” #kashmir pic.twitter.com/TcfeLbOFn1 — Fahad Shah (@pzfahad) March 24, 2019

The reports said that a group of four to five people, one of whom identified himself as Nithin, approached him as he was having coffee at Madouk Cafe, on the evening of March 19. The group accused Dhar of eve-teasing, the allegation politely refuted by him.

[also_read url=”https://www.siasat.com/news/goons-saffron-kurtas-thrash-kashmiri-vendors-video-goes-viral-1474918/”]Goons in saffron kurtas thrash Kashmiri vendors, video goes viral[/also_read]

Following which 25-year-old Nithin and his associates 21-year-old Manjesh, 26-year-old Gautham, and 20-year-old Abhi alias Santhosh, all residents of Kundalahalli Colony warned him and left the cafe.

Armed with iron roads, the accused caught hold of Dhar the next day at an an ice-cream parlour in AECS Layout. They began assaulting him without any provocation by dragging him out of the shop.

Dhar, who does modelling to fund his career, told DH, “They could have killed me… I’m living in fear, not attending college as the assailants roam free in front of my house as if nothing happened.”

The HAL police arrested the accused based on the complaint filed by Dhar.

Earlier this month, two Kashmiri dry fruits sellers were roughed up by the saffron-clad right-wing Hindu activist in Uttar Pradesh’s Lucknow.
