16-yr-old gang raped in Ludhiana

Ludhiana

booked for rape

: Missing since April 30, a teenage girl has allegedly been gang-raped by four youths, including three minors in Ludhiana. Following the information, Ludhiana police registered a case late on Friday evening under IPC sections of gang-rape and the Pocso (Protection of Children from Sexual Offences) Act.According to information, the 16-year-old domestic help left her house on April 30 to go on work. It is alleged that the main accused (aged 21), who lives in her locality, lured her and took her to an isolated place, where he first raped her, and then called his three minor friends, who also raped her.Inspector Pragat Singh said the accused raped the girl for three days. When she tried to escape, they attacked her with bricks, following which she sustained a severe head injury. Thereafter, late on Thursday night, the accused took the girl to civil hospital, stating that she had met with an accident and sustained injuries. After admitting her in the hospital, the accused escaped from there.“Initially, it was considered an accident case, but after medical reports, rape was ascertained. The girl’s parents, who were already searching for their daughter, somehow came to know she was admitted in hospital. On Friday, they reached the hospital, where the main accused also reached to confirm if the girl had died or not. The kin nabbed him and handed him over to the police. The other three accused have also been arrested,” added the inspector.The official said the girl was still unfit to give a statement. The police have registered a case on her father’s statement.In another case, Khanna police have booked a bus conductor for allegedly raping a woman after promising to marry her. The accused was identified as Gurmeet Singh. Police officials said the woman of Samrala Road told police that some time ago, while she was going through Guru Amardas Market in the city, the accused called her. They added that the duo exchanged their contact numbers.Cops said that as per the complainant, the accused made physical relations with her after promising to marry her, but refused to do so later, after she asked him to keep his promise. They added that the woman then told the accused she would approach the police, but he threatened to kill her if she did so.Police sources said the woman, after being allegedly cold-shouldered by police, knocked the doors of the court, which directed the Khanna police to probe the matter. They added that following the investigation, the accused was booked by Payal police for rape.
