Martyr’s kin celebrate Balakot hit

RANCHI: Hours after the news of surgical strike at JeM training camp in Balakot in Pakistan led by Indian Air Force broke, family members of CRPF jawan Vijay Soreng , who was martyred in the Pulwama terror attack, rejoiced for the first time since February 14.The slain jawan’s family in Gumla and Ranchi told TOI that while the loss of Vijay can never be compensated for, the strike came as a solace to them. “Dil ko thoda shanti mila subah khabar sunke (The news of strike came as a bit of solace to my heart),” his widow Karmila Soreng said over phone.“I learnt that some 300 terrorists were killed in the air strike. If it is true, then India has avenged the dastardly act in which our jawans were killed. It is high time that women across the border, too, feel the loss and pain like the widows of slained soldiers in India like me. The government shouldn’t stop here and continue the offensive from time to time. The time for restraint is gone,” added Karmila, who works with Jharkhand Armed Police (JAP) and is posted in Ranchi.In Gumla, Vijay’s elder brother, Sanjay, said that after weeks of mourning, it was time to celebrate. “Aaj khushi manayenge sab milke. (We will celebrate together today),” he told reporters who had gathered outside their house.Vijay’s son, Rahul, added, “If they (Pakistan-sponsored terrorists) kill 40 of our jawans, the army should eliminate 400 of theirs. I thank PM Modi for avenging the attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama and elsewhere.”Meanwhile, leaders from across political sections also hailed the air strike. Celebratory rallies were taken out across the state by political, social, voluntary and business outfits.Chief minister Raghubar Das, who was in Delhi till afternoon on personal work, said, “The strike has once again reaffirmed that India is safe under the leadership of Narendra Modi.”Senior BJP leader Arjun Munda tweeted: “I heartily thank and bow before PM and Indian Army for this courageous step to enter in terrorist hideout to flush them out. It’s high time we tell Pakistan that if you do Uri and Pulwama, India won’t be a sitting duck and fly pigeons (peace mascot).”Opposition leaders thanked the action of the Army but chose to avoid comments on the Modi. JMM working president Hemant Soren, in a statement on social media, said, “Our brave Indian Air Force men have replied to the Pulwama attack by entering into their house to demolish them. I thank and congratulate our Army for this. Our Army will always give a fitting reply to cowardly terrorist attack.”On the other hand, various parts of the city, such as Albert Ekka Chowk, Upper Bazaar, Hinoo, Kanke Road, reverberated with pro-Army and pro-India slogans.Members of several Muslim outfits took out a procession from Vikrant Chowk till Albert Ekka Chowk with the Tricolour and hailed the surgical strike. Wholesale shop owners, under the banner of Shradhanand Path Dukandar Samiti, played with colours and distributed sweets among people at Upper Bazaar.
