IAF air strike: Any retaliatory move by Pakistan case for further retaliation by India, says Kanwal Sibal

Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale’s commentary shows we are not itching for a wider conflict with Pakistan. Our intention is to deal with terrorist camps and supporting infrastructure that the Pakistani ISI has built up for them, said, Former Foreign Secretary, in an interview with ET Now Edited excerpts:The idea is to convey to Pakistan that we are not itching for a wider conflict with Pakistan, our intention is to deal with the terrorist camps and supporting infrastructure that the Pakistani ISI has built up for them. Since there was a terrorist attack in Pulwama, the retaliation is against the terrorists not against other targets in Pakistan. So, this is an effort to limit the potential for escalation on the assumption that Pakistan would have good sense not to do so because escalation will not help either country.However, the fact remains that we have sent a very powerful message by crossing the LOC. At the time of the Kargil War, our airforce was under strict instruction not to cross the LOC which was a big handicap. The surgical strikes in 2016 were across the LOC but those were shallow strikes and there is a big difference between a limited ground operation of the kind that took place in 2016 and air strikes which actually are essentially escalatory in nature. Pakistan should read the writing on the wall that India has now clearly conveyed to Pakistan that we are ready for any escalation should they so wish and we will do whatever is necessary to defend ourselves.Pakistan will need to be extremely cautious. There would be call from within Pakistan to retaliate. I am not very convinced that Pakistan will retaliate. They will be taking a huge risk and opening up for further retaliation by India.A couple of things. If you recall, the US National Security Advisor apparently told our NSA publicly that India has the right to self defence. So, we have acted in self defence since there was a terror attack and United States has gone further while dealing with terrorist strikes. We have had a very powerful statement by the UN Security Council after the Pulwama attack which was diplomatically very significant because on the Kashmir issue for decades now, the other countries have been very ambivalent.They are trying to counsel both countries to show restraint even when India was the victim and issues relating to Kashmir have been raised in the Security Council. This is very refreshing that a lead was taken in the Security Council by task and a very strong statement occurred and we have had also supportive statements even from the Gulf, from the UAE, from Saudi Arabia. To that extent, Pakistan will not get the kind of support that they have been getting in the past for our diplomatic push is certainly stronger.However, there always will be lurking fear in the minds of even those who support us that the escalation should not reach a point where a nuclear element will come in because the argument has always been that India and Pakistan need to talk to each other because both are nuclear weapon states.I am sure the Americans are going to tell Pakistan very strongly not to think of retaliation because Pakistan is in a weak position and other countries would not want the Pakistani military to go in for a misadventure of this kind which would have strong repercussions on internal stability in Pakistan.As for the impact on the standing of the Pakistan military, we must remember, a) like in the case of the surgical strikes, they are again trying to minimise the whole thing by saying that nothing really happened, they went in only a few kilometres and they hit only the open spaces, threw their bombs in panic etc, etc. This gives them internally cause not to react.If as in the case of surgical strikes this is an indication of their reluctance to act, then there may not be that kind of reactions from Pakistan. There will be a push by public opinion but then they will be pushed by public opinion only.If the military or the government actually takes up the issue or encourages the television channels and the press to bray for blood and for retaliatory action, they would putting themselves into a corner. At the moment, it is very clear what decision they will take with regard to counter strikes.
