NIA raids houses of separatist leaders in Srinagar

NL Correspondent

Srinagar, Feb 26

National Investigating Agency (NIA) Tuesday conducted raids of at least 9 separatist leaders in connection with militant funding.

Reports said that since Tuesday morning different teams of NIA raided the houses of Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, JKLF Chief Muhammad Yasin Malik, Nayeem Ahmed Khan, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, Zafar Akbar Bhat, Nayeem Geelani, Masrat Alam and Shabir Ahmed Shah.

The raid at the house of Muhammad Yasin Malik sparked violent clashes when youth pelted stones on the deployed security forces. The security Forces resorted to tear-smoke shelling to disperse the protesting youth. The NIA raid sparked shutdown in Maisuma.

NIA teams in their raids confiscated books, documents, cell phones, lap tops and other materials.

Meanwhile, senior separatist leader and president Anjuman Shari Shain Tuesday condemned the arbitrary and coercive act of raiding the houses of separatist leaders including Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, Muhammad Yasin Malik, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai and other political activists and said that despite the “state sponsored attrocities” the people in state will pursue their struggle for freedom and won’t give up resistance or change their stance.

In a statement, Aga Syed Hasan while, reacting to raids conducted by (NIA), said that they have been given this task “just to drag and involve leadership into fabricated cases”.

He said that during day long raids, the NIA team found nothing except their mobile phones, laptop and documents pertaining to personal properties.

NIA sleuths after questioning found nothing and it is rather strange that instead making things public, maintained a mysterious silence, and in turn Indian media without any reason and proof assigned un-proportional and unnecessary hype.

It is well thought out plan to defame movement and resistance leadership, said Aga Syed Hasan.

Referring to these raids, he said that it was failed step by Delhi authorities and illustrates their frustration and fascist mindset.
