IAF destroys 3 terror camps in Pakistan in pre-dawn operation

NL Correspondent

New Delhi, Feb 26

Indian Air Force (IAF) fighter jets struck at three terror camps in Pakistan in the wee hours of Tuesday. These include training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) and Lashkar-e-Taiba. One of the camps is in Pakistan and the other two are in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK).

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale, while addressing a press conference, said a large number of terrorists and their commanders had been eliminated in the air strike.

Tension between the two nuclear-armed neighbours has been high following the Pulwama terror attack. Heavy exchange of fire also started across the 749 km-long Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir. The IAF mission inside Pakistan and PoK lasted 21 minutes.

The first to be hit was Balakot, located 24 km north-west of Muzaffarabad around 3.45 am. A simultaneous strike was carried out at Muzaffarabad around 3.48 am and the third one at Chakoti at 3.58 am. The IAF mission started off at 3 am. A group of Mirage 2000 fighter jets that had the back-up of a mid-air refueller, airborne radars and more fighter jets on standby for a second strike, hit terror camps and destroyed them; 1,000 kg precision bombs were used in the attack.

The Mirage jets based in Gwalior had been forward-located to the IAF base at Adampur near Jalandhar, the home base of the MiG 29 twin-engine jets. This is the first strike by the IAF deep inside Pakistan since the 1971 Indo-Pak war. During the 1999 Kargil conflict, IAF jets, on the orders of the government, had not crossed the LoC.

However, Pakistan on Tuesday morning claimed that IAF jets intruded across the LoC and dropped a ‘payload’-military euphemism for warhead or bomb-but it did not cause any loss to life or damage.

“Indian aircrafts’ intrusion across LOC in Muzafarabad Sector within AJ&K was 3-4 miles. Under forced hasty withdrawal aircrafts released payload which had free fall in open area. No infrastructure got hit, no casualties. Technical details and other important information to follow.”

Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor, Director General of the Inter-Service Public Relations (ISPR) of Pakistan armed forces, tweeted at 5.12 am saying, “Indian Air Force violated Line of Control. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled. Indian aircrafts gone back. Details to follow.” At 7.05 am, the Pakistani spokesperson sent out another tweet saying, “Indian aircraft intruded from Muzafarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage.”

Muzaffarbad in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir lies north-west of Tangdhar in J&K while Balakot is further west, beyond PoK, and is technically in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KPK).Meanwhile, both sides have been using their air-borne radars, and doing constant patrolling to keep an eye on various bases. Indian jets are also guarding the air space over the LoC.

On the ground, IAF bases at Ambala, Halwara, Bathinda, Sirsa, Adampur, Pathankot, Bikaner and Suratgarh are in ready mode. These bases have MiG-29, Jaguar and Sukhoi 30 MKi jets. As per protocol for such a scenario, these bases have certain number of planes in ‘runway readiness’. India and Pakistan maintain a no-fly zone for fighter jets on either side of the LoC to ensure no accident occurs.

Following the terror attack in Pulwama in Kashmir, which left 41 CRPF jawans dead, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had said the Indian armed forces were free to respond to the Pakistan-sponsored action in the manner and time of their choosing.

The developments coincide with Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj being in Wuzhen today for an RIC (Russia-India-China) meet.

From aggression to denial, Pak sends confused signals

New Delhi, Feb 26

“Indian Air Force violated Line of Control. Pakistan Air Force immediately scrambled and Indian aircrafts gone back. Details to follow,” tweeted the Pakistani army spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor this morning at 5.12 am.

This tweet alerted media and the strategic community on both sides of the Line of Control about the big early morning development on Tuesday less than a fortnight since the horrific killing of 40 CRPF jawans in the Pulwama terror strike. Within a few hours Ghafoor in a series of tweets claimed, “Indian aircrafts’ intrusion across LOC in Muzafarabad Sector within AJ&K was 3-4 miles. Under forced hasty withdrawal aircrafts released payload which had free fall in open area. No infrastructure got hit, no casualties. Technical details and other important information to follow.”

He also tweeted photographs supposedly of ‘Payload of hastily escaping Indian aircrafts that fell in the open’. But as details emerged from New Delhi claiming a major ‘non-military pre-emptive’ Indian Air Force early morning strike at the biggest Jaish-e-Mohammad camp in Balakot in KPK (Khyber Pakhtwukhwa province), well inside Pakistani territory, the Pakistani army, establishment and government huddled into series of high-profile security meetings.

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi in a statement to local media called it an act of ‘grave aggression’ by India that would be given a ‘befitting response’ adding that ‘Pakistan has a right to self-defence’.

However, soon after the national security committee special meeting convened by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, the tone and tenor was different with the Indian claims called as fictitious that was made with an eye on upcoming general elections in the country.

“Forum strongly rejected Indian claim of targeting an alleged terrorist camp near Balakot and the claim of heavy casualties. Once again Indian government has resorted to a self serving, reckless and fictitious claim. This action has been done for domestic consumption being in election environment, putting regional peace and stability at grave risk,” said a statement released by the Pakistani Prime Minister’s Office.

In a deja vu of the statements from Pakistan post the Indian surgical strikes in 2016, Islamabad chose to opt for deniability of the current IAF strike. “The claimed area of strike is open for the world to see the facts on ground. For this domestic and international media is being taken to the impact site. Forum concluded that India has committed uncalled for aggression to which Pakistan shall respond at the time and place of its choosing,” added the statement, raising questions about why talk of a befitting response if the Indian claims are fictitious.

Deniability from Pakistan is being seen as sign of immediate or knee-jerk escalation as possibly not being considered with global players asking for restraint to be exercised between the two nuclear neighbours. Also, Pakistan’s constant denial of terror pads operating from its soil means any admission of their destruction is not an option.

Sources told The Tribune that at the all party meeting briefing this evening, External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj told leaders that “Pakistan is confused about how to respond”.

Meanwhile, Imran Khan has called for a special joint session of the Parliament on February 27 even as both sides stepped up their diplomatic offensive. The acting Indian High Commissioner in Islamabad was also summoned by the acting Pakistani Foreign Secretary today.

5-star Balakot camp was sitting-duck target for IAF, 350 terrorists killed

New Delhi, Feb 26

Hundreds of Fidayeen and their trainers were shifted from Pakistan occupied Kashmir to a five-star, resort-style camp in a hilltop forest in Balakot after the Pulwama attack, providing Indian forces with “a sitting duck target” when they carried out an air strike early on Tuesday, killing up to 350 terrorists, sources said.

They said at least 325 terrorists and 25 to 27 trainers were at the camp, the biggest operated by the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad group, which had claimed responsibility for the February 14 suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama, Kashmir, that killed 40 jawans.

Everyone at the camp was sleeping and Pakistani defence establishment had no clue that the attack was coming so deep into their country because they had expected a surgical strike on camps in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir near the Line of Control, said the sources.

But India received intelligence that JeM had shifted many in-training terrorists and hardcore operatives, along with their trainers, to the Balakot camp, which has facilities for 500 to 700 people, and even has a swimming pool along with cooks and cleaners.

Fighter and other aircraft took off from several air bases in Western and Central commands at about the same time, leaving Pakistani defence officials confused as to where they were heading, sources said. A small group of aircraft broke away from the swarm and headed to Balakot where “the sleeping terrorists were sitting ducks for the Indian bombing,” said one source.

“They had no idea that Balakot was to be the target…when the pictures come in you will see only khandhar (ruins) of the once-flourishing camp,” said the source.

The terror camp is located 20 km from Balakot town.

Balakot is some 80 km from the Line of Control near Abbotabad where Al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden was killed in hiding by covert US forces, who had also sneaked into Pakistan to carry out the operation, catching the entire Pakistani military unawares.
