Air strike to avenge Pulwama is appropriate, but do not rule out escalation

Lt Gen (retd) Syed Ata Hasnain commanded XV (Chinar) Corps, which is responsible for military ops in the Kashmir valley

Out of all the options available to India to respond to the Pulwama outrage it currently appears that it chose the most appropriate one. The word ‘currently’ is important here because in hybrid conflict situations oneoff acts do not bring an end to conflict. In fact, many times they exacerbate a situation. The appropriateness of the chosen Indian option appears correct because it did not stick to old wine in terms of a surface-based surgical strike like the last one in September 2016. The decision this time has taken the calibration many notches higher.The common understanding in the armed forces is that we can resort to various options within the spectrum of response but the moment we choose to get the Indian Air Force (IAF) to cross the border or the LoC with a targeted mission the escalation climbs higher to the extent of a nearwar-like situation. The Indian government in conjunction with the armed forces has obviously done a deep risk appreciation and concluded that an air strike by a reasonably large quantum of aircraft and armed appropriately with 1000 and 500 pound bombs would meet the needs of retribution being sought for the Pulwama attack.However, very correctly the decision remained limited to the old concept of 2016 with only terrorist infrastructure being targeted and not Pakistan military facilities or any other civilian infrastructure. Within this decision the choice could have been the large new Bahawalpur facility of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) or an equally important training and holding camp at Balakot deeper in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; the latter better approached through PoK. Bahawalpur carried greater risk of early engagement in Pakistan air space.The choice of going surgical again, against terrorist facilities suits Indian strategy. By choosing to escalate through targeting the Pakistan Army India would lose the support of the international community or at least weaken the traction gained in the diplomatic campaign. The decision to target terrorist facilities also maintains India’s moral ascendancy in the current situation.Damage assessment is yet to confirm the physical outcome of the air strike. Pakistan is attempting to downplay the Indian action by claiming that its own air force scrambled in response to force the Indian aircraft to return without meeting the intended aim of the strike. It also claims that the munitions were dropped randomly by the Indian aircraft with limited or no effect. Pakistan’s Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR) arm has gone on an overdrive to push the information aspects in its favour.However, what is clear is that Indian aircraft entered Pakistan air space with impunity and returned to base safely without any challenge by the Pakistan Air Force (PAF). With PM Imran Khan and his numerous ministers having passionately warned India and promised that any military adventurism would be met with a Pakistan military response, it now puts the leadership under pressure. Whatever Pakistan decides to do, the onus of escalation clearly lies in its court.The DG ISPR is promising a very strong and appropriate response, obviously without spelling out what the options are. We may therefore assume that the Pakistan military’s ego will largely dictate what it intends to do. There is no similar terrorist infrastructure on the Indian side which it can target as a quid pro quo. If it chooses to escalate by targeting Indian military facilities or civilian infrastructure it would be counted as an act of war. Pakistan is economically in no position to sustain a warlike situation although it is not particularly known for rational thinking when it comes to choice of options. That is the reason due to which India cannot expect that this one-off action is the last we have seen in this escalating standoff. While risk may have been well calculated, the feasibility of contingencies leading to far higher levels of escalation is something India needs to be prepared for.The international community is already trying to de-escalate the crisis between the nuclear-armed neighbours. What India needs to do is ensure once again that political consensus is sought and maintained while ensuring the fullest support to the armed forces. There will be time to celebrate the achievements of our armed forces but under no circumstances must misplaced jingoism take the place of rational and cool thinking in the rapidly changing security environment.
