What is National Command Authority? And why did Pak PM called for NCA meeting?

What is National Command Authority? And why did Pak PM called for NCA meeting?

International

oi-Madhuri Adnal

Islamabad, Feb 27: Prime Minister Imran Khan has called for a high level meeting of the National Command Authority (NCA) on Wednesday. This high-level, joint command oversees Pakistan's strategic components, most notably the country's nuclear arsenal. The meeting will be attended by the Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General Qamar Javed Bajwa, Defence Ministers and Foreign Ministry on Wednesday.

The disclosure of the NCA meeting was clearly meant to be a threat of nuclear retaliation. They also declared that Pakistan would "dominate escalation ladder."

The meeting was summoned in the wake of violation of Lion of Control (LoC) by Indian Air Force.

What is National Command Authority:

The National Command Authority, (abbreviated as NCA), is the apex civilian led command to oversee the employment, policy formulation, exercises, deployment, research and development, and operational command and control of Pakistan's nuclear arsenals.

The NCA meeting is generally attended by the Federal Ministers of Defence and Interior, Chairman JSC, Chief of Army Staff, Chief of Naval Staff, Chief of Air Staff, Director General Strategic Plans Division, Director General Inter Services Intelligence, Secretary Foreign Affairs and other senior officials.

The NCA was set up in 2000 following the overthrow of the civilian government and approval from Pakistan's National Security Council and its then Chief Executive General Parvez Musharraf.

The NCA is charged with joint-space operations (such as military satellites), information operations (such as information warfare), missile defense, internal and external command and control, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR), and strategic deterrence, and combating weapons of mass destruction.

The NCA oversees the operations of the Pakistani Army, Air Force, and Navy's Strategic Commands, along with their functional basis.

The unified military strategic command structure is intended to give the Prime Minister and Cabinet of Pakistan a unified resource for greater understanding of specific threats (military, nuclear, chemical, biological, radiological, conventional, and non-conventional, and intelligence) and the means to respond to those threats as quickly as possible to prevent the collateral damage.

The convening of 'extraordinary' meeting of NCA confirms that Pakistan is gearing up for a befitting response to any misadventure by India which is continuously whipping up war hysteria in the wake of Pulwama attack.
