Exclusive: Why Balakot was chosen for IAF airstrike

According to sources, the Balakot camp was home to 200-300 JeM recruits at any given time.

The Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp struck by Indian Air Force in Balakot is where the Pulwama terror attack was planned. According to sources, the Balakot camp was home to 200-300 JeM recruits at any given time.

It has been revealed that Indian Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa briefed NSA Ajit Doval on February 15. Dhanoa had presented Ajit Doval with the option of conducting an air strike to target the Balakot camp.

India Today TV has accessed an intelligence report on the activities in Balakot Jaish-e-Mohammad training camp.

In December 2017, Abdullah, the son of JeM chief Masood Azahar underwent advanced training here. Later, he did a 10-day refresher training at the camp.

The camp was controlled by Masood Azhar’s brother-in-law Yousuf Azhar, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said.

The planning for the Pulwama attack was also done here, according to the report. 40 CRPF men were killed on February 14 when suicide bomber Adil Ahmed Dar rammed an explosive-laden vehicle in a bus which was transporting the CRPF convoy.

Recently, 60 JeM recruits underwent a 3-month training at the Balakot Jaish camp. This included training in suicide bombings using cars -- like the one in Pulwama.

The Balakot complex had 5-6 barracks with further construction underway to increase the strength. Around 200-300 cadres were always present at the Balakot camp at any given point.

The report said that Pulwama mastermind Abdul Ghazi, who was killed in a shootout last week, was also trained here.

This is also one of the camps where Border Action Teams (BAT) conducts cross-border operations and raids across the LoC. The BATs include commandos from the Pakistan Army and terrorists. It’s these teams that have carried out the beheading of Indian soldiers in the past.

"JeM was attempting other fidayeen attacks. India struck the biggest training camp in Balakot. JeM terrorists, trainers, commanders and group of Jihadis eliminated," Gokhale said.

Intelligence agencies are tracking chatter on the other side to assess the damage done by the airstrike, sources said. No major mobilisation or unusual activity has been noticed by Pakistani forces till now, said an official.

The report also said that the camp in Balakot was not an ordinary one but a specialised complex with military facilities. It provided training on making Improvised Explosive Devices or IEDs, sniping, using drones and water combat.

After the air strike by the Indian Air Force in the early hours of Tuesday, in which 12 fighter jets were used, there was action on the Line of Control in the evening. Pakistani forces resorted to shelling in Nowshera, Akhnoor and Krishna Ghati sectors in Jammu and Kashmir.
