Pune: Youth missing after killing his girlfriend in Narhe, search still on

23-year-old Sonali Bhingardeve had been missing from the last five days. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Pune: In an incident of love gone wrong, a man is absconding after killing his girlfriend in the Narhe area of Pune.

23-year-old Sonali Bhingardeve had been missing from the last five days. Her parents registered a missing complaint in the local police station.

Sonali was an engineering student. Her boyfriend, one Somesh Ghodke, had taken a flat on rent near her college. Sonali and Somesh lived together in this flat. Sonali's decomposed body was found by the Sinhagad Road police in the Narhe flat.

While the police is yet to find the suspect, missing Somesh, they found a suicide note, allegedly written by Somesh in the flat. The note read that he would kill Sonali because he suspects she had an affair with someone and then would commit suicide following a failed relationship.

Both Somesh and Sonali belonged to Karad in Satara. The police is still searching for missing Somesh. According to Sinhagad Road assistant inspector Vishawjeet Jagtap, a police team has been sent to Somesh's native place and his workplace.

They are also trying to find if there is another case of a missing body being found in the nearby areas.



Another murder incident in Pune

In another horrific incident that happened in Chandannagar area of Pune, two youngsters killed a man when he called out to them for staring at his female friend for too long. The deceased was identified as Chandan Jaiprakash Singh (36).

The accused have been identified as Tipusultan Feroz Mansuri, 24, from Chandannagar and Aniruddha Amrish Rathod, 25, from Wadgaon Sheri.

According to the police, the deceased and his female friend were talking to each other near Kharadi labour camp when the two accused passed by them and kept staring at the woman. Singh then called out to them and in anger, the youngsters beat up Singh and hit him with a stone and a rod. While the accused fled from the scene, the police is still investigating the matter.
