A bulletproof economy is the real deterrent against all odds

LAHORE: The government should make it its business to focus all its resources to fortify the core economy, making it unassailable against all odds and let the valiant sentinels take on all the external as well as internal threats to the security of the country.

As a matter of fact, our belligerent neighbour would hardly ever indulge in any misadventure owing to its intrinsic strategic weaknesses, our nuclear deterrent, and the embarrassing lessons it learnt from its past campaigns.

However, it would go to unprecedented lengths in its attempts to undermine our economy.

In the two earlier wars fought with India, Pakistan was economically stronger than India. The situation has reversed after 48 years. Though, our military might is sufficient to , economically we are weak.

We should take cue from Soviet Union that matched United States in military strength but was broke economically. Its military might was not enough to save it from fragmenting into small states.

Pakistan’s survival lies in economic growth, which is stifled owing to our inept policies.

This is the time to change our policies from self-interest mode to national interest mode or from elitist tilt to sustained growth path.

Pakistan has the ability to finance its development program through its internal resources only if the tax regime is streamlined that promotes tax culture instead of rent-seeking.

We need strong military in view of a hostile neighbour and the military spending is not as high as depicted in many comments. But because we are not generating revenues according to the size of our economy the military budget and debt servicing look very high.

We are a $330 billion or Rs45850 billion documented economy and over $330 billion grey economy. Even from the documented economy we hardly generate tax revenue worth 9.5 percent of our GDP (current revenue target Rs4390 billion).

All regional economies generate revenue equivalent to 18 percent of their GDP. If we attain the regional level, our tax revenue from documented economy will shoot up to Rs8253, which is almost the double of current revenue target.

It is worth noting that the tax rates including corporate income tax, income tax on banks and sales tax rates in Pakistan are highest in the region.

It warrants that the tax collection in Pakistan should be proportionately much higher in Pakistan. But it is not so.

The tax evasion even in the documented sector is very high.

In fact, if they pay the actual tax, most of them will be booted out of the market by the undocumented sector.

They evade full taxes by greasing the palms of tax officials. Production is underreported, services sector companies do not issue full invoices, and the importers under-invoice their imports to save taxes.

The rent seekers in the Federal Board of Revenue (FBR) are now sharks that do not let any opportunity for making money pass them by.

Undocumented sector is the basic strength of corrupt tax collectors. It is also the avenue for further rent seeking. Tax evaders, smugglers pay bribes to them to operate without coming into tax net.

The government planners should realise they have to break this vicious circle. The nexus between the bribers and the bribed is stronger than the law of the country. They operate openly without any fear of law.

The government should muster the courage to bring them to book. Our survival is linked to collection of actual revenues. The non-documented sector is more powerful than the formal sector.

Over time it has developed the ability to paralyse the country if any government dares to bring them into tax net through documentation. They have forced every government since 1987 to take nominal tax from them on their annual turnover.

The tax collectors do not have the right to determine their annual turnover which is decided by the traders. The tax collectors are bound to accept what they deposit.

Taming them will be an uphill task but once done it would resolve all our problems. This is easier said than done. The government would have to show the political will to bring about a paradigm change in our policies.

It will have to break cartels, monopolies and tackle the elitist groups so that level playing field becomes open for all. All these groups operate both formally and informally directly or through

proxies.
