These shows we can do without

harinder@tribunemail.com

Col DS Cheema (retd)

On February 19, two Surya Kiran Aerobatic Team aircraft collided, killing Wg Cdr Sahil Gandhi and injuring two officers during the 12th edition of the Aero India show at Bengaluru. The IAF has already given the ‘Missing Man’ salute. After the probe report, the matter will rest at that. The Indian Navy, too, conducted a similar probe, when on October 1, 2002, two IL-38 reconnaissance aircraft of the Winged Stallions squadron collided midair, killing nine highly qualified, trained and experienced pilots during the Navy Week celebrations in Goa. There have been many other such accidents when Army units celebrate their raising days or golden jubilees and other important historic landmarks. Years ago, the EME Corps lost two men and two were grievously injured at Secunderabad during preparations for the golden jubilee celebrations. Why must such accidents continue to take place and why must the nation remain a mute spectator to such ghastly happenings?

Every citizen of India is proud of its gallant armed forces and knows very well that they are among the finest fighting machines in the world. They have earned the gratitude of the nation by laying down their lives for the national cause. They have displayed remarkable grit and professionalism in war and peace and are seen as the bright North Star in a corrupt system. When they lose their brave men and material worth hundreds of crores, it is bound to become a concern for every citizen.

Admittedly, golden jubilees, raising days and other such historic occasions mean a lot to the armed forces. Such events remind them of their unique culture of gallantry and inspire young soldiers. Also, different governments wanting to showcase the nation’s superior military power is also a laudable goal and meets many objectives. Both have many benefits. But must it be done at such a terrible cost? Time, energy and money spent on such activities could certainly be better utilised. These celebrations and displays consume months of preparations involving hundreds of men and huge material resources. Could that time and money be put to better use for training so that officers and men shed lesser blood during war?

It is unfortunate that many a time our armed forces have the compulsion of using ageing weapon systems and equipment during such celebrations and displays, increasing the risk of accidents. Under these circumstances, must they continue using such systems and equipment for ceremonial functions? Our annual celebrations like the Republic Day parade, which showcases our military might, give suitable message to our enemies and convince our own people that the security of the nation is in the right hands. They are good enough. The IAF and the Navy must stop these dangerous aerobatics, since these in no way enhance their combat effectiveness.
