Post attack, larger terror threat looms over state

editorial@tribune.com

Arun Joshi

Tribune News Service

The Indian Air Force’s airstrikes at terror camps in Pakistan and Pakistan occupied Jammu and Kashmir Tuesday morning have brought the imminence of more terror strikes by Pakistan-sponsored outfits in the state closer instead of diminishing these.

Apart from the threat of retaliation that Pakistan has held out to India for what it called the violation of the Line of Control that divides Jammu and Kashmir between India and Pakistan, security agencies are worried over Pakistan unleashing a fresh wave of terror through suicide bombers it has trained and stored in Kashmir to target the security forces as they did after the September 2016 surgical strikes.

“There can be a serial repeat of Pulwama type attacks or even uglier than that as Pakistan, in its desperation, would use its strategic assets in the state,” a top counter-terrorism official in the state told The Tribune in his initial assessment of the impact of the airstrikes in Balakot, Pakistan, the major training centre of Jaish-e-Mohmmad, the group responsible for the Pulwama atrocity.

Two kinds of threats are staring at the security forces in J&K. First, Pakistan in a bid to avenge the loss of its strategic assets (terrorists) in the airstrikes on terror camps on its soil early this morning would activate terrorists in Kashmir to strike at the Army, paramilitary forces and Jammu and Kashmir Police. They could go in for spectacular attacks, said the official.

The airstrikes might have added urgency to their plans to repeat the Pulwama type attack that left at least 40 CRPF personnel dead on February 14.

At least half of the 300 militants operating in Kashmir are from the Jaish-e-Mohammad group that had owned the responsibility for the Pulwama attack. The Jaish cadres are mostly concentrated in south Kashmir.

Jaish has been quite active in indoctrinating and recruiting local youth into its ranks. They are preparing suicide bombers and enhancing their capabilities to strike at a short notice.

While Adil Ahmad Dar, a local of Ganaigund- Kakpora, Pulwama, had rammed the explosive-laden van into the CRPF convoy in a suicide bombing attack, on February 14, Fardeen Khandey of Tral of the same district was among the three fidayeens who had mounted attack on the CRPF commando centre, Lethpora, last year, indicating how Pakistanis were using local boys in terror attacks where their death was certain.

The second major threat emanates from high infiltration from across the international border into the plains of Jammu. Some of the terror-friendly elements have created local support base for infiltrators as was evident in the Sunjawan camp attack in February last year. These terrorists, the security agencies apprehend could strike in crowded places or place of worship because that would serve their purpose of causing communal conflagration and divert the attention of security forces. This has been the objective of Pakistan for long.
