Imran Khan to chair Pakistan's nuke authority meeting after Indian Air Force bombs Jaish camps in Balakot

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has summoned a special meeting of the National Command Authority (NCA), which controls the country's nuclear arsenal, on Wednesday. The second high-level meeting has been called a day after the Indian Air Force (IAF) conducted airstrike across the Line of Control (LoC) and destroyed the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) training camps in Balakot.

The meeting of the National Command Authority will be held at the Prime Minister's office at 1:00 pm. Imran Khan has summoned the meeting in the wake of violation of Line of Control (LoC) by Indian Air Force.

The meeting will be attended by Chairman Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee, General Zubair Mahmood Hayat and Army Chief General Qamar Javaid Bajwa. Chief of Air Staff (CAS) Air Chief Marshal Mujahid Anwar Khan, Chief of Naval Staff (CNS), Admiral Zafar Mahmood Abbasi, heads of sensitive institutions and security officials will also attend the meeting. Director General Strategic Plans Division will also be present in the meeting.

Sushma tells Russia and China IAF strike not military op, firing stops in Shopian encounter | LIVE updates

Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Defence Minister Pervez Khattak, Federal Minister for Defence Production Zubaida Jalal and Finance Minister Asad Umar will also attend the meeting.

On Tuesday (February 26), Imran Khan convened an emergency review meeting of the National Security Council (NSC). The NSC meeting, which was attended by the civil and military leadership, including Pakistan Army chief Gen Qamar Jawed Bajwa and the Defence and Foreign Affairs Ministers, decided that a joint session will be called to take Parliament into confidence.

In the meeting, Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan "rejected Indian claims of targeting an alleged terrorist camp near Balakot as well as the claim of heavy casualties" and said in a statement that Pakistan will decide the time and place of response to the "aggression", Geo News reported.

As per the statement, Imran Khan "directed that elements of national power, including the armed forces and the people of Pakistan, remain prepared for all eventualities".

Imran Khan's meeting with the National Command Authority is one of the first significant reactions from the country after the Indian airstrikes.

Pakistan has also decided to engage with the global leadership and said it will "expose India's irresponsible policy" and its breach of the Line of Control (LoC). Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said India's crossing of LoC would be raised at the United Nations (UN), Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and among friendly countries.

He also discussed India's airstrikes in Pakistan with the US and apprised it of the violation of the LoC in Kashmir by India. He told US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo that India's "aggressive posture" could affect joint efforts for peace in Afghanistan.

Later on Tuesday, Pakistan directed the country's armed forces and citizens to "remain prepared for all eventualities". The direction came hours after Pakistan's military spokesperson Asif Ghafoor denied reports of any damage after the airstrike and warned India of a "surprise attack".

He also said that the response to the early morning strikes in Pakistan will come at an appropriate time. "I had said that India can never surprise us and I reiterate that it has not surprised us," he said, adding, "We are ready, wait for the surprise."
