Images of the Camp where the Jaish-e-Mohammed trained and stored their Ammunitions

The training camp of the terrorist group based in Pakistan called Jaish-e-Mohammed that was bombed down by the Indian Air Force on Tuesday was reportedly spread over 600 acres in Balakot, a place that is across the LoC (Line of Control), the camp could accommodate at least 600 people at one time and had large halls and dormitories.

The sources from the government released some details and photos of the terrorist camp that is located 80 kilometers away from the PoK (Pakistan Occupied Kashmir), the photographs show its facilities which include a gym, firing range, and a swimming pool. The camp was located on a hill that was gliding in with the thick forests around it.

The construction of the terrorist camp started back in 2003 and 2004, war veterans from Afghanistan who fought against the USSR helped the terrorist group and gave them military training for the young terrorists who were willing to join the group.

In one of the photographs you can see the main hall where the terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed would train its terrorists, the hall is full of flags and banners that has their name on it.

A text accompanying this photo said: “In this hall, Mufti Abdul Rauf Asghar, de-factor Amir of the organization and brother of Maulana Masood Azhar attended annual passing out parade of militant cadres on 01st April 2018”

The images of the camp also show a staircase that was painted with the flags of countries like Israel, UK, and the USA that will “develop feelings of hatred against enemy countries among militant cadres.”

According to some reports, the terrorist camp was being run with the supervision and was protected by the ISI (Inter-Services Intelligence) of Pakistan, the camp was currently training more than 250 young terrorists at the complex.

The photos also show an ammunition storage room where “200 AK rifles were uncountable rounds, hand grenades, explosives, and detonators” were placed.

The training camp was led by Maulana Yousuf Azhar who is also known as Ustaad Ghouri, he is the brother-i-law of Masood Azhar the chief of the Jaish-e-Mohammed, he was killed in the Air Strike that was done by the Indian Air Force. The photos also revealed the SUV that Ustaad Ghouri used while he traveled.

The trainees in the camp used advanced weapons, tactics in the field, strategies for attacks in convoys, explosives, planting IED’s (Improvised Explosive Devices), preparations for suicide bombing, and many other things as a part of their training.

The terrorist camp is located near the Kunhar River, sources believe that the group also offered training that included them to swim through the river.

Masood Azhar and other leaders of the terrorist group came to the camp to do religious indoctrination and ideological training for the recruits of the terrorist group.

The Indian Air Force carried out a “non-military, pre-emptive air strikes” at the terrorist camp of the Jaish-e-Mohammed, India also said that the terrorist group was planning to conduct more attacks in the country after the Pulwama attack on February 14 where 40 CRPF men were killed. 12 Mirage 2000-5 Indian Fighter Jets from the Indian Air Force crossed the LoC (Line of Control) by 3:30 AM and dropped 1,000 kilograms of bombs that were laser-guided on the camp.
