IAF Strike: Pakistan Minister trolled on Twitter for saying “We were Ready, But It Was Dark”

NEW DELHI: After the air strikes by the IAF on Jaish-e-Mohammed’s biggest terror camp in Balakot, Pakistan defence minister Pervez Khatak who told reporters that their forces were ready to repel the Indian attack but “it was dark” was trolled on Twitter relentlessly.

The IAF carried out multiple aerial strikes at terror launch pads at various places in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir, destroying control rooms of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) and other infrastructure.

The air strikes by the IAF on Jaish-e-Mohammed’s biggest terror camp in Pakistan on Tuesday was in retaliation to the February 14 attack in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, which had left 40 Indian CRPF troopers dead.

Later after the IAF strike, Pakistan defence minister Pervez Khatak is heard explaining the role of the Pakistan air force. In the video clip, which was shared by Pakistani journalists on social media, Mr Khatak is heard saying, “Our air force was ready, but since it was happening in the night and it was dark, they could not gauge the extent of the damage. So they waited and now they have received clear directions.”

This video of Pakistan’s minister was targeted on social media, here are some tweets.

Pak Defence Min response : " Our Air Force were ready but it was DARK". Hahahahhahahahahhaha seriously ? This is defence minister ? And they want to attack India. #IndiaStrikesBack #PulwanaRevenge — Dada (@Sui_generis0192) February 26, 2019

Unbelievable. Pakistan's Defence minister & Army chief said in press conference that Pak Airforce was ready to respond.. but 'Andher mein kuch dikha nahi aur nuksaan ka idea nahi aaya'. Even India should be embarrassed to have this country as our neighbour. #IndiaStrikesPakistan — Kushagra Swarnkar (@kushhagra_) February 26, 2019

Torch nahitaa kyaa?? Indiase battery export karu kyaa?? — Pranam Mangalore (@PranamAnamica) February 27, 2019

https://twitter.com/NARENDRANARAYAN/status/1100375358782619654
