Spotted Terror: Panic grips parts of Rajasthan as leopard sightings, attacks go through the roof

The spotting of two leopards in the Madhopur range has triggered panic in the area (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: Panic has gripped locals in several districts across the state of Rajasthan owing to the rising number of leopard sightings and attacks in recent days. On Sunday itself, instances of big cats attacking villagers or cattle in Ajmer, Nagaur, Sikar and Udaipur districts came to light prompting a sense of heightened tensions amongst locals in these districts.

Forest officials in Godunga block had to install a cage near Kadmal area after a leopard attacked four villagers from Butala and Kadmal villages within a span of two days. In the wake of these attacks, rangers have warned tribals in the district to look out for the big cat which has been terrorising the area.

Leopard cub rescued by forest department officials from an army camp in Mount Abu. #Rajasthan pic.twitter.com/58h2jIW0Yc — ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2018

Locals attacked by the animals are now out of danger, Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) RK Jain told Times of India. He added that permission to tranquilise the animal has been sought from the chief wildlife warden adding that multiple teams of forest rangers are working round the clock to ensure that the leopard is captured before it attacks any more villagers.

Over 700 kms from Kadmal village, a full-grown leopard had terrorised the Dujod village in Sikar district earlier this week. Efforts by the forest department led to the big cat's capture. It was captured in a cage and transported to Neem ka Thana.

Leopard, that strayed into a residential area, captured by forest officials in Rajasthan's Sawai Madhopur. pic.twitter.com/jzgIPAQMXx — ANI (@ANI) October 6, 2017

Similarly, a leopard spotting near Lilasevdi village near Pushkar has put the forest department on their toes. Reports assert that this is the first time a leopard was spotted in the area in as many as 15 years. In Madhopur range, rangers are camping for a second day as part of their efforts to capture two leopards who were seen near a hillock in the area.

Must Read: Karkatgarh waterfall to become first crocodile conservation reserve in Bihar soon
