Political leaders slam Indian aggression

PHOTO: REUTERS

LAHORE: Political leaders and the public at large have unanimously condemned the violation of Pakistani airspace by Indian fighter jets on Tuesday. They took the chance to express their solidarity with the armed forces of the country.



Punjab Chief Minister Sardar Usman Buzdar strongly condemned the airspace violation in Muzaffarabad. He paid rich tribute to the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) for giving a timely and befitting response.



The chief minister said the entire nation is proud of the PAF and stood by its armed forces. "Every child of the country is ready to defend their motherland. Befarious Indian designs will be foiled," he said.



Buzdar said that the enemy would not dare cast an evil shadow over this motherland. “The Indian planes have violated international laws by crossing the line of control (LOC). The invasion by the Indian air force planes in Muzaffarabad has showed their military jingoism. It is a fact that the Indian government is trying to divert the attention off its internal problems through xenophobia."



Meanwhile, members of the national and provincial assemblies from various districts also condemned the Indian aggression and appreciated the of the PAF.

Lawmakers, including Muhammad Afzal Khan Dhandala, Abdul Majeed Khan, Ghazanfar Abbas, Muhammad Amir Anayat Shahani, Muhammad Mamoon Tarrar and others agreed that the PAF falcons foiled the coward act of the enemy. It was stated that the true face of India has been exposed to the world, yet again



The politicians said the people of Pakistan stood by their armed forces like rocks, they underlined.



Punjab Minister for Law, Parliamentary Affairs Muhammad Basharat Raja said the Pakistani nation was united to combat any kind of Indian aggression. Speaking to the media outside the provincial assembly, the minister said it was an Indian tradition to connect such an aggressive action to non-existing camps of organisations such as Jaish-e-Muhammad.



Basharat affirmed that the military forces of Pakistan were ready, as always, and fully equipped to teach a lesson to their enemies.



Pakistan Muslim League Quaid-e-Azam (PML-Q) President Chaudhry Shujat Hussain and Punjab Assembly Speaker Chaudhry Parvez Elahi said rulers like Narendra Modi never accepted the creation of Pakistan from their hearts.
