Live updates: Pakistan’s surprise response to India

ISLAMABAD: Pakistan shot down two Indian Air Force planes in its airspace in Kashmir on Wednesday, a military spokesman said, adding that two Indian pilot had been captured.



"PAF shot down two Indian aircrafts inside Pakistani airspace," tweeted military spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor, adding that one aircraft had fallen in Azad Jammu and Kashmir, while the other crashed on the Indian side.

"One Indian pilot arrested by troops on ground while one in the area," he said without elaborating.



The Pakistani foreign office also released a statement saying that the air force "undertook strikes" across the border, known as the Line of Control, Wednesday -- however it did not elaborate on what it meant by "strikes" and did not mention shooting down planes.

It said the strikes were aimed at a "non military target", adding: "We have no intention of escalation".

Tensions have dramatically escalated between the nuclear-armed rivals since Indian warplanes flew into Pakistani airspace and struck what New Delhi claimed was a camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).

DG ISPR Tweet

Military spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor has confirmed that there is only one Indian pilot under Pakistan Army’s custody.

In a Tweet, Director General Inter Services Public Relations, the media wing of the military, said, “Indian pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan is being treated as per norms of military ethics.”

PM Imran Khan's Address to Nation

Prime Minister Imran Khan has once again offered PM Narendra Modi for a dialogue after Pakistani Air Force shot down two Indian fighter jets.

In his address televised nationally, the PM said India should think where they want to take this situation.

Calling Pulwama attack a tragedy, the premier said he fully understands the pain of victims as he himself has witnessed the destruction of war.

“We had offered India for a joint probe into the Pulwama attack because it is not in Pakistan's interest that our soil is used against any country.”

Video statement of Wing Commander Abhinandan



China urges restraint



China called on Pakistan and India on Wednesday to "exercise restraint" and seek dialogue after Islamabad said it shot down two Indian warplanes in its airspace over disputed Kashmir.

"What we are concerned about is that India and Pakistan, as important countries of the South Asian subcontinent, can maintain good neighbourly and friendly relations," foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang said at a regular press briefing.

NCA meeting

An important meeting of National Command Authority is currently underway at the PM Office. Prime Minister Imra Khan is chairing the session convened after Indian planes struck inside Pakistan.

'We had no choice'

Addressing the press conference, DG ISPR said Pakistan had no choice other than hitting back. He also shared details of arrested Indian pilots.

Flight operations suspended

The flight operations at major Pakistani airports were suspended. According to officials, operations at the Lahore, Faislabad , Multan and New Islamabad Airport were suspended and flights are being routed to other facilities.

DG ISPR Press Conference

DG ISPR Maj General Ghafoor will address an important press conference later today.

First photo emerge from the scene of Indian fighter jets downed by Pakistani forces.

Experts call for unity

Senior journalists and defence analysts are of the view that Pakistan has so far given a matured response to Indian aggression. Talking to Geo News, they said Pakistan has not targeted civilians and only military targets were hit. Now it is up to the world community that they should intervene and tell India that it should not escalate the situation, they opined.

"Nuclear arms in hands of an extremist prime minister should be a matter of concern."
