Indian Air Force chopper crashes in Kashmir's Budgam, 2 pilots killed

The IAF chopper crashed in an open field near Garend Kalaan village in Budgam on Wednesday morning.

Indian Air Force's Mi-17V-5 military transport helicopter has crashed in Budgam district of Jammu and Kashmir.

Three persons, including two pilots, were killed in the crash at Budgam.

The IAF aircraft had taken off from Awantipora airbase and crashed because of technical fault and weather. Whereabout of three the fourth person are not known.

The jet crashed in an open field near Garend Kalaan village in Budgam at 10.05 am, news agency PTI said as it quoted officials.

The jet broke into two and caught fire immediately, the officials said, and added that one body was seen near the site crash.

#SpotVisuals: Police on military aircraft crash in Jammu & Kashmir's Budgam, say, "Two bodies have been found at the crash site." pic.twitter.com/Tg2uFeJjdW ANI (@ANI) February 27, 2019

PAKISTAN DROPS BOMBS: AGENCIES

Pakistan Air Force jets violated Indian airspace in Rajouri sector, dropped bombs, ANI has said. No reports of casualties have been reported.

Pakistani jets violated the Indian airspace as it entered border areas of Nowshera sector in Jammu and Kashmir’s Rajouri district, PTI said, as it quoted unnamed officials.

AIRPORTS IN J&K ON HGH ALERT

After the IAF fighter jer crash was reported, airports in Leh, Jammu, Srinagar and Pathankot were put on high alert.

Airspace has been suspended due to security reasons with many commercial flights put on hold.

The crash happened a day after Indian security forces Indian warplanes struck a JeM training camp in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province around 80 kilometres from the Line of Control and killed a large number of terrorists.

Tensions between India and Pakistan have escalated after the IAF crossed the border to destroy terror camps.

Earlier, in the day Indian security forces killed two terrorists with links to Jaish-e-Mohammed in an encounter in Shopian.

A gunfight broken out between security forces and terrorists early Wednesday morning in Shopian district.

Three terrorists were believed to be involved in the encounter that began at 4.20 am. The firing, however, stopped around 8.30am after which a search operation was launched in the area.

Five soldiers of the Indian Army were injured in the encounter in Shopian, ANI said, and added that two of these soldiers were taken to a military hospital for treatment and are in stable condition.

ALSO READ | 2 Jaish terrorists killed in encounter in Jammu and Kashmir's Shopian

ALSO WATCH | 2 IAF pilots feared dead as MiG crashes in Kashmir's Budgam
