US Warns Pakistan: Pompeo Seeks Action Against Terrorists After India Strike

After the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out air strikes on terror camps in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir on Tuesday, the United States warned Islamabad to not resort to any military action and instead take action against terrorists.

Referring to the air strike by IAF as "counter-terrorism actions,” U.S. Secretary Mike Pompeo issued a statement saying he spoke to Pakistan's Foreign Minister SM Qureshi as well as India’s External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj and asked them to avoid “escalation.”

"Following Indian counter-terrorism actions on February 26, I spoke with Indian Minister of External Affairs Swaraj to emphasize our close security partnership and shared goal of maintaining peace and security in the region," the U.S. State Department said in the statement on behalf of Pompeo.

"I spoke to Pakistani Foreign Minister Qureshi to underscore the priority of de-escalating current tensions by avoiding military action, and the urgency of Pakistan taking meaningful action against terrorist groups operating on its soil," the statement said.

"I expressed to both Ministers that we encourage India and Pakistan to exercise restraint and avoid escalation at any cost. I also encouraged both Ministers to prioritize direct communication and avoid military activity," it added.

Meanwhile, the Pakistan Air Force jets violated Indian airspace and dropped bombs near Indian army force Wednesday and according to reports, one of the jets was shot down in Indian retaliatory fire. Pakistan too claimed to have shot down two Indian aircraft inside Pakistan airspace.

Photo: JAMEEL AHMED/AFP/Getty Images

The IAF destroyed the biggest Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Pakistan on Tuesday, killing nearly 300 terrorists. In a media conference, India’s foreign secretary, Vijay Gokhale said the attack was a “preemptive strike” which was necessary after they received credible information that the JeM was planning suicide attacks in India. The terrorist group was also behind the Feb.14 suicide bombing at an Indian paramilitary convoy in Kashmir that killed scores of soldiers.

Post the IAF strike, the Pakistan army warned India saying “It is your turn now to wait and get ready for our surprise.”

Imran Khan, Pakistan's prime minister, rejected India's claim of terrorist camps being the target and called it “a self-serving, reckless and fictitious claim.” He also asked the people of Pakistan to "remain prepared for all eventualities."
