8 airports including Amritsar, Srinagar and Shimla reopen after being shut down temporarily

As tension between India and Pakistan escalates the airports in Srinagar, Amritsar, Pathankot, Jammu, Leh, Shimla, Kangra and Kullu have been reopened after being shut down temporarily.

Many of these airports are also jointly operated by IAF due to its close proximity with Pakistan.The restrictions were imposed after the IAF had asked for the same.

Air Vistara tweeted that flights from Amritsar, Srinagar, Chandigarh and Jammu are on hold due to the airspace restrictions. Besides, SpiceJet and Jet Airways have also issued statements regarding the cancelled fights.

Track LIVE updates: Arun Jaitley says if US can kill Laden then anything is possible

"As per instructions from Delhi ATC regarding airport closure, flight operations to/from Amritsar, Srinagar, Jammu & Leh have been suspended until further notice. We request our guests check their flight status before proceeding to the airport", Jet Airways tweeted.

#9WUpdate As per instructions from Delhi ATC regarding airport closure, flight operations to/from Amritsar, Srinagar, Jammu & Leh have been suspended until further notice. We request our guests check their flight status before proceeding to the airport https://t.co/q3TCmCPN0Q — Jet Airways (@jetairways) February 27, 2019

"Due to operational reasons the airspace at Amritsar has been closed for now. No commercial flights are coming to Amritsar, there is no base here, so flights are not even taking off from here.," AP Acharya, Amritsar Airport Director told ANI.

"Due to airspace restriction, flights to/from Srinagar (SXR), Jammu (IXJ), Adampur (AIP) and Amritsar (ATQ) are affected", said SpiceJet.

#Update: Due to airspace restriction, flights to/from Srinagar (SXR), Jammu (IXJ), Adampur (AIP) and Amritsar (ATQ) are affected. Passengers are requested to keep a check on their flight status via https://t.co/NvhsCyQeoc. February 27, 2019

Meanwhile, International flights from Air India and few other foreign airlines are re-routing in order to avoid Pakistani airspace. The flights are instead using Delhi-Mumbai- Muscat route to fly onwards rather than flying over Pakistan.

The international flights that transit between India and Pakistan airspace have been affected due to the cross border tensions between the two countries, ANI reported citing sources.

"International flights that transit between Indian and Pakistani airspace now being affected. Some flights returning to origin, while others appear to be seeking alternate routing," sources told the news agency.

Pakistan has immediately stopped its domestic and international flight operations from Lahore, Multan, Faisalabad, Sialkot and Islamabad airports.

On Tuesday, India carried out air strikes on a terror camp run by Jaish-E-Mohammad in Balakot, a hill town in Pakistan’s Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province. Soon after that the Pakistani side started building up for a confrontation and resorted to ceasefire violation in 15 places including Poonch and Rajouri.

There were reports that the Pakistani Air Force jets violated Indian airspace in Rajouri sector, and dropped bombs near Indian Army establishments. No reports of casualties have been reported so far.

(With inputs from agencies)
