India vs Pakistan: Could India and Pakistan conflict trigger World War 3?

India Pakistan: Nuclear war would starve world says physicist

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistani officials said the airstrikes were carried out a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan for the first time since a war in 1971. Tensions have been growing since a suicide car bombing by Pakistan-based militants in Indian-controlled Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police on February 14. But the conflict worsened on Tuesday when India launched an air strike on what it said was a militant training base. READ MORE: What countries support India? Who supports Pakistan?

The attack targeted the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), the group that claimed credit for the Valentine’s Day suicide attack.

India said a large number of JeM fighters had been killed but in conflicting reports, Pakistani officials said the strike was a failure as it did not cause any casualties. In a statement, Pakistan's foreign ministry said it had hit a "non-military" target inside Indian-controlled Kashmir.

But the agency added the strike had avoided human loss and collateral damage.

Indian soldiers and Kashmiri onlookers stand near an Indian Air Force aircraft after it crashed

The statement said: ”If India is striking at so called terrorist backers without a shred of evidence, we also retain reciprocal rights to retaliate against elements that enjoy Indian patronage while carrying out acts of terror in Pakistan.”

A spokesman for India's defence ministry has not yet made a comment.

Police officials in Indian-occupied Kashmir said that two Indian pilots and a civilian had died after an Indian air force plane crashed in Kashmir.

But did not confirm if the plane had been shot down by Pakistani forces.





Indian security guards are seen at the crash site after an Indian Air Force plane crashed in Kashmir

Could India and Pakistan conflict trigger World War 3?

With tensions between India and Pakistan escalating rapidly in the past few days, concerns have been raised the violence could spark all out war.

And with powerful allies on both side of the split, the resulting conflict would likely be deadly.

Russia has been a close ally of India since its independence, while Pakistan has the support of China and Saudia Arabia on its side.

But with both India and Pakistan have nuclear weapons, what could happen next is anyone's guess.

A map shows the difference in size of India and Pakistan's armies

Both India and Pakistan have ordered airstrikes over the last two days, which is the first time in history that two nuclear armed powers have done this.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said he talked to the foreign ministers of India and Pakistan this week, urging them to avoid "further military activity" following Tuesday's airstrike.

Mr Pompeo said in a statement on Wednesday: "I expressed to both ministers that we encourage India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, and avoid escalation at any cost.

"I also encouraged both ministers to prioritize direct communication and avoid further military activity.”





Pakistani officials said the airstrikes were carried out a day after Indian warplanes struck
