Kashmir conflict: Why India and Pakistan could be on the brink of war

Crowd gathers around wreckage of crashed Indian Air Force plane in Kashmir

Crowd gathers around wreckage of crashed Indian Air Force plane in Kashmir

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

Pakistan says it has shot down two Indian warplanes and captured two pilots alive sparking fears the conflict could escalate

Kashmir conflict: Why India and Pakistan could be on the brink of war

India and Pakistan could be on the brink of war after two Indian warplanes were shot down inside Pakistan - a day after an air raid struck a 'terrorist training camp'.

Pakistan claims to have captured two pilots alive while India has rejected the claims and said that it shot down a Pakistani fighter jet today.

Tensions between the two nuclear-armed states have escalated after a suicide attack by a Pakistani-based terror group which killed more than 40 police personnel.

Yesterday India carried out an attack on what it described as a training camp for banned organisation Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM).

World leaders have called on the two states to show restraint.

It is the first time the Indian military has struck in Pakistan since the two countries were at war in 1971.

Major General Asif Ghafoor said Pakistani troops on the ground captured an Indian pilot.

He said one of the planes crashed in Pakistan's part of Kashmir and the other went down in Indian-controlled Kashmir.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images) Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

What sparked this fresh conflict?

India is incensed after a Pakistani terrorist group, Jaish-e-Mohammad, claimed credit for a suicide bombing on February 14.

The attack claimed 46 Indian lives after a vehicle packed with explosives was rammed into a checkpoint.

It retaliation, Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said the group's "biggest training camp" in the Balakot region was struck early on Tuesday.

Pakistan, however, claims no damage was caused.

Who are the Jaish-e-Mohammad? Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), which translates as "The Army of Muhammad", is a Pakistan-based terror group active in Kashmir. Founded in 2000, it aims to "liberate" Kashmir from India, before driving Hindus and other non-Muslims from the Indian sub-continent. India has accused its nuclear-armed neighbour of failing to do enough to tackle the terror group. In recent weeks JeM has been blamed for a February 14 suicide bombing which killed more than 40 Indian police officers, and it is claimed the group was planning another attack. JeM has been officially banned in Pakistan since 2002, after it carried out an attack on the Indian Parliament, which claimed 14 lives, in 2001. It also killed seven security personnel in a 2016 attack on India's Pathankot Air Force Station. JeM has been branded a terrorist organisation by India, Pakistan, Russia, the US, Britain, Australia, Canada, the United Arab Emirates and the United Nations.

Image: Hindustan Times via Getty Images) Hindustan Times via Getty Images)

Founded in 2000, JeM aims to "liberate" Kashmir from India, before driving Hindus and other non-Muslims from the Indian sub-continent.

In a scathing attack yesterday, Mr Gokhale accused Pakistan of failing to deal with the terrorist organisation.

India also claims that it received intelligence that a fresh terror attack was being planned.

Pakistan has outlawed JeM, but India claims the group would not be able to operate without the knowledge of Pakistani officials.

Image: Hindustan Times via Getty Images) Hindustan Times via Getty Images)

When did India and Pakistan last go to war?

Since the partition of India in 1947 - which created the nation of Pakistan - tensions between the two countries have flared up repeatedly.

With both sides claiming supremacy in the state of Kashmir, an uneasy 'Line of Control' was created between Indian and Pakistani-controlled zones back in 1972.

The countries had previously gone to war in 1947 and 1965 over the disputed territory, and in 1999 the Kargil War broke out after Pakistani soldiers infiltrated positions on the Indian side of the line.

Both countries also went to war in 1971, resulting in the creation of Bangladesh, formerly East Pakistan.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

What is the Indian government saying about the latest conflict?

Lieutenant Colonel Devender Anand, an Indian army spokesman, said Pakistani soldiers targeted dozens of Indian military positions across the Line of Control throughout the night.

An Indian military statement said that "out of anger and frustration", Pakistan "initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation".

The statement said Indian troops "retaliated for effect" and claimed to have destroyed five Pakistani posts.

It accused Pakistani soldiers of firing mortars and missiles "from civilian houses, using villagers as human shields".

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

What is Pakistan saying?

Pakistan said it launched missiles early on Wednesday aimed at a "non-military" target across the Line of Control.

This action, it claimed, demonstrated its "right, will and capability for self defence".

Foreign affairs ministry spokesman Mohammad Faisal said: "We have no intention of escalation, but are fully prepared to do so if forced into that paradigm."

Discussing yesterday's attack Masood Khan, president of the Pakistani-controlled Kashmir region, told Al Jazeera : India is playing with fire. It is brutalising the people of Kashmir.

"This incident is being used to demonise Kashmiris and project them as violent extremists, which they are not."
