There can’t be peace in world until Pakistan is eliminated from global map: Shiv Sena

uddhav thackeray | Photo Credit: ANI

Mumbai: The world can not be a peaceful place unless Pakistan is wiped out from the map. States like Pakistan are not only dangerous for India, but also for the entire world, according to Shiv Sena. The party also praised the air strike by Indian Air Force on terror camps at Balakot in Pakistan. In the party's editorial mouthpiece Saamna, Shiv Sena has said that the act of bravery by the Air Force has created an atmosphere of patriotism across the nation. The editorial has not minced any word in the praise of the air strike.

The editorial says, Pakistan had threated to pay in the same coin if India launched an attack. However, without even taking cognizance of the tall talks, India struck at terror camps in PoK in the wee hours on Tuesday. The fighter jets of Indian Air Force crossed the border and entered Pakistan. The fighter jets destroyed the Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camps using 1,000 kg bombs. There was widespread anger over the cowardly attack on CRPF convoy 12 days ago at Pulwama, wherein 40 Jawans were martyred. People were seeking revenge for the attack, according to Saamna.

The demons like Masood Azhar must be eliminated like America did with Osama-bin-Laden in Pakistan. The revenge will be incomplete until then, according to Saamna. Pakistan needs to be wiped from the map to restore world peace. States like Pakistan is a threat not only for India but also the world. There is no democracy in Pakistan. The army is controlling the entire power behind the facade of the Prime Minister and local governing bodies. A proxy war with India is fueled to keep the armed forces relevant.

The mouthpiece also said that the Pakistan army will be rendered useless if the disputes with India are resolved. peace talks are not possible with the nation, which is controlled by the demons. The so-called peace talks are going on for 70 years. Indira Gandhi initiated military action against Pakistan and divided it into two nations. She believed in direct action. She had brought Pakistan to knees by the direct military action. Prime Minister Narendra Modi will lead a similar brave history and it has already begun.
