Pakistan news latest: Air Force shoots down two India jets amid escalating tensions

P akistan today said it shot down two Indian jets and captured pilots as rising tensions threatened to ignite a new military conflict between the rival nuclear powers.

Islamabad said the Indian Air Force planes had crossed the boundary between the two nations in the disputed territory of Kashmir.

Two pilots from one of the planes were said to have been captured. One bloodied airman was seen on video being arrested by Pakistani troops in a clip shared on social media.

Pakistan’s civil aviation authority subsequently shut its airspace to all commercial flights.

Today’s developments came a day after India launched a pre-dawn air strike on what it claimed was a terrorist training camp in Balakot, in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir.

The incident, the first of its kind since the two neighbours went to war in 1971, was intended to prevent further attacks after a suicide bombing in Kashmir killed at least 40 paramilitaries two weeks ago. It prompted Pakistan’s prime minister, Imran Khan, to convene a meeting of his nuclear command.

Following the downing of the two Indian jets, Pakistan military spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor said both pilots were in custody but one was being held in a military hospital.

Pakistan's Inter Services Public Relations issued a photo of damage caused to trees in hilly terrain after the Indian air force dropped their payload in Balakot area / AFP/Getty Images

One of the planes crashed in Pakistan’s part of Kashmir while the other went down in the India-controlled section of the region, Mr Ghafoor said. Firefighters were seen at a crash site in the Budgam area, some 18 miles from Srinagar. Witnesses said soldiers fired into the air to keep locals away.

Pakistan’s foreign ministry said the planes had been shot down “with clear warning and in broad daylight”. The country’s president, Arif Alvi, warned “brinkmanship can lead to war”, adding: “We know how to defend ourselves.”

There was no immediate comment from India’s government or military.

US secretary of state Mike Pompeo urged India and Pakistan to exercise restraint and avoid escalation at any cost. Hours before the airmen were captured, Pakistan said mortar shells fired by Indian troops from across the frontier dividing Kashmir killed six civilians including children, and wounded others in the village of Kotli.

Meanwhile, Indian officials said at least five of their soldiers were wounded in firing by Pakistani troops along the frontier.

They said Pakistani jets had been pushed back and claimed to have shot one down. Residents on both sides of the so-called Line of Control, said there were exchanges of fire between the two sides overnight.

India's Border Security Force soldiers patrol along the fenced border with Pakistan on Tuesday (REUTERS) / Reuters

Pakistani minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi told state-run TV he was in touch with his counterparts across the world about “Indian aggression”, adding that New Delhi had endangered peace by launching an air strike.

India’s external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj insisted the country did not wish to see any further escalation.
