India-Pakistan tensions: Order to shut civilian operations at 9 airports withdrawn, flights to resume

Representational image | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The government has withdrawn the order to restrict civilian flights from nine airports in North India, after earlier issuing a directive to vacate the entire airspace north of the national capital in view of the escalating tensions between India and Pakistan. The NOTAM (Notice to Airmen to alert aircraft pilots of potential hazards along a flight route) has been withdrawn and flight operations will resume, it has been reported.

The tensions escalated to unprecedented levels on Wednesday following the air strikes at a Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Balakot yesterday.

Following the government’s earlier order, nine airports in Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab were temporarily shut down for civilian flights. The nine airports included those at Srinagar, Jammu, Leh, Pathankot, Amritsar, Shimla, Kangra, Kullu-Manali and Pithoragarh.

The development came as high-level meetings were happening in the national capital. Prime Minister Narendra Modi, National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and other members of the government’s core group were present.

Pakistan today claimed that it had shot down two Indian jets in its airspace and arrested two pilots, amid a sea of fake news emanating from Pakistan. The same, however, has not been confirmed by the Indian government or the Indian Air Force.

An Airports Authority of India official at the Srinagar airport had earlier told PTI, "The civilian air traffic has been suspended temporarily in view of the emergency." The official, however, did not specify the nature of the emergency.

Meanwhile, airports at Chandigarh, Pathankot and Bathinda have been put on high alert. "Commercial operations are on," Chandigarh Airport director Suneel Dutt said.

This morning, an Mi-17 chopper of the Indian Air Force had crashed in Budgam district of Jammu and Kashmir due to a technical problem.
