If Navy SEALs can do it, why can’t we?: Jaitley lauds IAF air strikes referring to US killing bin Laden in Pak

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on Wednesday made a strong statement today, backing the Indian Air Force’s massive offensive in Pakistan’s territory on Tuesday, destroying training camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed, a terrorist organisation responsible for the killings of 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14.

Taking reference from the covert attack to kill al Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden in Pakistan’s Abbottabad in 2011, Jaitley said that if US can do it, “why can’t we”.

“A week is too long a time for any country. If you look at the last 24 hours, one week would appear to be a day. The kind of things we see... I remember when the US Navy SEALs had taken (down) Osama bin Laden from Abbottabad (Pakistan)…then can’t we do the same?,” Jaitley said, according to news agency ANI.

Stating that such covert operations were a possibility these days. “This used to be just an imagination, a desire, a frustration, a disappointment. But today this is possible.”

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley: This used to be just an imagination, a desire, a frustration, a disappointment. But today this is possible. https://t.co/apXQREMfIh — ANI (@ANI) February 27, 2019

A day after the Indian Air Force (IAF) conducted the air strike, three Pakistan Air Force (PAF) F-16 fighter jets on Wednesday reportedly violated Indian airspace in Nowshera sector of Jammu and Kashmir but were pushed back by the Indian side. There was a flare-up in the cross-LoC shelling, which was triggered by the Pakistani troops in the early hours of Wednesday.

Indian Air Force fighter jets on Tuesday launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed, the terror group responsible for the dastardly terror attack in Pulwama less than two weeks ago where 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The attack that was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover fire throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilograms.
