Pakistan claims two IAF jets shot down over its airspace, India says 'ascertaining details'

DG ISPR Asif Ghafoor | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Pakistan today claimed that it shot down two Indian military aircraft over Pakistani air space and arrested two Indian pilots. Briefing the media, Major General Asif Ghafoor, DG ISPR said that one fighter crashed inside the "Azad Jammu & Kashmir" while other fell inside Kashmir. MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that India lost one fighter during engagement and the government is trying to ascertain facts about this report. Kumar also added that one PAF fighter jet was shot down when it violated Indian airspace by an Indian jet of MiG 21 Bison make.

DG ISPR Asif Ghafoor said that one pilot is injured and has been shifted to a hospital, while another one is unhurt.

Meanwhile, a Pakistani Air Force F-16 fighter jet was shot down by Indian air defence forces in Rajouri sector of Jammu region on Wednesday morning, however, Islamabad denied this report and claimed that the PAF did not even deploy the F-16 in the first place.

The aircraft was reportedly brought down in Jhangar area of Jammu and Kashmir's Rajouri sector but the DG ISPR claimed that no Pakistani air force fighter was shot over the Indian airspace.

Meanwhile, China urged India and Pakistan to "exercise restraint" and to start a dialogue to de-escalate the situation. This came after Pakistan claimed to have shot down two Indian fighters in its airspace today.

"We hope that both India and Pakistan can exercise restraint, take initiatives that are conducive to promoting dialogue, meet halfway and make active efforts for lasting peace and stability in South Asia," AFP quoted foreign ministry spokesman Lu Kang as saying.

DG ISPR also reiterated that Pakistan does "not want to go towards war" with India and added that Islamabad is not looking for escalation.

Ties between the nuclear-armed neighbours have been under immense strain after 40 CRPF jawans were killed in a suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14.
