We do not want to escalate crisis with India, do not want war: Pakistan military spokesman

highlights We do not want war with India: Pakistan Army spokesman

India shot down PAF's F-16 fighter jet following airspace violation in Rajouri

PAF shot down two Indian aircraft inside Pakistani airspace: Ghafoor

New Delhi:

Amid heightened tensions between the two neighbouring countries, Pakistan Army spokesman Major General Asif Ghafoor on Wednesday said that they do not want to escalate the ongoing conflict with India and cause a regional war.

Addressing a press conference in Islamabad, Ghafoor said, "We have the capability and capacity to respond to your attacks, but we don't want to destroy the peace in this region. War is the failure of policy which India needs to understand", adding that Pakistan has "always conveyed a message of peace to India."

Early in the day, India shot down Pakistan Air Force’s F-16 fighter jet following an airspace violation in Jammu and Kashmir’s Nowshera sector on Wednesday morning. The fighter jet was shot down in Indian retaliatory fire 3 KM within Pakistan territory in Lam valley of Nowshera sector. Nowshera is a border town in Jammu.

While details of this retaliation are yet be ascertained by either the Indian Air Force or the Ministry of Defence, contrary claims are being made by the officials across the border.

Ghafoor claimed that, "PAF shot down two Indian aircraft inside Pakistani airspace. “Another starling claim Maj Gen Ghafoor said that, “One Indian pilot arrested by troops on ground while two in the area".

In view of this deteriorating situation at border areas in Jammu andKashmir, a high-level meeting took place at the Home Ministry in New Delhi. National Security Advisor Ajit Doval is among those attending the crucial meet.

Meanwhile, flights to Jammu, Srinagar, Chandigarh, Leh, Amritsar, Pathankot, Dehradun and Dharamshala have been suspended till further notice. Pakistan has also shut down all its airport. "All Pakistan airports have been shut down. Flight operations have been suspended in Multan, Islamabad, Lahore, Sialkot, and Faisalabad,” news agency ANI reported. "Due to airspace restrictions, flights to and from Amritsar, Srinagar, Chandigarh, and Jammu are currently on hold," Air Vistara announced in a tweet.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
