IAF strike aftermath Updates: Restrictions from at least 8 airports lifted

Delimitation will happen, J&K statehood to be restored: Amit Shah in Srinagar

India requests Pakistan government to allow Srinagar-Sharjah flight to use its airspace

IAF strike aftermath Updates: Restrictions from at least 8 airports lifted

India

oi-Chennabasaveshwar P

New Delhi, Feb 27: Restrictions from eight airports have been lifted after the tension in the international airspace reduced on Wednesday. One Delhi-bound flight already took off from Jammu airport.



Both India and Pakistan had suspended domestic and international flight operations in due to the tension in the international airspace.

Airports in Leh, Jammu, Srinagar and Pathankot were on high alert due to security reason on Wednesday. Many commercial flights were put on hold, according to news agency ANI.

AP Acharya, Amritsar Airport Director, said, "Due to operational reasons the airspace at Amritsar has been closed for now. No commercial flights are coming to Amritsar, there is no base here, so flights are not even taking off from here."

India shoots down Pakistani F-16

Vistara Airline, Indigo, GoAir and Air Aindia had cancelled flight following the alert issued by the government.

"Due to airspace restrictions, flights to and from Amritsar, Srinagar, Chandigarh and Jammu are currently on hold. Customers are requested to check flight status before commencing their journey to the airport."

#TravelUpdate. Due to airspace restrictions, flights to and from Amritsar, Srinagar, Chandigarh and Jammu are currently on hold. Customers are requested to check flight status before commencing their journey to the airport. (1/2) — Vistara (@airvistara) February 27, 2019

Earlier, Pakistan Air Force jets violated Indian airspace in Rajouri sector, dropped bombs near Indian Army post. No reports of casualties yet.

Pakistan claimed "strikes across Line of Control from within Pak airspace", saying "purpose to demonstrate right to self-defence".

UPDATES ON FLIGHT OPERATIONS:
