Pakistan CLOSES its airspace after 'Indian jets shot down'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Never miss breaking news by signing up to our free email updates

Pakistan's civil aviation authority has shut its airspace to all commercial flights as tensions with India escalate.

It comes after Pakistan's air force shot down two Indian jets in its airspace and captured two pilots alive.

A British Airways plane flying from Delhi to London was among those diverted around the conflict zone in the disputed region of Kashmir.

It was not immediately clear whether flights from Birmingham Airport will be affected.

Indian administrator Baseer Khan confirmed the airport in Srinagar, the main city in Indian-controlled Kashmir, was closed and said it was a "temporary and precautionary measure".

The Press Trust of India said Indian authorities also closed two airports in northern Punjab state, which borders with Pakistan.

Major General Asif Ghafoor said one of the Indian pilots is injured and is being treated in a military hospital, while the other pilot is in custody.

Pictures being circulated on social media allegedly show a bloodied Indian fighter pilot being captured by Pakistan and a video released later shows a man blindfolded and speaking to the camera.

The military said an Indian Air Force plane was downed on the Pakistani side of the Line of Control in Kashmir - a boundary separating the disputed Himalayan region between the nuclear-armed neighbours.

(Image: AP)

Indian air force spokesman Anupam Banerjee in New Delhi said he had no information on Pakistan's statement.

The conflict escalated a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan for the first time since a war in 1971.

India launched an air strike yesterday on what it said was a militant training base operated by Jaish-e-Mohammed, the group that claimed credit for a February 14 suicide attack in Indian-controlled Kashmir that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police.

Kashmir is split between Pakistan and India and claimed by both in its entirety.

Though both sets of troops in Kashmir often trade fire, the latest civilian casualties on the Pakistani side came a day after tensions rose sharply following a pre-dawn air strike and incursion by India on Tuesday that New Delhi said targeted a terrorist training camp in north-western Pakistan.
