MEA accepts one Indian pilot ‘missing’ in action

New Delhi: Pakistan has used its Air Force to target military installations in India in response to Indian counter-terrorism operations but their attempts were foiled successfully though one Indian pilot is ‘missing in action’, the External Affairs Ministry (MEA) said Wednesday.

In a very brief press statement, MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar, accompanied by Air Vice-Marshal RGK Kapoor, also said details are being ascertained about Pakistan’s claim of having captured one Indian pilot.

The statement follows fresh confrontation a day after Indian Air Force (IAF) launched a counter-terrorism action against a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) in Pakistan based on credible evidence that JeM intended to launch more attacks.

“Against this counter terrorism Action, Pakistan has responded this morning by using its Air Force to target military installations on the Indian side. Due to our high state of readiness and alertness, Pakistan’s attempts were foiled successfully,” Kumar said. He said the planes of the Pakistan Air Force were detected and the Indian Air Force responded instantly.

“In that aerial engagement, one Pakistan Air Force fighter aircraft was shot down by a MiG 21 Bison of the IAF. The Pakistani aircraft was seen by ground forces falling from the sky on the Pakistan side.

“In this engagement, we have unfortunately lost one MiG 21. The pilot is missing in action. Pakistan has claimed that he is in their custody. We are ascertaining the facts,” he said.

Both officials did not take any questions from the media.

Meanwhile in another development Wednesday five persons were killed when an IAF helicopter crashed in Budgam district of Jammu and Kashmir.

The helicopter crashed in an open field near Garend Kalaan village in Budgam around 10.05am, they said, adding five bodies have been recovered from the scene.

One of the deceased persons has been identified as Kifayat Hussain Ganaie, a local resident, while the identity of other four – believed to be IAF personnel – is being ascertained, local authorities stated.

Officials here said it was a MI-17 helicopter. Earlier, officials in Srinagar had described the downed aircraft as a jet. They said the aircraft broke into two and caught fire immediately.

PTI
