Pakistan PM: Imran Khan offers talks again with India, says better sense should prevail

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan today again offered talks with India and said better sense should prevail between both the countries.Imran Khan claimed that two Indian MIGs crossed the Line of Control and they were shot down. "Our action was only intended to convey that if you can come into our country, we can do the same. Two of their MiGs were shot down (in the ensuing action)," Imran Khan said in an address to nation today.Offering to defuse tensions Imran said: "Let us open the corridor of negotiations and settle all outstanding issues."Imran's address came after the Indian External Affairs Ministry said that Pakistan Air Force targeted military installations in India in response to Indian counter-terrorism operations but their attempts were foiled successfully though one Indian pilot is "missing in action".He said that all wars are miscalculated, and said that better sense must prevail. "We should sit down and talk about differences," he said."We offered India every possible support into the investigation into the Pulwama attack. That's not in Pakistan's interest to promote terrorism," Imran Khan said."No sovereign country can allow another country to become judge, jury and executioners. Therefore I prompted India in case of aggression, we would have no option but to respond," he said."All wars in world history have been miscalculated, those who started the wars did not know where it will end. So, I want to ask India, with the weapons you and we have, can we afford miscalculation?" he asked."After India's provocation, Pakistan shot down two Indian Air Force plane today. We ensured no casualties and no collateral damage in the operations we undertook. The intent was to show India, we can and would respond if aggression would be thrust upon us," he added."If you can enter our country, we can also enter your territory. Two Indian MiGs who entered Pakistani airspace today after our retaliation were shot down. But where do we go from here?" he asked."I ask India: with the weapons you have and the weapons we have, can we really afford a miscalculation? If this (situation) escalates, it will no longer be in my control or in (Prime Minister) Narendra Modi's," Khan said.
