Newborn named as 'Mirage' to celebrate IAF strike on terror camps in Pak

In a swift and precise air strike following the Pulwama attack, India bombed and destroyed Jaish-e-Mohammed's biggest training camp in Pakistan early Tuesday, killing a "very large number" of terrorists, trainers and senior commanders, as reported.

The operation, described as a non-military, preemptive strike, was welcomed by the entire political spectrum and military experts who had been advocating retribution after the February 14 suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama claimed by JeM.

The operation took place around 3.30am on Tuesday morning. While one side the IAF was conducting the operation, a boy in Nagur, Rajasthan was born. According to reports, Sonam, wife of Mahavir Singh was admitted to the hospital in the wee hours of Tuesday. As per reports, Sonam gave birth to child at the same when the Indian Airforce's Mirage 2000 bombarded terror camps in Pakistan.

To celebrate the victory, the family members named the boy as 'Mirage Rathore'.

Ajmer: Parents name their newborn 'Mirage' to pay tribute to Air force for yesterday's strike on terror camps in Balakot. S S Rathore, father says,"We named our child Mirage Rathore to commemorate strike on Pak by Mirage jets. We hope he'll join security forces when he grows up" pic.twitter.com/2cWLAAxT9M February 27, 2019

Jubilant people came out on streets and marches were held on Tuesday as the news of the IAF's strike on a JeM terror camp in Pakistan was welcomed across the country, with political leaders as well as general public lauding the armed forces for the action which came in the aftermath of the dastardly Pulwama attack.

As per latest reports, a day after Indian Air Force (IAF) fighter planes obliterated Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) training camps deep inside Pakistan, an F-16 aircraft of Pak Air Force was shot down following the violation of Indian airspace.

Pakistan claimed that its jets crossed the Line of Control to undertake strikes in India for "self defence". Indian officials said Pakistani fighter jets violated Indian airspace in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch and Nowshera sectors but were pushed back by Indian aircraft.
