Pakistan 'royally isolated, in precarious military situation': Strategic expert Rumel Dahiya

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: The Pakistani Air Force (PAF) has shot down a MiG-21 belonging to their Indian counterparts and the Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot flying the supersonic jet fighter is missing in action, said a spokesperson with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) during a press conference held earlier today. The spokesperson also added that this is believed to be Pakistan's response to 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets entering Pakistani airspace and dropping 1,000 kgs of explosives reportedly on Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camps across boundary lines in the early hours of Tuesday.

Pakistan's Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haider Shah was spotted at the South Block a few minutes ago after being summoned by the MEA. Even as a high-level meeting is currently underway at the Prime Minister's residence, Mirror Now spoke to strategic analyst Rumel Dahiya about how the present situation can play out in the coming days.

Back and forth communication between neighbouring countries continue even during wars, said Dahiya adding that India is in a position to handle if there appears to be a deceitful action on the side of the Pakistani security forces. Dahiya also said that Pakistan is at present, "totally royally isolated" which makes it very clear that this is a not a good time for them to "flex their muscles".

.@rumeldahiya, Strategic Analyst: #Pakistan is royally isolated. They are in an extremely precarious situation militarily. pic.twitter.com/HGnRbVaTSB — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) February 27, 2019

To sum up the situation, Pakistan does not have a whole lot of precision-guided munition which means that they cannot sustain themselves for even one whole week in the event of an escalation, Dahiya said. He concluded with, "Pakistan has entered themselves into a precarious situation militarily".

Delhi: Pakistan Deputy High Commissioner Syed Haider Shah at South Block. He had been summoned by Ministry of External Affairs. pic.twitter.com/ZZEb0tAQ8z — ANI (@ANI) February 27, 2019

The MEA has also claimed that Indian security forces managed to shoot down a PAF aircraft near the Line of Control (LOC). Measures to heighten security arrangements have been put into effect in New Delhi and Mumbai among other cities. In addition, a high alert has been sounded in areas on the India-Pakistan border following multiple cease-fire violations since the IAF strike in Balakot on Tuesday.

Must Read: India Pakistan tension: Maharashtra put on high-alert; coastal lines monitored
