Pakistan’s Prime Minister offers talks with India

By: Times News Service

Muscat: Pakistan’s Prime Minister Imran Khan has addressed the nation on Wednesday and chose to once again invited India to hold a dialogue.

This came after the Pakistan Air Force reportedly took down two Indian Air Force jets that allegedly crossed the Line of Control earlier on the day.

In his address, PM Khan said: “I wanted to take the nation into confidence over the developments since yesterday morning. We offered peace to India after what happened in Pulwama and asked them to hold investigation if anyone from Pakistan is involved. We are ready to corporate.

“I understood the pain of the families as Pakistan has also lost and seen casualties of around 70,000 people in the last 10 years, and I have visited hospitals and have seen the pain of people affected by violence. I know what those who are left behind and those who are injured feel.

He said that “it is not in Pakistan’s interest to let our soil be used for terrorism. There is no dispute there. However, I feared that India would still take action and that’s why I warned them against it and said we will be compelled to respond as no sovereign country can allow such an action. You can’t act as the judge, jury and the executioner.”

Khan said that when India reportedly attacked yesterday (February 27), he and the army and naval chief spoke but decided not to take action before knowing the casualties they were likely to suffer.

“We did not respond in haste as this would have looked irresponsible and would have resulted in casualties on their side," said the Prime Minister. "Once we assessed the damage caused, we were ready to take action. Our plan was to make sure no collateral damage or casualties are done but to convey that if you can come into our country, we can do the same."

The Prime Minister also claimed that two Indian MiGs had been shot down and the pilots are said to be in their custody.

"I am addressing India – it is important where we go from here," said Khan. "From here, it is imperative that we use our heads and act with wisdom. All wars that happened before were miscalculated, and no one knows where they lead to. World War I was supposed to end in months and yet it took six years. Similarly, do you think the US expected the war on terrorism to last 17 years?

“My question is: with the weapons you have and the weapons we have, can we really afford such a miscalculation? If this escalates, things will no longer be in my control or in Modi's," he said, addressing the Indian Prime Minister.

"I once again invite you to come and hold a dialogue with us regarding the Pulwama tragedy – we are ready for any sort of dialogue on terrorism. I reiterate that better sense should prevail, and we should sit and talk."
