This is what Pakistan did last time one of our pilots was in its custody

Kambampati Nachiketa was 26 years old when the Kargil war took place between India and Pakistan in 1999. (Photo: India Today)

India holds its breath as news has come of an Indian Air Force pilot being captured by Pakistan as tensions escalate between the two nations. Pakistan today claimed that it had captured an Indian Air Force pilot after shooting down two Indian Air Force fighter jets this morning. However, Pakistan later clarified that only one Indian pilot has been captured.

A video has been released by Pakistan that shows a man wearing a flight suit and identifying himself as IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan. India, on the other hand, has admitted that a pilot is "missing in action".

At a briefing in New Delhi, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said that an Indian Air Force MiG-21 Bison was "lost" and the pilot was "missing in action".

This has refreshed memories of the last time an Indian pilot was held captive by Pakistan. The pilot was Group Captain Kambampati Nachiketa. He was the first and only prisoner of war of the 1999 Kargil war.

Kambampati Nachiketa was 26 years old when the Kargil war took place between India and Pakistan in 1999. A flight lieutenant at the time, he was serving in the No. 9 Squadron of the Indian Air Force. The squadron was tasked with protecting the war-hit Batalik sector.

Nachiketa with then prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee and defence minister George Fernandes. (Photo: Getty)

Nachiketa was assigned with the duty of hitting enemy targets at altitudes over 17,000 feet with deadly 80 mm rockets. On the fateful day of May 27, 1999, Nachiketa was carrying out strikes against enemy posts from his MiG 27 fighter aircraft. Disaster struck when his aircraft experienced engine failure while raining rockets on the Munthadalo range in the Batalik area. Left with no option, he had to eject from the jet.

As he made sense of his surroundings, he saw his colleague, squadron leader Ajay Ahuja, who was looking for him in his MiG 21 jet, struck by a Pakistani missile.

Nachiketa was soon taken hostage by Pakistani forces. However, he did not go without a fight. He continued to fire at the enemy from his service pistol till he ran out of bullets. He was taken to a prison in Rawalpindi where he was brutally beaten up by Pakistani soldiers who had captured him till a senior officer intervened.

Speaking to NDTV in 2016, Nachiketa said, "The jawans who had captured me were trying to manhandle me and maybe trying to kill me because, for them, I was just an enemy pilot who had fired on their locations from the air... Fortunately, the officer who came was very mature. He realised the situation that I am now a captive and now I need not be handled that way. So he was able to control them, which was a big effort because they were very aggressive at that stage."

"I have overcome the trauma of war, but the way the nation rooted for me still tugs at my heartstrings"

Recalling the time he was interrogating K Nachiketa, Pakistan Air Force Air Commodore (Retd) Kaiser Tufail said that the two bonded over "his father's heart problem and the recent marriage of his sister."

Nachiketa believed he would never return, telling Hindustan Times "It was very tough. I can't describe that experience in words. That time I thought maybe death is a simpler solution. But I am thankful to God that destiny was on my side. I underwent severe mental and physical torture there for three-four days."

Meanwhile, India had started mounting international pressure on Pakistan for the release of K Nachiketa. Bowing to scrutiny from international media as well as the United Nations, Pakistan finally released Kambampati Nachiketa eight days later on June 3, 1999. He was handed over to the International Committee of the Red Cross in Pakistan and returned home via the Wagah border.

Nachiketa greeted on his return. (Photo: IAF)

However, his return was not without its perils -- he had suffered a compression fracture, caused by ejecting at 18,000 ft. For the first three years after his return home, he was medically downgraded and given ground duties. He resumed flying only in 2003. "It was a life-shattering experience," he said of his time in captivity.

Nachiketa was awarded the Vayu Sena Medal for his bravery in 2000.

Speaking to India Today, Group Captain K Nachiketa exclaimed, "The biggest thing my Kargil experience has taught me is the value of life."

A 2006 photo of Captain Nachiketa, his wife Prasanthi and child.

LIVE COVERAGE OF IAF AIRSTRIKE AFTERMATH

FROM THE ARCHIVES
