Nimrat Kaur on missing IAF MiG-21 pilot: May this dignified officer be back on Indian soil soon

Twitter users took to the micro-blogging platform to pray for safe return of the Indian Air Force pilot who went 'missing in action' this morning. On Wednesday morning, Pakistani jets violated the Line of Control between India and Pakistan, prompting Indian Air Force fighters to launch counter operations.

During this 'aerial engagement' between the fighter jets of Indian and Pakistani Air Force, one Indian Air Force MiG-21 Bison was shot down by Pakistan.

Raveesh Kumar, spokesperson of Ministry of External Affairs, confirmed the news during a briefing in New Delhi on Wednesday afternoon. He said, "The pilot is missing in action. Pakistan has claimed that he is in their custody. We are ascertaining the facts."

Soon, Twitter exploded with messages to bring the Indian Air Force pilot back on Indian soil. Airlift actress Nimrat Kaur too voiced her opinion on the social media platform.

She wrote, "Strength and resolve to the family and loved ones of #WingCommanderAbhinandan. The nation's prayers and thoughts are with him in this tough hour. May this stoic, dignified officer be back on Indian soil soon."

Strength and resolve to the family and loved ones of #WingCommanderAbhinandan. The nation’s prayers and thoughts are with him in this tough hour. May this stoic, dignified officer be back on Indian soil soon. February 27, 2019

Apart from Nimrat Kaur, actress Swara Bhasker also prayed for the safe return of the IAF pilot.

Wednesday's developments come a day after the Indian Air Force carried out airstrikes in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan, eliminating training camps of terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed. Jaish was responsible for the February 14 attack on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama that took the lives of 40 jawans.

ALSO READ | MiG lost, pilot missing in action, MEA says after Pakistan shows video of captured IAF wing commander

ALSO READ | India confirms one IAF pilot is missing in action: Full text of MEA briefing
