India objects to vulgar display of injured IAF pilot, tells Pak to return him safely

India objects to vulgar display of injured IAF pilot, tells Pak to return him safely

The MEA stated that a dossier was handed over to Pakistan with details on terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed complicity in Pulwama terror attack.

news Conflict

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on Wednesday summoned the Acting High Commissioner of Pakistan Syed Haider Shah on Wednesday and lodged a “strong protest at the unprovoked act of aggression by Pakistan against India.” In a statement released to the media, the MEA also “strongly objected to Pakistan’s vulgar display of an injured personnel of the Indian Air Force in violation of all norms of International Humanitarian Law and the Geneva Convention. It was made clear that Pakistan would be well advised to ensure that no harm comes to the Indian defence personnel in its custody. India also expects his immediate and safe return.”

Although the statement did not name the IAF pilot, Pakistani army has put out a video claiming that it captured Wing Commander Abhinandan. Many videos have emerged on social media, mostly put out by Pakistani journalists, influencers and other civilians. One of the first videos that emerged shows the blindfolded pilot, wearing military apparel.

Another video shows him with a bloodied nose being walked with police and army officials around him. Yet another video showed civilians assaulting him while the army is heard asking people not to hit him any further. Many pictures of the pilot surrounded by army officials have also surfaced on social media.

A third video shows the IAF pilot sipping a cup of tea and saying that he was being treated well by Pakistani officials.

The MEA also stated that a dossier was handed over to Pakistan with details on terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed complicity in Pulwama terror attack and provided details on the presence of JeM terror camps. “Regret was expressed at continuing denial by Pakistan’s political and military leadership at the presence of terrorist infrastructure in territories under its control,” stated the MEA.

It also stated that Pakistan’s act of aggression is in contrast to India’s “non-military anti-terror pre-emptive strike at a JeM terrorist camp in Balakot” on Tuesday.

Pakistan Air Force fighter jets had violated Indian airspace on Wednesday morning. Thereafter, Indian Air Force jets responded and in an aerial engagement one Pakistani F16 was shot down by the IAF. While the Pakistani jet landed in Pakistani territory, India’s MiG 21 bison aircraft was shot down by the Pakistani Air Force.

“It is unfortunate that instead of fulfilling its international obligation and bilateral commitment to take credible action against terrorist entities and individuals operating from its soil, Pakistan has acted with aggression against India,” the MEA stated.

Full Statement below:

The Acting High Commissioner of Pakistan was summoned this afternoon by MEA to lodge a strong protest at the unprovoked act of aggression by Pakistan against India earlier today, including by violation of the Indian air space by Pakistan Air Force and targeting of Indian military posts.

This is in contrast to the India’s non-military anti-terror pre-emptive strike at a JeM terrorist camp in Balakot on 26 February 2019. It is unfortunate that instead of fulfilling its international obligation and bilateral commitment to take credible action against terrorist entities and individuals operating from its soil, Pakistan has acted with aggression against India.

It was clearly conveyed that India reserves the right to take firm and decisive action to protect its national security, sovereignty and territorial integrity against any act of aggression or cross-border terrorism.

India also strongly objected to Pakistan’s vulgar display of an injured personnel of the Indian Air Force in violation of all norms of International Humanitarian Law and the Geneva Convention. It was made clear that Pakistan would be well advised to ensure that no harm comes to the Indian defence personnel in its custody. India also expects his immediate and safe return.

Regret was expressed at continuing denial by Pakistan’s political and military leadership at the presence of terrorist infrastructure in territories under its control. A dossier was handed over to Pakistan side with specific details of JeM complicity in Pulwama terror attack and the presence of JeM terror camps and its leadership in Pakistan. It was conveyed that India expects Pakistan to take immediate and verifiable action against terrorism emanating from territories under its control.
