RTHK: Khan calls for talks with India after jets clash

RTHK: Khan calls for talks with India after jets clash

The Pakistani Prime Minister has made a televised address calling for dialogue with India, after both sides claimed to have shot down each other's warplanes, escalating a confrontation that has fuelled concerns of all-out conflict between the nuclear-armed rivals.

Calling for talks to defuse the situation, Imran Khan warned of the potentially catastrophic consequences should "better sense" not prevail, and called for talks.

"Can we afford any miscalculation with the kind of weapons that we have and you have?" he said.

However a spokesman for India's ruling BJP party before any talks can start, Pakistan must first admit that terrorist operations are being carried out from its territory, and to promise to take action against such terrorist groups.

While both sides have sought to play down the threat of war, the rare aerial engagement over the divided and disputed territory of Kashmir significantly raises the stakes in a standoff sparked by a suicide attack on the Indian-controlled side earlier this month.

Pakistan initially said it downed two Indian jets in its airspace and captured two pilots, but later its military spokesman tweeted that there was "only one pilot" in Pakistani custody.

India's foreign ministry demanded the "immediate and safe return" of the pilot, calling on Pakistan to ensure no harm comes to him.

New Delhi confirmed the loss of one of its planes and said it had shot down a Pakistani fighter jet.

In a sign of the deepening crisis, Pakistan closed its airspace "until further notice". At least six airports were shuttered in India, and a vast area north of New Delhi was closed to civilian flights.

The incidents are the latest in a dangerous sequence of events between the two countries, whose ties have been under intense strain since a February 14 suicide bombing in Indian Kashmir that killed 40 troops.

New Delhi had promised to act, and on Tuesday its warplanes flew into Pakistani airspace and struck what it said was a camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed, the militant group that claimed the Kashmir bombing.

It was India's first air strike on Pakistani soil since the neighbours fought a war in 1971. (AFP)

This story has been published on: 2019-02-27. To contact the author, please use the contact details within the article.
