Pakistan Claims Downing of 2 Indian Fighter Jets in Kashmir & World War 3: India-Pakistan war could cause NUCLEAR WINTER – ‘no one is safe’



Kashmir region (Wikipedia)

COGwriter

India and Pakistan have been in conflict again related to Kashmir:

Pakistan Claims Downing of 2 Indian Fighter Jets in Kashmir February 27, 2019

Pakistan says its air forces shot down two Indian warplanes that had flown over its border in the disputed territory of Kashmir Wednesday. Pakistani Major General Asif Ghafoor says one of the pilots was captured after his plane crashed in Pakistani-held Kashmir, while the other fighter jet crashed on the Indian side. India said one of its air force planes was “lost”. Islamabad’s announcement of the shootdown coincides with India’s claim that its fighter jets had intercepted three Pakistani fighter jets that flew into the airspace over its territory in Kashmir and turned them away. The aerial incidents took place hours after Pakistan said at least four people were killed during a mortar attack by Indian troops across the heavily militarized Line of Control. Tensions have been growing between the nuclear-armed neighbors and rivals since 40 Indian paramilitary forces were killed by a suicide car bomb in Indian Kashmir on February 14. The Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad claimed responsibility for the attack. Indian warplanes carried out pre-dawn airstrikes in Pakistan Tuesday on a Jaish-e-Mohammad training camp. The targeting of militant camps is a departure from India’s decades-old policy of restraint born out of fears of triggering an outright conflict. The militant groups are fighting for either Kashmir’s independence or its merger with Pakistan. https://www.voanews.com/a/pakistan-air-force/4805731.html

Some see the potential for massive worldwide problems from the conflict between India and Pakistan:

World War 3: India-Pakistan war could cause NUCLEAR WINTER – ‘no one is safe’ 27 February 2019 War between India and Pakistan, the two smallest nuclear powers, could destroy civilisation, warned a physicist. Brian Toon, a Professor of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, explained his theory at a talk in February last year. Speaking at a Tedx meeting, Professor Toon claimed: “War between India and Pakistan, two of the smallest nuclear powers, with only a few hundred weapons the size of the Hiroshima bomb. We might die as unintended consequences that the Indian and Pakistani generals never even gave us a thought about. My colleagues Luke Oman and Alman Roebuck calculated the spread of smoke after a war between India and Pakistan. “It only takes about two weeks for the smoke to cover the entire earth, and it would rise to altitudes between 20 and 50 miles above the surface, at those altitudes it never rains. The smoke would stay there for years. “This farmer may be in Europe or in the United States, but many thousands of miles from Pakistan and India, is looking at the smoky sky above him, and down at the crops that have died in his field from lack of light and cold temperatures.” … “It is estimated that in a war between India and Pakistan, that we would lose 10 to 40 percent of the yields of corn, what and rice for years afterwards because of the bad weather. “The entire world only has enough food to feed the population for 60 days unless agriculture produces more food. Ira Helfand, a member of the Nobel Peace Prize winning International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, has estimated that one to two billion people would die after a war between India and Pakistan, of starvation. “After a full scale nuclear war, temperatures would plunge below ice age conditions. We would be in a nuclear winter, no crops would grow. “It is estimated that 90 percent of the population of the planet would starve to death, and civilisation would be destroyed, and no one would be safe. “Not those in countries with no nuclear weapons, not those in countries that did not participate in the war, and not those on the other side of the planet from where those explosions occurred, no one would be safe.” Pakistan has shot down two Indian warplanes that had crossed into its side of the Kashmir airspace, the Pakistan armed forces has confirmed. https://www.express.co.uk/news/world/1093062/World-War-3-india-pakistan-war-attack-video-nuclear-weapon-nuclear-winter

While we can expect to see conflict between Pakistan and India, no this particular dispute will not bring on WWIII this year of next.

Furthermore, we can expect to see Pakistan and India, eventually, agreeing on a few matters in the future.

For example, both biblical and Catholic prophecies suggest that most of those in India and Pakistan will temporarily support the future ecumenical religion that the coming European Beast power will advocate. Notice those from Catholic mystics and leaders:

St. Bridget (14th century): Before Antichrist comes, the portals of Faith will be opened to great numbers of pagans (Birch, DA. Trial, Tribulation & Triumph: Before During and After Antichrist. Queenship Publishing Company, Goleta (CA), 1996, p. 449) Venerable Magdalene Porzat (died 1850) (Great Monarch)…shall…restore to their dominions the legitimate kings. A just and pious man born in Galacia shall be the Supreme Pontiff: then the whole world will be united and prosperous. One faith only and one emperor shall reign over the whole earth (Connor, Edward. Prophecy for Today. Imprimatur + A.J. Willinger, Bishop of Monterey-Fresno; Reprint: Tan Books and Publishers, Rockford (IL), 1984, p. 38). Cardinal La Roque (c. 18th century): A regeneration of Faith will appear in Asia (R. Gerald Culleton. The Prophets and Our Times. Nihil Obstat: L. Arvin. Imprimatur: Philip G. Scher, Bishop of Monterey-Fresno, November 15, 1941. Reprint 1974, TAN Books, Rockford (IL), p. 193). Elizabeth Canori-Mora (died 1825):…Such is the glorious triumph reserved for the Catholic Church; she shall be praised, honored and esteemed by all men. All men shall become Catholics, and shall acknowledge the Pope as Vicar of Jesus Christ.” (Connor, p.24). Alphonse Eppinger (1867): “After God has purified the world faith and peace will return. Whole nations will adhere to the teachings of the Catholic Church.” (Connor, p.25) Pope Leo XIII (1893): The Orient, courageously and successfully explored by the Portuguese, is coveted by many today for its lucrative trade. We, however, have a more noble purpose in mind…To take care, therefore, of the preservation and propagation of the Catholic religion among the Hindus, a Hindu clergy has to be formed that could administer the sacraments and govern the Christian people properly, no matter how menacing the times…Be sure that the role of Christianity in such remote regions becomes well known. Make your people understand that something must be done for the Hindus (AD EXTREMAS ON SEMINARIES FOR NATIVE CLERGY. Encyclical of Pope Leo XIII promulgated on June 24, 1893. http://www.vatican.va/holy_father/leo_xiii/encyclicals/documents/hf_l-xiii_enc_24061893_ad-extremas_en.html viewed 07/19/09).

But this acceptance of the “Catholic” leaders by those of Indian heritage will not last (more on the ‘Great Monarch’ can be found in the following: The Great Monarch: Biblical and Catholic Prophecies).

Perhaps I should mention that even many Catholic writers have warned that one that they call an “antipope” will lead a changed church calling itself “Catholic” that will be an ecumenical world religion that many all over the world will follow, but should not follow (see also Catholic Prophecies: Do They Mirror, Highlight, or Contradict Biblical Prophecies?)–but many will still follow this false power for a while.

The Bible teaches:

3b And all the world marveled and followed the beast. 4 So they worshiped the dragon who gave authority to the beast; and they worshiped the beast (Revelation 13:3-4). 8 All who dwell on the earth will worship him, whose names have not been written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. (Revelation 13:8)

However this worship of the coming beast power will not last. According to the Bible, those from India and Pakistan will likely rebel. Even some Catholic writings seem to support that:

Countess Francesca de Brillante (20th Century). “I see yellow warriors and red warriors marching against Europe. Europe will be completely covered with a yellow fog that will kill the cattle in the fields. Those nations that rebelled against the law of Christ will perish by fire. Europe will then be too large for them who survive (Dupont, Yves. Catholic Prophecy: The Coming Chastisement. TAN Books, Rockford (IL), 1973, p. 78). Nostradamus (16th century): Meanwhile the great Asiatic Empire will spread across the sea and continents to destroy the Christian world (Culleton, p. 168).

Notice the following from the Bible:

44 But news from the east and the north shall trouble him; therefore he shall go out with great fury to destroy and annihilate many. 45 And he shall plant the tents of his palace between the seas and the glorious holy mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and no one will help him. (Daniel 11:44-45)



It is the Babylonian European King of the North Beast power that is mentioned in Daniel 11. India and Pakistan are located east of Europe and according to various prophecies, look like they will be aligned with Russia against Europe.

Notice, the following:

50:41 “Behold, a people shall come from the north,

And a great nation and many kings

Shall be raised up from the ends of the earth.

42 They shall hold the bow and the lance;

They are cruel and shall not show mercy.

Their voice shall roar like the sea;

They shall ride on horses,

Set in array, like a man for the battle,

Against you, O daughter of Babylon. 43 “The king of Babylon has heard the report about them,

And his hands grow feeble;

Anguish has taken hold of him,

Pangs as of a woman in childbirth…”(Jeremiah 50:41-43).

1 The burden against Babylon which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw. 2 “Lift up a banner on the high mountain, Raise your voice to them; Wave your hand, that they may enter the gates of the nobles. 3 I have commanded My sanctified ones; I have also called My mighty ones for My anger–Those who rejoice in My exaltation.” 4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, Like that of many people! A tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together! The LORD of hosts musters The army for battle. 5 They come from a far country, From the end of heaven–The LORD and His weapons of indignation, To destroy the whole land. 6 Wail, for the day of the LORD is at hand! It will come as destruction from the Almighty. 7 Therefore all hands will be limp, Every man’s heart will melt, 8 And they will be afraid. Pangs and sorrows will take hold of them; They will be in pain as a woman in childbirth; They will be amazed at one another; Their faces will be like flames (Isaiah 13:1-8).

Thus, both the accounts in Jeremiah and Isaiah seem related to the same invaders. This is an Asian confederation under Russian direction.

The concept of Asian involvement in a major battle is confirmed in the Book of Revelation:

13 Then the sixth angel sounded: And I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is before God, 14 saying to the sixth angel who had the trumpet, “Release the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates.” 15 So the four angels, who had been prepared for the hour and day and month and year, were released to kill a third of mankind. 16 Now the number of the army of the horsemen was two hundred million; I heard the number of them. 17 And thus I saw the horses in the vision: those who sat on them had breastplates of fiery red, hyacinth blue, and sulfur yellow; and the heads of the horses were like the heads of lions; and out of their mouths came fire, smoke, and brimstone. 18 By these three plagues a third of mankind was killed–by the fire and the smoke and the brimstone which came out of their mouths(Revelation 9:13-18).

Only China, with India and others in Asia like Pakistan, are capable of fielding a two hundred million man army. Thus, Revelation appears to be discussing an Asian role in the end-time prophecies.

Scriptures in Revelation as well as those in Daniel point to India and Pakistan actually cooperating militarily against the future European Beast power.

However, war is not their ultimate destiny.

The ultimate destiny for those in India and Pakistan will be to be called into the kingdom of God.

Yes, the God of love will ultimately save nearly all from India and Pakistan.

But we will see conflicts and a major war before then.

Some articles of possibly related interest may include:

India, Its Biblical Past and Future: Any Witness? The Bible discusses the origins of those of Indian heritage. This article quotes the Bible and also discusses some of the witness to India throughout history and what is happening in the 21st century (including those in Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka).

India and the Beast of Revelation 13 Do biblical, Catholic, and even Hindu prophecies suggest that many in India will follow, for a while, the Beast and False Prophet/Antichrist? Here is link to a related YouTube video Will People in India Worship the Beast of Revelation 13?

Does God Have a 6,000 Year Plan? What Year Does the 6,000 Years End? Was a 6000 year time allowed for humans to rule followed by a literal thousand year reign of Christ on Earth taught by the early Christians? Does God have 7,000 year plan? What year may the six thousand years of human rule end? When will Jesus return? 2027 or 20xx? There is also a video titled 6000 Years: When will God’s Kingdom Come? Here is a link to the article in Spanish: ¿Tiene Dios un plan de 6,000 años?

When Will the Great Tribulation Begin? 2019, 2020, or 2021? Can the Great Tribulation begin today? What happens before the Great Tribulation in the “beginning of sorrows”? What happens in the Great Tribulation and the Day of the Lord? Is this the time of the Gentiles? When is the earliest that the Great Tribulation can begin? What is the Day of the Lord? Who are the 144,000? Here is a version of the article in the Spanish language: ¿Puede comenzar la Gran Tribulación en 2018 o 2019? ¿Es el Tiempo de los Gentiles? You can also see the English language sermon videos: The Great Tribulation from the Mount of Olives and Can the Great Tribulation begin before 2020? A shorter and newer video is: Might the Great Tribulation start in 2019?

The Times of the Gentiles Has there been more than one time of the Gentiles? Are we in it now or in the time of Anglo-America? What will the final time of the Gentiles be like? A related sermon is available and is titled: The Times of the Gentiles.

Armageddon Who is involved and when will this gathering happen? Here is also a video from Dr. Thiel, from Tel Megiddo in Israel: Armageddon. Other videos include: Armageddon Will it come on Trump’s watch?, Iraq, Armageddon, & Prophecy, Freemasonry, Armageddon, and Rome, Is China paving roads to Armageddon?, and Jordan, Petra, and Armageddon.

Asia in Prophecy What is Ahead for Asia? Who are the “Kings of the East”? What will happen to nearly all the Chinese, Russians, Indians, and others of Asia? China in prophecy, where? Who has the 200,000,000 man army related to Armageddon? Two YouTube video are Is China THE Threat to the United States of America? and China: A King of the East.

Catholic Prophecies: Do They Mirror, Highlight, or Contradict Biblical Prophecies? People of all faiths may be surprised to see what various Roman and Orthodox Catholic prophets have been predicting as many of their predictions will be looked to in the 21st century.

The Great Monarch: Biblical and Catholic Prophecies Is the ‘Great Monarch’ of Catholic prophecies endorsed or condemned by the Bible? Two sermons of related interest are also available: Great Monarch: Messiah or False Christ? and Great Monarch in 50+ Beast Prophecies.

Jesus Returning, David’s Throne, and the Stone of Destiny Will Jesus return to the throne of David? What about the Stone of Scone? Here is a link to a related video: Stone of Destiny and Jesus’ Return.

Two Horned Beast of Revelation and 666 Who is 666? This article explains how the COG views this, and compares this to Ellen White. Here is a link to a prophetic video Six Financial Steps Leading to 666?

The Mark of Antichrist What is the mark of Antichrist? What have various ones claimed? Here is a link to a related sermon What is the ‘Mark of Antichrist’?

Mark of the Beast What is the mark of the Beast? Who is the Beast? What have various ones claimed the mark is? What is the ‘Mark of the Beast’?

Europa, the Beast, and Revelation Where did Europe get its name? What might Europe have to do with the Book of Revelation? What about “the Beast”? Is an emerging European power “the daughter of Babylon”? What is ahead for Europe? Here is a link to a video titled: Can You Prove that the Beast to Come is European?

European Technology and the Beast of Revelation Will the coming European Beast power would use and develop technology that will result in the taking over of the USA and its Anglo-Saxon allies? Is this possible? What does the Bible teach? Here is a related YouTube video: Military Technology and the Beast of Revelation.

World War III: Steps in Progress Are there surprising actions going on now that are leading to WWIII? Might a nuclear attack be expected? Does the Bible promise protection to all or only some Christians? How can you be part of those that will be protected? A related video would be Is World War III About to Begin? Can You Escape?

The Gospel of the Kingdom of God This free online pdf booklet has answers many questions people have about the Gospel of the Kingdom of God and explains why it is the solution to the issues the world is facing. Here are links to three related sermons: The World’s False Gospel, The Gospel of the Kingdom: From the New and Old Testaments, and The Kingdom of God is the Solution.

Universal OFFER of Salvation, Apokatastasis: Can God save the lost? Hundreds of scriptures reveal God’s plan of salvation This free book is packed with scriptures showing that God does intend to offer salvation to all who ever lived–the elect in this age, and the rest in the age to come. Do you believe what the Bible actually teaches on this? Will all good things be restored? Will God call everyone? Will everyone have an opportunity for salvation? Does God’s plan of salvation take rebellion and spiritual blindness into account? Related sermon videos include Universal Offer of Salvation I: God is love and Universal Offer of Salvation II: The Age to Come and the ‘Little Flock’ and Universal Offer of Salvation III: All Are to Know Jesus, But When? and Universal Offer of Salvation IV: Will the Guilty be Pardoned? and Universal Offer of Salvation V: All Israel Will be Saved? A version of the main article was also translated in the Spanish language: Oferta universal de salvación: Hay cientos de versículos en la Biblia que apoyan la verdadera doctrina de la Apocatastasis.
