Pulwama attack aftermath: I-T dept raids houses of separatist leader in Kashmir, Delhi

The I-T department has said that the evidence recovered from the raids is " robust enough to show a deliberate and willful attempt to evade tax".

Continuing the government's crackdown on separatist groups in Jammu and Kashmir, the Income Tax department carried out raids against separatist organisations and leaders.

The I-T department conducted raids at four locations in Jammu and Kashmir and three locations in New Delhi. The raids were conducted with the intention of cracking down on illegal funding of separatists in the Valley.

According to sources in the I-T department, the searches have yielded credible evidence of large scale undisclosed financial transactions carried out in the business of quarrying, hotels etc.

The department also said that it had found clinching evidence of huge unaccounted expenditure incurred in cash on the reconstruction and remodelling of the residential premises of tax evaders.

While the government did not disclose the name of the separatist leader or their affiliation, it claimed that the accused leader and their family had never filed any income tax returns.

The I-T department has said that the evidence recovered from the raids is " robust enough to show a deliberate and willful attempt to evade tax".

Three hard discs have also been found in the probe, which are being analysed by the government. "Three hard disks have also been seized. The analysis of the information contained in the disks is likely to yield even more substantial evidence against the tax evader and his associates. This action is part of a concerted drive to trace illegal sources of funding that have financed the separatist elements and their activities in the Valley," a spokesperson for the income tax department said.

According to sources, the raids were conducted against Naeem Khan. Naeem Khan was arrested by the NIA in 2017 for fuelling unrest in Jammu and Kashmir by taking hawala money from Pakistan. Naeem Khan was once a close aide of Hurriyat leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani.

The I-T raids cames as the National Investigation Agency carried out searches at seven locations, including on the premises of separatists like Mirwaiz Umer Farooq, in connection with a case related to funding to terrorist and separatist groups in Jammu and Kashmir, officials said.

The government has launched a massive crackdown on separatists in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14. Several separatist leaders including Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front chief Yasin Malik have been detained since the Pulwama attack. The Jammu and Kashmir administration has also withdrawn security cover of several separatist leaders, including Naeem Khan.
