Indo-Pak tensions: Police beef up security in parts of Hyd

Indo-Pak tensions: Police beef up security in parts of Hyd

"All necessary precautionary steps have been put in place. Our force is fully geared. There is no need to panic," the Cyberabad Commissioner said in a message.

news Conflict

The Cyberabad police in Hyderabad has beefed up security in parts of the city in view of the rising tensions between India and Pakistan.

Assuring people that all precautions were being taken, Cyberabad Commissioner V C Sajjanar said in a message, “We have alerted all our officers to intensify patrolling, conduct surprise checks, intensify anti sabotage checks etc. We also kept all our force on standby too. Special police pickets have been posted in all sensitive areas. We are coordinating with other forces.”

“All necessary precautionary steps have been put in place. Our force is fully geared. There is no need to panic. Please alert everyone not to believe rumours. Your safety is our concern,” he added.

Large parts of the city’s IT sector which include the offices of several corporate giants come under the jurisdiction of the Cyberabad police.

The conflict between Indian and Pakistan escalated on Wednesday after the Pakistan Air Force violated Indian airspace in Jammu and Kashmir’s Poonch and Nowshera sectors. While Indian officials said that a Pakistani Air Force F-16 fighter jet was shot down in Jammu, Pakistan has claimed to have shot down an IAF aircraft.

The Indian government on Wednesday confirmed that an Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot had gone missing in action and acknowledged that the pilot is in Pakistan's captivity. The captured IAF pilot, according to Pakistan, is Wing Commander Abhinandan, a MiG 21 Bison pilot.

Read: 1 IAF pilot missing in action says India; Pak claims Wing Commander Abhinandan in custody

Meanwhile, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said that they are ready to hold talks with India.

“World history tells us that that there are miscalculations in wars. My question to the Indian government is -- with the weapons that you have and we have, can we afford a miscalculation? Shouldn't we think about what will happen if the situation escalates? This will not be in my control or in Narendra Modi's control,” he said.

“That's why, I once again invite you. We are sitting ready -- we have told you that the hurt you have faced because of Pulwama tragedy... If you want any kind of dialogue over terrorism, we are ready,” he added.

The entire series of incidents began earlier this month after a total of 40 CRPF jawans were killed in a deadly terrorist attack in Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir on Feburary 14 after a 'fidayeen' (suicide) attacker belonging to the Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM) terror outfit rammed an explosives-laden SUV into the CRPF troopers’ bus.

Also Read:

'We should sit down, talk about problems': Full text of Pak PM Imran Khan's statement

Explainer: What the Geneva Convention says about treatment of Prisoners of War

Pak social media shares video of pilot injured in Bengaluru Aero Show as that of IAF Pilot

IANS inputs
