This is not the first time IAF chief BS Dhanoa has to get a man back from Pakistan

Cross-border tension continues to brew over the capture of an Indian fighter pilot Abhinandan Varthaman. Pakistan has claimed Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was captured on February 27 when Pakistani Air Force struck down two Indian jets.

While initially, Pakistan had claimed it had captured two pilots, it retracted its statement, saying only one Indian pilot had been arrested. "There is only one pilot under Pakistan Army's custody. Wing Comd Abhi Nandan is being treated as per norms of military ethics," Pakistani military spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor said in the evening.

A video released by Major General Ghafoor shows a blindfolded Abhinandan telling his name and service number. He also very calmly says that is the only information he can reveal. "I'm sorry sir...that's all I'm supposed to tell you" he can be heard saying as he maintains his composure.

Another video released shows Wing Commander Abhinandan claim that he has been treated well by the Pakistani forces. He can be seen sipping tea in the video as he cooly says, "I would like to go on record and I will not change my statement IF I return to my country, the officers of the Pakistani army have looked after me very well and they are thorough gentlemen."

India, however, has simply said that a pilot is "missing in action". In a terse press statement, External Affairs Ministry Spokesperson Raveesh Kumar, accompanied by Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor, said details are being ascertained about Pakistan's claim of having captured one Indian pilot.

"In this engagement, we have unfortunately lost one MiG 21. The pilot is missing in action. Pakistan has claimed that he is in their custody. We are ascertaining the facts," he said.

At this time, Air Force chief BS Dhanoa will be sure to recall the last time one of his men was captured in Pakistan. He is no stranger to losing his men to enemy forces.

In 1999, at the peak of the Kargil War, a flight lieutenant, Kambampati Nachiketa, was captured by Pakistan. He was in Pakistani custody for eight days -- a period of immense mental and physical torture for him.

Nachiketa was captured by the Pakistani forces when the fighter plane he was flying developed engine failure and he had to eject from an altitude of 18,000 ft.

Squadron leader Ajay Ahuja (left) and Group Captain K Nachiketa (right)

Not only was Nachiketa captured, but India also lost another pilot -- squadron leader Ajay Ahuja, who was looking for Nachiketa after he saw the flight lieutenant eject from the flight. Ahuja was shot down as a Pakistani missile hit his MiG 21 jet.

Ajay Ahuja's squadron was under the command of then Wing Commander BS Dhanoa, who happens to be the current chief of the air force.

FOLLOW LIVE COVERAGE OF IAF AIRSTRIKE AFTERMATH HERE
