YS Jagan Murder Attempt: NIA Still Gets No Cooperation From AP Police

Visakhapatnam: Opposition leader, YSR Congress party president YS Jagan Mohan Reddy murder attack case is now being investigated by the National Investigation Agency. But the NIA facing non-cooperation from the state police, which is directly hindering the investigation of the case.

The murderous attack on the YSRCP chief YS Jagan Mohan Reddy happened on 25 November 2018 at the Visakhapatnam airport. The High Court expressed its disapleasure at the investigation conducted so far by the state police and handed over the case related to the murderous attack on the Leader of Opposition in AP assembly to NIA.

On 1 January 2019 NIA officials headed by Chief Investigation Officer Mohammed Sajid Khan filed the FIR. Upon being denied any kind of support from the state police department, officials from NIA said that it is for the first time that they are facing an issue of this nature with a state police department. They added the expert team which handled terrorists is being denied information.

NIA officials are not only denied files regarding the case but any other details related to the case. On the same day, while the NIA got the orders from Union Home Ministry to investigate the case, city police commissioner Mahesh Chandra Laddha went on leave. Having hit a roadblock in their first step, the NIA officials contacted Special Investigation Team (SIT) appointed by the state government and the airport police, where the case was filed, but were not shared any information. For the first two days, the state authorities said they can not share any information.

Later, they outrightly refused to talk to the NIA official altogether.State officials are even thinking of writing a letter to Union government objecting to the case being handed over to NIA. If the need arises, they might even file a petition in the court over the same.

It is said the state authorities have received strict orders from the top leadership in the government not to to cooperate with the NIA. The officials from the central agency have state officials under the scanner to find out if anyone from the government is supporting the state police.

There is a talk in the police circles that a senior minister and key TDP leader called the police officer over the phone and warned him not to share any information with the NIA officials. On Monday Home Minister and Deputy Chief Minister, Nimmakayala Chinna Rajappa made comments against the case being handed over to NIA.

If there is no conspiracy behind the murderous attack and senior leaders involvement in the case investigation, then why is the state government not disclosing any information to the NIA. As it is said, this question is also being raised by NIA. They are likely to probe all angles to the case.

Talking to the media, one of the NIA team members said, as the case under investigation, no details should be disclosed. We have no cooperation from the state government and they are even going to file a petition in the court on NIA investigating the case, he added. NIA is also taking this matter to the Union government, he concluded.

Visakhapatnam: State opposition leader, YSR Congress leader YS Jagan Mohan Reddy’s, attacker J Srinivasa Rao’s bail petition came up hearing. In the Metropolitan Sessions Court accused's lawyer Saleem put forward his argument. Additional Public Prosecutor requested AP police for the CD file, but they denied saying that they are barred from doing so complying with the orders received from superiors. APP put forth the same appeale to judge Parthasarathy, who expressed his displeasure over the conduct of the AP police and issued the notice regarding the bail petition to the NIA. He ordered the issue of notice to NIA to continue the investigation. The next hearing is scheduled for 19 January.

Also Read: NIA Team To Inspect Vizag Airport VIP Lounge In YS Jagan Attack Probe
