Brits stranded in Thailand after Thai Airways cancels flights to Europe

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Never miss breaking news by signing up to our free email updates

Hundreds of Brits are stranded at the airport in Thailand after flights to Europe were cancelled following the India plane shootings.

Thai Airways cancelled all of its scheduled flights to Europe, including one that had already taken off and had to turn back, leaving furious tourists stranded at Suvarnabhumi Airport in Bangkok.

The 13-hour route goes straight over India and passes through Pakistan.

The next scheduled flight to the UK was due to leave tonight just after midnight at 12:15am but officials said it would be rescheduled.

(Image: Publicity Picture)

Flights to Copenhagen, Frankfurt, Milan, Oslo, Paris and Zurich were also cancelled.

It comes after Indian warplanes were shot down in Kashmir amid rising tensions between India and Pakistan.

Pakistan at the time claimed to have captured two pilots, although the country's chief military spokesman later said the Pakistani army had only one downed Indian pilot in custody.

However India claimed they shot down one Pakistani plane with Indian ground forces observing it falling on the Pakistani side of the Line of Conflict - they also admitted they "lost" one of their own pilots.

Pakistan have closed their airspace to commercial flights and India have closed a number of airports.

(Image: AP)

Backpacker Nicholle Paisley was on the flight which turned back earlier today. She tweeted : "We've been back for hours now, no food or water. No information on our rescheduled flight. Not good enough at all.

"The staff aren't doing much to help. I'm already at the airport. They've told us to stay in line.

"They can't help as they don't have the answers either. We just want to know when our flight is."

Three hours later she said that passengers had been taken from the airport to a hotel "with no information".

Thai Airways President Sumeth Damrongchaitham said an urgent meeting had been called to reschedule flights to Europe, which normally pass through airspace affected by the chaos between India and Pakistan.

He said: "The conflict situation between Pakistan and India has affected Thai Airways flights. Flights also had to turn back to Bangkok, including the London and Frankfurt flights.

"By closing the airspace, every flight from Thailand to Europe has been affected. For flights that are going to depart this evening will call an urgent meeting to consider the impact of such events."

If you have plans to travel to India or Pakistan, you should contact your airline or tour operator before starting your journey.
