Undeclared War!

The Pakistan today ventured a failed attempt to bomb the Military installations in the country but its fighter planes F-16 were not only push back but one of F-16 fighter was shot down by Indian Air Force vintage aircraft Mig 21. While India responded well, one of India’s fighter was crashed when chasing the other Pakistani planes. The Pilot was beaten and misbehaved by the villagers in the area under Pakistan control.

After patiently waiting for nearly two weeks and with Pakistan failing to take any action against the terror bases in its land, India Tuesday finally gave a fitting reply to the recent terror strike in Pulwama, in which more than 40 CRPF jawans were killed. In an early morning strike across the Line of Control, the Indian Air Force destroyed camps of militants and eliminated many ultras, an action welcomed by people and leaders cutting across party lines in the country.

Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said, “Credible intelligence was received that JeM was attempting another suicide terror attack in various parts of the country, and the fidayeen jihadis were being trained for this purpose. In the face of imminent danger, a pre-emptive strike became absolutely necessary.” Explaining what made India launch the attack, he said information regarding the location of training camps in Pakistan and PoK had been provided to Pakistan from time to time. “Pakistan, however, denies their existence. The existence of such massive training facilities capable of training hundreds of jihadis could not have functioned without the knowledge of Pakistan authorities.”

India has been repeatedly urging Pakistan to take action against the JeM to prevent jihadis from being trained and armed inside Pakistan. However, Pakistan has taken no concrete actions to dismantle the infrastructure of terrorism on its soil. Tuesday’s attack shows a paradigm shift in the way India deals with terrorism. Not in Kargil, or even during the 1971 war had India crossed into Pakistani territory. This is comparable only to the United States’ operation to take out Osama bin Laden. And, Pakistan has to pay this price for being a safe haven for unlawful ultras.
