India and Pakistan are playing a dangerous game of chicken

Blog Post

AEIdeas

Are India and Pakistan lurching toward a war? An escalating confrontation between the South Asian neighbors means that we can no longer rule out the possibility.

In my most recent Wall Street Journal column — read it here — I wrote about how a Feb. 14 suicide car-bombing in Indian Kashmir by the Pakistan-based jihadist group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) has raised domestic pressure on Prime Minister Narendra Modi to retaliate militarily against Pakistan. The attack on a paramilitary convoy killed at least 40 Indian soldiers, the largest single loss of life in the province, claimed by both India and Pakistan, since an insurgency erupted there 30 years ago.

Now the two nuclear-armed powers stand eyeball-to-eyeball in what could spiral into a deadly confrontation. On Tuesday, India announced that its air force had bombed a JeM training camp in the Pakistani province of Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa in order to pre-empt another attack by the terrorist group. This marked the first time that Indian jets have crossed into Pakistan during peacetime, and the first such incursion since the 1971 India-Pakistan war that resulted in the creation of Bangladesh. Pakistan vowed retaliation, though it also claimed that the Indian bombs had caused little damage after falling harmlessly on a forest.

Today, Pakistan announced that it had struck targets in India, downed two Indian fighter jets, and captured one of the pilots. A military spokesman shared a photo of the Indian airman, and Radio Pakistan shared video. According to Indian media reports, India downed a Pakistani F-16, but this could not be independently verified.

Thus far, both India and Pakistan appear to be showing a modicum of restraint. India dubbed its airstrikes Tuesday as pre-emptive and non-military. Pakistan said that in retaliating, its fighter jets did not cross the line of control that divides Indian and Pakistani Kashmir. Nonetheless, with passions running high in both countries — fueled by both mainstream and social media — this could spiral into an actual war.

On Tuesday night, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo released a strong statement that backed India’s air strikes as “counter-terrorism actions” and called on Pakistan to start “de-escalating current tensions by avoiding military action” and by “taking meaningful action against terrorist groups.”

For now the path out of the current crisis appears straightforward: Pakistan should return the captured Indian pilot and take concrete steps to rein in jihadist groups like JeM and Lashkar-e-Taiba that target India. For its part, India needs to ensure that its official rhetoric remains measured, and that its next steps are not driven primarily by domestic political considerations. With domestic passions running high, the margin of error for both India and Pakistan is extremely limited.
