Latest: Narendra Modi gave Indian Forces 'free hand'

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday chaired a crucial security meeting in the wake of escalating tensions between India and Pakistan. The PM Modi-led committee has decided that India will not buckle under pressure. Navy, Air and Army have been given a free hand to take a future course of action. A befitting reply would be given at a proper time. Earlier today, Pakistan claimed its air force shot down not one but two Indian aircraft that entered its territory. One of the fighters crashed in Pakistan-controlled territory and its pilot was taken into custody. The Pakistan government also claimed to have two Indian pilots in its custody, but later changed his statement in a tweet saying there was only one.The Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar confirmed that an Indian Air Force pilot was 'missing in action' and that a MiG-21 jet was 'lost' during a confrontation between the Indian Air Force and Pakistan Air Force this morning. The Indian Air Force has also said that a Pakistan fighter jet that had violated the Indian airspace in Lam district of Nowshera sector in J&K has been shot down. India registered a strong-worded objection to Pakistan's unwarranted advances into Indian airspace and advised to ensure that no harm comes to the Indian pilot. India also said that it expects safe and immediate return of its aviator.(news also on ndtv, and republic news)------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- First off, as a side note, the above was decided by Modi in a top level security meeting just 5 hours ago, at 9:55 pm!- I think India is turning the conflict into a war now! The reports of armor moving towards working boundary, as well as of their navy mobilizing, it is all coinciding.- On another side note, random; their Government might also be clamping down on media giving even the slightest hints of objectivity, NDTV and Abbtak during transmission were transferred onto 'pay-for-channels' list and no longer come with the packages in by indian service providers, this happened with more than one service provider, one known being TATA.If War is what they want, War is what they will get!Pakistan Zindabad!
