Reiterate call to Pak to stop providing support to terrorists: USA

The United States on Wednesday (local time) reiterated its call for Pakistan to "abide by its United Nations Security Council commitments to deny terrorists safe haven and block their access to funds."

"Cross-border terrorism, such as the recent attack on India's Central Reserve Police Force on February 14, poses a grave threat to the security of the region. We reiterate our call for Pakistan to abide by its United Nations Security Council commitments to deny terrorists safe haven and block their access to funds," the US Department of State told ANI.

"The United States calls on India and Pakistan to cease all cross-border military activity and for a return to stability," the department further said.

It also urged both sides to take immediate steps to de-escalate the situation, "including through direct communication".

"Further military activity will exacerbate the situation," it added.

The United States had earlier told Pakistan to stop funding and providing a safe haven to terrorists in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack, the responsibility for which was claimed by Pakistan-based terror outfit, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM).

Tensions have been mounting between India and Pakistan after the ghastly attack, where over 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives.

In the aftermath of the February 14 terrorist attack, India on Tuesday launched an anti-terror strike against a JeM terror training camp in Pakistan's Balakot, in which a large number of terrorists have been killed by the Indian Air Force, according to Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale.

Meanwhile, fighter jets from the Indian Air Force repulsed a morning raid launched by Pakistani F-16 fighter jets on Wednesday, which prevented damage on Indian troop positions or infrastructure, after the Pakistani Air Force violated India's airspace.

Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, however, was captured by the Pakistani army after the PAF violation.

India has since sought the immediate and safe return of the personnel, strongly underlining that "no harm comes to the Indian defence personnel in its custody.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
