Captured Indian pilot says Pak Army treated him well

ISLAMABAD: Captured Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan said on Wednesday that the Pakistan Army treatedgentlemen’. The captured Indian Air Force pilot was seen speaking in a video clip, where he said that he wanted ‘to bring this on record’ that he has been treated well. He said the Pakistan Army’s behaviour is quite professional and impressive.

While responding to a question inquiring if the Indian pilot is being treated well in Pakistan, Abhinandan responded: “Yes, I have been. And I would like to put this on record that I will not change my statement if I go back to my country also.”

He said that the Pakistan Army officers have looked after him very well and they were thorough gentlemen, starting 'from the captain who rescued him from the enraged mob'. When asked where does the IAF pilot hail from, Abhinandan said that he was from ‘down South’.

While responding to a question to describe the aircraft he was flying, the captured Indian pilot said: “I am sorry, I am not supposed to tell you this, but I am sure you have found the wreckage." He also refused to answer when asked about the nature of his mission.

Captured Indian Wing Commander Abhinandan was seen in the video, sipping tea from a cup, and replying to questions. “The tea is fantastic, thank you,” he said in response to a question. “I am married,” said the IAF pilot when inquired about some details of his personnel life.

Meanwhile, the Indian Ministry of External Affairs said a MiG 21 was shot down and its pilot is missing. Addressing a press conference, a spokesperson for the Indian MEA said, "We unfortunately lost one MiG-21 in this engagement and an Indian pilot is missing in action. Pakistan claims the pilot is in their custody, however, we are ascertaining the facts."

Moments earlier, Indian media confirmed an IAF wing commander is in Pakistan's custody. India media reports stated IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan took off in a MiG 21 Bison jet and did not return. Wing Commander Abhinandan is the son of a retired Indian Air Marshal, the reports added.
