Afghan Airliner Barred From Crossing Pakistan’s Airspace

An Afghan airliner en route to India was barred from crossing Pakistan’s airspace and was forced to return to Kabul, an official from Kabul-based Kam Air said.

Najib Paiman, a spokesman for the airline, said the plane was forced to return due to the tensions between Islamabad and New Delhi.

Afghanistan’s Civil Aviation Authority and the International Civil Aviation Organization are working to find a new route for flights between Afghanistan and India, he said.

Kam Air’s flight was not the only airliner which was prevented from crossing Pakistan’s airspace, he said, adding that other airplanes were also forced to return to Kabul when they were not allowed to enter the neighboring country’s airspace.

The Afghan government so far has not commented in this regard.

Pakistan’s Civil Aviation Authority said it has shut its airspace to all commercial flights as military tensions with India escalates.

Meanwhile, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) said Kabul wants peace and stability in the region and that the tension between Islamabad and New Delhi should not put negative impacts on Afghanistan's situation.

“Afghanistan’s internal affairs, such as peace which is initiated by the Afghan government is not related to any country. We hope Pakistanis put into practice their commitments to Afghanistan over bringing peace in the country and take practical steps. Stability in Afghanistan will bring stability in the region, especially in Pakistan,” said Sebghat Ahmadi, the MoFA spokesman.

The tensions between Pakistan and India worsened after on Tuesday New Delhi said that Indian air force jets carried out air strikes on militant camps inside Pakistan.

According to the New Delhi, 12 Indian fighters targeted a hideout of Jaish-e-Mohammad group in Balakot area in Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province in Pakistan.

“Air Force carried out aerial strike early morning today at terror camps across the LoC (Line of Control) and Completely destroyed it,” minister of state for agriculture Gajendra Singh Shekhawat said on Twitter.

The Indian media reported that the Jaish-e- Mohammed group was involved in Pulwama attack on February 14 that killing 40 India's CRPF personnel.

In reaction to the airstrikes, Pakistan military said they will retaliate.

On Wednesday, a spokesman of Pakistan armed forces said that Pakistan has shot down two Indian jets.

Indian media also on Wednesday reported that India has shot down an f-16 fighter of Pakistan, but Islamabad has rejected the claim.
