For Rahul, not work as usual

For Rahul, not work as usual Congress chief cancelled mega public rally as he felt party should not hold a big event at such a sensitive time

| New Delhi | Published 27.02.19, 09:32 PM

Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday decided to cancel the Congress Working Committee meeting and a mega public rally scheduled in Ahmedabad a day later, causing consternation among party leaders who lamented that the entire public space had been vacated for the ruling BJP, which has continued with its election-related programmes. The Gujarat unit had worked hard for the past fortnight to mobilise a huge crowd for Thursday’s rally, apart from completing the logistics for holding the CWC meeting.

Advertisement

The Congress president, however, overruled the reservations as he felt the party should not continue with such a big programme at a time there were clear signs of escalation on the border and when an Indian fighter pilot had been captured by Pakistan. UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, who hosted a meeting of Opposition parties in the afternoon, cancelled the scheduled lunch. The meeting had been called to talk about a common minimum programme but the senior leaders decided to restrict themselves to discussing the national security situation. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has continued with his scheduled programmes, even addressing public rallies and going on a foreign tour, and will on Thursday address what the BJP has advertised as the “biggest video conference in the world” — a party event in which he will interact with booth workers. On Wednesday, he launched a Khelo India mobile app to promote fitness. Asked if the Opposition was having withdrawal symptoms in the new climate brought in by the India-Pakistan tensions, Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala told The Telegraph: “Not at all. We are committed to expose the BJP’s failures on national security but today is not the occasion for partisan political warfare. Our minds are with the Indian Air Force pilot who has been captured by Pakistani troops.”
