Pakistan Prime Minister invites India for discussions

COLOMBO (News 1st) – Pakistan stated that it has shot down two Indian aircraft and captured an Indian pilot today (February 27) following air raids in Indian administered Kashmir.

The spokesperson for the Pakistani Ministry of Foreign Affairs made a statement regarding this incident”Sole purpose of this action was to demonstrate our right, will and capability for self-defence. We do not wish to escalate but are fully prepared if forced into that paradigm.”

Pakistani Prime Minister, Imran Khan noted that shooting down aircraft was not an act of aggression, it was merely responding to action taken by Indian forces. He added that Pakistan was prepared for any investigation demanded by India and yet again the Prime Minister invited India for discussions. Imran Khan also noted that it was crucial to avert war as it leads to eventual futility.

Meanwhile, the spokesperson of the Indian Ministry of External Affairs Raveesh Kumar in a statement said “Due to our high state of readiness and alertness, Pakistan’s attempts were foiled successfully.”

The statement added the Pakistan Air Force was detected and the Indian Air Force responded swiftly. In the aerial combat, one Pakistani Air Force fighter aircraft was shot down by a MiG 21 Bison of the Indian Air Force.

The Ministry of External Affairs added “In this engagement, we have unfortunately lost one MiG 21. The pilot is missing in action. Pakistan has claimed that he is in their custody. We are ascertaining the facts.”

Following the incident, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi met with top officials including Advisor Ajit Doval, the Defence and Foreign Secretaries and intelligence officials.

Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj, in a visit to China, noted that India wants to avoid any “further escalation of the situation” and will “continue to act with responsibility and restraint”.

In the meantime, Pakistan released footage purportedly showing one of the captured Indian pilots, a wing commander who gave his name as Abhinandan. In the video, it is visible that uniform is bloody and a rag was tied around the head of this alleged wing commander.

Additionally, the “wing commander” gives his name, service number, rank and his hometown, but when asked for more, replies: “I’m sorry sir, that’s all I’m supposed to tell you.”

Regarding this tensed up situation between India and Pakistan, several other countries shared their opinions.

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has urged India and Pakistan to avoid “further military activity” following a dramatic escalation in tensions between the two South Asian neighbours.

Issuing a statement US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo “I expressed to both ministers that we encourage India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, and avoid escalation at any cost”

A statement from Australian Foreign Minister Marise Payne demanded Pakistan do more to crack down on Islamic militants after giving tacit backing for India’s air strike on a “terror camp” on Pakistani territory.

It added “Pakistan must do everything possible to implement its own proscription of Jaish-e-Mohammed. It can no longer allow extremist groups the legal and physical space to operate from its territory.”

These events had a butterfly effect on the rest of the world.

Civil aviation authority in Pakistan said Pakistan has closed its entire airspace.

Reports in India said nine airports in northern India have been closed.

The flight monitoring group Flight Radar says international flights are also avoiding the area.

Bahrain’s national carrier Gulf Air has suspended all flights to and from Pakistan with immediate effect due to the closure of Pakistani airspace.

Qatar Airways has also cancelled all flights to and from Pakistan.This has resulted in Qatar Airways flights to Peshawar, Faisalabad, Islamabad, Karachi, Lahore, Multan and Sialkot being cancelled until further notice.
