Mushrooms as packing material? They are at it

science exhibitions

TVs

crockery

fragile objects

Bangalore

mushrooms

If this trio has their way, we could be looking at a biodegradable alternative to thermocolIf thermocol has a purpose, it is to make classroom models for school. But other than that, when used as packing material withand, it ends up adding to your trash pile.But if this inventor trio has their way, we could soon be looking at a biodegradable alternative to thermocol.Jinit Dharia, Mit Parekh nd Yash Parekh, who are chartered accountants by profession are also first-year MBA students at IIM. They are also winners of the ‘The Ultimate pitch 4.0’ organised by Reliance Industries Limited, and their idea for biodegradable protective packaging material won them a cash prize of Rs 4.5 lakh.Interestingly, this idea cropped up when Mit and Yash decided to growfor their own consumption in May last year. The trio soon realised that mushrooms have other benefits and the ‘gluing’ characteristic of mushrooms (fungi) needs to be explored. In the West, a lot of research in this direction is already underway. The trio researched online, spoke to scientists and then started working on the idea of creating biodegradable packaging material.Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, Jinit Dharia said, “We have proposed the use of mushrooms and agricultural waste such as husk and straw as core raw materials. Mycelium - a vegetative part of a mushroom, consisting of a mass of branching, thread-like hyphae, will act as the glue and bind the substrate together forming a solid composite structure. Our final product is fully bio-degradable as compared to thermocol, which takes years to decompose.”Dharia said that the product is still in the concept stage and they have reached out to various scientists from institutes of national repute to help create a minimum viable product.Interestingly, two national incubation centres have extended their support and will be helping the team to source the raw materials and the equipment required to create the product. “As per the initial estimate, we would require another three months to develop a product prototype with is commercially viable,” said Dharia. The Rs 4.5 lakh cash reward includes Rs 50,000 for winning the campus round, mentorship under the Reliance Jio GenNext Hub, interaction with the Chairman’s office, pre-placement interview and a private jet trip to Jamnagar refinery. The fourth edition of the event saw about with 2,239 teams comprising 6,117 students.The primary judging criteria were viability, feasibility and and sustainability. The team has also secured second position in B Starters – a National Business Plan competition organized by a student club of IIM Bangalore in cooperation with NSRCEL, IIM Bangalore. They won Rs 1 lakh and an opportunity for incubation at NSRCEL, IIM Bangalore. “B-Starters” is a premier B-Plan competition for aspiring entrepreneurs and start-ups from the top business schools of the country. Participation is open to all students and alumni from IIM Ahmedabad, IIM Bangalore, IIM Calcutta, IIM Lucknow, FMS and XLRI. The competition requires participants to present their innovative ideas with a viable business plan.********Thermocol contains an important thermoplastic compound, called polystyrene, which is obtained by the polymerisation of styrene or phenylethene. The chemical properties of phenylethene are identical to polyethene. It responds slowly to bacterial decomposition in the soil, thus making the soil infertile. It also releases poisonous gases on burning, which can cause respiratory problems, or even death, when inhaled.According to reports, thermocol can take hundrerds of years to decompose, increasing the clutter in already-full landfills. When burned, it releases more than 90 different hazardous chemicals.Taking note of the harmful effects of thermocol, Jinit, Mit and Yash researched extensively online and found that mushrooms can be an alternative. Then they spoke to several scientists in the West and started working on the idea of creating biodegradable packaging material.Mycelium, a vegetative part of mushroom, will act as a glue. It will bind the substrate together, forming a solid composite structure. The product made of mushroom will be biodegradable
