Captured in conflict: The case of Flight Lieutenant Kambampati Nachiketa

In the early hours of the morning of May 27, 1999, Flight Lieutenant (now Group Captain) Kambampati Nachiketa , piloting a Mig27 fighter aircraft, was tasked to hit targets in Batalic Sector during the Kargil conflict.After carrying out his first attack on the ground-based military target, Nachiketa came back for a second attack. His aircraft was hit by an American ‘Stinger’ surface-to-air missile and his aircraft engine flamed out. The problem that pilots attacking Pakistani positions across the LoC faced was that they were sometimes relatively easy targets for such missile attacks, because they had a relatively small area to manoeuvre, because of instructions that they should not cross the LoC. Despite his efforts to escape, a Pakistani army patrol captured Nachiketa.The Indian High Commission in Islamabad was advised that Nachiketa had been captured and under custody. A few days later Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif grandiosely announced that as a gesture to India, he was releasing Nachiketa to enable him to return to India. Barely an hour later, I received a call from a senior official in the foreign office that Nachiketa would be handed over to me in the Foreign Office.Sensing that something is more sinister in the offer, I probed him and was told that Nachiketa would be handed over to me in the Jinnah Room, where large gatherings including members of the media were invited.I told the Pakistani of ficial that it was evident that it was obviously their intent to make the Prisoner of War the object of a media spectacle and would therefore not attend any such event. The release had to be in accordance with provisions of the Vienna Convention and there was no question of I attending any such function. I said that we could arrange to receive in an environment free from any media presence and preferably in the High Commission.I insisted that in accordance with the Geneva Convention, Nachiketa would have to be accompanied by the officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).I informed Brajesh Mishra, the then principal secretary to the prime minister, of what I had done and asked the High Commission’s air attaché Air Commodore Jaiswal to inform the Chief of Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal AY Tipnis, about the reasons why I had refused to attend a ceremony to release Nachiketa at the Foreign Office. I told them it was quite clear that they were proposing an event, which would be humiliating for an officer of the Indian Air Force as it would be made out that the officer had been forced to surrender. Both the principal secretary and the Air Chief endorsed what had been done.Just as the sun was setting on that day, officials of the ICRC brought in Nachiketa to the High Commission. An hour later Prime Minister Vajpayee called him on phone to welcome him back, while thanking him for his services to the country.Nachiketa spent the night at the residence of Air Commodore Jaiswal. Early next morning, he was seated in an embassy Mercedes between Jaiswal and naval attaché Commodore (now Vice Admiral) Srikant and driven across the Wagah border to India. It must be mentioned that while in custody, Nachiketa was subjected to severe grilling, but otherwise treated normally.I can only wish and pray that the family of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who is now in Pakistani custody, will bear his absence with courage and fortitude.
