'Their lies have been exposed': India points out contradictions in Pakistan's version

India on Wednesday pointed out to the contradictions and repeated flip flop of Pakistan over its claim on the capture of an Indian Air Force pilot after Islamabad's attempt to target military installations in India was foiled.

Indian Air Force foiled an attempt by the Pak jets to target military installations and pushed back, shooting down one of their aircraft. But an Indian pilot was captured by Pakistan after a MiG-21 was lost in the engagement.

Highlighting the contradictory statements made by the Pakistani Army post the capture of an IAF personnel, a top source said, "The DG ISPR had tweeted that there is only one Indian pilot in Pakistan's custody. This is directly contradictory to his earlier tweet which claimed two pilots were in their custody."

India reiterated that Islamabad does not appear to be acting on the issue of terrorism.

"This shows Pakistani duplicity - their own lies have been exposed," the source added.

The Pakistan side did not just one but two flip flops on Wednesday.

Pakistan's chief military spokesman General Asif Ghafoor first claimed that two IAF pilots were arrested. One pilot is injured and has been shifted to a hospital, while another one is unhurt, the spokesman claimed.

The spokesman also showed items and documents of the arrested pilots. Addressing a press conference, he said one of the aircraft crashed in Pakistan occupied Kashmir while the other fell in Jammu and Kashmir.

However, India said that it had only lost one MiG-21 and its pilot was "missing in action."

Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) spokesperson Raveesh Kumar briefed the media at 3.15 PM in which he confirmed that the pilot of one of the IAF aircraft which flew to push back Pak jets had not yet returned.

An hour later, when Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan addressed the nation he continued the claim that two Indian MIGs crossed the Line of Control and they were shot down. In his address, he mentioned two 'pilots' in the plural.

The top source, speaking to WION said, "This is evidence that the Pakistani officials and military were not briefing their PM correctly."

Explaining, "If they cannot even present the right facts before their Prime Minister, how can we trust them to take any action against terrorists."

Soon after Khan's address, Pakistan went back on its claims and said that it had only one IAF pilot.

Ghafoor took to Twitter to announce that "there is only one pilot under Pakistan Army's custody".

The Pakistan Army has also refused to accept that one of its fighter jets was shot down.

Officials in India said a Pakistani Air Force F-16 fighter jet was shot down by Indian air defence forces in Jammu region's Rajouri sector.

In his statement, MEA spokesperson did not specify the type of Pak aircraft that was shot down by Indian Air Force but sources said it was an F-16.

On Tuesday, the Indian Air Force had conducted strikes against a training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) in Pakistan's Balakot as a preemptive measure, based on credible evidence that the terror outfit led by Masood Azhar intended to launch more attacks.

"Against this Counter Terrorism Action, Pakistan has responded Wednesday morning by using its Air Force to target military installations on the Indian side. Due to our high state of readiness and alertness, Pakistan's attempts were foiled successfully," Raveesh said.

Kumar added the violation of Indian airspace by Pakistan Air Force was detected and the IAF responded instantly.

"In that aerial engagement, one Pakistan Air Force fighter aircraft was shot down by a MiG 21 Bison of the Indian Air Force. The Pakistani aircraft was seen by ground forces falling from the sky on the Pakistan side,'' he said.

"In this engagement, we have unfortunately lost one MiG 21. The pilot is missing in action. Pakistan has claimed that he is in their custody. We are ascertaining the facts," he said.
