HRS leader arrested for 2018 murder

Absconding for a year, the criminal had indulged in a gang war in January last year, which led to the killing of one in broad daylight



The Pune police arrested a Hindu Rashtra Sena (HRS) member — an alleged criminal on record — on Wednesday, who was wanted in the 2018 gang-war murder since one year.



The Hadapsar police with a team under deputy commissioner of police zone-V Prakash Gaikwad arrested the accused, identified as Sandip Dangmali.



Gaikwad told Mirror, “Sandip is an HRS member and he was wanted in Sujit Varma murder case. He was arrested on a tip-off.”



Sujit Varma was allegedly murdered in Gondhalenagar of Hadapsar in January 2018. The murder had sent chills down the spine of the residents when six men on bikes had stabbed him to death in broad daylight.



Hadapsar inspector Sunil Tambe said, “Varma was a local gangster in Hadapsar, who was in loggerheads with the HRS member, Dangmali. Both the gangs had had scuffles at different periods of time for supremacy in the area”.



He added, “During their ongoing fight, Dangmali and his gang members had pre-planned Varma’s murder and stabbed him to death. The other accused were all arrested. However, Dangmali had fled from the city and remained absconding.”



The other accused, who were arrested previously in the case, were Abhijit Bhosale, Prakash Shelar, Kiran Gundewad, Pravin Suthar, Akshay Hake, Yashwant alias Akshay Suryavanshi, Shivshankar Sharma, Prithvi Suryavanshi and Santosh Devkar.



According to police, Dangmali was earlier arrested in Paud Road murder case, too — that happened in 2012. Dangmali, along with Tushar Hambir and Pankaj Gaikwad, were nabbed by Deccan Gymkhana police in the murders of Rahul Dhumal and Tanaji Deshmukh.



In this case, Dhumal and Deshmukh had entered into a brawl with land dealer Sanjay Baburao Ohale. As per the case details, Ohale had hatched a plot to kill Dhumal and Deshmukh. After killing the duo, the accused had cut their bodies into several pieces and burnt them at Taminihi Ghat.



The police had first arrested Dangmali and others after which, the main conspirator — Ohale — was also arrested by police in the double murder case.



The Hadapsar police said that Dangmali also has cases of attempt to murder, dacoity, attempt to dacoity and extortion against him.




