Air Canada suspends flights to India following Pakistan airspace closure

Air Canada has suspended flights to Mumbai and New Delhi after two Indian fighter jets were shot down by Pakistani military in an escalating crisis between the neighbouring, nuclear-armed countries.

The airline diverted a flight en route to New Delhi over the Atlantic Ocean and landed back in Toronto, Air Canada spokesperson Peter Fitzpatrick told the Star by email Wednesday.

Data from the website flightaware.com indicated that the Air Canada flight, which departed Pearson airport Tuesday night, was over Sweden before turning back. The website shows the flight was in the air for almost 14 hours and 20 minutes before returning to Pearson.

Fitzpatrick said there are "no suitable alternate routings" for the airline to take into New Delhi.

The non-stop flight usually takes 13 hours and 45 minutes.

A second flight from Vancouver to New Delhi was also cancelled, Fitzpatrick said. A flight from Toronto to Mumbai is still scheduled to run tonight because it takes a different route from the New Delhi flights, he said.

The suspension of flights comes after Pakistan on Wednesday said it shot down two Indian warplanes over its territory, the latest escalation in a growing crisis between the two nuclear-armed countries.

Global Affairs Canada said that the country will keep its airspace closed until 11:59 p.m. on Feb. 28.

Flights from other major airlines, including British Airways and Air India, also had to reroute to avoid transiting over Indian and Pakistani airspace. Multiple Indian airlines tweeted that passenger flights were delayed because of airport closures.

Vancouver resident Sudarshan Bakshi is scheduled to fly to Punjab on Friday.

An Order of British Columbia recipient honoured for his charitable service, Bakshi said he is not worried about continuing his annual trip to the state in northern India, which borders Pakistan. Friends and relatives on the ground, he said, have told him the area is safe.

Still, Bakshi said he respects the airline's decision to put passengers first.

"I appreciate what Air Canada is doing," he said.

Bakshi, a retired blueberry farmer and founding member of the South Asian Human Rights Organization, has raised hundreds of thousands of dollars to construct a new hospital and orphanage in the state - projects he is looking forward to visiting when his Air Canada flight ultimately lands in India.

Pakistan's Civil Aviation Authority said it shut Pakistani airspace to all commercial flights Wednesday, without elaborating or indicating when flights might resume. It was not clear if the shutdown applied to commercial overflights, though aviation authorities in Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates stopped all flights to Pakistan.

"Canada is gravely concerned about rising tensions between India and Pakistan," said Foreign Affairs Minister Chrystia Freeland in a statement on Wednesday. "We urge both sides to exercise maximum restraint and avoid any further military escalation."

Air Canada runs daily service to New Delhi from both Vancouver and Toronto, while also running flights four times a week from Toronto to Mumbai.

Air Canada is offering a "goodwill policy" for affected passengers, that allows them to rebook their flights free of cost, depending on availability.

"We are monitoring the situation in order to resume service once the situation normalizes and we determine it is safe to do so," Fitzpatrick said.

Read more:

Pakistan says 2 Indian warplanes downed, 1 pilot captured

India airstrikes in Pakistan hike tensions between nuclear neighbours

Pakistan said Wednesday it had captured two Indian pilots after shooting down their warplanes over the disputed region of Kashmir, a mountainous region claimed by both India and Pakistan since almost immediately after their creation in 1947.

One of the downed planes crashed in Pakistan's part of Kashmir while the other went down in Indian-controlled section of the Himalayan region, Pakistan's army spokesman Maj. Gen. Asif Ghafoor said.

Pakistani troops on the ground captured an Indian pilot, he later said, after earlier saying it captured two. He did not explain what caused the confusion.

The pilot was injured and was being treated at a military hospital, Ghafoor said. He did not elaborate beyond saying the pilots were being "treated well" and made no mention of them being returned to India.

"We have no intention of escalation, but are fully prepared to do so if forced into that paradigm," he added.

India acknowledged one of its Air Force planes was "lost" in skirmishes with Pakistan and that its pilot was "missing in action" on a chaotic day, which also saw mortar shells fired by Indian troops from across the frontier dividing the two sectors of Kashmir kill six civilians and wound several others. A helicopter crash in the region also killed six Indian Air Force officials and a civilian on the ground.

Pakistan responded by shutting down its civilian airspace as Prime Minister Imran Khan called for negotiations with his Indian counterpart Narendra Modi, to ensure "better sense can prevail."

Tuesday's pre-dawn strike by India was its first inside of Pakistan since the two nations' 1971 war over territory that later became Bangladesh. Pakistan had said that Indian warplanes dropped bombs near the Pakistani town of Balakot but there were no casualties.

The violence Wednesday marked the most-serious escalation of the long-simmering conflict since 1999, when Pakistan's military sent a ground force into Indian-controlled Kashmir at Kargil. That year also saw an Indian fighter jet shoot down a Pakistani naval aircraft, killing all 16 on board.

The Government of Canada has issued travel advisories to both India and Pakistan.

Canadians are urged to avoid non-essential travel to Pakistan and parts of Northeastern India, and avoid all travel to the Kashmir region and the border areas between the two nations.

Travellers are advised to "exercise a high degree of caution" when travelling throughout India, due to a continuing threat of terrorist attacks throughout the country at all times, the advisory says.

With files from Star wire services

Premila D'Sa is a breaking news reporter, working out of the Star's radio room in Toronto. Follow her on Twitter: @premila_dsa

Read more about:
