Delhi-Mumbai airfares skyrocket as India-Pakistan tensions prevail

Most airlines are booking tickets for a one-way direct New Delhi-Mumbai flight for today starting from Rs 20,000. (Photo: Reuters)

Amid escalating tensions between India and Pakistan and Pakistan closing its airspace for all commercial operations for the second day today, airfares for domestic travel in India, especially in the western sector have risen exponentially.

Price for a one-way direct ticket between Delhi and Mumbai in most airlines is starting from Rs 20,000.

Source: Yatra.com

This comes a day after several airports in North India were temporarily shut amid escalating tensions with Pakistan. The Mumbai airport was also put on high alert and the government had asked schools to exercise caution.

Flight tickets with one stop between Delhi and Mumabi start from Rs 8,500.

In the New Delhi-Goa sector, flight tickets today are starting from Rs 12,000.

Source: Yatra.com

Air service from Delhi to Srinagar has been impacted as only a couple of airlines are flying in this route.

Source: Yatra.com

Tensions between Indian and Pakistan escalated after India carried out airstrikes at Jaish-e-Mohammed camps in Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, eliminating a "large number" of terrorists, including top commanders", according to Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale.

The terror camp, located in a thick forest area atop a hill, was led by Ustad Gauri, brother-in-law of JeM chief Masood Azhar, Gokhale said, making a statement before the media, hours after the airstrikes using Mirage 2000 were carried out.

In retaliation, Pakistan violated ceasefire in a number of places along the LoC. Heavy shelling was also reported in the region.

One Pakistan fighter aircraft was shot down by a MiG-21 jet of the Indian Air Force. The Pakistan Air Force too shot down one MiG-21 aircraft and captured IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman. India has called for his immediate return.

Also Read | IAF airstrike aftermath: Flights on western routes turn longer

Also Read | Civilian flights to resume from airports in north India: Airports Authority of India

Also Read | Pakistan airspace to remain closed today

Also Watch | IAF airstrike was not military action, says Sushma Swaraj in China
