Pakistan violates ceasefire in J&K's Krishna Ghati sector day after breaching Indian airspace

The Indian Army retaliated effectively and strongly. (PTI image used for representation purpose)

Pakistan on Thursday violated ceasefire for the seventh consecutive day and resorted to firing in Krishna Ghati sector along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district, prompting Indian Army to retaliate befittingly. The unprovoked firing began at 6 am and continued till 7 am.

"At around 6 am today, Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling mortars and firing small arms along the Krishna Ghati sector," Defence spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Devender Anand said.

The Indian Army retaliated effectively and strongly. Firing exchanges stopped around 7 am, he added. The authorities have shutdown all educational institutions within 5 km of the Line of Control and the international border in Rajouri, Poonch and Samba districts.

UPDATE: Pakistan again violated ceasefire at 1 pm today along the Line of Control in Krishna Ghati sector of Poonch district. Indian Army retaliated effectively.

The developments have been reported a day after Pakistan retaliated to the Indian airstrikes on Tuesday and violated Indian airspace on Wednesday. The Pakistan Air Force (PAF) jets turned back after India scrambled its aircraft and chased them out.

Following which, India summoned Pakistan's Acting High Commissioner to India and lodged a strong protest at the unprovoked act of aggression in the morning when Pakistani fighter jets entered Indian airspace and targeted military posts.

A statement by the Ministry of External Affairs on the demarche issued to Pakistan said that this was in contrast to India's non-military anti-terror pre-emptive strike at a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist camp in Balakot.

On Wednesday (February 27), Pakistan violated ceasefire and resorted to heavy mortar shelling on forward posts and civilian areas along the LoC in Mendhar, Balakote and Krishna Ghati sub-sectors in Poonch district at around 7 pm.

The year 2018 had witnessed the highest number of ceasefire violation, numbering 2,936 by Pakistani troops, in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border.

Pakistan continues to violate the 2003 ceasefire agreement with India, despite repeated calls for restraint and adherence to the pact during flag meetings between the two sides.

Meanwhile, Pakistan army is said to have deployed tanks along the LoC and the international border.
