US, UK and France propose UN Security Council to blacklist Masood Azhar, head of Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM)

The proposal, when moved, will be fourth such bid at the UN in past ten years. In 2009 and 2016, India moved the UN's Sanctions Committee 1267 to ban Azhar, also the mastermind of attack on the air base in Pathankot in January, 2016. (PTI)

Reuters: The United States, Britain and France proposed on Wednesday that the United Nations Security Council blacklist the head of Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad, which said it attacked an Indian paramilitary convoy in Kashmir. — ANI (@ANI) February 28, 2019

The United States, Britain and France proposed on Thursday that the United Nations Security Council blacklist the head of Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad, which said it attacked an Indian paramilitary convoy in Kashmir, India. The proposal comes a day after India handed over to Pakistan a dossier on "specific details" of involvement of the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) in the Pulwama. The dossier was handed over to the Acting High Commissioner of Pakistan who was summoned this afternoon by MEA to lodge a strong protest at the unprovoked act of aggression by Pakistan against India.The proposal, when moved, will be fourth such bid at the UN in past ten years. In 2009 and 2016, India moved the UN's Sanctions Committee 1267 to ban Azhar, also the mastermind of attack on the air base in Pathankot in January, 2016. India was joined by P3 countries --the US, the UK and France-- in the 2016 proposal. In 2017, these P3 countries moved a similar proposal at the United Nations. However, China has always blocked the proposal from being adopted by the UN. The three nations have asked the 15-member United Nations Security Council sanctions committee to subject Maulana Masood Azhar, the head of Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammad, to an arms embargo, global travel ban and asset freeze. The JeM had taken the responsibility of the suicide attack in Jammua and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14, following which counter-terror action against the JeM and killed at least 350 terrorist as the IAF destroyed Pakistan-based terror outfit's biggest camp in Balakot on Tuesday.
