Support India's airstrikes on JeM training camps in Pakistan: US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo tells NSA Ajit Doval

National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo had a telephonic conversation late on Wednesday night on the issue of Indian strikes against Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist camp in Pakistan's Balakot on Tuesday.

During the conversation, the US Secretary of State supported Indian action as a counter-terrorism step and stated that they stand with India on this.

On Tuesday, the Indian Air Force carried out strikes to target terror camps in Pakistani territory. The IAF wiped out the biggest terror training camp of the JeM in Pakistan's Balakot.

The conversation between Doval and Pompeo came amid heightened tension between India and Pakistan after with Pakistani jets violated the Indian airspace and dropped some bombs in Rajouri sector after which one of their fighters was shot down.

India said it foiled an attempt by Pakistan Air Force to carry out strikes in Jammu and Kashmir by shooting down an F-16 fighter plane while losing its own MiG-21 jet after which a pilot was "missing in action". Pakistan later claimed that the Indian pilot was in its custody.

Following the development, India strongly objected to Pakistan's vulgar display of injured personnel of the Indian Air Force in violation of all norms of International Humanitarian Law and the Geneva Convention.

MEA in a strongly worded statement yesterday said, "It was made clear that Pakistan would be well advised to ensure that no harm comes to the Indian defence personnel in its custody. India also expects his immediate and safe return."

India is launching a diplomatic offensive along with military steps to take decisive action against Pakistan supported terrorist infrastructure in the region.

External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj has left for Saudi Arabia to garner support against support to terrorists by Pakistan.

Ambassadors and Defence Attaches posted in Indian embassies abroad have been asked to push forward and push Indian viewpoint across strongly.

(With inputs from ANI)
