ED cracks down on terror funding, to seize properties of Hafiz Saeed, Zakir Naik

File photo | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The Enforcement Directorate (ED) is poised to seize about 14 properties in Jammu and Kashmir belonging to Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) terrorist outfit chief Hafiz Muhammad Saeed in an attempt to clamp down on terror funding, the Economic Times reported citing people familiar with the development.



The financial daily mentioned that the ED, which has started proceedings to attach the assets, has identified the “proceeds of crime” invested by Kashmiri businessman Zahoor Ahmed Shah Watali, who is alleged to be terror mastermind Hafiz Saeed’s financier. In August last year, Watali, 70, was arrested by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) over terror funding.



“The 14 properties identified include bungalows, palatial houses. All these properties will be attached,” a senior officer told ET on condition of anonymity.



The agency, which registered a fresh case against Hafiz Saeed on January 19, was already following one against him and others on the basis of a first information report (FIR) filed by the NIA in June 2017, as per the report. The LeT carried out the terror attacks on Parliament in 2001 and Mumbai in 2008.



Also, the ED has identified properties worth Rs 50.73 crore in Mumbai and Pune belonging to controversial Islamic preacher Zakir Naik. These assets were allegedly acquired from the proceeds of crime, the agency sources told the publication.



In October 2018, a special NIA court had ordered the attachment of four properties in Mumbai belonging to Zakir Naik, booked under an anti-terror law.



Besides, the ED has identified 13 properties belonging to other militant organisations. Attachments in six cases have already been executed by the agency, the report said.



“The endeavour is to close the tap of terror funding by attaching all the properties which have been acquired from the proceeds of crime,” one of the persons cited above told the daily.
