Big Donald Trump statement on India-Pakistan tensions: Have decent news, think it is going to end

Following the Indian Air Force airstrike in Pakistan and the capture of an IAF pilot by the Pakistani military, tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad are at a tipping point

US president Donald Trump suggested that tensions between India and Pakistan, which have been rising on a near-daily basis since the February 14 Pulwama attack, will be coming to an end soon.

"We have I think reasonably attractive news from Pakistan and India," Donald Trump said in Hanoi, Vietnam after a failed summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un.

Donald Trump said that the United States was "involved" in mediating between India and Pakistan and in "trying to have them stop". "And we have some reasonably decent news... and I think it is going to end... it has been going on for a long time," Trump said, referring to the heightened tensions between India and Pakistan.

New Delhi and Islamabad have been on the brink of armed conflict since the Febrauary 14 suicide bombing of a Central Reserve Police Force convoy in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama that killed 40 jawans. The Pulwama terror attack was carried out by the Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad.

In response, the Narendra Modi government authorised armed forces to avenge the attack at a time and place of their choosing.

And so, on February 26 the Indian Air Force carried out a pre-dawn airstrike deep inside Pakistan. The Indian government officially called it an "intelligence-led, non-military, pre-emptive action".

The airstrike a terrorist camp in Balakot, which was the the Jaish-e-Mohammad's largest in Pakistan killing scores of terrorists, commanders and trainers.

The airstrike significantly heightened tensions between India and Pakistan which reached another level a day after on February 27.

On February 27 morning, Pakistani jets and Indian fighters had a confrontation in the skies over Jammu and Kashmir. Indian Air Force's MiG-21 fighter jets managed to shoot down a Pakistani jet, something which Islamabad denied.

However, an Indian jet was also "lost" in the confrontation, the government said, and its pilot was "missing in action".

What? Trump says reasonably attractive news coming from India and Pakistan and that it’s coming to an end pic.twitter.com/62Ikuh3ukk Ananth Krishnan (@ananthkrishnan) February 28, 2019

The Pakistani military identified the pilot as Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman and put out videos of him being interrogated by Pakistani army officers.

India has not identified the identity of the pilot "missing in action" and has said it is "ascertaining the facts" with regards to Pakistani claims of having Wing Commander Abhinandan in custody.
