Tension between Pakistan, India rises to alarming level

Tension between Pakistan, India rises to alarming level

IRNA - Islamic Republic News Agency

Islamabad, Feb 27, IRNA -- Tensions between Pakistan and India have increased to an alarming level prompting the international community to ask both countries to exercise restraint and make efforts to de-escalate tensions.

Earlier Indian media quoted the country's officials as saying that between 200 and 300 were killed in the Indian air strikes on an alleged camp of militias across the border between India and Pakistan in the disputed Kashmir region, however Pakistan rejected the claim.

Meanwhile Iran's Foreign Ministry spokesman Bahram Qasemi had called on both India and Pakistan to exercise restraint.

Both countries exchanged heavy shelling across the Line of Control the defecto border between Pakistan and India in Kashmir region leaving at least four Pakistani civilians dead and 11 others wounded.

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi had a telephone contact with US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and apprised him about the the sentiments of Pakistani government, parliament and the people on the current tension with India.

He said Indian aggression can disturb joint efforts to establish peace in Afghanistan.

Qureshi has also written a letter to the UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres inviting his attention towards the deteriorating security situation in the region.

Pakistani Ambassador Maleeha Lodhi has spread Pakistan's key message at the United Nations saying that Pakistan will respond to India at a time and place of its choosing.

China has also called for restraint from both Pakistan and India saying that a sound relationship and cooperation between the two nations serves the interests of the international community as well as peace and stability in South Asia.

Relations between Pakistan and India have been tense since a suicide bombing in Indian-Kashmir killed over 40 Indian soldiers, with New Delhi blaming Pakistan of being complicit in the attack, a charge Islamabad has denied vehemently.

The tensions soared even more after the LoC violation by Indian jets for which Major General Asif Ghafoor, the director general of Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), has warned New Delhi to 'wait for our response'.

272**1424

NEWS LETTER Join the GlobalSecurity.org mailing list Enter Your Email Address






