Pakistan 'ready to free captured Indian pilot if it leads to de-escalation'

Nuclear powers India and Pakistan have clashed in Kashmir region this week as world leaders call for restraint

Pakistan 'ready to free captured Indian pilot if it leads to de-escalation'

Pakistan says it is ready to free a captured Indian pilot if it leads to "de-escalation" of the on-going crisis between the countries.

It comes after two Pakistani fighter jets allegedly tried to fly into Indian airspace in the Poonch district near the border, a day after the two nuclear powers both downed enemy jets and Pakistan captured the pilot.

Troops from both countries briefly exchanged fire in Poonch earlier, India's army claimed.

India and Pakistan have clashed in the disputed Himalayan region of Kashmir this week and world leaders have called for restraint.

US President Donald Trump hinted at de-escalation on Thursday when he said he hoped the conflict between India and Pakistan will be coming to an end.

Speaking in Hanoi, Vietnam, after holding a summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, Trump said he had some "reasonably decent" news from India and Pakistan.

Image: Twitter) Twitter)

But he did not elaborate.

He told reporters: "They have been going at it and we have been involved in trying to have them stop.

"We have been in the middle trying to help them both out."

World powers have urged restraint as tensions escalate following tit-for-tat air strikes this week after a suicide car bombing that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Indian-controlled Kashmir on February 14.

India has blamed a Paskistan-based militant group for the attack. Tensions in the region were escalated when India carried out air strikes on what it claimed was a militant training camp on Pakistani soil.

Image: The Express Tribune) The Express Tribune)

It was the first time Indian warplanes have struck inside Pakistan since the 1971 war, and it led to Wednesday's downing of fighter jets.

India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who faces a general election in May, told a rally of supporters that India would unite against its enemies.

He said: "The world is observing our collective will. It is necessary that we shouldn't do anything that allows our enemy to raise a finger at us."

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan has called for talks between the two nations.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

Saudi Arabia was sending its foreign minister to the region to help broker a peaceful resolution.

Pakistan continues to hold the Indian Air Force pilot, who was seen being beaten, leaving him bloodied, as he was captured after his jet was shot down on Wednesday.

The two countries have been exchanging shellfire along the Line of Conflict (LoC) in the disputed region.

India is building more than 14,000 bunkers, which are suitable for families, along the border with Pakistan in Jammu and Kashmir state.

Meanwhile, the conflict has caused chaos for tens of thousands of airline passengers after Pakistan closed its airspace and airports, and India shut some northern airports.

Image: Flightradar24.com) Flightradar24.com)

Thai Airways has cancelled more than a dozen flights to and from Europe, including London, leaving about 5,000 passengers scrambling to find alternative arrangements.

Many airlines, including British Airways and Emirates, route flights over Pakistan and are now diverting their planes around the conflict zone amid fears of further strikes.

Air Canada said it had temporarily suspended service to India.

Pakistan's Civil Aviation Authority announced it had reopened its airspace to some commercial flights on Thursday.

Pakistan and India have fought three wars since independence from British colonial rule in 1947, two over Kashmir, and went to the brink of a fourth in 2002 after a Pakistani militant attack on India's parliament.
