Abhishek Ambareesh’s ‘Amar’ teaser to be released along with Darshan’s ‘Yajamana’

Abhishek Ambareesh’s ‘Amar’ teaser to be released along with Darshan’s ‘Yajamana’

The teaser of the film, directed by Nagashekar, will be released on March 1.

Flix Sandalwood

Abhishek Ambareesh’s debut movie Amar is progressing at a good speed. The team was recently in Malaysia where they shot a song sequence on a cruise for seven days. A major portion of the film has been shot in Switzerland. Sources say only a couple of songs are left to be canned.

The latest update on Amar is that its official teaser will be released along with Darshan’s Yajamana on March 1. Interestingly, Darshan makes a cameo appearance in Amar. Scenes involving him were shot for a period of three days, which includes a song sequence. These scenes were shot in various locations in and around Bengaluru, we hear. According to sources, Darshan’s character in Amar will be crucial and will bring about the turning point in the story. However, no further details about the star’s role have been revealed.

Directed by Nagashekar, Amar is being bankrolled under the banner Sandesh Productions. The shooting of this film commenced last year and is progressing at a rapid pace. Amar’s technical crew comprises Arjun Janya for composing music, Satya Hegde to crank the camera and Sania Sardhariya to design the costumes. The film has Tanya Hope playing the lead opposite Abhishek. Both the leads play motocross bikers, according to reports. It is learnt that the makers of Amar are planning for a summer release and are working towards this deadline.

Speaking about his role as a motocross biker in the film, Abhishek had said in an interview much earlier, “I am passionate about motorsports in general. Bike racing is new and I am excited about this. I have been meeting experts and rallyists and understanding what it is to be on the track. I’m working on my body language and understanding. We plan on keeping it as real as possible and I’m planning on shooting for most of it, except maybe a few dangerous stunts, which might have doubles.”

(Content provided by Digital Native)
