Kashmir crisis: India and Pakistan nuclear arsenals raise stakes

It would take only four minutes for a Pakistan nuclear missile to reach India.

The sobering fact means the ‘regional dispute’ between India and Pakistan over Kashmir has the potential to unleash global catastrophe.

So what’s behind it?

The escalating conflict between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan is part of a long-running dispute over Kashmir that has previously brought the bitter rivals to the brink of war.

Emergency workers inspect wreckage of one of the Indian warplanes downed over Kashmir. (AAP)

Yesterday Pakistan said its military shot down two Indian warplanes and captured a pilot.

Pakistan immediately shut down its civilian airspace in response.

WHAT STARTED THIS LATEST CRISIS?

On February 14, a suicide car bomber attacked a paramilitary convoy on the Indian-controlled side of Kashmir in the Himalayas, killing more than 40 Indian soldiers. The militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed, which is based in Pakistan, claimed responsibility for the attack.

Indians celebrate its air force's strikes against Pakistan earlier this week. (AP)

The suicide bomber was from Indian Kashmir. India has long accused Pakistan of supporting such groups, something denied by Islamabad. India launched an airstrike on Pakistani territory early Tuesday that New Delhi called a pre-emptive strike against militant camps in Pakistan. India said its bombs killed a "very large number" of militants, while Pakistan said there were no casualties.

THE NUCLEAR THREAT

India and Pakistan are believed to have more than 100 nuclear warheads each and have conducted atomic weapon tests. Both countries have test-fired nuclear-capable missiles.

According to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, India had an estimated 130 warheads in 2017.

A file photo showing India's Brahmos supersonic cruise missiles. (AAP)

India is capable of delivering nuclear bombs from the ground, air and sea – what is known as a full nuclear ‘triad’. Its ground-based ballistic missile, the Agni III has a range of about 3000 kilometres. India’s arsenal also included the BrahMos, a cruise missile developed with Russia, which can be fired from land, sea or air. Indian warplanes have also been adapted to carry nuclear bombs. The nation’s naval forces include a ballistic missile submarine.

While Pakistan has a slightly larger nuclear arsenal – estimated to be 140 warheads in 2017 – it has less ability to deliver them to targets.

Although it is developing new ballistic missiles, its current ballistic missile range is only 2000 kilometres. Pakistan has no nuclear submarines.

A file photo showing a Pakistani-made Shaheen-III missile, that is capable of carrying nuclear warheads. (AAP)

Ominously for the two nations and the entire world, it takes less than four minutes for a missile fired from Pakistan to reach India.

The Bulletin of Atomic Scientists warns that "computer models have predicted that the physical impacts of a nuclear exchange between India and Pakistan, or even a single strike on a large city, would be devastating and its effects would be felt throughout the world.”

ORIGINS OF THE KASHMIR DISPUTE

After Britain granted independence to the region in 1947, it divided the Indian subcontinent into a largely Hindu India and mostly Muslim Pakistan.

Some areas could decide their own fate. In Kashmir, the only Muslim majority area ruled by a Hindu monarch, its ruler decided against giving the population a choice. That started the first India-Pakistan war in 1947.

A Pakistan soldier stands by an artillery weapon during the 1971 India-Pakistan war. (aap/getty)

Indian soldiers during the 1971 India-Pakistan conflict. (aap/getty)

The conflict ended in 1949 when a United Nations resolution established the Line of Control dividing Kashmir between the two nations and calling for a direct vote on which country should control it. That vote has never been held. India and Pakistan fought a second war over Kashmir in 1965.

CONSTANT FLASHPOINT

India and Pakistan fought a third war in 1971 over what was East Pakistan, which later became Bangladesh. In 1999 and 2000, after Pakistan's military sent ground troops into Indian-controlled Kashmir at Kargil, the two countries faced off and a worried world feared it could escalate into a nuclear conflict.

Escalation was averted by the intervention of the then US President Bill Clinton, who persuaded the leaders of Pakistan and India to pull back, reports CNN. Clinton compared the Cuban Missile Crisis of the Cold War with what was happening on the Indian subcontinent.

POSSIBLE OUTCOMES

Further escalation will largely depend on the fate of the captured Indian pilot, according to one expert.

Professor Ian Hall, of Griffiths University, told nine.com.au the pilot may hold the key to defusing the crisis.

“If he is handed back in the next few days, things may settle down a little.

“But there is an argument that if that doesn’t happen, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi may have to respond.”

The Indian AIr Force pilot that Pakistan says it is holding after his plane was shot down. (AAP)

Prof Hall said that may take the form of an Indian ground force occupying Pakistan territory in Kashmir or even Pakistan itself.

“They could seize a village and try to use it as a bargaining chip to get their pilot back.”

Then Pakistan could fall back on its nuclear arsenal, he warned.

“India has much larger conventional forces. While the Pakistan army has many modern weapons, supplied by the US and China, it can’t match India’s in size.

“Pakistan instead relies on the doctrine of deploying short range nuclear weapons to make up for its numerical inferiority. It’s based on NATO’s doctrine against Soviet Russia during the Cold War.”

But Prof Hall also stressed conflict over disputed the Kashmir region flares up regularly without escalating.

“Every year there are incidents across the Line of Control. In 2017, there were 5,500 firing incidents.”
