War, what is it good for?

(Web Desk) - Indian media in collaboration with Indian establishment has indoctrinated the Indian masses to the extent that they consider Pakistanis war mongers and extremists. Most of the Indians have gone out of control especially after February 14 Pulwama attack in which more than 42 CRPF soldiers were killed. Indian journalists are too jingoistic to have an argument with. Watch their videos on social media and you will know they have already announced a full-fledged war on Pakistan, setting aside its dire consequences.

Pakistan has fought a long, hard battle against the extremists and terrorists who were supported from within and out of the country, including from Indian RAW. The country fought this war with sheer dedication and commitment – never invaded India just like the latter did and had its jets down and pilot nabbed. Pakistan’s news analysts did not buy the "foreign hands’ involvement narrative", and asked for explanation as to how the explosive material reached its target.

India should show the same spirit and ponder over internal causes and factors which led this attack to happen. Interestingly, some sane voices within India raised questions of the timing of Pulwama attack. Some declared it a political stunt from Modi to intensify war hysteria with Pakistan, while others raised questions of explosive-laden vehicle’s plain sailing movement within the area heavily guarded by Indian forces. The neighbouring government does not have answers for these questions.

Indian record on human rights’ front is quite dismal. UN High Commissioner for Human Rights’ recent report on human rights violations in Kashmir has bluntly affirmed India a violator rather a protector of right to self determination which it has been claiming since ages.

Its less developed areas of rural southern and eastern India too are soaring with insurgency. India even blamed this on Pakistan. It is projecting itself a world power, the one which can influence the regional states. In reality, it cannot bully Pakistan just like other states. More than half of its population is still living below the poverty line but its defense budget is growing like never before.

Indian claim to kill more than 300 extremists seems utterly nonsensical and purely a political stunt. Even Indian journalists with jingoistic mindsets are demanding proofs of dead bodies of the terrorists, but the state has nothing more than an old video readily available over the YouTube.

Another act of intrusion will harm India beyond its expectations. The most suitable strategy would be to focus on internal issues and becoming conscious of the networks operating within it. India should thoroughly study why they are even active and how they can be dismantled.

Let the sanity prevail. And this will only happen if India takes responsibility and let the Kashmiris decide what they want. Having hundreds of thousands of soldiers and crushing the poor voices of native people will breed revenge and worldwide condemnation.
