India tests two quick reaction surface-to-air short-range missiles

India has test-fired two quick reaction surface-to-air short-range missiles (QR-SAM) from launch complex 3 of the integrated test range (ITR) at Chandipur in Balasore district, off the Odisha coast.

The missiles were fired from a canister mounted on a rotatable truck-based launch unit, according to media sources.

During test firing, the missiles were tracked and monitored throughout their entire flights by radars, electro-optical systems, telemetry and other stations.

Test flights were carried out to evaluate the missiles for different altitude and conditions. They were carried out amidst air strikes launched by the Indian Air Force on terrorist camps in Balakot, Pakistan.

Related

Missiles demonstrated the ‘robust control, aerodynamics, propulsion, structural performance and high manoeuvring capabilities’. They met all the mission objectives.

Data, insights and analysis delivered to you View all newsletters By the Army Technology team Sign up to our newsletters Sign up here

“The all-weather network-centric QR-SAM missile system can engage multiple threats such as aerial targets, tanks and bunkers within a strike range of 20km to 30km.”

The missile system has been jointly developed by Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and Bharat Electronics (BEL).

Congratulating DRDO on the successful test flights, Indian Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman said in a statement: “The indigenously developed state-of-the-art QRSAM will significantly boost the defence capabilities of our armed forces.”

The all-weather network-centric QR-SAM missile system can engage multiple threats such as aerial targets, tanks and bunkers within a strike range of 20km to 30km.

It is equipped with a 360° rotatable, electronic-mechanically operated, turret-based launch unit.

The test firing is said to be the third developmental trial. The first was carried out in June 2017 and the second in July 2017 from the same base.
