Dangers of climbing the escalation ladder: Why all-out war with Pakistan is not an option

Tensions between India and Pakistan have reached an all-time high following the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama on February 14 by the Pakistan-sponsored Jaish-e-Mohammed that martyred over 40 CRPF jawans.

India launched an airstrike into the heart of Pakistan's terror network as our fighter jets demolished Jaish's Balakot base.

Pakistan airforce then violated Indian airspace and India chased down Pakistan fighter jets. In the course of that aerial engagement, an Indian Air Force pilot was captured by Pakistan after his MiG crashed.

These incidents could spiral out of control into a full-fledged war if deescalation doesn't happen soon.

Question is: Can India and Pakistan afford a war?

Let us draw up an India-Pakistan escalation ladder, at the top of which is a nuclear war.

'NO HOT WARFARE' THRESHOLD

In the first phase, the two countries begin pre-crisis manoeuvring, gestures coupled with diplomacy.

This is followed by military signalling tests, which includes carrying out exercises.

Strategic restraint needs to be followed at this level as the alternate would have dire consequences.

'NO CONVENTIONAL WAR' THRESHOLD

The next step on the escalation ladder is the sub-conventional war.

This phase features low-intensity attacks or limited strikes by the armed forces. It may not be limited to military targets. An instance of a sub-conventional war from India's side was the surgical strike in 2016. The recent airstrike conducted by the IAF in Pakistan's Balakot also comes under the sub-conventional war as India targeted only non-military targets.

This phase also expands to psychological warfare which includes misinformation or false reporting of facts to mislead masses, deception and spinning of narratives to create confusion.

'NO NUCLEAR USE' THRESHOLD

Now comes the limited war on the escalation ladder. This phase requires the war to be restricted to one area or region. An example of such a situation would be the Kargil war. During that time, India did not cross the Line of Control (LoC).

The limited war conditions include precise and guided ammo and artillery bombardment on key posts.

Top of the limited war step is conventional war.

It means war fought between two armies using military-grade weapons. It can be related to the war India fought with Pakistan in 1971 when armies of both countries were in an all-out war.

Conditions for the conventional war is that there is no use of biological, chemical or nuclear weapons.

NUCLEAR RESPONSE

Right at the top of the escalation ladder is the nuclear war. This phase, as the name suggests, includes the use of nuclear weapons.

Pakistan has threatened the use of such tactical nuclear weapons. While we are hopefully far from that situation, multiple steps have to be taken to avoid climbing the escalation ladder.

ALSO READ | Willing to return Indian pilot to de-escalate situation: Pakistan
