Opposition parties hit out at PM Narendra Modi for mega video conference

New Delhi:

Senior Congress leader Manish Tiwari on Thursday slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for holding mega video conference with BJP workers. “At this point in time when the nation is looking towards its leadership, when the nation wants its leadership to speak to it, the Prime Minister chose to address the booth workers of the BJP rather than address the nation,” Tiwari said.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal also took to Twitter and denounced PM Modi for holding the conference. Kejriwal said that when the whole nation is busy strengthening forces and country, our prime minister is making his booth strong. “When the country will become strong the booth the booth will automatically become strong,” he added.

Earlier, Senior Aam Aadmi Party leader Sanjay Singh took a dig at the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his mega-video conference, amid heightened tensions with Pakistan.

"Entire Opposition is concerned over national security. (Chief Minister) Arvind Kejriwal postponed his hunger strike over full-statehood issue. Congress cancelled its CWC and the Opposition is worrying about the unity of the nation. Modi-ji is getting down to strengthen polling booths and the BJP is busy with election rallies," Singh tweeted.

BSP chief Mayawati also hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his proposed address to BJP workers through a mega video-conference, terming it "ridiculous and betrayal of national

"At a time when India is facing hostility of war and country needs firm leadership, PM Narendra Modi instead of concentrating on the matters of national security trying to serve political interest by addressing his BJP workers is ridiculous besides betrayal of national sentiments (sic), Mayawati wrote on Twitter.

"Indian forces foiled Pakistani attack yesterday it is a matter of big relief but an IAF pilot is under Pak custody is a matter of great concern. India should try to do its best at all levels to ensure safe return of the pilot only then the country will feel relief (sic)," she added.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his mega video conferencing said that it is necessary to ensure that nothing is done to dent the morale of the security forces.

PM Modi's remarks came a day after the Opposition accused the BJP of politicising the sacrifices of the armed forces, prompting the ruling party to claim that Pakistan is using its statement to project that India's political leadership is not united in the fight against terror.

"We have trust in the capability of our armed forces. So, it is very necessary that anything that dents their morale or allows our enemy to point a finger at us is not done," the prime minister said during a video interaction with BJP workers from across the country.

One of the goals of the "enemy trying to destabilise us and carrying out terror strikes is to stall our growth", Modi said, asking people to do their work at a faster pace as India marches ahead on the path to progress.

"India will live as one. India will work as one. India will grow as one. India will fight as one. India will win as one," he said, adding that the country is brimming with self-confidence.

Amid heightened tensions between India and Pakistan with the former launching air strikes on a terrorist camp in the neighbouring country, Modi said the nation's sentiments are at a different level.

An Indian Air Force pilot was captured by Pakistan after an air combat Wednesday. Both sides said they shot down each other's warplanes. "Our country's soldiers are displaying their bravery at border and outside it as well. The country is standing with its soldiers," he said.




