Pakistan says ready to return captured Indian fighter pilot

Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi (R) and Pakistan's Defense Minister Pervez Khattak talk with journalists in Islamabad after Indian Air Force violated Pakistani Air Space, Feb. 26, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/T. MUGHAL

Pakistan's foreign minister said Thursday that his government was ready to release captured Indian fighter pilot if it helps in lowering tensions with India.

Military and diplomatic tensions between the South Asian nuclear powers escalated over the last few days that led to cross-border aerial strikes and shooting down of fighter planes in the disputed Kashmir region.

"We are willing to return the captured Indian pilot if it leads to de-escalation," Shah Mehmood Qureshi said in an interview to local TV Geo.

The Pakistani army Wednesday released video footage of the pilot (captured Wednesday) drinking tea in military custody and saying that he was in good condition.

Qureshi once again offered to hold a dialogue with India and claimed that Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan was ready to speak to his Indian counterpart.

"Prime Minister Imran Khan is ready to hold a telephonic conversation with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi," said Qureshi.

The foreign minister confirmed that Pakistan had received a dossier from Indian authorities about terrorism which they will examine.

The Pakistani offer comes in the midst of an unprecedented military escalation in recent years, after India announced that it had conducted airstrikes Tuesday on a Pakistan-based militant training camp run by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) out.

The group had claimed the Feb. 14 suicide bombing in India-administered Kashmir in which 42 paramilitary troopers were killed.

Islamabad, however, denied any casualties or damage and only admitted a brief aerial invasion of its territory and the launching of four bombs by Indian fighter jets that fell into open spaces.

In response, Pakistan announced Wednesday that it had shot down two Indian fighter planes and captured one of the pilots.

Pakistan also claimed that its warplanes hit non-military targets across the Line of Control (de facto border that divides Kashmir between the two countries) without causing casualties or damage.

India admitted the loss of an aircraft and the capture of the pilot adding that it had also downed a Pakistani fighter plane, without providing evidence.

Khan on Wednesday offered India talks in a speech to the nation but India is yet to respond to the offer.
