Pakistan lying about not using F-16: Army, Navy, IAF come together to call out Pakistan

The Indian Army, Indian Air Force and Navy came together on Thursday evening to call out Pakistan's lies about not using any F-16 fighter jets in its operation on Tuesday.

The tri-services chiefs showed parts of the AMRAAM missile that was brought down in the exchange of fire on Tuesday and said that Pakistan is lying and stating facts that are not true.

"Electronic signature proves Pakistan deployed F-16 to attack Indian military installations. Parts of AMRAAM air-to-air missile, which is carried only on the Pakistani F-16s, was recovered east of Rajouri within the Indian territory," said Air Vice Marshal Ravi Kapoor who addressed the media in Delhi after the tri-services meeting.

India had on Tuesday confirmed that it shot down a F-16 warplane of Pakistan while it lost a MiG 21 during the fierce engagement between the air forces of the two countries along the Line of Control (LoC).

Three Pakistani jets violated Indian air space on Tuesday, the package of the aircraft deployed by Pakistan Air Force (PAF) for the operation was "significantly large" as it comprised a fleet of JF-17 and F-16 combat aircraft, reported PTI.

At the joint media address, AVM Kapoor said, "One Pakistani F-16 was shot down by an IAF MiG 21 Bison Aircraft in east of Rajouri. Parts of F-16 have been recovered inside Indian territory."

Air Force officials display parts of the AMRAAM missile that was shot down. (Image: Pankaj Nangia)

Indian Army's Major General Surinder Bahl said, "They specifically targeted our defence establishments. But there were effective, curative response given by the Indian forces. Ground defence forces are on high alert all along the IB."

Asked about releasing evidence on the Balakot airstrikes, the senior IAF official said that it is upto the government to decide on releasing any evidence about the strikes.

However, AVM Kapoor added, "There is credible evidence that we destroyed the target in strike on the Jaish-e-Mohammed camp, but it is still premature to give the number of casualties."

Asked about Pakistan's talks of de-escalation and the measures taken by the Indian forces, Army's Major General SS Mahal said, "Escalation of tension done by Pakistan when they targeted our military establishments. India is prepared for any contingency if the enemy provokes us."
