Pakistan’s ‘Love’ for Peace and Good Relations – An Exercise in Hypocrisy

Rewind to 2008

Here’s what the Pakistan Foreign Minister said per a report on Reuters:

Pakistan Foreign Minister, speaking in a televised address, said Pakistan wanted good relations with India and that now was not the time for a “blame game, taunts (and) finger-pointing”.

“The government of Pakistan has offered a joint investigating mechanism and a joint commission to India. We are ready to jointly go into the depth of this issue and we are ready to compose a team that could help you,” Qureshi said.

(https://in.reuters.com/article/idINIndia-36793420081202)

Does this sound familiar to the statements Pakistani government is giving now, in the wake of Pulwama attack, Indian air strikes and the PAF incursion episode?

This statement is from December 2, 2008, barely a week after the Pak-backed, ghastly 26/11 terror attacks that killed hundreds of Indians.

Indian government, immediately after 26/11, had asked Pakistan to return 20 people including Dawood Ibrahim and Maulana Masood Azhar at same time. Pakistan spoke about peace and good relations but nothing moved.

Reaction after 2006 Mumbai train blasts

Earlier, in 2006, a series of bombs ripped through Mumbai’s local trains. What happened then?

Here is what Pakistan said according a report on Times of India:

Terming the bomb blasts in Mumbai’s trains that killed over 100 people as a “despicable act of terrorism,” Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz have condemned the attacks.

“Pakistan strongly condemns the series of bomb blasts on commuter trains in Mumbai. This despicable act of terrorism has resulted in the loss of a large number of precious lives,” said a statement issued by the Pakistan Foreign Office spokesperson Tuesday night.

“The President and prime minister have also strongly condemned this terrorist attack and have expressed condolences over the loss of innocent lives. Terrorism is a bane of our times and it must be condemned, rejected and countered effectively and comprehensively,” the statement said.

(https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/World-leaders-condemn-Mumbai-explosions/articleshow/1733511.cms)

First behead our soldiers, then talk peace

In January 2013, a horrific incident of Pakistani soldiers beheading Indian soldiers during skirmishes along the LoC.

India summoned the Pakistani ambassador to lodge a “strong protest” about the border incident. What happened after that?

Here’s a report from Washington Post a day after this incident came to light:

Pakistani Foreign Minister Hina Rabbani Khar told the Associated Press on Thursday that she was “unpleasantly surprised” by India’s accusations, but she tried to allay fears of an escalation.

Pakistan’s government and its people “have demonstrated a deep and abiding commitment to normalize and improve relations with India and to really start a journey of trust-building,” she said, according to AP.

(https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/india-media-fuels-outrage-over-beheading-but-real-story-may-be-more-complex/2013/01/10/ef03472e-5b2b-11e2-9fa9-5fbdc9530eb9_story.html?utm_term=.b69160dee981)

After all the talk, what happened to investigations or handing over Pak-based terrorists responsible for this? Nothing.

Post-Uri, what did Pakistan do?

Immediately after the Uri attack, what did Pakistan say? Here is a report from Dawn, a Pakistani newspaper.

“Pakistan has always fought terrorism as a moral obligation. I have always reached out to neighboring countries for regional peace, stability and prosperity,” Nawaz Sharif said.

(https://www.dawn.com/news/1284928)

Post-Pathankot, the same tune

After the Pathankot attacks, Pakistan played the same tune, again.

Pakistan condemned the attack and called it a “terrorist incident”, adding that it remained committed to peace efforts with India.

(https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-india-35211265)

Conclusion
