My films have a strong visual grammar: Vikkramm Chandirramani

MUMBAI: Writer–director Vikkramm Chandirramani has won several awards for his last short film Destiny. It also went viral on YouTube with 4.3 million plus views on its release. His new urban crime drama short film The Perfect Murder, released last month to tremendous critical acclaim, is already being welcomed at film festivals.

In an exclusive conversation with us, Vikkramm spoke about his short films, his view on the digital medium, and more. Read on!

This is your second consecutive short film to receive critical acclaim outside of India. What makes this possible?

I think my films have a strong visual grammar. There is a common dictum in filmmaking which says, 'Show, don't tell'. With my last film, Destiny and with this one, The Perfect Murder, you can turn off the sound completely and still understand most of the film. This sets it apart from so many short films being made. Additionally, the subtitles, which I write myself, help in creating an appeal for audiences outside India.

You write your films yourself. Does this help when you're making a film?

Yes, it does. When a writer and director are two different people, they need to collaborate. Being both helps because I can stay true to my story the way I have written it. Also, my stories are visual and my screenplays are tight. When I revise my drafts, I sometimes edit out scenes that I feel don't belong there and then turn them into a shooting script.

What was it like making The Perfect Murder?

We shot it over two days at a bungalow on Madh Island. We wanted to have good production values, higher than most short films you see. When you see the film, you'll notice that the couple really looks wealthy. We sourced costumes from our apparel partners and ensured the production design was suitable. It was shot on RED Epic. We used sync sound and had background music and color grading, making it like an Indie feature film except for the duration. I had a very competent crew. The cast was very dependable too. Rohan Gandotra, Samvedna Suwalka, Niharica Raizada, and Deepak Daryani performed very well. Many reviews have praised them considerably.

The Perfect Murder is a crime drama. Have you been a fan of this genre?

Yes, although crime as a genre is very wide. I have seen it evolve over the years. If you see the films of Hitchcock, you'll find there's almost no blood and gore. It's all suggested, and still, there's so much terror. Over the years, there has been a change. Now there's a lot more blood and heads rolling off torsos.

Do you think the digital medium will bring forth better actors?

The actors overlap across mediums. Some A-list stars are doing digital, and many from TV are doing digital shows. The working style does make a difference. There seems to be a lot more pressure in TV. Actors are sometimes informed one day before shoot day that they will be required the next day. Sometimes, they are given revised dialogue sheets on the sets. This pressure and unpredictability make it difficult for them to perform. The same actors, given a good script, a good director, and time, deliver watchable performances.

You seem to have very strong female characters in Destiny as well as in The Perfect Murder.

That's true. Tanya in Destiny was an assertive woman who knew what she wanted, even if she didn't get it. Neha and Carol in The Perfect Murder are also strong ambitious women who want to make things happen. It hasn't been a conscious effort. It's just the way I conceived the characters.

Which genres would you like to explore?

I'm open to all genres: drama, romance, comedy, crime, thrillers, etc.

What are you working on now?

I have several scripts across various genres and formats. There's a female-centric drama short film. There's another socially relevant drama, a web series, and a feature. Let's see.
