India-Pakistan in numbers: Pakistan DWARFS India's nuclear power - military might compared

India Pakistan: Congress 'anguished' over military sacrifice

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistan said today it was considering returning a captured Indian pilot, as US President Donald Trump said American mediation was helping to defuse the tensions between the two countries. The pilot has been identified by Islamabad as Wing Commander Abhi Nandan and videos have shown him being captured and later held in custody. Qureshi told Geo TV: "We are willing to return the captured Indian pilot if it leads to de-escalation.”

The latest developments come after a series of airstrikes carried out by both Indian and Pakistani militaries.

Pakistan conducted airstrikes a day after Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistan for the first time since a war in 1971.

Pakistan and India have fought three wars since independence from British colonial rule in 1947.

Two wars broke out over Kashmir and the neighbours even went to the brink of a fourth in 2002 after a Pakistani militant attack on the Indian parliament.

Now fears have been sparked another war could break out amid escalating violence.

India vs Pakistan AT WAR: Pakistan has more nuclear weapons than India

As tensions continue to heighten this week, here is the countries’ military powers compared - in numbers.

Pakistan has a total of 935,800 personnel in its army, navy, air force and paramilitary.

But it is no match for the 5.1 million people in India’s military.

Meanwhile, there are between 434 fighters in the combat aircraft in Pakistan. The south-asian country also has 273 helicopters.

But India is still in front, as it has 889 combat aircraft.

There are 805 helicopters in the Indian army too.

But India is no match for Pakistan’s nuclear forces.

Indian pilot Wing Commander Abhi Nandan was captured by Pakistan

Pakistan has between 140 to 150 warheads in its nuclear army, while India has between 130 to 140.

India has 54 ballistic missiles at both short-range and medium-range sizes.

But Pakistan still beats this as it has more than 60 ballistic missiles.

India has support from some of the world’s biggest military mights if needed including Russia and the USA.

But Pakistan also has China, Saudi Arabia and Turkey on its side if tensions worsen.

India vs Pakistan AT WAR: A map shows the difference in size of the nuclear armed countries' armies
