Citizenship bill: Police open fire as protests turn violent in Tripura

Several protesters were injured in clashes with the police in Tripura during an agitation against the Citizenship Bill. Some protesters sustained bullet injuries after the police opened fire at protesters as they blocked the NH-8 which connects Tripura with Assam.

The protests were being carried out by the indigenous Twipra Students' Federation (TSF) as part of the day-long shutdown call across the northeastern states called by the umbrella body North East Students' Organisation (NESO) against the Modi government's move to pass the proposed Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, 2016.

Also Read | Citizenship bill row: 70 organisations observe disgust day in Assam

The Citizenship Amendment Bill, which was passed in Lok Sabha today amid protests, seeks to amend the Citizenship Act 1955 to grant Indian citizenship to Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians - from Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan - after six years of residence in India instead of 12 even if they don't possess any required documentation.

Agitating protesters set several shops on fire in Khumulwng town. It's been alleged that the protesters even pelted stones and bottles at the police.

Police first resorted to tear gas shelling to disperse the mob and later fired in the air when things went beyond control, claims West Tripura police superintendent Ajit Pratap Singh.

"The crowd was unruly; we initially requested them to leave as it's illegal to block the national highway. We even warned them but they did not pay any heed and started pelting stones and bottles at the police. We lathi-charged and dispersed the crowd and even shot blank fire in the air," Ajit Pratap Singh said.

The injured were first taken to the ADC hospital and later shifted to the GB Pant hospital in Agartala. Prohibitory orders under the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) section 144 have been imposed in Madhavbari area where the tension broke out, about 15 kilometers from state capital Agartala.

Also Read | AGP dumps BJP over Citizenship Bill: What the saffron party stands to lose in Assam ahead of Lok Sabha polls

Also Watch | Citizenship Bill row: Assam's AGP snaps ties with BJP
