Pak To Release IAF Pilot Abhinandan Tomorrow, Global Powers Ask UNSC To Declare Masood Azhar Terrorist + Top News

Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan today announced in parliament that they will release Wing Commander Abhinandad Varthaman tomorrow as a gesture of peace. Abhinandan had been detained following a fierce engagement between air forces of the two sides along the Line of Control (LoC) in which a Pakistani jet and an Indian jet were downed. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) Declare JeM Chief Masood Azhar As Global Terrorist, US, UK And France Ask UNSC As India Unites International Community

Amid the escalations over the Pulwama terror attack on February 14 which killed over 40 CRPF personnel, India's efforts to bring the perpetrator of the attack, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) chief Maulana Masood Azhar to justice is getting global support.

The US, UK and France, three permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) have moved a fresh proposal to designate Azhar as a global terrorist. Read More.

2) India-Pakistan Border Tension: World Powers Urge To End Escalation, Tell Islamabad To Stop Terror

Amidst heightening border tensions between India and Pakistan after suicide attack on CRPF convoy that killed 40 personnel on February 14, nations across the world have urged India and Pakistan to exercise restraint and resolve differences through dialogue.

The United States favoured India post Balakot airstrikes carried out by Indian Air Force and subsequent escalation of tension. US has asked Pakistan to adhere to UN Security Council commitments and deny terrorists safe haven and block their access to funds. Read More.

3) LPG Cylinder Blasts Could Soon Be A Thing Of The Past, India's First 'Blast-Proof' LPG Cylinders Are Here

A solution to the long standing issue of cylinder blasts could be just around the corner. A private firm has introduced what the company claim is a 100 per cent blast proof LPG cylinders.

The GoGas Elite LPG cylinders were launched by Confidence Petroleum India Limited in association Time Technoplast Limited, a technology-based innovative polymer product company in Mumbai on Tuesday. Read More.

4) Forest Department Left Baffled As Cannibal Tiger Kills And Eats Two Tigers In Kanha National Park

A Cannibal tiger inside Kanha National Park has aroused curiosity of wildlife experts to study cannibalistic nature among the big cats. Two tigers were killed and eaten by another tiger on Tuesday which has prompted Madhya Pradesh officials to study into this behaviour.

A tigress was also killed and eaten by the same tiger on January 19 earlier this year. Officials informed Times of India that tigers killing tigers is natural but it is strange for a tiger to kill and eat only tigers. Read More.

5) Pakistani Women Are Sending A Message Of Peace To Indian Women And Urging To 'Say No To War'

Women and feminist organisations from Pakistan are reaching out to Indian women with a message of peace.

Women Democratic Front, a Pakistan-based, independent socialist-feminist political organisation, shared a video on their Facebook page. The women, holding placards that read “Women to women across border”, “women for peace” and “#SayNoToWar”, urged Indian women to call for peace. Read More.
