Imran’s peace-speak

Let’s face it: India is stuck with the Neighbour from Hell and there’s only so much we can do about it. We can’t move houses to get away from this particular troublemaker. That said — and at the risk of prematurely declaring hostilities over — it looks like Pakistan may have won the peace. Prime Minister Imran Khan announced the captured Indian pilot would be returned to us Wednesday amidst much thumping of desks in Pakistan’s National Assembly. For its part, India has made a significant point that, if pushed too far, it will pursue terrorists deep into Pakistan territory. Whether our war planes targeted a major Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp or, as Reuters reported, a JeM-run madrasa with, maybe, a small hospital for locals attached, shouldn’t worry us too much. Our bombs also may have been purposely dropped short to avoid distressing scenes of casualties.

More importantly, however, Khan could be carving out a reputation internationally as peacemaker. Ever since the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attack, global public opinion has been firmly on India’s side. Also, the Americans in Afghanistan have been getting a taste of the Taliban who engaged them in battle and then raced back across the border into Pakistan. But since taking office, Khan has been making peace overtures that have been rebuffed strongly by India. The view on this side of the border was that Khan wanted to look good because Pakistan desperately needed — and still does — a loan from the IMF. But there’s also a risk India could lose its image in the global arena of public opinion of being the wronged party that has held its fire even under extreme provocation.

Khan has talked peace at every opportunity even as our government has stayed resolutely silent. One commentator remarked on Twitter that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh “won brownie points for India” in 2008 and Prime Minister Modi was “now spending them.” Leading commentator Vir Sanghvi put it differently, remarking that: “When Im the Dim seems to outmanoeuvre us, we have a problem.” We definitely are the wronged party, but it's important that we keep hammering away at that message and ensure the world hears us loud and clear.

Paran Balakrishnan Editorial Consultant
