Country standing with PM, but PM is busy campaigning: Arvind Kejriwal

Kejriwal criticises Modi’s video event

AAP national convener and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi for going ahead with a scheduled BJP booth workers’ event at a time when an Indian Air Force pilot is in Pakistan custody.

Speaking in the Delhi Assembly during the Budget session, Mr. Kejriwal said the country was grieving and angry over the terrorist attack that killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force personnel in Pulwama on February 14. He said the country was “standing with the Prime Minister and the armed forces” as the Air Force carried out a strike in Pakistan and then lost a plane, the pilot of which is in Pakistan custody, when Pakistan struck in Kashmir on Wednesday.

“The whole country is standing with the Prime Minister and the armed forces. All parties are with the Prime Minister, putting aside politics. But it is sad that the Prime Minister is busy in election campaigning, strengthening the BJP’s organisation,” the Chief Minister said in the House.

He added that when the Prime Minister should be working on securing the return of the pilot, he was instead addressing the BJP’s ‘Mera Booth Sabse Mazboot’ event through videoconferencing.

Referring to the Lok Sabha elections, which are supposed to be held in April and May, Mr. Kejriwal asked whether “all this was done at the border” with that in mind.

Citing BJP Karnataka Chief and former Chief Minister B.S. Yeddyurappa’s statement on Wednesday who said that the party would win 22 seats in that State after the airstrikes, Mr. Kejriwal said: “For 300 seats, how many martyrs will you create?...The BJP is counting bodies”.

While Mr. Kejriwal was speaking, the Opposition BJP MLAs began disrupting, leading to MLAs Manjinder Singh Sirsa and O.P. Sharma being marshalled out. Leader of Opposition Vijender Gupta and the remaining BJP MLA, Jagdish Pradhan, walked out after raising objections to the Chief Minister’s allegations.

Protest in Assembly

Meanwhile, AAP MLAs and AAP Ministers speaking in the Delhi Assembly during the Question Hour all began or ended their statements by saying “mera jawan sabse mazboot”.

AAP also used the hashtag — #MeraJawanSabseMazboot — to hit out at the BJP on Twitter. AAP social media head Ankit Lal said that the hashtag had been used around 86,600 times as of the evening.
