Kashmiri & Indian leaders laud Imran Khan for pledging to release Indian pilot – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashùmir

BJP created war like situation for election campaigns, wants to kill people for vote Says Congress leader

Wahid Bhat

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): Jammu and Kashmir Pradesh Congress Committee (JKPCC) vice president and MLC Ghulam Nabi Monga said that the war like situation was created by BJP for the election campaigns.

While speaking to News agency Press Trust of Kashmir Monga said “BJP is doing all this for their own benefit and they want to kill people and nothing else”.

Monga added, “BJP changes their stand 10 times in a day. In early morning BJP says something, in afternoon they say something else during the evening times they changed the whole story. People should not trust on such party”.

He added that Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan said yesterday that “we should solve issues through dialogues, central Govt should think about this” he said even some big countries also demand they India Pakistan should solve issues peacefully.

“Whatever is happening among these two countries only common men is suffering, and both countries lose everything”, he said.

He further added “We should look at the ground situation of both countries there will be nothing in war happen among these two countries”.

Yesterday Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan offered talks to India and urged that “better sense should prevail” as tensions spiked between the two nuclear-armed neighbours following an aerial engagement between their air forces.

Khan’s comments came after New Delhi said it shot down a Pakistan fighter jet in the aerial engagement between the Indian Air Force (IAF) and the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) but lost one of its MiG-21s, with its pilot in Pakistani custody.

Pakistan, however, announced earlier in the day that “it had shot down two Indian fighter planes on its soil, captured two pilots and carried out bombings in the neighboruring country while avoiding human loss and collateral damage”.

Pakistani military authorities later clarified that they were holding only one Indian pilot.

That pilot was identified as Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman. As Pakistan claimed to capture the pilot, a video was circulated by Pakistani accounts showing a man in uniform, blindfolded and wounded.

Prime Minister Imran Khan said in a televised address to the nation: “Our action was only intended to convey that if you can come into our country, we can do the same. Two of their MiGs were shot down… From here, it is imperative that we use our heads and act with wisdom.

“All wars are miscalculated, and no one knows where they lead to. World War I was supposed to end in weeks, it took six years. Similarly, the war on terrorism was not supposed to last 17 years.

“I ask India: With the weapons you have and the weapons we have, can we really afford a miscalculation? If this escalates, it will no longer be in my control or in (Prime Minister Narendra) Modi’s.

Major General Asif Ghafoor, Director General of the Pakistan Army’s media wing, Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR), addressed a press conference earlier in the day and said “Pakistan wanted peace and India needs to understand war is a failure of policy.

“We do not want to escalate and follow a path which leads to peace. The people of both countries and region at large have a right to live and live in peace. War is not the solution to problems. India should think with a cool head on this offer from Pakistan,” he added. (PTK)

Sidhu advocates talks with Pakistan

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): Punjab minister and Congress leader Navjot Singh Sidhu today advocated talks with Pakistan and said that the solution to the tensions between the two countries is peace.

In a letter, titled “We have a choice”, Navjot Sidhu said the belief that only in thinking the worst “they can protect and defend” is a “mirage”.

Navjot Singh Sidhu said, “On both sides of the border, tacticians are planning for the worst. They must think the worst of one another, because only in thinking the worst do they believe that they can protect and defend. But this belief is a mirage.”

“I have seen the pain of our nation etched on the faces of the families of our martyrs. Fear breeds fear. Fear of dialogue, fear of new conversation, fear of thinking differently, fears of ideas that challenge those at the top. Fear if the dark room in which negatives are developed,” he said.

“It is easy to think the worst of the other, but it does not make us safer.”

Asserting that “a community cannot be blamed for the actions of a few”, he said, “A sentiment of our prime minister echoed, when he said: Our fight is against terrorism and enemies of humanity. Our fight is for Kashmir not against Kashmir, not against Kashmiris.”

“I stand by my conviction that dialogue and diplomatic pressure will count for a great deal in seeking a long-term solution to the presence and practice of militant outfits that operate within and across the border. The solution is peace, development and progress. Not unemployment hatred and fear,” he said. (PTK)

Will solve Kashmir issue if gets 16 MPs seats: TRS MP

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): A Member of Parliament of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi party said that their party can solve the Kashmir issue and Ram Mandir dispute if it gets 16 MPs seats.

During the press conference on India-Pakistan tensions Naraiah Goud said that Congress is responsible for the India-Pakistan tensions and that Jawaharlal Nehru, the former Prime Minister, escalated the situation.

Explaining that Kashmir and Telangana (then it was the Hyderabad State) have a close connection, he said that “Telangana got merged into India due to Sardar Patel otherwise, our state would have been burning like Kashmir.”

However, looks like the TRS MP forgot that Sardar Patel was also in the Congress Party when he was the Home Minister of India when he took the decision to bring the princely states under the Union of India.

Adding that Telangana Chief Minister is the only leader who can solve the Kashmir issue, Narsaiah Goud said that KCR has the vision and capacity to solve Kashmir’s tensions and bring peace to “India and Pakistan. And, he can also solve the Ram Mandir issue and perform Bhoomi Pooja and get the Ram temple in Ayodhya opened.”

His comments have received mixed response from political circles. While some have had a laugh at it, some believe such comments show how TRS leaders blindly trust KCR and do not lose an opportunity to eulogise at their “great leader.” To each, his own! (PTK)

War hysteria in India due to general elections: Pak PM

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan alleged on Thursday that all the war hysteria in India is because of the upcoming general elections.

Imran Khan further alleged that he tried to speak to PM Narendra Modi yesterday (Wednesday) as well, but could not succeed in his bid to de-escalate the rising tension between India and Pakistan.

Speaking at the Pakistan National Assembly, Imran Khan said, “I spoke to several nations yesterday. I even tried to speak to Narendra Modi, but to no avail.”

The Pakistani PM further warned India saying his attempts to de-escalate the tension must not be read as Pakistan’s weakness.

“Don’t assume this to be Pakistan’s weakness. We are trying to de-escalate the tension in everyone’s interests,” said Khan.

Imran Khan said, “The whole issue is because of Kashmir. No Kashmiri leader is supporting Indian leaders and their stand. They only demand azaadi at all times. India should introspect as to what was the reason behind a 19-year-old Kashmiri youth [Adil Ahmed Dar] to pick up weapons and do this [Pulwama attack].”

“Pakistan wants peace,” Imran Khan said, as he announced that captured IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan will be released tomorrow (Friday). (PTK)

Pakistan willing to consider return of Indian pilot if it means de-escalation: Pak FM

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said Pakistan is willing to consider returning the Indian pilot if it means de-escalation of ties between the two countries.

“We are willing to return the captured Indian pilot if it leads to de-escalation. Prime Minister Imran Khan is ready to hold a telephonic conversation with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi,” Shah Mehmood Qureshi told Geo News.

“We are willing to return the captured Indian pilot if it leads to de-escalation,” he added.

The foreign minister further said, “Prime Minister Imran Khan is ready to hold a telephonic conversation with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.” (PTK)

Geelani hails Imran Khan’s statement

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): Hurriyat Conference (G) chairman, Syed Ali Geelani has expressed his serious concern and anguish on the escalating tension between India and Pakistan and said that although borders were never calm, but for the last couple of days they are roaring with thunders of bombs and guns threatening the whole population and if it continues, a full-fledged war is knocking the doors of sub-continent.

Citing the Pulwama incident, strategists and manufacturers, have created war madness in whole India, justifying their cross border violations and then celebrating this jingoism and sense of winning the first round just to milk the situation in favor of its political ambitions, but after the surprising response from the other side—celebrations and jubilations faded away. One gunned down the war planes other claiming to kill more than 300 people, the claims and counter claims will have no end and it is immaterial, who kills how many and who bleeds more, one thing is sure that humanity and human race is threatened on both sides.

Hurriyat chairman hailed the mature and repeated peace appeals by Pakistan premier and said that such statements can only come through a person with human heart. In response to the persistent provocation by the so-called world’s largest democracy, the press briefing from across are focused, sensible and responsible and they should be taken as a peace narratives rather than weakness, inability or incapability.

Pro-freedom leader said that if the war mongers and media generals continue to guide their political masters, a widespread disaster and a massive human devastation is eminent and then neither the media war rooms will thunder nor the jingoism and ultra-nationalism echo will be heard.

Hurriyat chairman said that sane and good sense should prevail on the architectures and escalators of this man made tragedy, they need to shun the denial veil and stop parroting the “Integral Part” rhetoric. Get to the root cause of this catastrophe in waiting, as the poor soldiers cannot always afford to offer their blood to satisfy power lust of their arrogant politicians.

Hailing the free accommodation offer of the Kashmiri Hotelrs for the stranded passengers and tourists because of prevailing circumstances, pro-freedom leader said that this is a difference between a human and a beast.

One is in search of his prey to quench his bloody thirst and take advantage of the circumstances while other in similar conditions offers his helping hand to the suffering masses irrespective of their cast, creed, religion or region. This is a slap on the face of those communal forces who used the Pulwama incident to flex their muscles on poor and helpless Kashmiries.

Condemning the recent NIA raids on scores of common people including pro-freedom leaders, Hurriyat chairman said that these coercive measures have never succeeded in curbing the freedom sentiments of people and undemocratic, immoral and illogical tactics of harassing people, has its own repercussions and is just an addition to their long list of mighty tools used by our oppressor and will yield nothing. (PTK)

Imperative for youth to protect JKs unique identity: Dr. Farooq Abdullah

SRINAGAR, FEB 28 (PTK): Jammu and Kashmir National Conference President Dr. Farooq Abdullah on Thursday asserted that the flag of Jammu and Kashmir is the expression of states historical unique identity saying that the youth of the state must come forward to protect and uphold its sanctity.

He made these remarks while addressing two separate delegations at party headquarters Nawa-e-Subah, Srinagar. The party President reiterated that NC will continue to fight against forces inimical to states identity and uniqueness. “We have faced lot of challenges over the years as far as the protection of our identity is concerned. Thankfully we have defeated them but we must not lower our guard. We as a society must come out as a united unit irrespective of region or religion and give the communal forces a befitting reply. Youth and women have to play a major role in this,” he said.

While addressing a delegation led by women’s wing president Shameema Firdous, Party President said, “The women are no way inferior to men. They have proved to be as vibrant, sincere and perfect in many fields. Their role in shaping a nation’s destiny is no less. Women of our state and Kashmir in particular are resilient enough to face all odds. Realizing the power of women our party gave 33 percent reservation to the women in Panchayat and reserved 50 percent seats for women in medical colleges.”

He further added, “Our party has been a strong votary of having women in politics. We are lucky to have many educated and industrious women in our party. Once in power our party will roll out effective policies for the empowerment of girls and women. A progressive society is what our party aspires for and the idea of making progress cannot be achieved without giving women their due share in every field.” Er. Sabiya Qadri was also present.

Later a delegation of YNC functionaries led by YNC district president Khalid Rathore called upon Dr. Farooq at Nawa-e-Subah, Srinagar. YNC Central Zone president Imran Pandit was also present.

In a long with chat with YNC functionaries he impressed upon them to work towards realizing the long cherished dreams of Sher-e-Kashmir by making NC strong at grass root and make people realize the importance of constitutional provision accorded to J&K.

“The question arises what shaped the unique identity of our state? The answer to this query lies in the long history of ours. It is this individuality of ours that reflected in the efforts of Sher-e-Kashmir, who lent immense sacrifices for preserving the individual character of our state. Art 370 and Art 35 A are the embodiment of this unique character of ours which was astutely incorporated by the makers of the Constitution of India,” adding, “It is youth that has to come forward now and shoulder the responsibility of protecting our unique character as guaranteed by the constitution of India. They have to carry forward the ideals that have been guiding us all along since the inception of J&K National Conference.”

Urging the youth to maintain a healthy life style, Dr. Farooq said, “To youth I want to say that hard work, persistence and perseverance leads to success. The youth of a nation are the trustees of posterity. Youth comes but once in life, so they must keep away from bad habits and utilize their full potential for the betterment of their family and nation at large.”

Among others Peer Afaq, Mushtaq Guroo, Irfan Shah, Showkat Mir, Imran Nabi Dar was also present in the meet.

Meanwhile Dr. Farooq paid obeisance at the Asaar-e-Shareef Dargah, Hazratbal. He offered Zuhur prayers there and prayed for peace and prosperity of the humanity in particular the state. It is pertinent to say that the Urs of Hazrat Abu Bakar Sidiq (RA) is being observed today across the state with religious fervor and enthusiasm. He also made brief stopovers in the parts of old city. (PTK)
