IAF airstrike aftermath: Russia President Putin speaks to PM Modi, conveys solidarity

The prime minister thanked President Putin for Russia's steadfast support for India's efforts to protect its interests against cross-border terror attacks, and renewed India's commitment to strengthening bilateral cooperation in countering terrorism as a pillar of privileged and special strategic partnership. (File photo: Reuters)

Russia President Vladimir V Putin called Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday and expressed his deep condolences on the Pulwama terrorist attack. He also conveyed solidarity of the people of the Russian Federation with the people of India in the fight against terrorism.

The prime minister thanked President Putin for Russia's steadfast support for India's efforts to protect its interests against cross-border terror attacks, and renewed India's commitment to strengthening bilateral cooperation in countering terrorism as a pillar of privileged and special strategic partnership. Both leaders agreed that the concerned should stop all support to terrorism.

Both the leaders also agreed that the growing cooperation between the two countries would take their Special and Privileged Strategic Partnership from strength to strength.

President Putin reiterated the invitation to PM Modi to attend the Eastern Economic Forum in Vladivostok later this year. The prime minister welcomed the invitation and underscored the significance of growing economic cooperation, including in the Russian Far East, between the two countries.

Earlier in the day, Press Secretary of the Russian President Dmitry Peskov told reporters: "Russia calls on India and Pakistan for restraint in connection with the border incident."

According to Dmitry Peskov, Moscow is following the development of events.

"We are extremely concerned about the news coming in, we are very closely monitoring the situation and, of course, we urge all parties to show restraint," said a Kremlin spokesman.

India-Pakistan tension persisted today as the Indian Air Force (IAF) chased away intruding Pakistani fighter jets in Jammu and Kashmir's Nowshera sector with India shooting down a Pakistani F-16 which fell on the Pakistani side.

India shot down one of the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) F-16s that had come close to the LoC in Nowshera sector. The aircraft fell three kilometres in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. The incident occurred a day after IAF jets bombed the biggest training camp of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) outfit in Balakot.
