Letters to the Editor - March 1, 2019

The confrontation

The initial euphoria created over the Balakot airstrikes evaporated in no time with the capture of an Indian pilot by Pakistan (Page 1, “IAF plane shot down, pilot taken captive by Pak. army”, February 28). Though emotions are running high, there will not be any winners if the situation escalates into full-fledged war. Having made its intentions clear with its airstrikes, India should now attempt to make clear to the international community the pressing need for consensus on combating terrorism. So far it appears that world opinion is inclined favourably towards India, which should be capitalised. Despite its bravado, Pakistan may be eager to engage in talks with India. Reviving talks through backdoor channels could help ease the situation. A growing economy like India’s should not put the clock back. Restraint and diplomacy should be the focus.

V. Subramanian,

Chennai

Civilisational values

I hope opinion writers understand that it is because India is civilised that Pakistan exists (Editorial page, “Think like a civilisation”, February 28). But given Pakistan’s record of perfidy and being a terror agent, there is virtually no chance of it becoming a civilised nation. It appears to be in the hands of terror agents.

Let us not prevent the Indian government from acting against Pakistan so as to save India from the dangerous consequences of Pakistan becoming a permanent hub of terror. Pakistan is not a danger for India alone but it also endangers the entire civilised world. India needs to act with the support of all like-minded nations.

M.V. Gopalakrishnan,

Chennai

I think the writer has forgotten history. India has always been restrained in its responses and in adopting tactics that are moderate, but it is Pakistan that does not understand that war and violence will not solve any issue. There is no guarantee that even after Pulwama Pakistan will change. One can expect it to adopt the same old tactics: of asking for evidence and denying its involvement following terror.

There are times when firm action is needed to correct others.

Arvind Kumar Choudhary,

New Delhi

Pacifists would be well-advised to read world history, starting from the 20th century. Pakistan is waging a war of a “thousand cuts” against us, but do we still turn the other cheek, in the name of peace? The writer talks of civilisational values. But an examination of civilisations will show a history of wars, punctuated by spells of peace. George Washington’s quote, “To be prepared for war is one of the most effective means of preserving peace”, is worth remembering. No nation wants a war, least of all its soldiers. However, if a nation’s territorial integrity or its citizens lives are under threat, retaliation in a manner deemed fit is an option.

Ravindra Ramarao,

Bengaluru

It is ironical that the push towards global capitalism calling for open markets has gone hand-in-hand with a surge of militarism and the breakdown of international mechanisms, conventions and organisations for ensuring peace. Perhaps, the intertwining of the arms industry and unaccountable powers of global capitalist entities explains this seeming paradox. The writer is correct in drawing our attention to the threat to democracy posed by a climate of irrational and inhuman mobocracy. The failure of diplomacy and reconciliation, whether at the domestic or international levels, is also a failure of our patriarchic forms of politics and government. After all, why should it be so difficult for humans to forge conditions of peace and justice, unless we were held captive by the vested interests of the few and the powerful?

Firoz Ahmad,

New Delhi

Every sentence is sensible. Taking recourse to jingoism and drum beating will lead us nowhere. India is peace loving and should explore all avenues that will defuse the situation and result in a peaceful dialogue.

Mohammed Ikramulla,

Hyderabad

Dogs under check

It is heartening that the Chennai Corporation is getting serious about the stray dog situation (Chennai, February 27). My father had a narrow escape while walking home with a bag of food which a pack of starving, vicious stray dogs were after, and continued to go for him even after he threw it at them. He was saved by a bunch of college boys. He was almost 90 at the time, with neither the strength nor energy to run away or defend himself, and it could well have been fatal. In Navi Mumbai, I met a woman whose child had been killed by stray dogs in similar circumstances.

I have watched a sea turtle die a slow, painful death, her throat ripped open and a flipper eaten by dogs. Those of us who were involved in the Ridley turtle nest collection project know how many nests are decimated by dogs on the beach. Smaller animals like blackbuck, and the young of many species, are also targets for stray dogs. Let’s face it, it can’t be much fun being a street dog, often starving and injured, and being chased away wherever you go. So more power to the Chennai Corporation. Let’s do it for the wildlife, children, seniors, and the destitute who sleep on the streets and are often victims of attacks. And for the dogs themselves.

Zai Whitaker,

Vadanamelli, ECR, Tamil Nadu
