If 'these' two conditions are met, PM Modi should grab Imran's offer for talks: Raj Thackeray

raj thackeray

Mumbai: Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray has his own advice for Prime Minister Narendra Modi. PM Modi must seize Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan's talk offer if Imran takes the first step of releasing captured Indian pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan and also stops all firing violations on the LoC, opined Raj Thackeray.

Wing Commander Abhinandan had mistakenly ventured into Pakistani territory after chasing out two Pakistani fighter jets that had intruded into India, imperilling our military installations. His MiG21 plane was shot down and he was captured by the Pakistani forces. The Indian Air Force also shot down one Pakistan Air Force fighter plane and drove out another, that had entered Indian air space on Wednesday.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has invited Prime Minister Narendra Modi for talk to resolve the issue. Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray has appealed Prime Minister Modi that the opportunity should not be ignored if Pakistan offers to talk on the bilateral issues.

"If Pakistan is willing to talk, it should take the first step and release Wing Commander Abhinandan and immediately stop the firing-related violations at LoC. Only this can prove that Pakistan had good intentions. PM Modi should not waste the opportunity of talks if these things happen," Thackeray said in a statement released on Thursday.

In the statement, Thackeray says, "I came across the appeal for talks by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan. I had made a similar appeal after the Pulwama attack. We had lost 41 jawans in the attack and in retaliation, Indian Air Force had launched an airstrike. I had congratulated the Indian Air Force as well."

On Wednesday, Pakistani PM Imran Khan reiterated his offer for talks and also agreed to talk on the issue of terrorism. Raj Thackeray recalled the Vajpayee era and said: "Similar efforts were made when late Atal Bihari Vajpayee was Prime Minister and General Pervez Musharraf was the president of Pakistan. Atal Bihari Vajpayee even started the Delhi-Lahore bus service and the Samjhauta Express. The historial Agra Summit was also organised. Unfortunately, it could not be taken to fruition. The opportunity is knocking the door once again. If North Korea and South Korea can come to the discussion table, why cant we?", Thackeray asked.

"War is not the solution to any problem. Both countires will suffer a set back if war happens and the Kashmiri people will be at receiving end. No one can afford a war. Terrorists need to be crushed brutally. But no one should try to get political milege by creating a war-like situation. I wish both the nations resolve the disputes through talks," Thackeray said.
