Row in Legislative Council over ruling on motion seeking expulsion of BJP MLC

Chairman asks party group leaders to decide Prashant Paricharak’s fate

Legislative Council chairman Ramraje Naik Nimbalkar’s decision to allow party group leaders to decide the fate of controversial BJP legislator Prashant Paricharak caused a stir on Thursday.

The Council was adjourned after Shiv Sena legislators marched to the well when the Chairman — without passing a ruling — announced the motion to expel Mr. Paricharak moved by the Shiv Sena was not sustainable and a decision would be taken only by party group leaders later.

This led to sloganeering and shouting by Sena legislators, who called the decision an insult to the armed forces on a day the country was praising their role in the India-Pakistan tensions.

The controversial BJP-backed independent legislator was suspended for one-and-a half years for his controversial remarks on the wives of Army personnel in 2017. When the period of suspension ended, it was revoked by the Council last year. Meanwhile, Shiv Sena MLC Anil Parab moved a proposal seeking expulsion of Mr. Paricharak for his controversial remarks.

This proposal came up for ruling on Thursday, when Mr. Nimbalkar said that in his opinion the proposal could not be accepted until group leaders have adjudicated on it. “During the last session the decision was taken to allow group leaders to adjudicate on this matter and whether he [Paricharak] should be allowed in the house,” he said. Mr. Nimbalkar later told The Hindu that he was merely expressing his opinion as the motion was not sustainable on technical grounds. “I am bound by technicalities and not emotions. The ultimate decision will be by group leaders. I merely expressed a point of view,” he said.

The Sena legislators trooped into the well and called the apparent decision an insult to the armed forces. “it is a grave insult to allow him (Paricharak) in the house when the armed forces are fighting a decisive battle,” Sena leader Diwakar Raote said. Mr. Parab later clarified that members had misread chairman’s words when he was only referring to the motion being adjudicated by the group leaders. Leader of the Opposition in the Council Dhananjay Munde alleged that the chairman was under pressure from the BJP, at a time when the country was dealing with a crisis on the border. “We must be discussing farmers and drought, instead the chairman decided to take up this motion when it was not even listed in the morning on the agenda,” he said adding it was a wrong time to take up the motion for adjudication.
