India will live, work, grow, fight and win as one: Modi

New Delhi: It is necessary to ensure that nothing is done to dent the morale of the security forces, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Thursday, asserting that India will live, work, grow, fight and win as one.

Modi’s remarks came a day after the Opposition accused the BJP of politicising the sacrifices of the armed forces, prompting the ruling party to claim that Pakistan is using its statement to project that India’s political leadership is not united in the fight against terror.

“We have trust in the capability of our armed forces. So, it is very necessary that anything that dents their morale or allows our enemy to point a finger at us is not done,” the prime minister said during a video interaction with BJP workers from across the country.

One of the goals of the “enemy trying to destabilise us and carrying out terror strikes is to stall our growth”, Modi said, asking people to do their work at a faster pace as India marches ahead on the path to progress.

“India will live as one. India will work as one. India will grow as one. India will fight as one. India will win as one,” he said, adding that the country is brimming with self-confidence.

Amid heightened tensions between India and Pakistan with the former launching air strikes on a terrorist camp in the neighbouring country, Modi said the nation’s sentiments are at a different level.

The Prime Minister also expressed confidence of winning the Lok Sabha elections, and urged the party workers not to commit any mistake so that there are no regrets later.

“I am confident that I will get another opportunity to serve the people of the country for the next five years as we have fulfilled the promises made to the people… If there are weaknesses in our efforts, all work done in the last five years will be ruined,” Modi said.

Giving the example of the new Congress governments in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, Modi alleged that they had been trying to ruin the schemes initiated by previous governments.

He said the election in 2014 was to fulfil the needs of the country and the 2019 battle will be meet the expectations of every citizen.

Modi also dismissed the ‘mahagatbandhan’ (grand alliance) of Opposition parties as ‘mahamilavat’ (highly adulterated) and said it would send the country to the intensive care unit (ICU), adding that the people of the country are very wise.

He said that the opposition parties, who earlier never spoke to each other, were today standing shoulder to shoulder with each other.

“But today people know well that they are opportunist, dynast and corrupt,” he said. (Agencies)
