The dust is a long way from settling

Bhavdeep Kang

The government’s stance on the muh-tod jawab to Pakistan has been nuanced and devoid of triumphalism. Apart from a flurry of tweets on the morning of February 26, hours after the cross-border bombing of terrorist training camps by the Indian Air Force, even the normally verbose BJP spokespersons held their peace, leaving displays of chest-thumping to TV anchors.

The Opposition commended the IAF and stood with the government, hailing the air strikes as “a befitting response to the martyrdom of our soldiers”. On the whole, the political class conducted itself responsibly and with grace, presenting a united front. The world reacted favourably and by the end of the day, it was advantage India.

The most heartening aspect of the recent developments is the sense of common purpose they have engendered among citizens and politicial parties must show that they, too, continue to partake of those sentiments. That India’s decisive response to Pulwama might willy nilly translate into advantage NDA is clearly a peripheral issue, in the urgency of the moment.

The credit for ‘political will’ in greenlighting the Balakot operation has gone to the ruling dispensation and rightly so, though it admittedly had little choice in the matter. Domestic politics apart, any display of skittishness would have reinforced the perception of India as a ‘soft state’. Public satisfaction over the decisive response to Pulwama is manifest and the government is seen as having discharged its duty to protect Indian soil.

Pakistan has attempted to slap a political colour on the air strike by continually harping on the impending general elections. These efforts must not divide the political establishment. National Conference leader Omar Abdullah may have seen fit to don a ‘political prism’ and point out that nuclear tests and a victory in the Kargil War had not won the BJP a majority in 1999.

The Opposition may have called a meeting to discuss the Indo-Pakistan issue, but their purpose cannot be, as news reports have suggested, to neutralise the ruling party’s ‘surgical strike advantage!’ It is regrettable that party leaders accused the government of politicising the “sacrifices” of the military, provoking their BJP counterparts to respond.

Pakistan’s sabre-rattling after the IAF strike is inevitable. Face-saving stratagems such as violating Indian airspace, resulting in each side losing one of its fighter jets and shutting down its own air space, are a show of strength vis-a-vis its domestic audience as well as a belligerent signal to the international community.

Whether the Indian armed forces score victories or suffer reverses, unconditional solidarity is the need of the hour, if India is to continue its efforts to isolate Pakistan diplomatically and protect its borders by force of arms. The dust is a long way from settling and the threat of a violent backlash looms large over the nation. The ground for dialogue remains hostile, with Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Maulana Masud Azhar still under the protection of the Pakistani state.

Prescriptions of bilateral talks emanate from international and domestic quarters, but will find few takers even among hardened peaceniks. In these circumstances, politicians across the spectrum have no option but to present a united face. A responsible Opposition will cease to attack the NDA, at least on grounds of national security. In this context, the continuing imbroglio over the Rafale deal is undesirable.

On the very day of the IAF strike against the JeM camps, the Supreme Court decided to hear, in open court, a review petition against its 2018 verdict refusing a court-monitored into the purchase of Rafale fighter jets from the French company, Dassault Aviation (which also manufactured the Mirage 2000s used in the Feb 26 air strike).

The apex court’s decision was the subject of an excited tweet from one of the petitioners, eminent lawyer Prashant Bhushan. He and his co-petitioners, former Union ministers Yashwant Sinha and Arun Shourie, would do well to stand down for the moment.

The Congress, which had made a cause celebre of the Rafale deal, is well aware that it will face a severe backlash if it continues to hammer away at Prime Minister Narendra Modi with its chawkidar slogan. Citizens stand together and the public discourse must follow suit.

In the run-up to a general election, the cacophony of angry voices, attacks and counter-attacks, tends to obscure the fact that at the end of the day, we are all on the same side. Nothing reminds us of this more forcibly than an external threat. Pulwama, the IAF strike and events thereafter, have succeeding in doing just that.

Bhavdeep Kang is a senior journalist with 35 years of experience in working with major newspapers and magazines. She is now an independent writer and author.

Pakistan’s ‘peace’ talks: Four times when India trusted Pakistan to its peril

There have been crucial instances of India trusting Pakistan enough to engage in visits and talks. These have invariably been followed up with terror attacks on India

‘Talk peace, act war’ appears to be the guiding principle of the civilian and military establishment in Pakistan.

India and Pakistan enjoy a topsy-turvy relationship, proof of which are the numerous wars and border skirmishes the two nations have frequently experienced since they attained independence from the British in August 1947.

While Pakistan constantly peddles a narrative which frames India as the bad guy in all its run-ins with its neighbour, the truth, however, is very different.

While war is always an understandable reality between two rival nations, the fact that many of India’s wars with its neighbour took place after it held fruitful peace talks with Pakistan exposes the true intention across the border.

But it’s not just wars. Our neighbour has also betrayed our trust by following peace talks with proxy attacks. These bring us to the only possible conclusion that Pakistan has over the years continued to use the promise of peace as a decoy for inflicting pain and suffering on India.

Here are four instances in the recent past when Pakistan back-stabbed India by responding to peace with violence.

The Kargil war, 1999

In February 1999, when Indian Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee embarked on a bus ride into the Pakistani city of Lahore to meet his counterpart, Nawaz Sharif, popular opinion was that India and Pakistan had turned a page on their troubled relationship and now, things would finally start to look up for the two nations.

Apart from signing a major peace accord, the trip also gave to the world countless memorable moments of love and hope as Vajpayee and Pakistani PM Nawaz Sharif appeared to be hugging out the long-standing differences between the two nations.

But even before the images could be taken down from television channels and newspapers, in May 1999, the Pakistani Army reportedly sent troops into the higher reaches of Kargil and started capturing post after post of Indian territory.

What followed was the most recent war in Indo-Pak history.

The Agra summit, 2001

Next up was the bilateral summit between PM Vajpayee and General Parvez Musharraf, for which the latter had flown down to Agra in May 2001.

The Agra summit was scheduled to be the venue of the signing of one of the most crucial peace treaties between India and Pakistan. However, due to many factors, no agreement was eventually signed and the summit to date is regarded by many Indian security experts as one of the greatest missed opportunities of the India-Pakistan relationship.

But it would have been okay if things had just stopped there.

Later that year, we saw two major proxy attacks from the Pakistani state that soured the Indo-Pak relationship.

In October 2001, insurgents attacked the legislature building in Kashmir, killing 38 people. However, an even bigger blow was dealt when gunmen attacked India’s Parliament in December that year and killed 14 people.

India blamed Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) for the attacks — two organisations that to date find patronage in Pakistan.

26/11 Mumbai attacks, 2008

The November 26, 2008 attacks in Mumbai were one of the deadliest instances of terror faced by any country across the globe.

On that fateful day, 10 Pakistani terrorists from the Lashkar-e-Taiba attacked separate locations in Mumbai — killing 164 people.

However, a lesser known fact is that before the attack, India and Pakistan were once again moving closer to peace.

In fact, the relationship was in such a good place that India had opened a trade route across to the Pakistani side of Kashmir for the first time in six decades, only a month before the Mumbai attack.

The year of betrayals, 2016

Between 2014 and the end of 2016, PM Narendra Modi-led NDA government took a number of extraordinary steps to improve relations between India and Pakistan.

First was PM Modi’s invite to his Pakistani counterpart Nawaz Sharif to come to New Delhi for his swearing-in ceremony. The optics were great and once again, there was an anticipation of peace in the air. But Modi did not stop just there.

In an unprecedented move in December 2015, PM Modi made a surprise visit to the Pakistani city of Lahore on Sharif’s birthday and the wedding of his granddaughter.

The move was lapped up by audiences from both sides of the border who had once again started dreaming of peace.

But, cut to January 2016, and all such hope was lost when six gunmen attacked an Indian air force base in the northern town of Pathankot, killing seven soldiers in a battle that lasted nearly four days.

Later in the year, India was betrayed again when four heavily armed Pakistani terrorists attacked an Army base in Uri, killing several jawans.
