Indian Son beats Father aged 60 to Death over Property Dispute

"Sonu inherited his share but wanted more."

Sonu Kumar, aged 30, of Haryana, India, was arrested on Sunday, January 6, 2019, after murdering his father over a property dispute.

His relative Rahul Kumar was also arrested for aiding Sonu with the murder.

The attack took place during December 2018 in the Hasangarh village of Barwala town when Kumar and his father Satbir Singh, aged 60, argued about a house and who should own it.

It was heard Kumar had regularly demanded his father to transfer the ancestral home into his name but refused to do so.

On December 17, 2018, Kumar enlisted the help of his cousin Rahul and they beat Mr Singh to death. Later, they buried him in the courtyard of his house.

The matter came to light when Mr Singh’s daughter Mukesh Rani lodged a missing person’s complaint. According to Prahlad Singh, Station House Officer (SHO) in Barwala, Mrs Rani said her father had gone missing on December 17, 2018.

Police officers registered a missing person’s report and a search began.

Over the course of the investigation, it was discovered that Mr Singh had lived in a ‘dhaba’ (roadside restaurant) in Kaller Bhaini village, Haryana following one argument with his son over the property.

In her complaint, Mrs Rani stated that she suspected her brother was behind her father’s disappearance as she was aware of his constant demands for the property.

Jaipal Singh, Deputy superintendent of police (DSP) said: “The victim’s daughter also gave us an important clue that her father owned nine acres of land out of which Sonu inherited his share but wanted more.”

On the basis of this suspicion, police bought in Kumar for questioning who confessed to murdering his father with the intention of obtaining the property and burying his body in the courtyard.

He also said he killed his father by beating him with sticks and he was helped by his cousin Rahul.

Police searched the courtyard and found Mr Singh’s body on January 6, 2019.

Both Sonu and Rahul Kumar were arrested for the murder of Satbir Singh. They were booked under Sections 299 and 300 of the Indian Penal Code.

Property disputes which lead to violence are not uncommon in India, especially when it is between a father and son.

In one case on August 28, 2018, Abhishek Chetan was arrested for attempted murder after becoming angry at his father for refusing to transfer property over to him.

Chetan then gouged his father’s eyes, leaving him bleeding. He had been harassing his father for the property in order to pay off his debts which were a result of his lavish lifestyle.

While this was violent, he was fortunate to survive the attack, unlike Satbir Singh who was murdered by his son over a property.
