Indian Navy, Army, Air Force joint press briefing as it happened: India presents evidence

Navy

Air Force

air strikes

In pics: India presents evidence that Pakistan Air Force used F-16s while violating India's airspace on Thursday.… https://t.co/b9sH5YhIqZ — Mumbai Mirror (@MumbaiMirror) 1551362364000

Visuals of cover of AARAM missile fired from Pakistani F-16 aircraft found near the LoC in India https://t.co/qHdOm5cDqN — ANI (@ANI) 1551362175000

Joint press briefing by Army, Navy and Air Force in New Delhi that was scheduled for 5 pm today has been postponed… https://t.co/kD4TJxcUd9 — ANI (@ANI) 1551354202000

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan: As a peace gesture we are releasing Wing Commander Abhinandan tomorrow. https://t.co/J0Attb6KDC — ANI (@ANI) 1551352075000

The chiefs of India's Tri-Services (the Indian, Army and) will hold a joint press briefing on Thursday. The briefing is scheduled to begin at 5 pm, according to the Press Information Bureau.The press conference comes a day after the Indian Ministry of External Affairs confirmed that IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman is in Pakistan's custody. On February 26, tensions escalated between neighbouring countries India and Pakistan after the Indian Air Force carried out strikes on terror camps in Pakistan's Balakot. The next day, the two countries shot down each other's war planes after the Pakistan Air Force unsuccessfully tried to target Indian military installations.Tensions between the two countries increased after more than 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a terror attack, led by Jaish-e-Mohammed, in Kashmir's Pulwama on February 14.West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday questioned the impact of the airstrike on Jaish-e-Mohammed camps on February 25, adding that the country and the Oppositions need to know how many terrorists were killed in thePreviously, in a press briefing, AVM Kapoor said, "There is fairly credible evidence which proves there was damage to the camps. It will be premature to give number of casualties. We got the desired effect."The parents of Wing Commander Abhinandan are heading to Delhi after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan announced that the IAF pilot will be released tomorrow as a gesture of peace.A statement purportedly issued by Varthaman went viral on social media. "We draw our strengths from your support and energy," it said."I thank God for his blessings. Abhi is alive and not injured, sound in mind. Just look at the way he talked so bravely (referring to videos released by Pakistan)... A true soldier... We are so proud of him. I am sure all your hands and blessings are on his head, prayers for his safe return. I pray that he does not get tortured, and comes home safe and sound in body and mind," the statement noted.On Imran Khan's announcement, Kapoor said, "We see this as a gesture in consonance with Geneva convention."Kapoor said, "What you are going to see today is a part of AMRAAM missile. Each aircraft has an electronic signature. We have evidence to show PAF used F 16s. It is up to the Govt on how to take up this evidence."The Pakistan Air Force used JF 17s, Mirage, F 16.Kapoor said, "There is fairly credible evidence which proves there was damage to the camps. It will be premature to give number of casualties. We got the desired effect."Major General Surendra Singh Mahal said that ground-based air missile systems have been put on high alert all along the LoC. On escalating tensions, he added "The escalation has been done by Pakistan as they targeted our military installations."He said, "As long as Pakistan continues to harbour terrorists, we will continue to target the terror camps."Kapoor added that there is no doubt Pakistan has tried to target our military installations.Navy Rear Admiral DS Gujral said, "We are ready for any misadventure by Pakistan and we are ready for resolute action. We want to ensure safety and security of our citizens."AVM Kapoor said that the pilot (Abhinandan Varthaman) ejected safely his parachute drifted and he was captured by the Pakistanis. There is enough evidence to show F 16s were used in this mission. Kapoor added that there were many factually incorrect statements by Pakistan, including the number of pilots captured by them. Pakistan later changed their statement that only one pilot was in their custody, he further said."IAF fighters were tasked to intercept the intruding Pakistani aircraft and managed to thwart them. Although PAF jets dropped bombs, they were not able to cause any damage," he said."One Pakistani F-16 was shot down by an IAF MiG 21 Bison Aircraft. East of Rajouri, parts of F-16 have been recovered, inside Indian territory," he added.Kapoor ended his statement by saying, "IAF is happy and looks forward to the return of Abhinandan Varthaman."Major General Surendra Singh Mahal, Rear Adnurak Dalbir Singh Gujral and AVM RGK Kapoor will brief the media shortly.Mehbooba Mufti told ANI, "Good news, whole nation will be relieved. I hope our leadership will also reciprocate this peace gesture. I hope Imran Khan will stand by his word and take steps on Indian dossier on Pulwama attack. Imran Khan has acted like a statesman."The Tri-Services press briefing has been postponed. It is now rescheduled and is expected to take place at 7 pm.Prior to the India's Tri-Services press briefing, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan announced in the Parliament that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman will be released on Friday as a peace gesture.
