The two neighbours

Pakistan’s response to India’s violations of the LoC is appreciative. It is easy to start war, but the parties involved in a conflict can never predict its end. Even if it ends in a timely manner, it will already have destroyed many families.

In such difficult times, Prime Minister Imran Khan’s statement shows the level of maturity our PM has. This shows that Pakistan is a peace-loving country which doesn’t want to enter in war. Pakistan can now also achieve a better status regarding the Kashmir issue.

Wasif Qayyum

Islamabad

*****

This refers to the ‘Need for dialogue’ (February 28). It couldn’t have been more timely and persuasive in underscoring the need for a meaningful dialogue between Pakistan and India. The desire on the part of Pakistan to deescalate tensions is reasonable. It is also heartening to note that saner voices from both sides of the border are quite loud in advocating peace and opposing war. Wars, as our PM is reiterating, in the 21st century can only cause pain and will be disastrous. Even when we read about past wars, we come to one conclusion: wars to conquer others have no happy ending.

It is important to realise that no issue in today’s world should be resolved through force. Voices of people demanding the right of self-determination should also not be suppressed for too long. It is in this context that the Indian leadership ought to recognise the demand of the Kashmiris for their right to self-determination. It should engage important stakeholders for dialogue to find the way forward. People on both sides must continue to convince their leaders for maintaining peace in the region.

Dr Zafar I Qureshi

Lahore

*****

History reveals that India always takes the path of hostility whenever it comes near to the general elections. After the Pulwama attack, the current Indian PM – who is eyeing another term – accused Pakistan of planning the attack. A couple days back, an Indian airplane entered into Pakistan airspace in clear violation of international laws. On the next day, in continuation to the worst military stand-off, two Indian fighter planes were shot down by Pakistan’s brave PAF personnel.

It is time India started thinking of its people and realised that war is not a solution. It should read up on the consequences of two world wars and try to understand that war will only displace people and wreak havoc in the South Asian region.

Imran Khan

Larkana
