Wg Cdr Abhinandan to return home today

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

KV Prasad

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, February 28

A dramatic announcement by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan today to release Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman from captivity on Friday as a “gesture of peace” contributed significantly to defusing tension between the neighbours.

Khan’s announcement in the National Assembly came a day after India issued a demarche to Pakistan that it expects immediate and safe return of Wg Cdr Abhinandan, who was captured after the MiG-21 Bison he was flying to chase a Pakistan Air Force plane suffered a hit and fell in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. India made it clear the pilot’s release without harm was to be unconditional and that his captivity could not be used for bargaining.

Part of the tension bordering on hysteria of a possible retaliation was triggered after India declared the Pakistan intrusion and attempts to target military installations yesterday as an “unprovoked act of aggression” and shut nine airports soon after. While India opened these later in the day, the Pakistan airspace remained shut even today.

The argument was when India carried out the aerial attack in Balakot, it was against a terrorist camp and by targeting India’s military facilities, Islamabad sent a message it was shielding terrorists. Pakistan circulating videos of the captured pilot and subsequent treatment through the social media altered the mood in India, something Islamabad intended. The onus was then on India to retain the focus on action against terror while securing the release of its pilot.

Adding to the situation was an attempt by Islamabad to create hysteria of possible action by New Delhi. A top government source pointed out that Islamabad also spread a rumour that India was preparing to launch a missile attack and had moved a ship towards Karachi. Pakistan then unilaterally decided to stop the Samjhauta Express, prompting India to cancel the train today on operational grounds.

Pakistan, the sources said, also briefed diplomats stating that an attack from India was imminent, setting off alarm bells in the international community. The sudden escalation of tension caused a stir within the international community with many countries, including major western powers, West Asian and South Asian countries, appealing for de-escalation and talks to address the situation.

National Security Adviser Ajit Doval held talks with his US counterpart John Bolton yesterday. In Hanoi, President Donald Trump commented he had some “reasonably decent” news from India and Pakistan.

The change in situation notwithstanding, India expects Pakistan to take immediate and credible action against terrorists, its proxies, infrastructure and cross-border terrorism, the sources said in response to Khan’s attempt to reach out to Modi.
