PM fields curated questions from ‘booth-level’ workers

The show must go on. Never mind the tension at the border or that the neighbouring Prime Minister was stealing his thunder offering to return captured Indian Air Force pilot, Abhinandan Varthaman as a peace gesture on Friday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had an important date to keep on Thursday with his party’s boothlevel workers. Touted as a recordbreaking event wherein he was addressing about a crore of booth-level party workers from 15,000 locations, nothing could go amiss during this well-orchestrated event. There was no room for spontaneity, as every question and the questioner had been intensely vetted and the questions adequately rehearsed before the real show got rolling.~~68208445~~At Pune’s Bal Gandharva Rang Mandir, the rehearsals were still underway at noon, before Modi initiated the mega video conference at 12.30 pm. More remarkably, the auditorium was not exactly packed with the booth-level party workers he was supposed to be addressing, but random citizens brought to the venue by certain corporators, who are not even members of the party. This was the big moment in Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP’s) campaign — ‘Mera booth sabse majboot’.On December 19 last year, Modi was caught off-guard when a party worker questioned his government’s imposition of taxes on all fronts, burdening the middle class. He hedged, calling it a trader’s question, but his evasive retort was snapped up by the Opposition to launch an attack on him. Evidently, not wishing to have a repeat of the embarrassment, the questions this time had to be scripted and scrutinised closely.Each centre was asked to send the questions collected to the party’s state unit, where a selection was made before being forwarded to the central team. From Pune about 40 party workers (not necessarily boothlevel party workers, as it turned out), were asked to record videos of themselves asking the questions and forward them to their team heads. After this, the query and who will raise it was finalised. Then came the rehearsal at the auditorium.BJP corporator Rani Bhosale, who got the opportunity to ask a question, recounted, “All the booth-level workers who were to participate in the event were asked to submit the questions they wanted to ask. Accordingly, I submitted my question almost a week ago. I was surprised when I was told that I might get the opportunity to ask the question. So, I rehearsed well to ensure that I ask the question confidently.”Explaining the elaborate process that preceded the event, Ashish Merkhed, who helms the state IT cell for BJP and was coordinating the video-conference, insisted, “The party’s state body selected the party workers who would speak as this was happening at such a grand scale and there was shortage of time. So we had to choose one karyakarta from each place.”But the focus on scripting a perfect show left many a party worker disgruntled. “The event was meant for booth-level party workers. Why were corporators asking questions? Why was she chosen?” a party worker, whose question was kept out of the scene, demanded to know. Yet another party man who actually walked out in the middle of the event, added, “Everything is decided in advance. Only a few people keep getting the opportunity. Party workers just keep working for nothing.”Pune has about 2,500 booths cell heads. Of these given the centres represented at Balgandharva, at least 500 of them were to be present at the event. However, in an auditorium packed with women from the slums, schoolchildren, apart from the party’s city unit head, Member of Parliament and corporators, it became very difficult to spot the booth cell heads, for whom the meeting was convened. The capacity of the ground floor, which was used for the interactive session is estimated to be 669 at best.In fact, people seated at the back of the hall claimed they’d been carted in from Aundh and Khadki by BJP corporator Prakash Dhore. Three buses used to ferry the women were parked outside the auditorium. “We were told there is a rally happening and we have to listen to the speech. I don’t work for the party but our corporator asked us to come. I am not even sure if they will serve us lunch and we left home at 10 am,” said Mangal Jadhav, a resident of Khadki.Some party workers complained of mismanagement by the organisers as a reason for this poor representation. A party worker involved in the management said, “The event was initially planned for one auditorium for each Assembly constituency. However, later with other venues coming up, we invited people from Kasba Peth, Shivajinagar and Kothrud to attend and bring along about 100 people from each of those centres.”
