BJP's Sambit Patra slams Congress' Khusbhu Sundar for tweeting 'PM Modi must learn from Imran Khan'

BJP's Sambit Patra slams Congress' Khusbhu Sundar for tweeting 'PM Modi must learn from Imran Khan'

He wrote: “While at one end because of the might of Indian Army & Diplomatic capital built by Indian PM,the World stands with India ..on the other end I see no reason as to why the @INCIndia should be busy promoting the Pakistan Flag & their PM. This is disgusting & depressive!”

The Indian Air Force Thursday said it is very happy that captured pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman is returning home but dismissed suggestions that it was a goodwill gesture from Pakistan, insisting it was in line with the Geneva Conventions.

"We are very happy Abhinandan will be freed today and look forward to his return," Air Vice Marshal R G K Kapoor, assistant chief of Air Staff, said.

He was speaking at a first joint media briefing along with the Navy and Indian Army officials, after Pakistani fighter jets targeted Indian military installations in an air raid on Wednesday.

Varthaman's MiG 21 was shot and he bailed out after bringing down one Pakistani F-16 fighter during a dogfight to repel a Pakistani attack on Wednesday morning, he said. He has been in Pakistan since then.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan announced in Parliament on Thursday that Varthaman would be released on Friday as a "peace gesture".

While this happened, the BJP took umbrage with Congress leaders for ‘praising’ Imran Khan.

BJP national spokesperson Sambit Patra wrote: “While at one end because of the might of Indian Army & Diplomatic capital built by Indian PM,the World stands with India ..on the other end I see no reason as to why the @INCIndia should be busy promoting the Pakistan Flag & their PM. This is disgusting & depressive!”

While at one end because of the might of Indian Army & Diplomatic capital built by Indian PM,the World stands with India ..on the other end I see no reason as to why the @INCIndia should be busy promoting the Pakistan Flag & their PM

This is disgusting & depressive! pic.twitter.com/7Gd4D1h5B6 — Sambit Patra (@sambitswaraj) March 1, 2019
