Ex-generals laud PM’s decision to release Indian pilot

ISLAMABAD: Appreciating Prime Minister Imran Khan’s decision of releasing Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Abhinandan, retired generals of Pakistan Army are hopeful that this gesture of peace will help deescalate tension between India and Pakistan.

One retired general claimed that after its fighter jet was shot down, India was ready to attack Pakistan with non-nuclear missiles on Wednesday night. The government of Pakistan received this information through credible intelligence sources. However, the international community, especially western countries, stopped India from doing this.

The generals also believe that prime minister took the decision of releasing the pilot after consulting the top military leadership. The ex-generals said the release of Indian pilot will create a goodwill gesture and this will be a diplomatic victory for Pakistan.

Talking to The News, former secretary defence Lt Gen (R)

Asif Yasin Malik said Prime Minister Imran Khan had displayed statesmanship by announcing the release of Indian pilot. He said Pakistan had already achieved its purpose.

“The effect we already have created on India is not going to diminish soon. We shot their fighting jet and we have captured their pilot. They cannot undo this. Therefore, it is a useless discussion whether we keep the Indian pilot with us or release him. Strategically and militarily, this is a great move by Pakistan to release the Indian pilot,” commented Gen (R) Malik.

He said Pakistan should hand over the pilot to Indian authorities at Wagah border in the presence of national and international media. It’s a win-win situation for Pakistan, as the entire world has appreciated this move, he said.

Asked whether the decision of releasing Indian pilot was taken with the consent of military leadership, Gen (R) Malik said obviously the military input must have been taken but ultimately it’s the prime minister who had to take this decision.

Whether this move will help de-escalate tension between India and Pakistan, General (R) Malik said he believed it will definitely de-escalate the situation because both countries could not afford a full-scale war.

Talking to The News, General (R) Amjed Shoaib said this was a great decision of Prime Minister Imran Khan to release the Indian pilot. He was supposed to be release sooner or later. The timing matters a lot in any strategic decision and this was the best time to release the Indian pilot.

“We could not keep him in our custody for longer. Pakistan would have faced international pressure to release him. But his early release will create a good impression and it will present a good gesture in the international community,” commented General (R) Amjed Shoaib.

He said this was purely a political decision by Prime Minister Imran Khan to release the Indian pilot. However, the top leadership of armed forces must have been taken into confidence while taking this decision.

General Amjed Shoaib also believes the international community might have played role in de-escalating the situation. They might have asked Pakistan to release the Indian pilot as a goodwill gesture.

“Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi was in contact with his counterparts of different countries. May be they have asked Pakistan to release the Indian pilot. There are chances that Trump administration has also played a role in the release of Indian pilot,” said Gen (R) Amjed Shoaib.

Major General (R) Ijaz Awan said Prime Minister Imran Khan had taken a positive step by releasing the Indian pilot. “This goodwill gesture will yield positive results for Pakistan on the diplomatic front. We could not use the Indian pilot as a pawn for long. Sooner or later he was to be returned. I think this is the right time to hand him over to India before the international community demanded his release”, commented Gen (R) Awan.

He said he was hopeful that tension between Indian and Pakistan would de-escalate soon. “India has handed over a dossier on Pulwama attack to Pakistan. Similarly, Foreign Minister of Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) is coming here tomorrow. I think things are moving towards de-escalation and countries like KSA and USA have played their role in the whole episode”, said Gen Awan.

“There are credible intelligence reports that India is going to attack Pakistan with non-nuclear missiles because after their fighting jet was shot down India could not afford to use its air force for another attack. Pakistan however sent a message to the international community that they will be left with no option but to retaliate and this will lead to a full-scale war.

The international community reacted on this and played its role to deescalate the situation,” informed Gen (R) Awan.
