Key witness recounts how Dabholkar was killed

Sachin Andure

Sharad Kalaskar

Omkareshwar bridge

NGO Andhashradha Nirmulan Samiti

The first breakthrough came three years after the murder, with the arrest of Virendrasinh Tawde, the alleged mastermind

Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar were allegedly instructed to aim for Dabholkar’s head; (Far Right) Sarang Akolkar, who was earlier suspected to have been one of the shooters, has now been given a clean chit

Street food vendor says alleged shooterconfessed his crime to him 15 days later.A fortnight after Sachin Andure, along with, allegedly shot dead Dr Narendra Dabholkar onin Pune on August 20, 2013, he purportedly confessed to the crime to an Aurangabad-based street food vendor.The vendor, Andure’s acquaintance, is a key witness in the case and his testimony is part of the CBI’s supplementary chargesheet against Andure and Kalaskar that was submitted in a Pune court on February 13.According to the chargesheet, the vendor found Andure seated on a cement bench outside his shop on September 5, 2013, looking “sick” and “pale”. After repeatedly asking him what had happened, Andure finally allegedly blurted out: “Kay sangu dada tumhala ata…Mi Dabholkarla thokale (What should I say? I killed Dabholkar).”The vendor allegedly asked Andure why he was disclosing this and if the deceased was a Muslim. To this, Andure allegedly revealed that Dabholkar was a Hindu who was associated with the anti-superstition. The vendor, who had read of the murder in newspapers, warned him against revealing more to him, saying he was a “businessman” and had “nothing to with” whatever was disclosed to him, according to the chargesheet.According to the chargesheet, Dabholkar was killed by the accused due to their “ideological differences and enmity/hatred” with him and his NGO over their efforts into drafting the anti-superstition bill. The 69-yearold rationalist was also perceived to be “anti-Hindu”.On Andure asking if the vendor could “financially help” his parents in case he got arrested in the case, the latter allegedly gave no answer. The vendor then apparently shut shop and left for home.In his statement recorded in court by the CBI under Section 164 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the vendor expressed shock that a man he knew “so well” had murdered Dabholkar.According to his statement, Andure was a regular visitor to his shop and they shared a common belief in “pro-Hindutva work”. The vendor claimed that he knew Andure as a “pro-Hindutva worker” who held strong views against ‘love jihad’ and believed that Hindus should project a united front to confront opponents.The vendor did not say that he reported Andure’s purported disclosure to anyone.It was almost three years after that alleged confession that the case saw its first breakthrough in June 2016— the arrest of Dr Virendrasinh Tawde, the alleged mastermind of the conspiracy.According to the CBI chargesheet, following their arrest, Andure and Kalaskar allegedly re-constructed the sequence of events preceding and following the murder, and were taken to the crime scene to retrace their steps.Exonerating two previous suspects— Sarang Akolkar and Vinay Pawar— who were described as the alleged shooters, the CBI said in its chargesheet said that during its “further investigation”, it was found that Dabholkar was shot dead by “Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar” and “not Sarang Akolkar and Vinay Pawar as earlier suspected”.Andure and Kalaskar allegedly shot dead Dabholkar “on the asking and planning” of Tawde and co-accused Amol Kale, the chargesheet said. It also cited two eyewitnesses who allegedly confirmed that they had seen Andure and Kalaskar at the crime scene.According to Andure, Dabholkar fell on the footpath of Omkareshwar bridge and lay motionless after Kalaskar shot him behind the right ear. Kalaskar allegedly fired again, at Dabholkar’s right temple—as per the instructions of Tawde and co-accused Amol Kale, a Pune-based mechanical engineer who is said to have organised arms training for the shooters. In a final shot, Andure allegedly fired once at Dabholkar.According to the chargesheet, it was Tawde who allegedly called up Andure the day before the murder and asked him to execute Dabholkar. Kalaskar, too, was allegedly informed. Both left Aurangabad by bus for Pune the same night. They reached Pune at 4.30 am but waited till 6.45 am for daybreak and then proceeded to pick up from a pre-decided spot a black motorcycle. This bike allegedly had three firearms (not two as earlier suspected) and fresh apparel for their assignment.Andure allegedly followed Dabholkar from his apartment to the bridge, where Kalaskar was already positioned, to target him. After the crime, the duo escaped on the bike through a planned route, after which Kalaskar allegedly left for home. The chargesheet said Andure dropped the bike and the weapons at MK Street in Pune, where he saw Kale who allegedly “gesticulated at him to proceed ahead”.Three days later, with both Andure and Kalaskar allegedly “scared” due to their involvement in the crime, Tawde called them to Pandharpur in Solapur district. There, the two alleged shooters recounted the grisly details of the murder, according to the chargesheet. Tawde allegedly told them that they made a mistake by staying at the Pune bus stop for long after arrival from Aurangabad. He allegedly warned them they may have been captured by cameras installed there and should therefore be ready to abscond if “something goes wrong”.The CBI is yet to locate the weapons and the bike allegedly used in the crime. It is expected to continue its investigation against three co-accused against whom a chargesheet is yet to be filed—Kale, Amit Degvekar and Rajesh Bangera. They were arrested but secured bail last December. Kale and Degvekar are also accused in the Gauri Lankesh and Govind Pansare murders.Andure, Kalaskar, Tawde, Kale, Degvekar and Bangera have denied any role in Dabholkar’s murder.Advocate Virendra Ichalkaranjikar, president of Hindu Vidhinya Parishad, which represents all the accused in the Dabholkar, Lankesh and Pansare cases, rejected the CBI’s findings. “These are false allegations. Andure and Kalaskar are innocent. We are yet to get a copy of the chargesheet. According to the CBI, when Sarang Akolkar and Vinay Pawar were the alleged shooters, Dr Tawde was the mastermind. Now when Akolkar and Pawar are exonerated, Tawde is still the mastermind? How is that possible? Tawde once said that he is innocent and that there was no need to kill Dabholkar as his [anti-superstition] bill had been pending since 2001.”He asked if the CBI had lied in the past now that it has named two different men as shooters. “The same witnesses who had earlier confirmed Akolkar and Pawar as the shooters are now pointing fingers at Andure and Kalaskar.”Ichalkaranjikar demand “a higher inquiry” as despite keeping the Andure and Kalaskar for 180 days, the CBI hasn’t been able to trace the weapons or the bike. “Kale is an easy prey since he was arrested in the Lankesh case. If the CBI had evidence, it would have filed a chargesheet against him earlier.”
