Leopard escapes from enclosure in Siliguri's Bengal Safari Park

Kolkata

Safari Park

Siliguri

Darjeeling

: A leopard named Sachin escaped from his enclosure by jumping the power fence on Tuesday morning, the first day of the year, when the Bengalinwas buzzing with tourists.January being the tourist season, people throng toand Siliguri, especially to the newly opened Bengal Safari park, the only safari park in the state.When the authorities came to know that Sachin has fled from its enclosure, the park was immediately closed and search started. After massive search operation, the leopard was tracked in the region reserved for herbivores.Safari Park director in-charge Rajendra Jakhar said, “Wildlife squad have arrived from Darjeeling and Lataguri. Another squad has arrived from Baikunthapur. They are all trying to bring Sachin under control. We are deploying two Kunki elephants also to search for Sachin. Concerned about the safety of the tourists, we are not allowing anyone in and around 200 metres of the main safari park.”As the leopard was located in the areas where herbivore animals live, it is a major concern for the park authorities. Already, six wildlife squads have been deployed from the morning. However, the leopard has not attacked anyone yet. If needed, the forest department has said that the leopard can be tranquilised.The authorities noticed at around 7.30 am that the leopard was missing from the enclosure. It had climbed a tree and fled from the enclosure. The authorities were scared as tourists started entering the park. “We had booked the tickets online but when we reached the park with children and family members, our money was returned. We were not allowed to enter the park,” said a tourist.There are fourleopards in Siliguri’s Bengal Safari Park - Sachin, Sourav, Shital and Kajol. Among them, Sachin and Sourav have been kept in the safari zone. Sachin had attacked a forest staff in November. Last year, Sachin and Sourav were brought from Khoirabari Tiger Reserve to the park.
