China Pakistan: Masood Azhar: China in focus after fresh proposal on Masood Azhar at UNSC

(This story originally appeared in on Mar 1, 2019)

(This article was originally published by The Economic Times on 01/03/2019.)NEW DELHI: India is hopeful that China will have no objection to a fresh proposal to designate Masood Azhar, the head of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), a global terrorist by the United Nations Security Council UNSC ). The move has been initiated by France and is backed by the US and UK.The proposal was moved jointly by the three permanent members of the Security Council on Wednesday, senior officials told ET. China, after having blocked such a measure for almost a decade, could change its stance by abstaining on a vote, they said.The issue of Azhar’s listing following the Pulwama attack, for which the JeM has taken responsibility, was discussed when foreign minister Sushma Swaraj met Chinese counterpart Wang Yi on the sidelines of the Russia-India-China foreign ministers meet in Zhejiang on February 27.China, while being ambiguous on India’s air strikes against JeM camps on February 26, had called for de-escalation of tensions between the two sides. It had condemned the Pulwama attack on February 14. China’s current position is being read as tacit support for India in certain quarters. ET first reported on Tuesday that France, backed by the US and UK, was planning to move a fresh proposal.The Security Council Sanctions Committee will have 10 working days to consider the new proposal, the people said. If the proposal is passed, the tag of a UN-designated global terrorist will subject Azhar to a global travel ban, asset freeze and arms embargo, they said.The proposal moved by the three veto-wielding members will also get the backing of Russia, which has been supportive of India’s counterterrorism actions and the designation of Azhar as a global terrorist. India has furnished detailed evidence on the activities of the JeM and its chief to all UNSC members, including the non-permanent ones. ET has learnt that India assisted France in gathering data on Azhar.France has obtained fresh information on Azhar and the role of his family members in JeM to counter Chinese attempts to block his UN listing on the grounds that he is no longer associated with the terror group.China, the fifth permanent member of the UNSC, has repeatedly blocked similar proposals to shield its ally Pakistan since 2010. In 2017, the US, supported by the UK and France, had moved a proposal in the UN’s Sanctions Committee to ban the JeM chief. However, the proposal was blocked by China.China had reiterated its position after the Pulwama attack. India has said that the site its air force bombed in the wee hours of Tuesday was a JeM training camp run by Azhar’s brother-in-law Maulana Yousuf Azhar, alias Ustad Ghouri.The French proposal has also been backed by Germany, Poland and Belgium. France also led the effort last week to get the Security Council to issue a statement condemning the Pulwama attack and naming the JeM.That move was not without roadblocks created by China to the draft initiated by France.ET reported Saturday that Beijing objected to the description of JeM as “'Pakistan-based”. It had also wanted Jammu and Kashmir to be referred to as “Indian-administered” Kashmir.To arrive at a consensus, the phrase “Pakistan-based” was dropped, while China yielded on the description of Kashmir, which finally went as Jammu & Kashmir as India wanted.There was also a back and forth on how to describe the incident — suicide bombing or terrorist attack. China wanted to describe it as a suicide bombing and then a consensus was built over a general condemnation of terrorism and terrorist attacks being present later in the text. On balance, however, the fact that China was part of the UNSC consensus as a permanent member should be seen as a step forward from the standpoint that it had been blocking Azhar's designation as a terrorist, said the people cited above.
