Cooperators hail Indian military on Pulwama revenge!

Cooperators from Kashmir to Kanyakumari have hailed Indian military might and congratulated Indian Airforce on its decisive success in dismantling Pakistan based terror camps run by Masood Azhar in Balakot in Pakistan.

NCUI President Chandra Pal Singh said “it is a proud moment for India as Pulvama has been avenged. But more challenges are ahead and we should be prepared.” Yadav also said that co-operatives can function only in a peaceful society and nation’s security comes before anything else.

Jyotindra Mehta, Sahakar Bharati leader and Nafcub President said “We are proud of our armed forces”. In a FB post he wrote “Jaish Vs Josh”.

Dileep Sanghani, President of NAFSCOB-apex body of co-op banks in the country hailed the military move and said “Since we have worked together in Gujarat when Narendrabhai was the Chief Minister I know his determination. If he said he would take revenge he will do so”, added Sanghani.

Ashok Dabas, Director of apex Labour co-op federation NLCF wrote “ the revenge was taken after 12 days on Tuesday morning at 3.29 am with the help of 12 aircraft and if you add up app the figure it comes up to 56”. Dabas was hinting at 56 inch chest of Prime Minister Modi.

One cooperator joked on social media “Pakistanis were preparing for *Surgical Strike*, but *Air Strike* came…..Out of Syllabus*”

“This is an attack on terrorism based in Pakistan and not on Pakistan. Our valiant forces have proved our prowess once again”, said R S Sodhi, MD of GCCMF.

It bears recall that at 3.30 am Tuesday morning twelve Indian Air Force Mirage-2000 jets crossed the Line of Control (LoC) and destroyed terror camps of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot. The air strike comes two weeks after the terror attack on CRPF soldiers in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir.

Foreign Secretary Gokhale said India struck the biggest training camp of JeM in Balakot, where a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated.

India, therefore, clarified that it was a nonmilitary strike. By calling it a preemptive action, it has taken the diplomatic pressure off itself that it acted to take revenge or for retribution. It has, instead, made it an act of self defence.

Following the attack, Prime Minister Narendra Modi vowed to not let the lives of jawans go in vain. At a rally in Rajasthan, Prime Minister Modi said ”he would never let India down and that the country was in safe hands”.

Meanwhile, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan asked the armed forces and the people of Pakistan to remain “prepared for all eventualities.” The statement came after an emergency meeting to review the situation, PTI reported.
