Head constable on duty hit by speeding car; dies

Police officer given guard of honour; accused arrested

A 52-year-old Delhi police officer was killed in the line of duty when a speeding car hit the barricades which fell on the officer injuring him fatally in the early hours of Tuesday in Dwarka. He was given a guard of honour during his last rites.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka) Anto Alphonse said that victim — head constable Guljari Lal — was on duty with head constable Prakash at the underpass in Kapasehra when the incident happened. “Around 1 a.m., a speeding car was coming from the underpass and the officers signalled the driver to stop but he smashed the barricades which fell on officer Guljari. The driver fled the spot,” Mr. Alphonse said.

Lal was rushed to a private hospital by fellow officers where he was declared brought dead.

Police share messages

During investigation, the police shared messages on several WhatsApp groups and sought help of locals to look for any vehicle found in accidental condition. “All the staff of the police stations of Dwarka district were briefed to look for any vehicle that was damaged in accident and any injured person who got admitted to any private hospital or nursing home in the early hours,” the DCP said.

On Tuesday afternoon, the police received information from a car repair shop in Pochanpur village that a vehicle is parked near the shop and is damaged. Investigators reached the spot and sought details of the owner. “He was identified as Nagesh Kapoor, resident of Pochanpur and belonging to Uttar Pradesh. He was detained for questioning and was subsequently arrested,” the officer said.

The accused hold a MBA degree from a university in Saharanpur and is working in the accounts department of a luxury bike company.

‘Accused tried to escape’

During interrogation, the accused allegedly told the police that he was returning from Gurugram after meeting friends when he was asked to stop and got scared. In order to escape, he hit the barricades and officers standing there, the police said.

Lal is survived by his two sons and a daughter who works as a teacher in Meghalaya. He was given a guard of honour in his home town in Alwar where several senior officers were present. He joined the force in 1990 and was residing in Delhi’s Najafgarh.
