High Josh at Wagah-Attari border to welcome Abhinandan from Pakistan -See Pics

Indian tri-colour being waved by a supporter who awaits the arrival of IAF pilot Abhinandan at Wagah-Attari border on Friday I Photo credit: @mkdholakiya15 | Photo Credit: Twitter

Amritsar, Punjab: The detained Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Wing Commander Abdhinandan Varthaman is set to be released by Pakistan at 3 pm today (Friday). He was taken into custody after his MIG-21 was shot down during a dogfight between Pakistan Air Force (PAF) and IAF fighter jets when the former tried to attack military installations in India. Varthaman managed to target one PAF F-16 aircraft before crashing.

Pakistan earlier asked India for a dialogue as a pre-condition to release Varthaman but later announced to release him in order to de-escalate the tension between the two nuclear-armed rivals. It was reported that the IAF Wing Commander will cross-over into India from the Attari border in Amritsar district.

Scores of people on Friday gathered at the Attari Joint Check Post (JCP) on Friday to welcome the IAF hero back into India. Attari, which lies 30 kms from Amritsar main city. Hundreds of people gathered at the Wagah-Attari border to get a glimpse of the IAF hero who is slated to be released by Pakistan authorities later today.

#BharatBadalGayaHai | Nation awaits its hero Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's arrival.



TIMES NOW's @wajihulla gives a mood check from Wagah. pic.twitter.com/qhoTWybq4P — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) March 1, 2019

Amritsar Deputy Commissioner Shiv Dular Singh Dhillon told the news agency ANI that, “Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman will cross the border Friday, can't tell you exact time since there are certain formalities. A senior Indian Air force team from Delhi is here, they will be the ones to receive him”.

There is a lot of josh or enthusiasm at the border where people started gathering since 6 am in the morning and the numbers had swelled to hundreds by 9 am.

This is what the world needs to understand. Pak wants peace and love to be spread across borders. Not just for the sake of Pakistanis but for the sake of everyone in the region too. @narendramodi ji, lets start a new beginning. #SayNoToWar #PakistanLeadsWithPeace #WagahBorder pic.twitter.com/baayzG2nWe — Atif (@AtifBaderShah) March 1, 2019

"We have come here to welcome our country's hero back home. We will give him a grand welcome. He showed a lot of bravery in the air combat and even after being captured by the Pakistanis," Jitender, a resident of Amritsar, who arrived here with his friends, told the news agency IANS.

The scenes at the Wagah-Attari border are of jubilation amid a sea of media personnel huddled get the first visuals of the returning pilot.

Earlier Abhinandan’s parents were cheered as they boarded a flight from Chennai to New Delhi on Thursday evening. They will be at Attari to welcome their son back.


