Chennai: Duo murder brother-in-law, make it look like accident

Following his death, Mubarak Ali’s brother Ahmed lodged a complaint with the Poonamallee Traffic Investigation Police alleging that there was a family feud and he suspected that his brother had been murdered. (Representational Image)

Chennai: The city police on Monday arrested a duo on charges of murder after they killed their brother-in-law and arranged to make it look like an accident.

According to the police, Mubarak Ali (37), a native of Avadi was married to Sabur Nisha (34) and the couple has a daughter and a son.

On October 10, Mubarak Ali was run over by a car. The accident happened at Pudu Nagar in Avadi, a few metres away from his house. Mubarak Ali died at the Rajiv Gandhi Government Hospital on October 14 without responding to any treatment.

Following his death, Mubarak Ali’s brother Ahmed lodged a complaint with the Poonamallee Traffic Investigation Police alleging that there was a family feud and he suspected that his brother had been murdered.

The Poonamallee Traffic Investigation Police nabbed Sabur Nisha and on enquiry, she told the police that Mubarak Ali was a tailor and his income was not sustainable for the family.

Sabur Nisha’s brothers Sathakathulla and Abdul Rahman had arranged for a job in Kuwait in the month of October but Mubarak Ali had turned down the offer saying that he was not willing to relocate. Since he was not working for two months then and the family was under financial pressure, a dispute arose between them. In the quarrel, Mubarak had broken the windshield of Sathakathulla’s car, she added.

Suspecting that Sathakathulla and Abdul Rahman must have murdered their brother-in-law, the police launched a hunt for the men but they were absconding.

Meanwhile, acting on a tip-off that Sathakathulla had come to visit his sister on Monday, the police team nabbed the suspect and he admitted to having murdered him over the quarrel.

After Mubarak Ali broke their car’s windshield, Sathakathulla and Abdul Rahman followed him and knocked him down at the street corner in a fit of rage, the police said.

Sathakathulal was arrested and remanded to judicial custody and a search is on for Abdul Rahman.
