China hopes Abhinandan’s release will yield joint investigation of Pulwama incident

China’s call for maintaining the status quo and against the use of force, was followed by an assertion in the statement that, “China does not want to see acts that violate the norms of international relations.”

China on Friday welcomed the impending release of the Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthman by Pakistan, and hoped it would lead to further de-escalation of tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad, as well yield a joint investigation of the Pulwama incident.

Asked specifically if China had played any behind-the-scenes role in facilitating Wing Cmdr. Abhinandan’s release, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesperson Lu Kang said that, “From the start China has been calling upon both sides to exercise restraint and take measures to decrease tension, engage in dialogue to resolve their differences.”

He added: “I have taken note of the development (and) that China welcomes the goodwill signals released by the Pakistan side. De-escalation serves the common interest of both sides. We encourage the two sides to engage in more dialogue for the peace and stability in the region.”

Asked to comment both on Wing Cmdr. Abhinandan’s release as well as the presentation of a dossier by India to Pakistan of the Pulwama episode, Mr. Lu said, he welcomed the goodwill signals shown by the Pakistan side. He added that Beijing has been encouraging both sides “to create favourable atmosphere for the joint efforts to deal with the relevant issue”.

Mr. Lu hoped that New Delhi and Islamabad would cooperate on “counterterrorism and jointly uphold the regional peace and stability….”

Late on Wednesday, China spellt out its “red line”— of seeking immediate de-escalation of tensions between India and Pakistan, following an “urgent” telephone call by Pakistan’s Foreign Minister, Shah Mahmood Qureshi to his Chinese counterpart, Wang Yi.

The Washington Post paraphrased remarks by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan that he had feared on Wednesday night that India might launch a missile attack on Pakistan.

Mr. Wang — the Chinese state councilor and foreign minister — during his conversation with Mr. Qureshi had stressed that “sovereignty and territorial integrity of all countries should be earnestly respected,” a Chinese Foreign Ministry statement in Mandarin had said.

China’s call for maintaining the status quo and against the use of force, was followed by an assertion in the statement that, “China does not want to see acts that violate the norms of international relations.”
