Pakistan airspace partially closed till March 4, operations resume at international airports with restrictions

Pakistan's Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) on Friday said in a fresh NOTAM (A Notice to Airmen) that the country's airspace will be closed till March 4.

However, exceptions have been made for to and fro operations from four international airports: Karachi, Quetta, Peshawar, and Islamabad.

"Flight operations only to/from Karachi international, Peshawar international, Quetta international and Islamabad international airports with restricted entry/exit as follows will be available," said the fresh circular.

It has been issued almost three days after Pakistan had shut down its entire airspace, affecting thousands of flights from international locations.

According to Flightradar24, which tracks real-time air traffic, said the closure of Pakistani airspace has affected almost 400 flights and that the greatest impact of the airspace shutdown has been felt by Iran.

The closure of Pakistani airspace has affected 400 flights daily, per Eurocontrol. The greatest impacts have been felt in Iran (????) and Georgia/Azerbaijan (????). Southern India has also seen an increase in flights.



Live tracking: https://t.co/Xnltx3QPBo pic.twitter.com/NuEux7tsSw Flightradar24 (@flightradar24) March 1, 2019

The closure of Pakistan's airspace was in response to escalating tension with India, following which major disruptions were observed on major routes between Europe and South Asia; it left thousands of air travellers in the world stranded.

Many passengers in Thailand

India, too, had blocked at least 8 airports after it Indian Air Force pilot Abhinandan Varthaman was taken into custody by Pakistan after his Mig 21 Bison jet was shot down while he was in pursuit of an intruding Pakistani jet fighter.

However, tension between the two neighbouring countries may de-escalate today as Pakistan has decided to hand over the pilot to India today at around 3:30 pm.

While the Wing Commander's release is a diplomatic victory for India, the government has made its stance clear on talks with Pakistan.

Speaking at the India Today Conclave 2019, BJP president Amit Shah slammed Pakistan for failing to control terrorist groups like Jaish-e-Mohammed that operate on its soil.
