Now, use Google's complaint form to report fraud on Maps

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Now, use Google's complaint form to report fraud on Maps

01 Mar 2019

Google has launched a handy new way to combat the issue of fraudulent activity on Maps.

The search giant has started Business Redressal Complaint Form allowing Maps users to report cases of fraud or fake information related to businesses.

It can be used by anyone who notices fake information on the platform, intended to harm businesses or to fool the customers.

Here's more.

How Google Maps' businesses plagued by fraudsters

Benefit

As Google Maps' business information relies on publicly-sourced data, it allows users to edit the information related to businesses with the popular 'Suggest an edit' option.

However, sometimes, bad actors, competitors, and others use this option to modify a local business' authentic information.

They change open hours, phone numbers, addresses or even URLs to hurt the entity and its potential/regular customers.

Sometimes fraudsters even target customers with this option

Fact

We have also seen multiple cases where fraudsters edit a bank's contact number and enter their own to fool unsuspecting customers into giving away their confidential banking details. These cases have led to financial theft in India.

Now, this new form may offer some help

Benefit

With the new complaint form, users witnessing such activity can report it directly to Google.

The reporters, as Google says, will have to provide their own details along with the name and location of the business and the piece of information (URL, number) that might lead to fraud on Maps.

Notably, they'll also have to upload screenshots and provide a description of the issue.

Submission might not always lead to action, says Google

Note

While this option offers a reliable way to combat fraud stemming from Google Maps, it's important to note that submitting a complaint might not always mean that action will be taken.

Google will review your complaint and if it doesn't appear credible, the company might not take any action.

Also, if the complaint is not related to fake business information, it won't be reviewed.
