Guided by Modi hate, they are suspecting Armed Forces, harming India: PM trains guns on opposition

Guided by Modi hate, they are suspecting Armed Forces, harming India: PM trains guns on opposition

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Froday launched a blistering attack on the opposition for their conduct post-Pulwama attack. He said that the enemies of the country are latching onto the words of leaders of few parties and are Pakistan is broadcasting it happily.

He mentioned how statements made by some leaders have been splashed prominently by Pakistani media including state-run Radio Pakistan. It was a veiled reference to the opposition meeting's statement being reported by Radio Pakistan which was used by Pakistan to promote their propaganda in front of their domestic constituency.

#India: 21 Opposition parties express deep anguish over #Modi's blatant politicization of prevailing security situation https://t.co/zZTimuRovj — Radio Pakistan (@RadioPakistan) February 28, 2019

Yesterday, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee also cited foreign media reports and asked Air Force to give details about the Balakot attack.

PM accused that Modi hate is making few political parties hating India. PM Modi was speaking at a BJP rally in Tamil Nadu. BJP has allied with AIADMK for the Lok Sabha elections and the party is contesting from 5 seats in Tamil Nadu.

Earlier he also inaugurated various developmental schemes in the state. Inaugurating various developmental schemes, PM Modi laid the foundation stone for the extension of a railway line from Rameswaram-Dhanushkodi and a new bridge replacing old Pamban bridge, which connects Rameswaram on Pamban Island to mainland India.

The Prime Minister commenced his speech by saying that every Indian is proud that the brave Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman hails from Tamil Nadu. Abhinandan was in Pakistan's custody after his fighter jet MiG 21 was shot during an aerial skirmish between India and Pakistan on Wednesday, a day after India bombed largest JeM terror training camp in Balakot, Pakistan in retaliation to the Pulwama attack. Wing Commander Abhinandan has been released today by Pakistan after India created pressure on Islamabad citing Geneva convention rules and international pressure.
