OPINION: Lou Zako — A strong military is a better deterrent to war than isolationism

Dr. Lou Zako

The Petoskey News-Review

Two months ago I wrote about social pathologies in general terms, one month ago focusing on war and racism as perhaps our greatest of social pathologies. I started by opining that there is significant consensus among the American people about the reality of most social pathologies, but significant disagreement on how best to treat these pathologies/diseases. For example, I outlined the creation of the League of Nations after World War I and of the United Nations after World War II as failed attempts to cure the disease of war. Yet, even today millions of Americans innocently and, in my opinion, foolishly continue to believe that simply talking with one’s enemies, being nice to them and perhaps even giving them millions and millions of American taxpayers’ money will lead to peace. How is that working? Have the Iranian mullahs stopped chanting, “Death to America,” have they stopped their nuclear capabilities, have they stopped funding terrorist groups? Has Little Rocket, with the $5 haircut, stopped stocking long-range missiles, topped with nuclear warheads aimed at the U.S.? Did the presence of the United Nations prevent the largely Muslim state of Pakistan and the largely Hindu state of India, from engaging in an aerial battle earlier this week?

Recently I once again viewed the movie, Hotel Rwanda, which I recommend that all of my readers view. As I have previously mentioned, the small African nation of Rwanda is dear to my heart because of a mission trip there in 2008, at which time my wife and I, along with fellow mission workers, visited the Rwanda Genocide Museum, which contained horrific exhibits of thousands and thousands of human skeletons, both adult and child, all examples of close to 1 million Rwandans being slaughtered by fellow Rwandans, the reason being hatred between different tribes, the Hutus slaughtering the minority tribe of Tutsis. The social pathology in this case is class or tribal hatred leading to genocide. The cure was supposed to be a United Nations, which sadly, as in so many instances of war since its inception, failed miserably. At that time the UN and its secretary-general, refused to provide the French Canadian general commanding the small UN peacekeeping force in Rwanda with additional troops he requested as the civil war erupted. Rather, during the 100 days of slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Rwandans by their countrymen, the UN was the forum of days and weeks of blabbering by U.S. and European nations, representatives about the definition of “genocide.” The addition of perhaps 5,000 peacekeeping troops, including Nigerian, British, and American (even 200 American marines) could have stopped the slaughter of most of those killed, but instead the UN ordered the withdrawal of most of its small peacekeeping force from the nation.

So one may ask what is a better treatment for war? I would submit that a militarily-dominate U.S., recognized by every nation on earth as a beacon for freedom, in alliance with other freedom-loving nations, is a far better deterrent to war than a feckless UN, the majority members of which consists of dictatorships. A NATO that is well-funded and well-equipped, for example, has shown, in spite of its obvious weaknesses and obvious challenges, to save more lives than the much larger UN, whether it be Rwanda, Darfur, Bosnia, or the Ukraine. We Americans have moral choices to make, one extreme choice being total isolation and the opposite extreme choice being the world’s policeman. I would argue against both, just as I argue for a rational policy of ongoing legal immigration in sustainable numbers to the U.S., but not open borders, allowing hundreds of millions of desperate human beings to stream into our country and lead to its collapse.

In my view, withdrawing all U.S. troops from Syria, from South Korea, from Poland, while understandably appealing, would be disastrous when we later face attack by either Russia or China, and have no bases overseas. I am well aware that most of my readers were not alive on Dec. 7, 1941, when the Japanese bombed defenseless Pearl Harbor. Had American forces, including naval, been based in the Philippines, in Australia, on Okinawa, at that time, there probably would not have been a Pearl Harbor, and the Japanese may well have decided to not wage war on the U.S. For isolation and demilitarization to be a successful strategy for the security of the American people, there first needs to be a vaccine developed and then injected into every human being on earth that eliminates hatred from the human condition. Until such a vaccine is developed (don’t hold your breath), I would prefer to have a pistol in my home next to my Bible, as I pray for peace.

Next month I will return to the topic of racism as a social pathology, discussing hate crimes, hate crime hoaxes, and the concept of a hate crime in comparison to an ordinary crime.
