Air Force does not belong to BJP: Chidambaram says ruling party claimed credit for airstrikes

Former Home Minister P Chidambaram said on Friday the government was claiming credit for airstrikes carried out by the Indian Air Force (IAF) in Pakistan, stressing that his own Congress party behaved exemplarily.

BJP leaders including Prime Minister Narendra Modi claimed credit for the IAF operation at "purely political meetings" held across India, P Chidambaram said at the India Today Conclave in New Delhi.

"The IAF does not belong to the BJP. The IAF belongs to the country," P Chidambaram said.

The government announced the pre-emptive strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pakistan on Tuesday, less than two weeks after the terrorist group killed 40 CRPF soldiers in Jammu and Kashmir. A day later, India said it had thwarted an attempt by Pakistan to target its military installations.

An Indian pilot captured by Pakistan on Wednesday -- Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman -- is about to be released.

'WORLD CANNOT BE ASKED TO SUSPEND DISBELIEF'

Meanwhile West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has asked for details about India's airstrikes, including the death toll. She cited media reports. including from the New York Times, that either said there were no deaths, or that one person had been killed.

India's foreign secretary said this week that "a very large number" of terrorists had been eliminated in the strike in Pakistan. The Indian Air Force said later that there was evidence that targets were hit, but also that it was premature to assess casualties.

Asked about Mamata Banerjee's request for details, P Chidambaram pointed out that the Indian Air Force had made no claims about casualties.

Chidambaram said it was the political party behind the government which fed the news that over 300 or 350 jihadis were killed, and praised the Air Force and the external affairs ministry for what he said were restrained statements.

He pointed to claims made by foreign publications that were contrary to the Indian position, saying he was prepared to believe the government, but "the world cannot be asked to suspend disbelief".
