What's China's stance on the India-Pakistan conflict?

The 16th Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of China, Russia and India was held in Wuzhen, an ancient town of east China's Zhejiang Province, on February 26 and 27.

The meeting comes at a time when tensions in Kashmir have flared up between Pakistan and India. Pakistan claimed it shot down two Indian fighter jets inside Pakistani airspace, which India disputes.

Since both India and Pakistan are nuclear-armed nations, the situation is “worrisome”, according to Xu Qinduo, a senior fellow from the Pangoal Institution. It depends on both countries' willingness to “de-escalate” the conflicts after showcasing their determination and capability to safeguard territory.

The incident comes a day after India launched air strikes in Pakistani territory in the first such incursion by the India Air Force since the India-Pakistan war of 1971.

However, the stakes are even higher for the Indian side as the incident also comes as they are scheduled to hold national elections at the end of May.

China has urged restraint from both sides. Chinese Foreign Ministry Spokesperson Lu Kang has said to the press that, “China hopes India and Pakistan will keep restraint, take measures to promote dialogue, and make joint efforts to protect long-term peace and stability in South Asia.”

Srikanth Kondapalli, professor in Chinese Studies at Jawaharlal Nehru University, focuses more on what the two countries can achieve together. He emphasizes the principles and efforts that have been made since President Xi Jinping's meeting with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi last April in Wuhan, central China, especially the joint counter terrorism exercises.

“A lot has been built up between the two countries on cooperation and coordination of counter-terrorism related issues”, Kondapalli added.

As India and Pakistan's common friend, China's position is quite delicate. John Gong, a professor of economics at the University of International Business and Economics, says China traditionally has been a very good friend of Pakistan and has a huge investment in the country; on the other hand, the relationship between China and India has become closer since the two leaders' meeting in Wuhan.

“China's stake here is very high to make sure there is no further escalation of tension,” Professor Gong commented.
