Pakistan hands over captured Indian pilot in peace gesture

People hold depiction of captured Indian Air Force Pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, as they shout anti-India slogans during a protest in Lahore, Pakistan, Feb. 28, 2019. EPA-EFE/RAHAT DAR

Pakistan on Friday handed back an Indian pilot who was shot down over Kashmir during a recent escalation of tensions between the two neighboring nuclear powers.

Wing commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was captured when his fighter jet was shot down over Pakistani territory in an apparent dogfight Wednesday, crossed back into India through the Wagah border near Lahore dressed in civilian clothing and accompanied by a Pakistani diplomat in an event that was broadcast live on television aimed at cooling the simmering relations between the two countries.

"I am a fighter pilot in the Indian Air Force. I was in search of the target when your Air Force shot me down," Varthaman said in a statement shared by the Pakistani government's official Twitter account.

After successfully ejecting, Pakistani soldier saved him from an angry mob, he said.

"The Pakistan Army is a very professional service. I see peace in it. I have spent time with the Pakistan Army [and] I am very impressed. Indian media always stretches the truth. The smallest of things are presented in a very incendiary manner and people get misled," he said, while still in the custody of the Pakistani army.

Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan had on Thursday announced the released as a gesture of peace and goodwill following a week where the two nations launched air strikes against each other over the disputed Kashmir regions.

India had welcomed the news, saying the release was in line with the Geneva Convention but claimed that its armed forces would remain vigilant and were prepared to respond to any provocation from the Pakistani side.

"Welcome Home Wing Commander Abhinandan," said Narendra Modi, Prime Minister of India. "The nation is proud of your exemplary courage," he added in a statement published on his official Twitter account.

The flashpoint in the violence was once again the contested Himalayan region of Kashmir, roughly half of which is administered by Islamabad while the other is administered by New Delhi.

For the past few days, the two neighbors have been locked in a military escalation that had not been seen in recent years, after India announced on Tuesday that it conducted airstrikes on a Pakistan-based militant training camp run by Jaish-e-Mohammed outfit in Pakistan-administered Kashmir.

The group had claimed the Feb. 14 suicide bombing in India-administered Kashmir in which 42 paramilitary troopers were killed, the deadliest attack in the region in 30 years.

Islamabad, however, denied any casualties or damage and only admitted a brief aerial invasion of its territory and the launching of four bombs by Indian fighter jets that fell in open spaces.

In response, Pakistan announced Wednesday that it had shot down two Indian fighter planes and captured one of the pilots.

Pakistan also claimed that its warplanes hit non-military targets across the Line of Control, the de facto border that divides Kashmir between the two countries, without causing casualties or any damage.

India admitted the loss of an aircraft and the capture of the pilot adding that it had also downed a Pakistani fighter plane, without providing evidence.

Kashmir, one of the most militarized territories in the world, has been the subject of a decades-long sovereignty dispute between Pakistan and India since 1947.

The two countries have fought two wars over the Himalayan region.

An unending armed insurgency in India-administered Kashmir has left tens of thousands of people dead since it erupted in 1989.

India repeatedly accuses Pakistan of supporting cross-border terrorism and provoking separatist protests in Kashmir.

Pakistan has always dismissed the allegations.
