Abhinandan’s return: IAF wing commander Avinandan’s return: People celebrate in Bhubaneswar

BHUBANESWAR: People from various walks of life celebrated Indian Air Force wing commander Abhinandan Varthaman ’s imminent return from Pakistan. They said Pakistan should also hand over terrorist Masood Azhar to India for maintaining peace in the border area.Teachers and students of St Xavier’s High School in the city celebrated the return of the IAF pilot to India. They shouted patriotic slogans like ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’ and hailed the wing commander for his bravery and heroic feat.Director of the school Ajit Kumar Das said they welcomed the brave man to make students understand about the valour and heroic deed of their Indian Air Force personnel. “A wing commander from India shot down a Pakistan Air Force’s F-16 jet before his own fighter jet crashed. Though he was taken by the Pakistan Army, he did not worry and refused to divulge any information about his mission. He is a hero. We welcome him,” he added.A group of students of Utkal University celebrated the return of the wing commander by shouting slogans ‘Our hero returns’. People also celebrated the return of Avinandan. Social media showered praises on the brave pilot for his indomitable spirit and gallantry.Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) members celebrated the occasion at Master Canteen square by holding placards and banners welcoming Avinandan’s return to India. The activists cried with joy and shouted slogans like ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’ and ‘Vande Mataram’ after hearing the news about the IAF man’s arrival in India. They dubbed the return as a victory of Indian diplomacy.ABVP national secretary Abhilash Panda said Pakistan should hand over dreaded terrorist Masood Azhar to India to maintain peace in the border area. “Pakistan has become a safe haven for terrorists. Heroes like Avinandan showed Pakistan about India’s grit and bravery. He is a hero for us,” he added.BJP workers burst crackers in front of their state headquarters here to celebrate the occasion. The party workers flaunted the tricolor flag and danced to the beats of traditional drums to welcome the brave IAF personnel.
