Indian Govt ban on JK Jamaat-e-Islami widely condemned – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR, MAR 01 (PTK): The Indian government has banned Jammu & Kashmir Jamaat-e-Islami on Thursday due to its alleged involvement in ‘illegal and destructive’ activities.

After the meeting, the Indian Union Home Ministry issued orders to impose order restrictions. About 500 Jamaat workers have been arrest during the past one week in the valley. After the ban was imposed by the center, the arrest of the arrests will be started soon and the lockout on the institutions of the Jamaat will also be started.

After the Pulwama attack, the police had taken more than 150 workers of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front and Jamaat-e-Islami into custody last week (February 22, 2019) by staging a tough stand against Kashmir’s separatist leaders. This is the biggest action till now on the Jamaat.

In this action, Jamaat-e-Islami chief Abdul Hamid There were dozens of leaders including Fiyaz. Mehbooba Mufti had also condemned the arrest of Jamaat-e-Islami activists for this action on separatists. Mehbooba is not alone, former Minister of State Sajjad Lone also opposed this action.

The foundation of Jamaat-e-Islami was laid in 1942 by Pir Saiduddin. Kashmir is considered as the largest base of Jamaat and National Conference. Therefore, the Jamaat, which has called itself a social and religious organization, has an important role in Kashmir’s politics.

In 1971, Jamaat contested in Kashmir, but did not win a single seat. After this, in 1972 the five candidates of the Jamaat became the first MLA. Among them, the fundamentalist leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani was also involved.

The Jamaat had openly opposed the Indira-Sheikh Agreement in 1975.

In 1987, the Jamaat together with other religious organizations made Muslim United Front Kashmir (Muff). During the Emergency, then Chief Minister Sheikh Mohammed Abdullah had also banned him for being involved in illegal anti-national activities.

Like the Jamaat, on the Hurriyat, has always been accused of promoting separatism in the valley and being accused of involvement in anti-national activities.

Chief Hurriyat and separatist leader Syed Ali Shah Geelani has also been associated with the Jamaat and fought elections from that. Now he has separated from it. It is believed that after the scam of the Jamaat, now the Hurriyat is in turn. Hurriyat formed July 13, 1993 happened on.

The Hurriyat consists of seven different parties, Jamaat-e-Islami, Awami Action Committee, People’s League, Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen, Muslim Conference, JKLF and People’s Conference. The chief or representative of seven organizations has been included as member of the Hurriyat Executive Council.

A 21-member Working Committee of the Hurriyat and 23 There is also the General Counsel of the members. Two of its members have already been murdered.

In May 2002, Abdul Gani Lone, who was head of the People’s Conference. He was the father of the present Chief of People’s Conference Sajjad Lone. (PTK)

Mehbooba, Sajad Lone condemns center’s decision to ban Jamaat-e-Islami

SRINAGAR, MAR 01 (PTK): Peoples Democratic President (PDP) president Mehbooba Mufti, and Chairman Peoples Conference Sajad Lone today condemned the Centre’s decision to ban the Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir, saying it was another example of “muscular approach” of the central government to deal with a political issue of the state.

“Democracy is a battle of ideas, crackdown followed by banning of Jammat Islami (JK) is condemnable, another example of high handedness and muscular approach of GOI to deal with political issue of J&k,” the former chief minister said in a tweet.

Sajad Lone while taking to his Twitter said “Why has Jamaat been banned. Jamaat is a social political and religious organisation. In a vibrant democracy ideas have to be fought not banned. This organisation has given us illustrious leaders and legislators. How can they b banned. I strongly pitch for revocation of the ban.” He Tweeted.

On Thursday, the Centre banned the Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir for five years under the anti-terror law on grounds that it was “in close touch” with militant outfits and is expected to “escalate secessionist movement” in the state. A notification, banning the group under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, was issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs after a high-level meeting on security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The notification said the Centre is of the opinion that the Jamaat is “in close touch with militant outfits” and is supporting extremism and militancy in Jammu and Kahsmir and elsewhere. It said the outfit claims “secession of a part of the Indian territory from the union” and supporting terrorist and separatist groups fighting for this purpose.

The notification, which came barely a few days after the Jammu and Kashmir Police had arrested around 100 cadres of the group in the state, said Jamaat has been indulging in activities intended to disrupt the territorial integrity of India.

During the intervening night of 22 and 23 February, the police had carried out a crackdown on Jamaat cadres and arrested 100 across the valley, including its chief Abdul Hamid Fayaz and advocate Zahid Ali (spokesperson).

The action came following the February 14 terrorist attack in Pulwama, in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed. There have been allegations in the past that the group was a political outfit of banned terror organisation Hizbul Mujahideen but the group has denied the charges.

The Centre is also of the opinion that the group is “involved in anti-national and subversive activities in the country intended to cause disaffection”. While banning it under the anti-terror law, the Centre reasoned that the group was intending to escalate its subversive activities, including an attempt to carve out an Islamic state out of the Union of India by destabilising the government established by law.

The group is also expected to escalate secessionist movement, support militancy and incite violence in the country, the notification said. The group has been banned for five years. It has to be ratified by a tribunal constituted by the home ministry.

The outfit, which was formed in 1945 as a chapter of the Jamaat-e-Islami Hind and separated in 1953 due to differences over political ideology with the parent body, was banned in 1990.

The previous ban lapsed in 1995 and since then it has never been invoked again. (PTK)

Banning JeI will shrink space for reconciliation,Govt. completely depending on force to subjugate people: Mehbooba

SRINAGAR, MAR 01 (PTK): Disapproving the imposition of ban on Jamat -e- Islami (JeI) by government of India, Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) President and Former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti has said that such a decision would further shrink the space for political rapprochement and reconciliation in Jammu and Kashmir. Addressing the meeting of senior party leaders here which was called to deliberate upon the latest developments being witnessed at present, Mehbooba said that the Government of India is taking orstrich like approach towards Kashmir which is reeling under dreadful crisis.

She added that Jamat-e- Islami has been credited for running schools and is a socio- religious organisation which is totally non- violent and the organisation has on many occasions publicly disapproved of violence as a method of political struggle. “ Banning this organisation will further shrink the space for politics and dialogue and it seems that government of India is now completely depending on force as a measure to subjugate the people of state,” Mehbooba said and cautioned that no muscular policy will work as it has never worked in the past and it will never work in future also.

The PDP President also termed the recent Union Cabinet decision a dangerous trend being set by the central government in Jammu and Kashmir and said PDP will now allow such constitutional vandalism to take place.

She said that her party is not against reservations in promotions as it was done by Mufti Mohammad Sayeed in 2004 -2005 , but got held up in courts.

Mehbooba added that PDP doesn’t oppose the idea of reservation but the method the Governor administration has adopted is very dangerous and it is a clear subversion of letter and spirit of law. “It is the President who is right now ruling the state and his own representative cannot take the role of the state cabinet in the matter of making constitutional changes. This is a fraud on the constitution and on the people of the state,” Mehbooba said.

She added that PDP will not allow this constitutional vandalism to deprive the state of the last remnants autonomy and constitutional guarantees.

Mehbooba said that while the government of India should be working to empower the state more, it is taking away whatever is left with it. “The BJP government at the centre has set the alarms for the entire country. It was the unfortunate incident of violence in Jammu and Kashmir which brought the sub-continent to the threshold of a destructive war. You are further pushing the people of Jammu and Kashmir into a corner while their constitutional rights are being trampled which is being guaranteed by the constitution of India. Government of India must put on hold any such plans that it might still be having,” said the PDP President.(PTK)

Banning of JeI against ethos & ideals of democracy: PC

SRINAGAR, MAR 01 (PTK): Peoples Conference Chairman Sajad Gani Lone today opposed banning on Jamaat-e-Islami (JeI), terming it against ethos, ideals and essence of a vibrant democracy, and advocated for an early revocation of this unfair ban.

While condemning central government’s decision to ban JeI, Sajad said that true test of democracy lies in allowing space to opposing political thoughts and ideologies rather than putting a cage around people with a certain political orientation. He also appreciated JeI’s contribution in social and political spheres and advocated revocation of the ban.

“Why has Jamaat been banned. Jamaat is a social, political and religious organisation. In a vibrant democracy ideas have to be fought not banned. This organisation has given us illustrious leaders and legislators. How can they be banned? I strongly pitch for revocation of the ban” (sic), the PC Chairman tweeted to express his disapproval of banning JeI. (PTK)

Jamaat e Islami distt office sealed in Ganerbal

SRINAGAR, MAR 01 (PTK): Jamaat e Islami Distt office sealed by Authorities in central Kashmir of Ganderbal district.

According to reports Authorities sealed office of Jamaat-e-Islami at Tawheed Chowk area of Central Kashmir’s Ganderbal.

The move comes following central government’s decision to ban the prominent socio-religious organisation, days after arresting scores of its leaders and activists in a massive crackdown. (PTK)
