‘BJP will pay for meting out raw deal to State’

TDP opposes new railway zone that is devoid of revenue-earning Waltair division

The TDP organised a day-long dharna on Friday at the Gandhi statue near GVMC opposing the visit of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to the city without fulfilling the promises made to State at the time of bifurcation. Most of the leaders wore black as a mark of protest and released black balloons.

The latest announcement of a railway zone with Visakhapanam as headquarters was also criticised on the ground that the revenue-earning Waltair division was excluded from it.

Launching a blistering attack on Mr. Modi, R&B Minister Ch. Ayyanna Patrudu said it was an unfortunate day on which the Prime Minister who had done injustice to the State was holding a public meeting. He questioned the rationale behind the meeting before the elections without fulfilling the promises made in Tirupati in 2014.

Promises of Special Category Status, funds for the Polavaram project and the Capital and backward North Andhra and Rayalaseema remained unfulfilled, Mr. Patrudu said.

Later speaking to the media, HRD Minister Ganta Srinivasa Rao accused Mr. Modi of not keeping any of the 18 promises made in Tirupati.

Ganta’s challenge

Countering the claims of the Centre, he cited the example of IIM in Visakhapatnam on which there was no progress at all after the foundation was laid. He said the State government had released nine White Papers, and dared the Union Government to release a White Paper on what it did for A.P. and for educational institutions promised.

Both Ministers predicted the rout of the BJP in the forthcoming elections, saying it would draw a blank in the State.

Tribal Welfare Minister Kidari Sravan Kumar said the promised Girijan University did not materialise. Mr. Modi’s meetings were not meant to instil confidence among people of the State or fulfil promises but to criticise Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu, he said.

TDP urban president and Visakhapatnam South MLA Vasupalli Ganesh Kumar, who led the protest, said instead of hand-holding the new State, it was badly let down.

Government Whip P.G.V.R. Naidu, MLAs V. Ramakrishnababu, Panchakarla Rameshbabu and Giddi Eswari and MLC Pappala Chalapati Rao were among those who participated.
