Battling ‘Viral Fever’ at a time of ‘War & Peace’

As a young democracy grows out of adolescence, its rolling out reels and reels of tales. If the first post office or a telephone connection paint one colour, the Stamp of a stock market scam or the recent Jewel Thieves scandal paint yet another colour. If failure of a sounding rocket was a stepping stone, sending 104 satellites in one go was a podium. If farmer suicides are a bad climax, growing Unicorns are a grand entry. Chethan Kumar, Assistant Editor, The Times of India, who alternates between the mundane goings-on of the Aam Aadmi and the wonder-filled worlds of scientists and scamsters, politicians and Jawans, feels: “There’s always a story, one just has to find it. LESS ... MORE

Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was in Pakistan’s custody after his MiG-21 Bison was shot down, forcing him to eject in enemy territory, was back on Indian soil.

It was a good Friday. Not that everything was OK: There were ceasefire violations (CFV) in Nowshera, Mendhar, Balakote and Krishna Ghati sectors along the Line of Control (LoC), besides exchange of fire in Kamalkote sector, and India again lost five security personnel in Kupwara. (Note: This is latest, at the time of publishing this…Action was ongoing along the LoC).

Yet, Abhi’s return brought back some positivity, after a horrible February—just too many lives were lost in the shortest month of the Year—that India has had to endure.

With the situation still tense, the corridors of South and North Blocks remained abuzz with activity even on Friday. Yet, it wasn’t immediately clear—indicators of continued tension between India and Pakistan rent the air—as to what the next course of action would be.

All this action, whatever may happen in the next few weeks and months, will be on the ground, with high stakes.

But there’s another world operating from the safety of their pucca homes, from behind LED screens displaying homepages of social media sites and not from behind a control stick of a fighter jet, their fingers tick-tocking on computer keyboards and not behind the trigger of an assault rifle. Neither are they the ones staring at all-terrain maps of enemy territory, nor those sorting out megabytes of intelligence input to plan attacks, or counter one.

Yet, people from this world holler the loudest, giving advice on what is to be done. They were even found giving orders in the past month. And for some reason, in a country of 130 crore people, these minority numbers have the strongest vocal chords—or so it seems given the increasing indulgence of the internet and set-top-box-linked TV sets—clamouring for things they mostly don’t understand in full.

From #War to #SayNoToWar, from losing more than 45 lives to taking many (IAF says it’s premature to give out numbers of those killed in the air strike by India), February has been a mad month.

I spent February covering two military aircraft crashes—India lost three well-trained pilots— from the ground, kept track and reported on multiple other military actions in one way or another. But that’s not all: I also spent anxious hours on social media platforms, struggling to combat propaganda, failing to comprehend the urge to push a nation into war without fully understanding the purpose or the repercussions.

Twitter and Facebook, the mainstay of the hoi polloi military pundits, and WhatsApp, the force-multiplier of these Online Generals have been active on both sides of the border. Some demanded peace, most sought war. Some demanded a future free of terrorists, most wanted revenge in any form. And then there were profanity farmers.

I did manage to identify fake videos, images, unverified forwards and ridiculous theories: Largely using common sense, but I must thank friends and sources in the armed forces who kept tight vigil too. Confirming, and, denying.

That our armed forces had to also spend time correcting the wrong on media at a time they were fighting enemies, consoling families of buddies and planning counter attacks, I think, was the online society’s crime against them.

Chew this: Just hours before Abhi’s return, an objectionable video went viral. There was clearly no truth in the video. While it was a propaganda from across the border, it did not fail to find currency even in India, using up precious spectrum. Is this how we welcome back a hero like Abhi?

While this is an example of the kick one gets out of making things go ‘viral’ on the internet—using context to spread anything that one gets her hands on—the ‘fever’ or disease itself cannot be diagnosed by just this symptom.

What one must do to stop this is beyond me. But self censorship seems like a good start, especially when matters you are discussing, mostly sans the required expertise, relate to life and death and peace and war.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
