Ashish brings back “Didda- The Warrior Queen of Kashmir” - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Excelsior Correspondent

JAMMU, Mar 1: Post incredible success of “Refugee Camp”, the son of the soil Ashish Kaul has brought Didda – The Warrior Queen of Kashmir, yet another jewel from the forgotten history of Jammu & Kashmir.

Didda – The Warrior Queen of Kashmir is the story of the Princess of Lohar Dynasty that ruled the western territories of undivided modern Jammu & Kashmir including Poonch. Didda eventually was married to Kshemgupt, the erstwhile King of Kashmir during a time when Kashmir was going through turbulence and was on the verge of disintegration.

Born in 925 AD to King Simh Raj, Didda was abandoned by her parents at birth into care of a servant as she was born disabled. She eventually rose above her disability to become the longest serving Queen in the history of medieval Asia. Such was the military might of the Kingdom of undivided Jammu & Kashmir that the dreaded warlord Mahmood of Gaznavi, who was earlier believed to be invincible, lost two battles with Didda’s Army.

“The book assumes extreme importance given the fact that Didda, the great daughter of the State was eventually erased from history post the advent of Islam in the State,” says Ashish and adds that he has worked hard for about 6 years to bring this extraordinary story from his state for the world to know the great heritage of J&K.

Another proud daughter of India, the renowned Paralympian Deepa Malik has written the foreword for Didda-The Warrior Queen of Kashmir. She says “Didda is a story that will change historical perspectives. By recreating a story that was buried and forgotten for over 1200 years ago, I believe that the author, perhaps is the first to undertake such a herculean task and bring an invaluable piece of our history to life”.

The iconic all women Band called Meri Zindagi and the illustrious crusader, art curator, author & journalist Alka Raghuvanshi unveiled the first copies of the book in Delhi. The book was also showcased on the globally popular show ‘Horizon’ on All India Radio.

Didda- The Warrior Queen of Kashmir has created unprecedented success with a debut at no. 10 across global rankings. Post a soft launch on Amazon, Didda- The Warrior Queen of Kashmir trail blazed to No. 67 on global rankings across all categories on Amazon.
