BYE BYE ABHINANDAN – KashmirWatch

ALI SUKHANVER

A crowd of blames and allegations on both sides of the Line of Control has simply made the situation painfully complicated; for the last few weeks, the situation of affairs is not very well between Pakistan and India. Though Pakistan has tried its best to draw back the things to ‘no-more tensions’ stage by sending home the Indian pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan who was arrested from Pakistani area after his plane was targeted by the Pakistani security forces but it seems this ‘kindness’ of Pakistan would go waste. The extremist elements in the BJP government are in no way willing to accept this step as an act of kindness. Experts are of the opinion that such elements would try all their best to make the scenario more complicated with their foolish behaviour. They are not trying to understand that their extremist approach would push the whole region into an inferno with unfathomable depth.

Renowned Indian actress Shabana Azmi lives in the very hearts of art-lovers, not only in India but in Pakistan too, and same position enjoys her husband Javed Akhtar. The couple receives a very sincere welcome whenever it comes to Pakistan. The couple was invited to grace a conference scheduled to be held in Karachi in the last week of this February. This conference was organized to acknowledge marvelous literary services of Kaifi Azmi in the field of poetry. Kaifi Azmi was Shabana Azmi’s father. Unfortunately the Pulwama tragedy turned the whole program upside down; Shabana Azmi and Javed Akhtar regretted that they won’t be able to attend the Conference because of mounting pressure on them from the Hindu extremists. Shabana Azmi and her husband are among those Muslims who literally have devoted rather dedicated whole of their lives to the ‘Secular-India’ but a Damocles’ sword of religious hatred is all the time hanging over their heads.

A few weeks back, a video clip became viral in which Shabana Azmi was talking to a TV anchor on increasing religious intolerance of Hindu extremists in India. She said that she had been trying to buy a flat in Mumbai but everyone refused to sell her a flat because she is a Muslim. Shabana expressed her depression and disappointment over the situation by saying, “If in Mumbai, Shabana Azmi and Javed Akhtar are treated this way, what way a common Muslim would be treated there.” Same is the situation everywhere for the Muslims all over India, from the Indian Held Kashmir to Ayodhya and from Gujarat to Delhi. The Hindu extremists under the ‘marvelous leadership’ of Mr. Narendra Modi are doing all their best to mould India into a purely Hindu state where no Muslim or anyone from any other religion would be allowed to live in. Just to make life more difficult for the Muslims in India, they do not even refrain from killing their own soldiers and putting blames on the Indian Muslims and Pakistan; the Pulwama Terror Attack is a very recent example of this anti-Muslim strategy. Whatever happened there in Pulwama was nothing unexpected. Experts say that more horrible incidents of the same type may occur in the days to come.

The Washington Post of 23rd December 2018 published an article by Joanna Slater and Ishfaq Naseem. The title line of that article was ‘2018 is the deadliest year in a decade in Kashmir. Next year could be worse.’ The writers said, “In 2018, the death toll for militants and security forces in Kashmir touched the highest point in a decade, according to official figures, with more than 324 killed. Human rights groups put the civilian fatalities at over 100. Almost no experts believe the situation will improve in the short term.” Another report by a monitoring group comments on the Indian atrocities in the Indian Held Kashmir that 2018 had been the deadliest year in a decade in the IHK, with more than 550 people including 150 civilians killed. Amitabh Mattoo, a professor of international relations at Jawaharlal Nehru University and a longtime observer of the Kashmir conflict said in a recent statement, “There is now a ‘generation of people’ whose only encounter with India seems to be through the prism of the security forces.”

Not only in the Indian held Kashmir but also in the whole India, situation is getting horribly atrocious. Kashmiri youth has always been the most favourite target of the Indian security forces deployed there in the Indian Held Kashmir. These forces know very well that the Kashmiri youth in the distressed valley of Kashmir is the most threatening challenge to the Indian hegemonic designs; without crushing this youth India could never materialize her dreams there. Moreover it is much easier to portray a young man as a militant than introducing an old man as a terrorist or militant. According to the different media reports, in the name of investigations of the Pulwama Attack, hundreds of the Kashmiri young men are being arrested by the Indian troops. The Modi government may deny the facts but it is a daylight reality that there is a revolt-like situation in the Indian Held Kashmir particularly after the Pulwama Attack. It seems certain that by the end of 2019, situation in the Indian Held Kashmir would be more agonizing, more painful and more miserable.

Feedback at : kashmirwatch@gmail.com
