Osama’s friend Masood Azhar a global threat

NEW DELHI: Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar, a known associate of Al Qaida founder Osama bin Laden, had helped the latter flee from Tora Bora caves in Afghanistan where he was cornered after the 9/11 attacks in 2011, at a time the Pakistan army had cordoned off one side of the vast cave network.According to Indian intelligence sources, Jaish planned two major attacks in India in the immediate aftermath of the 9/11 attacks in the US planned and executed by al Qaida. First, on October 1, 2001, some three weeks after 9/11, Jaish bombed the J&K assembly complex, killing 35 persons. Two months later, on December 13, 2001, Jaish fidayeen carried out an audacious attack on India’s Parliament, which claimed nine lives.A top intelligence official told TOI that the two attacks heightened hostilities between India and Pakistan, leading to a war-like situation and provided the Pakistan army a “pretext” to withdraw much of its forces from its western border, which were cordoning the Tora Bora caves. This assisted Osama’s escape to Pakistan.As a result, it took the US forces 10 additional years to get hold of Osama. He was killed by US Navy Seals on May 2, 2011, in a compound in Abbotabad, Pakistan.“This is the nature of Jaish’s capability, and demonstrates that it is an organisation that does not just impact India, but feeds on pan-Islamism and has been a major threat to global peace and security,” an intelligence functionary told TOI.Recent inputs suggest that Azhar is suffering from renal failure and requires regular dialysis at the Army hospital in Rawalpindi.Azhar, who founded Jaish soon after his release from an Indian prison as part of the IC-814 swap deal in 1999, reportedly worked closely with Osama in the 90s. As the top motivator of Harkat-ul-Ansar, he was used for jihadi indoctrination across various African countries.After Azhar was freed in 1999, he was greeted in Kandahar by Mullah Mansoor, a senior representative of Taliban chief Mullah Omar. Mansoor later replaced Omar and was killed in a drone strike in 2016. On the night of Azhar’s release, Osama is known to have hosted a banquet for him.Azhar is known to many as the Pakistani cleric who brought jihad into religious discourse in UK mosques. He reportedly made contact with people who helped provide training and logistical support for terror plots of 7/7 and 21/7 attacks in London and the attempt in 2006 to smuggle liquid bomb-making substances on to transatlantic airlines.One of his UK recruits, Omar Shaikh, as a member of HuA, kidnapped four western tourists in Delhi in 1994 to get Azhar freed but security agencies succeeded in releasing the hostages and arresting Shaikh. He was released along with Azhar as part of the Kandahar swap, and later went on to abduct and kill journalist Daniel Pearl, apart from funding the 9/11 attacks.
