Celebrations erupt as Pakistan returns pilot

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) A pilot shot down in a dogfight with Pakistani aircraft returned to India yesterday, after being freed in what Islamabad called a 'peace gesture following the biggest standoff between the two countries in years.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, shot down on Wednesday over Kashmir crossed into India at the famed Wagah crossing point, sporting a black eye from his ordeal.

Pakistan's foreign ministry said that the pilot was 'treated with dignity and in line with international law, and that his release was 'aimed at de-escalating rising tensions with India.

Thousands of Indians, waving flags, singing and dancing with patriotic fervour, had gathered at the crossing point yesterday afternoon but the crowd dwindled after his release was delayed inexplicably by hours.

Others also danced and shouted slogans in New Delhi.

In India the experienced pilot's release was seen as a diplomatic victory, but New Delhi warned that its military remained on 'heightened alert.

After the pilot's release Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted: 'The nation is proud of your exemplary courage.

Junior foreign minister and former army chief, Vijay Kumar Singh, tweeted that the 'welcome release of the pilot was 'the first of many steps that #Pakistan must take to reinforce their commitment to peace.

A defence official said Abhinandan was taken for medical checks. 'This check-up is mandated particularly because the officer has had to eject from an aeroplane, Air Vice Marshal R G K Kapoor told reporters near a border crossing in Punjab.

The parents of handlebar-moustached Abhinandan were given a standing ovation by fellow passengers as they boarded a flight to Amritsar near Wagah to welcome their son.

He has become a national hero after purported footage that went viral showed him being beaten by locals after being shot down before Pakistani soldiers intervened, with social media abuzz with #GivebackAbhinandan and #Abhinandanmyhero hashtags.

His subsequent polite refusal to proffer more details than necessary — 'I am sorry major, I am not supposed to tell you this — won him particular sympathy in India.

His father, a retired air force officer, told the Times of India newspaper, 'Just look at the way he talked so bravely...a true soldier...we are proud of him.

MENAFN0103201900670000ID1098193939
