Pleasures of Goa easy to sink into

Think of it as India's happy place: The state of Goa, which occupies a sliver on the country's western coast, is where residents of Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore and other cities converge for long weekends and lazy holidays filled with sun, sand and revelry.

A commingling of cultures makes this one of the most fascinating pockets of India, defined by a leisurely pace and laid-back attitude. Perhaps there's no better way to describe the vibe in Goa than "susegaad," a Konkani language term derived from Portuguese that alludes to a sybaritic, contented way of life — or, as the travel show host and Goa resident Mayur Sharma told me, the feeling that you can "sink into life here."

Friday

Church crawl

Hire a car and driver and get your historical bearings in Goa Velha (Old Goa), the original walled Portuguese city once hailed as the Rome of the East. Goan Catholics make up about a third of the state's population today, and their influence is palpable in every corner. You can see where it all began in Old Goa, at places like the 17th-century Basilica of Bom Jesus; the Se Cathedral, the largest Roman Catholic church built by the Portuguese in Asia, with its distinctive single belfry (the other one was struck down by lightning in 1776 and never rebuilt); and the Church of the Lady of the Mount, which has expansive views over the Mandovi River.

Fashion finds

Sacha Mendes was a fashion editor at the Indian editions of Elleand GQ in Mumbai before she returned home to Goa, where she opened Sacha's Shop in Panaji. "When you come from a place like Goa that's so pure, you wonder what's outside; then you go out and you feel nostalgic," she said of what inspired her homecoming. Now, in the elegant 1938 mansion in the heart of Panjim where she grew up — the rooms were lovingly decorated by her grandfather with tiles and antiques imported from Macao and other Portuguese colonies — she brings the "outside" to Goa. Browse resortwear from Indian labels like Savio Jon, Naushad Ali, and 11.11; mirror-work bags and accessories; and apricot kernel oils and scrubs from the skin care brand Pahadi Local.

Local eats

Kokni Kanteen might not look like much from the outside, but this restaurant, modeled after Portuguese-era khanavats, or taverns, is warm and inviting inside: Old photos, spice racks and clusters of chiles, garlic and onions are hung on the walls. Order the fish thali, a seemingly never-ending platter of seafood favorites like kingfish, mackerel curry, tisryo (clams), prawns and more. If that's not enough, add a coriander-heavy chicken cafreal or mutton xacuti to the mix. Don't miss the cumin-dusted fries, either. Dinner for two is around 1,500 rupees (about $21).

Saturday

Bohemian breakfast

Before heading to the beaches of North Goa, stop for breakfast at Baba Au Rhum in Anjuna, a bohemian cafe you'll find en route. Grab a seat on the leafy patio and order the shakshouka (250 rupees), Leo Special (fried eggs, chicken, cheese and a chile plum sauce on a flaky croissant or fresh baguette, 300 rupees) and a Vietnamese coffee (130 rupees).

Beach-hopping

Goa is incredibly spread out, so if you're short for time, you'll need to choose between spending your time in North or South Goa. Generally speaking, South Goa is more secluded, serene and not as developed, making it good for a relaxed long weekend. If you want buzzing beaches, night life and restaurants aplenty, head north. You'll find options here: Arambol beach has a hippie vibe, complete with the occasional drum circle; Ashwem and Morjem are trendy; Vagator is known for its cliffs and rocky coves; and beautiful Mandrem is entered by a rickety walkway over a creek.

Burmese bites

Bawmra Jap arrived in Goa about 15 years ago, and his modern Burmese restaurant, Bomra's, in Candolim has since become an institution — you'll often come across its name on lists of India's top restaurants. The food merits every accolade it's earned: The lah-pet toke (pickled tea leaf salad), raw beef salad with basil, mint and coriander, steamed chile crab, and lemongrass ginger creme brulée are outstanding. Expect to spend around 2,500 rupees for two; Bomra's is closed during the monsoon season (from May to September), so plan accordingly.

Sunday

Bistro brunch

More Information Lodging Right in the middle of Panjim's historic quarter, Mateus (432 Rua 31 de Janeiro, Fontainhas, Panaji; doubles from $42) is a nine-room boutique hotel set in a 140-year-old Portuguese home. The villa has lots of lovely, colorful touches - from wrought-iron balconies to cane chairs to patterned Bharat Tiles to the cozy seating nooks with fuchsia and turquoise pillows - and it's a great base for exploring Panjim's most important sites. If you want to stay closer to the beaches of the north, go to Casa Vagator (House No. 594/4, Ozran, Vagator, Bardez; doubles from $77). The 30 simple, comfortable rooms cascade down a cliffside toward Little Vagator Beach. Most rooms have terraces and outdoor seating areas, some overlooking one of the property's two pools. If you go the Airbnb route, Assagao has a hip village vibe, and lots of great restaurants nearby. You'll find rooms and apartments for about $30 to $40 per night. For a bit more - from about $40 to $80 - you can stay near beaches like Ashwem, Morjim or Mandrem. See More Collapse

The once-sleepy, suddenly trendy village of Assagao is home to Villa Blanche Bistro, which serves all-day breakfasts — waffles, Greek scrambled eggs, scrambled tofu with sweet potato chips and chiles — as well as German fare like imported Black Forest ham (a nod to the German owner), and lots of vegan and gluten-free options. But the main weekend draw is the decadent Sunday brunch buffet, with sausages, salads and so much more. Enjoy it in a cheery patio with tiled tables and mismatched throw pillows.

South Indian lunch

Also in Assagao, Gunpowder is the restaurant credited with putting the quiet hamlet on the map. This perennially packed spot draws crowds to an outdoor dining platform draped in colorful, petal-like cloth panels for its South Indian fare — you'll probably need to wait if you don't have a reservation. The Toddy Shop Meen Curry, a sour Kerala-style curry with coconut sauce (350 rupees), is the dish to get, but other contenders are the royyalu pulusu (Andhra style prawn curry, 450 rupees); mango-pineapple pachadi (fruits in a coconut-yogurt sauce, 250 rupees); and Kerala mutton curry (400 rupees).
