Varun Dhawan to perform live at Wagah border on Republic Day

Sonam Bajwa

Varun Dhawan, Shraddha Kapoor reunite for Remo D'souza's yet-untitled musical It’s time to dance again for Shraddha Kapoor who has come on board to play the female lead in Remo D’souza’s yet-untitled musical which rolls in Punjab on January 22.

Sardaar Ji 2

Super Singh

Diljit Dosanjh

The final permissions are still being worked out but the plan is for Varun to perform in front of a live audience on January 26. The V Unbeatable Dance Crew, a participant in the fourth season of the talent hunt show Dance Plus, which Remo judges, will be performing with Varun who is really kicked about this performance. Source

Alia Bhatt

Varun Dhawan gets ready to shoot action sequences in Hyderabad; Alia Bhatt, Madhuri Dixit, Aditya Roy Kapur to join in Alia Bhatt, Madhuri Dixit, Aditya Roy Kapur to join in to shoot climax of their period-drama.

Mirror (January 7) recently reported that Shraddha Kapoor has stepped in for Katrina Kaif in Remo D’souza’s yet untitled musical that will feature her as a professional dancer representing the Indian contingent in the film which has several dance face-offs on the lines of the Hollywood franchise Step Up. The film, produced by Bhushan Kumar and Lizelle D’souza, goes on the floors on January 22 in Amritsar and while Shraddha will join the team in London for the second schedule, her leading man Varun Dhawan is gearing up to shoot a major dance sequence at the Wagah border on Republic Day for which he has begun rehearsals.“The final permissions are still being worked out but the plan is for Varun to perform in front of a live audience on January 26. The V Unbeatable Dance Crew, a participant in the fourth season of the talent hunt show Dance Plus, which Remo judges, will be performing with Varun who is really kicked about this performance,” informs a source close to the development.The actor will also shoot another celebratory song during his stay in Punjab for which rehearsals have begun. “Punjabi actress Sonam Bajwa who has huge hits likeandwithto her credit has also been roped in for a special appearance and will be matching steps with Varun,” says the source. The Amritsar schedule of the film will wrap up on January 28 after which the team will head to UK.Meanwhile, Varun andare busy with Abhishek Varman’s period drama Kalank. “They are even giving each other cues during shots even after one of them is done with the day’s work,” informs the source.
