Seven arrested for gambling

Ludhiana: Division number six police station have registered a case against several persons for allegedly gambling in public space. The accused has been identified as Rajvinder Singh of Daba colony, Harjinder Singh of Basant Nagar, Sham Singh of Dugri and Mintu Gupta of Ajaaz Nagar. Investigation officer, Gurmeet Singh, said that on Tuesday they were patrolling near Sherpur Chowk and got information that accused are gambling at a park in front of Monte Carlo showroom. Police raided the spot and recovered Rs 1,440 from their possession and have registered a case under Section 13-03-67 of the Gambling Act. Police have arrested the all accused in the matter.

One held for selling illegal liquor

Ludhiana: Division number six police station have registered a case against a person for allegedly selling liquor in the town. The accused has been identified as Rajinder Singh of Kartar Nagar. Investigation officer, Harmeshlal, said that they set up a checkpost at Gill Chowk. Meanwhile, the accused was coming from opposite direction and on seeing the cops, he tried to flee. Police chased him and arrested him from the spot. Upon checking, police recovered five boxes of liquor from his possession and have arrested the accused i the matter. Police have also registered a case under Section 61-01-14 of the Excise Act.

Four wheeler stoken from market

Ludhiana: Salem Tabri police station have registered a case against an unidentified person for allegedly stealing a four-wheeler of a resident of New Grain market. In his police complaint, 44-year-old Gurpratap Singh said that he parked his car at 6pm in the evening outside his home and when he got up in the morning, he saw that the car was missing. On being informed, cops from the police station have registered a case against an unidentified accused into the matter under relevant Sections of the Indian Penal Code. Police is yet to identify and arrest the accused in the matter.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
