Pakistan releases captured Indian pilot in bid to ease tensions

Pakistan released a captured Indian pilot Friday in an attempt to reduce tensions between the nuclear rivals.

It shot down an Indian fighter jet this week, leading to concerns that the two nations might be at the brink of all-out war. But on Friday, in attempt to tamp down the tension, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was released back into Indian custody at a border crossing.

A large crowd of people gathered to witness the handover, many cheering and snapping photos. After his return, Varthaman was sent to the hospital to receive a medical evaluation. Indian journalist Aditya Raj Kaul captured the moment Varthaman was taken from an airport in New Delhi to a military hospital for examination.

Cavalcade of Wing Commander Abhinandan leaves from the Palam Technical Airport in New Delhi towards Military Hospital for medical check-up. Heavy security of Air Force Police and Delhi Police. pic.twitter.com/4uyAXkfW6w — Aditya Raj Kaul (@AdityaRajKaul) March 1, 2019



Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted about the return noting the “inspiration” that the Indian military brings: “Welcome Home Wing Commander Abhinandan! The nation is proud of your exemplary courage.”

Welcome Home Wing Commander Abhinandan!



The nation is proud of your exemplary courage.



Our armed forces are an inspiration for 130 crore Indians.



Vande Mataram! — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 1, 2019



This week has seen the most intense escalation between India and Pakistan in 20 years. The tension began after Pakistani terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed responsibility for killing more than 40 Indian police with a suicide bomb in Indian-controlled Kashmir last week. Jaish-e-Mohammed’s stated goal is to unite India-controlled Kashmir with Pakistan under Sharia law.

India has retaliated with airstrikes, entering Pakistani territory for the first time since 1971. In addition to airstrikes and mortar fire, there have been exchanges of gunfire from both sides of the border.

The international community hopes that Friday’s move will ease pressure in the region and de-escalate the odds of a war. India and Pakistan both possess dozens of nuclear weapons. They have been at war three times since partition from the United Kingdom in 1947, though not since each has acquired nukes.
