IAF air strike hit 4 buildings in Jaish madrassa: Media report

New Delhi:

At least four buildings inside the Jaish-e-Mohammad training camp in Balakot were hit by Indian missiles. The Indian Express quoted a source as saying that intelligence agencies have evidence, in the form of imagery from Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), showing that the four buildings, identified as targets, were hit by five S-2000 precision-guided munition (PGM) fired from IAF’s Mirage-2000 fighter jets. The missiles hit inside the campus of Madrasa Taleem-ul-Quran run by Jaish which is located on the same ridge line as the hilltop, a few hundred metres to the east, according to the Indian Express report. Earlier, Pakistan confirmed that the area was hit by IAF jets. However, it has so far denied any damage.



“Why did the Pakistan Army seal the madrasa after the strike? Why did it not allow journalists to visit the madrasa? We have evidence in the form of SAR imagery to show that a building used as a guest house, where brother of Maulana Masood Azhar used to stay; an L-shaped building where trainers used to stay; a double-storied building used to house students entering the seminary and another building where those undergoing final combat training used to stay, were hit by the bombs,” The Indian Express quoted an official as saying.



‘It is for the political leadership to decide if it wants to release that imagery and make public what is a ‘classified’ capability. The SAR images are not as clear as satellite pictures and we couldn’t get a good satellite picture on Tuesday because of heavy clouds. That would have settled the debate,” the official added.

"The madrasa was selected carefully as it was in the middle of nowhere and there was little chance of any civilian casualties. Intelligence given to the IAF was accurate and timely,” the official said.



Earlier, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale spoke about ‘intelligence operation.’ “In an intelligence lead operation, India struck the biggest training camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot. In this operation, a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commander and Jihadis were eliminated,” Gokhale said. “Credible information was received that JeM was attempting other attacks in the country. A pre-emptive strike became important. India struck the biggest camp of JeM in Balakot,” Gokhale added.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
