Witness discharged after frantic search for document fails

Suleman Usman Bakery case

Mumbai 1992-93 riots

Wireless Control Room

Joint Police Commissioner RD Tyagi

madarsa

The ‘log book’ wherein the wireless messages pertaining to the raid had been entered could not be found.Hardly had it started that the much-delayed trial of seven policemen in theof theencountered another hiccup, as an original document could not be traced on Friday.Head Constable Amrut Ingale, who was posted in 2001 in the, took the stand but had to be discharged after public prosecutor Ratnavali Patil and the cops assisting her hunted feverishly in files dating back 26 years, when the firing inside the Bakery had taken place.The original ‘log book’ and ‘register’ wherein the wireless messages pertaining to the January 9, 1993 raid on the bakery had been entered could not be found. Only the xerox was available.The audio cassettes containing the messages and their transcript, however, are available. The hunt for them had stalled the trial for a long time, as reported earlier in this paper. These wireless messages were exchanged between the policemen at the Bakery, including thenand the Control Room. They describe the situation outside the Bakery and after the raid got over. The policemen are charged with murder of unarmed inmates of the bakery and the adjacentAccording to the chargesheet, these wireless messages disprove the police version that there was firing upon them from the top of the bakery from the morning of January 9. Additional Sessions Judge UM Padwad expressed anger at this further delay and asked that the investigating officer (IO) be summoned to explain where these original documents are. He also asked that the DCP/SP of the Special Task Force, which investigated the incident in 2001, to appear personally before the court.The IO, Prahlad Sonawane, retired as DCP some years back. In the long course that this case has taken, he has only appeared after repeated summons. So far, only one witness, a panch, has testified in this case. He turned hostile.
