ISI's sinister plan to target security personnel in Kashmir unearthed, intel report warns of poisoning of ration stocks

Amid an escalation of India-Pakistan tension following Pulwama terror attack and India's subsequent airstrikes on Jaish-e-Mohammed camp in Pakistan, intelligence agencies have warned that the ISI is planning to target security personnel deployed in Kashmir by poisoning their rations.

In an intel note, seen by Zee Media, Criminal Investigation Department (CID) of Jammu and Kashmir has alerted security agencies in the valley of chatter that Pakistan Military Intelligence and Inter-Services Intelligence agents were planning to mix poison in the ration of security forces deployed in Kashmir.

"Chatter floated by a Pakistani number claims that Pakistan MI (military intelligence) and ISI agents operation in Kashmir are planning to mix poison in ration stocks of security forces deployed in the region,” the note said.

Following the warning, the forces have been put on alert. Authorities have asked forces to ensure the security of ration depots of all camps. They have also suggested to check the ration being moved to Kashmir to ensure the safety for forces operating in the state.

The warning comes after Pulwama attack, carried out by Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammed, in which a suicide bomber targeted the convoy of CRPF personnel, killing at least 40 jawans.

Following the attack on paramilitary personnel on February 14, the Indian Air Force on Tuesday struck the JeM training camp in Balakot. The government said that a very large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, senior commanders and groups of jihadis who were being trained for fidayeen action were eliminated in the operation.

A day later on Wednesday, Pakistan Air Force violated Indian airspace in their attempt to target military installations in Jammu and Kashmir. While Indian forces foiled the attack and shot down an F-16 of the Pak Air Force, India lost a MiG-21 in the engagement. The pilot of the Indian jet, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was captured by Pakistan and was released two days later on Friday after international pressure on Islamabad.

(With inputs from Ieshan Wani)
