The big news: ‘Good to be back,’ says IAF pilot after return from Pakistan, and 9 other top stories

A look at the headlines right now:

IAF pilot Abhinandan walks into India via Wagah border after being released by Pakistan: The pilot walked onto the Indian side around 9.20 pm on Friday. Pakistan foreign minister now claims Jaish-e-Mohammad was not behind Pulwama bombing: Shah Mahmood Qureshi claimed that people known to the terrorist outfit in Pakistan had been in touch with the JeM and that they denied planning the attack. ‘Go all out to explain reasons for air strikes,’ Parliament panel tells Ministry of External Affairs: The committee, led by Congress MP Shashi Tharoor, met in the Parliament House. BJP criticises Mamata Banerjee for ‘doubting armed forces’, says it’s shameful: BJP’s West Bengal unit chief Dilip Ghosh claimed some political leaders and parties were speaking ‘Pakistan’s language’. ‘When will you return to face proceedings?’ Bombay High Court asks Vijay Mallya: The court was hearing Mallya’s petition against a special court’s order to declare the businessman a fugitive. Four security personnel, a civilian killed in encounter in Kupwara, say officials: A civilian was reportedly killed in the clashes that followed the encounter. Pakistan plans to lodge eco-terrorism complaint with UN against India for air strikes: Climate Change Minister Malik Amin Aslam said the government will conduct an environmental impact assessment, that will form the basis of its plaint. Lok Sabha polls will be held on time, says Election Commission amid India-Pakistan tensions: Arora defended electronic voting machines, saying they were made by ‘highly secure companies’. Rahul Gandhi promises 500 sq ft homes for Mumbai slum-dwellers if Congress comes to power: Gandhi reiterated his promise of providing a minimum income for every person if his party Congress is voted to power in the Lok Sabha elections. Saudi Arabia revokes citizenship of Osama bin Laden’s son Hamza: The decision was made public a day after the United States announced a reward of up to $1 million for information on the al Qaeda leader.
