Jamaat 'Contribution' Hailed, Centre Slammed For 'Unfair Ban...

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) SRINAGAR — Democracy is a battle of ideas. Crackdown followed by banning of Jammat Islami (JK) is condemnable, another example of high handedness and muscular approach of GOI to deal with political issue of J & K--- Mehbooba Mufti By banning JeI, the government will achieve nothing but give it a dissident glamour. The move will not help; it will rather impede the process of reconciliation and rapprochement in our state—Ali Mohammad Sagar In a vibrant democracy ideas have to be fought not banned. This organisation has given us illustrious leaders and legislators— Sajad Lone Jamat-e-Islami has made huge contributions in education and social sectors and has also played its part in genuine social reforms, the party has considerable following in every nook and corner of the state among all sections of society— Er. Rasheed (Jamaat) politically silent for a long time; no question of their involvement in 'unlawful activities' does not arise— Kashmir Centre for Social and Development Studies Srinagar: Mainstream parties and civil society groups Friday asked the Centre to revoke the 'unfair ban' on Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir, saying it is against the essence of democracy which allows space to opposing political thoughts.

Peoples Democratic Party president Mehbooba Mufti termed the decision as another example of "muscular approach" of the Centre to deal with the political issue and wondered if "being anti-BJP" is "anti national now".

"Democracy is a battle of ideas. Crackdown followed by banning of Jammat Islami (JK) is condemnable, another example of high handedness and muscular approach of GOI to deal with political issue of J & K," the former chief minister said in a tweet.

The Centre on Thursday banned the Jamaat-e-Islami Jammu and Kashmir for five years under anti-terror law on grounds that it was "in close touch" with militant outfits and is expected to "escalate secessionist movement" in the state.

A notification, banning the group under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, was issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs after a high-level meeting on security, chaired by Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Before imposing the five-year-long ban, more than 250 leaders and cadres of the organisation were picked up by police during nocturnal raids throughout the Valley.

After lodging them in local police stations, many senior leaders of the Jamaat have been shifted to the central jail in Srinagar city.

Mehbooba, who led a coalition government with the BJP from April 2016 to June 2018, tweeted, "Why is GoI so uncomfortable with Jamaat e Islami? Radicalised Hindu groups representing fringe elements are given carte blanche to spread misinformation & vitiate the atmosphere.

"But an org that has worked tirelessly for Kashmiris is banned. Is being anti BJP anti national now (sic)?"

National Conference general secretary Ali Mohammad Sagar expressed dismay over the Centre's decision, saying it will impede the process of reconciliation in the state, and demanded that the ban be rescinded.

'By ideologies, we mean a specific mind set. It has be tackled by arguments. By banning JeI, the government will achieve nothing but give it a dissident glamour. The move will not help; it will rather impede the process of reconciliation and rapprochement in our state,' he said.

Sagar said it does not augur well for a democracy like India to ban socio-political outfits.

The government could have used a platform of arguments in dealing with the dissent. Suppression will inevitably breed radicalization, he said and asked the Centre to roll back the decision in the greater good of the country.

Peoples Conference chairman Sajad Gani Lone, a former ally of the BJP, also opposed the ban, terming it against ethos, ideals and essence of a vibrant democracy.

Lone advocated an early revocation of this "unfair ban".

"True test of democracy lies in allowing space to opposing political thoughts and ideologies rather than putting a cage around people with a certain political orientation," he said.

The former minister appreciated Jamaat's contribution in social and political spheres.

"In a vibrant democracy ideas have to be fought not banned. This organisation has given us illustrious leaders and legislators," he said.

The group has been banned for five years. It has to be ratified by a tribunal constituted by the Home Ministry.

The outfit, which was formed in 1945 as a chapter of the Jamaat-e-Islami Hind and separated in 1953 due to differences over political ideology with the parent body, was banned in 1990.

The previous ban lapsed in 1995 and since then it has never been invoked again.

Condemning ban on Jamat-e-Islami, AIP President Er. Rasheed accused New Delhi of choking political space and continuing with its policies of suppression on Kashmiris.

In a statement, Rasheed said, 'It is unfortunate that rather talking to genuine stak holders over resolution to Kashmir issue, New Delhi is keen bent on muzzling the genuine voices. While Jamat-e-Islami has made huge contributions in education and social sectors and has also played its part in genuine social reforms, the party has considerable following in every nook and corner of the state among all sections of society.

The Jamat-I-Islami constitution doesn't believe in running underground movements and it was the reason why Jamat-e-Islami had deep differences with Geelani Sahab which ended at their parting ways from each other. Jamat has also openly denounced violence and believes in peaceful resolution to Kashmir dispute as such banning the organization carries no sense and logic'.

Er. Rasheed appealed central government to reconsider the decision and revoke the ban before it creates further disappointment among masses. He accused Governor of crossing his domain and getting indulged in constitutional assaults on the special status of the state. Kashmir Centre for Social and Development Studies (KCSDS) strongly condemned GOI's announcement of ban on the politically almost dormant Jama'at-e-Islami for a period of five years to prevent them from 'having any political space in J & K.'In a statement, a spokesperson of KCSDS said that they have been politically silent for a long time and the question of their involvement in 'unlawful activities' does not arise. 'This has been done days after its top leaders and dozens of members were abruptly and inexplicably arrested,' Spokesperson said.
