Patna High Court notice to ex-CMs on lifetime bungalows

The Patna High Court on Tuesday shot off notices to Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and his predecessors, seeking to know why they could not live in private homes when they were already provided with high security cover.

According to The Bihar Special Security Group (Amendment) Act, 2010, former chief ministers of Bihar are entitled to lifetime government accommodation and related perks, without any financial limits.

The order by a division bench of Chief Justice Amreshwar Pratap Sahi and Justice Anjana Mishra asked the state government to file a reply on the matter within four weeks, slating the next hearing for February 11. The court also sought to know the basis for the privileges provided to them.

The court notice has been issued to former chief ministers Lalu Prasad Yadav and Rabri Devi, Jitan Ram Manjhi, Jagannath Mishra, Satish Prasad Singh and CM Nitish, who continues to occupy the 7, Circular Road bungalow allotted to him as a former CM along with 1, Anne Marg bungalow, the official residence of the CM.

The court also expressed surprise over how two bungalows were allotted to one person though the state government submitted that CM Nitish does not reside at the Circular Road residence allotted to him. Citing the Supreme Court ruling that had struck down the provision for bungalows to former chief ministers in Uttar Pradesh last year, the court asked why it had not been implemented in Bihar.

During the hearing, it was also brought to the notice of the court that an expense of around Rs 1.74 crore had been incurred on various works at 7, Circular road, before its allotment to CM Nitish in 2016.

Earlier on Monday, the Patna High Court had dismissed the petition of RJD leader Tejashwi Prasad Yadav seeking a stay order the state government's notice to vacate the residence allotted to him while he was the deputy CM of Bihar.

2 Houses For CM?

Patna High Court also expressed surprise over how two bungalows were allotted to one person though the state government submitted that CM Nitish Kumar does not reside at the Circular Road residence allotted to him
