Head constable killed during picket checking in Dwarka

A 53-year-old Delhi Police Head Constable was killed allegedly after being hit by a speeding car in Dwarka's Sector-23 on Tuesday. Police have arrested the accused while he was getting his car repaired.

According to the police, the deceased has been identified as Guljari Lal who was posted at Sector-23 police station in Dwarka while the accused has been identified as Nagesh Kapoor (33). The incident took place at around 1 am on Tuesday when the Head Constable Guljari Lal along with another Head Constable Prakash were checking vehicles at a picket in Sector-23 area.

"They saw a Baleno car coming towards them. They signalled the car to stop but the driver accelerated the vehicle and fled, hitting the barricade at the picket. The barricade hit Guljari Lal on his neck. He was rushed to Venkteshwar Hospital where doctors declared him brought dead," said Anto Alphonse, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka).

A case under section 186/353/279/304A/427 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) was registered at Dwarka Sector-23 police station.

Police teams were dispatched to check the car repair shops in Dwarka and adjoining areas to nab the accused, the senior officer said.

"We approached the insurance agents and service stations to collect any intelligence regarding the vehicle involved in the accident. The message was also circulated on WhatsApp and to RWAs in the area," said Alphonse.

Based on specific input received from a car repair shop mechanic in Pochanpur village that a Baleno car is parked near a shop in damaged condition, the police team rushed to the spot who then verified the car.

"Subsequently, one of the accused identified as Nagesh Kapoor (33), a resident of Gopi Apartment in Pochanpur was taken into custody. During interrogation, the accused revealed that he was coming from Gurugram after meeting his friends around 1:00 am and when the police present at the picket tried to stop him for checking, he got sacred and in order to escape he hit the police barricades and the police officials standing there," Alphonse said.

After the incident, the accused parked the damaged car at a safe place near his home. When he took out his vehicle for repair he was nabbed by the police.

Guljari Lal had joined the police force in 1990. He is survived by two sons and a daughter. While his daughter is working as a teacher at a Kendriya Vidyalaya in Shillong, Meghalaya, his sons are still unemployed.

He was living in Najafgarh and was a native of Kotputli in Rajasthan. His last rites were performed with a Guard of Honour at Kotputli, the police said.
