Delhi: Dog owner held after he shoots man for hurling stone at canine

A man has been arrested from Kashmiri Gate in connection with the murder case of a 30-year old man who was shot dead after he objected to a dog barking at him in North-East Delhi's Welcome area.

According to the police, the accused has been identified as Mehtab, who allegedly shot at the deceased Aafak who worked as a tailor at a factory. The deceased had thrown a stone at the dog as he was scared the dog might attack him.

" Following the incident, Mehtab had fled the city and had gone to Dehradun. On Tuesday afternoon, he had come back to the capital and was arrested from Kashmiri Gate. During initial interrogation, he has disclosed that he was heavily drunk at the time of the incident," said Atul Thakur, Deputy Commissioner of police, (north east).

Police said that further investigation is underway.

According to Shaukat, Aafak's father-in-law he was at his house in the same area when Aafak's eldest son Altaf (10) came running to him saying that his father had passed away. "I was at my house when he came and told me. I initially thought he was joking and randomly saying something. Later on I heard others also talking about it and ran to the lane where he was killed but by then he was already taken to the hospital," said Shaukat.

Aafak's employer Jarrar stated that he had left from the factory around 4pm. When he reached home he was informed that his other son Rizwan (8) had injured himself after a cylinder fell on his fingers and was rushed to the hospital. Aafak immediately left his house and was on the way to the hospital when the dog started barking at him and even tried to bite him. Scared that the dog will attack him he picked up a stone and threw at him.

The owner of the dog Mehtab saw the dog being hit and argued with Aafak. In fit of anger Mehtab fired at Aafak and the bullet hit him on the back. He was rushed to the GTB Hospital where doctors declared him dead on arrival. As per doctors the bullet pierced through the back and punctured his heart leading to his death.

The dog, Jack was on Monday seen tied in the background even though police officers did not confirm his name or breed. But as per locals the dog belonged to Mehtab.

TRAGIC END
