Abhinandan will get a new meaning now: PM Modi hails brave Indian Air Force pilot

Prime Minister Narendra Modi. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday hailed brave Indian Air Force pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, for his exemplary courage and presence of mind after being captured by the Pakistan Army following aerial combat with Pakistan Air Force along the LoC earlier this week.

Speaking at an event in the national capital, PM Modi said that the word ‘Abhinandan’ will have a new meaning henceforth. “Hindustan jo bhi karega, duniya use gaur se dekhti hai. Is desh ki takat hai ki dictionary ke shabdon ke arth badal deta hai. Kabhi ‘Abhinandan’ ka angrezi hota tha ‘congratulation’, ab ‘Abhinandan’ ka arth badal jaayega (The world observes closely whatever India does. The strength of this country is such that it can change the meanings of words in the dictionary. The meaning of ‘Abhinandan’ once used to be ‘congratulations’. Today, it will get a new meaning),” Modi said at the Construction Technology India 2019 event in New Delhi today.

PM Modi at 'Construction Techonolgy India'19' in Delhi: Hindustan jo bhi karega, duniya use gaur se dekhti hai. Is desh ki takat hai ki dictionary ke shabdon ke arth badal deta hai. Kabhi '#Abhinandan' ka angrezi hota tha 'Congratulation', ab 'Abhinandan' ka arth badal jaayega. pic.twitter.com/vit3RTCXBS — ANI (@ANI) March 2, 2019

Pakistan handed over Abhinandan to India on Friday night after a prolonged delay and the brave pilot crossed over into the Indian side at about 9:15 pm. His much-awaited release was delayed due to procedures, and reportedly due to the last minute propaganda video released and later taken down by the Pakistan government. “Recording of his video message caused a delay in his handing over,” news agency PTI quoted a source as saying.

PM Modi welcomed him on Twitter yesterday and said that the “nation is proud of your exemplary courage”.

Welcome Home Wing Commander Abhinandan!



The nation is proud of your exemplary courage.



Our armed forces are an inspiration for 130 crore Indians.



Vande Mataram! — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 1, 2019

Banned Pakistani terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out a brutal attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans on February 14 in Awantipora area of Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district. The attack took place around 3:30 pm after a suicide bomber, identified as local boy Adil Ahmad Dar, in a Mahindra Scorpio car loaded with 350 kilograms of explosives rammed into a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying over 2500 CRPF personnel on the Srinagar-Jammu Highway.

Following the attack, Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed.

The offensive that was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.
