Jammu and Kashmir: 4 Indian forces, 1 civilian killed - The Muslim News

By Zahid Rafiq

SRINAGAR, Jammu and Kashmir, India, (AA): Four personnel of Indian armed forces were killed in a gun battle with militants on Friday in Kashmir’s north, police said.

“Two police personnel, two CRPF [paramilitary] personnel and a civilian sustained critical injuries and later succumbed to their wounds,” the police said in a statement.

The police identified the slain civilian as 21-year-old Wasim Ahmad Mir, who they said, was killed by a bullet injury in a nearby area.

At least 11 soldiers including a paramilitary commandant were wounded during the ongoing gunfight and clashes in Handwara area of north Kashmir’s Kupwara district on Friday.

Quoting official sources, news agency GNS reported that the encounter broke out after the joint team of army’s 22 RR, 92 Battalion CRPF and SOG launched a cordon-and-search operation at Khanan Babagund in Langate during midnight of Thursday and Friday. A fierce encounter started and two militants were believed to have been killed.

However, when the joint search team went to retrieve the militant bodies amid a lull, one of the two militants, earlier believed to be dead rose from the rubble and fired indiscriminately leading to injuries to CRPF Inspector, a policeman and five government forces’ personnel including army soldiers who were shifted to hospital.

Jammu and Kashmir, a Muslim-majority Himalayan region, is held by India and Pakistan in parts and claimed by both in full. A small sliver of Kashmir is also held by China.

Since they were partitioned in 1947, the two countries have fought three wars — in 1948, 1965 and 1971 — two of them over Kashmir.

Also, in Siachen glacier in northern Kashmir, Indian and Pakistani troops have fought intermittently since 1984. A cease-fire came into effect in 2003.

Some Kashmiri groups in Jammu and Kashmir have been fighting against Indian rule for independence, or for unification with neighboring Pakistan.

According to several human rights organizations, thousands of people have reportedly been killed in the conflict in the region since 1989.

Additional report by The Muslim News

[Photo: Earlier on 26 February, an Indian paramilitary troopers put down protests during a demonstration after National Investigation Agency (NIA) India’s domestic Counter Terrorism Law Enforcement Agency, carried out early morning raids at the houses of prominent separatist leaders in Kashmir, India on February 26, 2019. Photographer: Faisal Khan/AA]
