Pakistan minister recommends Nobel Peace Prize for PM Imran Khan – DETAILS

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan. | File image

New Delhi: After facing severe criticism and backlash for lack of proper action against terrorism emanating from the country, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan is once again making headlines. Amusing as it may sound, Pakistan's Information and Broadcasting Minister Chaudhry Fawad Hussain has recommended Khan's name for the Nobel Peace Prize “for his contribution towards peace in the region”.

Hussain submitted a resolution in the National Assembly Secretariat of Pakistan demanding Khan be given the honour, Radio Pakistan said in a report. The resolution stated that Khan “played a sagacious role in de-escalating tension between Pakistan and India”.

Khan, however, denied claims that organisations based out of Pakistan were involved in terrorist activities in India and that they would act “if the Indian government furnished proof”.

Indian Air Force pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was captured by the Pakistan Army following aerial combat with Pakistan Air Force along the LoC earlier this week, was on Friday returned to India as a “peace gesture” by Pakistan.

India and Pakistan have been at loggerheads ever since Partition in 1947, but tensions escalated massively after a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force jawans on February 14 in a brutal attack on Indian soil. The attack that took place in broad daylight left the country in shock and drew severe criticism for the Pakistan government from international communities.

Following the attack, Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed.

The offensive that was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.
