High speed mobile internet throttled

High speed mobile internet throttled

Restrictions in Anantnag, old city of Srinagar

SRINAGAR, Mar 1: Authorities today imposed stringent restrictions in parts of Kashmir valley including Srinagar city and Anantnag in south Kashmir with blocking of high speed mobile internet as a precautionary measure.

The move officials said was taken as a precautionary measure to maintain and order following Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) protest call post Friday prayers against ban on socio religious organization Jamat-e-Islami (JeI) by Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA).

Authorities in the old city areas imposed restrictions since morning with all exit and entry points sealed with barbed wire and iron barricades.

Besides, additional deployment of police and paramilitary forces was made in down town to thwart any attempt of protest by people on JRL call against ban on Jamat.

Restrictions were also imposed in south Kashmir’s Anantnag district with police and paramilitary CRPF deployed in strength on main roads and interiors as well.

A lady also suffered injuries during clashes that broke out between the deployed police and paramilitary forces and youth at Nawakadal area of the old city.

The 45 years old Neelofar from Ellahi Bagh Soura was rushed to the hospital after being hit with a stone during clashes in Nawakadal. Hospital authorities however termed her condition as stable.

Chairman of his faction Hurriyat Conference (M), Mirwiaz Umar Farooq who also delivers Friday sermon at historic Jama Masjid being chief cleric of Kashmir continued to be under detention at his Nigeen residence.

It may be in place to mention that Union Home department late Thursday evening issued a formal order of having announced (JeI) as ‘unlawful’ organization. The ban according to MHA order was imposed for next five years.

Pertinently to mention that dozens of Jamat leaders and activists were arrested by National Investigation Agency (NIA) in Kashmir over the past few days.

In another order the Union Cabinet approved the Jammu and Kashmir reservation (amendment) Ordinance, bringing people residing along International Border (IB) within the realm of Reservation at par with people living in areas adjoining Line of Control (LoC).

Authorities fearing law and order blocked high speed mobile internet in Srinagar and other parts of the valley.

Meanwhile, dozens of JKLF activists on JRL call held protest at Maisuma area of the city against ban on Jamat-e-Islami.

Shouting slogans “we want freedom, revoke order” dozens of JKLF activists took out a protest march from Maisuma to Budshah Chowk against MHA’s order banning Jamat for five years.

The protesters said Government of India’s move to ban Jamat in Jammu and Kashmir is aimed at choking the voice of dissent.

They said the centre relentlessly make moves which goes against the interests of the state and that of the common masses.
