Bihar: Mobile, sim cards recovered from jails

In raids carried out simultaneously across jails in Bihar, the state police has recovered mobile phones, SIM cards and other prohibited items from various jails during searches.

Acting on the information regarding illegal activities taking place inside the jails in Bihar, raids and searches are being carried out across all the jails in the state.

DGP Gupteshwar Pandey, speaking to India Today said he has been receiving complaints regarding illegal activities and wrongdoing taking place inside the jails in the state following which he has ordered raids to be carried out on Saturday.

Uses of mobile phones and drugs is rampant in jails in Bihar. On many occasions earlier, police has recovered mobile phones, SIM cards and other prohibited items from various jails during searches.

Led by respective District Magistrate and Superintendent of Police, raids are presently underway in Vaishali, Muzaffarpur, Bhojpur, Siwan, Gaya, Katihar and Begusarai districts.

According to sources, in the backdrop of rising crime in the state, government has been keeping a strong vigil on jails as it has been reported that most of the crime taking place is being remote controlled by criminals lodged inside.

In Begusarai, the police has recovered to mobile phones, ganja and chilam during the raids.

Similar raids across all jails in the state were carried out in August last year just ahead of the Independence Day.

Gupteshwar Pandey who took charge as new DGP last month is in a crackdown mode and has warned criminals that police will be retaliate in the same coin if they pick up arms. In order to make policing more effective he has also carried out surprise inspection in Patna, Muzaffarpur, Vaishali and Bhojpur at midnight.

Two SHO's in Patna, Gardani Bagh and SK Puri and three in Vaishali, Town, Sadar and Industrial Area were latest suspended for dereliction of duty. The SHOs in Vaishali district were suspended for not maintaining up to date station diaries.

Also Read | 2 elderly women killed in Bihar; 5 held

Also Watch | Congress leader Kirti Azad accepts he benefited from booth capturing in 1999
