YOGA CAN HELP YOU RELAX AND CALM DOWN





Stress and anxiety contaminate health and quality of life more than any other emotion. Stress has been compared to a slow-moving time bomb, which can alter the quality of life. It can cause diabetes, blood pressure and heart disease in healthy body, within a short span of time. The good news is that stress can be controlled and eradicated gradually by our own will. Since yoga works very well by awaking ‘chakras’ of the body. Therefore, it helps to reduce stress and anxiety.

Originated in India, yoga is a discipline in which the body and mind are conceived as a unit. Through the yogic postures (Asanas) and the breathing (Pranayama) our body is filled with energy and positivity, it also relaxes the muscular tension and the cells are stimulated.

Unlike other stress-reducing practices, yoga allows you to reduce not only the symptoms of stress but also makes you aware of the cause of stress or anxiety. During performing yoga, our body releases accumulated tensions and reaches to a great state of relaxation. So, this influences our central nervous system as well as the circulatory, digestive and respiratory system. Yoga provides for relaxation and that too instantly. It also helps in recomposing the energy balance of the body, loosening and releasing tensions and contractures.

We are automated beings that contemplate life always from the same prism. Our reactions and attitudes do not change since we are submerged in numerous cultural, social, educational, etc. constraints that limit our freedom of development.

To regulate and balance the functions of the body and mind; it is necessary to learn to economize the energy produced by the body which, very often, is spent uselessly. More energy is employed in keeping muscles continually ready for action than in true action.

During relaxation, practically none of the prana (vital energy) is consumed. Other benefits include, decrease in anxiety and blood pressure, stabilization of cardiac and respiratory functions, improvement of blood circulation and quality of sleep, increased skin temperature, increased speed of reflexes and ability to concentrate and memory, as well as greater resistance to diseases and better cerebral oxygenation.

The practice of relaxation in a habitual and constant way also entails the increase of the creative capacity and greater capacity of learning. Also, the development of the level of consciousness, the capacity for direct internal visualization and reflection, of the natural tendency. The key is abhyasa (constant practice), that is, integrate relaxation into everyday life.

Yoga to relax and calm down

Here are 5 yoga ways to combat stress, which are very easy to put into practice. Of course, these types of exercises can be carried out occasionally. Although it is also worth practicing yoga as often as possible.

•Child's Pose

Also, called balasana, this posture is perfect to combat stress as it is used in yoga classes to rest. Therefore, the child's posture provides mental rest and is mainly used to calm anxiety and general stress. Performing it is very easy: just kneel and place your upper body on the floor with outstretch arms inhaling and exhaling

•Viparita Karani

This posture is obtained by putting legs on the wall. It is ideal for stress and back ailments. This is because this position decreases and relieves tension in the lower part of the spine and hip. Also, this posture is of great help in treating other types of aches and pains such as arthritis, insomnia, mild depression and cramps in various parts of the body.

•Savasana

The savasana posture is one of the basic way to relax and reduce stress. In broad outline, the body's posture relaxes the body, soothes the mind and relieves stress. Then, is used to treat anxiety, high blood pressure, depression and headaches. Although this posture seems simple, in truth it is not that simple. First of all, it requires being completely calm and focuses.

First, place your body facing up on yoga mat, with your legs open at hip height and rest your arms to one side with the palms facing up. Then close your eyes and breathe deeply and slowly, while taking all the relaxation to the body in general. Concentrate. This position should be maintained for about five or ten minutes.

•Closed-angle spine

This position helps in controlling stress and to have a better quality of life, especially in the emotional aspect. That is why this posture is very effective for anger and distress. The close-angle spine is performed as follows:

First, lie on your back, placing two small pillows on the side of each thigh. Then, place the palms of the feet facing each other.

The palms of the hands should be at the side of the body, looking up. Breathing should be slow and deep for one to two minutes. The knees should be open and close while you are doing this posture.

•Kapalabhati Pranayama

This type of posture is one of the well-known and easiest to perform. It helps mainly in relaxing the body and reducing stress and anxiety. In this case, it is enough to sit with knees bent and hands on knees. A series of deep and regular breathings are performed with the closed eyes.

When you practice these yogasanas, you begin to understand and perceive what impact they have on your body and mind. Each movement releases stress and tensions and after few minutes, the state of your mind improves. So now you are clearer and more relaxed than before. Your body is more rested and relaxed and you feel deeper state of joy and relaxation.




