Maharashtra politicians insinuate ‘inside knowledge’ in Pulwama attack

The Pulwama terror attack was carried out by a Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist on February 14. | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: Maharashtra Navnirman Sena chief Raj Thackeray’s speech in Kolhapur last week asking for an investigation into the intelligence lapses in Pulwama has set off a chain reaction among political leaders in Maharashtra. In a media interaction in Solapur, NCP leader Sharad Pawar said, “One has started to wonder if there is some truth in what Raj Thackeray has said.”

When probed further whether he agreed with Thackeray about an investigation, Pawar declined but reiterated that Thackeray was amongst the first to say a war like the situation could be created before the 2019 elections by the ruling party. Southern leader Pawan Kalyan also claimed that he had been told of war two years ago by the BJP.

At the peak of the border tensions, the MNS even released a video compilation of Raj Thackeray’s utterances since 2015 on the issue, in a bid to claim political acuity and relevance for the leader, for whom this is a ‘do or die’ election. It is no secret that Sharad Pawar has been trying to get Raj Thackeray in the grand alliance but Congress has so far maintained a stiff opposition to this. When probed further on his comments, Pawar told reporters in Solapur that the government needed to do more to bring Kashmiris closer to the Indian union, given that the suicide bomber was a local. The BJP government, however, feels that the time for a softer approach is long gone.

On Friday, another leader that the grand alliance has been courting, Prakash Ambedkar also alluded to the elusive ‘inside hand’. He said, “Of the buses in the convoy, this particular bus did not have the capacity to withstand a bombing. Someone gave the terrorists this information, someone from inside. This needs to be investigated. There are no two ways about Pakistan's involvement and we will wholeheartedly support the PM in action against Pakistan, we won't question it. But whether these insiders will be investigated, is a question.”

Ambedkar has so far not reached any agreement with the grand alliance for 2019, mainly because he aims to field candidates in Baramati, which is Sharad Pawar’s constituency.

The BJP on its part has dismissed all these allegations. In a rally in Uttar Pradesh, party president Amit Shah said, “Mamata Bannerjee wants to know if the airstrike happened. Akhilesh wants an investigation into Pulwama attacks. There is a limit to vote bank politics. The opposition is welcome to such politics at the cost of the country's security.”
