India, Pakistan accuse each other of ceasefire violations

A handout photo made available by the Pakistani military Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) shows shows trees damaged after Indian Air Force dropped their payloads near Balakot, Pakistan, Feb. 26, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/ISPR/HANDOUT HANDOUT EDITORIAL USE ONLY/NO SALES

People burn a mock of an Indian flag during an anti-India protest in Karachi, Pakistan, Mar. 01, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/SHAHZAIB AKBER

Indian Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) workers wear masks depicting Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Indian Air Force (IAF) Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman during a bike rally to celebrate Varthaman's return, in New Delhi, India, Mar. 02, 2019. EPA-EFE/RAJAT GUPTA

India and Pakistan continued to exchange fire across the Line of Control, or the de facto border between the two countries, in the disputed Kashmir region, a day after Islamabad had freed an Indian pilot to make way for peace talks.

Both the countries have accused each other of violating a ceasefire that has been in place since 2003 in the disputed region and have claimed that civilians have been killed in the crossfire.

Indian authorities on Saturday claimed three civilians were killed in Poonch frontier district, and one was injured, late on Friday night.

"A mortar shell hit the house of Mohammad Younus late last night killing his wife, son and daughter on spot," Deputy Commissioner (DC) Poonch, Rahul Yadav told EFE.

He said that Younus was rushed to a hospital in Jammu, where he is reported to be in a stable condition.

Police sources told EFE that the mortar hit the house after hours of cross-border firing between India and Pakistan.

The Pakistani army also said two civilians and two soldiers have been killed in the cross-border firing, although they did not say when the violations took place.

"Indian troops undertook firing along LOC (...) India also deliberately targeted civil population. 2 citizens embraced shahadat (died) while 2 got injured including a woman," said the Pakistani Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) in a statement.

Shortly after, in another statement the ISPR said that two Pakistani soldiers had died in another exchange of gunfire.

The Pakistani military reported that they had responded to the attacks with gunfire on Indian military posts.

"PAF (Pakistan Air Force) and PN (Pakistan Navy) continue to be alert and vigilant," said ISPR.

Allegations of ceasefire violations are relatively common between the two countries but the latest ones come amid the worst military escalation between the two nuclear powers in decades.

On Friday, Pakistan had handed over a pilot, captured on its territory after an aerial strike on Wednesday, to India in a gesture of peace aimed at de-escalating tension, which had shot up since Tuesday when Indian fighter jets had bombed Pakistani territory.

The target of the bombing was a military camp of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), a terrorist group that on Feb. 14 had carried out one of the deadliest attacks in the last three decades against security forces in Indian Kashmir, killing 42 policemen.

In response to the Indian air strikes, Pakistani warplanes bombarded Indian territory without causing casualties or damage, leading to cross-border airstrikes in which Pakistan claimed to have shot down two Indian fighter jets, while India said it had destroyed one jet and lost another.

India and Pakistan have fought two major wars over the disputed region of Kashmir - claimed in its entirety by both the countries - and several minor clashes.

A violent separatist insurgency has been in place in the region for decades and has claimed thousands of lives so far.

India accuses Pakistan of sponsoring militancy in Indian Kashmir and sheltering terrorists on its soil, who plan attacks on India, although Islamabad denies these charges.
