abinandan varthaman: Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman meets IAF pilot in Delhi hospital

Delhi

Indian Air Force

Air Chief Marshal

. @DefenceMinIndia meets the #AirWarrior #AbhinandanVarthaman at his hospital room in Delhi to convey the sentiment… https://t.co/yCatU2Vtvn — Defence Spokesperson (@SpokespersonMoD) 1551527167000

Pakistan Army

Imran Khan

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman met Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman at a hospital inon Saturday. Thepilot is undergoing medical evaluation at Air Force Central Medical Establishment (AFCME), a compact and specialised medical evaluation centre for aircrew of all the three services, as per standard operating procedure. Abhinandan, who was in Pakistan's custody, returned to India on March 1 at around 9:20 pm.The brave pilot, who displayed exemplary bravery and commitment to the nation, was brought to Delhi by an IAF flight at around 11:45 pm on Friday after Pakistan released him through the Attari-Wagah border.In her meeting, the Defence Minister conveyed to him that the entire nation is proud of his courage and determination. The Defence Minister appreciated his impeccable combat skills as well as calmness in adversity. She interacted with the family and the hospital staff too.Varthaman met his immediate family members as well as several top officials of the IAF this morning.Birender Singh Dhanoa on Saturday met Varthaman. During a separate meeting with the Air Chief, Varthaman is believed to have briefed him about his detention in Pakistan.After the health check up phase is over, debriefing sessions will be arranged for him.Amritsar's Deputy Commissioner Shiv Dular Singh Dhillon told reporters that the fighter pilot was glad he was back in India. Asked what Abhinandan told officials upon his return, the DC said he first smiled and remarked, "I am happy to be back to my country".Varthaman was captured by Pakistani authorities on February 27 after his MiG 21 Bison went down during a dogfight with Pakistani jets. Before his plane was hit, Varthaman had shot down an F-16 of Pakistan Air Force (PAF). He was in the custody of thesince Wednesday when his parachute drifted and fell inside Pakistan-occupied Kashmir.On Thursday, Pakistan Prime Ministerhad announced that Abhinandan would be released on Friday without any preconditions as a "gesture of peace".-- With inputs from agencies
