Top news of the day: Defence Minister meets Abhinandan, Samjhauta Express services to Pak restored, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on March 2 met Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman and conveyed to him that the entire nation is proud of his courage and determination, officials said. During the meeting at a medical facility of the Indian Air Force, Wg. Cmdr. Varthaman is understood to have explained to Ms. Sitharaman details about his nearly 60-hour stay in Pakistan.

The Samjhauta Express will leave for Pakistan from Delhi on Sunday after the two neighbours agreed to start services at their ends, a senior railway official told PTI. The announcement came a day after Pakistan released Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman.

Was the ‘man-eating’ tigress Avni that was killed in Maharashtra’s Yavatmal district a casualty of rising man-animal conflict, or was some other dynamic at play? Serish Nanisetti on how development projects in tiger habitats and the fragmentation of migration corridors call for a rethink of conservation policies

Former ICICI Bank CEO Chanda Kochhar and husband Deepak Kochhar appeared before the Enforcement Directorate here on Saturday in connection with a money-laundering case related to a bank loan fraud, officials said. The two reached the central agency’s regional office in Ballard Estate area around noon, a day after the ED raided their premises.

The UN Security Council has designated Hamza bin Laden, the son of slain Al Qaida chief Osama bin Laden, under its sanctions list, subjecting him to a travel ban, assets freeze and an arms embargo as it described him as being seen as the “most probable successor” of the group’s current leader Aiman al-Zawahiri.

Pakistani troops again violated ceasefire along the Line of Control on Saturday in Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir, prompting strong and effective retaliation by the Indian Army, a defence spokesman said.

The Aam Aadmi Party on Saturday announced candidates for six of the seven Lok Sabha seats in Delhi, a day after Delhi Congress president Sheila Dikshit rejected the possibility of an alliance between the two parties.

Did you know India has a hospital dedicated to elephants? Or that there is a specialised centre where abandoned race horses and branded donkeys are cared for?

Islamic State looks about to lose its last foothold - on the banks of the Euphrates near the Iraq border - but while its era of territorial rule may be over for now, there is near universal agreement that IS remains a threat.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be in Amethi, the Lok Sabha constituency of Congress president Rahul Gandhi, on March 3 to launch a Kalashnikov rifles manufacturing facility. During his visit, the Prime Minister will unveil several other development projects for Amethi and the region, a statement from his office said.
