Owaisi takes a political jab at Modi’s mera booth sabse Mazboot slogan

Owaisi takes a political jab at Modi’s mera booth sabse Mazboot slogan

Owaisi also slammed the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) and Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) brand of Islam and called them “demon” outfits.

news Elections

The All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief Asaduddin Owaisi took a political jab at Prime Minister Narendra Modi, for attending a ‘mera booth, sabse mazboot (my booth is the strongest),’ election preparation programme for BJP workers when an Indian aircraft was shot down in February.

The Member of Parliament from Hyderabad in response to the BJP slogan told voters to vote for what is good for the nation and not what is good for someone's booth. He was speaking on the occasion of 61st revival day of the AIMIM on Friday.

While addressing the allegations against his party for being the B team of the BJP, Owaisi said, “What was our mistake? Are we against Hindus? Are we against Dalits?…You may doubt because I am a Muslim but if BJP is saying ‘mera booth, sabse mazboot' (my booth is the strongest), then I am saying ‘mera sarhad majboot toh desh mazboot' (if my borders are protected, then my country is protected). So when you vote, keep in mind what is good for the nation and not the strength of someone’s booth."

The MP also took on Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan for his statement in a televised address that both countries should de-escalate considering the number of weapons both countries have.

"The Pakistan prime minister talks about atom bomb (Kya baat kartey hain?!)…What is he saying?…..Don't we have it? (Bomb toh humaare paas bhi hai) We have it too. What is he talking about?", said Owaisi and asked the Pakistani PM to stop playing the Muslim card in India. “Muslims of this country know better. Handle your ‘Lashkar-e-Shaitaan,” he added.

Owaisi then went on to criticise the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) and Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and the brand of Islam they represent and called them “demon” outfits. He also appealed to people to not address the JeM chief Masood Azhar as a “Maulana” but a “devils dog and butcher of humanity.”
