India sent warning after two Pakistan soldiers killed at border during mortar shelling

India Pakistan: Jet fighters appear to battle over Kashmir

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistan’s military has issued a new worrying warning to its Indian counterpart as tensions between the two nuclear-armed countries remain high. On Saturday, Islamabad said its air force and navy "continue to be alert and vigilant”. This comes after Imran Khan’s Government decided to release on Friday Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, the Indian pilot who crashed his plane on enemy soil on Wednesday following a dogfight with Pakistani JF-17 on Wednesday.

Pakistan touted Mr Abhinandan's return as "as a goodwill gesture” after weeks of unease. The country’s foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said: "As a gesture of peace and to de-escalate matters, the Indian pilot who is under arrest with us will be released today in the afternoon at the Wagah border." The pilot himself thanked the Pakistani army for how he had been treated in a speech broadcasted by Islamabad’s national TV. Explaining he had been saved from an angry crowd chasing him after his crash, Mr Abhinandan said: "The Pakistani army is a very professional service. READ MORE: Indian pilot RELEASED: First picture of Pakistan-captured fighter pilot walking free

Pakistan warned India its army remains 'vigilant' amid tensions in Kashmir

"I have spent time with the Pakistan army. I am very impressed." The return to India of Mr Abhinandan was broadcasted live on TV, signifying the importance of the gesture. And it was followed by an invitation to the Indian Government by Pakistani leaders to do its part to avoid a conflict. But clashes in Kashmir continued throughout Friday and Saturday.

India Pakistan: Captured pilot freed by military on Wagah border

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was freed on Friday

A fin of an exploded mortar found inside a damaged house near the LoC

Shelling across the so-called Line of Control (LoC), which acts as a border in the disputed area, killed two Pakistani soldiers after they exchanged fire with their Indian counterparts. New Delhi accused Pakistan of firing mortar shell across the LoC border. Fears of a new war between India and Pakistan were fuelled after a suicide car bombing on February 14 killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police officers in Kashmir. The attack met the response of India, which on Tuesday launched an air strike on what the Government said were militant camps of the Jaish-e Mohammad group behind the bombing. READ MORE: India-Pakistan: TOTAL WAR fears return as ‘shelling resumes in Kashmir killing civilians’

Pakistan touted Mr Abhinandan's return as "as a goodwill gesture”
