‘Masood Azhar is a devil’s dog, butcher of humanity,’ says AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi; also slams Imran Khan

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi (File image) | Photo Credit: ANI

Hyderabad: AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi on Saturday slammed Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar, saying that he should not be referred to as ‘Maulana’ but as ‘devil's dog and butcher of humanity.’ Addressing a public gathering, the MP from Hyderabad said, “Exploding bombs, attacking people is not Islam.” He added that enemies of India were “our (Muslims’) enemies too.”

Owaisi also lashed out at Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, hitting out at him for playing the nuclear and Muslim cards against India. Stating that Khan often makes “weird” comments in his country’s Parliament, Owaisi said, “Khan says we have atom bomb, etc. Do we not have those? We also have.”

The AIMIM chief also asked Khan to avoid playing the Muslim card in a bid to attack India. “Muslims of this country know better. Handle your ‘Lashkar-e-Shaitaan' and Jaish-e-Shaitaan,” the Lok Sabha member said while referring to terror groups Lashkar-e-Taiba and Jaish-e-Shaitaan.

He also called out Khan for ‘misrepresenting’ the role of Indian rulers Tipu Sultan and Bahadur Shah Zafar in his speeches. As per news agency PTI, Owaisi said, “Tipu Sultan was never against Hindus but against the regimes, whosoever led those.”

Owaisi, who was speaking at a function in the city on the occasion of 61st revival day of AIMIM, also blasted Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi who said on Friday that Masood Azhar was in Pakistan but was “very ill.” The AIMIM leader said, “He (Qureshi) asked for evidence. What more evidence do they need? His organisation (Jaish-e-Mohammad) is banned.”

He further added, “Sixty years ago, at this very place, Jinnah came. We didn't accept Jinnah's message. We said India is our country. Those who understood Islam, stayed in India while the ‘razakars' (volunteers), who adhered to the message of Mohammad Ali Jinnah, went to Pakistan.”

The AIMIM chief also expressed his happiness over Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman return from Pakistan after spending nearly 60 hours in captivity. The IAF pilot was taken in Pakistan’s custody after his MiG-21 fighter plane was shot down on February 27.

However, Owaisi also had a few questions for the Narendra Modi government at the Centre. Speaking at the event, he said, “We praised the government over air strikes (on JeM camp in Balakot) in response to the Pulwama terror attack. But, now the Prime Minister (Narendra Modi) needs to answer, how the terrorists were able to procure explosives? How they got hold of American weapons? Why was there intelligence and diplomatic failures? ”


