Big conspiracy: Pakistan's ISI plans to poison ration stocks of Indian Army personnel in Kashmir

New Delhi:

Pakistan Military intelligence (MI) and ISI are planning to "mix poison" in ration stocks of Indian security forces deployed in the Kashmir Valley, according to reports. An intelligence note, accessed by India Today TV, said necessary measures should be taken to ensure the security of ration depots of all the camps, especially in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The report, quoting the chatter floated by a Pakistani number, added that agents of the Pakistan intelligence agencies operating in Kashmir are planning to carry out the conspiracy.

Security forces have been asked to check all ration procured for soldiers across the country "to rule out any untoward incident or attempt", the report added. The report came even as five security personnel, including a CRPF officer, were killed in an encounter with militants while a civilian died in clashes near the site in Kupwara in Jammu and Kashmir on Friday, where areas along the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts were heavily shelled by Pakistan for the eighth consecutive day.

The fresh violence came amid heightened Indo-Pak tensions in the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack, the subsequent anti-terror operation by India and Pakistan Air Force's attempt to target Indian military installations in Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was captured by Pakistan on February 27, was handed over to India on Friday night at the Attari-Wagah border. He underwent a series of medical tests as part of a "cooling down" process, officials said. Early Saturday morning, Varthaman met his immediate family members as well as several top officials of the Indian Air Force, they said.

Varthaman arrived in the national capital around 11:45 PM Friday and soon after he was taken to the Air Force Central Medical Establishment (AFCME), a compact and specialised medical evaluation centre for aircrew of all the three services.

He was captured by Pakistani authorities after his MiG 21 Bison went down during a dogfight with Pakistani jets. But before his plane was hit, Varthaman shot down an F-16 of Pakistan air force.

Wing Commander Varthaman is undergoing a series of medical tests as part of the "cooling down" process and it is expected to continue till Sunday. Once, the health check-up phase is over, debriefing sessions will be arranged for him, the officials said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
