Recent outcomes would have been different with Rafale aircraft, Narendra Modi indirectly admits 'defeat'

NEW DELHI - Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed his annoyance over the delay in the delivery of Rafale jets while referring to a recent battle with Pakistan Air Force.

Addressing the India Today Conclave 2019 on Saturday, the premier expressed that recent outcomes would have been different had India been provided with the Rafale aircraft - an indirect admission that he was not satisfied with the current results.

“The country has felt the shortage of Rafale. Today, India is speaking in one voice and saying what all could have happened if we had Rafale. Ego politics over the Rafale deal has harmed the nation,” Indian premier said.

Modi said there is a lot of talk in the country these days that the country is suffering due to the absence of Rafale fighter jets.

"And at present, we continue to suffer due to the politicisation of the Rafale deal. The vested interests and politicisation has caused great harm to the nation's interest," Narendra Modi said.

PAF shoots down two Indian fighter jets inside ... 10:39 AM | 27 Feb, 2019 MUZAFFARABAD – Two Pakistan Air Force jets targeted two Indian warplanes in a dogfight and shot them down along the ...

The Indian premier also lashed out at the opposition which dared to criticise the sitting regime for using soldiers to garner political gains.

They [Opposition] are welcome to criticise my government's policies and find faults in its working but I request you not to oppose matters related to the nation's security, he said.

Modi's remarks come days after India and Pakistan engaged in an aerial confrontation in Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan shot down two Indian aircraft and captured a pilot Abhinandan alive as well.

Abhinandan was released as a gesture of peace by Pakistan.

Though India claimed to have trounced Pakistan in the aerial clash, analysts say the capture of wing commander ABhinandan and shooting down two Indian fighter jets ratifies the superiority of Pakistan over India.

Though Modi has been hesitant to admit the 'defeat' at the hands of PAF, his regret regarding the delay in the Rafale deal and subsequent link with the 'different outcome' somewhat confirms that Pakistan surprised the Indians in the latest combat.

Modi's remarks over the Rafale deal also angered Rahul Gandhi, president of Indian National Congress who took to Twitter and alleged that the premier 'stole 30,000 Cr' and gave it to his friend Anil.

Dear PM,



Have you no shame at all?



YOU stole 30,000 Cr and gave it to your friend Anil.



YOU are solely responsible for the delay in the arrival of the RAFALE jets.



YOU are WHY brave IAF pilots like Wing Cdr. Abhinandan, are risking their lives flying outdated jets. https://t.co/BrzAuFTlFu — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 2, 2019

Narendra Modi is alleged to have cut the deal in a dubious manner while favouring Indian magnate Anil Ambani.
