Nobody in world questioned air strikes on Pakistan, says former NSA Shivshankar Menon

Many panelists were of the view India needs a long-term vision on Pakistan | Photo credit: Vikram Sharma

A lot happened in the past few days, be it the India-Pakistan tensions on the border or the Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Abhinandad Varthaman being captured and released by Pakistan or the Pulwama terror attack that happened on February 14 killing 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel.

The whole of it compelled the leading military and strategic experts of the country to discuss the road ahead for India.

General Deependra Singh Hooda, former commanding-in-chief, Indian Army, said, "We should understand that military is only one aspect of what the government should be doing. Military should be used in conjunction with other options."

Shivshankar Menon, former foreign secretary and former national security advisor (NSA) added, "You have a set of levers one can use to try and change Pakistan's behaviour."

"Nobody in the world questioned the air strikes on Pakistan," he added.

Most of the strategists on the panel believed and echoed the view that India had reacted in a measured and strategic manner but also that India needs a long-term vision and policies on Pakistan.

"Till the time there is provocation I don't see anything happening in the near future," Air Chief Marshal Fali Homi Major on whether India would de-escalate or escalate the situation with Pakistan.

"What happens next depends on a lot of other factors such as what is Pakistan's reaction, their short-term and long-term intentions. If India is provoked again and if we have a lucrative target backed with intelligence we will hit the target but don't want to hit civilians in that (sic)," Air Chief Marshal Fali Homi Major said.

General Hooda said, "You need to have a consistent policy approach towards Pakistan. The Indian government's reaction has been strong, more consistent, diplomatic. A long-term consistent policy will pay dividends."

However, Shah Faesal, former director, education, Kashmir, spoke on how the government has alienated the average Kashmiri.

"Last fortnight has been horrific. All Kashmiris were subjected to panic. Whenever there is hostility, people of J&K become the worst sufferers. I have been critical because I feel the government should de-escalate the situation. Kashmir will be the worst place in the world if war happens," Shah Faesal said.

Follow our live updates on India Today Conclave 2019.
