India bans Jamaat-e-Islami in occupied Kashmir for five years

News Desk |

The Government of India has placed a five-year ban on the socio-religious party Jamaat-e-Islami (JI) in Indian-occupied Kashmir. According to the local Kashmiri press, Indian Home Ministry sent out a notification banning JeI on the allegations of supplementing the freedom movement and pro-freedom groups in held Kashmir.

The official notification said that the JI, if not banned, would continue supporting freedom of Jammu and Kashmir from India, propagate anti-India and pro-freedom sentiments and intensify the ongoing freedom struggle in occupied Kashmir.

Meanwhile, the Indian security agencies detained six more JI activists during raids in various villages of Tral in Pulwama district. The JI activists were detained from Laribal, Pinglish, Dardsara, Panner, Mandoora and Lurgam villages last night and were lodged at police station Tral.

Senior APHC leader and the Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement in Srinagar termed the ban on Jamaat-e-Islami as highly condemnable and shocking.

Last week, Indian police arrested more than 300 JI leaders, including its leader, Abdul Hamid Fayaz. The situation in occupied Kashmir has worsened in the aftermath of the February 14 Pulwama attack which killed over 40 Indian soldiers.

The Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) comprising Syed Ali Gilani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, and JKLF leader Muhammad Yasin Malik in a statement issued in Srinagar said Jamaat-e-Islami has been running many schools and educational institutions across the valley as a socio-religious organization for decades.

It said post-Pulwama incident there has been a deliberate attempt to direct revenge against Kashmiris including attacks on students studying in different cities of India, raids on homes of resistance leadership and people across the valley to banning organizations, the JRL said. It said that all this was being undertaken by the rulers in New Delhi in a sweeping and muscular manner by continuing with their Kashmir doctrine of force, to be seen as being tough on Kashmir and fulfilling their agenda over it in order to woo and consolidate their voters for electoral gains.

Read more: India lashes out in frustration as it loses international face

Senior APHC leader and the Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement in Srinagar termed the ban on Jamaat-e-Islami as highly condemnable and shocking. He said, “This organization is the most vibrant and known for its socio-religious and humanitarian work across the territory and has been working for the poor and needy since decades.” Banning this organization is an unethical and coercive measure, he added.
