Anurag Thakur brings back NaMo Again hoodies and merchandise. PM Modi is a fan

Namo Again merchandise has gone live after BJP MP Anurag Thakur was seen making a statement in his 'Namo Again' hoodie.

Apart from being an influential political leader, PM Narendra Modi has always been a style spinner.

From his dhotis, to kurtas and to even his looks, numerous ethnic fashion trend have been inspired by him.

But pushing the envelope forward in the Namo merchandise game, Anurag Thakur, MP, from Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh walked into the parliament sporting a 'Namo Again' hoodie which has sparked a social media storm.

- Get Ready

It’s time for #NaMoAgain !

Smarty Bro :)



Parliament New Delhi



Akash Gupta

Team Anurag Thakur

Himachal @ianuragthakur pic.twitter.com/cwOaCmq2KX Akash Gupta ( Team Anurag Singh Thakur ) (@akashgu98512163) 8 January 2019

The 44-year-old MP was seen wearing a blue and orange hoodie, with words 'Namo Again!' printed on it in saffron.

Anurag's Modi inspired style statement brought him tons of attention and also a re-tweet by PM Modi himself, saying, "looking good."

To mark their solidarity, BJP supporters were soon seen wearing the same sweatshirt and posting pictures online.

Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment Thawar Chand Gehlot followed suit and posted a picture of himself in an identical hoodie, saying, " I have worn it, have you worn it or not? You should also wear it with the pledge: NaMo Again! Let's vow to bring Narendra Modi back as the Prime Minister in 2019."

Thakur, in order to inspire other party leaders, sent out a tweet later and said, "I an wearing mine. Where is your hoodie?" Ministers like Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath to Union Minister Kiren Rijiju were hashtagged in the post.

Soon after party workers took to Twitter to share pictures of themselves wearing the same hoodie. Have a look!

Along with the 'Namo Again' hoodie, new 'Namo Again' T-shirts in saffron and black were also sported on BJP supporters on social media.

#NamoAgain praying for namo again for a better india. pic.twitter.com/m8QhHPj5vz P. Vasantha Kumar (@PVasanthaKumar9) 6 January 2019

I wear the slogan of #NaMoAgain where ever I go. I wear @namomerchandise to support Hon'ble PM @narendramodi ji.

To get yours, refer to the link in bio. pic.twitter.com/40k4rKYCnu Amber Agarwal (@iamberagarwal) 9 January 2019

People also ventured into selling the Namo Again merchandise including mugs, T-shirts, magnets among others in the following ways.

The hoodies and other merchandise is now available online.

The Central Government is thus leaving no stones unturned in the face of stronger opposition this time round in the approaching general elections.

A film titled 'PM Narendra Modi' is also set to hit the theaters probably before the elections.

ALSO SEE: Vivek Oberoi turns PM Narendra Modi in biopic. Internet burns the actor
