No samjhauta at LoC in Kashmir

As India and Pakistan agreed to operationalise services of Samjhauta Express at their ends on Saturday, no convincing reciprocity has been shown by Pakistan to de-escalate tensions between the two neighbours. The first train from India will leave on March 3.



Not only did the Pakistan army on Saturday continue to violate the ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch, Rajouri, Jammu and Baramulla districts of Jammu and Kashmir, reports stated that Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar, also the mastermind of Pulwama terror attack, was being treated at an army hospital in Rawalpindi.



Cross-border shelling killed one woman and left 9 people injured on Saturday. The Pulwama terror attack claimed lives of 40 CRPF men on February 14.



Two days after Indian Air Force jets dropped bombs, leading to a war-like situation, India, acting on assurances from the international community, handed over a dossier to Pakistan, expecting it to investigate and act against the JeM terror network. Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had also repeatedly asked for proof of the JeM involvement in Pulwama suicide bomb attack. Senior Army officer Major General Surinder Mahal, during the tri-service briefing on Thursday, also held out that despite the present turn of events, the Indian Army was committed to maintaining peace and stability in the region. Past one week, Pakistan has violated ceasefire over 60 times by targeting over 70 civilian and forward areas. In view of the prevailing situation, authorities have ordered temporary closure of educational institutions in a 5-km radius along the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts.



Masood Azhar is suspected to be suffering from renal failure and is under regular dialysis at an Army hospital in Rawalpindi. Official sources here said that this action was indicative of Pakistan's brazen attempt to move the terrorist to a safer place under the protection of its army.



"He is in Pakistan according to my information. He is unwell to the extent that he can't leave his house," Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi was quoted by an American TV network when asked about Azhar. In another interview to another TV channel, Qureshi even absolved the JeM from its role in the terrorist attack, even before reading the Indian dossier. He said that "there is some confusion" about the role of JeM in the Pulwama terror attack. When prodded to reveal what the confusion was about, the Pakistan foreign minister said, "We have asked them and they have denied it." He contracted his own government of Punjab province, which last week took control of a campus comprising Madressatul Sabir and Jama-e-Masjid Subhanallah in Bahawalpur. The campus is the headquarters of the JeM terror group.



Meanwhile, government sources said they had evidence that shows four buildings, that were marked as targets in the operation, were hit by the Spice-2000 precision-guided bombs and AGM-142 missiles. After the IAF's air strikes across the LoC on February 26, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale, in a presser, had said that Mirage-2000 dropped bombs weighing 1,000 kilograms in "thick-forested hilltop in Balakot and eliminated a large number of terrorists", adding that the targeted camp was headed by JeM chief Masood Azhar's brother-in-law Maulana Yousuf Azhar.
