‘Indian dossier on Pulwama lacks specific, actionable intelligence’

ISLAMABAD: India in its dossier submitted to Pakistan last week has failed in provide any fresh and tangible intelligence to implicate any outfit present in Pakistan in the Pulwama suicide attack that resulted in killing of 44 personnel of Indian CRPF. Well placed diplomatic sources told The News/Jang on Saturday that Foreign Secretary Ms. Tehmina Janjua was entrusted to scrutinise the dossier.

They studied the dossier and couldn’t find any concrete substance in the voluminous pack of documents. It is understood that the dossiers comprises Indian intelligence own reports submitted to their government to satisfy their bosses. Incidentally similar documents in the dossiers were submitted to Pakistan a number of times before as well. "The dossiers however fails to offer any specific, actionable intelligence", sources said. Despite the shallowness of the dossier, the government is here determined to probe all aspects, the sources added. The dossier is appeared to have been prepared by incompetent and lower grade officials who complied reports based on hearsay. The Indian government handed over to Pakistan it with the claim that it is detailing Jaish-e-Mohammed's (JeM) role in the Pulwama attack. Indians further claimed that the dossier also details the presence of JeM camps and that of its top leadership within Pakistan. The move came after Pakistan had demanded "actionable evidence" from India on the Pulwama suicide attack that was carried out by a young Kashmiri from the held Kashmir (IHK). India handed over the dossier to the acting high commissioner of Pakistan Syed Haider Shah on Wednesday. Prime Minister Imran Khan had asked his Indian counterpart on more than two occasions to provide the actionable evidence and "give peace a chance". Imran Khan said he "stands by his words" and Pakistan will "immediately act" if India provides "actionable intelligence" on the Pulwama attack. India had said that it expected Islamabad to take immediate and verifiable action. Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi had also assured India that Pakistan would evaluate the Indian dossier with an open heart.

The Foreign Office in a statement reminded that the dossier would be reviewed for “any and all legal evidence”. Islamabad will take action against “credible evidence” provided by India, it said. The Foreign Office said Prime Minister Imran Khan has already made it clear that Pakistan will help in the Pulwama attack investigation. “Pakistan is ready for talks on all subjects including terrorism,” the statement added.
