Khattar: India in Modi’s safe hands

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Karnal, March 2

Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar on Saturday claimed that the country was in the safe hands of Narendra Modi-led BJP government, which was capable of giving a befitting reply to Pakistan.

He alleged that opposition parties never took stringent steps as far as security of the nation was concerned and never took action against terrorism.

The Chief Minister was participating in ‘Vijay Sankalp’ motorcycle rally, organised on a call of BJP national president Amit Shah to prepare the party cadre for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

The 11-km rally started from the old vegetable market and concluded at Nehru Palace after passing through various roads.

Leading the rally, Khattar exhorted the party cadre to be ready for Lok Sabha elections. Two independent councillors — Yudhvir Saini and Ish Gulati — joined the BJP.

Addressing party workers, Khattar exhorted them to spread information about achievements of the BJP governments in the Centre and state with the people to help the party retain power.

“The model code of conduct will be enforced anytime and all workers must be ready for it. The party cadre will take achievements of the government to the people,” he said.

He started his speech by paying tributes to Pulwama martyrs and lauded the Air Force airstrike on terror camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed.

It was the second surgical strike. We are proud of the firm action taken by our Air Force in retaliation to the Pulwama attack on our CRPF cavalcade,” he said.

He lauded the courage of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman. He said the entire nation was saluting the Air Force pilot for his bravery.

Khattar refused to comment on the Supreme Court direction, restraining the state government from implementing a recently enacted law to allow construction in the Aravalli hills.

Asked about rumours of giving the Karnal Lok Sabha ticket to an outsider, he said the candidate would be decided by the parliamentary board and its decision should be accepted by everyone.
