Rahul Gandhi again starts his Rafale’s strike on PM Modi, Asks PM Modi about Rafale

New Delhi: Minutes after PM Modi targeted Congress over Rafale jets in the wake of India-Pakistan tensions, Congress president Rahul Gandhi asked the prime minister if he had "no shame at all". He slammed Modi for "risking lives" of IAF pilots by letting them fly "outdated jets". Rahul Gandhi tweeted after PM Modi said that the country was feeling the absence of Rafale, as "Dear PM, Have you no shame at all? YOU stole 30,000 Cr and gave it to your friend Anil. YOU are solely responsible for the delay in the arrival of the RAFALE jets. YOU are WHY brave IAF pilots like Wing Cdr. Abhinandan, are risking their lives flying outdated jets,".

also read After 9 Years PM Modi and Nitish Kumar share dais to host ‘Sankalp Rally’

On Saturday, While speaking at a media event evening, the prime minister had said that results would have been different if India had Rafale fighter jets. Tearing into the Congress, Modi alleged its rule saw many defence scams. He said "They began with jeeps and later graduated to weapons, submarines, helicopters. The defence sector suffered in the process,". Indian fighters bombed terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed's biggest training camp near Balakot deep inside Pakistan early Tuesday. Pakistan retaliated by attempting to target Indian military installations on Wednesday. However, the IAF thwarted their plans. IAF pilot Varthaman shot down an F-16 fighter of the Pakistan Air Force shortly before his jet was hit during the fierce dogfight.

also read IAF Pilot Abhinandan Varthaman brief about this harassment to Defence Minister



However, in his tweet, Gandhi reiterated his earlier statement, which was made during a rally in Jharkhand's Ranchi. The Congress president alleged that there was "corruption" in the Rafale deal and Rs 30,000 crore had been wrongfully given to Anil Ambani. He said "Vaayu Sena desh ki raksha karti hain aur hamare PM use chori karti hain (The IAF defends our country but the PM has snatched money from the force),".
