India-Pakistan crisis: Tensions ERUPT in Kashmir as 'flare ups continue killing civilian'

India-Pakistan: (L) Pakistanis shout anti-Indian slogans (R) People burn effigy of Indian PM Modi

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Clashes flared up after Indian security forces allegedly targeted a residential house where they said militants were hiding. It is the third day of the operation in Kupwara, Indian news outlet NDTV reports. The outlet stated shots were fired in an exchange between police and alleged militants on Friday resulting in the death of one civilian.

NDTV reported four security personnel and one civilian were killed in an “encounter” in Jammu and Kashmir's Handwara area. Police sources said there was no clarity about how many supposed terrorists had been killed. These latest developments come after a week of tensions between India and Pakistan. The bitter standoff came to a head when an Indian aircraft crossed into Pakistan on Tuesday, sparking the capture of Indian IAF pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was later released as a "peace gesture" on Friday. READ MORE: India sent warning after two Pakistan soldiers killed at border

An unverified video appears to show Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman being beaten

protest against India after ceasefire vilation at LOC by Indian Army killed civilians

Explaining he had been saved from an angry crowd chasing him after his crash, Mr Abhinandan said: "The Pakistani army is a very professional service. "I have spent time with the Pakistan army. I am very impressed." The return to India of Mr Abhinandan was broadcasted live on TV, signifying the importance of the gesture. And it was followed by an invitation to the Indian Government by Pakistani leaders to do its part to avoid a conflict. But clashes in Kashmir continued throughout Friday and Saturday.

Supporters of the Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Democratic Party protest
