Masood Azhar's brother confirms Indian jets struck JeM's camp

Masood Azhar's brother confirms Indian jets struck JeM's camp

Masood Azhar's brother confirms Indian jets struck JeM's camp

Shalini Ojha Twitter Mar 03, 2019, 10:38 am 2 min read

Contradicting Islamabad's version that Indian Air Force jets destroyed just a few trees and not any camp in Balakot, Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar's younger brother has confirmed the outfit's "learning institute" was attacked. Maulana Ammar, identified as the youngest brother of Masood, while speaking to cadres "condemned" IAF's airstrikes. Audio of his speech has gone viral on social media and verified by agencies too.

Context Backstory: Rattled after airstrikes, Pakistan says only trees were destroyed

Pakistan-based JeM carried out an attack on CRPF convoy on February 14 in Pulwama. 40 soldiers were martyred in the attack. In a response to heinous crime, IAF breached Pakistani airspace and dropped bombs on JeM's camp in Balakot. In denial, Pakistan said no camps were present in the area and only a few trees fell. The country also called it India's "aggressive act".

Speech But Ammar confirmed camp was hit

But Ammar's admission busts the theories of Pakistan. While addressing cadres in Peshawar, Ammar said the enemy "bombed Muslim schools". It is believed Ammar spoke two days after the Balakot strike. "So, raise your weapons and show them if jihad is still an obligation or a duty," Ammar reportedly said. He criticized Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan for releasing WC Abhinandan Varthaman.

Quote They attacked schools where students were being trained: Ammar

"Let me remind you, they didn't attack any headquarters, they didn't attack the meeting points of agencies (JeM), they attacked the schools where students were being trained to understand jihad better and vowed to help "oppressed" Kashmiris," Ammar said.

Twitter Post You can hear the viral clip here

Success Earlier, IAF officer said the strikes were successful

Speaking about the unprecedented airstrikes, Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor said on Thursday the operation was successful. He, however, chose to not reveal the toll leaving the decision on the Indian government. A senior government official told HT, Ammar's speech spoke for itself. "The tone and tenor of the message indicate that the strikes have hit the group hard," he said.

Details India called the operation pre-emptive, handed dossier to Pakistan

India has maintained the strikes were pre-emptive and it had credible intelligence to confirm JeM was planning more attacks on the country. New Delhi has also handed over a dossier to Pakistan detailing JeM's role in the Pulwama attack, its modus operandi and the route terrorists took to infiltrate J&K. Pakistan, which wanted evidence, said it would go through the dossier.
