Surat traders make saris with soldier print after Pulwama attack, realise they used US Army instead

Surat traders printed saris with US soldiers on it

While the entire nation was angry after the Pulwama terror attack that took place on February 14, sari traders in Surat came up with a new way to show their outrage.

Keeping their business in mind, the traders designed saris with armed soldiers on it. But they had an oops moment as they realised, they had used prints of US soldiers instead of Indian army on the saris.

Don't believe us? Have a look.

Surat traders design saris depicting outrage over Pulwama Attack. But uses US Soldiers instead of Indian Soldiers pic.twitter.com/UNyoZ3lg1k Zoo Bear (@zoo_bear) March 2, 2019

There was not just one sari with that error.

Here is one more... pic.twitter.com/AxvKWGcWn4 Zoo Bear (@zoo_bear) March 2, 2019

Twitter account, Zoo Bear shared this hilarious blooper by the Surat traders with his followers and the thread has gone viral. Twitterati has some priceless responses to this.

Aise nazuk haalat mein jiska t-shirts, saree, burger, chai jo bik raha hai bikne do, ye fact check wagairah toh April-May ke baad bhi ho sakta hai Rofl Gandhi (@RoflGandhi_) March 2, 2019

That would have been awkward.

Thank God they didn't use pictures of Pakistani Soldiers Ruchi (@sewethnic) March 2, 2019

Ouch.

That is exactly what happened.

they used the first image popped up in Google image search for 'Army' :D saket (@iam_saket) March 2, 2019

However, another sari trader in response to this thread posted another video where they showed how they had made different saris within 3-4 hours of each attack to show their outrage. And this time, these traders had the correct soldier print too. If you see carefully you will also be able to spot, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the sari.

This sari too had some hilarious responses headed its way.

Looks like the surgical strike turned a 56 chest into a 56 belly. PremTraxYou (@PremTraxYou) March 2, 2019



ALSO SEE | Nagpur Police gives a twist to Abhinandan Varthaman's statement to Pak Army, wins the internet
