BJP slams Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy for politicising airstrikes in Pulwama attack aftermath

Minister of State for External Affairs on Sunday slammed HD Kumaraswamy for his comments on IAF airstrike in Pakistan. (Photo: PTI)

Minister of State for External Affairs Vijay Kumar Singh on Sunday slammed Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy after he said that celebrating pre-emptive strikes in the aftermath of Pulwama attack will lead to rising communal tension in the country.

"Retaliation in the aftermath of the Pulwama Attacks was the action of an ONE nation standing up against #terrorism," he said.

"HD Kumaraswamy, why for your political gain, are you using it in a divisive manner and looking at it from a (non-existent) communal prism?" Singh asked.

Retaliation in the aftermath of the #PulwamaAttacks, was an action of an entire nation standing up against #terrorism@hd_kumaraswamy why for your political gain, are you using it in a divisive manner & looking at it from a (non-existent) communal prism?https://t.co/WL1lHtxixn Vijay Kumar Singh (@Gen_VKSingh) March 3, 2019

There has been a lot of political commentary since the Pulwama terror attack which claimed the life of at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawans.

Angered over the development, India carried out airstrikes to take out terror camps belonging to Jaish-e-Mohammed across the Line of Control (LoC) in Pakistan. Soon after the airstrike, a wave of celebrations was seen across the country.

Kumaraswamy had earlier accused BJP of politicising the airstrike as well. He warned that innocent lives may be lost if this bigotry continues.

"Bombing terror cells inside Pakistan aside, by standing on the streets, distributing tea and bursting crackers in celebration of this, the BJP is making way for communal tensions within the country," he said.

"For your (BJP's) political gain, you are alienating members of one community and in the coming days, this will lead to innocent lives being lost.," he added.

The Karnataka CM had earlier lashed out at BJP state president BS Yeddyurappa for his statement that the pre-emptive strike in Balakot would help the BJP win 22 seats in Karnataka.

However, the ruling dispensation clearly stated that the sole reason behind the attack was to warn Pakistan as there were no civilian causalities. Pakistan also tried to launch a similar attack but it was foiled by Indian Air Force jets.

While Pakistan managed to shoot down an IAF Mig 21 Bison jet and arrested Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, it had to release the IAF pilot in the wake of increased diplomatic pressure.
