The ‘real terrorist’

INDIA’s statement after the attack on Pakistan that its fighter planes struck militant training camps is starkly similar to what the occupiers of Palestine chant when they want to test their military hardware.

It seems India is not interested in peace with Pakistan despite endless efforts made by Pakistan.

Lives are important but war-mongers interested in making a few bucks do not understand this.

This war is pointless. Kashmiris have fought Indian forces for decades with lives lost on both sides. They, the Kashmiris, will not stop until they achieve their freedom.

Trust me, we are fighting a very similar war in Palestine — a mess created by the ‘white’ man so that our resources are taken to enrich the ‘white’ man’s life, while we the ‘brown’ people are continuously buying weapons, denying our people a right to decent living.

Sooner or later the occupiers of our land, Palestine, will go back to where they come from, to their ‘white’ race.

Narendra Modi, Pakistan is not India’s enemy. Your enemy is the close friendship you have with the occupiers of Palestine. The occupiers want to fight Pakistan and it will get India to do it.

Therefore Pakistan and India should fight the real ‘terrorist’ — Israel — the one hoping that this war escalates.

Angabeen Ahmad

United Arab Emirates

(2)

BY conducting retaliatory attacks across the Line of Control and shooting down two Indian jets, Pakistan has demonstrated its power and capability to defend itself.

It has sent a stern, clear message to India that Pakistan will not procrastinate and is ready for all eventualities. The BJP-led government had erroneously underestimated Pakistan; now they have got a tit-for-tat response. Let us hope that better sense will prevail.

For the sake of regional peace, New Delhi must stop war-mongering. The exigency of elections must not deprive a leader of common sense. Repercussions will be beyond imagination if the situation is not mitigated timely.

Prime Minister Imran Khan has reiterated the offer for a dialogue. Now without any delay, India ought to come to negotiating table so that a nuclear apocalypse could be averted.

Mohammad Tabasum Malhan

Ghotki

(3)

PAKISTAN Air Force shot down two Indian air force jets when they crossed the border. One of their pilots was arrested. It was a befitting reply to Indian aggression.

This came a day after the Balakot ‘attack’ by the Indian air force where they released their payload and vanished in the dark of the night. New Delhi claims it killed 350 ‘terrorists’ hiding in the camp at the site, which is a blatant lie.

Prime Minister Imran Khan has already asked armed forces to stay alert and be ready for action.

Well done Pakistan Army! Well done PAF!

Kashif Rasheed

Sukkur

Published in Dawn, March 3rd, 2019
