K’taka Cong MLA Ganesh who assaulted another MLA seeks bail saying he is unwell

K’taka Cong MLA Ganesh who assaulted another MLA seeks bail saying he is unwell

JN Ganesh has been suspended from the party for assaulting fellow MLA Anand Singh in January.

news Crime

Karnataka Congress MLA JN Ganesh, who was arrested on February 20 on charges of attempting to murder his colleague MLA Anand Singh, was shifted to a hospital based on a medical report after he complained of hernia and kidney stones. The New Indian Express reported that Ganesh has been admitted to the government-run Victoria Hospital in the city from the Bengaluru Central Prisons in Parappana Agrahara in Bengaluru. His ward has been guarded by the City Armed Reserve police.

Meanwhile, the Kampli MLA on Saturday approached the special court for people’s representatives in Bengaluru to seek bail. Hearing the petition, special judge Ramachandra D Huddar issued a notice to Bidadi police, directing them to file objections, reported The Times of India.

The Bidadi Police Station booked Ganesh under sections 323 (Voluntarily causing hurt), 324 (Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons), 307 (Attempt to murder), 504 (intentional insult to breach peace) and 506 (Criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

In his statement to the police, Anand Singh had said that if Ganesh had his way, he would have shot him dead with his gunman’s rifle.

Anand Singh told the police that on the night of January 19, after dinner, Anand Singh and Ganesh were walking to their respective rooms. Ganesh then apparently questioned Anand Singh as to why he did not give enough money for election campaigning and started blaming him. When Anand Singh denied these allegations, Ganesh allegedly started abusing him and hit him with a flowerpot. When Anand fell on the ground, Ganesh reportedly started stamping on his chest. This was when MLA Tanveer Sait and two others rescued Anand, who by then, had lost consciousness.

Ganesh had reportedly said, “I should have killed you long back and all these things would not have happened. Where is the pistol, I want to shoot you now.”

He was absconding for a month until he was arrested on February 20.

Following the incident, an embarrassed Congress had suspended Ganesh and a committee headed by Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara was to decide his future in the party.
