IAF Used Decoy Jets to Distract Pak in Raid on Alleged Terror Base - Reports

In a parallel development, the Hindustan Times has reported that an audio message ostensibly issued by a senior leader of Jaish-e Mohammad appeared to confirm that Indian aircraft had reached their target in Balakot, and inflicted significant damage.

The audio was reportedly tweeted by a France-based Pakistani journalist, and its authenticity was allegedly verified by Indian security officials. If true, this information contradicts Islamabad’s official version that the Indians hit only a patch of trees.

A voice resembling that of Maulana Ammar, who has been identified as the brother of Jaish-e Mohammad founder Masood Azhar, can reportedly be heard in the recording:

“The enemy announced a war by crossing its borders to enter an Islamic country and launching bombs on Muslim schools. So, raise your weapons and show them if jihad is still an obligation or a duty”, the man is reportedly heard saying.

The message is believed to have been recorded two days after the Balakot air raid and played out as a call for action to militants at the Madrassah Sanan bin Salma in Peshawar, the Hindustan Times reported.

“Let me remind you that the Indian aircraft did not bomb the safe house of any agency, they didn’t attack any headquarters, they didn’t attack the meeting point of agencies, they attacked the schools where students were being trained to understand jihad better and vowed to help ‘oppressed’ Kashmiris. By entering our territories and attacking our schools, India has ensured the beginning of jihad against them”, he reportedly said.

READ MORE: WATCH Footage of Handover of IAF Pilot Captured by Pakistan to India

The Hindustan Times cited a senior Indian security agency official as saying that the address was a “clear confirmation of the effectiveness of the airstrikes”.

“The tone and tenor of the message also indicate that the strikes have hit the group hard forcing a senior functionary to issue a message to their cadre”, the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.

The developments come amid heightened tensions between the two nuclear-armed neighbours, triggered by a suicide attack claimed by Jaish-e Mohammad on 14 February that killed more than 40 Indian soldiers.
