J-K: Two terrorists killed in Kupwara, encounter operations underway

Kupwara (Jammu and Kashmir) [India), Mar 3 (ANI): Two terrorists were gunned down by security forces on Sunday during encounter operations which is in its third day in Kupwara district of Jammu and Kashmir, officials said.

"Two terrorists have been killed today in Handwara encounter. Five security personnel and a civilian have lost their lives in the encounter so far. Encounter operations are still underway," officials said.

Out of five security personnel, the identity of one Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) soldier, who succumbed to his injuries on Saturday is yet to be revealed.

Encounter operations at Babagund village of Langate, Handwara in the district entered the third day on Sunday.

Four security personnel, including two policemen and two CRPF jawans, were killed during the encounter in Handwara town on Friday. A civilian Waseem Ahmad Mir was also killed in the encounter.

The two police personnel who lost their lives were identified as SgCt Naseer Ahmad Kholi and SgCt Ghulam Mustafa Barah, while the two CRPF personnel were identified as Inspector Pintu and Ct Vinod.

The wreath-laying ceremony of the two CRPF jawans - Inspector Pintu and Vinod of 92 Battalion of Central Reserve Security Force (CRPF) in Srinagar- was held on Saturday. Based on credible input about the presence of terrorists in Baba Gund area of Kralgund in Handwara, a cordon and search operation was launched jointly by police and the security forces in the area on Friday.

An encounter between the terrorists and the security forces broke out after the terrorists fired indiscriminately at the search party.

"Citizens are requested not to venture inside the encounter zone since such an area can prove dangerous due to stray explosive materials. People are requested to cooperate with police till the area is completely sanitised and cleared of all the explosive materials if any," said a statement released by police. (ANI)
