Just like they questioned surgical strikes, opposition leaders seeking evidence of airstrikes: PM Modi

Officially kickstarting NDA's election campaign in Bihar, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday launched a blistering attack on opposition parties for seeking proof of airstrikes on Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) training camp in Pakistan's Balakot.

Speaking at a rally at Patna's Gandhi Maidan, Modi said, "The leaders of opposition parties are now doubting our forces' valour. Just like they questioned the surgical strikes, they are now seeking evidence of airstrikes on terror camps."

Indian Air Force conducted air strike at a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province on February 26.

"You are all witnesses when our country's army is crushing terror. Whether they are within our border or outside, what are some people doing within the country at such times? Instead of boosting the morale of the forces, they are doing things that make enemies happy," Modi said. "This is New India, it does not remain silent on killings of its jawans."

While I want to eliminate terror, opposition parties are conspiring to finish me, the Prime Minister said.

"When there was a need to speak in one voice against the terror factory, 21 parties gathered in Delhi to pass a resolution against the NDA government and Modi. They are demanding proof from the armed forces for their act of bravery," the PM said at the BJP's Sankalp rally.

He alleged that the opposition parties were "conspiring" against him.

"These days competition is underway to abuse the 'chowkidaar', but you be assured, this 'chowkidaar' of yours is as alert as ever," Modi said.

The Prime Minister shared the stage with Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar at the NDA's Sankalp rally. This will be the first joint rally of Modi and Nitish after 9 years. Union minister Ramvilas Paswan's LJP, another constituent of NDA, is also taking part in the rally.

Talking about development work in Bihar, Modi praised Nitish Kumar-Sushil Kumar Modi combine for their achievements in the state, asserting that the NDA government wants to ensure that all sections in the state gain access to the best of facilities.

The NDA government is working on all departments, including roadways, railways and airways, to improve infrastructure in the state, he said.

Thanking Saudi crown prince Mohammed Bin Salman for increasing Hajj quota in India, he said the favour has not been extended to any other country.

The PM also expressed his gratitude to the crown prince, who visited Delhi recently, for deciding to free 850 Indians detained on various counts.

"This demonstrates India's improved standing and also exposes that Congress pursued politics for its own benefits," he added.

Launching an attack on RJD chief Lalu Prasad Yadav, Modi said, "People of Bihar are very much aware of what all happened in the name of fodder. Only we have dared to end the culture of corruption and middlemen which had been a normal practice in the country for decades."

(With PTI inputs)
