Rajkot: Child wets sofa, suffocated to death by father's live-in partner

The deceased was the two-and-a-half-year-old daughter of the live-in partner of the accused (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Rajkot: A woman allegedly smothered a two-and-a-half-year-old after she wet a sofa. The accused allegedly killed the daughter of his live-in partner after she wet the sofa at her residence. The victim is a resident of Vrindavan Park Society which is situated in Morbi.

The accused allegedly smothered her live-in partner's daughter after she wet her sofa. The accused confessed to her crime after her arrest. The deceased was the two-and-a-half-year-old daughter of the live-in partner of the accused.

Also Read: Delhi: Husband fights over kind of music played at wedding; wife dies while shielding him from bullet

Immediately after the incident, the accused took the girl to a hospital. On being asked the reason behind the death, the accused and her partner stated that the daughter had injured herself after falling from a sofa. Unconvinced by the reason given to them, the doctors informed the police and asked them to take the body for an autopsy.

While talking to the Times of India, an official from the Morbi police station stated that the police was approached by the uncle of the deceased who alleged that she had been killed by the accused. The reports of the autopsy stated that the deceased had been suffocated to death. This prompted the police to probe the accused, after which, she confessed to her crime.

According to her confession, the accused stated that after the deceased wet her sofa, she flew into a fit of rage and smothered the latter to death. She also confessed that she had fabricated a story to use as an alibi. The complainant, the uncle of the deceased alleged that he had given an application to the Surat Police stating that the life of his niece was in danger but to no avail. The girl was taken to a hospital after the incident where the doctors declared her brought dead.
