Love Island's Katie Salmon flaunts curves in pink embellished bikini on Tenerife break

She soared to fame during her stint on the 2016 series of Love Island.

And Katie Salmon flaunted her incredible bikini body once again as she hit the beach in Tenerife with her friend India Jennings on Sunday.

The reality star, 23, caught the eye in a hot pink two-piece which showcased her jaw-dropping cleavage.

Beach babe: Katie Salmon flaunted her incredible bikini body once again as she hit the beach in Tenerife with her friend India Jennings on Sunday

Katie ensured all eyes were on her as she strolled down the beach in the halterneck bikini top, which drew attention to her ample bust due to its plunging neckline.

The bronzed beauty also highlighted her enviably-taut waist and peachy posterior in the matching teeny-tiny embellished tie-side bottoms.

She wore her raven tresses in braids and shielded her eyes from the sun with a pair of purple-tinted aviators.



Busty display: The reality star, 23, caught the eye in a hot pink two-piece which showcased her jaw-dropping cleavage

Strike a pose! Katie ensured all eyes were on her as she strolled down the beach in the halterneck bikini top, which drew attention to her ample bust due to its plunging neckline

Skimpy: The bronzed beauty also highlighted her enviably-taut waist and peachy posterior in the matching teeny-tiny embellished tie-side bottoms

The reality starlet finished off her beach look with heavy strokes of bronzer, highlighter and a dark pink lip.

Katie appeared in her element as her pal India took an impromptu photoshoot, with the reality star posing up a storm as she showed off her killer curves and tattoos.

The pair appeared to be having the time of their life as they larked around on the beach, with India, who was clad in a mint green lace bikini, giving Katie a piggy back down to the shoreline.

Glam: The reality starlet finished off her beach look with heavy strokes of bronzer, highlighter and a dark pink lip

Giggly: The pair appeared to be having the time of their life as they larked around on the beach

Incredible figure: Katie appeared in her element as her pal India took an impromtu photoshoot, with the reality star posing up a storm as she showed off her killer curves and tattoos

Katie is certainly no stranger to causing a stir after her Love Island 2016 appearance.

She is best known to viewers of the ITV2 show for pairing up with the late Sophie Gradon on the reality dating series.

Sophie was originally partnered with Tom Powell but later coupled up with Katie after he quit the show.

Feeling the heat: Despite it only being 18 degrees in Tenerife, the pair couldn't resist stripping down to their bikinis

Girls' holiday: India gave Katie a piggy back down to the shoreline

Get that Instagram snap! The pair knelt on the sand as they tried to get a selfie

Head-turner: Katie is certainly no stranger to causing a stir after her Love Island 2016 appearance

Toned: India looked incredibly svelte as she headed to the beach in a mint green lace bikini

However, Sophie later dumped Katie and bowed out of the show to be with Tom again, leading Katie to pair off with Adam Maxted. Their romance was short-lived, lasting just two weeks after the series drew to a close.

Katie opened up about the abuse she received from the LGBT community, following her same-sex romance with late Love Island star Sophie.

Speaking on the Victoria Derbyshire programme in September, Katie admitted she was the subject of much uproar after her relationship with Sophie, who was tragically found dead in June aged just 32.

She said: 'In the villa I was so scared because I didn't know what the outside world was thinking, what my family was thinking, what my friends were thinking, so I was really upset that they'd not supported me from my own community.'
