Year that will define India: Constitutional morality will be tested as never before in an election year

Sagarika Ghose has been a journalist for over three decades, starting her career with The Times of India, subsequently moving to Outlook magazine and The Indian Express. She has been a primetime news anchor and has also worked as Consulting Editor, The Times Of India. She is also a political commentator on the news channel ET Now. Ghose is the author of the best selling biography of Indira Gandhi, "Indira, India's Most Powerful Prime Minister." She is the author of the recently published theoretical work, “Why I Am A Liberal”. LESS ... MORE

A new year has begun. Yet 2019 isn’t just another year. It’s a year when, with general election looming, India is faced with a fundamental question: What is the ‘new India’ that we seek as citizens?

The drumbeat for a Ram mandir is building to a fever pitch. Unspeakable violence is still being wreaked in the name of the cow. There are attempts to broaden the surveillance powers of the Big State by allowing certain agencies to get access to personal computers in the name of ‘national security’. Farm loan waivers are being offered as lollipops. Civilian deaths in Kashmir continue to mount.

The question arises: Is there a creeping attempt to rewrite the Constitution by practice even while paying lip service to it in theory? Perhaps the very practice of India’s electoral politics, with its heady mix of identity, populism and demagoguery, is itself at odds with the constitutional project envisaged in 1947.

The Constitution of India is a charter of individual liberty, with citizenship at its core. The Constitution aims to restrain the power of the Big State through democratic accountability. It aims for a democracy in which all citizens are equal, not a majoritarian democracy in which those of the majority community are considered more equal than others. But the very nature of politics seems to have overturned the Constitution by seeking to arm the Big State with ever greater powers which daily threaten individual liberty. The Big Government in the lust for votes, patronises majoritarian mobs, ideological para-militaries and regressive group identities instead of supporting individual freedom, equality and dignity.

Actor Naseeruddin Shah recently said he fears for the safety of his children. When Hindutva vigilantes threatened to disrupt Shah’s function in Ajmer, the new so-called ‘secular’ Congress government in Rajasthan helplessly did nothing to control the mob. In Bulandshahr a police officer was shot dead by a mob incensed over a case of cow slaughter. The BJP UP government’s first instinct in the dastardly violence in Bulandshahr was to investigate whether a cow had been killed rather than single mindedly probe the murder of a policeman. India’s most populous state seems to be fast turning into a putative Hindu rashtra with Hindutva street fighters whipping up frenzy over love jihad, animal slaughter houses being summarily shut down, cities and railway stations renamed, the chief minister vowing not only to rename cities in other states but also to drive rival politicians like Asaduddin Owaisi out of India.

While BJP swerves back into an aggressively Hindutva agenda, Congress is struggling to offer a counternarrative. By busily mimicking the saffron party’s ostentatious rituals and religious symbolism, the Congress leadership reveals its own limitations. With so many religious rituals enacted in public, someone standing forth as a Shiv bhakt, another as a Hanuman bhakt, where are the real values of religion? Where are the values of compassion, justice and accommodation that every religion so strongly emphasises? Instead, there’s only a welter of competitive rituals and politicians wearing myriad religious costumes. Given this attack on constitutional values, will it be a single religious community – Hindus – who will get primacy in this election year? 2014 saw the fewest number of Muslim MPs, will the number fall further in 2019?

Each party is adopting the worst features of the other in the race to occupy the seat of power. Each party offers big government, patronage from party high commands, populism and varying shades of Hindutva. Loan waivers, handouts and subsidies, the command and control economy are back in fashion across the board. Competitive religious ritualism coexists with competitive populism as shortcuts to the greatest number of votes. The farmer is deified as “annadata” yet not seen as deserving of true reform, wooed only through short term fixes and not given a sense that agriculture, India’s oldest and biggest private sector, has a stake in policy making beyond being just a passive votebank.

The Big State is seeking total transparency from citizens but is receding into near-total opacity from citizens’ scrutiny. As government turns super snoop, who will hold the government accountable? Why has a Lok Pal not been appointed? The government wants social media companies to blow the whistle on citizens, but who will blow the whistle on the government? While courts have ruled on a wide-ranging right to privacy, IT draft rules are seeking to take away citizens’ privacy by authorising de-encryption of personal data without permission. The Constitution begins with the words “We The People”, but today it is ‘I, the supreme Big State’ that seems to enjoy all the rights.

The Constitution was meant to unify India and place individual freedom over group identities. But openly casteist parties like the Koeri party of Upendra Kushwaha, HAM or Mushahar party led by Jitan Ram Manjhi and many other smaller parties indicate galloping Balkanisation and group identities coming to the fore. Will the Indian voter refuse to be polarised or will cynicism with conventional politics push India further away from the promise of the midnight hour of 1947?

Whoever wins or loses, the crucial question is, will 2019 see a deepening of fissures or will it see course correction, a pull back, to force the political class to take more centrist positions rather than push towards the extremes. Either way, whatever the election result, the onus is on civil society to reclaim the liberal values of the Constitution by asserting the power of individual sovereignty. Political assaults on the Constitution will continue unless assertive, courageous, noisy citizens demonstrate their refusal to be polarised, treated as vote banks for sops or divided into warring caste groups.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
