Nakuul Mehta shares a HEARTFELT post as Ishqbaaaz is set to go off air soon

‘’If I was to ask the lad in the picture, circa 2015 (at the pilot shoot of IB) if the journey was everything he had imagined, he'd reply with an even more emphatic smile, today. I take the liberty to say this on behalf of the entire cast & crew, that we gave it our all. There were no half measures. We tried, we did, we failed, we succeeded. There were hard days, and then there were great days but the greatest of 'em all was to just be on set each day doing what we all loved doing,’’ the actor added. View this post on Instagram A post shared by Nakuul Mehta (@nakuulmehta) on Feb 28, 2019 at 8:18pm PST Nakuul Mehta has been part of ‘Ishqbaaaz’ since the show’s inception. Nakuul and Surbhi Chandna’s sizzling chemistry helped the show grab several eyeballs and fans were disappointed when Surbhi had to leave the show post the generation leap. Manjiri Pupala was roped as the female lead post the leap but the makers introduced Niti Taylor as the new female face of the show after ratings dropped. Talking about Nakuul, the talented actor made his TV debut with the show ‘Pyaar Ka Dard Hai Meetha Meetha Pyaara Pyaara opposite Disha Parmar. Gossip mills are buzzing with the rumours that Nakuul and Surbhi might be part of the remake of ‘Sanjivani’ on Star Plus. However, the show’s producer Siddharth Malhotra has denied the reports. 'Ishqbaaaz' actors Nakuul & Surbhi to STAR in 'Sanjivani' remake? Show's producer CLEARS the air! Watch this space for more updates!

Nakuul Mehta and Niti Taylor starrer ‘Ishqbaaaz’ is all set to bid adieu to the viewers on March 15. The show has been entertaining the fans since June 27, 2016 and is quite popular on social media. Speculations are rife that ‘Ishqbaaaz’ will be replaced by ‘Yeh Rishtey Hain Pyaar Ke’ but the channel is yet to make any official announcement. ‘Yeh Rishtey’ is the spin-off of Shivangi Joshi and Mohsin Khan’s ‘Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai’. Nakuul Mehta, who plays the role of Shivaansh Oberoi, shared a heartfelt note on Instagram and reminisced his journey on the show. The actor got all emotional while sharing a picture from the pilot shoot of ‘Ishqbaaaz’. ‘’3 years. Over 750 Episodes. Over 1000 shifts. 99999 litres of sweat & blood (Subtle exaggeration) And Infinite love. Last two weeks of Ishqbaaaz until we air our finale episode on 15th March. It's difficult to contain the myriad of emotion running inside of me and yet words elude me,’’ Nakuul wrote in his post.
