Digvijaya Singh is not mentally fit: Kailash Vijayvargiya

Indore: BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya on Sunday claimed that Congress leader Digvijaya Singh is not “mentally fit” after the latter questioned the air strike carried out by the Indian Air Force on February 26.

Speaking to media here, Singh said, “I think Digvijaya Singh is mentally challenged, that is why he is saying such things. Earlier also he had shared the stage with Zakir Naik and had called him a messenger of peace. Zakir Naik used to get money from other countries and give it to terrorists here. Not only that; he is also involved in forcibly converting people.”

Substantiating his stance, the BJP leader added, “The same Digvijaya Singh is questioning and asking for proof from the security forces who risk their lives and sometimes at the cost of their lives protecting our country. This is a very shameful remark, he should be ashamed.”

Earlier in the day, Singh had said the central government should provide ‘solid proof’ of the IAF air strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed’s terror camp in Pakistan’s Balakot.

“I am not raising questions on the operation, but this is the technical age and satellite pictures are possible. Like the USA had given solid proof of the Osama bin Laden operation to the world, we should also do it for our air strike,” Singh had said.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee had on Thursday asked the central government to spell out “details” of the exact place where the air raids were carried out and the casualties inflicted as international media had claimed that there was no damage in the strikes.

“We, as the Opposition, want to know the details of the air strike. Where were the bombs dropped? How many people died? I was reading the New York Times and Washington Post and they said that there were no casualties. Some media houses said one died. We want to know the details,” Banerjee had told reporters in Kolkata.

Tension spiraled between India and Pakistan after the Indian Air Force on February 26 carried out a strike at terror launch pads in Balakot.

The strikes were in response to the terror attack in Pulwama carried out by the JeM in which 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
