US dragged into India-Pakistan tensions as Islamabad accused of illegally using US F-16s

India Pakistan: Jet fighters appear to battle over Kashmir

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Washington could be dragged into the latest clash between India and Pakistan over the Kashmir contended territory as “reports” fuelled suspicions US-made warplanes may have been used by Islamabad during airstrikes. Pakistan said it hasn’t recurred to the F-16s bought from the US to shoot down an Indian warplane which crossed the Line of Control (LoC), the de facto border in Kashmir. But the US is making sure the Asian country is adhering to the terms of the sale agreement.

A spokesperson for the US embassy in Islamabad said: "We are aware of these reports and are seeking more information. "We take all allegations of misuse of defence articles very seriously." Washington often inserts restrictions on how its exported military hardware can be used through so-called end-user agreements. The relationship between India and Pakistan became strained once again on February 14, when a Kashmiri suicide bomber killed 40 Indian paramilitary police.

The US is 'seeking information' on whether Pakistan breached the terms of a sale agreement

This act pushed New Delhi to order a new military attack against Islamabad. On Tuesday, the Indian air force carried out an airstrike across the Pakistani border to destroy a camp of the Jaish-e Mohammad group, believed to be responsible for the suicide attack. While the Indian Government claimed its air force had successfully carried out the mission, Islamabad denied such military camps existed and said India missed whatever it was targeting. But Islamabad retaliated nevertheless, sparking a series of attacks which continued to kill civilians and military personnel throughout the week.

India Pakistan: Captured pilot freed by military on Wagah border

Indian citizens celebrating the release of the Indian pilot

The exchange of fire has killed seven people on the Pakistani side and four on the Indian side so far. And it has fuelled fears among world leaders the two nuclear powers may enter a fourth war since they gained independence from the British empire in the late 1940s. But a temporary calm seems to have returned in the LoC between Saturday and Sunday night. Chaudhry Tariq Farooq, a minister in Pakistani Kashmir said on Sunday: "By and large the LoC was calm last night but you never know when it will become active again. Tension still prevails." The release on Friday of an Indian pilot captured on Wednesday by the Pakistani army is believed to have helped ease the tensions.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been accused of exploiting the tensions to gather consensus
