'R-73 selected': Wing Commander Abhinandan's last radio transmission before he shot down Pak's F-16

'R-73 selected': Wing Commander Abhinandan's last radio transmission before he shot down Pak's F-16

Abhinandan was flying a MiG-21 Bison fighter jet aircraft and engaged with Pakistan's air force jet F-21 which had entered the Indian air space to target military installations. Entering into a dogfight with the Pak air force, Abhinandan shot down their F-16 using a short-range R-73 missile which he fired from his MiG-21.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman who was in Pakistan's custody returned to India on Friday (March 1) is being lauded by the entire nation for his valour, courage for shooting down Pakistan's F-16 while Pakistan was attempting to target Indian military installations on February 27.

Pakistan air strikes had come a day after India targeted the biggest JeM terror camp in Balakot, Pakistan. India's action to attack JeM terror camp was in retaliation to the Pulwama terror attack where 40 Indian CRPF Personnel were martyred on February 14.

Abhinandan was flying a MiG-21 Bison fighter jet aircraft and engaged with Pakistan's air force jet F-21 which had entered the Indian air space to target military installations. Entering into a dogfight with the Pak air force, Abhinandan shot down their F-16 using a short-range R-73 missile which he fired from his MiG-21. According to reports, 'R-73 selected' was Abhinandan's last radio transmission.

He was successful in shooting down Pak's F-16, however, in the dogfight, his jet too got damaged forcing him to eject from the aircraft. It was unfortunate that his parachute landed on the Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir (PoK) following which he was captured by the Pakistani Army.

It was after immense pressure from India on Pakistan by building up international pressure on Islamabad after New Delhi reached to the world community and through Geneva convention rules, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had announced the release of Abhinandan Varthaman on February 28 (Thursday).
