Masood Azhar dead? Twitter explodes with reactions on rumoured death of JeM head

Intense speculation made rounds on the condition of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar on Sunday after some said that the Jaish chief was killed in airstrikes by the Indian Air Force in Balakot.

Using the hashtag #MasoodAzharDEAD, which has gone viral on Twitter, many have claimed that the JeM chief was killed in the airstrikes by India across the Line of Control in Pakistan.

They, however, added that Pakistan could portray it as a natural death.

This came a day after Pakistan foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi claimed that Masood Azhar was not doing well, but was in Pakistan.

Masood Azhar was suspected to be suffering from renal failure and undergoing regular dialysis at an army hospital in Rawalpindi in Pakistan, officials in New Delhi had told PTI.

Even as an official confirmation from both India and Pakistan is awaited, Twitter has exploded with messages on the Jaish chief. Here are the top ones.

MASOOD AZHAR is dead. Top Intelligence Resources confirm.



Now we all know what Pakistan is gonna say: He died a 'natural death' or due to some disease.



Let's wait and watch what Islamabad comes up with this time around.#MasoodAzharDEAD #ModiInAmethi pic.twitter.com/B9bi9VzzQU March 3, 2019

#MasoodAzharDead

Let no God give you peace, rot in hell! pic.twitter.com/xq1cuM2zlU | nisheeth sharan | (@nisheethsharan) March 3, 2019

The way Pakistan tried to attack India with F16s is an indication that some serious damages were inflicted on Pak targets. No wonders #MasoodAzharDEAD reports are true. #Pak says Maullana Masood Azhar is in hospital could be to divert attention from truth. SudhirBharg (@sudhirbharg) March 3, 2019

Maulana Masood Azhar is dead - whether from an airstrike or from a heavenly-strike, isn't clear The Bad Doctor (@DOCTORATLARGE) March 3, 2019

If JeM chief Maulana Masood Azhar is actually dead, I'm feeling bad because he couldn't be brought to justice. (@ikaveri) March 3, 2019

Rumours of death of Masood Azhar can help Pak in two ways :-



-Diffuse India's anger

-Meanwhile Masood Azhar can go underground & plan afresh.



Beware ! Don't believe anything so soon. Ashima (@AshiQuotes) March 3, 2019

ALSO READ | Is Masood Azhar dead? Speculation rife on Jaish chief's whereabouts
