BJP workers, police clash in West Bengal

Party workers were trying to take out ‘Vijay Sankalp’ rally.

Workers of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and police clashed in parts of the State, as police tried to prevent the saffron party’s bike rally as the part of its nationwide poll campaign. Many on both sides were injured. A police statement noted that the BJP did not have a permission to hold such rallies and thus the rally was stopped. State BJP, on the other hand, claimed that permission was denied.

The BJP had planned a ‘Vijay Sankalp’ rally, which is the party’s countrywide pre-poll campaign, on Sunday. Men, with a party activist as a pillion rider, could be seen in the city moving in motorbikes from one point to another, carrying the Indian and BJP flags.

As part of BJP’s ‘Vijay Sankalp’ rally, its countrywide pre-poll campaign, the party organised in various parts of the State on Sunday. Police stopped the rallies and clashes broke out, injuring many on both sides. Later, a Kolkata Police statement said that “between 10.30 and 14.30 hours, members and supporters of BJP tried to organise bike rallies in several places within the city of Kolkata without having any valid permission.”

“Accordingly they were intercepted and total [of] 135 (including one female) persons were arrested under preventive section[s] and 59 motorcycles were also seized,” the police statement said.

Clashes were particularly fierce in Paschim [West] Medinipur, Paschim Bardhaman, Jhargram in south Bengal and South Dinajpur and Cooch Behar in north Bengal. Police resorted to lathi charge to disperse the mob at Asansol and Goaltore.

BJP’s State president Dilip Ghosh, however, said that they sought permission but it was denied.

“We are continuously denied permission. Police and TMC workers have brutally beaten us today…[but] we will continue with our protest challenging [TMC] cadres and the police,” he said. (With Agency inputs.)

The TMC’s secretary general Partha Chatterjee indicated that the BJP is trying to create tension in the State and the attempts to disrupt law and order will be dealt with strongly.

“In the name of Sankalp rally, they tried to go on a rampage in different parts of the State…These attempts will be dealt with strongly by the administration,” Mr. Chatterjee said.
