Modi govt avenged Pulwama attack by killing 250 terrorists in air strike: Amit Shah

Modi govt avenged Pulwama attack by killing 250 terrorists in air strike: Amit Shah

He said: “After Pulwama attack, everyone thought that this time surgical strike cannot happen. They wondered what will happen but on 13th day, Modi govt did airstrike killing more than 250 terrorists. When Abhinandan was caught, they again started pinpointing (he was criticising opposition).”

On Sunday, speaking at a Jain community event organised by the Jain International Trade Organisation (JITO) in Ahmedabad, Amit Shah said that Modi government avenged the Pulwama terror attack by carrying out an air strike which ‘killed more than 250 terrorists’.

He said: “After Pulwama attack, everyone thought that this time surgical strike cannot happen. They wondered what will happen but on 13th day, Modi govt did airstrike killing more than 250 terrorists. When Abhinandan was caught, they again started pinpointing (he was criticising opposition).”



He added: “But it was due to Modi government influence, that Abhinandan was sent back in 48 hours, making him first such case in the world. We have also been in the opposition but stood like a rock with the govt in power when it came to nations security. But how can they question the Indian Air Force, and ask for proof. Level of politics should not be so low.”

Earlier, Union Minister Ahluwalia said neither Prime Minister Narendra Modi nor any government spokesperson had given any figure on casualty of air strikes. Rather, it was the Indian media and social media where the unconfirmed figures of terrorist killed were being circulated, he said.



"I have seen reports in Indian media and international media and also what Modi-ji had said. After the air strike, there was a rally by Modi-ji and he didn't say anything on the casualty figures. I want to ask if Modi-ji, or any government spokesperson, or our party president Amit Shah has given any figures?" he asked reporters in Siliguri on Saturday.

The minister of state for electronics and information technology said the intention of the strike was to send out a message that India is capable of destruction in Pakistan's own backyard if needed. We didn't want any human casualty, he said.

With inputs from Tanushree Bhatia
