Handwara encounter: Pakistan terrorist among 2 LeT men killed as 72-hour Kupwara gunbattle ends

SRINAGAR: The Handwara encounter ended on Sunday with the killing of both terrorists who had engaged the security forces in a three-day gun battle.The security forces lost five men in the firefight at Babagund village in Handwara, district Kupwara — three CRPF men and two J&K policemen. A civilian, too, was killed, taking the total number of lives lost to eight.The police said on Sunday the two militants were affiliated to the Lashkar-e-Taiba . “Both the #terrorists killed were affiliated with proscribed terror outfit #LeT. One has been identified as #foreigner from #Pakistan. Identity of the other is being ascertained,” the police wrote on Twitter.According to reports, eight buildings, including two cowsheds, were damaged in the nearly 72-hour gun battle. Internet services in the area remained suspended when reports last came in.“This operation posed considerable difficulties for the security forces due to the topography of the area. The area where the militants were hiding was very congested and civilians in adjoining houses had to be evacuated to safer places away from the site of the encounter,” a police spokesman said.He added that the bodies of both terrorists were recovered from the site of the gunfight. “Their identities and affiliations are being ascertained,” he said. “Incriminating material, including arms and ammunition, were recovered from the site of the gunfight,” the police spokesman said.Police have registered a case and the incriminating material retrieved from the encounter site has been put in the case records for further investigation.The police spokesman said CRPF jawan Sham Narayan Singh Yadav, who was injured earlier, succumbed to his injuries, raising the toll of CRPF dead to three.The encounter began in the intervening night of February 28 and March 1 after a joint team launched a cordon-and-search operation. A fierce encounter started and two terrorists were believed to have been killed. However, when the joint search team went to retrieve the militants’ bodies amid a lull, one of the two militants, earlier believed to be dead, stood up and opened fire. CRPF inspector Pintu Kumar, paramilitary trooper Vinod and two policemen — Naseer Ahmad Kholi and Ghulam Mustafa Barah —were killed and 11 uniformed men, seven of them Army personnel, were injured in the subsequent gunfight. Civilian Waseem Ahmad Mir was also killed, allegedly in government force action amid clashes near the encounter site.
