Lead in the Water Pipes

By Sandip Roy

If Kargil was the first truly televised war in India, the post-Pulwama faceoff was our first hashtagged conflict, as social media bristled with #IndiaStrikesBack, #terroristanPakistan, #PakArmyZindabad, and a lonelier #SayNoToWar.

While Indian channels were trumpeting Pakistani militant casualties of ‘over 300’ in an air strike in Balakot, the Pakistanis scoffed there were no casualties at all, at best ‘one crow’, a jihadi crow no doubt. India claimed it had shot down one Pakistani plane; Pakistan insisted it had lost no planes.

Amember of the Pakistani national assembly shared a video of a Pakistani fighter jet bombing an Indian aircraft.

But as fake news-busting website AltNews.in pointed out, it was spliced together using bits from a 2015 video on the Pakistani Defence YouTube channel and a video of a Royal Danish Air Force exercise.

Pictures from the 2005 Kashmir earthquake were passed off as evidence of the devastation caused by the 2019 Indian air strike. A funeral after a Taliban attack was sold as a funeral for Balakot jihadis. The fog of war has been replaced by the far more toxic smog of fake news.

As Pakistani writer Fatima Bhutto remarked in The New York Times, “…never before have I seen a war played out between two nucleararmed states with Twitter accounts”.

What she could have added is that Twitter itself was weaponised, a way to spread misinformation at lightning speed, to keep the national temperature at boiling point, so that those who dared call out fake news or question figures were immediately pilloried as #PakApologists.

If social media went ballistic, mainstream television news was an able handmaiden whipping up the sound and fury, as anchors outdid each other to prove their ‘josh was high’.

Pakistani anchors appeared dressed in military and navy uniforms, while an Indian reporter wore military fatigues and brandished a toy gun. Channels willingly turned themselves into ministries of misinformation and broadcasting.

These days, as it turns out, scepticism towards fake news and misinformation is regarded as the telltale sign of an ‘anti-national’ by self-styled nationalists hypercompetitive about showcasing their nationalism and damning anything and anyone that doesn’t fit their bill.

Merely questioning the government’s stance — never mind dissenting — can bring out the troll armies, even among ‘ordinary Indians’, who insist that questioning the ruling party is tantamount to questioning the integrity of Channels were not just toeing the government line, they were writing eulogies.

One claimed a ‘Titanic’ victory over Pakistan as soon as Imran Khan announced the Indian pilot would be released, a premature celebration that could have thrown a spanner in the diplomatic works — not to mention the inconvenient fact that upper-cased ‘Titanic’ could be construed as a sinking ship.

It’s not surprising we are at this point. In the last few years, patriotism has increasingly become a performance sport where everyone must follow one preordained script.

In the name of patriotism, we have seen people roughed up in the dark of a cinema hall for not standing during the national anthem. The issue is not whether one cannot stand up to honour the national anthem.

The issue is how these days we feel increasingly justified in administering mob justice whenever we feel anyone is off the ‘adarsh Bharatiya nagrik’ script — whether it be sitting quietly during ‘Jana Gana’, or objecting to a civilian used by the Indian Army as a human shield in Kashmir Valley, or having what might be beef in the refrigerator.

Now we have seen what this pressure cooker of fake news and hashtag patriotism can deliver in a time of impending war. A Pakistani prisoner was beaten to death in Jaipur allegedly by fellow inmates. A Kashmiri student in Himachal Pradesh was reportedly jailed for uploading an image of a Pakistani flag on Facebook seven years ago — when he was 12.

A professor in Odisha lost her job after saying on TV that India and Pakistan should not go to war. The governor of Meghalaya, Tathagata Roy, endorsed a call to boycott everything Kashmiri after the Pulwama attacks and received not even a rap on his knuckles.

Instead of cooling heads, our studio warriors, high on ‘josh’, seemed to be itching to cry havoc and let slip the dogs of war. All of it made a friend wonder if the one hashtag that actually needs to trend now should be #MuteNewsTVAnger. Otherwise, we might be doomed to live out Kurt Vonnegut’s famous warning: future generations will look back on TV as the lead in the water pipes that slowly drove the Romans mad.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
