‘Only a strong leadership can ensure nation’s security’

Meenakshi Lekhi, MP and spokesperson of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said here on Sunday that only a strong leadership demonstrated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi could provide security to the country and also give a fitting reply to terrorists.

She was speaking at the Panchajanya Samavesha public meeting organised by the Namo Bharat organisation on Malpe beach here.

Ms. Lekhi said that the fate of 54 prisoners of war taken into custody by Pakistan during the India-Pakistan war in 1971 was still not known. India had carried out airstrikes on terrorist dens in Pakistan in reply to the Pulwama terrorist attack by Jaish-e-Mohammed on February 14.

The Indian forces had shot down an F-16 fighter jet belonging to Pakistan when it entered Indian air space. The powerful response by India had forced Pakistan to release Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman whom it had held captive for a couple of days, she said.

Some psuedo politicians were demanding proof of destruction of terrorist camps during the recent airstrikes at Balakot in Pakistan. These people had demanded proof when India had crossed the Line of Control to eliminate terrorists in Uri in 2016. At a time, when the country was faced with problems from terrorists, all the people should be behind the Prime Minister, she said.

Pakistan’s policy was to bleed India with several wounds. Hence, it was encouraging terrorist activities in its territory. The terrorist attack on Mumbai on November 26, 2008, was also one of them. But Mr. Modi, who has been decisive, had given a befitting reply to Pakistan whenever it tried to use its terror tactics, she said.

On the one side was the Prime Minister who had given commendable leadership to the country in the last five years and on the other was a shaky “Mahagatbandhan” which was leaderless and visionless. In fact, the progress made by the country in the last five years was much better than that achieved during any five-year term of any government in the country, Ms. Lekhi said.

Shashank Shivathaya, Seetharam Bhat, Chethan Azad, leaders of Namo Bharat, were present.
