Modi admits Indian Air Force lacks strength, fails to get desired result

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has admitted that Indian Air Force is incapable of getting desired results as it lacks strength to achieve the task.

Indian PM's statement came amid growing pressure on its military and government as they failed to provide explanation or evidence to back up their claims of the number of casualties in Balakot strike and the proof of shooting down an F-16.

Instead of giving any evidence of the cross-border strikes by the Indian Air Force, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had himself ‘questioned’ them by his remarks that the country was feeling the absence of Rafale fighter jets as the results could have been different if India had these aircraft.



The Indian Prime Minister's statement is being taken as his admission of superiority of Pakistan Air Force, which recently shot down two of Indian warplanes and captured a pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan, who was later released by Prime Minister Imran Khan in a peace gesture.

Congress lashes out at Modi



Congress sought explanation from Modi why he said results would have been different with Rafale jets, adding that it was not seeking any evidence of the cross-border strikes by the Indian Air Force but Prime Minister Narendra Modi had himself ‘questioned’ them by his remarks.



Congress leader Rahul Gandhi was quick to shame Modi for the alleged corruption in Rafale deal. "Dear PM, Have you no shame at all? YOU stole 30,000 Cr and gave it to your friend Anil," Rahul said in a tweet.



Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari asked that Modi should himself explain what would have been different with the Rafale jets. He held the Prime Minister responsible for the delay in induction of the French-made fighter jets into the IAF.



“India is feeling the absence of Rafale. The entire country is saying in one voice today, if we had Rafale probably the results would have been different. The country has suffered a lot due to selfish interests earlier and now politics over Rafale,” Modi had said at the India Today conclave.



Indian Opposition lashed out at Modi for allegedly trying to politically exploit the Pulwama attack and Air Force strikes.

Major political parties, in India, have blamed their Modi over the purchase of Rafale planes from Dassault Aviation, saying he had overpaid for the planes and had not been transparent.



Bahujan Samaj Party chief Mayawati said, "It is not hidden from the people how BJP and especially PM Modi are trying to hide their failures in the garb of what is happening in Jammu and Kashmir."


