Bits & Bytes

ASH WEDNESDAY REMINDER: Lent starts this Wednesday – While all Roman Catholics are encouraged to attend Mass on Ash Wednesday in order to begin the Lenten season with the proper attitude and reflection, Ash Wednesday is not a Holy Day of Obligation. It is, however, a day of fasting and abstinence, intended to prepare the church membership for Easter, the celebration of Christ’s death and resurrection.

A TEACHER WITH A BIG HEART: Nathan Alexander, a math professor at Morehouse College in Atlanta, GA, was photographed holding a student’s baby as he gave a lecture on Friday. One of his students had been forced to bring the baby to class for lack of a babysitter. The prof offered to hold her so the student could take good notes. https://www.sunnyskyz.com/good-news/3236/Professor-Holds-Student-039-s-Baby-During-Class-Because-He-Couldn-039-t-Find-A-Babysitter

RELATIVISM DESTROYS COMMUNICATION AND INTIMACY: Without a common reality, there can be no common truth and no true communion between people. “I’ve got my truth, you’ve got your truth” appears to keep people from avoiding conflict. But in reality, it leads to the destruction of community. [4:08]

ICE DIRECTOR TEES OFF AT AOC’S LIES: Tom Homan — “She says we’re dangerous? What’s dangerous is a congresswoman who doesn’t know fact from fiction! You have a congresswoman who doesn’t know how to tell the truth. I forgot more on this subject than she will ever know in her two whole months of being a congresswoman.” Hell, yes. I’m upset too!

FIGHTING DRUGS: Because they kill people – Democrats are so offended by guns, yet they don’t seem at all concerned about the opioids pouring across our leaky border. On Friday, federal agents busted a heroin and fentanyl mill in the town of Ardsley, an affluent New York City suburb in Westchester County. They arrested five people and seized five kilograms of fentanyl and six kilograms of heroin. The fentanyl alone has the potency to kill nearly 2 million people. https://www.waynedupree.com/fed-agents-bust-fentanyl-mill-in-ny/

VERY SCARY NEWS: Two nuclear powers — India and Pakistan — are teetering on the edge of a major conflict after Pakistan said it had shot down two Indian military planes and captured one of the pilots. https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/news/nuclear-powers-india-and-pakistan-on-brink-of-all-out-war

CPAC 2019: Diamond and Silk – What Makes America Great. [14:43] … Silk is so funny!

MEDIA BIAS: CNN decided that Trump’s CPAC speech was “Hitler-esque” and probably penned by Putin. The phrase they found particularly offensive – “The men and women here today are on the front lines of protecting America’s interests, defending America’s value and reclaiming our nation’s priceless heritage.” My favorite tweet take down: The president’s chairman of the commission for the preservation of America’s heritage is an Orthodox Jew from New York. Keep talking about Nazis you clown.

JUDGE JEANINE, SEBASTIAN GORKA, DAN BONGINO: Commentary on this week’s news.

MEDIA YAMMERS ABOUT TRUMP’S NOKO NO DEAL: From Dan Gainor at Fox News – “The deadlock on the Korean Peninsula is so old that it now qualifies for Social Security. Yet the media acted like they wanted Trump to fix it with a few short meetings.” https://www.foxnews.com/opinion/media-obsession-with-michael-cohen-trumps-coverage-of-trumps-north-korea-summit-until-it-ends-with-no-deal

CORRUPTION AND INCOMPETENCE: Democrats running NYC – Bill de Blasio’s wife, Chirlane McCray, cannot explain where $850 million given to ThriveNYC – the mental health program she champions – has gone, according to reports. In the three years it has been running, ThriveNYC has largely failed to keep records of its achievements. And the data that has been collected shows it is lagging well behind targets. Politico reported that it had tried and failed to acquire a line-item budget from ThriveNYC and that the two budget breakdowns it had seen showed wildly different numbers. Despite all this, the program has been granted an even bigger budget going forward and is now on track to spend $1billion over five years. Meanwhile Mayor de Blasio announced earlier this week that he is mothballing his failed Renewal school program after spending $773 million. The aim of the scheme was to improve 100 of New York’s worst schools, but after three years of trying, just 25 of them improved enough to make it off the list. Meanwhile, the same number either closed or were merged with other schools while under the initiative. https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-6760503/Bill-Blasios-wife-account-850m-given-mental-health-project.html

HOW SOCIALISM DESTROYED MY COUNTRY: Is Bernie Sanders right? Are people living under socialism better off? Brazil is a good case study. Felipe Moura Brasil, a journalist and Veja magazine columnist, explains how his country has fared under socialism.

KEEP THEM OUT OF THE MILITARY: Since July 1, 2016, a total of 1,524 soldiers have been diagnosed with gender dysphoria. Between psychotherapy visits, hormone prescriptions, and surgical procedures such as breast reductions or augmentations and “male reproductive” procedures, the treatment totaled $7,943,906.75. Banning transgenders isn’t about any kind of “phobia.” It’s about only recruiting people who can best serve the military’s vital mission. Click the second URL to see the extensive list of medical conditions that disqualify an individual from military service. https://www.lifesitenews.com/news/report-1500-transgender-troops-cost-taxpayers-almost-8-million-since-2016

https://www.military.com/join-armed-forces/disqualifiers-medical-conditions.html

RUH, ROH BERNIE: A recent NBC poll of qualities voters want in a 2020 candidate puts Bernie at the bottom. Another recent poll, this one by Monmouth, showed the share of voters who say they’ll definitely or probably vote for Trump in 2020 is growing over time. https://hotair.com/archives/2019/03/03/nbc-poll-least-desirable-qualities-2020-nominee-socialist-age-75/

LEMMINGS: Democrat Prez Wannabes are lining up to condemn Vice President Pence for his Christian faith in the sanctity of one man/one woman marriage. When they say Pence’s LGBTQ positions are “not decent”, they’re condemning every Christian who is faithful to biblical teaching. https://hotair.com/archives/2019/03/03/elizabeth-warren-iowa-no-pence-isnt-decent-man/

JUDGE JEANINE: Conservative Stephanie Hamill and Democrat Jonathan Harris talk about AOC, the Green New Deal, and today’s Democrat Party.

When you’re trying to justify to yourself + others that we should ignore one of the greatest threats to humanity and imperil all children by denying, deflecting, and delaying action on climate change, you say ridiculous nonsense like this. https://t.co/Q03R5lj1kB — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (@AOC) March 2, 2019

AOC’S THIN SKIN: At CPAC, Ted Cruz made a funny about how he hoped to see PETA start supporting Republicans now that Democrats want to kill all the cows. AOC was not amused. Dunno why. She said herself she wanted to get rid of all the cows.

#OcasioCortezChildrensBooks: This Twitter tag has inspired so many various titles of children’s books that it is trending in the top spot on Twitter. Some best choices from Twitchy – Green Deals and Ham

Horton Hates the Jews

Oh The Places You’ll Gulag

The Grinch Who Redistributed Christmas

Where the Breadline Ends

The Little Engine that Couldn’t without Govt Assistance

Old MacDonald Used to Have a Farm

Anne of Green New Deals

Where the Wild Capitalists Are

Green Deal and Spam

The Little Engine That Wasn’t Allowed To

Comrade Hears a Coup

The Grinch That Stole Everything

Little Red Robbing Hood

Good Night Capitalism

The Lion, the Witch and the Unwilling to Work

If You Give a Socialist a Cookie

Alexandria and the Chambers of Congress

The Bridge to TerraBitchAtYa

Goodnight Loon https://twitchy.com/samj-3930/2019/03/03/where-the-breadline-ends-aoc-inspired-childrens-books-titles-go-viral-with-hilarious-tag-ocasiocortezchildrensbooks/

YOU GO, GIRL – Cornell University President Martha Pollock rejected the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) demands of an anti-Israel coalition led by the Cornell Students for Justice in Palestine (SJP) in a letter that also rebuked the group’s overall purpose.
