DMK & DMDK are like oil and water, won’t bond: RB Udayakumar

AISMK founder and actor R. Sarath Kumar called on his long-term friend and DMDK founder Vijayakanth at the latter’s residence in the city on Sunday. Later, speaking to reporters Sarath Kumar said he had called on his friend Vijayakanth and enquired about his health. Vijayakanth had recently returned from the US after undergoing medical treatment. Tamil film ‘superstar’ Rajinikanth was the first to call on him on Feb. 22 and a few hours later DMK president M. K. Stalin too called on Vijayakanth at his Saligramam residence, triggering speculation of change in alliance. The AIADMK leaders have been insisting that the alliance with the DMDK would be finalised soon.

CHENNAI: State Revenue Minister R. B. Udayakumar took pot shots at the DMK for attempting to rope in Vijayakanth’s DMDK. He said the two parties are like oil and water and they would never bond.

“DMK and DMDK are like oil and water. The two will never bond,” Mr. Udayakumar sarcastically remarked. Participating in the foundation stone laying ceremony for the construction of a building for the Madurai District Rural Development Agency (DRDA) at an estimated cost of Rs 5.5 crore on Sunday, the Minister told reporters that Vijayakanth would take a “good decision” on aligning with the AIADMK and announce it.

“Elder brother Vijayakanth hails from Madurai and was married to Premalatha in Madurai….those in Madurai possess good knowledge of politics,” Mr. Udayakumar said indicating that he would align with the AIADMK.

“There will be good news soon. It will be a happy ending, as the talks are being held cordially. We will soon form a mega alliance and our front will register an overwhelming victory,” Fisheries Minister D. Jayakumar said and added that the AIADMK’s political foes will spend sleepless nights.

Speaking to reporters here he said, the alliance would be finalised before March 6 and the Prime Minister Narendra Modi would address a joint rally of the allies in the city soon.

Replying to a query, he felt sad for the left parties, which by aligning with the DMK have become the “sacrificial goats for the DMK.” “We have the strength of an elephant. No one can defeat us nor dare to come near us,” Mr. Jayakuamar said.
