Post Pulwama, seven-tier security at Chennai airport

The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) has been instructed to check the passengers thoroughly and ensure proper screening at the airport. Patrolling outside airport area has also been intensified.

Chennai: In view of the tension between India and Pakistan following the terror threat after the Pulwama attacks, a red alert notice has been issued to all the international airports including Chennai airport. A 7-tier security has been put in place and entry of visitors is banned. Passengers are allowed inside after a thorough check, airport sources said.

The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) has been instructed to check the passengers thoroughly and ensure proper screening at the airport. Patrolling outside airport area has also been intensified.

The terror attack on security forces at Pulwama in Jammu & Kashmir on February 14 killed 40 jawans. In retaliation, the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out a pre-emptive strike against terror by crossing LoC at Balakhot. This has led to tension at the border between the two nations.

Following this, BCAS issued the alert and marked it to senior police officials of all states, in-charges of security at all airlines and airports, and officers of the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF).

“In view of the intelligence input in the aftermath of the Pulwama attack and subsequent developments, it is imperative to enhance the existing security measures being taken at all the civil aviation installations like airports, airstrips, airfields, air force stations, helipads, flying schools, aviation training institutes, so that no untoward incident takes place,” the alert notification read.

As a result, a strict vigil is being maintained at the Chennai airport. Seven-tier security has been put in place. No vehicle should be parked in front of the terminal building, and there should be intensive vehicle checks entering the car parking area, according to the alert notification.

The BCAS has suggested enhanced screening of passengers, staff and hand baggage and ‘strengthening of anti-terrorism measures’ and placement of quick response teams at all airports.

An enhanced random check at the entry of the terminal building, including utilization of bomb detection and disposal squads and dog squads at the entry point has been suggested.

A strict ground monitoring of regulatory guidelines for operations of a non-conventional aerial platform like microlight aircraft, aero models, paragliders, unmanned aerial systems (UAS), drones, power hang gliders and hot air balloons is also done.
