Shifting winds: Pakistan’s tantrums over India’s OIC invite reveal a sore loser. India must press forward

UAE’s invitation to India to be a “guest of honour” at the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) foreign ministers summit has stung Pakistan to the extent of making it boycott the plenary session. External affairs minister Sushma Swaraj used the opportunity to effectively convey India’s stance on state-sponsored terror and its tradition of multiculturalism. Home to the world’s third largest Muslim population of 180 million, India ticks all the right boxes to be a natural OIC partner. But with Pakistan regularly firing on India from OIC forums, this was a non-starter. The adoption of Pakistan’s resolutions with uncharitable references to India’s Kashmir policy is unfortunate but importantly the summit’s key deliverable, the Abu Dhabi Declaration, is silent on Kashmir unlike last year.

It’s best to look at the broader picture. The incongruity of OIC excluding India throughout its 50-year history fearing Pak disapproval was corrected at a critical time. Both countries are de-escalating from a near-war scenario and UAE’s OIC invite a week after the Pulwama attack signalled disapproval of Pakistani sanctuary for proscribed groups like Jaish-e-Muhammed, which owned up to the terror strike. A fundamental shift in domestic policy is also underway in Arab countries.

Conservative monarchies like Saudi Arabia and UAE have been benefactors to Pakistan but are now fighting battles at home against Islamic radicalisation. They cannot afford to be indulgent of or complacent about terrorism any longer. Pakistan is the only holdout in this regard as its religious nationalism, based on burning hatred for India, trumps everything else. India has bonded with many West Asian countries amidst shared concerns of economy and national security. The diplomatic breakthrough was helped along by Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s building a rapport with their leaders, which also required breaking out of the long held and ossified parameters of “non-alignment”.

Thus, OIC used to be Pakistan’s favourite platform for launching diatribes against India, but it’s now on slippery ground even there. The “Muslims vs Hindus” narrative no longer works. Even Pakistan’s alarmist and fraudulent attempts to convince world nations that India was engaged in a war buildup came to naught. Pakistan must take note of the shifting winds and crack down on anti-India terror groups.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
