Tough queries stare at Modi

BENGALURU/LUCKNOW/PATNA: Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi is facing tough questions on his claims about adventurism against Pakistan in the wake of Pulwama killings of paramilitary troops, reports Indian media.

Karnataka Minister Priyank Kharge claimed the so-called pre-emptive air strike by the Indian Air Force on alleged terror camps in Pakistan has raised doubts among masses that it was a "conspiracy", reports Indian media.

"This (IAF air strike) raises doubts among masses that it is a conspiracy. It is like '44 for 22'. The statement (by BJP state chief B S Yeddyurappa) was that the martyrdom of 44 soldiers were for 22 seats in Karnataka," the social welfare minister told reporters at Chamarajnagar, adding, "Whatever was in their (BJP's) mind was now out in the open and they have made it clear to what extent they could go."

When asked what he meant by 'conspiracy', Kharge said, "Wait for two-three days for the truth to come out to see what the international and national media have been saying... Has the defence minister (Nirmala Sitharaman) given any statement (on the air strike)?”

In Lucknow, Bahujan Samaj Party chief Mayawati said, "It is not hidden from the people how BJP and especially PM Modi are trying to hide their failures in the garb of what is happening in Jammu and Kashmir."

Addressing party workers here, she called the meeting to give guidelines to BSF workers on the party's alliance with SP. Earlier, she had criticised PM Modi for "ignoring" matters of national security and trying to serve political interests.

"At a time when India is facing hostility and the country needs firm leadership, PM Narendra Modi, instead of concentrating on the matters of national security, is trying to serve political interests by addressing BJP workers. It is ridiculous, besides betrayal of national sentiments," she had said.

In Amaravati, TDP president and chief minister Chandrababu Naidu alleged that whoever speaks against Prime Minister Narendra Modi faces Enforcement Directorate (ED)and Income Tax (IT) raids. "Whoever speaks against Narendra Modi faces IT and ED raids. We will not be afraid of all these acts. We will fight for justice until we achieve it. I am speaking on behalf of 5 crore people. I will not tolerate any injustice to Telugus residing in any part of the world," he said.

In Patna, Modi on Sunday condemned opposition parties for asking for proof of the Indian Air Force’s strikes in Balakot, Pakistan. Addressing the NDA’s Sankalp rally, Modi said the new India would not sit quiet on the martyrdom of its brave soldiers.

“Instead of boosting the morale of our brave soldiers, they are asking for proof of the air strike on terror camps in Pakistan like they had earlier asked for evidence of surgical strikes … I want to know from the Congress and other parties, why are they bent on destroying the morale of the armed forces? Why is the Congress giving speeches where enemies are benefiting? When we have to stand united against terror factories, 21 parties united for questioning us,” Modi said in his speech, India media reported.

“We’re proud of our defence forces but some people in our country are making statements which have brought a smile on the faces of our enemies,” he said.

“But, your chowkidar (watchman) is standing rock solid before them for the security of the country and protecting the interests of the poor people,” Modi said. “The new India doesn’t sit quietly over the martyrdom of its brave soldiers … it takes revenge point by point,” he added.

My priority is to end terrorism but they (the opposition) have united to finish Modi,” he added.

“The people of the country have decided to punish them (opposition parties) once again,” he said, listing out the Centre’s initiatives in the state while lauding the achievements of Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar for “giving new direction to Bihar.” “Today, Bihar has got a better atmosphere for business activity,” he said.

Modi also said that for the first time in 50 years, India was invited to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) conference and “its voice was heard with respect”. Earlier, Modi admitted air superiority of Pakistan Air Force (PAF) compared to IAF, which recently suffered downing of two of its warplanes and capture of a pilot by Pakistan.

"Today, we badly felt the absence of Rafale fighter jets," the Indian premier said, at the India Today Conclave 2019 in New Delhi.

"If we had Rafale, the scenario would have been different." Indian political parties have been gunning for Modi over the 2016 purchase of 36 Rafale planes from Dassault Aviation estimated to be worth $8.7 billion, saying he had overpaid for the planes and had not been transparent. The deal was aimed at overhauling the outdated IAF fleet.

The Indian premier further said the country suffered due to "vested interest" over the Rafale jets in the past. "We continue to suffer due to the politicisation of the Rafale deal. The vested interests and politicisation has caused great harm to the nation's interest," he said.

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi was quick to shame Modi for the alleged corruption in Rafale deal. "Dear PM, Have you no shame at all? YOU stole 30,000 Cr and gave it to your friend Anil," Rahul said in a tweet.

"YOU are WHY brave IAF pilots like Wing Cdr. Abhinandan, are risking their lives flying outdated jets," he stated. As India gets trapped in crisis, the Indian TV channels have become 'graphic war rooms' and while they spew venom against Pakistan they are brazen enough to run fake news. They ran two fake stories — one claiming martyrdom of a PAF pilot which was effectively belied by a Pakistani journalist, and another about the death of Masood Azhar, the chief of a banned outfit accused by India of masterminding terrorism in India.

Besides, Indian journalists are being pressured to conform to the official narrative on Pakistan. Ravish Kumar from Indian broadcaster NDTV told DW that those who don't comply have faced public ridicule on social media.

Ravish Kumar said the channels are not reporting on the conflict as much as they are using the conflict as an excuse to build up the ruling party's electoral prospects in the upcoming general elections. The intention of this warmongering is to polarize people and consolidate votes, he added.

He said the media is using "experts" to legitimize their the ruling party's propaganda. When told that it seems most journalists in India are facing pressure to conform to the official narrative, Ravish said: “We are under pressure because if the general mood is tuned toward warmongering, we have to decide between catering to this mood and reporting factual information. This has become a big challenge. For example, the chief of the Indian air force has not said exactly how many people were killed in the airstrike that India carried out.”

In Ayodhya, Acharya Satyendra Das, chief priest of the “makeshift” Ram Mandir for nearly a quarter of a century, anticipates the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) may not have to peddle dreams about constructing the Ram Mandir while campaigning for the 2019 general election.

“The BJP will replace the Ram Mandir issue with the attack in Kashmir. They used to chant Ram, Ram, Ram, but now they won’t,” he said. “Ram Ram rat rat kar, BJP mara mara ho gayi.” In any case, the 80-year-old priest said, the BJP has cashed in its rhetorical chips as far as the Ram Mandir is concerned. “If the BJP try and run on the Ram Mandir, they will lose. The public will not believe them. They have lost the trust of the people,” he said.
