Jammu and Kashmir: Pakistan violates ceasefire in Akhnoor sector, Army retaliates

New Delhi:

Pakistan violated the ceasefire yet again in the Akhnoor sector of Jammu and Kashmir on Monday. Pakistan initiated unprovoked firing and shelling at around 3 am along the Line of Control (LoC). Mortars and small firearms were used. The Indian Army retaliated strongly. The firing, however, stopped at 6:30 am, according to reports. The Pakistan Army has violated the ceasefire for over 60 times during the last one week by targeting over 70 civilian and forward areas along the LoC in Poonch, Rajouri, Jammu and Baramulla districts of Jammu and Kashmir, in which one woman was killed and 9 persons were injured.



On Saturday, Pakistan violated the ceasefire Nowshera sector of Jammu and Kashmir's Rajouri district. Pakistan initiated unprovoked firing and shelling at 12.30 pm along the LoC.



On Friday, too, Pakistani had violated ceasefire along the LoC in three sectors of Jammu and Kashmir namely Mendhar, Balakote, and Krishna Ghati sectors at 6 pm. Earlier today, one civilian was injured in a ceasefire violation by Pakistani troops along the LoC in Uri sector of Jammu and Kashmir, officials said.



ALSO READ | Jaish-e-Mohammed confirms IAF’s airstrike, says its chief Masood Azhar is alive



Three members of a family were killed and two others injured as Pakistani forces heavily shelled areas along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district. Pakistani forces targeted civilian areas with mortar bombs and heavy guns, including Howitzer 105 mm. The Indian forces retaliated effectively. In the heavy shelling, three members of a family were killed and another was injured in Salotri in Poonch district, where shells hit several houses, they said. Twenty-four-year-old Rubana Kosar and her son Fazan (5) and nine-month-old daughter Shabnam were killed in the shelling. Rubana's husband Mohd Yunis was injured, officials said.





In view of the prevailing situation, authorities have ordered temporary closure of educational institutions in a 5-km radius along the LoC in Rajouri and Poonch districts. They have asked all border dwellers to remain inside their homes.



The ceasefire violation by the Pakistani troops comes as tensions between India and Pakistan rose following the February 14 terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district in which 40 CRPF soldiers were killed. Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror group claimed responsibility for the attack.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
