Wedding reason enough to release seized money

High Court

Anti Corruption Bureau

Govt official's daughter needed money for wedding, so she approachedWedding is a good enough reason to get money seized in a corruption raid released, the daughters of a Karnataka government official have found out. The High Court has allowed two daughters of a deputy director of the Mines and Geology Department to withdraw nearly Rs 20 lakh of the money that was seized in a raid on their father in 2016. One of the daughters is getting married and needed money for the wedding expenses.VS Swathi and VS Chandana, daughters of SB Sampath Krishna, approached the High Court against the(ACB). Sampath Krishna was one of the three government officials; the other two being Srinivasa Reddy and GT Srinivas, who were raided by the ACB on September 7, 2016.The two women had approached the lower court trying the corrpution matter to get their bank accounts defreezed. The court had rejected their applications after whichthey approached the High Court. Before the HC, their advocate argued that the bank accounts of the two women which were seized during the course of investigation belonged to the two and had nothing to do with their father. They were not connected in any way with the offence which is alleged on the accused. Sampath Krishna has been charged with possessing of money and property disproportionate to his known sources of income. There was no prima facie material to show that the money in the two accounts belonged to him. The two women were ready to offer surety and indemnity bond if they were allowed to use their money. The money kept idle was causing them inconvenience and financial loss, the court was told.One of the sisters, Chandana, was engaged to be married. Her marriage however had to be postponed for non-availability of funds "and if the said amount is not released it is going to cause inconvenience to both the families," it was argued. The government advocate argued that the said amount belonged to the accused as per the accounts furnished by the investigating agency. When the amount was deposited in the accounts of the two daughters of the accused, they were still students and not earning members of their family. This shows that the money belonged to the accused Sampath Krishna, the court was told. If the amount is released, it would be very difficult for the State to reappropriate and seize it, he argued.The HC noted that four accounts in the name of VS Swathi had Rs 9,45,869 and four accounts in the name of VS Chandana had Rs 10,67,189. The HC felt that it was right to allow them to use the money instead of keeping it idle. "Whether the said amount standing in the name of the petitioners is accumulation of the assets of accused is a matter which has to be considered and appreciated only at the time of trial. It is the submission of the learned Senior Counsel that the marriage of the petitioner Miss Chandana has been fixed and for the purpose of meeting out the marriage expenses, they require the said amount. Though the said amount is liable to be seized, I am of the considered opinion that if adequate security/indemnity bond if it is taken in accordance with law, then it is going to meet the ends of justice."The HC ordered the release of the amount in the names of the two women on the condition that they execute indemnity bond for the said amounts and also provide two sureties. If the tiral court establishes that the money was part of the disproportion amount of the accused, the two women would have to pay it back.The HC said that the lower court only has to decide whether the amount in these accounts were invested by the accused and they were part of his disproportionate assets.
