Bathinda: Maur blast victims, kin protest against Jassi during his rally

BATHINDA: A score of residents of Maur town of Bathinda and the family members of those killed in blast on January 31, 2017, just four days before the Punjab assembly elections, protested against former MLA Harminder Singh Jassi during his rally on Sunday.Jassi is a close relative of Dera Sacha Sauda head and rape convict Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh . It was during his election meeting that the blast had done. Police investigation in the case has already hinted at the involvment of some Dera followers.The residents assembled at the site where the blast had occurred on the Truck Union Road in Maur, where five children and who men were killed. The residents also brought Jaskaran Singh, who had sustained serious injuries in the blast and still is bedridden, to the protest site on a cot. The police not allowed the protesters to go at the rally venue.They accused Jassi of doing nothing to provide justice to victim families. “He is now playing politics as the parliamentary elections are round the corner,” they alleged.In the meanwhile Jassiheld the rally at the Maur grain market and counted out the achievements of the Congress government in last two years.The state government had assured job to a family member of those killed in blast but the jobs were denied to families of four children stating that the families were not dependent on the minor children. At the same time jobs to family members of two persons killed in blast have been provided.The protesters also demanded Rs 1 crore per family as compensation. The residents also are angry over police failing to arrest any of those behind blast even after over two years.A powerful improvised explosive device (IED) blast in a car had ripped the town whereas another detonator put in a pressure cooker had failed to go off. Jassi’s office manager Harpal Singh Pali (41), rag picker Ashok Kumar (40), his daughter Barkha (12), Japsimran Singh (15), Ripandeep Singh (10) and Sourav Singla (13), Ankush Singla (13) had died in the blast.Ripandeep’ grandfather Balbir Singh said that they had approached Jassi on a number of occasions but he never stood by the victims. “We wanted him to ensure the victim families got justice and thus have decided to protest against him. We have also decided to oppose the Congress candidate in parliamentary elections if Jassi campaigns for him in Maur,” he added.When contacted, Jassi denied the charges. “I have been supporting the victim families and have raised the issue before chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh . I am trying that they get them justice as I demanded jobs to the family members, compensation of Rs 50 lakh each to the families of those killed and Rs 2 lakh each to those injured. I will again raise the issue with the government,” he added.
