I’m trying to eliminate terror & graft, opposition is trying to finish me off: PM Modi

PATNA: Riding high on the recent air strikes on terror camps in Balakot and safe return of wing commander Abhinandan Varthaman from Pakistan, PM Narendra Modi on Sunday attacked the Congress for demanding proof of the armed forces’ feat.Addressing the NDA’s Sankalp Rally here, he accused the Congress-led opposition of helping Pakistan and demoralizing the Indian armed forces. “They had asked for evidence of surgical strike and they are now seeking proof of destruction of terrorist launch pads in Pakistan. I want to know from Congress and its allies why are they bent upon breaking the morale of our brave jawans,” Modi said.The PM, referring to senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh’s statement on Saturday that the Indian government should provide proof of the air strikes in Balakot, asked the audience did not they (Congress-led opposition) deserve punishment again. “When there was a need to show unity against those running terror factories, 21 opposition parties in Delhi passed a resolution against the NDA government at the Centre. People of Bihar and the country will never pardon their action,” he said.Sharpening his attack on Congress, Modi said, “The country has seen the approach of Congress and its allies on security issues. But this is naya Hindustan, progressing with new ethos and policies. Now, the country does not remain silent on the martyrdom of its brave jawans. Chun chun ke badla leta hai (we avenge each and every attack).”The PM said the opposition was working overtime only to finish Modi, while his preference is to eliminate terrorism and corruption. “When the armed forces are working with dedication to wipe out terrorism in the country and across the border, some people in India are making statements which bring cheers to the enemy camp and are being shown repeatedly on television screens in Pakistan,” Modi said at the same historic Gandhi Maidan where Indian Mujahideen had triggered a series of bomb blasts during his ‘Hunkar Rally’ on October 27, 2013 before the last Lok Sabha election.Blowing the poll bugle for NDA in Bihar for the upcoming general elections, Modi said, “Fundamental needs of the country have been fulfilled since 2014. NDA has laid the foundation of a new India in the last five years and time has come to build a new country on this strong foundation. The time after 2019 election will be utilized for taking the country to new heights in the 21st century.”Taking a jibe at Congress president Rahul Gandhi for attacking the PM, Modi said: “Whether it is the question of protection of the country or protection of poor and needy persons, your chowkidar and NDA stand as a wall against those with bad intentions … It is because of such reasons that there is a competition to abuse the chowkidar. However, your chowkidar is completely alert.”While trying to impress the Muslim voters, he said the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, during his visit to India recently, agreed to increase the country’s quota for haj to 2 lakhs and release the 850 Indians lodged in the jails there.The PM also mentioned Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) meet held earlier this week in which India was the guest of honour. “It happened after 50 years. Doesn’t it give you pride and confidence,” Modi asked.The PM also lauded Bihar CM Nitish Kumar , who had been his bête noire since 2013 — when Modi was projected as NDA’s PM candidate — till the JD(U) national president joined hands with BJP again in August 2017. The two leaders, in fact, shared the stage for a political event for the first time after 2009.“Today I feel happy that a hardworking and pro-poor person like Nitish babu has given a new direction to Bihar. Development in Bihar has been expedited with NDA government at the Centre as well as in the state, especially under the joint leadership of Nitish ji and Sushil Kumar Modi (Bihar deputy CM) ji,” Modi said.Nitish also praised PM Modi for the air strikes on terror centres and the development works in the country. “Our alliance in Bihar has been done for development of the state and we are getting the required support accordingly, especially in terms of infrastructure … elections are coming and I want to say from this stage that people of Bihar assure PM Modi of NDA victory on all 40 seats,” Nitish said.Meanwhile, launching a veiled attack on RJD chief Lalu Prasad while referring to multi-crore fodder scam, Modi said: “Chaara ke naam pe kya kya hua hai, Bihar ke logon ko achche se pata hai (People of Bihar know it very well what all has happened in the name of fodder).”Lalu has been convicted in fodder scam cases and serving jail term since December 2017.It was evident from the speeches of all NDA leaders that Pulwama terror attack and the retaliatory air strikes will be the main agenda for the ruling alliance in the upcoming general elections.“Humko Buddh Chahiye, Lekin Agar Aawashyakta Padi to Humko Yudh bhi Chahiye (We want Lord Buddha but if needed, we should go for a war as well). As we have won the battle of bullets, we are going to win the battle of ballots as well by winning over 400 seats in the upcoming general elections,” LJP chief Ram Vilas Paswan said.
