'Naked dance of dictatorship': BJP slams Mamata government as workers clash with police after bike rallies prevented

'Naked dance of dictatorship': BJP slams Mamata government as workers clash with police after bike rallies prevented

An unspecified number of BJP workers and policemen were injured in clashes in several districts of West Bengal Sunday after the saffron party's motorbike rallies held as part of its public outreach programme were denied permission.

Police said they disallowed the motorbike rallies as permission had not been granted to them because of the ongoing school board examinations.

Rafale: Prashant Bhushan quotes Pakistani channel's report to make point against PM Modi

Clashes between BJP workers and policemen took place at Durgapur and Asansol in West Burdwan district, Midnapore town and Goaltore in West Midnapore, and Balurghat in South Dinajpur when they took out the motorcycle rallies. In Cooch Behar too clashes happened and BJP has claimed TMC hand in it. Several party leaders shared pictures of wounded workers on Twitter and blamed the Mamata Banerjee government in the state for the violence.

Also Read: 'You are afraid that Amethi is developing': Irani hits back at Rahul Gandhi over Ordinance Factory tweet

The police resorted to lathicharge to disperse the saffron party workers at Asansol and Goaltore leaving some people from both sides injured.

Among the injured were a DSP level officer and four other policemen, sources in West Midnapore said.

BJP state president Dilip Ghosh accused the ruling Trinamool Congress (TMC) of using the police and administration to prevent the party workers from holding 'Vijay Sankalp' rallies out of fear of losing political ground in West Bengal.

The 'Vijay Sankalp' bike rally is part of the BJP's countrywide pre-poll exercise to establish contact with the people.

An officer of Kolkata Police said 135 persons were arrested and 59 motorcycles were seized from different places of the city as a preventive measure.

With BJP gaining traction in West Bengal, there have been increasing reports of political clashes from the state. The state witnessed many transgressions during the last Panchayat elections. Later, there was a protracted legal battle between the state government and BJP regarding holding of Rath Yatra in the state. The matter even went to Supreme Court where the state government won.

Senior BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya who is also overseeing party's Bengal operations tweeted after Sunday's incident,

It loosely translates to: "What is the condition of the state government? After anarchy and autocracy, now we are seeing naked dance of dictatorship. BJP workers are being beaten up ruthlessly. This has to end".

Amit Shah has set an ambitious target for Bengal BJP to win 23 of the 42 seats from the state in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. Whereas, Mamata Banerjee one of the key players of the opposition's Mahagathbandhan is aiming for a clean sweep.

With PTI inputs
