Pakistan hatching major conspiracy along IB in Jammu, may carry out BAT attacks: Sources

highlights The BSF has been asked to stay alert to thwart any possible attack. Tension has increased on the border after IAF's strike in Balakot. Pakistan had vowed surprise attack after the Balakot strike.

New Delhi:

Wounded by Indian Air Force’s massive strikes on terror camps inside its territory, Pakistan is hatching a major conspiracy on Jammu international border. According to sources, Pakistan has deployed a specially trained team of its Border Action Team (BAT) personnel to carry out attacks on Indian armed forces. It has also deployed snipers near the international border to cause damage to the Indian side.

Following the report, the Border Security Force (BSF) has been directed to remain extra vigilant on the international border. The conspiracy by Pakistan is being hatched against India’s cross border action on a JeM camp in Balakot.

The Indian Air Force on February 26 had conducted an air strike on a JeM terrorist camp in Pakistan’s Balakot to avenge the Pulwama attack in which over 40 CRPF personnel were killed. It was the first time in more than a decade that Indian jets had crossed the LoC to strike against Pakistan.

Although Pakistan denied that the Indian Air Force had struck a terrorist camp and caused heavy casualties, it vowed to respond, "at the time and place of its choosing".

"Do not underestimate us. We have our own sense of timing and we will act and react. Pakistan will do what Pakistan should do... we will not disappoint the people of Pakistan," Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi had said after the strike.

Following India’s air strike, the Pakistani Air Force had also violated Indian air space and dropped bombs at a military post in India, but its jets were scrambled back by IAF. The Indian Air Force even shot down a US-made F-16 fighter jet used by the Pakistani Air Force to strike India.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
