Let people speculate about Disha and me: Tiger Shroff

Mumbai: Tiger Shroff, who celebrated his 29th birthday on Saturday, has been faring well in both his professional and personal life. With Baaghi 2 being a spectacular success last year, his career path seems bright and is lined up with a number of projects including the much awaited Karan Johar’s Student Of The Year 2.

While most of the shooting of Student Of The Year 2 is completed, Tiger is yet to shoot a dance number with Alia Bhatt who will be making a cameo appearance. “We’ve just one more song to shoot. It’s the introductory song. And I guess it will be spectacular. How could it be otherwise, when it is (Karan Johar’s) Dharma Production?” Tiger wonders rhetorically. He further adds that he does not know the details of the song, but assures the shooting will be fun.

While the first film of the Student Of The Year franchise saw Alia Bhatt, Varun Dhawan, and Sidharth Malhotra as debutants, the second film will also see Ananya Pandey and Tara Sutaria debuting as the two leads along with Tiger. Talking about stepping in the shoes of the actors of the first film, Tiger reveals, “It was enjoyable. There was also a lot of pressure on the three of us, especially the two new girls Ananya and Tara who have Alia Bhatt from the first Student Of The Year to be compared with. Both the girls have worked hard. Hopefully, we will encore the success of the first film of the frothy franchise.”

Additionally, Tiger has also been shooting for an action film with Hrithik Roshan. “Audience can expect both the expected —that is a lot of action featuring Hrithik sir and I — and the unexpected. I can’t reveal more about the film, not even its title because we don’t have any as yet,” reveals the tight-lipped actor. It’s no secret that Tiger has always idolised Hrithik, and now that he is starring in a movie with him, he can’t stop gushing. “Shooting with my idol Hrithik sir has been an experience that I will never forget. He lived up to all the expectations, and then some more. He spent a lot of time, sharing his experiences with me. I came away enriched.”

Tiger’s next project will be Baaghi 3. “The plot is in place, and of course Ahmed (Khan) sir is directing it. The pressure to deliver another high-octane action film after the first two Baaghi films is immense. All I can tell you is, we are trying our best,” he says.

Despite the busy schedule, Tiger will also be squeezing in another action film Rambo which is an official remake of the Sylvester Stallone franchise. Talking about it, he reveals, “It’s a remake of Rambo. Sylvester Stallone tweeted about it. Would he make a guest appearance in our film? That would be a dream come true!”

There isn’t the slightest doubt that the actor has set himself up with some ambitious projects, but when it comes to the ambitions of the heart, he chooses to tease rather than confirm his relationship with former co-star Disha Patani. “Well, we are seen together at restaurants for dinner and for coffee. She is a dear friend and we do go out together. Beyond that, let people speculate. Some amount of speculation is good,” he signs off.
