Theresa May praises PM Imran Khan’s commitment to reduce tensions with India

ISLAMABAD/LONDON – British Prime Minister Theresa May, during her telephonic conversation with her Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan on Sunday, praised the latter’s commitment to reduce the recently escalated tensions with neighbouring India

Theresa May emphasized the importance of Pakistan taking action against all terrorist groups, in support of global efforts to combat terrorism.

She also welcomed Imran Khan’s decision of releasing the Indian pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman who was captured alive by Pakistan troops after his MiG-21 Bison was shot down by Pakistan Air Force jet over the Line of Control that divides the disputed region of Kashmir.

British Prime Minister Theresa May had a call with Prime Minister Imran Khan today. She welcomed his commitment to reducing tensions with India, and the return of Wing Commander Abhinandan. Both leaders reiterated their commitment to the UK-Pakistan bilateral relationship. pic.twitter.com/xpiV8F8kUG — Ministry of Information & Broadcasting (@MoIB_Official) March 3, 2019

She mentioned the need for both India and Pakistan to de-escalate and said that her country is in touch with both sides in this regard.

PM Imran Khan apprised Mrs May of Pakistan’s perspective on the developments since the Pulwama incident.

The chronology of events as they happened with and after Pulwama.#PakistanLeadsWithPeace #KashmirBleeds pic.twitter.com/gU6A8nmEIH — Government of Pakistan (@GovtofPakistan) March 2, 2019

India and Pakistan came to the brink of war this week as tensions escalated following a suicide car bombing that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Indian-occupied Kashmir. India accusing Pakistan of harbouring the Jaish-e Mohammad group behind the attack, which Islamabad denied.

The two nuclear-armed countries then engaged in an air battle and India lost jets in it after carrying out an air strike on what it said was a camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad, considered a terrorist group both by India and Pakistan.

While India has accused Pakistan of supporting the militants and having a "direct hand" in the incident, Pakistan, in turn, has rejected the allegations, accusing India of being responsible for human rights violations taking place in Kashmir.

OIC condemns Indian terrorism, grave human rights ... 09:30 AM | 3 Mar, 2019 ABU DHABI - The 46th Session of the Council of Foreign Ministers of Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) held in ...

During the conservation, Khan invited the British premier for a visit to Pakistan. PM May reciprocated the invitation.

Both the leaders reiterated their commitment to good relations between the United Kingdom and Pakistan.
