Minister Nara Lokesh fires at Telangana government

Amaravati: AP IT Minister Nara Lokesh fires at Telangana government. He alleged by stealing the data, they have spoiled the brand name of Hyderabad IT hub.

Responding through a tweet the Minister said, Justice prevails! The High Court has reprimanded the Telangana Police for unlawfully arresting the four employees when complaint was filed against the company.

It has questioned the police why they were taken in as witnesses without being served prior notice which is part of procedure. The Court was shocked to see the Police take signatures of the VRO on blank papers and gave them an earful for blatant disregard for the law of the land

By using police and embracing extra judicial tactics, TDP data has been stolen and handed over to the YSRCP. But can they steal the respect and admiration that people have for @ncbn? Every voter is watching how all the anti-AP forces are ganging up against one single man @ncbn

He used the hashtag #TSGovtStealsData in these tweets.

Justice prevails! The High Court has reprimanded the Telangana Police for unlawfully arresting the four employees when complaint was filed against the company. #TSGovtStealsData — Lokesh Nara (@naralokesh) March 4, 2019

It has questioned the police why they were taken in as witnesses without being served prior notice which is part of procedure. The Court was shocked to see the Police take signatures of the VRO on blank papers and gave them an earful for blatant disregard for the law of the land — Lokesh Nara (@naralokesh) March 4, 2019

By using police and embracing extra judicial tactics, TDP data has been stolen and handed over to the YSRCP. But can they steal the respect and admiration that people have for @ncbn? Every voter is watching how all the anti-AP forces are ganging up against one single man @ncbn — Lokesh Nara (@naralokesh) March 4, 2019

Lokesh also pointed to TS government, That he thought, in the name of the return gift they will support YS Jagan but by sealing the data you have the damage the Hyderabad IT brand name.
