Tamil Nadu battles rain deficiency of 99 per cent, no improvement ahead

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

After the post-Monsoon season, Tamil Nadu has been battling dry weather conditions. As on January 8, Tamil Nadu is largely deficient to the tune of 99%. From January to January 8, the state has recorded 0 mm of rainfall against the normal of 6.1 mm.

October and November are the rainiest months for Tamil Nadu with average rainfall to the tune of 180 mm and 170 mm, respectively. However, we see a sharp decline in rainfall during December and the average mean falls to 80 mm.

The following months of January and February record least rainfall of the year. According to weathermen, after the withdrawal of Northeast Monsoon in December, any system seldom forms in Indian Seas that could impact the weather over the state. Thus, rains remain on the lower side during these months.

It is only with the development of any freak weather system that could give rains over parts of Tamil Nadu. Hence, January and February usually record deficient rainfall. Going by the trend, January began on the dry note. The first week of the month remained practically dry and recorded 0 mm of rain from January 1-7.

Further also, we do not expect any rainfall in the coming week as well and there are bright chances that fortnight would end with 0 mm of rain. However, looking at the past statistics, there is nothing new in this. In fact, last five years have seen deficient rainfall, barring one occasion of January 2017. Following rainfall graphs would help you understand better:

It has been a difficult season for Tamil Nadu, this year. Northeast Monsoon, wherein the state records over 50% per cent of its annual rainfall. However, the three-Month long season from October to December failed miserably and ended with deficiency of 23%. In fact, northern districts of the state have been battling drought like conditions.

Above shown graph indicates rainfall figures for Tamil Nadu during January for the last 5 years

Above shown graph indicates rainfall figures for Tamil Nadu during February for the last 5 years

Image Credit: Hindu

Any information taken from here should be credited to skymetweather.com
