It’s A Case of The Thief Questioning The Cops: KTR To Chandrababu On Data Theft

TRS working president K Taraka Rama Rao (KTR), lashed out at Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu for being involved in breach of data and then accusing the Telangana government of targetting the IT company in question. It may be recalled that IT Grids company located in Madhapur, Hyderabad has been entrusted with the task of developing the Seva Mitra app for the TDP. This small IT firm became the eye of a major storm when it was learnt that it had accessed private information with respect to citizens of AP.

A resident of Kukatpally, Lokeshwar Reddy complained to the Telangana Police authorities about data breach regarding his personal information by a private entity in Hyderabad. Acting on his complaint, KTR pointed out, the Telangana police took up investigation of the matter under Sections 66 and 72 of the IT Act.



KTR observed that Lokeshwar Reddy had in fact acted as a whistle blower and across the world, whistle blowers were commended and protected. The AP police, without informing the Telangana police, raid Lokeshwar Reddy's house, abused him and tried to take him into their custody. KTR remarked that this itself was unlawful and wondered as to what the AP government was afraid of. He pointed out that the matter was under the jurisdiction of Telangana police because the complainant was a resident here and his complaint related to a crime committed by a local company. "What business does the AP police have in this case?" KTR questioned.



The TRS working president also flayed the AP government for leaking information to the party and allowing personal information of the citizens of the state to be accessed by a private entity. The AP government should have taken action in this matter and instead Chandrababu is hurling all kinds of wild allegations against the Telangana government, he said. He quoted the popular Hindi saying which goes "ulta chor kotwal ko daante' (a case of the thief reprimanding the cops).



KTR cautioned the people of Andhra Pradesh to be wary of Chandrababu Naidu who has compromised on their personal information so branzenly. He also demanded to know how the Andhra Pradesh police could block the Telangana police from probing IT grid company.



One of the key questions that requires investigation is how personal information related to AP residents could be accessed by Seva Mitra in the first place.

Also Read: Brand Chandrababu Goes For A Toss With Defections, Deletions Of Voters, Corruption
