Indian 'vintage' army incapable of fighting a war with Pakistan, reveals New York Times

NEW YORK – Leading international publication The New York Times has revealed Indian Army’s incapacity to fight war with Pakistan

In an article titled, “After India Loses Dogfight to Pakistan, Questions Arise About Its ‘Vintage’ Military”, the writer tells about the bad situation Indian Army currently faces.

“While the challenges faced by the India’s armed forces are no secret, its loss of a plane last week to a country whose military is about half the size and receives a quarter of the funding was still telling,” the article read.

“India’s armed forces are in alarming shape,” it stated, adding, “If intense warfare broke out tomorrow, India could supply its troops with only 10 days of ammunition, according to government estimates. And 68 percent of the army’s equipment is so old, it is officially considered ‘vintage’.”

“Our troops lack modern equipment, but they have to conduct 21st-century military operations,” said Gaurav Gogoi, a lawmaker and member of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defense while talking to NYT.

“Indian forces are vastly underfunded; and the country’s navy, army and air force tend to compete rather than work together,” it further read.

Indian ‘surgical strike’ in Pakistan a ... 04:16 PM | 3 Mar, 2019 WASHINGTON – An analysis by the Digital Forensics Lab of a leading US think tank has termed the Indian claimed ...

India and Pakistan came to the brink of war last week as tensions escalated following the Feb 14 suicide car bombing that killed at least 40 Indian paramilitary police in Indian-occupied Kashmir. India accusing Pakistan of harbouring the Jaish-e Mohammad group behind the attack, which Islamabad denied.

The two nuclear-armed countries then engaged in an air battle and India lost jets in it after carrying out an air strike on what it said was a camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad, considered a terrorist group both by India and Pakistan.

Pakistan also captured Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Abhinandan Varthaman after his MiG-21 fighter jet was shot down during a dogfight near the Line of Control (LoC) on February 27. He was released by Islamabad on Friday night as a “peace gesture”.

While India has accused Pakistan of supporting the militants and having a “direct hand” in the incident, Pakistan, in turn, has rejected the allegations, accusing India of being responsible for human rights violations taking place in Kashmir.
