IAF chief BS Dhanoa: If we dropped bombs in a jungle, why would Pakistan respond?

Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa has dismissed accounts refuting India's version of its airstrikes in Pakistan, saying on Monday that Indian Air Force warplanes hit their intended target.

"If we plan to hit the target, we hit the target," he told reporters in Coimbatore. "If we had dropped bombs in the jungle, then no need for him [Pakistan] to respond."

He said the Air Force was not in a position to provide clarity on the number of casualties in the Balakot strike. The IAF, he said, did not count human casualties, but targets hit or missed.

BS Dhanoa said medical fitness would determine whether Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, the fighter pilot captured and later released by Pakistan last week, would fly again.

Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa:Whether he (Wing Commander #Abhinandan) flies or not depends on his medical fitness. That's why post ejection, he has undergone medical check. Whatever treatment required, will be given. Once we get his medical fitness, he will get into fighter cockpit pic.twitter.com/2ykp5aon3h ANI (@ANI) March 4, 2019

Several opposition politicians have attacked the BJP over numbers of casualties that have been doing the rounds -- numbers that were announced neither by the ministry of external affairs (which announced the airstrike) nor by the Air Force. Some have asked for operational details or proof of the strike.

"Were you uprooting terrorists or trees?" asked Navjot Sidhu, a Congress minister in Punjab (before the Air Force Chief's press conference). Sidhu also asked if the strike was an election gimmick.

Earlier, former Union Minister Kapil Sibal had asked if Prime Minister Narendra Modi was "politicising terror", citing foreign news reports saying India's airstrikes had not killed terrorists.

Also on Monday, Manish Tewari, another former UPA-era minister, criticised BJP chief Amit Shah for saying more than 250 terrorists were killed -- when the Air Force had said it was early to assess casualties.

"Is this not milking airstrikes for politics?" Manish Tewari asked.
