Rafale deal stopped by Michel mama? PM Modi redirects fire at Rahul Gandhi

PM Modi lashed out at the Congress over Christian Michel's links in the Rafale deal.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday diverted the Rafale deal heat and redirected it on Congress president Rahul Gandhi based on reports that Agusta middleman Christian Michel was also lobbying for another fighter jet that was competing against France's Rafale.

Speaking at a rally in Maharashtra's Solapur, PM Modi said, "We brought Michel to India and now he is revealing things. Media reports have said that 'Michel mama' was lobbying for another company. Congress leaders should now explain themselves."

India Today TV reported on January 6 that according to some documents, Michel who is accused of receiving kickbacks in the AgustaWestland chopper deal, was also lobbying for Eurofighter, a fighter jet that was competing with Rafale for the jet deal.

A "strategy paper" seized during the raids at Italian middleman Guido Haschke's residence and offices has revealed that Christian Michel and Guido Haschke worked on a plan to place Rafale's prime competitor in the "win zone".

Several BJP leaders and Union ministers, including Piyush Goyal and Rajyavardhan Rathore cited the India Today TV report to attack the Congress.

On Wednesday, PM Modi, too, joined the onslaught to pull up Rahul Gandhi.

Referring to himself as the 'chowkidaar', PM Modi said that all "friends" of those who took commissions are scared because the 'chowkidaar' never sleeps.

Modi was in Solapur to launch a series of developmental projects. The development projects, Modi said, will improve connectivity in Solapur and surrounding areas.

Modi on Wednesday launched civic projects worth Rs 2,980 crore during his visit to the city.

He launched the Gangajal project to provide better and more assured water supply and also laid the foundation stone for an Integrated Command and Control Centre for the Agra Smart City project.

The smart city project is meant to develop the tourism destination as a modern world-class city.
