We hit the target, we do not count deaths: Air Force Chief BS Dhanoa

Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa said on Monday the Air Force was not in a position to say how many casualties were caused by India's counter-terrorism operation against Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pakistan.

That, he said, was the government's job, adding that the Air Force did not count human casualties, but targets hit and missed.

Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa on air strikes: IAF is not in a postilion to clarify the number of casualties. The government will clarify that. We don't count human casualties, we count what targets we have hit or not. pic.twitter.com/Ji3Z6JqReB ANI (@ANI) March 4, 2019

Responding to accounts refuting India's version of the airstrikes (carried out by Mirage 2000 fighters), BS Dhanoa said the Indian jets had hit their targets.

"If we plan to hit the target, we hit the target," he told reporters in Coimbatore. "If we had dropped bombs in the jungle, then no need for him [Pakistan] to respond."

Dhanoa also said medical fitness would determine whether Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, the fighter pilot captured and later released by Pakistan last week, would fly again.

Several opposition politicians have attacked the BJP over numbers of casualties that have been doing the rounds -- numbers that were announced neither by the ministry of external affairs (which announced the airstrike) nor by the Air Force. Some have asked for operational details or proof of the strike.

"Were you uprooting terrorists or trees?" asked Navjot Sidhu, a Congress minister in Punjab who was previously with the BJP, before BS Dhanoa's news conference. "Was it an election gimmick?"

Earlier, former Union Minister Kapil Sibal asked if Prime Minister Narendra Modi was "politicising terror", citing foreign news reports saying India's airstrikes had not killed terrorists in Pakistan.

Also on Monday, another former UPA-era minister, Manish Tewari, criticised Amit Shah for saying more than 250 terrorists were killed when the Air Force had said it was early to assess casualties.

"Is this not milking airstrikes for politics?" Manish Tewari asked.
