Don't you trust what our armed forces say?: PM Modi attacks Congress

PM Modi said that some fail to understand how the situation today would have been different if India had the Rafale jets. (Photo: ANI)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday made a veiled attack on the Congress party for questioning the Indian Air Force (IAF) airstrikes in Pakistan and asked if they don't trust what the armed forces in India say.

Speaking at a rally in Gujarat's Jamnagar, PM Modi said, "The nation agrees that the menace of terror has to be eliminated. I want to ask you [Congress], don't you trust what our armed forces say? We should be proud of our armed forces."

The prime minister further said that some fail to understand how the situation today would have been different if India has the Rafale jets. Hitting back to the Congress over the Rafale deal, Modi held it responsible for hindering the IAF from getting the state-of-art fighter jets from France.

"If the Indian Air Force had the Rafale today, the situation would have been different. I can't do anything if some people fail to understand this," he said.

PM Modi in Jamnagar, Gujarat: The nation agrees that the menace of terror has to be eliminated. I want to ask you, don't you trust what our armed forces say? We should be proud of our armed forces. pic.twitter.com/zx71igb81d March 4, 2019

On Sunday (March 3), while addressing a rally in Bihar's Patna, Modi accused the Opposition of demoralising the security forces by asking for proof of the IAF air strike.

Referring to the Opposition parties collectively accusing the BJP of "blatantly politicising" the sacrifices of the armed forces, Modi said that by making such statements, they were playing into the hands of India's enemies.

To PM Modi's charges at Congress, party chief Rahul Gandhi said that the prime minister is himself "solely responsible" for delay in the arrival of Rafale jets.

"Dear PM, Have you no shame at all? YOU stole 30,000 Crore and gave it to your friend Anil. YOU are solely responsible for the delay in the arrival of the RAFALE jets. YOU are WHY brave IAF pilots like Wing Commander Abhinandan, are risking their lives flying outdated jets," Rahul Gandhi said on Twitter.
