Antibiotic discovery in Arctic puts Northern Ireland scientist Clare in global spotlight

Every scientist dreams of making a breakthrough that changes the way we think about the world.

And for one Northern Ireland woman, a discovery in the Arctic Circle has been making headlines around the globe.

Clare McCann was part of a project that found antibiotic-resistant genes - responsible for some of the world's deadliest superbugs - in one of the last pristine places on Earth.

The 33-year-old had a key role in the Newcastle University-led study which discovered the genes, first detected in urban India, some 8,000 miles away in soil samples taken in the Kongsfjorden region of Svalbard, Norway.

It has raised fears about the global reach of antibiotic resistant bugs, and could have far-reaching repercussions for the treatment of disease for future generations.

The Kongsfjorden region was home to Dr McCann and her team for two months as they conducted their research, which was finally published in January.

It is a world away from the Co Londonderry village of Castledawson, where she grew up with her parents and four siblings. But the former student of St Mary's Grammar School in Magherafelt and Queen's University Belfast said the opportunity of an Arctic expedition was one any scientist would jump at.

"I had gone to Newcastle University to further my studies and was asked to join the research team," she said.

"I never thought I'd be heading to the Arctic Circle and never expected to write a study on something that was so significant for world health research."

Armed with her BSc in Geography, MSc in Environmental Engineering and PhD in Environmental Civil Engineering, Dr McCann relished the chance of joining the research team.

"I was never going to turn down the opportunity," she said. "It was quite a culture shock. It was the end of summer when we arrived and that meant almost 24 hours of daylight, though temperatures could drop as low as -20C.

"We were stationed at an international research base which can hold up to 100 people, and while two months might seem like plenty of time, it really was a race against time to fit in all the work we needed to do.

"It's an experience I'll never forget and that's before we made our discovery."

It was in a series of usual soil samples that the breakthrough was made, though it has taken several years for the study research to be pulled together and presented.

The findings were published in late January, and the team's work has made headlines around the world since.

"It was quite a commitment," added Dr McCann. "It was my job to collate the results, analyse them and finally present them and that's what I've spent an awful lot of my time doing these past couple of years, trying to piece together a picture of what we found - particularly the surprise that popped up in the results.

"We actually went to the Arctic back in 2013, and what we discovered was a gene (blaNDM-1) which had first been spotted 8,000 miles away in India just three years before.

"We were puzzled as to why it would be there, but it has highlighted the speed at which antibiotic resistance can spread around the world.

"Polar regions are among the last presumed pristine ecosystems on Earth but less than three years after the first detection of the gene in the surface waters of urban India we found them thousands of miles away in an area where there has been minimal human impact."

By 2050 it is predicted antibiotic resistance will be responsible for the deaths of 10 million people every year if action is not taken.

Dr McCann added: "Without effective antibiotics, everyday operations like caesarean sections or hip replacements could become too dangerous to perform.

"Encroachment into areas like the Arctic reinforces how rapid and far-reaching the spread of antibiotic resistance has become, confirming solutions must be viewed in global rather than just local terms.

"What humans have done through excess use of antibiotics on a global scale is accelerate the rate of evolution, creating resistant strains that never existed before."

Her proud family - including parents Brenda and Patsy McCann in Castledawson - have watched in admiration as Dr McCann's work has hit scientific headlines around the world in recent weeks.

"My sister lives in Texas and was able to send me some of the coverage in the US newspapers, so that was great," she added.

Dr McCann's next project isn't quite so exotic, however - she is conducting her next research project around inner-cities in England.
