Indian pilot Abhinandan sticks to his words regarding Pak Army

He praised the Pakistan Army and their treatment.

NEW DELHI (Web Desk) – Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was released by Pakistan on Friday after his aircraft was shot down, has praised the Pakistan Army and their treatment during over 60 hours he spent in their custody.

According to media reports, he praised Pakistan Army during his meeting with Indian defence minister at a hospital in New Delhi.

Abhinandan disclosed that the Pakistan Army personnel did not torture him during the nearly 60 hours he spent in their custody.

On Friday, in a videotaped statement, the Indian Air Force wing commander while giving an account of the events that unfolded after he entered the Pakistani airspace, said "My name is Wing Commander Abhinandan. I am a fighter pilot in Indian Air Force. I was trying to find a target. Pakistan Air Force shot my aircraft down following which I have to leave it as it had broken down. I later ejected and opened parachute."

"Pakistan Army is a very professional service and I see peace in it. I have spent time with the Pakistani Army and I am very impressed by them," apprised Abhinandan.

The Indian Pilot confessed that Indian media’s ranting always misleads Indian public opinion about Pakistan and it presents trivial things as huge.

"Indian media always exaggerate the situation. The smallest things are overstated, misguiding the people," he asserted.

In a previous video, Abhinandan expressed gratitude to the Pakistan Army for their good conduct and hospitality shown to him.

Captured pilot handed over to India



The pilot shot down in a dogfight with Pakistani aircraft returned to India on Friday, after being freed in what Islamabad called a "peace gesture" following the two countries’ biggest standoff in years.

Wing Commander Abhinandan, downed on Wednesday over Azad Kashmir, crossed into India at the Wagah crossing point, hours later than expected.

Matters escalated alarmingly after a massive suicide bombing killed 40 Indian troops on February 14. Twelve days later Indian warplanes launched a strike inside Pakistani territory, claiming to have hit a militant camp. An infuriated Islamabad denied casualties or damage, but a day later launched its own incursion across the LoC.

That sparked the dogfight which ended as Pakistan shot Indian aircrafts and captured Abhinandan.

Prime Minister Imran Khan unexpectedly announced Thursday that he would be released in the first sign of a potential thaw.

Khan alluded to the catastrophic consequences of nuclear war and called for talks -- even as he warned India should not take the announcement as a sign of weakness.

Pakistani foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi meanwhile said he was boycotting a meeting of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) held in Abu Dhabi, as India had been invited.

The tensions prompted Pakistan to close down its airspace, disrupting major routes between Europe and South Asia and grounding thousands of travellers worldwide.

Pakistan’s Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) said Friday that flights could land and depart from its main airports from 1300 GMT, and that others would be opened "gradually".
