Indian armed forces in alarming shape: NYT

After India Loses Dogfight to Pakistan, Questions Arise About Its ‘Vintage’ Military

March 3, 2019

Indian paramilitary troops in Srinagar in Kashmir this month. Sixty-eight percent of the army’s equipment is so old that it is officially considered “vintage.”CreditTauseef Mustafa/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesImageIndian paramilitary troops in Srinagar in Kashmir this month. Sixty-eight percent of the army’s equipment is so old that it is officially considered “vintage.”CreditCreditTauseef Mustafa/Agence France-Presse — Getty ImagesBy Maria Abi-Habib NEW DELHI — It was an inauspicious moment for a military the United States is banking on to help keep an expanding China in check.An Indian Air Force pilot found himself in a dogfight last week with a warplane from the Pakistani Air Force, and ended up a prisoner behind enemy lines for a brief time.The pilot made it home in one piece, however bruised and shaken, but the plane, an aging Soviet-era MiG-21, was less lucky.The aerial clash, the first by the South Asian rivals in nearly five decades, was a rare test for the Indian military — and it left observers a bit dumbfounded. While the challenges faced by the India’s armed forces are no secret, its loss of a plane last week to a country whose military is about half the size and receives a quarter of the funding was still telling. 10 days of ammunition , according to government estimates. And 68 percent of the army’s equipment is so old, it is officially considered “vintage.”“Our troops lack modern equipment, but they have to conduct 21st-century military operations,” said Gaurav Gogoi, a lawmaker and member of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Defense.American officials tasked with strengthening the alliance talk about their mission with frustration: a swollen bureaucracy makes arms sales and joint training exercises cumbersome; Indian forces are vastly underfunded; and the country’s navy, army and air force tend to compete rather than work together. said the United States was looking into the report. The offensive use of an F-16 warplane against its neighbor might have been a violation of the sales agreement.“We are aware of these reports and are seeking more information,” the embassy said in a statement. “We take all allegations of misuse of defense articles very seriously.”However troubled its military, India holds an obvious strategic appeal to the United States by virtue of both its location and its size.Indian Air Force officials displaying the remains of an air-to-air missile they say a Pakistan fighter jet fired during a strike over Kashmir last week.CreditAnushree Fadnavis/ReutersImageIndian Air Force officials displaying the remains of an air-to-air missile they say a Pakistan fighter jet fired during a strike over Kashmir last week.CreditAnushree Fadnavis/ReutersIndia will soon become the world’s most populous country, on track to surpass China by 2024. It shares a long border with southern and western China and controls important territorial waters Beijing needs for its maritime trade routes. Cold Peace: China-India Rivalry in the 21st Century .”“As China rises and the United States fights to keep its dominance, it will need a swing state to tip the balance of power in the 21st century,” Mr. Smith said. “And that swing state is India. The United States knows this and is willing to be patient.”For India’s military, funding remains the biggest challenge.In 2018, India announced a military budget of some $45 billion. By comparison, China’s military budget that year was $175 billion. Last month, Delhi announced another $45 billion budget.It is not just a question of how much India spends on its military, but how it spends it.The majority of the money goes to salaries for its 1.2 million active duty troops, as well as pensions. Only $14 billion will be used to buy new hardware.“At a time when modern armies are investing hugely on upgrading their intelligence and technical capabilities, we need to be doing the same,” said Mr. Gogoi, the Parliament member.Unlike China, where an authoritarian government is free to set military policy as it wishes, India is a democracy, with all the messiness that can entail. land and sea China has significantly outpaced its rival, creating a robust and taxable middle class. China’s economic boom has allowed it to invest aggressively in buying top military hardware and producing it at home.As the world’s conflicts are increasingly fought with state-of-the-art weaponry rather than the large invading armies of the past, India is falling behind. Despite being the fifth-largest military spender, only about a quarter of its military budget this year will purchase new equipment.Although the purchase of military hardware is a slow-moving process in most countries, in India it moves even more sluggishly amid a swollen bureaucracy.There are also concerns about corruption.Mr. Modi is currently being grilled by the opposition over a murky $8.9 billion deal to buy 36 Rafale fighter planes from France. His political opponents have cast the agreement as corrupt in an effort to discredit him ahead of elections. would have fared better in its skirmish with Pakistan last week if it had had the Rafale jets.“The country has felt the shortage of Rafale,” Mr. Modi said.
