After India strikes Jaish, Iran threatens to take action against Pakistan-based terrorist groups

Pakistan has been trapped under pressure by India after terrorist outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) or Jaish carried out a suicide bombing attack on security personnel in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama, in which over 40 CRPF jawans were killed. However, not only India but Pakistan is also facing international pressure over sheltering terrorist organisations on its soil. As India on February 26, bombarded Jaish camp in Balakot in PoK, in revenge to Pulwama, now Pakistan’s another neighbouring country Iran, threatens to take action against the terrorist groups on its soil. Amid tensions with India, Pakistan cornered the notice by the Iranian government leaders and armed forces in which they have threatened to act against the Pakistani terror groups since the country ‘fails’ to act against them.

Reportedly, three of Pakistan's neighbours - India, Afghanistan, and Iran are tormented by the country’s cross-border terror attacks.

According to TOI, General Qassem Soleimani, commander of IRGC Quds Force, has issued stern warnings to the Imran Khan-led Pakistan government and its military establishment.

“I have this question for the Pakistani government: where are you heading to? You have caused unrest along borders with all your neighbours and do you have any other neighbour left that you want to stir insecurity for," Gen Soleimani was quoted as saying.

“Are you, who have atomic bombs, unable to destroy a terrorist group with several hundred members in the region?” he asked, adding that Pakistan should not test Iran’s resolve.

In recent years, India and Iran have enhanced their counter-terrorism co-operation speedily. Foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale was scheduled to travel to Iran over the weekend, however, the trip was postponed amid India-Pakistan crisis.

In a major move by Iran, chairman of Iranian parliament’s foreign policy commission Heshmatollah Falahatpisheh reported said that the country wanted to build a wall on its border with Pakistan. Falahatpisheh also promised that Tehran would take action inside Pakistan if it fails to stop cross-border attacks into Iran.

Also read: Pakistan may 'not' oppose Jaish chief Masood Azhar’s listing as global terrorist in UNSC
