Browse through international photographs at this over 100-years-old Chennai library

Flooded with natural light and mounds of books, Madras Literary Society is the go-to destination for book and photography lovers alike at this edition of Chennai Photo Biennale

The massive mounds of books, that once took up every inch of the high-ceilinged hall, have been cleared away. Instead, two tables now stand across from each other, with nothing but a couple of century-old, claw-footed bookshelves to keep them company. In this sunlit right wing, that flanks the somewhat dingier entrance hall of Madras Literary Society, the shelves stand testament to the books that were preserved and revived, and managed to survive the ravages of time. One table stands for the books that couldn’t.

Atop it lies what looks like a large, soft-bound coffee table book. It is actually a body of work from 2011 by respected German-born, Canada-based photographer Angela Grauerholz, and contains image after image of charred remains of books destroyed by fire. Privation is one of two books by Angela — the other one being The Empty Shelf (2018) — to take up space at the library, as part of the Chennai Photo Biennale. But unlike the other photographic works at the venue — supported by US Consulate General Chennai — this collection consists of scanned images: of covers, spines and pages curled by the heat, blackened by soot or partially destroyed, some with segments of the title still legible. So passive are the objects, yet so strong the sense of destruction, that the crumbling tomes seem almost to rise off the pages, taking pride of place in a hall that stands for the opposite of dilapidation.

The irony is not lost on 55-year-old Prabhu Viswanathan, a member of the Madras Literary Society and one of the advisors to Chennai Photo Biennale. In fact, Viswanathan finds it more poetic than ironic, and lauds artistic director Pushpamala N’s decision to fill this over-100-year-old building with displays that focus on books, libraries and old memories. “This particular building was built especially for the Madras Literary Society, and we moved into it in 1905,” he says, “The society was housed in a different building in the DPI complex before that.” It was built by Robert Fellowes Chisholm, but is often overshadowed by the more iconic creations that make up his legacy, such as Chennai’s Presidency College and Senate House, Ooty’s Lawrence school, Vadodara’s Lakshmi Vilas Palace, and Rangoon Cathedral.

One of the features that endears the building to Pushpamala, is its lighting. “It was built over 100 years ago, and is heavily dependant on natural lighting,” she says, leading a small crowd of visitors through a dark passage, flanked by floor-to-ceiling shelves, to another room flooded by sunlight streaming in through arched windows. This is where she chooses to put up a collection of faded old images, discovered and printed on delicate rice paper by German photographer Liz Fernando. Liz’s project is an attempted restoration of Albert Kahn’s ‘Les Archives de la Planète’ (The Archive of the Planet), which aimed at documenting the full extent of the human race. The pieces Liz chooses to display are photographs taken largely in the South Asian region, parts of them lost beyond the scope of restoration. So there are animals ambling down the streets with a limb no longer visible, and profiles of women so faded that the sun shines right through, with their waif-like figures doing very little to block the leaves and houses outside the window from view. Again, the need for restoration screams out at the viewer, with hardly a word being said for it.

Some of the photos, framed in glass, are kept in little tin boxes with the lid left open. Others hang from the old windows, letting sunlight have its way with them. “All the furniture used in this display is old that belongs to the society itself,” says Pushpamala, emphasising on how little was done to disturb the normal layout of things. “The whole library is beautifully proportioned, with L-shaped rooms and enough space,” she points out.

Having said that, she chooses to spread the final display of the venue throughout the external corridor, so that the viewer has to travel to see it just like the subject did. Indonesian photographer Putu Sayoga’s body of work here follows the journey of a little mobile library hoisted on horseback by a man named Ridwan Sururi who takes books around villages and towns to give children a chance to read. This ties in perfectly with the raison d’etre of Madras Literary Society itself, with its collection of 55,000 books, maps and records.
