3 arrested in Kurukshetra for Barara carjacking

KURUKSHETRA: On Sunday, the crime investigation agency (CIA) of Kurukshetra police arrested three accused identified as Shubham alias Shubi, Sanjeev alias Numberdar, residents of village Tatka in Kurukshetra, and Akash alias Shubi, a resident of Vikas Nagar at Ladwa in Kurukshetra in connection with a case of carjacking from a cop near village Mangoli Jattan in the limits of Babain police station of the district on February 22 at around 11.30pm.All the arrested accused are in the age group of 20-25 years. On Monday the district police presented them before the court which has sent them to custody for three days with the CIA team.Investigative officer, sub-inspector Gulab Singh, told TOI, "We have taken the three accused on three-day police remand and the arrests of other accused involved in this case are pending. The snatched car, bag of documents and weapons used in the crime are yet to be recovered. Further details would be shared once the interrogation is completed.”As per sources, the accused have thrown the snatched car into a canal near village Nandi Khalsa of Karnal district which would be recovered during the remand.Earlier, on February 23, at 6.34 am, the Babain police after receiving complaint from Anil Kumar , a head constable posted as reader in the office of Barara DSP, registered the First Information Report (FIR) under section 25, 54 and 59 of the Arms Act and 341 (punishment for wrongful restraint) and 395 (punishment for dacoity) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). But on Monday, the police have added Section 120-B (punishment for criminal conspiracy), 201 (causing disappearance of evidence of offence) and 397 (robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt) of the IPC to the FIR.On February 22, at around 11.30 pm, Anil Kumar a head constable (HC) posted as a reader with Barara DSP was attacked by some miscreants, who fled away with his Maruti Ciaz car near his village Mangoli Jattan under Babain area. In his complaint to the police, Anil Kumar stated, “I was coming home after finishing my work at Barara DSP office. When I passed Rani Lakshmi Bai School at my village Mangoli Jattan suddenly two youths stopped their motorcycle in front of my car.”“I stopped the car and lowered the pane to talk to them when one of them fired at me, which went past my ear. I came out of the car and the other youth attacked me with an iron rod. Two more youths came from behind and one of them attacked me with a sharp-edged weapon and I received injury on my left palm. Then they started thrashing me while demanding the keys of my car. They snatched my car keys and fled with my vehicle and their motorcycle towards Babain,” he said.
