Chennai: Man killed by brothers-in-law after heated argument, arrested

However, the police have arrested Sathakathula but his brother is still absconding. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: In an appalling case reported from Avadi, Chennai, the local police arrested a duo on charges of murder after they killed their brother-in-law on Monday. Shockingly, the accused made it look like an accident.

According to a report in the Deccan Chronicle the deceased was identified as 37-year-old, Mubarak Ali, a native of Avadi. He was married to Sabur Nisha and the couple had two children. Reportedly, on October 10, Mubarak Ali was run over by a car.

The accident happened a few metres away from his house in Pudu Nagar. However, on October 14, Mubarak Ali died at the Rajiv Gandhi Government Hospital while undergoing treatment. Following his death, Mubarak Ali’s brother lodged a complaint with the Poonamallee Traffic Investigation Police alleging that there was a family feud. And he suspected that his brother had been killed and he did not die due to the accident.

Also Read: Mumbai: 40-year-old man arrested for secretly filming video of woman at Andheri railway station

The newspaper report claimed that the Poonamallee Traffic Investigation Police nabbed Sabur Nisha during an investigation. The police official then said that Nisha informed police, Mubarak Ali was a tailor and his income was not sustainable for the family. She added, her brothers Sathakathulla and Abdul Rahman had arranged for a job in Kuwait but Mubarak Ali had turned down the offer.

He allegedly said that he was not willing to leave his country. Nisha alleged that the family was under financial pressure, a dispute arose between them. Reportedly, the police suspected that Sathakathulla and Abdul Rahman must have murdered their brother-in-law, the police launched a hunt for the men but they were absconding.

Acting on a tip-off that Sathakathulla had come to visit his sister on Monday, the police team arrested the suspect. And he admitted to having a quarrel with his brother-in-law.

However, the police have arrested Sathakathula but his brother is still absconding.
