Pak Minister claims Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar is alive

Pak Minister claims Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar is alive

Maulana Masood Azhar is alive, confirmed the incumbent Provincial Minister of Punjab for Information and Culture in Pakistan on Monday.

Maulana Masood Azhar is alive, confirmed the incumbent Provincial Minister of Punjab for Information and Culture in Pakistan on Monday.

"He is alive, Maulana Masood Azhar is alive, we have no information of his death," Fayyaz ul Hassan Chohan told ANI, without elaborating on Azhar's current state of health.

Punjab(Pakistan) Minister Fayyaz ul Hassan Chohan: He is alive, Maulana Masood Azhar is alive, we have no information of his death. #Lahore pic.twitter.com/Z3zNWvBjNe — ANI (@ANI) March 4, 2019

Social media has been abuzz with speculations regarding death of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) chief, with many alleging liver cancer as the reason behind his supposed demise.

Pakistan-based JeM has claimed responsibility for the February 14 ghastly terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama, which killed over 40 Indian CRPF personnel.

Read: Imran Khan, please send Masood Azhar to India for treatment

Following this, the international community has thrown its weight behind India in its fight against terrorism, with the United States telling Pakistan to stop providing support to terror outfits and terrorists in the immediate aftermath of the terror attack.

Also Read: After India exposed Pakistan's F-16 lies, Islamabad tries to brazen it out, US seeks report

On Sunday, there were reports on several media outlets that Jaish-e-Mohammad chief had passed away. The rumours did the rounds after Pak Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi admitted that Azhar was in Pakistan and ill.

The message from Jaish reportedly read: "Assalm O Alaikum .... Respectful Mr Masood Azhar by the grace of Allah, is safe, sound and alright."

Pakistani media outlet Geo News quoted his family members saying that he was 'alive'.

Earlier, there were reports that Massod Azhar, the founder of the dreaded terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) was afflicted with renal failure.

Read: Masood Azhar – the maulvi with a limp

(Inputs from various agencies)
