Grain and chaff in Balakot strikes

Nitpicking fetches up nits. The point is to look at the big picture, when it comes to things like the recent Indian Air Force strike inside Pakistani territory. Quibbles are being aired about the precise number of terrorists killed in the attack. There are charges of politicisation of the attack, and counter-charges. Whether Pakistan’s decision to release prisoner of war Abhinandan Varthaman was an act of magnanimity on the part of the country’s prime minister, who, till the other day, used to be called Im the Dim, or the result of Islamabad buckling under international pressure, as some hawks within Pakistan allege, is another question vexing habitués of social media. It is time to focus on what really counts.

The significant achievement of the air strike within Pakistan carried out on February 26, in response to the terror attack at Pulwama on February 14, is that India has finally called Islamabad’s nuclear bluff. Pakistan has been posturing that it is immune from India’s vast superiority in terms of conventional war-fighting capability, because it has nuclear weapons and a first-use doctrine. India refrained from using its conventional arms might to punish Pakistan for attacks on India by its terrorist proxies, whether the attack on Parliament in December 2001or the attack on Mumbai in November 2008, on the rational ground that the result might well be to trigger a nuclear exchange. This paradigm has been broken, with the attack on Balakot. This is so, regardless of how many people were killed in the strike, how many minutes Indian planes stayed within Pakistan airspace and how far inside the country’s territory Indian planes intruded. It took political will to take the calculated risk. The move has paid off. The proposition that India will always be compelled to pull its punches because of Pakistan’s nuclear weapons stands smashed by the air strike. The rest is detail.

War is a serious matter with potential for untold misery and economic loss. To use talk of it to quench the bloodthirst of TV studio warriors is profane, on par with partisan politicking with the martyrdom of our soldiers.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Economic Times.

END OF ARTICLE
