Rana to camp in the jungles of Kerala to film ‘Haathi Mere Saathi’

Rana to camp in the jungles of Kerala to film ‘Haathi Mere Saathi’

A trilingual, the film is titled ‘Kaadan’ in Tamil and ‘Aranya’ in Telugu.

Flix Cinema

Rana Daggubati is a star with a pan Indian appeal, having acted in Hindi, Telugu and Tamil films so far, and his portrayal of Bhallaladeva in the blockbuster Baahubali is unforgettable. The star is now all set to enthral movie buffs with his new film, a trilingual that is titled Haathi Mere Saathi in Hindi, Kaadan in Tamil and Aranya in Telugu. The shooting of this film is currently underway and recently the actor had announced on Twitter that he will be off to the jungles of Kerala for the film shoot. His tweet read: “Morning... Off into the jungles of Kerala for filming Haathi Mere Saathi.”

Morning....Off into the jungles of Kerala for filming #HaathiMereSaathi — Rana Daggubati (@RanaDaggubati) January 7, 2019

The trilingual is directed by Prabhu Solomon, who has directed critically acclaimed Tamil films such as Myna and Kumki. In an interview to Mumbai Mirror much earlier, Rana had said, “Yes, I’ll need to do more for this film. I’ll be taking 15-20 days before the shoot to stay with the elephants in the jungle and get familiar with them before I start filming. At the same time, we are also doing a bunch of workshops because the story is inspired by two events, so we are trying to get as authentic as we can in the filming process.”

The star will be playing a mahout in the film and will be sporting a bulky look for the role. Reports say that he will be gaining a lot of weight for the same.

Apart from Rana, Haathi Mere Saathi also has Zoya Hussain, Kalki Koechlin, Vishnu Vishal and Pulkit Samrat playing lead roles. The film is bankrolled by Inder Singh Bariya, Omshankar Bhagat, Ajay Rai and Sushil Tirwadkar under the banner Trinity Pictures and will be distributed by Eros International. Shantanu Moitra is the music composer for this film and sound designing is done by the Oscar winning sound engineer Resul Pookutty.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
