India’s plan to attack Pakistan foiled due to army’s alertness

ISLAMABAD: Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi Monday said Pakistan Army’s alertness prevented possible Indian missile attack at five sites inside Pakistan.

“The armed forces were alert … our intelligence was confirmed. Diplomatic and military contacts played a role in stopping the attack. The civilian and military leadership was also in contact [over the matter],” the foreign minister told a private TV channel.

Reports said India had planned to attack seven to eight places inside Pakistan from a base in Rajasthan. After learning of the plan, Pakistan’s security agencies warned their counterparts in India that Islamabad was ready and if an attack is launched, the magnitude of Pakistan’s response will be thrice as much.

Report said that according to a second plan, India was to attack Pakistan with missiles. To foil this plan, Islamabad sent a message to New Delhi via third countries that any such attempt will draw a very strong response from Pakistan’s security forces.

Talking to the TV channel, the foreign minister said India’s opposition leader Rahul Gandhi has asked for documentary evidence from the Modi government regarding their claims of bombing a terrorist camp in Balakot. “Their version has been exposed as they have themselves admitted that two of their jets were struck down by the Pakistan Air Force,” he said.

The foreign minister said that Pakistan is fully aware of a nexus between Israel and India. “They are in contact since long and regularly share intelligence reports with each another,” he said.

The minister said the situation is improving at the Line of Control as compared to that in the previous days. “Pakistan is reviewing the Indian dossier which we received after 12 days of attack. We will respond to it after due review,” he said.

Qureshi said Pakistan wants friendly relations with India but Kashmir is the bone of contention between the two neighbours. “Kashmiris are giving sacrifices. No solution for Kashmir can be implementable without taking Kashmiris onboard,” he asserted. He said the international community is stressing for dialogue between the two countries for normalcy to restore in the region.

Qureshi said had the previous government implemented the National Action Plan in letter and spirit, Pakistan would not have been in the FATF’s grey list today. “Time has come to do what is in Pakistan’s interest,” he said. “We have to make a decision with political consensus. The international community has got the message that Pakistan wants peace,” he added.
