Zero tolerance for militants

During the past week, Pakistan received much praise for its measured handling of hostilities with India, particularly for its release of Indian fighter pilot Abhinandhan Varthaman. In an interview with the BBC, Pakistan’s Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi admitted that Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), the militant organisation accused of being behind the Pulwama attack in Indian Occupied Kashmir, was based in Pakistan. He added that Pakistani authorities had been in contact with the JeM leadership. Many around the world — especially across the border in India — these remarks taken as an admission from the Pakistani Foreign Minister himself that Pakistan soil may have militants.

Pakistan’s association with militant non-state actors has long been a blight on its image that has triggered numerous diplomatic crises with both the United States and India. Last year, it also landed Pakistan on the Financial Action Task Force’s (FATF) greylist.

However, it seems the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) government has decided to grab the bull by the horns following the latest meetings with the FATF. Bans were announced last week on the Hafiz Saeed-led Jamaat-ud-Dawa and Falah-e-Insaniyat Foundation. This was followed by Information Minister Fawad Chaudhry’s announcement yesterday that the federal government had decided to take firm action against all militant groups on Pakistani soil. This is a step that should have been taken when the National Action Plan (NAP) was first announced following the December 2014 Army Public School massacre.

Pakistan has to rid itself of the stigma of fraternising with militant organisations. More importantly, these groups pose a security threat to Pakistani citizens and weaken this country’s narrative on several foreign policy issues, such as the Kashmir dispute.

However, if this latest effort is to be successful the government must formulate a long-term strategy on depriving all non-state actors of space in this country. This time around no group must be allowed to get around government bans simply by changing its name. Additionally, while Pakistan is involved in US-Taliban peace talks, Islamabad must make clear to the Taliban that it too should have a zero tolerance towards groups such as TTP and the Islamic State.

Lastly, the government must shun any political consideration while taking action against armed groups. It should be noted that the Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, allegedly once linked to Al Qaeda, had announced support for the PTI in the run-up to the general elections last year. It is time for such unwarranted support to come to an end once and for all. *

Published in Daily Times, March 5th 2019.
