Exposed! Pakistan bluff on Hafiz Saeed network ban

Hafiz Saeed was the mastermind of the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks. Pakistan had earlier said that his organisations had been banned.

Pakistan had lied that it had banned Mumbai attacks mastermind Hafiz Saeed-led Jamaatud-Dawa (JuD) and Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation (FiF), official documents accessed by India Today TV have revealed.

The expose comes amid growing anger in India against Pakistan's inaction on Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) that carried out the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF men died.

It also coincides with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) slamming Pakistan on terror financing and flagging reports on thousands of suspicious transactions.

Pakistan had said on February 21 that JuD and FiF had been banned. But a latest list of organisations released on March 4 by Pakistan's National Counter Terrorism Authority, based on a notification issued by its Ministry of Interior, only puts the two terror groups on the 'watchlist' and not on the 'proscribed' list.

JuD and FiF were put on the 'watchlist' on February 21, the same day when the official announcement to "ban" the organisations was made. Pakistan has been under tremendous pressure to act against these terror networks. This is the reason the announcement of the "ban" was made just a day before FATF's plenary session was held in Paris where Pakistan's "greylist" status came up for review.

Despite the announcement of the "ban", global watchdog FATF came down heavily on Pakistan and continued to keep it on its "greylist".

Schedule-I of the Anti Terrorism Act (ATA)-1997 has 68 organisations in the proscribed category, whereas JuD and FiF are on Schedule-II of the Act wherein they are only "under watch" by the Ministry of Interior.

Both JuD and FiF were actually placed on the 'watchlist' in January 2017 and remained on the list when it was updated on February 8, 2018. But with the February 21 announcement made by Pakistan, the status should have changed from "under watch" to "proscribed" which has not been done officially.

"This demonstrates Pakistan's lack of seriousness in taking credible and verifiable action against terrorists and terror groups operating from areas under their control and proves their complicity with terror groups," an official said.

On February 21, 2019, the Ministry of Interior's spokesperson had said in a press release, "It was further decided that JuD and FiF be notified as proscribed organisations by the Ministry of Interior."

Urging Pakistan to "walk the talk" on taking action against terrorism, an official told India Today TV, "Unfortunately, whatever they have done so far is only to hoodwink the international community, while the terror forces are carrying on their activities as business as usual."

The decision of the "ban" was taken at the National Security Committee meeting which was held at the Pakistan Prime Minister's Office where PM Imran Khan "reviewed" the "National Action Plan" in detail. The statement had also said, "It was decided during the meeting to accelerate action against proscribed organisations."

FATF HEAT

Meanwhile, FATF's pressure is mounting on Pakistan. It has warned the country to curb terror financing, saying terrorism continued to threaten societies around the world, and could not take place without funding and the means to move money among terror supporters.

The Financial Monitoring Unit has issued 8,707 suspicious transaction reports (STRs) in 2018, as compared to 5,548 STRs issued in 2017 in Pakistan. Some 1,136 STRs have been issued in January and February alone this year, Pakistan-based newspaper Dawn reported.

A recent warning to Pakistan by FATF to deliver on its commitments to curb terror financing and money laundering risks to the global financial system has virtually put the country's entire machinery into an aggressive mode to show tangible progress within two months.

NOT OVER YET?

On February 26, India bombed Jaish's biggest terror camp in Pakistan. Pakistan attempted to carry out a retaliatory strike last week. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's MiG-21 Bison crashed after he shot down an F-16. He was captured by Pakistan and he returned to India on Friday.

On Monday, IAF jets scrambled and shot down a Pakistani drone that violated Indian airspace at the IB in Rajasthan.

The Pakistan Air Force (PAF) chief on Monday asked his officers to keep their "guard up" as challenges facing the country "are not over yet". The Indian Air Force Chief also termed anti-terror operations "ongoing."

Hafiz Saeed was the mastermind of the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks.

Read | Jaish: The ISI Start-up

Watch | Pakistan's lies exposed, terror outfits Jamaat-ud-Daawa, Fatah-e-Insaniat not banned
