Talks with Pak can't happen till situation improves: VK Singh

In an exclusive interview with Vishal Pandey on Zee News, Minister of State for External Affairs VK Singh said India has got a lot of support from the world community on the issue of terrorism post-IAF airstrikes on terror launch pads in Pakistan.

After India's strong actions against Pakistan, the country has become isolated in the entire world today. The whole world wants Pakistan to act against terror. How do you see the development on the path of India's war against terrorism?

India has got a lot of support from the world community on the issue of terrorism. India is making an effort for a comprehensive camping against terrorism at the United Nations in which the whole world can participate.

After India's pre-emptive air strikes on terror launch pads in Pakistan, has the Pulwama terror attack been avenged? Or will you keep the heat on?

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has made it clear that we won't spare those who dare to disturb the peace. Based on that India's actions against Pakistan continues under his decisive leadership and with that we are furthering our fight against terrorism.

A rattled Pakistan has hinted at talks. Is India ready for talks with Pakistan?

India has made a clear cut policy. I would like to reiterate Prime Minister Modi's 2014 statement that talks and terror can't go together, talks with Pakistan can't happen as it supports and shields terror outfits in its soil operating against India. The talks can't happen until the situation improves.

Post-IAF airstrikes on launch pads in Pakistan, there are some politicians who are not only questioning the government but also goes on to question the bravery of our Armed forces. Your comments...

On this I would like to state that the mental thinking of those who are questing the armed forces has been perverted.The problem is that most of those politicians are from the Congress party. The Congress leadership does not want that the strong actions against Pakistan – which has enhanced the India's position internationally – should not leave an impression that what they could not do during their dispensation is happening now under the Modi government.

I must emphasise on the fact that the country is facing the issue of terrorism. At this juncture, all parties, cutting across political lines, must come together in support of our armed forces.
