To frame a Tihar rival, city gang murders woman

NEW DELHI: In a ghastly crime to frame a rival who had beaten him up in Tihar Jail, a criminal forced a 25-year-old woman to write a note incriminating the rival before allegedly murdering her and disposing of the body in a sack.The body was discovered near the railway lines in south-east Delhi’s Sarita Vihar on February 27. A note written by the woman, blaming the rivals for having filmed her nude, was found in her trouser pocket.Cracking the case within 90 hours, police have arrested one of the main plotters, Dinesh, 25, who has nine cases of snatchings and burglaries against him. Dhirender, who is out on bail in a murder case and had been nursing a grouse against another criminal for thrashing him in jail, is still on the run.The accused have also confessed to having raped the victim, a claim that is yet to be medically corroborated.The criminals posed as placement agency staffers and lured the victim to their Sangam Vihar flat in south Delhi on the promise of a job. After murdering the woman, they booked a self-drive car, packed the body in a plastic bag and dumped it near the railway tracksAccording to DCP Chinmoy Biswal, a third man named Saurabh Bhardwaj, 19, was also involved in the crime. The gang also roped in two others, identified as Rahimuddin, 25, and Chander Prakash, 30, to help them dispose of the body. All but Dhirender have been arrested.A special team led by inspectors Ajab Singh and Suman Kumar was formed to crack the case. The girl was identified to be from a neighbouring locality where her family had lodged a missing complaint. The police collected handwriting samples and from the woman’s and got it analysed by experts who confirmed that the writing on the note was that of the girl.“The girl had specifically mentioned the names of three people who were responsible for her death. The trio was detained and questioned,” Biswal added.Call detail analysis revealed that on the day the woman went missing, there were phone calls between her and the persons mentioned in the note. However, no pervious calls between them were found.The locations of the trio also did not match the woman’s. So, cops gave them a clean chit. Eventually, the team managed to zero in on Dinesh using extensive technical analysis and he led them to others.During interrogation, Dinesh revealed that his friend, Dhirender, wanted to frame his rival, Aarush, who had thrashed him in jail, and thus plotted his murder. The accused also hoped that once Aarush and his aides were framed in the murder, they would be able to take possession of a plot in Burari which Aarush and his brother had allegedly usurped from the legal owner.Dhirender and Dinesh were staying in the same house in Sangam Vihar where the murder was committed on February 25. The woman was a friend of Dinesh’s girlfriend. Daughter of a security guard, the woman badly needed a job which the accused exploited to their benefit.
