‘Be a man and answer my question’ – Rahul Gandhi to PM Modi despite outrage over comments on Sitharaman

Congress president Rahul Gandhi addresses during the Kisan Rally in Jaipur | Photo Credit: PTI

Jaipur/Agra: Unfazed by the massive controversy he triggered earlier on Wednesday, Congress president Rahul Gandhi has now launched a fresh attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

While addressing a rally in Jaipur, Gandhi said the PM got “a woman” to defend him in Parliament over Rafale deal as he couldn't do so himself. Slamming his remark, PM Narendra Modi accused the opposition of insulting Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman.

As if it was not enough, Gandhi made another misogynistic remark this evening. “Stop shaking. Be a man…,” tweeted Gandhi while continuing his attack on the PM.

Here’s his tweet:

With all due respect Modi Ji, in our culture respect for women begins at home.



Stop shaking. Be a man and answer my question: Did the Air Force and Defence Ministry object when you bypassed the original Rafale deal?



Yes? Or No? #RafaleScam — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) January 9, 2019

Earlier today, Gandhi said: “The watchman with a 56-inch chest ran away and told a woman, Sitharaman ji, defend me. I won't be able to defend myself, defend me.”

Speaking at a kisan rally, Gandhi added: “For two and a half hours, the woman could not defend him. I had asked a straight question - answer yes or no, but she couldn't answer,” the Congress chief said.

A few hours later, PM Modi, while addressing a public meeting at Agra in Uttar Pradesh, accused the Congress leaders of insulting the women of the country. He furthers said that Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, the first woman to occupy the post, had floored the Opposition in the Lok Sabha by presenting "fact after fact" on the Rafale deal.

"They are bent upon insulting a woman defence minister," he said, without naming Rahul Gandhi. "This is not an insult to a woman, but an insult to entire India's women power, for which these irresponsible leaders will have to pay the price," Modi added.

Former Rajasthan BJP president Arun Chaturvedi has sought an apology from Gandhi for his remarks on the defence minister.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
