Sara Ali Khan shares adorable birthday wish for ‘best brother’ Ibrahim, thanks him for having her back

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Sara Ali Khan shares adorable birthday wish for ‘best brother’ Ibrahim

Sara Ali Khan is making waves in Bollywood ever since she debuted with Abhishek Kapoor’s film Kedarnath in early December last year. She is just two films old in the industry and has already earned much applause and attention for her performances in the films and has become everyone’s inspiration as to how one should conduct oneself. Other than debuting in Bollywood, Sara Ali Khan also made her debut on Instagram around the same time and she keeps loading the social media platform with quirky pictures and videos. Her latest is a birthday post in which she has declared her brother Ibrahim Ali Khan to be the ‘best brother’ in the world.

Taking to Instagram, Sara showered all her love and wishes for her little brother Ibrahim on his birthday. The actress shared a couple of pictures in which the birthday boy is seen lifting up Sara as she gives cute expressions. In the first picture, it looks hard for Ibrahim to lift Sara however in the next click, his expressions change for good. Sara wrote, "Happiest birthday to the best brother in the world. Thank you for always having my back (literally) and tolerating all my nonsense patiently (mostly)." Check out the picture here-

(Also read: Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan fly to Delhi to kick-start shooting for Imtiaz Ali's Love Aaj Kal 2. Pics inside)

Earlier, when Sara was promoting her first film Kedarnath, she was often quizzed about Ibrahim and her parents Saif Ali Khan and Amrita Singh. Talking about her brother and his Bollywood debut, the actress revealed to Mumbai Mirror, “Ibrahim’s 18 and we’re very close. There’s nothing about me he doesn’t know while I know just 10 per cent of his life because he can be somewhat shady (chuckles). My mom, Ibrahim and I are a close unit.”

She added, “He does (want to become an actor) and from what I’ve seen of him on stage, he’ll be a better actor than me. Recently he gave me a page from his play. I’ve no idea if he had got his lines right because I couldn’t take my eyes off his face. He’s that good. But wanting to be an actor and understanding what it’s about and knowing this is what you want to do is a journey. I think he’s 99 per cent there.”

On the work front, after Kedarnath and Simmba, Sara Ali Khan has finally announced her next film. She will be seen in Imtiaz Ali’s next film opposite Kartik Aaryan.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
