Bengaluru shocker: Financier hacked over rumours of supari killing

murder

CV Raman Nagar

contract killing

Indian Penal Code

Rumours about a contract to kill the accused began to do the roundsSuspected rumours resulted in the brutalof a 38-year-old financier in Byappanahalli police limits. The victim has been identified as Shankar, a resident of Horamavu had lended the accused some money and was asking him to return it. The accused believed rumours about Shankar giving a ‘supari’ to contract killers to get him killed over the delay in payment. This accused then reportedly joined hands with his friends and committed the murder. Three of the seven accused who committed the murder have been arrested by the police.Shankar had given Narayanaswamy of Nagawarapalya some money to and there had been delay in the return, causing Shankar to pressure the latter. Following this, a rumour about the victim having given supari to get Narayanaswamy killed started to spread. Believing this, Narayanaswamy along with Praveen alias Chikka Koli, Manikanta, Kutta, Shankar, Sunil and others picked up an argument with the victim near the Moodalagiri bar on the Nagawarapalya main road inover the alleged“In the heated argument, the accused brutally attacked Shankar with lethal weapons on Sunday evening. He was rushed to a nearby hospital, where he succumbed to injuries on Wednesday. Three of the seven accused identified as Praveen, Manikanta and Kutta have been arrested and are remanded to judicial custody. Search for the other is on,” said an officer on part of investigations.At the time of the attack, the victim is said to have been with his friend Prathap Kumar, of Benniganahalli. Based on his complaint, the police registered a case of attempt to murder along with other sections of the(IPC) immediately after the assault. After the victim succumbed toinjuries, the police have registered a case of murder under section 302 of the IPC.“My friend has been murdered over a rumour. He did not give any contracts to kill anyone. Moreover the accused are also the friends of the victim.,” Kumar told Mirror.The Byappanahalli police have registered a case and are further investigations are on.
