Anti-terror ops by India to continue: IAF chief BS Dhanoa

IAF chief BS Dhanoa said it’s for the government to give out the number of terrorists killed in the air strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot.

Military operations to strike at terror camps in Pakistan will continue even though the heightened tension between India and Pakistan has deescalated to some extent after both the countries conducted air raids into each other's territory. Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa said on Monday that he would not comment on the 'ongoing operations' as he was asked question about the airstrikes at a press conference in Coimbatore.

The comment is being viewed as India continues with its response to hit at terror facilities within Pakistan amid regular military operations in the Kashmir valley to flush out terrorists.

Earlier, the Army chief also said that despite the turn of events it will continue to act against terror activities.

The Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out an aerial strike last week hitting a Jaish-e-Mohammad JeM) terror camp in Balakot, Pakistan.

This was a pre-emptive strike on inputs that fidayeen attacks similar to the one carried out in Pulwama, killing 40 CRPF personnel, is being planned. An explosives-laden vehicle driven by a suicide bomber rammed into a CRPF bus.

The Pakistan Air Force responded within 24 hours, striking military installations in Jammu, but there was no damage as the IAF fighter pilots engaged with the jets.

Air Force chief Dhanoa did not get into the political slugfest over the number of terrorists killed in the air strike even as BJP president Amit Shah claimed that the death toll was 250.

"We hit our target. The air force doesn't calculate casualty numbers, the government does that. The IAF is not in a position to clarify the number of casualties. The government will clarify that. We don't count human casualties, we count what targets we have hit or not," Shah said.

Stating that the IAF was successful in hitting the target, he said, "Otherwise why would Pakistan retaliate and drop bombs in jungles."

He backed the use of the MiG-21 that was part of the 'dogfight' and succeeded in bringing down the F-16 fighter jet of the Pakistan Air Force, which is considered superior to MiG. "It's a capable aircraft, it has been upgraded. It has better radar, air-to-air missiles and better weapons system," he said.

He also said that in an emergency situation, when there is a strike, every available aircraft goes in. "All aircraft are capable of fighting the enemy," he said.

Also read | IAF Chief BS Dhanoa says Rafale jets to be inducted by September: Know all about the omni-role fighter aircraft

Read | Have it, why not use it: IAF chief Dhanoa on MiG-21 vs F-16 post-Balakot dogfight

Also Read | We hit the target, we do not count deaths: Air Force Chief BS Dhanoa

Watch | Rafale dogfight: Who is delaying the procurement of jets?
