Second test of city’s biggest drug haul proves it was MSG

Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances

NDPS court

Central Forensic Laboratory

Kalina laboratory

Five cops were held and suspended, two a day before retirement.The second chemical analysis report of ‘contraband’ seized in the infamous 2015 Constable Kalokhe-Baby Patankar case was produced in the special(NDPS) court on Monday. The report reveals that the substance in one of the Mumbai Police’s biggest drug raids was not mephedrone but monosodium glutamate (MSG). The 2015 case involved constable Dharmaraj Kalokhe, his alleged paramour and drug lord Baby Patankar, and five other police officials.This has come as a huge relief to all the accused, especially the five policemen who were arrested and put under suspension. For two of them – senior inspector Suhas Gokhale from the Anti-Narcotics Cell and police inspector Gautam Gaikwad – the suspension had come just a day before their retirement. While the five officials haven’t been exonerated yet, they can either approach the high court seeking quashing of charges or the crime branch can file a closure report in theThis second analysis of the substance was conducted at the, Chandigarh. The first was conducted at the Forensic Laboratory in Kalina and tested negative.On March 9, 2015, the police had arrested head constable Dharmaraj Kalokhe and seized 112 kg of mephedrone (also called meow-meow) from his house in a village in Satara district and 12 kg from his locker inside Marine Drive police station. With Kalokhe’s arrest, the police claimed to have blown the lid off one of the biggest drug nexuses in the city. On May 29, 2015, the Crime Branch had arrested Gokhale, Gaikwad, sub-inspector Sudhakar Sarang, assistant sub-inspector Jyotiram Mane and head constable Yeshwant Parate in connection with this drug seizure. The police alleged that constable Kalokhe’s alleged paramour, Shashikala alias Baby Patankar, was also involved; she was arrested after being on the run for 40 days. Two separate cases were registered in the matter by the Mumbai and Satara police.“A chemical analysis of the sample was conducted immediately. Despite thereports stating that the substance was not mephedrone, these officers were held the same day. Hope the prosecution files for discharge of the accused; they have suffered too much,” their lawyer Ayaz Khan said while speaking to Mirror.After the NDPS court disallowed retesting, the police approached the High Court that passed an order in their favour last year. The samples for this retesting were taken inside the court.
