BJP, Sangh Parivar outfits fuelling ‘jingoistic nationalism’ in country, alleges Sitaram Yechury

New Delhi [India], Mar 4 (ANI): There is an orchestrated effort by BJP and Sangh Parivar outfits to fuel ‘jingoistic nationalism’ in the country after the terror attack in Pulwama, alleged CPI-M General Secretary Sitaram Yechury on Monday.

“A united India rose against terrorism. Instead of strengthening this, the post-Pulwama developments are seeing an orchestrated effort by BJP and Sangh Parivar outfits to rouse jingoistic nationalism,” said Yechury at a press conference here.

As many as 40 CRPF jawans were killed on February 14 in south Kashmir's Pulwama district after their convoy was attacked by the suicide bomber of Pakistan-based terror outfit--Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM).

Referring to alleged attacks on Kashmiris in various parts of the country, he said: “The targeting of Kashmiris, the call for abrogation of Articles 370 and 35A are all turning this battle of Indians against terrorism into a battle against Kashmiris and Muslims to further deepen the communal polarisation.”

“CPI-M denounces these efforts to disrupt the united fight of India against terrorism by the BJP and the leaders of its government,” he said.

Yechury also claimed that the number of terrorist incidents has witnessed a rise of 176 per cent during the tenure of NDA government led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

“The number of security personnel and civilians killed in terrorist attacks has also gone up. The number of security personnel killed has seen a rise of 93 per cent. On an average, eleven terrorists infiltrated every month between 2014 and 2018,” he said.

Yechury said: “Most dangerous trend has been the sharp rise in local Kashmiri youth joining terrorist groups from 16 in 2013 to 164 in 2018.”

“This deepening alienation of Kashmiri youth is a consequence of the NDA government reneging on its promise to initiate a political process of dialogue with all the stakeholders in Jammu and Kashmir and the implementation of confidence-building measures,” he said.

“Clearly, the terrorist strikes continued and intensified even after the surgical strikes carried out by the Indian Air Force after the terrorist attack on army units in Uri in September 2016.”

Yechury said: “It is Prime Minister Modi and BJP leaders who are politicising the issue of the fight against terrorism and disrupted the united fight of Indians against terrorism for their partisan electoral benefits.” (ANI)
