Ex-Union minister V Dhananjay Kumar succumbs to illness

Mangaluru: Former Union minister Venur Dhananjay Kumar, battling multi-organ failure, passed away at a private hospital here on Monday. He was 68.The four-time MP, who rose to ascendancy from a youth leader and held key cabinet posts and was considered a close confidant of BJP stalwarts such as Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Lal Krishna Advani , had a falling out with the latter over ideological issues, forcing the Saffron party to show him the door.The mortal remains will be kept at his house in Kadri Kambla here from 7am to 10am on Tuesday to allow public to pay their last respects. His final rites will be conducted at Venur, his native. He is survived by wife Vanitha Kumar and children Parinith Kumar and Pavithra. A lawyer by profession, Kumar had a brief stint with Janata Dal (Secular) and he was last associated with the Congress before illness laid him low for the past few months.Recalling the influence that Dhananjay Kumar wielded on the party and the young workers like him, Kota Srinivas Poojary, leader of the opposition in state legislative council, told TOI that he was an orator par excellence and leader who had the wherewithal to silence the party’s critics. His translation of the speeches of national leaders Vajpayee and Advani was a treat to listen to and he inspired a generation of party workers to work for BJP, he said.Having started his career in the youth wing of BJP, Kumar became an MLA in 1983 from then Mangalore assembly constituency. His efforts at re-election from the same constituency did not yield results in 1985. When the Lotus bloomed in Karnataka, Kumar won four successive terms to the parliament and served as minister for civil aviation and tourism in 1996, minister of state for finance from 1999-2000 and minister of state for textiles from 2000-03.His criticism of central BJP leadership, including Advani, led to his expulsion from the party for anti-party activities. He left BJP and along with former CM B S Yeddyurappa joined the Karnataka Janata Paksha that the latter floated in 2012. Having re-joined BJP on the eve of general elections in 2014, Kumar had a brief stint with the JD(S) before joining Congress. He was also the special representative of the state government in New Delhi.
