CTD arrests four suspects in Ali Raza Abidi murder case

Sindh’s Counter Terrorism Department (CTD) on Monday claimed to have made a major breakthrough in former Muttahida Qaumi Movement MNA Ali Raza Abidi’s murder case.

CTD officials said they have arrested four suspects, but they are yet to identify the mastermind of the target killing, suspecting that a hostile agency that uses hitmen may have been responsible. “It seems that the arrested suspects are associated with a Lyari-based gang, but nothing can be said for sure about the brains of the incident,” SSP Naveed Ahmed Nisar Khawaja told The News. “They were hired for the murder, but their handlers remain unidentified.”

He said that some eight men were behind the incident and they were paid Rs800,000 by a middleman. “The middleman has also been identified, but he is not affiliated with any party. A hostile agency like India’s RAW may have been behind the murder.”

During the news conference at his office earlier in the evening, SSP Khawaja said that the arrests were made during separate raids in Kharadar and its surrounding areas. “Abidi’s case was a blind murder. The investigation was initiated by conducting geo-fencing.”

He said the CTD investigators arrested a suspect, Farooq, on Monday, adding that they later arrested three more suspects on the information provided by Farooq. The other suspects were identified as Ghazali, Haseeb and Abu Bakar.

The SSP said Farooq’s brother (Mustafa, alias Kali Chiran) and three more suspects (Faizan, Hasnain and Bilal) remain absconding in the case. He said the suspects provided the weapons and cash concealed in a flour bag, adding that they started conducting Abidi’s recce between December 8 and December 9.

“The murder was committed after two weeks of planning,” the officer said while quoting the suspects’ statements. “They also conducted recce of his restaurant, office and house.”

He said the weapon used in Abidi’s murder was also used in the killing of another man, namely Ehtisham, in Liaquatabad, adding that the investigators are trying to ascertain the motive behind the incident.

Khawaja said Abidi had been receiving threats from the MQM-London, but apparently, paid killers were used for the murder, adding that Bilal was among the shooters while Mustafa was on backup. He said the arrested suspects have no criminal record or affiliation with any political or religious party.

The CTD has requested the administrative judge of the anti-terrorism courts for a judicial requisition to the Apple headquarters in the US for decoding Abidi’s iPhone following the demand by the technology company.

Abidi was killed on December 25 last year in a drive-by attack outside his residence at Khayaban-e-Ghazi in DHA, where gunmen opened fire on his vehicle and sped away. He suffered shots in the head and the neck as soon as he got out of his car.
