Tral encounter: Two Hizbul terrorists killed; AK-47s, 'war-like' materials recovered

Night and weekend curfew in Jammu and Kashmir 2022: Know guidelines, rules: What is allowed, what is not

Tral encounter: Two Hizbul terrorists killed; AK-47s, 'war-like' materials recovered

India

oi-Vikas SV

Srinagar, Mar 5: Two Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists were gunned down in Jammu and Kashmir's Tral area on Tuesday following a gunbattle between them and the security forces. Two terrorist were killed and one civilian was reportedly injured. He was caught in crossfire between the forces and the terrorists.

The encounter began around 7 am this morning. Reports say that two terrorists were holed up in a house when the gunbattle began.

"Two terrorists were neutralised today, two AK-47s and other war-like stores were recovered from them. Both the terrorists were associated with Hizbul Mujahideen (HM)," news agency ANI quoted Neeraj Pandey, Commander Officer of 43 RR, as saying .

There have been at least three major skirmished between the forces and the terrorists in Kashmir since India carried out a pre-emptive stike on JeM base in Pakistan's Balakot of February 26.

[J&K: Army camp attacked by terrorists in Shopian, police retaliate]

Two terrorists were killed in an encounter with terrorists in Babgund area of J&K's Handwara on March 3. The gunbattle went on for almost three days. The death toll of the security forces was five. The encounter began on Friday (March 1) morning when security forces launched a search operation in the area in north Kashmir, following information about presence of militants there

Terrorists on Saturday (March 2) evening launched an attack on a camp of the 44 RR (Rashtriya Rifles) in Nagbal in Shopian district. Police were alerted immediately, who retaliated and fired back.

The fresh encounters came amid heightened Indo-Pak tensions in the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack, the subsequent anti-terror operation by India and Pakistan Air Force's attempt to target Indian military installations in Jammu and Kashmir.
