Opposition Parties Accuse Amit Shah of Politicising Balakot Airstrikes

New Delhi: After BJP president Amit Shah on Sunday claimed that “more than 250” terrorists were killed in the Balakot airstrike, opposition leaders have criticised him for trying to politicise the issue.

Shah was the first leader of the ruling party to give a figure of the number of people believed to have been killed in the airstrike. On Saturday, Union minister S.S. Ahluwalia stated the strike was intended to send a message that India is capable of hitting deep inside enemy lines and not to inflict “any human casualty”.

Shah, in Gujarat, said, “After Uri, our forces went into Pakistan and carried out surgical strikes. They avenged the death of our soldiers. After Pulwama, everyone thought there could be no surgical strikes, what will happen? But under (Prime Minister Narendra) Modi’s leadership, the government carried out an air strike after the 13th day and killed more than 250 terrorists.”

Also Read: Air Force Chief Says IAF Doesn’t Count Casualties, Govt Will Disclose Balakot Toll

He also lashed out at opposition leaders demanding proof of the number of people killed in the airstrikes. “If they cannot support the armed forces, they should at least learn to keep quiet,” he added.

The IAF’s chief B.S. Dhanoa on Monday clarified that the Air Force does not count human casualties. He said the bomb damage assessment conducter after a mission only calculates if the target was hit or not, he said.

“We can’t count how many people have died. That depends on how many people were there,” Dhanoa said, adding that it is for the government to provide details of the number of terrorists killed.

On Monday, the Congress criticised Shah for “politicising the air strikes”. Senior leader Manish Tewari accused the BJP of “milking” the air strikes for political gains.

Former finance minister P. Chidambaram said he was ready to believe the government’s claims. But if the Centre wanted the world to believe the impact of the airstrikes on terror camps in Pakistan, then the government should not “indulge in Opposition-bashing”. He questioned how the figure of 300-350 casualties is circulating despite the IAF Vice Air Marshal declining to comment on the number of casualties.

As a proud citizen I am prepared to believe my government. But if we want the world to believe, government must make the effort, not indulge in Opposition-bashing. — P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) March 4, 2019

Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal also criticised Shah. On Monday, he said Shah took a stand contradictory to that of the armed forces over the number of terrorists killed the airstrikes.

“Amit Shah is saying that the armed forces are lying, 250 (terrorists) were killed. Amit Shah is calling the armed forces a liar. The country will not tolerate this under any circumstances,” Kejriwal tweeted in Hindi.

In another tweet, the Delhi chief minister said the whole country stands with the armed forces while the BJP stands against them.

“The armed forces cannot lie but the BJP is lying. The whole country stands with the armed forces but BJP stands against them,” Kejriwal said.

TMC’s spokesperson Derek O’Brien accused Shah and Modi of sending the soldiers to die without a plan. “Is your purpose only to win the election,” he asked.

He referred to Shah’s speech in Assam on February 17, where he said the sacrifices of the forces will not be in vain because the BJP is in power at the Centre. This, O’Brien said, reduced the armed forces to being “the private property of a political party”.
