Suspecting multiple affairs, man chops wife into several pieces with help of friends

On March 1, Ganga was killed while she was returning after buying milk from a nearby shop. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: In a ghastly murder case reported from Cuddalore district, a man chopped his wife into several pieces with the help of friends on suspicion that she had illicit relationships with many men. The victim, Ganga, a resident of Vazhapattu village near Nellipkkuppam, in Cuddalore district, fell in love with and married Rajasekar from neighbouring village of Sornavur.

Rajasekar is a driver and they have been married for six years. They were parents to two children, a son and a daughter. His work demanded that Rajasekar travel out of town frequently and would stay away from home. It was alleged that Ganga developed relationships with other men under those circumstances and Rajasekar had ‘cautioned’ her regarding the same.

This led to frequent quarrels between them and resulted in their deciding to seek divorce. They filed separate divorce petitions in the court. Since they live separately and did not present themselves in the court, the case was dismissed.

Ganga, meanwhile, set up her residence at Madukkarai, near Villianoor with her children. Learning this, Rajasekar approached her and they decided to live together again with the children.

On March 1, Ganga was killed while she was returning after buying milk from a nearby shop. Madukkarai police team, led by Inspector Kalaichelvan, was investing her murder after registering a case. At the time of the murder, Rajasekar was found ‘sleeping’ at his house. However, there were some doubts and police interrogated him.

In the statement given to police, Rajasekar had reportedly cried in front of his friends saying he felt humiliated due to Ganga’s behaviour and that the friends agreed to help him in eliminating her. After telling his friends to murder his wife, he acted as if he was asleep at home. Once this got exposed, the police arrested him.

Eight of Rajasekar’s friends, Sugu aka Sugumaran of Kalitheerthaalpuram, Arul aka Arul Prakasam of Tirubuvanaipalayam, Jegan, Prabha aka Prabhakran of Mandaga Pattu, Ayyappan, Gunaseelan of Madhgadipet, Dasa aka Dasarathan of Madukaarai were arrested in connection with this case.


