Donald Trump moves to end special trade treatment for India

Photo taken on Feb. 7, 2018 shows an electric car exhibited by Indian automaker Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. in Greater Noida, India. (Kyodo) ==Kyodo (Photo by Kyodo News via Getty Images)

Why Big Tech is racing to bring the internet to India

Farmers are using the sun to help water their crops

Water pours down an irrigation channel from a groundwater pump and well next to a field of rice growing on farmland in the Bhagpat district of Uttar Pradesh, India, on Monday, Sept. 3, 2018. Cumulative rainfall during August and September is forecast to be 95 percent of a 50-year average, according to the India Meteorological Department. The monsoon is critical to the farm sector as it accounts for more than 70 percent of India's annual showers and irrigates more than half the country's farmland. Photographer: Prashanth Vishwanathan/Bloomberg via Getty Images

In this photograph taken on April 6, 2015, smoke billows from two smoke stacks at the coal-based Badarpur Thermal Station in New Delhi. A study by the Centre of Science and Environment in India found the plant which produces 705 MW (Megawatts) is one of the country's most polluting and inefficient power plants. Authorities insist they must focus on meeting the growing needs of its 1.25 billion people, 300 million of whom lack access to electricity. In its action plan for the Paris COP21 meet, India pledges to reduce its carbon intensity -- a measure of a country's emissions relative to its economic output -- by 35 percent by 2030, rather than an absolute cut in emissions. Globally, India is the third largest carbon-emitting country -- though its per capita emissions are only one third of the international average -- according to the World Resources Institute. AFP PHOTO / MONEY SHARMA

Indian Oil's Singh: More oil suppliers is better for trade

He wants to bring a billion people to digital payments

How Big Tech plans to clean up the world's most polluted city

Traffic stretches back in Hero Honda chowk as waterlogging during monsoon downpours causes traffic jams in Gurgaon on July 29, 2016. Thousands of Indians were left stranded overnight July 29, as major traffic gridlock paralysed roads leading to a key business city near New Delhi and authorities struggled to get the situation under control. / AFP / STRINGER (Photo credit should read STRINGER/AFP via Getty Images)

Online dating isn't the norm in India. Bumble wants to change that

Asia's richest man wants to build the next tech giant

India's richest man and oil-to-telecom conglomerate Reliance Industries chairman Mukesh Ambani (R) attends the India Mobile Congress 2018 in New Delhi on October 25, 2018. - The second edition of the India Mobile Congress is taking place in New Delhi from 25-27 October. (Photo by CHANDAN KHANNA / AFP) (Photo credit should read CHANDAN KHANNA/AFP via Getty Images)

LIVE from #IITBombay Virtual Convocation: President of India's Medal for 2020 goes to Sahil Hiral Shah, http://B.Tech in Computer Science & Engineering Check out virtual avatar of the student receiving medal from Chief Guest and Nobel laureate Prof. @FDuncanMHaldane

Google CEO on India's Covid crisis: The worst is yet to come

NEW DELHI, INDIA - MAY 09: An elderly woman wears a oxygen mask and breathes as she arrived to receive free oxygen distributed at a Gurdwara as a service to Covid-19 and other patients in need of Oxygen amid the scarcity of Oxygen in the capital on May 09, 2021 in New Delhi, India. India broke a fresh record on Thursday with over 412,000 new cases of Covid-19 as the total number of those infected according to Health Ministry data neared 20 million. The real figure could be up to ten times higher, many health experts say, due to a lack of widespread testing or reporting, and only patients who succumbed in hospitals being counted. Hospitals have begun turning away people suffering from Covid-19, having run out of space for the crushing number of people seeking help. (Photo by Anindito Mukherjee/Getty Images)

Paytm CEO on IPO: Our business model is new for many investors

Paytm is India's biggest online payments firm with more than 300 million users.

Washington CNN Business —

US President Donald Trump announced plans Monday to end special trade treatment for India, accusing it of unfairly shutting out American businesses.

In a letter to Congress, Trump signaled his intent to remove India from a program that gives developing countries easier access to US markets. The Indian government “has not assured the United States that it will provide equitable and reasonable access to the markets of India,” the letter said.

The notice comes just weeks before before Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi faces a general election.

Trump has repeatedly slammed Indian duties on US goods. In January, he took aim at India’s 150% tariff on imported whiskey. Over the weekend, he blasted India as a “high-tariff” country.

Now, he’s moving to take India out of the preferential trade program, known as the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP), which lowers US duties on exports from 121 developing countries. India was the biggest beneficiary of the program in 2017, according to US data, with exemptions on goods worth $5.6 billion.

Indian Commerce Secretary Anup Wadhawan said Tuesday that the total benefit to India from the exemptions amounted to only about $190 million a year, describing them as “minimal and moderate.”

Last April, the US government said it would review India’s eligibility in the program after some American companies said their dairy and medical device shipments to India were being hurt by non-tariff barriers.

Wadhawan said India had proposed a “reasonable and meaningful” trade package to the United States, but that the two sides were unable to reach an agreement.

“There were some additional requests beyond that, which could not be accepted at this time,” he told reporters.

Trump’s letter to Congress starts a 60-day clock before he can take action, according to a statement from the Office of the US Trade Representative. The United States also plans to remove Turkey from the GSP program, the statement said, after finding that the country is “sufficiently economically developed” and no longer requires special access to the US market.

Trump’s move to end the preferential treatment of Indian goods comes just a few weeks after US Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross pulled out of a trip to the country at the last minute. The Commerce Department said bad weather at the time led to his flight being canceled.

The GSP isn’t the only source of tension in the two countries’ trading relationship, which was worth $126 billion in 2017.

Tensions between New Delhi and Washington have increased in recent years as Trump’s “Buy American, Hire American” strategy has clashed with Modi’s campaign to “Make in India.”

India was one of many countries hit by US steel and aluminum tariffs last year. In retaliation, the Indian government announced its own tariffs on US goods worth $240 million, but it has yet to actually put them into effect.

Wadhawan said Tuesday that India would keep the possible retaliatory tariffs out of its continued trade discussions with the United States.
