VK Singh backs Amit Shah's remarks that an estimated 250 terrorists were killed in Balakot air strikes

File Image of Union Minister of State for External Affairs VK Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Minister of State for External Affairs VK Singh, on Tuesday, said that around 250 terrorists were killed in air strikes carried out by India on February 26, targetting Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror launchpads in Pakistan’s Balakot.

“The 250 casualty figure is of the attack on Balakot. Only one place was targetted. The target was selected carefully. The target was away from residential areas to avoid civilian casualty,” Singh said.

Commenting on BJP president Amit Shah’s statement that more than 250 terrorists were killed in the air strikes, the former Army chief said, “That was based on people who were housed in the buildings which were hit, it's an estimate. He is not saying this is a confirmed figure, he is saying this many might have died.”

Shah, on Monday, said that over 250 terrorists were killed in the air strikes carried out by the Indian Air Force (IAF) to avenge Pulwama attack.

On February 28, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee had asked the government to disclose the "details" of the exact place where the air raid was carried out and the casualties inflicted, stating that international media claimed that there was no damage in the strike.

Besides Mamata, several other opposition leaders, including PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti, Congress’ Kapil Sibal, and Manish Tewari have been cornering the central government over the number of casualties in the air strikes.

Earlier on Monday, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa said that the IAF hit all the desired targets on February 26, when it struck the JeM terror launchpads in Pakistan's Balakot. Addressing a press conference — his first after the ongoing operations that began with the February 26 strike — the Air Chief said that counting the number of casualties is not the job of the IAF, but as far as hitting the targets is concerned 'we hit the targets'.

"IAF is not in a postilion to clarify the number of casualties. The government will clarify that. We don't count human casualties, we count what targets we have hit or not," Dhanoa said.
