Pakistan claims Indian submarine tried to enter its waters, returned after being ‘warned’

Pakistan claims Indian submarine detected in its waters | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi/Islamabad: At a time when the border tensions between India and Pakistan are at an all-time high in decades, Islamabad on Tuesday claimed to have detected an Indian submarine attempting to enter its waters. Pakistan claimed that the Indian submarine returned after being ‘warned’.

The development came on a day when Indian Navy Chief Admiral Sunil Lanba warned that there were reports terrorists are undergoing training to carry out attacks through the sea. The warning came weeks after the Pulwama terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir, in which 40 personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force were killed.

Following the February 14 terror attack, the Indian Air Force conducted air strikes in Pakistan on February 26 at a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Balakot. It may be noted that the JeM had claimed responsibility for the Pulwama attack.

A day later, Pakistani Air Force jets violated Indian airspace and tried to target military installations in Jammu and Kashmir. Indian Air Force jets thwarted that bid and a MiG-21 Bison downed a Pakistani F-16 jet in a dogfight before itself crash-landing in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. Pilot Abhinandan Varthaman was taken into custody by the Pakistan Army before being released two days later.

Meanwhile, the Navy Chief today said the Pulwama attack was carried out by terrorists that were "aided by a State" which is seeking to destabilise India. He was addressing a gathering of global experts at the Indo-Pacific Regional Dialogue in New Delhi.

Admiral Lanba said compared to other countries in the region, India was facing a "far more serious" version of "state-sponsored" terrorism.

"We recently saw the horrific scale of the extremist attack in Jammu and Kashmir about three weeks ago. This violence was perpetrated by extremists aided and abetted by a State that seeks to destabilise India," the Navy chief said without mentioning Pakistan.

"We have seen how quickly terror groups evolve across the globe. A particular brand of terror can well become a global problem in near future," he warned.

It may be recalled that 26/11 Mumbai terror attack in November 2008 was carried out by 10 sea-borne terrorists of Pakistan-based Lashkar-e-Taiba terror group, who had hijacked an Indian fishing vessel to enter Mumbai.
