In a knee-jerk reaction to IAF attack on Balakot, Pakistan begins heavy military build-up along LoC, border

Pakistan has reportedly made military movements along IB and LoC | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: In what is being viewed as a knee-jerk reaction to the Indian Air Force (IAF) strike in Balakot, Pakistan has begun a massive military build-up in areas along the Line of Control (LoC) and International Border (IB). Pakistan's strategic 10 Corps has mobilised additional troops along the LoC.

Citing sources, Times Now TV channel reported that a similar mobilisation has also taken place under Pakistan Army's 30 Corps in the Sialkot sector, where troop deployment has been stepped up along the IB. While regular blackouts have become a routine phenomenon in the Sialkot sector, Lahore airport has been put under the control of the Pakistan Army since the day of the strikes. According to sources, one convoy each with heavy military equipment was seen moving along the Karachi-Khokrapar route, Mirpur Khas – Chor axis in Sindh and Hyderabad-Mirpur Khas route to name a few.

A week after Indian air strikes on Jaish terror camps, the Pakistan government has ordered the movement of additional troops and heavy weaponry to the international border and the Line of Control.@deepduttajourno with the details | #PakSpooked pic.twitter.com/3KUdVJAz5A — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) March 5, 2019

Meanwhile, radars have also been activated along the IB and ordinance supply depots have been told to work round the clock. Forward area posts have also been told to be prepared for any eventualities. Meanwhile, it is also learnt that fighter aircraft have also been making practice landings along motorways and civilian highways. Civil administration has also been advised to move the local population to safer areas away from the forward areas- Times Now channel reported.

The latest buzz within the Pakistani military establishment comes just days after the IAF carried out airstrikes at Balakot in Pakistan devastating JeM terror launch pads across the border. Pakistan has already responded to India's 'non-military preemptive strikes' once with a military action in which its fighter jets targetted military establishments in India. However, the attack was thwarted by IAF jets which also downed a Pakistani F-16 fighter jet.
