India to share Pulwama dossiers with other countries

New Delhi [India], Mar 5 (ANI): Expressing dissatisfaction over Pakistan's inaction, India will be sharing the information contained in the dossiers - handed over to Islamabad following the Pulwama terror attack - with other countries, according to sources.

Slamming reports in Pakistani media regarding the dossiers containing "no actionable evidence", India quipped that what more actionable proof is needed following the 26/11 Mumbai attacks and the 2016 attacks in Pathankot, sources added.

India had handed over the dossiers to Islamabad after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan promised to act against Jaish-e-Mohammed, the perpetrators behind the terror attack in Pulwama, if "actionable evidence" was provided.

Meanwhile, sources further noted that Pakistan's allegations against India and Israel aligning together to launch an attack on them, reflect Islamabad's desperation and Pakistan's attempt at creating every possible division.

Questions are also being raised about the Pakistani media and their silence over the mortal remains of the second Indian Air Force pilot, who Pakistani authorities alleged was captured alongside Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman on February 27.

Sources further said that what evidence does Pakistan have that they are not escalating and why have there been no reports on that?

The immediate scrambling of Indian fighter jets helped foil Pakistani attempts to target Army units and oil depot last week, thwarting Pakistani designs of inflicting heavy Indian military loses. However, an IAF MiG21 Bison jet, flown by Varthaman, was lost in the process of shooting down a Pakistani F-16 fighter jet.

Pakistani authorities had originally claimed that it had two IAF pilots in its custody, but later retracted the statement, noting that only Wing Commander Varthaman had been captured by the Pakistani Army.

Reaffirming India's stance in its fight against terrorism, sources also said that while Pakistan wants mediation, India only wants the international community to ask Pakistan to stop supporting terrorism.

Following the Pulwama attack, most countries have thrown their weight behind India, with the United States immediately telling Pakistan to stop providing support and a safe haven to terrorists and terror outfits.

India lost over 40 CRPF personnel in the ghastly February 14 terror attack, following which it launched a pre-emptive, anti-terror strike against a major JeM terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot, where many top JeM commanders and terrorists were killed, according to Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale. (ANI)
