Pakistan detains Jaish chief Masood Azhar's brother, son

Rauf is the younger brother of terrorist Maulana Masood Azhar and operational head of terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammad. (Photo: NIA)

Pakistan has detained Abdul Rauf Asghar, the brother of Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Maulana Masood Azhar. Pakistan has arrested 44 persons affiliated with multiple banned terrorist organisations including Mufti Abdul Rauf Asghar, brother of JeM chief Masood Azhar and Hammad Azhar, who is Masood Azhar's son. Both are in preventive custody.

The news was announced by Pakistan Interior minister Shaharyar Afridi in a press conference. The move comes after Pakistan had assured the international community that it will take strict action against terror.

Pakistan has said their names were in the dossier given by India to Pakistan. Pakistani interior ministry secretary said if no evidence is brought up against them, they will be released. According to interior minister Shaharyar Afridi, the terrorists have been detained for a period of two weeks.

Pakistani officials insisted this was not done under pressure from India but was based on the decision taken by the National Action Plan committee. Pakistan assured the action would be taken against all proscribed organizations.

The order issued by Pakistan's Interior Ministry.

Previously, Pakistan's Information Minister Fawad Chaudhry had said that the country plans to take action against militant groups operating on its soil. He said the decision to act was taken at a meeting of the National Security Committee before the Pulwama terror attack which was claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), in Kashmir.

"A full-fledged strategy is now in place," Fawad Chaudhry said. "We have different strategies for different groups, but the main aim is that we have to enforce the writ of the state. We have to demilitarise if there are groups (on our soil)."

Pakistan's English-language Dawn newspaper said a source briefed journalists that a crackdown against militant groups was imminent.

Who is Mufti Abdul Rauf?

Known as Mufti, Rauf is the younger brother of terrorist Maulana Masood Azhar and operational head of terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammad, which is responsible for carrying out numerous terror attacks in India.

These attacks include the hijacking of Indian Airlines plane IC814 in 1999, the December 2001 attack on Indian Parliament and January 2016 attack on Indian air force base in Pathankot and the recent Pulwama terror attack which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF jawans.

Rauf has also been charge-sheeted by Indian investigative agencies including NIA for his role in these terror cases.

He is believed to reside in Bahawalpur, along with his brother Masood Azhar.

(with inputs from Hamza Ameer in Islamabad)

CORRECTION: A previous version of the story incorrectly identified Hammad Azhar as Masood Azhar's brother-in-law. The story has been rectified to include that Hammad Azhar is Masood Azhar's son.
