Never said PM has to be assassinated: Congress leader apologises over shooting remark after backlash

The Karnataka BJP posted the video on its Twitter handle and demanded that the police initiate action against Belur Gopalkrishna. (Photo: ANI)

Congress leader in Karnataka Belur Gopalakrishna who had allegedly asked his wing members "to shoot" Prime Minister Narendra Modi has apologised and clarified his comments after facing backlash from the BJP.

"I have respect for the Prime Minister, I never said PM has to be assassinated. How can I be silent when Gandhiji is disrespected? I said will you do the same thing to the PM? I will definitely apologise if my statements hurt anyone," Belur Gopalakrishna said.

A purported video of former MLA Belur Gopalakrishna's controversial remarks, made at a party event on February 4 to protest the action of a Hindu Mahasabha leader Puja Shakun Pandey glorifying Nathuram Godse for assassinating Mahatma Gandhi, has gone viral.

Pandey had shot at an effigy of Mahatma Gandhi with a toy gun on the death anniversary of the father of the nation and had observed it as "Shaurya Divas" in Aligarh on January 31.

"My dear friends, these people who speak in favour of Godse today, such people should not stay in the country. If they move to murder the democracy of this country.... If you (extreme right wingers) have the guts, shoot down your Modi. Don't kill anybody else. I am very happy...," Gopalakrishna is heard saying in the purported video.

The Karnataka BJP posted the video on its Twitter handle and demanded that the police initiate action against him.

"Belur Gopalakrishna, a Congress leader in an official party function calls for assassination of democratically elected PM Narendra Modi. Instigating for assassination of PM of a country is a nation threat and we urge Office of the Home Minister of India and Commissioner of Police, Bengaluru to impose legal action immediately," the BJP tweeted.

Belur Gopalakrishna, a Congress leader in a official party function calls for assassination of democratically elected PM Sri @narendramodi ji.



Instigating for assassination of PM of a country is a nation threat & we urge @HMOIndia, @CPBlr to impose legal action immediately. pic.twitter.com/Tg9GO0FCdM BJP Karnataka (@BJP4Karnataka) March 5, 2019



The party also asked Congress president Rahul Gandhi to take action against Gopalakrishna.

"Well Rahul Gandhi, we remember you saying you don't endorse hate politics but now that your own party leader has openly called for assassination of a democratically elected PM of this nation would act on him. If you don't act it clearly means you endorse his words," the party tweeted.

Well @RahulGandhi we remember you saying you don’t endorse hate politics but now that your own party leader has openly called for assassination of democratically elected PM of this Nation would you act on him ?



If you don’t act it clearly means you endorse his words. https://t.co/C6nw2T3k3J BJP Karnataka (@BJP4Karnataka) March 5, 2019




