Delhi-NCR Most Polluted In The World, AI To Say Jai-Hind After Every Announcement + Top News

India's pollution crisis is not getting any better and continues to remains the country with worst polluted air, according to a study. The IQAir AirVisual 2018 World Air Quality Report showed that Delhi remains the most polluted capital city across the world last year.

It was not just Delhi, but the entire national capital region (NCR) emerged as the most polluted region in the world, with Gurugram being the worst affected, followed by Ghaziabad, Faridabad, Noida, and Bhiwadi in the top six. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) Air India Crew Will Now Say Jai Hind After Every In-Flight Announcement, Thanks To This New Rule

India's national carrier Air India has now directed its crew to chant 'Jai Hind' after every announcement, a senior airline official said on Monday. The official said the operations' directive, which was first issued to the cockpit crew in 2017, has been in "continuous implementation". The only change now, sources said, is that such chant will also be applicable to other cabin crew members. Read More.

2) London Patient Who Contracted HIV In 2003 Becomes 2nd Patient In World To Be Cured Of AIDS Virus

Over the years, new medical treatments were developed to prolong the life of AIDS patients. Unlike yesteryears when sustaining the life of an HIV patient would be nearly impossible, in today’s generation these patients continue to live long and healthy lives.

An HIV patient in London has just given testimony to this fact as he has become the second known adult in the world to be cured of AIDS virus, Reuters reported. The man who resides in Britain received a bone marrow transplant from an HIV resistant donor. Read More.

3) Pakistan Military Drone Spotted In Bikaner, IAF Sukhoi-30 Fighter Jet Shoots It Down

A Sukhoi-30 fighter jet of the Indian Air Force (IAF) on Monday shot down a Pakistani military drone in Bikaner sector of the Indo-Pak border using an air-to-air missile, government sources said. This development comes a week after the Gujarat police shot down a Pakistani unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) on Tuesday near the international border in Kutch district in Gujarat. Read More.

4) Two Hizbul Mujahideen Terrorists Killed Pulwama's Tral Region By Indian Security Forces

Two terrorists belonging to Pakistan-based Hizbul Mujahideen were killed in an encounter with the Indian security forces in Tral area of Pulwama district in Jammu and Kashmir. The encounter broke out on Monday evening after the security agencies received inputs on the presence of terrorists in Mir Mohalla of Tral. A joint team of Army’s 42 Rashtriya Rifles, CRPF’s 180 Battalion and the police’s special operation group encountered the terrorists who returned the fire. Read More.

5) Donald Trump Plans To End India's Preferential Trade Treatment, Calls Country A 'High-Tariff Nation'

After supporting India in its bid to take counter-action against terrorism in the country, the United States plans to end preferential trade treatment for India that allows duty-free entry for $5.6 billion worth of the country’s exports to the United States.

As the U.S federal elections are due to take place next year, President Donald Trump has decided to cut U.S trade deficits. Last week, he called India a “very-high tariff” nation and told his supporters that he now wanted some kind of reciprocal tax. Read More.
