Pakistan arrests Masood Azhar brother Abdul Rouf

Pakistan arrests Masood Azhar brother Abdul Rouf: The move comes after mounting pressure on Pakistan to take strict action against terror outfits operating in the country. Announcing the arrest of Masood Azhar's brother, minister for Information Shehryar Afridi, however, said that the arrests were not made after any pressure, but are in the interest of Pakistan.

Pakistan arrests Masood Azhar brother Abdul Rouf: Amidst pressure, Pakistan has arrested 44 members of terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad including the brother of its chief, Mufti Abdul Rouf. The move comes after mounting pressure on Pakistan to take strict action against terror outfits operating from the country. Announcing the arrest of Masood Azhar’s brother, minister for Information Shehryar Afridi, however, said that the arrests were not made after any pressure, but are in the interest of Pakistan.

Afridi stressed that Pakistan would not allow its soil to be used against any country. He said that every detail about the arrests would be shared with all the stakeholders.

Among the arrested Jaish members, Ministry of Interior Secretary Azam Suleman Khan admitted that these include the people who India had held responsible for the Pulwama terror attack and are named in the dossier shared by India to Pakistan, reports said.

Ministry of Interior on Tuesday maintained that these actions would continue as per the decisions taken in the National Security Committee while reviewing the country’s National Action Plan.

Pakistan-based terror outfit Jiash-e-Mohammad had claimed the responsibility of the Pulwama suicide bombing which shook the country. At least 44 CRPF jawans were killed in the attack.

In order to punish the perpetrators, the Indin Air Force on February 26 launched air strikes on Jaish terror camps in Balakot area of Pakistan. Around 300 terrorists were killed in the pre-dawn strikes including the top commanders and trainers of Masood Azhar’s terror outfit.

After the Pulwama terror attack, Prime Minister Imran Khan had said that Pakistan offers full support in the investigation if India shares actionable evidence.

For all the latest World News, download NewsX App
