Nellore Samara Shankaravam: YS Jagan slams CM Chandrababu Naidu over data theft case

Nellore: The YSR Congress party chief and leader of opposition YS Jagan Mohan Reddy have slammed CM Chandrababu Naidu over data theft case at Samara Shankaravam meeting in Nellore on Tuesday.

Speaking at Samara Shankaravam meeting, YS Jagan came down heavily on CM Chandrababu that he has murdered the democracy, he is a thief for stealing the data of AP people.

For his crime, Naidu is blaming others as thieves. YSRCP chief alleged that Naidu has handed over the data related to AP citizens to his benami company and started the votes deleting process.

In the meeting YS Jagan said that there are more than 59 lakhs fake votes, as the elections are nearing in the state, the TDP is trying to remove the votes of YSRCP sympathizers from the voters' list.

Even his uncle YS Vivekananda Reddy's vote has been removed, YS Jagan said. He fired at CM that by giving the data of AP voters to his benami company he has killed the democratic values.

YS Jagan has made serious comments on Chandrababu Naidu that a thief, criminal is ruling the state. From every constituency, the votes are been removed and Naidu knows every voters bank account number, cheque details.

He questioned, why the information of AP voters is stored in the computers of his benami company and demanded to open up the relationship of Chandrababu, Lokesh with the company.

Why the data was given to this company..and stealing this data is not a crime? YS Jagan questioned. He alleged that when Telangana police conduct a raid on the private company, Chandrababu has sent AP police to cause interference in their investigation.

TDP government is making misuse of AP police..when they ask these questions, Naidu tries to give irrelevant answers by saying that he built Hyderabad..he invented mobile phones, YS Jagan commented.

He said that Chandrababu is selling others property as if it belongs to him. In spite of saying sorry to the people, Naidu is making allegations against YSRCP.

The time when Chandrababu does any crime, he gets remembered of section 8 that Hyderabad is the joint capital of two Telugu states, YS Jagan said.

YS Jagan criticised that during the cash-for-vote scam, Chandrababu has spoken in the same way..even in the data theft case his attitude remains the same.

YS Jagan has made strong allegations that in the state, TDP is trying to remove the votes of those who have not voted for them and they are giving pensions and other welfare schemes only to TDP activists.
