Street Dancer: Varun Dhawan strikes a cool pose with the ‘boys’ & fans are convinced ‘Tumhara Time Aagaya’

Having won the hearts of millions of people with Remo D’Souza’s ABCD 2, it came as no surprise that the makers decided to rope in Varun Dhawan for the third installment of the film. And as we speak, the cast and crew of Street Dancer 3D is in London shooting for the film. Thanks to social media, Varun Dhawan has been actively sharing fun pictures and videos while shooting for the film and amidst a series of pictures, today, Varun posted a photo with all the boys and his caption read, “The boys are back in town #streetdancer3d. The energy,passion,blood and sweat we gonna give it all.”

In this picture, we have Varun Dhawan, Remo D’Souza, Dharmesh, and Raghav Juyal striking a cool pose perhaps, on the streets of London and this picture is giving us all the street dancer vibes and fans are convinced that Tumhara Time Aagaya’. While one fan wrote, ‘Hard hai bhai hard Hai tumhara time agaya’, another fan wrote, ‘Boht Hard.’ A few days back, a video of Varun Dhawan twerking with Nora Fatehi had gone viral on social media as the video shows Varun observing Nora and dancer Sheetal Pery showing off their moves before Varun joins in. Street Dancer 3D was initially to have Varun and Katrina Kaif in the lead roles, however, Katrina later walked out of the film due to scheduling conflicts and was replaced by Shraddha Kapoor. Helmed by Remo D'Souza, Street Dancer 3D is the third installment of the ABCD franchise and features Shraddha Kapoor, Varun Dhawan, Nora Fatehi in lead roles. In the film, it is being reported that while Varun will play a dancer from Punjab, Shraddha will be seen as a dancer from Pakistan. Street Dancer 3D will release on 8th November 2019.

Before starting the first schedule of Street Dancer in Punjab, Varun had wrapped up Abhishek Varman’s Kalank and yesterday, Varun took to Twitter to tell all his fans that the trailer of Kalank is going to be out soon as he wrote, “Its coming soon i promise.” Talking about Kalank, the film stars Alia Bhatt, Madhuri Dixit, Aditya Roy Kapur, Sanjay Dutt, Kunal Khemu and Sonakshi Sinha and has been shot extensively in Mumbai, Hyderabad, Chanderi, and Kargil.

ALSO READ: Varun Dhawan and Alia Bhatt's Kalank's trailer to release soon; read what the actor has to say
