Top news of the day: Navy Chief cites reports of terrorists being trained for more attacks, no AAP-Congress tie-up in Delhi, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Chief of the Naval Staff Admiral Sunil Lanba highlighted the threat of state-sponsored terrorism that India faces, saying there are “reports of terrorists being trained to carry out attacks with varying modus operandi, including through the medium of the sea.”

There would be no alliance with the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) in Delhi for the coming Lok Sabha polls, Delhi Congress president Sheila Dikshit said. Ms. Dikshit’s statement came after she met party president Rahul Gandhi, All India Congress Committee in charge of Delhi P.C. Chacko and other senior leaders to discuss the strategy for the coming polls.

India will have “all options” available in case there is another terror strike, official sources asserted while maintaining that the government will insist on concrete steps taken by Pakistan in dismantling terror infrastructure.

The Government of India’s position on the number of terrorists killed at Balakot in the IAF strike was the same as the one provided by the Foreign Secretary in his statement, which “didn’t give a figure,” Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told reporters in Chennai on March 5.

United States President Donald Trump has said he intends to end the preferential trade terms for India under the U.S.’s Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) program. The program, which sets zero tariffs for certain goods from a set of 120 developing countries in order to foster trade and economic development, accounts for some $5.6 billion of India’s exports to the U.S, making India the largest GSP beneficiary.

The DMK will contest in 20 seats and its allies in 19 constituencies in Tamil Nadu and one in Puducherry in the coming Lok Sabha elections. At the end of seat-sharing talks with allies at the party headquarters morning, DMK president M.K. Stalin said the Congress would contest in 10 seats, including Puducherry; the CPI, the CPI(M) and the VCK in two each; and the MDMK, the IUML, the IJK and the KMDK in one each. The MDMK has also been given one Rajya Sabha seat.

Two militants were killed by security forces in an encounter in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district and their affiliation and identity were being established, police said.

The government is working on a scheme to push work-from-home jobs in the IT sector by offering financial incentives to both employees and employers.

In October 2016, a newborn was stolen from a Government hospital in Salem. The same year, a similar incident took place at a Government hospital in Trichy. A young couple at a Government hospital in Vijayawada too found that their baby was missing one morning in July 2016.
