I want to strike terrorism, they want to strike Modi: PM

Speaking at the public meet, PM Modi slammed the opposition for questioning the ability of the Indian forces post aerial strike.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi after concluding his two-day visit to Gujarat, marked his presence at Dhar in Madhya Pradesh on Tuesday. (Photo: File)

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi after concluding his two-day visit to Gujarat, marked his presence at Dhar in Madhya Pradesh on Tuesday.

Speaking at the public meeting, PM Modi slammed the opposition for questioning the ability of the Indian forces post aerial strike.

Modi in a veiled attack to the Congress said, “The party that ruled our country for decades is now questioning the ability of our brave forces, especially a leader from MP. Today, he said Pulwama terror attack is an accident. This is their mentality, he is the same person who gave Pakistan a clean chit during 26/11 attacks.”

Talking about the Indo-Pak situation, Modi said that India gave a befitting reply to the supporters of terror and terrorism and they have left with no option but to change.

Earlier on Tuesday, Modi launched the ‘Shram Yogi Maandhan Yojana’ pension scheme for the unorganised sector in Ahmedabad. Post the launch, Modi at the rally here, again slammed the opposition at a rally which he said has come together only to target him.

In the public address, PM Modi said that they are busy with strikes on him, while Modi is launching strikes on terror. “The opposition wants to get rid of me. They want to remove Modi, I want to remove corruption. They want to strike Modi, I want to strike terrorism,” said Modi.

Opposition party leaders like Rahul Gandhi, Mamata Banerjee, Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav had asked for details of the air strike and its impact following skeptical reports by a section of the world media.

Congress leaders Kapil Sibal and Digvijaya Singh had also asked for evidence. Banerjee asked the Modi-led government that why not a single joint-meeting was called post the Indian Air Force's strike revealing its details?

Moreover, the BJP's ally Shiv Sena in Maharashtra said on Tuesday that citizens have the ''right to know" about the casualties in the air strike.

BJP President Amit Shah on Sunday said over 250 terrorists were killed in the airstrike carried out by the Indian Air Force on the "13th day of dastardly Pulwama Terror attack."
