Congress leaders speaking “language of Pakistan”: Ravi Shankar Prasad

Union Minister says opposition leaders lowering the moral of armed forces

The BJP on Tuesday accused Congress leaders P. Chidambaram, Digvijay Singh and Kapil Sibal of speaking the “language of Pakistan” and accused the opposition party of “lowering the morale and prestige” of the armed forces by seeking evidence of damage following Indian Air Force strikes on an alleged Jaish-e-Mohammed camp in Pakistan.

Referring to tweets by the three leaders, Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said the Congress can’t disown these comments.

‘Backed by Rahul’

“They are not speaking in isolation. They have the blessings of (Congress president) Rahul Gandhi and (UPA chairperson) Sonia Gandhi,” Mr. Prasad said.

While launching an all guns blazing attack on the Congress the BJP remained mum on other opposition parties like Trinamool Congress, who have been equally vocal on the subject of the air strikes.

Mr. Digvijaya Singh in a tweet said the international press had raised doubts on the post-Pulwama air strikes which also raised questions on integrity of the Modi government. He referred to Pulwama as a ‘durghatna’ or accident.

“Digivijaya Singh has reduced himself to such a low level that now he will refer to a heinous attack on our CRPF jawans as a mere ‘accident,” Mr. Prasad said.

No foreign country has sought evidence of the air strike, the BJP leader said, adding that Congress leaders do not believe Indian media reports. By seeking proof, he said, the Congress was “lowering the morals and prestige” of the security forces.

“I would appeal to the Congress party for the sake of India, don’t reduce morale and courage of our security forces,” he added.

Shahs’s estimate

On his party President Amit Shah’s claim that 250 persons had been killed in the Indian air strikes, Mr Prasad said he [Mr Shah] had quoted numbers on the basis of estimates and there was no need for further comment on it.

In an oblique comment on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, Mr Prasad said, “Mamata-ji, you have seen struggle. What is wrong with you?”
