Pakistan made false claims of shooting down Sukhoi-30 fighter jet: Indian Air Force

Pakistan made false claims of shooting down an Indian Sukhoi 30 fighter jet to cover up the loss of their F-16, said Indian Air Force. (Photo: PTI)

Pakistan made false claims of shooting down an Indian Sukhoi 30 fighter jet to cover up the loss of their F-16, the Indian Air Force has said in an official statement on the air space violation by Pakistani Air Force (PAF) on February 27.

This is the first detailed statement recording the turn of events when Pakistan fighter jets entered Indian Territory.

"On 27 Feb 2019 morning, our Air Defence system was on full alert. Build up of PAF aircraft on their side of Line of Control [LoC] was noticed in time and additional aircraft were scrambled to tackle the adversary," the statement said.

"In their attempt to attack our ground targets, PAF aircraft were engaged effectively. From IAF side, Mirage-2000, Su-30 and MiG-21 Bison aircraft were involved in the engagement," the IAF statement said," it added.

PAF aircraft were forced to withdraw in a hurry, which is also evident from the fact that they were not able register a single accurate strike on Indian military installations.

"During combat, use of F-16 by PAF and multiple launches of AMRAAM were conclusively observed. Prompt and correct tactical action by Su-30 aircraft, in response to AMRAAM launch, defeated the missile."

IAF has claimed that parts of the missile fell in area East of Rajouri in J&K, injuring a civilian on ground. India has already submitted proof to US that Pakistan used F-16 fighter jets to launch the attack on February 27.

Sources said that the US is currently investigating the matter. One of the sources said India is trying to build "maximum pressure on Pakistan" on eradicating terrorism.

The Indian non-military strikes were a result of a dastardly suicide bombing attack on February 14 which killed at least 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) paramilitary troopers.
