Brexit Impact on India 2019: Boris Johnson Praises Modi

Former UK Foreign Secretary, and a man widely regarded as one of the original advocates for the UK departing from the European Union, Boris Johnson attended the India Today conclave in New Delhi last week. He made a riveting speech about India, Pakistan, Modi, as well as the Brexit Impact on India.

Our associates at The SmartMove2UK (a unit of SmartMove Immigration) present the latest happenings in the UK immigration environment in the SmartMove2UK blog to ensure that individuals with business or personal interests in the UK remain up to date about anything and everything that might affect them. For receiving updates every time we post an article about Brexit exclusively, send an email to info@smartmove2uk.com with a subject line: ‘Brexit’.

On Saturday, the 2nd of March, British MP Boris Johnson was all praise for Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The speech given by Johnson at the India Today Conclave in New Delhi was an effective piece of communication in terms of setting an optimistic theme to India-UK relationships post-Brexit. He recalled a rally Prime Minister Modi had held at Wembley Stadium UK by describing him as a “firecracker” and a “political phenomenon”.

The event comes in close proximity to what can be described as heart-wrenching times for the Indian populace, with widespread concern and pain over violence in Kashmir. Johnson said that his fellow Britons were outraged by the attack in Pulwama. He also made an appeal to nations to understand the situation in Pakistan in order to support its civilian government against its deep state military elements.

Questions were also raised by the Indian media regarding the possibility of another referendum, to which Johnson replied that another referendum regarding the UK’s fate in the EU was “not possible”.

Whatever be the case, Boris’s visit comes as a positive start to the UK’s relations with India, which might prove to be crucial for both countries in the near future.
