BJP plays down Amit Shah’s count of terrorists killed in air strikes

The BJP on Tuesday played down party President Amit Shah’s claim that 250 terrorists were killed during the air strikes in Pakistan even as the Opposition demanded to know how Shah arrived at this number when the Air Force has not put out any official figure.

Attacking the Opposition, especially the Congress, for “bringing down the morale of the Armed Forces”, Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad said he would “not speculate” about how many terrorists were actually killed during the air strikes in Pakistan.

“The Air Force is saying that the government will tell. The President (Amit Shah) has said something based on an estimation. This number can be even more. The government will talk. We will not speculate. It was a big strike and ambulances were seen; that is the contemporaneous evidence,” said Prasad.

Prasad said this in the wake of a barrage of questions raised by almost all political parties, including BSP chief Mayawati, AAP leader Arvind Kejriwal, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and former defence minister AK Antony.

Addressing a function at the Jain International Trade Organisation in Ahmedabad on Sunday, Amit Shah had said: “After the Pulwama attack, when everyone thought surgical strike cannot be done this time… now what will happen? At the time Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led central government undertook an air strike on the 13th day and killed more than 250 terrorists without any harm to our side.”

On Monday, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa had refused to comment on the likely number of casualties. “We hit our targets. We don’t count human casualties, we count what targets we have hit or not. The IAF does not calculate casualty numbers, the government does that… It depends on how many people were there,” ACM Dhanoa had said.

The Congress fielded former defence minister and senior leader AK Antony to criticisie Shah’s public comments on an ongoing IAF operation. “During our time, after a huge military operation, a defence spokesperson used to address the media and not the party President,” Antony said.

BSP chief Mayawati questioned why the president of the ruling party and not the PM is providing these operational details.

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal retweeted a video of of the IAF chief’s press conference and contrasted it with “Amit Shah’s lies”.
