Oppn talking Pak language, weakening soldiers’ morale, says PM

DHAR: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday tore into opposition parties for “acting like poster boys of Pakistan”, and accused Congress leaders of trying to protect terrorists and weaken soldiers’ morale.“Driven by Modi hate, opposition parties are trying to weaken the country when a decisive battle against terror is being fought,” the PM said in Dhar on Tuesday. Addressing a Vijay Sankalp rally — his first in MP since BJP lost the assembly election — Modi took on Congress general secretary Digvijaya Singh for calling Pulwama terror attack an ‘accident’ and said it “demonstrated the mentality of his party to protect terrorists”.“A (Congress) leader of Madhya Pradesh this morning called Pulwama terror attack an accident — an accident that just happened. They don’t just say this, this is their mentality,” Modi said, as he launched BJP’s Lok Sabha poll campaign in Madhya Pradesh. Without naming Digvijaya, Modi said, “In order to save their friend, to take their side, they are calling an attack by terrorists an accident.”The PM called out to the crowd, asking if they considered the terror attack an ‘accident’ and received a loud “no”.Modi went on to call Digvijaya an “advisor of Naamdars (Gandhi family)” and accused the Congress leader of calling Osama Bin Laden a ‘messenger of peace’ and attempting to give a clean chit to Pakistan on Mumbai terror attacks. “Congress leaders could not stop crying after terrorists were killed in the Batla House encounter in Delhi. Would you trust Congress to act against terror?” he asked the audience.Modi accused opposition parties of indulging in “international maha milawat” (uniting with international forces) and making statements in favour of Pakistan. Remarks made by such leaders are making headlines in Pakistan and are received with applause. “If you look at it, these maha milawati people have become poster boys of Pakistan,” he said.“After the air strikes, when Pakistan was cornered, these ‘maha milawati’ people came forward to bail Pakistan out. Some started asking for proof, some started asking for the number of terrorists killed. They even started calling Pakistan the messenger of peace,” the PM said, adding: “When the entire country is united in fighting terror and hailing the armed forces, they are trying weaken the country and pulling down morale of soldiers.”He accused Congress of having failed to take decisive action against terror during the time it ruled the country. “And now, it is questioning the bravery of our soldiers,” the PM said.
