Politics by means of war

War, said Clausewitz, is the continuation of politics by other means. That was remarkable prescience on the part of this Prussian general and military theorist who died in 1831 and, thus, could not observe India in 2019.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is consolidating the wave of nationalist sentiment that rose to greet the air strikes he ordered inside Pakistani territory. The Opposition’s chagrin is understandable, but there is no gainsaying the fact that the option of calling Islamabad’s nuclear bluff and using India’s conventional warfighting might to punish Pakistan, even if only symbolically, was open to the Manmohan Singh government after the attack on Mumbai in November 2008. As it was to the Vajpayee government after the attack on Parliament in December 2001. If this option was forgone then but has been exercised now, it is only natural that Modi would claim the credit for it.

Risking War Irresponsible

If that was all there was to the PM’s statement in Ahmedabad that he would enter the enemy’s house and strike him, if it merely pandered to those baying for blood, and meant nothing for India’s future actions, things would not be so bad. But there is the worry that once you start beating the drums of war and raise popular expectations, you would proceed to meet those expectations by carrying out one more strike.

Pakistan’s generals imagine their country to be the sword arm of Islam, the only Islamic nuclear power. It cannot afford to take India’s attacks lying down. There would be retaliation and how that would play out, regardless of India’s military superiority or because of it, is unlikely to be unilateral vindication of India’s moral claims as the victim of Pakistan-sponsored terror.

War would have horrific consequences. Especially when nuclear weapons are involved. There must be ample justification for risking that horror. Right now, India has the upper hand, having sent out the message loud and clear that New Delhi will not tolerate aggression by Pakistan’s non-state actors because of Islamabad’s threatened use of nuclear weapons, and having won international diplomatic support.

Any further use of force against Pakistan right now would not advance India’s strategic interests, and its sole purpose would be electoral gains for BJP. Such cynical risking of the horrors of war for partisan gain would be a crime.

BJP charges the Congress-led UPA government of passive inaction in the face of terror attacks during its term. This is false. The fact is that after P Chidambaram took over as home minister and galvanised cooperation among India’s intelligence and police agencies, every single terrorist cell of the Indian Mujahideen was destroyed. Chidambaram might be politically inept — he knocked Gadkari out of contention for BJP’s prime ministerial nominee with his ill-timed prosecution of his companies on corruption charges, paving the way for Modi’s rise — but he is an efficient administrator and deserves credit for putting an end to internal terror attacks.

Democracy the Watchword

But Congress keeps mum about this achievement, because it worries it would offend Muslims. This is silly and unfair to Muslims, the vast majority of whom have only anger towards Islamic radicals who carry out atrocities in their name and fuel Hindu majoritarianism.

This does not mean that India’s polity does not hold the potential for radicalism of the deadly kind propagated by the Islamic State. The Pulwama attack was carried out by a young Kashmiri youth, inspired and armed by the Jaish-e-Mohammed. But what drove this young man to the level of despair that made him convert himself into a human bomb?

All parties agree that Kashmir is an integral part of India. But Hindutva sees it as the land rather than as its people. Conduct flowing from this perception has done much to alienate the common people of Kashmir and propel protest, one end of whose spectrum is militancy that Pak agencies mould to their own ends. The counter to this policy is democracy, not waffling in fear of hurting sectional sentiments.

Democracy means opposing parties that stand for Islamic radicalism and separatism while respecting the democratic rights of Kashmiris at large. Democracy means holding early elections in the state, empowering the police under the control of elected politicians to maintain law and order, while withdrawing security forces to the border and lifting the blanket immunity security forces enjoy, through the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, for any crime against the civilian population.

Democracy should be the basis for countering religious extremism, whether Hindu or Islamic. Hindutva forces are creating the grounds for political instability in the country with its violent mob politics that posits opponents of Hindutva as antinational and subjugates them in actions ranging from extracting apologies to outright lynching.

War is but one end of the spectrum and democracy should focus not just on bread-and-butter issues, but also on threats to itself, including those raised in the name of nationalism.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
