India, Pak trade fire in Rajouri, Poonch

India, Pak trade fire in Rajouri, Poonch

MENDHAR/RAJOURI, Mar 5: India and Pakistan Tuesday yet again traded heavy fire in twin border districts of Rajouri and Poonch after the latter army shelled forward Indian posts and villages initially in Nowshera sector and later in KG sector on the line of Control.

Official sources stated that hours after Pakistani army violated the ceasefire agreement in Rajouri district today, it yet again fired unprovoked along the Line of Control in Krishna Ghati sector of Poonch district. Earlier in the day, Pakistan shelled civilian population and forward Indian posts in Nowshera sector of Rajouri at around 1100 hours.

“Later at about 1800 hours, Pak initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along LoC in Krishna Ghati sector of Mankote area in Poonch district. Indian army retaliated strongly and effectively, “said defence spokesperson. Civilian areas were badly affected in heavy shelling on KG sector of Mankote area, local sources added.

Earlier, Pakistani army violated ceasefire along the Line of Control by targetting forward posts and villages in Rajouri district in Nowshera sector around 1130 hours, prompting strong and effective retaliation by the Indian army, he said.

Defence spokesman said, “Pakistani army initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms. However, there was no immediate report of any casualty on the Indian side.” Cross-border shelling continued till late evening.

There has been a spurt in ceasefire violation by Pakistan after India's air strike at Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camp in Balakot on February 26 in a preemptive action following the February 14 suicide bombing in Pulwama in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

Four persons, including three members of a family, were killed and several others injured in over 60 ceasefire violations along the LoC, especially in the twin districts of Rajouri and Poonch last week.
