The fog of war

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

This much we do know. Jaish-e-Mohammed killed 40 or more of our soldiers in Pulwama. No one is denying that. We sent in twelve of our Mirages to cross the international border into proper Pakistani air space. At least some of these planes stayed around 20 minutes in Pakistani air space encountering little to no resistance.

Then they struck at Balakot in Pakistan proper. Whether they struck mud and hut or they flattened a Jaish training ground killing 300 jihadis in the process is besides the point. What is pertinent is that they were allowed to loiter so long in Pakistani air space. They could have hit any sensitive installation in Pakistan.

Second, Pakistan has always drawn a thin red line: India, ingress even an inch into our territory (including Pakistan-occupied Kashmir) and we’ll unleash nuclear terror on you. In the twin peaks incident of 2001-02, Pakistan is believed to have got its planes ready to take off for India with a nuclear payload. In the surgical strikes of 2016, the Pakistanis pretended as if the strikes hadn’t occurred so how could have India crossed any red line.

In this contention, they were aided by many of the same Indian people who are now questioning Balakot (Rahul Gandhi, Mamata Banerjee, Mehbooba Mufti). Suffice it to say that Operation Balakot effaced Pakistan’s aforementioned thin red line.

Third, why didn’t the Pakistani Air Force engage the Indian Mirages? The Indian Air Force is widely believed to be the most professional of India’s three defence services, and so is the case in Pakistan with the Pakistani Air Force. They have first-class planes and first-class pilots. Somewhere a massive intelligence and operational failure seems to have gagged the PAF.

To prevent his head from rolling, Pakistani army chief Bajwa sent in 24 (double the number of Indian Mirages mentioned earlier) of his fighter jets into Kashmir. These planes were supposed to strike an IAF base or munitions depot in Rajouri. The IAF has agreed that the Pakistani jets offloaded their payload (bombs) but no harm was done to anyone or anything.

Strange that in Balakot the Pakistanis say that no harm was done, and in Rajouri the Indians say that no harm was done. All of the planes involved in these two operations were sophisticated airplanes equipped with laser-guided missiles to hit targets with pin-point accuracy, yet no damage was done. Strange, very strange.

Perhaps both militaries intended to hit dummy targets. Perhaps this apparent sham was all pre-planned between the two countries beforehand. We don’t know.

What we do know is that eight outdated Migs took off from the Indian side to take on the Pakistani twenty-four jets. Initial Pakistani reports suggested that two Indian planes had been downed, and two or even three pilots had been taken as captees. The two-Indian plane theory kept circulating for a day until the Pakistani military spokesman clarified that only one Indian pilot was in their custody, and that only one Indian Mig had been downed.

India claimed that Wing Commander Abhinandan had shot down a Pakistani F-16 before being shot down himself. The Pakistanis have never contradicted that story, so it is safe to assume that an F-16 did go down. Since it went down in Pakistani-occupied Kashmir, there is no way India can produce hard evidence.

What the Indians have done instead is shown proof of an F-16 missile that fell in Indian territory and then tried to claim points over Pakistan that as per its contractual obligations with the US, it was not allowed to use F-16s against India. What perhaps they forget is that no gun points in only one direction. Since Ayub Khan’s time, when Pakistan signed the SEATO and CENTO treaties with the West, Pakistan had obtained state-of-the-art equipment from the US.

In the 1965 war, Pakistan received advanced Patton tanks from the US while our military had to make do with World War II vintage battle tanks. Still our army gave a sterling account of itself, check-mating Pakistani aggression.

Much is being made about how outdated our military is. This much we do know. It is. We have to do something about it. Fortunately in Narendra Modi we have, after a long time, a leader who’s willing to modernize the military. The opposition is making a big deal over the Rafale deal. Sure, it smells of friends and family, but it is also true that no transaction has happened as yet.

Two people, in their own respective countries, have emerged as heroes through this fog of war. One is Narendra Modi in India, and the other is Imran Khan in Pakistan. Both the leaders are smelling of roses. Many of us others have been left groping in the dark for answers.

The Indian elections are nigh. Mr. Modi has busted the myth of Pakistani nuclear blackmail and should be allowed to crow about his achievements. The opposition can cry foul as much as it wants, but the fact is Mr. Modi is the clear front-runner right now. But the elections are still two months away. And two months is a long time in Indian politics.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
