Time’s Shub for this beauty

After making her presence felt in Telugu and Tamil, she faced “no problem” in her debut venture in Kannada — Vajrakaya as well. She walked her way into success, featuring in one of the most popular songs of 2015, No Problem sung by Tamil actor Dhanush featuring alongside Century Star Shivarajkumar. A peppy number which celebrates the beauty and height of a pretty girl, the song has garnered more than 10 million views on various social media sites till now. The actress’s next film was John Seena directed by Simple Suni. Now, the model-turned-actress Shubra Aiyappa has signed her latest Kannada venture titled Ramana Avatara for which she will soon start shooting. She speaks to Bengaluru Chronicle on her new avatar and the ‘heights’ of opportunity coming her way, and more.

“Though I featured in just a song, and a couple of scenes in Vajrakaya, it has brought me immense fame and recognition. It was as good as a full-fledged debut in Kannada. Later, I kept getting similar opportunities to portray similar ‘glam doll’ roles where I was expected to just look glamorous. This is why I did not sign many of them. Eventually, John Seena directed by Simple Suni happened. It is ready, and for some reason, the release has been delayed. It has a great role that explores my full potential as an actress. I have also signed my next in Kannada film titled Ramana Avatara, and am thrilled about it,” says Shubra Aiyappa.

The actress does not want to take up movies just to add to her project list as it makes no sense to her. “For me, the film and role has to be relevant and exciting. What I look for, is quality of a script, the team and other crucial factors like casting before taking up a project. Thus, despite several opportunities, I have worked in only one movie after Vajrakaya. In John Seena, I play a girl’s character which has dual shades, similar to playing a dual role. It has an interesting plot and the change in appearance of my character along with its personality is the reel deal for me as an artist,” she shares, adding that unfortunately it is yet to release and once it does, the actress is confident that it will pave the way for more good roles rather than just being a glamour quotient on the silver screen.

In Ramana Avatara, she shares the screen space with Rishi, Raj B Shetty, Danish Sait, Pranitha Subhash and another actress. Directed by Vikas and Vinay Pampapathi, (brothers), it is going to be a fun filled venture.

She is also busy modelling, and recently shot for a prestigious annual calendar event. Shubra feel that modelling and films are two completely different worlds. “As a model, the focus is on looking good and to make sure I can add value to my endorsements. However, movies are about adding value to a character with emotions. I am no more walking the ramp for shows, and if I do, it is when I get the invites as a show stopper,” she says.

Shubra’s height has sometimes become an issue but that does not stop her in any way. “Yes, sometimes it is an issue. In fact, in Vajrakaya Shivanna who is way shorter than me celebrated my height in the song. I am different and it is the perspective on how one looks at it. However, if one looked at Deepika Padukone, and many more actresses who are taller, they have achieved success and that is the best way to look at their life, and not look at height as an issue.”
