PM Modi takes Michel mama dig at Rahul Gandhi over Christian Michel's role

Attacking the Gandhi family directly, PM Modi asked: "Did the deal stop because of dealings of Michel mama?" (Photo: PTI)

It is official, Rahul Gandhi's 'Mudda number one' is going to be BJP's 'Hathiyar number one' ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Prime Minister Narendra Modi quoted an India Today TV report to attack the Congress, especially the Gandhi family.

An India Today TV investigation revealed that two AgustaWestland middlemen, Guido Haschke and Christian Michel, also lobbied for Rafale's rival Eurofighter.

Addressing a public meeting in Solapur of Maharshtra, PM Modi quoted the report published in this newspaper: "I saw the newspaper report according to which the middleman who has been brought in the chopper scam case also played a role in the fighter jets deal with France during the regime of the previous government. The media report says that 'Michel mama' was lobbying for some another company. Now it needs to be answered as to what is the relationship between the noise being created by Congress leaders and Michel mama."

Attacking the Gandhi family directly, the PM asked: "Did the deal stop because of dealings of Michel mama?"

Reacting to the PM's direct charge, Congress spokesperson Sanjay Jha told India Today TV: "The PM is dodging and ducking the biggest issue which is the Rafale. PM needs to accept the Congress president Rahul Gandhi's challenge and should come to Parliament and answer all questions."

Reacting to Modi's comment, Samajwadi Party's spokesperson Ganshaym Tiwari said: "I do not take the words spoken by the PM on face value. If he really wants to make a point, he should do so in Parliament."

While Christian Michel is under judicial custody in India, Guido Haschke continues to roam free in Switzerland.

ALSO READ | Exclusive: Agusta papers reveal Christian Michel was also lobbying against Rafale to win deal for Eurofighter

ALSO READ | AgustaWestland scam: Christian Michel took bribes in other defence deals too, says ED

ALSO WATCH | Congress is scared of Michel's links in Rafale deal, says PM Modi
