IAF says Pakistan's Sukhoi claim is a cover-up

The Indian Air Force on Tuesday rejected Pakistan's claim of shooting down an Indian Sukhoi-30 as a "cover-up" for the "loss of its own aircraft."

"All the Su-30 aircraft engaged in combat landed back safely. False claim by Pakistan of shooting down a Su-30, appears to be a cover-up for loss of its own aircraft," the IAF said in a statement.

On the retaliatory strike carried out by Pakistan a day after the IAF targeted terror pads across the LoC, the IAF said it pressed Mirage-2000, Su-30 and MiG-21 Bison aircraft. One of the MiG-21 jets, piloted by Wing Commander Abhinandan, shot down a Pakistani F-16.

In another development, India has decided to go full throttle to expose Pakistan at international platforms for sponsoring terrorism with a new set evidence on terror camps operating across the Line of Control, DNA has learnt.

Sources in intelligence agencies said that they have identified 16 new terror hubs in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and hinterland where terrorists are being trained and are ready to infiltrate into India.

The agencies got fresh evidence about these 16 terror camps after the Balakot air strike. They have prepared a detailed report about these terror pads and submitted it to the government for action. The report, sources said, reveals that most of the terror infrastructure are near military installations in Pakistan.



There are five centres in hinterland Pakistan – three in Mansera and two in Punjab. In PoK, there are 11 such facilities that include five each in Muzzafarabad and Kotli and one in Barnala. The agency have identified camps in Boi, Laqa-e-Gair deep inside Pakistan, and Deolin, Khalid Bin Walid and Garhi and Dopatta in PoK.



Of the 16 terror pads, six centres train new recruit for carrying out commando-style operations and infiltration.



"The terror infrastructure includes communication and control stations and offices and training grounds," said sources in the agency. The specialised training at these centres includes water combat, assembling improvised explosive devices, sniping, use of drones and hijacking planes.



These camps were identified after the pre-dawn air strike on Jaish-e-Mohammed camps in Pakistan last month. The strike was carried out after India learnt that JeM was plotting suicide hits in various parts of the country.



On February 14, JeM terrorists carried out a fidayeen attack that left 40 Central Reserve Police Force personnel dead in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir.



India has been informing Pakistan of the existence of the camp and urged the country to dismantle the facilities. Pakistan, however, denies their existence.

—Agencies
