DNA Edit: Kamal Nath demurs – Courts are getting ex-CMs to vacate official residences

Housing, by the looks of it, is not merely a problem afflicting the toiling masses. Even former chief ministers, long out of power, are not too keen to quit grand ministerial bungalows allotted to them during their heyday. What’s more important, there is a tacit understanding among the political class to back each other in matters such as these, irrespective of irreconcilable political differences otherwise. Happily, the courts have taken notice and decided to break this unholy nexus, and all hell threatens to break loose. On Tuesday, the Patna High Court shot off notices to Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and his predecessors seeking to know why they could not live in their private homes when they have already been provided with a high-security cover.

According to The Bihar Special Security Group (Amendment) Act 2010, former chief ministers of Bihar are entitled to lifetime government accommodation and related perks, without any financial limits. The notice has been issued to six former CMs, including Lalu Yadav and his wife Rabri Devi. In one instance, two huge government bungalows were allotted to one person! The move follows a Supreme Court order last year, which had struck down the provision for lifetime allocations of bungalows to former Uttar Pradesh chief ministers. Since then, several High Courts have taken cognisance of the apex court directives, asking former chief ministers to vacate what was once their official residences. Cut to Bhopal, another state capital and the scene assumes a different hue.

Following the apex court order, the Bhopal High Court issued similar orders and former chief ministers Digvijay Singh, Uma Bharti, Kailash Joshi and Babulal Gaur vacated their government bungalows. But the new Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister, Kamal Nath, has other ideas. He has gone on record to state that former chief ministers should be allotted government bungalows. In tune with this thinking, he has re-allotted Digvijay Singh’s old house at the posh Shayamla Hills in Bhopal — by a coincidence on the same day as the Patna High Court issued notice to former Bihar chief ministers. Kamal Nath’s argument that since Digvijay was a Rajya Sabha MP, he was entitled to official accommodation, is a bit specious.

By that logic, many former chief ministers in India are either MPs or holding some or the other official position. Should then they be allotted houses for a lifetime, which they held as chief ministers? If that logic were to be taken to its natural conclusion, in the years to come, there would be no houses left anywhere for new incumbents! Most such housing allotments come under the ‘discretionary’ quota enjoyed by a serving chief minister. It is time someone filed a petition against such overriding veto powers; the chief minister is no monarch, but a duly elected public representative, who is as good as his term in office. It makes for a striking contrast with the United Kingdom, from where India has borrowed most, if not all, of its rules and traditions. The day after the British Prime Minister demits office, he travels in the Metro meant for the public. How about some Indian politicians following that tradition as well?
