DNA Edit: Spare the IAF - Politicians bicker about strikes, damage an institution

It should be considered no small matter that the air chief is sought to be dragged into a controversy that is best left to politicians.

At his press conference — conducted wisely in Coimbatore, rather than the National Capital that is bristling with belligerence these days — Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa, confirmed that the IAF had successfully bombed the targets they had intended to at the Jaish-e-Muhammed facility at Balakot in Pakistan on February 26.

He also confirmed that operations were still “ongoing” on the border, a euphemism for the tense stand-off that continues on the LoC. An Indian Sukhoi shot down a Pakistani UAV on Monday, suggesting that the cooling off on the border may still be some distance away. But it is rather unnecessary to ask the air chief about the likely casualties at the Jaish camp.

He rightly said that it was for the government to provide details. “The IAF does not count casualty numbers,” Dhanoa said as politely as he could. To put the record straight, the IAF gave no figures on the casualties even on the day of the strikes, and it was left to politicians to provide numbers — imaginary as it may now seem from the benefit of hindsight. It is crucial that the political discourse, shrill and ill-informed as it may be, stay clear of the defence forces, which in the case of this country have been strictly apolitical.

In the developing world, it is no mean achievement; India is perhaps the only country where the military stays in the barracks, leaving the politicians to their wares. With the general elections only a few weeks away, it is tempting for ruling party politicians to take credit for a job done by the defence forces, even if it involves injecting a bout of jingoism. Equally, it does not behove opposition parties, squirming under a wave of nationalism, to question the government about its claims on the air strikes.

It would be fair to say that the last word on the subject has been said by the air chief, and it is time to raise other political issues to get the better of the ruling party, rather than refuting facts stated on record by the IAF. Opposition parties should also realise that any denial of the air strikes that they are claiming in unison in an effort to damage the Prime Minister is indirectly raising question marks over a non-political defence force, which has merely done what its civilian bosses have asked it to do.

The opposition parties are quoting international media reports, which have apparently found no evidence of the Indian air strike in Balakot and surrounding areas. In doing so, they are unwittingly playing into the hands of the ruling party, which is keen to exploit voter sentiment about the tense exchanges between India and Pakistan since Pulwama last month. Safe it would be to say that politicians across the divide should now stay clear of sensitive security-related issues and concentrate instead on subjects that affect the common man. By doing so, they would be doing the country a favour.
