Won’t treat illegal immigrants inhumanely: Rajnath Singh

GUWAHATI: Reiterating that BJP is committed to do justice to the religiously persecuted non-Muslim people from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan who were forced to take shelter in India, Union home minister Rajnath Singh , in oblique reference to the Muslims, on Tuesday said India will not treat any illegal immigrant inhumanely.Speaking at a public rally in minority-dominated Dhubri bordering Bangladesh, Singh said, “No illegal immigrant will be treated inhumanely. We will talk with our neighbours from where they have come and decide what steps we can take to decide their fate.” Assam is plagued by illegal immigration from Bangladesh but those declared as foreigners by tribunals cannot be sent back to Bangladesh in the absence of any repatriation treaty between the two countries. There have been a couple of instances when Bangladesh has taken back about 90 of its citizens from detention camps in Assam after verification of their origin.“India cannot be inhumane. We believe in politics of humanity,” said Singh.Without mentioning the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill, Singh said, “If any minority person from either Pakistan, Bangladesh or Afghanistan, who has religious persecution and is forced to seek shelter in India, we will give justice to him.” He added that the Centre is committed to protecting the identity, heritage, language and culture of the indigenous people of the state through implementation of Clause 6 of the Assam Accord for which a high level committee has already been formed.Referring to the ongoing NRC update process, he said the exercise will be completed by July 31 as fixed by the Supreme Court.With an eye on the coming election, Singh reiterated that BJP was committed to granting tribal status to the six communities of the state, a promise that the party had made in the 2014 Lok Sabha and 2016 assembly election. A bill to this effect was brought in the Rajya Sabha but was kept pending.“We were determined to give them tribal status. The cabinet had approved it. We assure that BJP will grant tribal status to the six communities. We will also ensure that the interest of the existing tribes are not hampered,” he said.
