Sara Ali Khan's birthday wish for Dhadak girl Janhvi Kapoor is too cute for words

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Sara Ali Khan's birthday wish for Dhadak girl Janhvi Kapoor is too cute for words

Sara Ali Khan and Janhvi Kapoor maintain a strong bond even when the fans keep making them compete with each other. From their fashion game to performances, the divas are often put face to face and are compared on almost everything. But putting all that aside, Sara Ali Khan took to her Instagram to wish her friend Janhvi on her birthday. Even before any of the Kapoor siblings put out a birthday wish for Janhvi on her 22nd birthday, Sara Ali Khan wishes her all the happiness.

Taking to her Instagram story, Sara Ali Khan shared a picture of herself with birthday girl Janhvi and wrote, “Happiest birthday @janhvikapoor Have an amazing day and a wonderful year ahead.” In the picture, while Sara is seen looking heavenly in a white dress, Janhvi flaunts a silver glittery outfit. The divas looking nothing less than picture perfect in the click. Check out-

Sara Ali Khan's birthday wish for Dhadak girl Janhvi Kapoor is too cute for words

Ahead of her 22nd birthday, Janhvi Kapoor visited Kashi and also attended the Ganga aarti. The actress is currently in Lucknow where she is shooting for her next film, Gunjan Saxena biopic. The catress informed Mumbai Mirror, “We drove to Varanasi after the day’s work so I could see the Ganga aarti and go to the Kashi Vishwanath temple. I wanted to visit Tirupati (in Andhra Pradesh) again, mom (Sridevi) used to climb up to the temple every year for her birthday when she was working. I went there earlier this year and wanted to go again on my birthday, but arrangements couldn’t be made on time. I might go next week.”

Janhvi Kapoor made her big Bollywood debut with Dharma Productions’ Dhadak opposite Ishaan Khatter in 2018. The film managed to impress the audience and critics alike. Talking about her next project, Gunjan Saxena biopic in which she plays one of India’s first woman combat aviators to be posted in Kargil during the 1999 war, the actress said, “I have a day’s work left in Lucknow. After which I resume work next month. I feel blessed that I got the chance to work with this team.”

Revealing her 22nd birthday plans, Janhvi said, “There’s no better place for me in the world than a film set. My only wish is that I get the chance to do good work and make my parents (Boney Kapoor and Sridevi) proud.” Other than Gunjan Saxena’s biopic, Janhvi will be seen in Karan Johar’s Takht which is a multi-starrer period drama.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
