300 mobile phones detected at Balakot camp before IAF strike: Rajnath

Guwahati: Union home minister Rajnath Singh on Tuesday said the National Technical Research Organisation (NTRO), the country’s technical intelligence agency, had detected about 300 active mobile phone users at the JeM training camp at Balaktot days before IAF fighter planes pounded it with bombs on February 26.Singh made the revelation while addressing a public rally in minority-dominated Dhubri in western Assam after inaugurating BSF’s advanced border surveillance project.Tearing into the opposition, which has been demanding proof of casualties inflicted by IAF jets at Balakot , Singh said it is a pity that some leaders of political parties are asking for the numbers. “Today or tomorrow, this number (of terrorists killed in the air strike) would be known. Pakistan and its leaders know how many were killed,” he added.“Should our Air Force go and count the bodies after the attack? The IAF chief rightly said the IAF’s job was to destroy the targets,” the Union home minister said. “If Congress feels that the numbers should be given out, then I would like to say that if you want to go to Pakistan, then go, count and ask people there how many were killed by our Air Force personnel,” he added.“They are questioning our security forces…our jawans who are guarding the country’s borders and fighting terrorists in Jammu & Kashmir. Our jawans are making the supreme sacrifice and have been successfully eliminating a large number of terrorists. We should have respect for them in our hearts and be proud of them,” Rajnath said.“The entire country is bowing before these brave jawans and here are these people who are questioning…kitne mare gaye…batao? Why are you asking us about the casualties? The NTRO, India’s surveillance agency and the most authentic one, picked up 300 active mobile phone signals before the air strikes were carried. Now, imagine how many of them have been killed. We don’t have to say it,” Singh said.“If the NTRO found 300 active mobile phones before the air strike, were these mobile phones being used by trees? Now these people (opposition) would start doubting the NTRO also,” he further said, adding, “We assure you that our government will not compromise with the security of the nation under any circumstances. Whether we form the governmnet or not does not bother us. The country must remain secured.”He reminded the opposition that politics should not be done only to form the government. “Political parties are expected to do politics not for forming government but to build the country and society,” he said.
