Man hurt in AJK as India violates ceasefire accord

DHANNA VILLAGE (Azad Jammu and Kashmir): A woman is seen through a hole on the roof of a house caused by shelling from across the Line of Control on Tuesday.—AFP

MUZAFFARABAD: A man was critically injured in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) on Tuesday in yet another ghastly incident of ‘targeted firing’ by Indian troops amid ceasefire violations by them in at least two sectors, officials said.

Sharafat Hussain, 34, was standing outside his house in Darra Sher Khan village of the Battal sector when he was targeted by the Indian army from across the Line of Control (LoC) at about 11am, said Poonch deputy commissioner Shaukat Yusufzai.

The heavily militarised LoC is located at a stone’s throw from Darra Sher Khan village.

Mr Yusufzai said it was an incident of targeted firing which the Indian troops have gained notoriety for along the LoC.

“Even when the dividing line is apparently calm, innocent civilians, unmindful of the cruelty of the Indian army, fall prey to sniping by trigger-happy Indian soldiers,” he added.

Innocent men, women and children are being targeted by snipers

He said the victim was taken to the District Headquarters Hospital in neighbouring Kotli district, but the doctors there referred him to a major health facility in Rawalpindi on account of his critical condition.

Apart from this incident, Mr Yusufzai said, there had been “moderate” shelling by Indian troops in the Battal sector, but no more losses were reported immediately, except for damage to a house in Darra Sher Khan village, owned by one Mohammad Saleem.

Elsewhere in AJK, the Tatta Pani sector of Kotli district had also been witnessing shelling, but deputy commissioner Dr Umer Azam said no casualties had so far been reported from there.

Sniping incidents

Tuesday’s incident in Darra Sher Khan village was not the first time Indian troops had shot at an innocent civilian on this side of the divide in this fashion.

Only on Saturday, 19-year-old Abdul Ghaffar was injured in the same village after being shot by an Indian sniper.

Officials say that firing and shelling with small and heavy arms apart, the Indian army has added a cowardly and dreadful practice to the incessant ceasefire violations on their part — sniping with heavy calibre weapons and targeting innocent men, women and children while they carry out their daily chores.

Several AJK villagers have either been killed or wounded in such incidents of ‘targeted firing’ without having a presentiment of mischief by the Indian troops, they add.

On Nov 3 last year, Munazza Bibi, a 22-year-old mother of two, had been hit by a single gunshot from across the LoC when she had just switched on a torch to search for something in the veranda of her house in Lawana Khetar village of district Bhimber. She had died on the spot.

On June 12 last year, Shakil Qureshi had become the victim of ‘targeted killing’ when he was grazing cattle near his home in Taroti Dharamsal village of Poonch district.

A single shot in his head had left him dead on the spot.

Prior to that, on May 15, Muzaffar Chaudhry aka Mangu had lost his life in a similar incident when he was trimming a tree in the courtyard of his house in Darra Sher Khan village.

On Feb 22 last year, Indian snipers had shot dead Inzimam Hussain when was manually extracting sand at the right bank of the River Poonch near Tetrinote village.

Condemning the incident, AJK’s senior minister Chaudhry Tariq Farooq tweeted: “Sniping at innocent and unarmed civilians is the extreme form of black-heartedness, for which the entire civilised world must hold India and its occupation forces in Kashmir accountable, as fast as possible.”

Published in Dawn, March 6th, 2019
