Blazing a trail

At a lecture series this week, learn about the lives of some remarkable women who left their mark in the sands of time



The 2016 film, Doctor Rakhmabai, the biopic on Dr Rukhmabai Raut, helped create more awareness about the life of the first practising woman doctor in India. In 19th-century India, Raut not only broke through societal norms to study medicine, but she also fought a legal battle after refusing to consummate her marriage, which was performed when she was only 11 years old. The case generated a lot of debate in India and England, and influenced legislation, taking the form of the Age of Consent Act enacted in 1891. “Her life was no t just about being a career woman and doctor. She fought for women’s right to assert and consent,” says Shradhha Kumbhojkar, assistant professor, department of History at Savitribai Phule Pune University (SPPU), who will deliver a lecture on Rukhmabai Raut.



~~68275598~~

In her 30-minute lecture, which is a part of a lecture series organised by Heritage India to commemorate International Women’s Day on March 8, Kumbhojkar will attempt to show Raut’s life in perspective and highlight the time and the social realities through which she lived. “While her life is inspirational, I want to underline that she experienced a lot of failures before emerging victorious. She lost the court case a few times, but did not lose her will to achieve her goal. Even after she became a doctor, she experienced a lot of envy and there were many social battles that she had to fight. The struggle was an ongoing one,” says Kumbhojkar. Unlike Rani Lakshmibai who fit the patriarchal mould, Raut is not idolised as the perfect and praise-worthy woman, points out the professor who specialises in the history of 19th-century Maharashtra.



There were women in the remote past too who broke barriers in their time. In her talk titled ‘Illustrious Women in Ancient India,’ Dr Manjiri Bhalerao will showcase two queens of Maharashtra who ruled at a time when women did not enjoy a high status in society. One was Queen Naganika of the Satavahana dynasty, who ruled vast parts of Maharashtra in the 1st century BCE, after the death of her husband. She was the first queen to have coins issued in her name. The other is Prabhavati Gupta who was born in the Gupta Empire and married into the Vakataka dynasty, which ruled Maharashtra. She reigned as the queen regent in the 5th century CE, after her husband’s death. She had issued copper plates inscribing the land grants she made. “Recent excavations by Deccan College in Vidarbha have found a terracotta seal with Prabhavati Gupta’s name. A cave in Naneghat contains Naganika’s statue and inscriptions of the sacrifices performed by her, and her husband, whom she outlived by quite a few years,” says Bhalerao, a trained archaeologist and associate professor of Indology at Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth.



Bhalerao will also touch upon another Satavahana queen, Gautami Balashri, about whom not much is known. “Not everyone had coins or inscriptions to their name. Very few women have been referred to in ancient inscriptions. Even in the instances where they are mentioned, their identity is reduced to being somebody’s wife, daughter, mother…,” explains the Indologist, adding that people should get to know about these great women of the country because in their own time they did something different.



Besides the memorable royal women of ancient India and a 19thcentury pathbreaker like Raut, there was also the renowned Irawati Karve, who established her scholarship in a male-dominated field like anthropology in the 20th-century. Karve’s life and work will be the focus of a lecture by Shaunak Kulkarni, head of the anthropology department at SPPU, which was headed by Karve for nearly 40 years.



Not all women who have left their mark in history have yet been acknowledged, says Kumbhojkar. “Rukhmabai was part of the urban, cosmopolitan milieu and she had many supporters. But there are women of the Satyashodhak movement for instance, like Fatima Bibi, Tarabai Shinde, Mukta Salve and Tanubai Birje, who were relegated to the shadows of history. Savitribai Phule is relatively better known, also because of her husband, Jotirao Phule. But steps are being taken now to highlight their contributions,” she adds.



The three talks of the Women’s Day Lecture Series on Friday will be bilingual — in Marathi and English — and they are free and open to all.



WHERE: Firodia Hostel Hall, BMCC Road

WHEN: March 8, 5.30 pm to 7 pm

CALL: 9422405489

ENTRY: Free


