Important documents feared destroyed in fire at Delhi’s CGO Complex, one cop dead

Fire at CGO Complex: A major fire broke out on the fifth floor of Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan at CGO Complex in New Delhi Wednesday morning. A CISF sub-inspector who fell unconscious after inhaling the smoke and was taken to AIIMS, succumbed to his wounds, officials of Delhi Fire Services told PTI.

As many as 25 fire tenders rushed to the spot to douse the blaze. The cause of the fire is not yet known. The fire broke out a little after 8 am, just before office hours. Officials at the spot have not commented on whether there were people inside the building but rescue operations are underway. The fire Services officials said the fire department personnel are trying to douse the flames.

“The fire started at an office of the social justice and empowerment ministry in the building. The flames have been contained and the cooling process is underway. The cause of the blaze is yet to be ascertained,” PTI quoted Chief Fire Officer Atul Garg as saying.

“Godara was the shift in-charge. When he went to take stock of the situation, he fell unconscious after inhaling carbon monoxide. He died at the hospital,” Garg told PTI

According to a ministry official, 80 per cent of the entire B1 wing has been gutted and several files and documents have been destroyed.

“However, at this moment, it cannot be said that how much has been the damage but surely several files and documents may have been destroyed in the fire. We are not allowed to enter inside as it is sealed. An assessment can only be done once we go inside and check,” the official told PTI.

CGO complex fire: The fire broke out a little after 8 am, just before office hours. (Express photo: Tashi Tobgyal) CGO complex fire: The fire broke out a little after 8 am, just before office hours. (Express photo: Tashi Tobgyal)

The building, earlier known as Paryawaran Bhawan, houses many important central government offices including offices of the drinking water and sanitation ministry, forest ministry and a branch of the Indian Air Force. The 11-storeyed building also houses several ministries including the Ministry of Social Justice Empowerment and Disability and the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.

CGO complex fire: The cause of the blaze is not yet known. (ANI) CGO complex fire: The cause of the blaze is not yet known. (ANI)

This is a developing story. More details are awaited.
