First Look Out! Ayushmann Khurrana turns cop for Anubhav Sinha’s next film Article 15, read details

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM/TARAN ADARSH Ayushmann Khurrana turns cop for Anubhav Sinha’s next film Article 15

Ayushmann Khurrana, after wooing the audience with his terrific performances in Andhadhun and Badhaai Ho, is all set to impress the masses yet again as he steps into the shoes of a policeman for Anubhav Sinha’s next film called Article 15. The actor is currently in Lucknow for the shoot of the film and keeps treating his fans with pictures and videos of the same. The shoot began from March 1.

Bollywood critic and trade analyst Taran Adarsh confirmed the news through his social media and also shared Ayushmann Khurrana’s first look from the film. He wrote, “IT’S OFFICIAL... Ayushmann Khurrana in Anubhav Sinha’s next film #Article15... Costars Isha Talwar, Manoj Pahwa, Sayani Gupta, Kumud Mishra and Mohd Zeeshan Ayyub... Filming commenced on 1 March 2019 in #Lucknow... Ayushmann’s look from the film:” In the picture, Ayushmann looks handsome in a still form the film. Check out-

Earlier, reports in Mumbai Mirror suggested, “A chunk of the film will be shot in Kanpur. Like other Ayushmann-starrers this one too is high on content and on a socially-relevant topic. It is based on a true incident and Ayushmann will play a cop for the first time.” It was also said that the film was earlier titled as Kanpur Dehaat and might hit the screens later this year.

Ayushmann Khurrana is flooded with projects after the last year proved to be so productive for him. He recently wrapped up Ekta Kapoor’s Dream Girl and has also signed up for Dinesh Vijan’s Bala. Talking about how he ruled 2018 with his performance, Ayushmann revealed that he has always believed that the script is the true star of a film. He said, "I am audience made star. But I believe the real star (of a film) is the script, it is the script that makes you a star. I want to give the audience something unconventional every time, something novel. As an actor it is a great space to be in.”

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
