Delhi CGO Complex fire: CISF Inspector killed in fire at Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan

Massive blaze breaks out at Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan, CGO Complex in the national capital on Wednesday, March 06, 2019. The incident took place at 8:30 am, as per reports. 24 fire tenders are present at the spot and carrying out the cooling process. No casualties have been reported yet.

Fire broke out on the 5th floor of Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan at CGO Complex in Delhi on Wednesday. (Photo: ANI)

A massive fire breaks out at 5th floor of Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan, CGO Complex in the capital region on Wednesday, March 06, 2019. Immediately, 24 fire tenders were rushed to the spot. More details are awaited, as per ANI tweet. However, no casualties have been reported yet. Cause of the massive blaze is unknown. The fire broke out at the building 8:30 am, reports said. As per the latest update, according to the fire department, CISF Inspector who got unconscious in the fire incident today passed away.

The Antyodaya Bhawan in the CGO Complex houses many government offices, including a branch of the Indian Air Force, Water and Sanitation Ministry, the Forest Ministry and the National Disaster Response Force.

Till 2016, Antyodaya Bhawan was known as Paryavaran Bhavan.

Delhi: Fire breaks out on the 5th floor of Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan at CGO Complex, fire tenders present at the spot; More details awaited — ANI (@ANI) March 6, 2019

ANI has also tweeted some of the photographs. In the photographs, the 5th floor can be seen engulfed in a massive blaze.

#Visuals: Fire breaks out on the 5th floor of Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan at CGO Complex; 24 fire tenders present at the spot. #Delhi pic.twitter.com/5csHdEfMiU — ANI (@ANI) March 6, 2019

In another set of pictures, as tweeted by ANI, the office of ministry of social justice and empowerment office can been burned-out.

Delhi: Fire broke out at the office of Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan, at CGO Complex, today; 24 fire tenders present at the spot. #Delhi pic.twitter.com/epcfEpr7eN — ANI (@ANI) March 6, 2019

According to the latest update on the same, ANI reported that presently fire is under control and cooling process is going on.

This is not the first incident that has been reported from Delhi. Earlier, a similar incident was reported from Karol Bagh hotel claiming 17 lives. In the past few months, several fire incidents have been reported, from Delhi and NCR.

Here is a list of fire incidents:

On February 7, 2019 a number of patients and staff at Noida’s Metro Hospital and Heart Institute were evacuated after a major fire broke out

On January 30, 2019 four people were injured in a chemical factory in Okhla Phase-I in southeastern Delhi.

On Nov 19, 2018, a massive fire broke out at a factory in central Delhi’s Karol Bagh which claimed four people lives and one person injured

On May 29, 2018 a massive blaze of the highest magnitude broke out at a godown in south Delhi’s Malviya Nagar. However, no casualty was reported.

For all the latest Regional News News, download NewsX App
