Indian strike targeting Jaish in Balakot: First satellite images fuel debate

A satellite image shows a close-up of the Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp in Pakistan's Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province. (Photo: Planet Labs Inc via Reuters)

A patchwork of roofs. An empty yard. A madrasa perched above brown, forested slopes in Pakistan's northeast.

Far away from this aerial tableau, a furious debate among Indian politicians has focused on a single question -- did an airstrike ordered by New Delhi on the hilltop training camp successfully kill Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists?

The Indian Air Force has said categorically that it hit its target. Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa pointed out this week that there was no need for Pakistan to respond if Indian jets had dropped bombs in the jungle.

"If we plan to hit the target, we hit the target," the Air Force chief said -- but he also explained that the IAF did not count human casualties.

Satellite expert Col. (Retd) Vinayak Bhat tweeted images (taken on March 4) of the Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp on Wednesday, saying they indicated "likely damage" that wasn't "massive". He pointed out some specific details that included spots on a roof, and a dark patch in an open space that could have been caused by an airburst, or a fuel explosion.

#TerroristNationPakistan#IndiaStrikesBack

First post strike satellite images indicate likely damage but not massive.

Likely use of #SPICE250 & 'fuel explosive' warheads#IAF unlikely to have missed,burn marks indicate possible use on fleeing terrorists.https://t.co/EW0cWPZZ0j pic.twitter.com/6TpSoYTPb3 March 5, 2019

In an analysis published by ThePrint.in, Col. Bhat notes, among other things, the disappearance of tents observed prior to the Indian strike.

A report by Reuters interprets satellite imagery differently.

"The image is virtually unchanged from an April 2018 satellite photo of the facility. There are no discernible holes in the roofs of buildings, no signs of scorching, blown-out walls, displaced trees around the madrasa or other signs of an aerial attack," the London-based newswire says. (The images cited by Reuters are from the US-based Planet Labs Inc.)

The report concludes that the images show Jaish-e-Mohammed's training camp "appears to be still standing".

Sources say the Indian Air Force has submitted proof in the form of satellite and radar imagery to the government, and has told the Centre that 80 per cent of bombs struck targets.

India's Mirage 2000 fighters caused internal damage, using Spice-2000 precision bombs that penetrated roofs and blew up inside targets, according to sources. (Read more here.)

'DID YOU UPROOT TERRORISTS OR TREES?': OPPOSITION SKEPTICISM AFTER AIRSTRIKE

A number of Opposition leaders have either questioned the death toll figures doing the rounds, or asked -- like senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh did -- for proof of the strike.

"Were you uprooting terrorists or trees?" asked Punjab Minister Navjot Singh Sidhu, a Congress leader who was previously with the BJP.

Digvijaya Singh, a former chief minister of Madhya Pradesh, tweeted the Reuters report on Wednesday but did not offer any other comment.

India's foreign secretary said last week that the counter-terrorism operation in Balakot had eliminated a large number of terrorists, but gave no specific figure (Nor have any of the armed forces.). But top BJP leaders have said hundreds were killed.

"India's respected and authentic NTRO [National Technical Research Organisation] surveillance system has said that before Indian pilots dropped the bombs, 300 mobile phones were active there," Rajnath Singh, the Union Minister for Home Affairs, said this week.

"There's no need to tell you how many were killed."
