This week that year: When Irrfan Khan gave sleepless nights to Shoojit Sircar

Irrfan Khan

Vicky Donor

Irrfan Khan may return to India after Diwali It came as a rude shock when Irrfan Khan in March revealed that he has been diagnosed with NeuroEndocrine Tumour and soon after moved to London for treatment.

Madras Cafe

Irrfan and I have had a lot of heart-to-heart discussions over the last year which has only strengthened our bond. I know that whenever he gets back, and I am hopeful it will be soon, his experience over the last year will add a lot of depth to the performance. He was always one of our finest actors, now he’ll be even better, just wait and watch. Shoojit Sircar

He wanted to get into Rana’s head, get into our heads. From the first narration to the last day of shooting, he wouldn’t let Juhi or me sleep peacefully, constantly calling us to ask about the colour of his shirt, whether he was carrying a handkerchief, what was in his laptop, why he had to drive all the way to Kolkata to drop Bhaskor and Piku and not leave them mid-way. Shoojit Sircar

Udham Singh

Irrfan Khan’s Doob: No Bed of Roses is Bangladesh’s official entry to the Oscars Irrfan Khan’s international bilingual film Doob: No Bed of Roses has been sent to the Oscars as Bangladesh’s official entry. The 2017 film, which revolves around the life of a filmmaker – who leaves his wife to marry his daughter’s friend – is directed by Mostofa Sarwar Farooki and co-produced under Irrfan’s home banner.

He was invited by his Yahaan leading man, Jimmy Sheirgill, to a preview show of Haasil and since he knew the director, Tigmanshu Dhulia, from the National School of Drama, Shoojit Sircar went along. And was blown away by the film and the performances, particularly that ofwhose college bully-turned-political goon, Ranvijay Singh, was a character he was familiar with from his Delhi University days. “The film brought out all the rawness and ruthlessness of student politics and Irrfan’s portrayal was so real that he actually scared me. It hit me hard, I was devastated,” reminisces the filmmaker. The performance bagged Irrfan the Filmfare Award for Best Actor in a Negative Role and made him a part of mainstream cinema. And for Shoojit, he had found a real ‘hero’.Almost a decade passed... then, one day, Irrfan called Shoojit, telling him somewhat abruptly that he had seen hisand asked for the writer’s number. “I gave him Juhi’s (Chaturvedi) number wondering what it was all about. He called me back to rave about the film, saying he needed to speak to the writer first nahin toh galti ho jaati,” he smiles, adding that the actor was so overwhelmed by the writing that he wanted to get to know Juhi and him. “I saw in him a star hungry to explore and evolve, to collaborate with creative people. And when he finds someone whose work he likes, he wants to read their mind, understand the kind of person they are, their life goals, principles and ideologies,” Shoojit says.Before the release of, the director himself called Irrfan for a show and the actor came out shaken, admitting that he had never expected that a film like this could be made and released in India. “He hugged me and left but after that he kept in touch, always wanting to know what Juhi and I were writing,” says Shoojit, who told him that they were creating something for him.Once the first draft of Piku was ready, Juhi and Shoojit dropped by Irrfan’s Madh Island bungalow for a narration. The actor smoked quietly while listening to them. At the end of it, he wasn’t jumping with joy, and the only question he asked was, “Chai peeyoge?” The writer-director duo looked at each other, disappointed by his reaction. Then, he started speaking and didn’t stop for a couple of hours.“He wanted to get into Rana’s head, get into our heads. From the first narration to the last day of shooting, he wouldn’t let Juhi or me sleep peacefully, constantly calling us to ask about the colour of his shirt, whether he was carrying a handkerchief, what was in his laptop, why he had to drive all the way to Kolkata to drop Bhaskor and Piku and not leave them mid-way,” Shoojit laughs.Quiz him on the equation among Amitabh Bachchan, Deepika Padukone and Irrfan, given that they all belonged to different schools of acting, and Shoojit admits that Irrfan was curious about his co-stars before he met them, asking his director to describe his experience of working with Bachchan on Shoebite and his first meeting with Deepika. “I could sense him putting everything into his hard disk. It took them a little time to understand each other but once they did, they didn’t want to leave the film behind. Irrfan told me that he’d worked in many films but never was the experience so joyous. He wished that they could just continue with the journey,” Shoojit adds.Talking of the drive from Delhi to Kolkata, Shoojit reveals that they were shooting on the Gujarat highway and while they would rehearse for hours, the shots were canned quickly with the trio in a car and another car pulling them along. But since the U-turn was 15 km away, it took them at least 20 minutes to get back and while driving back, his actors would let their hair down and joke. Shoojit, who kept clicking them, ended up with some impromptu shots which were incorporated in the film, including the one in which they are sharing chips from a tiffin box. “That happened because they got hungry,” Shoojit reveals.On another occasion, when Irrfan screams at Bachchan during the drive, Shoojit reeled off a lot of shots but didn’t take any close-ups of Irrfan from the front despite his repeated insistence. “Finally, when I was packing up, he insisted I take a few even if I didn’t use them later. I did, reluctantly, and while editing the film ended up using it,” he admits.Piku was to be followed by thebiopic. Shoojit informs that when they went to Irrfan with the role, he was jumping with joy. “It was just a 10-minute meeting and I remember at the end of it, he told me that this was what he had been waiting for all his life,” says Shoojit. They were supposed to roll last year when Irrfan was diagnosed with Neuro Endocrine tumour and left the country for treatment.He’s been in regular touch with the ailing actor ever since, even calling him up to wish him on his birthday on January 7. He says Irrfan is doing well and they are optimistic that they will make this film, a dream project for both, together. “We have had a lot of heart-to-heart discussions over the last year which has only strengthened our bond. I know that whenever he gets back, and I am hopeful it will be soon, his experience over the last year will add a lot of depth to the performance. He was always one of our finest actors, now he’ll be even better, just wait and watch,” Shoojit signs off on a promising note.
