Pakistan to send back its high commissioner to New Delhi: Shah Mahmood Qureshi

Pakistan has decided to send back its high commissioner to India as tensions between the neighbouring countries begin to ease.

“This is a positive development,” said Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi while addressing a conference on the relations between Pakistan and China on Wednesday. The US played a pivotal role in reducing the tensions, he added.

Related: Two Pakistan Army soldiers, two civilians martyred in Indian shelling across LoC

Prime Minister Imran Khan is committed to implementing Pakistan’s foreign policy with honour and dignity, the foreign minister said. Dialogue and exchange of views are imperative to address all issues to achieve the goal of peace and tranquility of the region, he remarked.

Tensions escalated between India and Pakistan following a suicide attack on an Indian convoy last month, which killed 40 soldiers in Indian-Administered Kashmir. Indian media and government officials were quick to assign blame to Pakistan for what they said was supporting the Maulana Masood Azhar-led group, the JeM. Pakistan refuted allegations that its government was linked to the Pulwama attack.

On February 27, Pakistani Air Force shot down two Indian Air Force MiG 21 aircraft. One pilot was arrested too. One plane crashed in the Khuiratta sector of Azad Kashmir while one crashed in Indian-Administered Kashmir’s Budgam area.

The PAF shot down the Indian jets a day after two Indian aircraft violated the Line of Control and crossed three to four miles into Pakistani territory near Muzaffarabad before PAF jets scrambled and they turned back. They dropped a payload but no damage was incurred, according to the ISPR chief, who took to Twitter to announce the event. India, on the other hand, claims to have “completely destroyed” a “terrorist camp” in Balakot by dropping “1,000kg bombs”.

Related: Pakistan will retaliate if there is an attack from the Indian side: PM Khan

On Friday, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, an Indian Air Force pilot who was captured on February 27 after his jet was shot down for violating Pakistani airspace, was sent back to India Friday. He was released into Indian custody via the Wagah Border amid tight security.

Follow SAMAA English on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
