Tim Cook Says Facebook "Should Not Exist", Angry With The Social Giant's Privacy Issues

It's no news to anyone that Facebook and Apple aren't exactly allies. And by that we mean they're bitter rivals and constantly taking potshots at each other.

And Apple CEO Tim Cook renewed the hostilities this week with another salvo directed at the social network.

Images courtesy: Reuters

ALSO READ: Mark Zuckerberg Hits Back At Tim Cook's Facebook Jibe, Calls His Comments Extremely Shallow

At the company's annual general meeting today, Tim Cook fired off shots at Facebook regarding its abysmal privacy policy. "The idea that someone has built this enormous, detailed profile of you and of everybody in this room and then takes that detailed profile to ... stir the pot, this is offensive to us," he said.

"We think that it's just wrong to do, and it should not exist."

"We don't have to look very far," Cook added, a clear indicator of the target of his remarks, given that Facebook's headquarters is pretty near to Apple's.

ALSO READ: Mark Zuckerberg Orders Facebook Execs To Switch To Android, After Tim Cook's Criticism Of FB

It's just the latest exchange in what's been a years-long tempestuous relationship. It began back in 2014 when Cook, in an interview, talked about Facebook saying, "When an online service is free, you are not the customer. You are the product." For his part, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg was not pleased. He responded saying, "You think because you're paying Apple you're somehow in alignment with them? If you were in alignment with them, then they'd make their products a lot cheaper."

The situation only worsened during the Cambridge Analytica scandal, when Cook lambasted Zuckerberg for his incompetence. Zuckerberg responded by reportedly forbidding Facebook employees from using Apple phones. So it's probably only a matter of time before Zuckerberg responds once more.

ALSO READ: Facebook Data Scandal & Mark Zuckerberg's Leadership Have Been The Biggest Tech Failure Of 2018
