Welcome Bellevision.com

Mumbai: Dabboo Ratnani shoots Manyavar Calendar 2019

• Ace Celebrity-Photographer Dabboo Ratnani roped in for celebrity calendar shoot

• Celebrities Yuvika Chaudhry, Prince Narula, Salim-Sulaiman, Gauahar Khan, Amaan & Ayaan Ali Khan and Karan Tacker strike a pose in the Manyavar-Mohey Celebrity calendar for 2019

Mumbai, 10 Jan: One of India’s most coveted fashion and lifestyle photographers, Dabboo Ratnani recently came on board to shoot the Manyavar-Mohey celebrity calendar for 2019. Adding a flare of panache and grandeur, it carries the signature Dabboo Ratnani pizzazz as he creates magic with his camera for the 2019 Manyavar calendar.

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

Once again displaying his prowess with the lens, the calendar will showcase the ethreal wedding looks by Manyavar-Mohey. With its elaborate designs and collections, Manyavar-Mohey has become the one-stop destination when it comes to elegant ethnic wear for all occasions and celebrations. This exquisite collection consisting of sherwanis, kurtas, lehangas, etc along with the attention to detail that Dabboo Ratnani brings with him in his work is the highlight of the upcoming calendar.

This time’s line up features popular celebrities like the music composer duo Salim-Sulaiman, Sarod sensations Amaan and Ayaan Ali Khan, the recently hitchedjodi – Prince Narula and Yuvika Chaudhry, the glamorous Gauahar Khan along with popular TV actor Karan Tacker who shall be seen donning Manyavar-Mohey’s exquisite wedding collection, which is an elegant confluence of modernity and tradition. Each of these photos has wonderfully captured the setting and the mood of the celebrity conveying emotions of love and togetherness, raw attitude and confidence, class and elegance.

Having captured the imagination of millions of fans around the world, shooting for a wedding collection did give Dabboo lot to look forward to. The ace photographer said “I thoroughly enjoyed shooting the Manyavar Calendar. I couldn’t have asked for a better opportunity to have a wedding collection as the theme.
