Those questioning airstrikes can be tied to plane during next operation for counting casualty: VK Singh

New Delhi [India], Mar 6 (ANI): Launching a scathing attack on the opposition parties for questioning airstrikes at terror camps in Pakistan’s Balakot, Union Minister VK Singh on Wednesday said that “next time India conducts such operations, the opposition leaders who raise such questions can be tied to the plane and taken to the attack site.”

Talking to ANI, Singh, also a former Army chief, said: “I feel that next time when India does anything similar, the opposition leaders who raise such questions can be tied to plane. They can see the target when the bomb is fired. They can be left there to count and then come back.”

“I cannot understand this mentality. They know what action has been taken and are now asking for evidence. They could have gone and seen it,” said Singh.

Speaking about a tweet of his in this regard, Singh said: “Do you count things? Bombs were exploded. Buildings were hit and will people not be killed after an explosion of a 1,000-kg bomb?”

“If killed, then you make an estimate of the number of people killed. I don't know who wants to count it. It's unfortunate,” he said, adding “asking such questions repeatedly for political purpose is not good for the country.”

Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out air strikes at Jaish-e-Mohammad’s (JeM) largest training camp at Balakot in Pakistan’s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province during the wee hours on February 26 in retaliation of JeM’s debilitating attack on CRPF convoy in south Kashmir’s Pulwama district in which as many as 40 jawans were killed.

Hours after the air raid, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale had told the media that the IAF fighters hit the largest militant camp of JeM in Balakot and “a large number of JeM terrorists, trainers, and senior commanders were eliminated” in the targetted attack.

IAF chief BS Dhanoa in a press conference on Monday said that fighter pilots had hit the target given to them, adding that he could not give the number of casualties as it is for the government to clarify.

On last Sunday, BJP chief Amit Shah, while addressing a rally in Ahmedabad, had claimed that 250 terrorists were killed in the air strike. (ANI)
