Fire breaks out at Delhi’s CGO complex

A CISF sub-inspector died on Wednesday in a fire at the office of the Ministry of Social Justice in South Delhi’s CGO complex that houses important government offices, according officials. CISF Sub-Inspector M P Godara fell unconscious after inhaling toxic gases. He was taken to AIIMS, where he died, the officials said.

The fire department got a call regarding the blaze on the fifth floor of Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan at 8:34 am. Twenty-five tenders were rushed to the spot, Delhi Fire Services officials said.

The fire started at an office of the social justice and empowerment ministry in the building. The flames have been contained and the cooling process is underway, Chief Fire Officer Atul Garg said, adding that the cause of the blaze is yet to be ascertained. “Godara was the shift in-charge. When he went to take stock of the situation, he fell unconscious after inhaling carbon monoxide. He died at the hospital,” Garg said.

Offices of the drinking water and sanitation ministry, forest ministry and a branch of the Indian Air Force are located in the Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan, previously known as Paryavaran Bhawan.

NCLAT suspends hearing

The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) suspended its hearing till further notice after the fire broke out at Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan, where it is situated.

The appellate tribunal was scheduled to hear some important matters listed before it, including matters of Jyoti structures, Dishnet wireless, Monnet Ispat and Liberty House. “Due to fire incident in Pt Deen Dayal Antyodaya Bhawan today morning, the Court proceedings etc. of NCLAT shall remain suspended till further notice,” said a notice on the portal of NCLAT.

When contacted, an NCLAT official said that they would take time as they would have to inspect the premise and assess the probable damages.“Once it is opened, we would go inside and inspect the condition of the premise and then would decide after seeing various conditions,” he said.

NCLAT is on the third floor of the Deen Dayal Antyodaya Bhawan, earlier known as Paryavaran Bhawan.
