Samsung Galaxy S10+ quick review: Big, bold and beautiful

The Samsung Galaxy S10+ is the biggest flagship the new S10 series, that is if you exclude the Galaxy S10 5G from the lineup. The S10+ is everything we have come to expect as an incremental update to last year’s Galaxy S9+, and more. As predictable as it may seem at first, Samsung has made sure it offers enough upgrades and new features across the device to satisfy our desires. The Galaxy S10+ is no futuristic Galaxy Fold, but it is a substantial flagship that will set the benchmark for premium Android phones this year.

The Galaxy S10+ touts a large Infinity-O punch-hole display, a big battery, a bunch of cameras, a powerful new chipset and an intuitive ultrasonic in-display fingerprint sensor, among other things. This is a feature-packed phone that is all about excess, and is for die-hard Samsung fans who are looking for a premium flagship that feels big on the outside and inside. The Galaxy S10+ has been launched in India starting at Rs 73,900 and goes all the way up to Rs 1,17,900 for the ultra top-end variant that comes with 12GB of RAM and an insane 1TB of internal storage. I spent a brief amount of time with the Galaxy S10+ and here are my first impressions.

On first glance, the Galaxy S10+ looks no different than the Galaxy S9+. Samsung continues its tried and tested curved edge display along with glass on the front and back. But the S10+ is a new phone, and with that you get a new Samsung Infinity-O display, where the O stands for the O-shaped cutout on the display to house the selfie camera. But the S10+ comes with a slightly wide, pill-shaped hole on the top right corner because it gets dual selfie cameras.

The bezels on the top and bottom are pretty much the only bezels you’re going to see on the S10+, and Samsung has reduced it ever so slightly compared to its predecessor. What you’re left with is a large, gorgeous 6.4-inch QHD+ (3040x1440) Dynamic AMOLED display with a 19:9 aspect ratio, 522ppi and HDR10+ support. And just on first look, you will be hard-pressed to fault the display panel used by Samsung. The Galaxy S10+ offers a stunning OLED display, which comes as no surprise.

The new Dynamic AMOLED display aims to offer deeper contrast and better dynamic range compared to past displays. From the colours on screen to the sharpness and contrast, everything looks absolutely fantastic. This is based on a brief look at the UI, the wallpapers and some images captured by the cameras. The QHD+ resolution and HDR10+ support should offer a lot of sharpness, which will be great for watching HDR videos, but I’ll reserve my comments on that in my full review.

The hole-punch cutout does feel distracting at first, especially on a white background, and it will take a while to get used to it. I found it easier to ignore the cutout by enabling Dark Mode, which is one of the many things I appreciate about the new One UI OS, but more on that in a bit.

While the front gets a Gorilla Glass 6 protection, the back is protected by a previous generation Gorilla Glass. The phone feels sturdy to hold, slim in its form, but still pretty tall. The size of the phone does make it hard to reach for the power button, which is placed higher up on the right side of the frame. The left side gets the volume buttons and an excellently-placed Bixby button, which can now be remapped. Samsung has also retained the headphone jack, which is always nice to see, and you also get stereo speakers (bottom grille and earpiece), and a Type-C port.

The rear panel of the Galaxy S10+ looks different from the S9+, mainly because Samsung has added an extra camera to the setup, while the fingerprint sensor has been moved to the front, under the display.

One major new technology that Samsung has introduced is the Ultrasonic In-Display Fingerprint sensor, which uses sound waves to register a 3D model of your fingerprint. It is supposedly more accurate and faster than the optical in-display fingerprint sensor, which essentially only takes a 2D snapshot of your fingerprint.

The Galaxy S10+ gets the same Exynos 9820 chipset as the Galaxy S10 in India. It’s an octa-core chipset based on a 8nm process that comes with a dedicated NPU and Mali-G76 MP12 GPU. The Plus-sized model comes with up to 12GB of RAM and up to 1TB of internal storage, which reiterates my point that the phone is all about excess. Right out of the box, the S10+ performs as fast as you would imagine. Apps opened swiftly and browsing through the UI was fluid.

With 8GB of RAM as the base model, the Galaxy S10+ should handle mutitasking easily, and I feel the 12GB RAM variant is a bit of an overkill at this point in time. But I will have more to say about the multitasking, gaming and intensive usage performance of the Galaxy S10+ in our full review.

The Galaxy S10+ comes with the same triple camera setup as the regular S10. So you get a 12MP f/2.4 telephoto lens with OIS and autofocus, a 12MP wide-angle lens with Dual Aperture (f/1.5-2.4), and a 16MP ultra wide-angle f/2.2 sensor. On the front, the S10+ gets a 10MP f/1.9 main camera and a 8MP f/2.2 depth camera with support for Live Focus.

With a triple camera system, Samsung wants to offer more shooting modes with a press of a button. You can switch between wide-angle, ultra wide-angle and telephoto by tapping on the leaf icon in the camera app. You get modes like Live Photo, Pro, Food, Super Slow-mo, Hyperlapse and there is even a dedicated Instagram mode, which directly opens Instagram right after you have clicked a picture so you can share instantly. I haven't been able to test the cameras in depth, so I will reserve my opnion on that for the full review.

The Galaxy S10+ also gets the biggest battery among the three new S10 phones with a 4,100mAh capacity. This should be enough to deliver a full day worth of usage considering the large QHD+ AMOLED display and performance-driven Exynos 9820 chipset. I will test out the battery life over the next few days as well as the 15W charger that comes with the box. Do follow this space for our full review of the Galaxy S10+ where we will test the flagship's performance, battery and cameras in detail.
