Congruence Of Interests: India and Iran should put together their own Af-Pak policy

In another point of convergence between India and Iran, both nations appear to be fed up with terrorism emanating from Pakistan. After India conducted surgical airstrikes against a Jaish-e-Muhammed terror training camp inside Pakistani territory – which was seen as retaliation for the February 14 Pulwama terror attack – Iran has now warned of carrying out similar operations. This is in the context of the February 13 terror attack that killed 27 Iranian Revolutionary Guards which has been blamed on the Jaish al-Adl militant group operating from Pakistan. In fact, the chairman of the Iranian parliament’s foreign policy commission Heshmatollah Falahatpisheh was quoted as saying that Tehran would take action inside Pakistan if the latter was incapable of stopping cross-border attacks in Iran.

Of course, unlike India, Iran doesn’t have a Kashmir problem and its border with Pakistan is fully demarcated. However, it does have a Shia-Sunni issue with Pakistan. Jaish al-Adl is a terrorist organisation based in Pakistan and the Sistan and Baluchestan province of Iran. It is responsible for several attacks against civilians and military personnel in Iran. But the group was founded in 2012 by members of another outfit called Jundallah, a Sunni militant terrorist organisation whose stated aim was to fight for equal rights of Sunni Muslims in Iran.

Whether it is Jaish-e-Muhammed, Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jaish al-Adl or Jundallah, the fact remains that Pakistan is a breeding ground for militant organisations that plague its neighbours. I have alluded to the genesis of this problem in my previous articles. Pakistan was decisively put on this path during the regime of General Zia ul-Haq who actively aided the US in training and supporting the Afghan mujahideen to fight the Soviet forces in neighbouring Afghanistan. And of the seven mujahideen groups supported by Zia’s government, four that espoused Islamist fundamentalist beliefs got the most amount of American money and arms. As is well known, the mujahideen were successful in defeating the Soviets, but Pakistan’s policy of coordinating and sheltering the mujahideen to curry favour with the US laid the foundation of Pakistan becoming a land of militant outfits.

Add to this Pakistan’s failure to evolve stable democratic institutions and effective governance structures, these militant groups came to be embedded in Pakistani society. Of course, the Pakistani deep state or the elite military-ISI complex was fine with this. After all, they saw the militant groups as auxiliary forces. They then devised the plan of deploying these militants against India in Kashmir. But this strategy also costs Pakistan. For, it means that Pakistan is perennially swamped by militant groups – some working with the Pakistani deep state and others operating on their own agenda or even fighting the Pakistani state.

And this situation will persist as long as Pakistan lacks effective governance and remains impoverished. It then follows that Pakistan’s neighbours like India and Iran have to shore up their defences to prevent Pakistan-based militants from striking them. It therefore makes much sense for India and Iran to coordinate to contain Pakistan-based terrorism. I believe the two countries are already looking at this. However, more needs to be done to ramp up the level of cooperation. Additionally, India and Iran have common interests in stabilising Afghanistan after the Americans leave. Thus, it is time New Delhi and Tehran come together and evolve their own Af-Pak policy. The congruence in security interests already exist.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
