US revises visa rules for Pakistan; slashes stay validity to 1 year

Besides slashing stay validity of Pakistani nationals, their journalists and media persons will also not be allowed to stay in the country for more than 90 days without renewing the travel permit, as per the revised rules by the USA.



The US revised its visa policy for Pakistani nationals, slashing the stay validity from five years to one year, news agency PTI reported.

In a formal notification by the American embassy in Islamabad on Tuesday, the US has said that an additional fee will also be charged for H (Temporary Work Visa), L (Intercompany Transfer Visa), I (Journalist and Media Visa) and R (Religious Worker Visa) visas, Pakistani newspaper, Express Tribune reported.

“The US has reduced visa validity for Pakistani citizens from five years to 1 year whereas journalists and media persons will not be allowed to stay in the country for over three months without renewing the travel permit,” the paper quoted the notification by the US.

As per the notification, an additional fee of $32 for Journalist and Media Visas and $38 will be charged for all other visa categories at the Embassy, Islamabad or Consulate General Karachi before the issue of visa with effect from January 21.

The new US policies is along the same lines as Pakistani embassy rules in Washington. Similarly, Pakistan too issues visas for three months to journalists of American origin.

The revision decided by the State Department as Pakistan failed to “liberalise its visa regime for certain visa categories”, therefore, the US was required by American law on January 21 to reduce the visa validity and increase the visa fees to match Pakistan’s practices for similar visa categories,” the report said.

READ ALSO | Pakistan to send envoy Sohail Mahmood back to India; ready to engage with New Delhi to reduce tensions

United States President Donald Trump had described the situation between India and Pakistan post the terror attack in Pulwama as “very dangerous”, and said that he understood India’s desire for a “very strong” response.

An Indian Express report quoted sources in New Delhi saying that the US President wanted to put pressure on Pakistan to take action on terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad. The US informed India earlier the Pakistan government was going to act against the Jaish and JuD.

Trump however said that the relationship between US and Pakistan was improving even after he put a stop to $1.3 billion in financial aid to Pakistan.

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated after the Pulwama error attack on February 14 in south Kashmir whose responsibility was taken by Pakistan-based Jaish-E-Mohammad. India has been raising issues accusing Pakistan of sheltering terrorists. On February 26, the Indian Air Force launched air strikes in Balakot on JeM terror training camp as a pre-emptive measure.
