Meet the brave CRPF women personnel in Jammu and Kashmir who walk the talk

Of six women companies of the CRPF, four are in Jammu and Kashmir.

Swati Singh Gaur, 25, was part of the 78-vehicle Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy attacked by a suicide bomber in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

At least 40 CRPF personnel were killed in the deadly attack which was followed by heightened tensions between India and Pakistan.

Swati's josh, however, continues to be high.

A part of the mahila battalion, Swati says it was the training that helped her beat the odds.

"Those were moments of fear. We didn't have our weapons with us. But we acted as per the standard operating procedure and took position inside the vehicle," says the 25-year-old.

Swati says given an opportunity, she will avenge the killing of the CRPF soldiers. "The morale of the force is high," she adds.

Swati will be soon deployed at the Srinagar airport where she faces a challenging task -- keeping an eye on anything suspicious.

CRPF personnel say though their families remain concerned after the Pulwama attack, the sense of pride outweighs this fear.

Another CRPF soldier, Harpreet Kaur, was meant to be part of the convoy. However, the newly married got a last-minute leave extension.

"An approval for extension after marriage meant that I could spend more time with my husband. But the last few days have been tough," Kaur says.

Women from across the country are part of this mahila battalion. They face problems on professional and personal fronts, but it is their uniform that unites them.

Women have dual jobs. They have to serve the country and maintain work-life balance. And they excel in both, says Neera Chaudhary, Assistant Commandant, 73rd Battalion. Behind every woman soldier, there is a supportive family. It is a tough job, the officer adds.

Another soldier of the 88th Battalion of the CRPF says, "My husband is posted in Srinagar, but we meet during the break or when we return home."

Neelam Yadav of Rajasthan, who has been serving the country since 25 years, says being mentally and physical fit is most crucial.

On her ongoing stint in the Kashmir Valley, Neelam Yadav reiterates the importance of training. From stone pelting to frisking, we are trained to respond to various situations, Neelam adds.

Of the six women companies of the CRPF, four are in Jammu and Kashmir, securing its shrines and key government installations. The threat of sudden violence looms large, but these women continue to secure the country.

They are the heroes.

ALSO READ | Pulwama terror attack: Martyrs' families cry revenge, protesters reach Pak embassy

ALSO WATCH | Meet the women soldiers of the CRPF
