CGO complex fire: One CISF personnel dead after inhaling toxic fume during evacuation

The CISF official, who is from Churu district of Rajasthan died due to inhaling smoke during the evacuation on Wednesday.

The deadly blaze on the fifth floor of the Pandit Deendayal Antyodaya Bhawan at the CGO complex of New Delhi today morning has claimed the life of one Central Industrial Security Force sub-inspector. The CISF official died due to inhaling smoke on Wednesday, officials said. Fire broke out at the office of Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities on Wednesday morning, where 25 fire tenders were pressed into action.

According to media reports, Central Industrial Security Force personnel MP Godara, 53, was taken to AIIMS, but could not survive.

Godara, a former Air Force personnel, was the first one to notice smoke coming out of the fifth floor and reached there with another CISF personnel to evacuate the floor. While the evacuation process was on, he inhaled toxic fume and fell unconscious.

A CISF spokesperson said that Godara was a resident of Churu district of Rajasthan and had joined CISF back in 2008, reported PTI. He is survived by two sons and wife who live in Rajasthan.

Read Also| Congress trolls BJP for their hacked website, AAP says ‘Congress helping BJP’

The 11-storey building houses several important central government offices including a wing of Indian Air Force, Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities, Ministry of Forest, and Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation.

The fire department was reportedly contacted at around 8:30 in the morning and was being informed about the fire. However, “the fire has been contained around 10:50 am, and cooling process is underway,” said Chief Fire Officer Atul Garg. He also added that the fire could have started from a short-circuit caused the fire, though the exact reason could only be ascertained after investigation, reported PTI.

An official informed that the fire has gutted around 80 per cent of the B1 wing of the building, and have surely destroyed several files and documents. “An assessment can be done once we go inside,” the official added.
