Fire breaks out at Indian Air Force office in New Delhi

New Delhi- A major fire broke out on the fifth floor of a building in New Delhi housing an office of the Indian Air Force (IAF) and several other governments offices on Wednesday, reported Radio Pakistan.

According to the local authorities, "The fire started at an office of the social justice and empowerment ministry in the building. The flames have been contained and the cooling process is underway. The cause of the blaze is yet to be ascertained,"

The building, earlier known as Paryawaran Bhawan, houses many important central government offices including offices of the drinking water and sanitation ministry, forest ministry and office of the Indian Air Force. The 11-storeyed building also houses several ministries including the Ministry of Social Justice Empowerment and Disability and the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.

Twenty-four fire tenders had been rushed to the location of the fire to douse the flames, according to the local media, but flames are yet to be contained.

One sub-inspector of Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) has been reported dead so far. MP Godara was the shift in charge and fell unconscious after inhaling carbon monoxide. He was taken to the hospital where he succumbed to his wounds, officials from Delhi Fire Services informed local media.

The cause of the fire is yet unknown.

The incident occurred at a time when India is trying hard to justify its claims of doing a surgical strike inside Pakistan using warplanes. India Air Force has lost at least 8 warplanes in the past two months, two of them shot down by the PAF and sacked Western Air Command’s Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief from his post.

India’s MiG-27 fighter jet crashes near ... 06:09 PM | 13 Feb, 2019 JAIPUR – A MiG-27 fighter jet of the Indian Air Force (IAF) crashed in Rajasthan on Tuesday, according to reports in ...

PAF shoots down two Indian fighter jets inside ... 10:39 AM | 27 Feb, 2019 MUZAFFARABAD – Two Pakistan Air Force jets targeted two Indian warplanes in a dogfight and shot them down along the ...
