SHOCKER! After admitting to Masood Azhar’s presence, Pakistan says JeM does not exist in the country

File Image of JeM chief Masood Azhar | Photo Credit: ANI

Islamabad: Pakistan military’s spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor, on Wednesday, asserted that Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), the terror group that claimed the responsibility of the Pulwama terror attack, does not exist in Islamabad.

The diplomatic tension between two rival countries, India and Pakistan escalated after Pakistan-based JeM claimed responsibility for the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF jawans lost their lives.

"Jaish-e-Muhammed does not exist in Pakistan. It has been proscribed by the United Nations and Pakistan also. Secondly, we are not doing anything under anybody's pressure," Director General Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) Ghafoor said, news agency PTI reported quoting CNN.

Ghafoor’s statement comes days after Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi, during an interview with CNN, said that the chief of the terror outfit, Masood Azhar is present in Pakistan. Qureshi, however, added the government can act against him only if India presents "solid" and "inalienable" evidence that can stand in a court of law, PTI reported.

The military’s spokesperson rejected as “false” India’s claims regarding the Balakot air strike and said that not even a single brick had been found there nor were there any causalities.

The Indian Air Force carried out air strikes targetting JeM terror camps in Pakistan Balakot on February 26 as a retaliatory action for the Pulwama attack.

Ghafoor further said that the world should help Pakistan in getting rid of the terror organisations instead of blaming the country.

Pakistan has reportedly been tightening the noose of terrorists and their organisations due to mounting pressure from world bodies and several other countries, besides India. On Tuesday, Pakistan's Interior Ministry formally banned terror organisation Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) and its subsidiary, Falah-i-Insaniyat Foundation (FIF), news agency ANI reported.
