When An Indian Fighter Pilot Landed On An Abandoned Airstrip In Pakistan

In September 1965, a month after it failed to instigate Kashmiris into rebellion against the Indian state, the Pakistan Army decided to set in motion Operation Grand Slam, which was aimed at capturing the vital Akhnoor bridge over the fast-flowing Chenab, a weak link along the most viable route connecting the Kashmir Valley with the rest of India. The plan was to deny India supply lines to the state, thus taking over without resorting to an all-out war.

Bearing the brunt of the attack on the Indian side was 3rd Mahar and a squadron of AMX-13 tanks of the 20th Lancers, some of which had been airlifted to Chushul to halt the invading Chinese in 1962. Outnumbered and outgunned, troops sought India Air Force’s (IAF’s) assistance on 1 September. And it arrived, although with some delay.

Pathankot, the nearest airbase, had two squadrons of Mysteres and one squadron of Vampire fighters, which had been moved here recently from Pune. The Vampire were the most obsolete aircraft in the IAF's inventory.

The Pakistan Air Force (PAF), on the other hand, enjoyed qualitative advantage over the IAF, though it was outnumbered by a fair margin. The PAF had acquired at least 120 F-86 Sabres fighters from the United States in the late 1950s, 24 of which were equipped with the Sidewinder air-to-air missile, first in South Asia. It also had the latest Sidewinder equipped F-104 Starfighters.

Responding to the Indian Army’s SOS, the IAF scrambled 12 Vampires and 14 Mysteres from Pathankot to blunt the Pakistan Army’s offensive in Chhamb. A pair of PAF Sabers, which was over the area to provide cover to the advancing Pakistani armour, managed to shoot down four obsolescent Vampires of the IAF that evening. Three pilots were killed while one managed to bail out at the right time.

The IAF’s first mission of the war had not ended well.

In one of his writings, Group Captain Mohan Murdeshwar, who participated in the war, recalls: “We landed at Pathankot, at sunset and while taxiing to the dispersal I was greeted by dejected and sad looking faces of course mates and others standing alongside the taxiway. It was only when we all walked out to the Technical Area, that we learnt of the four Vampires that had been shot down on their attempt to neutralise the Pakistan Army’s large scale thrust towards Akhnoor”.

On 2 September, realising that its outdated Vampire fighters were no match to PAF’s Sabers, the IAF decided to throw into action its smaller and highly manoeuvrable Folland Gnats. Four Gnat fighters of the IAF’s 23 Squadron, stationed in Halwara, were dispatched to Pathankot under the command of Squadron Leader Brijpal Singh Sikand. Another detachment of four Gnats, stationed in Ambala, was also moved to Pathankot under the command of Squadron Leader Johnny William Greene, taking total the number of the fighter at the airbase to eight.

The Gnats were flown to Pathankot at low level to avoid radar detection. Consequently, Pakistan did not know that the fighters were moved.
