Could better accountability put a stop to India and Pakistan’s war-mongering?

Lack of truth from official sources while the media remains complicit

India claimed that its jets had destroyed a JeM militant camp in retaliation in Pakistan’s Khyber Pukhtunkhwa province, incurring a large number of casualties. Pakistan counter–claimed that India had only hit a forest and there had been no casualties. Pakistan said it had gone into Indian territory to display its capacity to do so, India claimed that it had done so to target military installations but had been thwarted by its jets.Amidst all these claims and counter claims, there is also little clarity on how an Indian plane came down in Pakistani territory. In fact, the only thing both sides seemed to agree was that there was one Indian pilot in Pakistani custody (though Pakistan originally claimed there were two). But when Pakistan offered to return the pilot, the conflicting narratives reasserted themselves: in Pakistan, this was a magnanimous gesture of peace with calls for Imran Khan to be awarded a Nobel Peace prize (at least on Twitter #ImranKhanForNobelPeacePrize), whilst in India, the news was covered as a major climb-down for Pakistan, with Imran Khan caving into international pressure.There seemed to be little objection around these completely opposing sets of narrative, despite the fact that information and news are easily accessible (online) and understandable on both sides of the border, since both India and Pakistan share languages (English, with Hindi and Urdu being understandable to one another). There was much finger-pointing on social media but few were calling for the ‘what actually happened’ truth of the matter. No one seemed to object to this lack of information and truth from either government. This could be down to citizens only reading or watching news from one country and not both, and the media being either entirely complicit or at least uncritical on both sides. It could be that even if people did follow the news, no one would believe the ‘other side’. Or it could be that the need to hold our governments accountable to the truth simply does not exist, as long as ‘our guys’ look like they are winning. Whether what we receive as news in such moments may actually be propaganda does not seem to matter.

As a South Asian, it is difficult to imagine that in the aftermath of all this, anyone is going to hold any public official accountable for disinformation, lack of honesty, or plain lying about the facts on either side. It is not just war-like circumstances that make blatant lies or alternative facts acceptable. It is also the rise in uber-nationalism and populist politics on both sides in which polarisation and ‘digging in one’s heels with one’s own bunch’ is the norm and fully acceptable. The situation may well be different if we could imagine there being serious costs associated with misrepresenting or misreporting on something as serious as an impending war.
