Janhvi Kapoor celebrates birthday in Varanasi ditching lavish birthday party with friends. See pics

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Janhvi Kapoor celebrates birthday in Varanasi ditching lavish birthday party with friends. See pics

Most of the youngsters, especially the celebrities like to celebrate their birthday with a lavish birthday which has all of their friends in attendance. We’ve seen umpteen such happening parties in the Tinsel Town where the entire industry is gathered under the same roof to celebrate a star’s birthday. Young actress Janhvi Kapoor is however different from the league. Instead of going for a plush birthday bash, Janhvi chose to have a low-key celebration with her father Boney Kapoor and sister Khushi Kapoor. The Kapoor family sans Sridevi who passed away last year, flew to Varanasi to ring in her 22nd birthday.

Janhvi Kapoor sought blessings from Shri Kashi Vishwanath Temple in Benaras a day before she turned 22. In the pictures that are doing rounds on the social media, Janhvi is seen cutting her birthday cake with a sword while her family cheers for her. Her sister Khushi Kapoor is seen wearing a green salwar suit while the Dhadak actress is wearing an embroidered Chikankari suit.

Janhvi Kapoor, Boney Kapoor and Khushi Kapoor spent some time on the Ganga Ghat and took a boat ride.

Janhvi shared a candid picture of herself on her Instagram and wrote, “Thankful & grateful. For all your love and blessings. For every opportunity. For my family. For my country. Love you all!”

Janhvi Kapoor and Khushi Kapoor’s mother and veteran actress Sridevi Boney Kapoor passed away in February last year, months before her birthday. The actress still celebrated her birthday with the same spirit as her mother would like her to. She has been carrying herself with utmost grace in various media interviews (even those which mentioned her mother’s sudden demise).

On the work front, Janhvi Kapoor will be next seen in Kargil Girl in which she’s playing Gunjan Saxena, who is India’s first ever woman combat pilot to fly in a war zone. The film is being helmed by Sharan Sharma. The actress was in Lucknow to shoot for the film.
