United States Changes VISA Policy for Pakistan

Guwahati: The United States has changed its visa policy in different categories for the Pakistanis which was announced through an official notification. The visa policy rules were issued by the US Consulate in Islamabad on Tuesday.

According to a report, the work and missionary visas have been reduced to one year from five years term while the visa limit for journalists has been reduced from five years to three months.

The notification issued by the Consulate also mentioned that the visas for trade, tourism and students will remain valid for a period of five years.

According to diplomatic sources, the policies have been revised as per rules of the Pakistani Embassy in Washington.

The notification further reads as visas will be issued to the government officials based on the nature of their works.

The new fee applicable under revision from January 21 is Rs. 13,539.84 which was earlier Rs.11,283.

The US has changed the visa policy in the wake of the recent Pulwama terror attack that took place on February 14 where more than 40 CRPF jawans have been martyred. The terror attack was made by Pakistan based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad.

The US has also suspended financial aid worth millions to cash strapped Pakistan for not taking any action to tackle terrorism.

The US has also asked Pakistan soon after the terror attack to take meaningful action against terrorist group operating in the country and urged both New Delhi and Islamabad to exercise restraint and avoid escalation at any cost.

Mike Pompeo, the US Secretary of State called both the Foreign Ministers of India and Pakistan separately after the Indian Air Force destroyed the Balakot terrorist camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad on February 26 which killed at least 325 militants.

India has taken the action after the JeM terrorist have attacked CRPF jawans in Pulwama attack which left more than 40 jawans martyred on February 14 sparking outrage in the country.

In a statement issued by US Secretary Pompeo, it said that he had spoken to Indian Minister of External Affairs Sushma Swaraj to emphasize the close security partnership and shared goal of maintaining peace and security in the region after the Indian counter-terrorism action on February 26.

Also Read: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
