Pak compelled to act against terrorists due to Modi's

Pakistan has been compelled to act against terrorists as it now realises that Indian security forces have been given a free hand by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to retaliate, BJP president Amit Shah said Wednesday.

Though, Indian soldiers were beheaded during the previous UPA government's regime, there was no response to such dastardly acts, he told a meeting of BJP functionaries from five Lok Sabha constituencies under the Nizamabad cluster.

Shah said following the Uri terror attack, the Modi government replied with surgical strikes. Similarly, after the Pulwama incident, in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed, the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out air strikes on terror camps in Pakistan, he said.

"Our IAF carried out air strikes on three terror camps and destroyed them", the BJP chief said.

"Today, for the first time Pakistan feels that terrorism will not work...They are now compelled to arrest (terrorists) and curb that (terrorism)...The reason for that is our leader Narendra Modi has demonstrated political will," he said.

He said Pakistan knows India will respond to their every action.

Shah's comments came a day after Pakistan announced it had taken into "preventive detention" 44 members of banned militant outfits, including Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar's son and brother.

Modi has given full freedom to the defence forces. "If a bullet comes from there, let it be replied with a canon. If a brick comes let it be replied with a stone," he said.

He claimed that the Congress and leaders like West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, BSP chief Mayawati, TDP supremo and Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu should feel ashamed that they were raising "questions on the valour of jawans, asking for proof (of the air strike)".

"Pakistan is not asking for proof, Chandrababu, What proof are you asking. Feel ashamed," the BJP chief said.

Targeting Rahul Gandhi, he said instead of standing with the country in this "hour of difficulty", the Congress president was seeking for proof.

"You see, the statements of Pakistan media and a leader of grand alliance are of similar type. Many times, I don't understand whether he is speaking or the Pakistan media is saying or Rahul baba is saying what Pakistan media says," he said.

Shah also said Modi had enhanced the country's respect in the world by giving the go ahead for the air strikes.

Earlier, only America and Israel were known to take revenge for the death of their soldiers, now Modi had added India to the list by taking up the air strikes, the BJP chief said.

"I feel and the whole world feels that India is secure today under the leadership of Modiji," he said adding Modi alone can ensure safety and security of the country.

He claimed that the opposition alliance cannot give a strong reply to terrorists.

BJP had given a prime minister who was "courageous, transparent and sensitive to the needs of the poor", he said.

Referring to the National Register of Citizens, he said it was aimed at removing infiltrators from the country but opposition parties raised concerns as if they were their cousins.

Attacking the TRS government headed by K Chandrasekhar Rao, Shah said it did not feel the need to remove 'infiltrators' from Hyderabad.

Though he did not name anybody, the BJP had earlier expressed concern over the presence of large number of Rohingya refugees from Myanmar in the city.

Shah said the BJP-led government at the Centre would remove infiltrators from the country if it was elected to power in the coming elections.

BJP would continue to ask Rao why he was not celebrating Hyderabad Liberation Day (the merger of erstwhile Nizam state with the Indian Union on September 17), he said.

The coming general elections are very important for the BJP and its workers, he said, adding that the people have decided to make Modi the prime minister again.

"Our aim is to re-elect Modiji as prime minister again with a thumping majority in the forthcoming elections," Shah said.

Taking a dig at the proposed grand alliance of opposition parties, he said while the BJP and its partners in the NDA under Modi's leadership were ready to fight the polls, the 'mahagatbandhan (grand alliance)' under "Rahul Baba has no leader, no policy.This alliance is formed only for the sake of power," he alleged.

"I want to ask Rahul Baba what is your agenda for the upcoming elections. On what issues are you going to fight the elections. Rahul Baba you got 55 years to eradicate poverty but why kept it pending till now. You gave only (empty) promises and nothing else in the 55 years," he said.

The BJP has ensured the overall development of the country and taken the Indian economy to the sixth position from ninth, he said.

In the last five years, under the Modi government 50 crore poor people benefited through various welfare schemes such as LPG connections, construction of toilets and houses, electricity supply, Mudra loan and health schemes, Shah said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
