Terrorists will ‘think twice’ before attacking India now, says Amit Shah

While addressing a rally in Godda, Jharkhand, Amit Shah said, “PM Modi has secured the borders of India, and has given due respect to the armed forces.”

BJP president Amit Shah on Wednesday said that the terrorists will now think twice before attacking India, because of the measures taken by the Narendra Modi government.

While addressing a rally in Godda, Jharkhand, Amit Shah said, “PM Modi has secured the borders of India, and has given due respect to the armed forces.”

Referring to former PM Manmohan Singh as ‘mouni baba’, Shah launched a scathing attack at the former UPA government saying, “during his time people from Pakistan used to trespass into the country and kill our soldiers and now they will ‘think twice’ before attacking.”

“Ever since PM Modi assumed office, they attacked Uri and he answered it with a surgical strike when they attacked Pulwama, he attacked them with air strike within their home. Modi reinstated the trust that the world has on the armed forces of India. This government has shown the world what might happen if they try to attack India,” he said in the pre-poll campaign at Jharkhand.

Amit Shah invited the gathering to vote for the NDA government saying, “Elect BJP for one more term, and we will arrest all the infiltrators from across the country without prioritising on the vote banks politics.” “We view the security situation of the country with utmost importance and concerned,” he added.

He later said, the parties in ‘mahagathbandhan’ would not be able to lead the country in the right track.

Earlier this year, nearly 40 CRPF personnel were killed in a terrorist attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama of Jammu and Kashmir, following which the tension between India and Pakistan rose to a whole different level. Later last month, the Indian Air Force launched an attack in a training camp of terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot of Pakistan. However, the number of terrorists killed is yet to be known.
