Amid Pakistan’s fake news propaganda, Pak FM Shah Qureshi tells Parliament that PAF shot down 2 IAF jets

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. | File image

Islamabad: Tensions are rife between India and Pakistan following the Pulwama terror attack and subsequent IAF air strikes in Pakistan last month. While the Pakistani media continues to rebuff claims that India shot down its F-16 fighter jet and India categorically states that a MiG-21 Bison had downed a Pakistan Air Force fighter jet.

Amid fake news propagated by Pakistani media that India had planned a "dangerous attack" from Rajasthan, Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi on Wednesday told at the Pakistan Parliament that PAF jets had shot down “two” Indian Air Force jets. To corroborate his claims, Qureshi also announced the names of the two Pakistani pilots involved in the combat.

“Pakistan Air Force shot down two Indian aircraft violating the Pakistani airspace. One Indian jet was shot down by Squadron Leader Hassan Siddiqui while the other was downed by Wing Commander Nauman Ali Khan,” Qureshi told the National Assembly, according to a report by news agency PTI.

The Pakistani foreign minister claimed that Khan was the pilot who shot down the Indian fighter jet in the aerial combat last week, as reported by Dawn. The Pakistani military had earlier claimed that a second IAF jet had crashed in Jammu and Kashmir after being hit by the PAF fighter jet. However, India clarified that only one IAF aircraft was taken down by an F-16 fighter plane of the PAF.

Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot that falls in the Khyber- Pakhtunkhwa region, along with Muzaffarabad and Chakothi in PoK. The terror group is responsible for the dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14 where 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The attack was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.

The very next morning, Pakistan Air Force jets entered Indian airspace from Nowshera sector but were immediately sent back by IAF jets on February 27.
