Fake encounter: suspension of sentence of 11 cops quashed

Govt.’s 2015 order doesn’t show application of mind, says HC

The Bombay High Court on Wednesday quashed the suspension of sentence imposed on 11 policemen, who were convicted in 2013 in the Lakhan Bhaiya fake encounter case.

In a strongly-worded judgement on Wednesday, a Division Bench of Justices B.P. Dharmadhikari and Revati Mohite-Dere said the State government’s order suspending the sentence of the convicts for six months does not show application of mind and is also bereft of cogent reasons.

The 11 convicts were released from prison in December 2015 after the government passed an order suspending their sentence of life imprisonment for six months so that they could pursue the appeals filed by them in the Bombay High Court, challenging their conviction.

Lakhan Bhaiya’s brother Ramprasad Gupta subsequently filed a writ petition in the HC challenging the suspension, which was ordered by the government under provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code.

“The HC order is very satisfactory and shows clearly how the State government differentiates between common criminals and its own people,” Mr. Gupta said.

The Bench said reports were submitted to the State government by various parties, including the then Commissioner of Police, Mumbai, and officials from the Prisons department, along with an opinion from a Sessions Court judge.

The HC referred to its own order instructing the Mumbai Police to start an investigation into the fake encounter, on the basis of which a Special Investigation Team (SIT) was formed, arrests were made, and subsequently the accused were convicted.

“The said fact was completely overlooked/ignored by the respondent no. 1 (State government) while passing the impugned order, showing not only non-application of mind, but consideration of irrelevant material and non-consideration of relevant material,” the Bench said.

The judges further said, “It is amply evident that the respondent no.1 has considered irrelevant material and ignored relevant material, while passing the impugned order, warranting interference in writ jurisdiction. In the aforesaid circumstances, a judicial review of administrative action is warranted to uphold the rule of law, lest, it results in failure of justice. Courts cannot be expected to be silent spectators to such decisions, which are blatantly perverse and unsustainable in law.”

An alleged aide of gangster Rajendra Nikhalje alias Chhota Rajan, Ramnarayan Gupta alias Lakhan Bhaiya was shot dead in an encounter in 2006. His brother, Ramprasad, sought an inquiry into the matter, and the SIT, which was formed on orders of the HC, arrested 22 accused, including senior police inspector Pradeep Sharma, who was at the time dismissed from the force.

In 2013, Mr. Sharma was acquitted in the case while the rest of the accused were convicted. Mr. Sharma was later reinstated and now heads the anti-extortion cell of the Thane Police Crime Branch.
