J&K: Definite trend and desperation on Pakistan’s part to indigenise terrorism in Kashmir: Top Army officer

(This story originally appeared in on Jan 10, 2019)

Pakistan’s export of terrorism is suffering with most terrorists being eliminated on the LoC itself while trying to infiltrate Indian territory. Besides, the large number of Pakistani nationals killed in Kashmir has exposed Pakistan as an incubator of terrorism, the Army’s top officer in the Valley, Srinagar-based 15 Corps commander Lt Gentellsin an interview. ExcerptsI would like put it differently, call it a very special year. Firstly, the Centre took the noble initiative of observing `Non-Initiation of Combat Operations’ during the holy month of Ramzan as a goodwill gesture for the ‘awaam (people)’. This was followed by focus on an extended duration Amarnath Yatra, which was conducted without any incident. Another major initiative was to hold elections for urban local bodies and panchayats in the entire state after 2011, a grass-root democratic process to empower people.The security forces, in total synergy with intelligence agencies, were successful in killing over 250 terrorists in 2018, the highest in last 11 years. Also, this was achieved with minimum casualties among security forces. Our counter-infiltration grid at the LoC proved to be quite effective, with the counter-terrorist grid in the hinterland functioning like a well-oiled machinery. What gives me great satisfaction is that our own losses in combat reduced considerably, with the soldier to terrorist attrition ratio being 1:8.The overall security situation is steadily improving, barring some pockets in south Kashmir. Our objective is to bring conditions of peace and defeat Pakistan’s proxy war . Our challenges are three-fold: increased local recruitment, radicalisation and alienation. Our aim is to neutralise those who abet/instigate the youth, especially stone-pelters.Terrorism in Kashmir continues to be fully funded, organised and abetted by Pakistan. The terror infrastructure in Pakistan comprising Pak Army, ISI, special terror outfits, the so-called strategic assets like LeT, JeM, UJC and Al Badr, jihadi seminaries and madrassa networks, remains intact. The main terror-training camps are in the hinterland, which supply trained jihadis as per the Pak Army-ISI’s demand. There are always 300-350 terrorists stationed in launch pads, ready to infiltrate, which are de-facto Pak army camps located close to its bases.I see a definite trend and desperation on Pakistan’s part to indigenise terrorism in Kashmir. The reasons are evident. First, only a miniscule number of infiltrators are succeeding despite daily attempts. Many are eliminated at the LoC itself, with Pakistan army also paying a heavy price. Second, scores of terrorists killed every year are Pakistani nationals, which reinforces the international community’s belief that Pakistan continues to be the world’s terror incubator. Given its exalted treatment to terror icons like Hafiz Saeed, Masood Azhar and the like, Pakistan’s claim of also being a victim of terrorism has no takers. Hence, Pakistan is using social media, its proxies like JRL, Jamaitees, Tehreek-e-Hurriyat and other Salafi-Wahabi organisations to fan radicalisation and promote a jihadi version of Islam.The security forces’ SOP is to conduct operations with no loss of civilian lives and minimum damage to property. But during some operations in south Kashmir, instigators succeed in pushing gullible sections of civilians, especially youth, to encounter sites with a false belief that they would be able to assist the terrorists escape by indulging in heavy stone-pelting. We are devising ways to keep civilians away from encounter sites. With the cooperation of people, especially parents, elders and civil society, we hope to avoid civilian casualties. Loss of civilian life only benefits those whose sole agenda is to widen the alienation. So, my appeal to youth and parents is: never rush to encounter sites since your life is precious to your family and the society. Pakistan and its proxies want you to be cannon fodder. Don’t fall prey to their evil propaganda.AFSPA is an enabling provision for the Army to undertake counter-terror operations. Today, there is no secure zone available to terrorists and our relentless operations force them to keep changing their locations. Revocation from certain areas has the danger of that area becoming safe havens for terrorists. Hence, any abrupt/selective revocation is not advisable.I would like to reinforce the Army chief’s Dos and Don’ts are strictly followed. As a practice, all searches by us are carried out with police, even though AFSPA permits independent searches. Also, we detain a suspect only as an exception.Our response to any ceasefire violation by Pakistan is instant, befitting and proportionate to make its provocative actions cost prohibitive. Ceasefire violations are always triggered by Pakistan to facilitate infiltrations. Our response to such blatant acts of hostility by Pakistan will continue to be prompt.
