India must behave sensibly

It seems like things are going to get harder for Kashmiri Muslims. The targeting of people of Kashmiri origin all over India is the first occurrence of its kind in the history of present India. The evidence of brutality committed against Kashmiris at work, educational institutions and on the street, is easily available on social media or press. It is as if the hate that stirred against Muslims during Partition has stirred again, but is now directed only at Kashmiri Muslims. The government of India is out to accuse Pakistan of the suicide attack on the CRPF personnel in Pulwama. On the other hand, India has to answer why its security forces are at war with the people of Kashmir. There are innumerable cases of abominable killings being committed against Kashmiris; including rape and gang rape, mass murder and blinding by pellet gun. And India still expect from Kashmiris not to raise their voice against atrocities of Indian forces. It is the militant Hindu fundamentalists that are working hard to curb genuine struggle to seek right of self-determination by Kashmiris in the Indian Occupied Kashmir (IOK). These fundamentalists are entrenched in the Indian security forces stationed in IOK and the administration. They are currently engaged in brutal acts of violence against Kashmiri Muslims there. Actually, India is being ruled over by the ferocious and radical elements that are dreaming of staying in power even after the approaching elections. Indians cannot live in peace if they continue to support the extremist elements in their country. The general public in India will have to unseat the ruling party led by Narendra Modi. Conflicts only kill the opportunity for economic prosperity and peace. Among the conflicts in the South Asia, Kashmir is the biggest one. In the long run, India will have to to opt for negotiations to resolve this issue, so why not now. Politicizing the Pulwama incident for the sake of winning the hearts and minds of Hindu fundamentalists to secure their votes for elections is quite damaging. It may increase the vote bank for the BJP government for the time being but would endanger the region’s peace and harmony. India has a truck-load of international obligations accepted at the United Nations. It refers to Kashmir as an integral part of its territory, however, the facts do not certify this claim. India has agreed to have a free and fair UN-supervised referendum in Kashmir. It has been duly cautioned by the UN Security Council, that the Government on the Indian side of Kashmir is not a representative government. India had better behave prudently for the sake of its people and stop escalating tension along the LoC.

Politicizing the Pulwama incident for the sake of winning the hearts and minds of Hindu fundamentalists to secure their votes for elections is quite damaging.
