Opposition parties still have no PM choice: Amit Shah

NIZAMABAD: Bharatiya Janata Party president Amit Shah on Wednesday criticised the Opposition parties on Wednesday for seeking proof of the air strikes carried out by the Indian Air Force on terrorist camps inside Pakistan territory after the Pulwama attack.

Pakistan is not in a position to ask for proof of IAF strikes, but Congress president “Rahul Baba” and Telugu Desam president N. Chandrababu Naidu are asking for proof of the strikes, he said. “We don't know why the Pakistan media and Indian Opposition leaders are expressing similar doubts and demanding proofs of air strikes,” Mr Shah said.

The BJP held a cluster meeting for the forthcoming Parliamentary elections in Nizamabad on Wednesday. Shakti Kendra leaders of Nizamabad, Adilabad, Karimnagar, Medak and Zaheerabad parliamentary constituencies took part in the meeting.

In his address at the meeting, the BJP chief said he has been waiting for the last one-and-a-half months for the Opposition parties to name their Prime Ministerial candidate. "We are proud to say Narendra Modi is our PM candidate for the next elections," he said.

Mr Shah said though the names of Mr Akhilesh Yadav, Ms Mayawati, Ms Mamata Banerjee, Mr M.K. Stalin and Mr N. Chandrababu Naidu are in the limelight, there was no certainty of whom the Opposi-tion would project as its Prime Minister candidate. He said there is no sincerity or ideology among Opposition parties over good governance, as they are united only to share power. He said that only Mr Narendra Modi’s able leadership could resolve all problems of the country.

Mr Shah claimed that Mr Narendra Modi put India on the right path right after the US and Israel when it came to air strikes. He said the BJP performed in its 55-month rule better than the Congress' 55 years in power.

He urged the party workers to strive hard for victory of the BJP in the coming elections. He said the TRS was encouraging the Razakars whose mantle the MIM has inherited.

BJP MP Bandaru Dattatreya, party state president K. Laxman, senior leaders G. Kishan Reddy, N. Indrasena Reddy, Arvind Limbale, Arvind Dharmapuri, Dhanpal Suryanarayana Gupta and E. Laxminarayana were among those present at the meeing.
