Bombay HC nixes Maharashtra government's relief for 11 fake encounter cops

MUMBAI: The Bombay high court on Wednesday struck down Maharashtra government’s decision to suspend the life sentence of 11 police officers convicted in the 2006 fake encounter of Ramnarayan Gupta alias Lakhan Bhaiya, an alleged close aide of gangster Chhota Rajan In a scathing judgment, a division bench of Justice Bhushan Dharmadhikari and Justice Revati Dere termed the state’s decision “perverse”. The bench also castigated special CBI judge for the “casual and cavalier” way recommendation was given to suspend the punishment.“It appears that all agencies of the government had submitted reports to facilitate the release of the police officers, by submitting biased reports,” said the bench. “Judicial review of administrative action is warranted to uphold the rule of law, lest it results in failure of justice. Courts cannot be expected to be silent spectators to such decisions, which are blatantly perverse and unsustainable in law.”The court was hearing a petition filed by the deceased’s advocate brother Ramprasad Gupta challenging the December 2, 2015 decision of the state government to suspend the punishment of the police officers for six months and release them from prison.The high court had subsequently, in an interim order, stayed the decision and sent the 11 cops back to jail.Gupta and his friend Anil Bheda were picked up by a police team from Vashi on November 11, 2006. Gupta was killed in a fake encounter near Versova’s Nana-Nani Park the same day. In 2013, a sessions court acquitted prime accused encounter specialist Pradeep Sharma, but convicted 21 others, including Pradeep Suryawanshi and 12 other police officers.Advocate Yug Chaudhry, counsel for Gupta, questioned the legal validity of the government directive as the early release of a convict serving life imprisonment could have been considered only after 14 years. The advocate said the state could not have exercised its powers when the appeals against the conviction were pending in the high court. The state had justified its decision saying the police officers were released so that they could instruct their lawyers and pursue the early hearing of their appeals.The HC bench pointed to errors at every stage of the decision-making process. Under the law, the state should have approached the judge who had held the officers guilty or his successor for an opinion on suspending the conviction. Instead, the jail authorities approached special CBI judge M B Gosavi. There were two copies of recommendation of the judge—the latter one with grammatical errors.The HC said the state relied on earlier reports that said the encounter was genuine and not on the subsequent report of the metropolitan magistrate’s report that had held that the encounter was fake and Gupta had been abducted and murdered in police custody.The no-objection certificate given by the Mumbai police commissioner was flawed, said the court as it did not mention that the bail pleas of the convicts had been rejected. The additional director general of police’s report too showed non-application of mind, said the bench.“The (government’s) order shows not only non-application of mind, but also consideration of irrelevant factors and non-consideration of relevant factors... (the order) is also bereft of cogent reasons,” the high court said.The bench said that the special CBI judge, while giving his opinion, had not considered the fact that bail pleas of the convicts were rejected. “One cannot lose sight of the fact that when the government seeks opinion of the judge, the object is to ensure that the nature of opinion will throw light on the nature of crime committed, the record of the convict himself, his background and other relevant factors... (this) will enable the government to take the right decision, as to whether or not suspension of sentences should be granted," said the bench, adding, “as such, the judge cannot abdicate his duty in a casual and cavalier manner, as has been done in the present case.”
