Pune slips in Swachh Survekshan ranking

Opposition demands action on consultant appointed to look over projects that could have ensured a better score



Despite several new initiatives launched to execute Swachh Survekshan 2019, Pune could not retain its 10th rank. While the administration aimed for a threestar rating, it managed to secure two. The officials said that they lost points in the documentation domain, a claim that has been slammed by the Opposition members, who have also demanded action on the consultant involved in the process.



The person concerned surveyed various projects like selfie with SWaCH workers and levying fines on those who spit on roads. The cleanliness quotient was escalated by appointment of security personnel at chronic spots and the officials had also drawn rangolis and carried out plantations in these spaces. These efforts won Pune the 14th rank in the categories of cities above 10 lakh population and to 37th in the cities above one lakh population.



Dnyaneshwar Molak, head of solid waste management department, said, “I checked the ranking details and we have found out that we have lost marks in the documentation category. As we had submitted all the required documents, we are really trying to understand what went wrong.”



Ruling party members have claimed that this could be the result of ongoing infrastructure projects in the city, which has resulted in accumulating debris. Mayor Mukta Tilak, too, supported the administration. She said, “We have really worked hard and the change can be clearly seen. It seems that something has gone wrong in the documentation. We will see what can be done.”



Opposition parties have however blamed the consultant and have demanded action. Nationalist Congress Party leader Dilip Barate said that PMC shelled out Rs 34 lakh for the consultant, and added that this amount has gone in vain. “The ruling party has failed to deliver. We want action against the person concerned and want the administration to recover the amount paid in the process,” he said.



Lakshmi Narayan, founder of SWaCH Cooperative pointed at the ranking break-up which highlights the positives and the negatives of the statistics. She said, “Pune has taken good strides in the integration of waste pickers, door-to-door collection, segregation and container reduction, getting almost 100 per cent results and that too, at the least cost. The city needs to now reach out further through citizen participation in solid waste management and strengthen the secondary collection management systems.”




