Centre, Opposition spar over Pulwama and its aftermath

National Conference leader Omar Abdullah said, "TV channels claim to have accessed secret dossiers and reports related to Balakot and the government has no problem with that. As with everything else this government is very selective with where it directs its outrage."

The war of words between the government and the opposition over Pulwama and the Balakot airstrike continued after Prime Minister Narendra Modi hit out at Congress leader Digvijaya Singh for calling the Pulwama terror attack an "accident".

On Wednesday, Digvijaya retweeted a video link, which showed Uttar Pradesh's deputy chief minister Keshav Prasad Maurya, calling the February 14 Pulwama terror attack, in which 40 CRPF personnel were martyred, an "accident". Earlier Digvijaya had said, "Modiji, you and many of your ministers have made several allegations against me. Many of your BJP leaders want to lodge cases of sedition against me. My tweet, over which you've accused me of being a Pakistani supporter, was sent from Delhi. The police in Delhi is under central jurisdiction. I dare you to file a case against me if you have the courage."

As the Opposition continued to raise questions over the damage inflicted by the Indian Air Force in Balakot, Pakistan on February 26, MoS External Affairs, General VK Singh posted a sarcastic tweet on Wednesday. He wrote, "Last night at 3.30 am there were too many mosquitoes, so I used HIT (repellant). Now should I start counting how many mosquitoes I killed or should I go back to sleep?"

Speaking to the media later, VK Singh poked fun at the Opposition and said the next time the government conducts a counter-terror operation maybe it should tie Opposition leaders to the bottom of the Indian Air Force aircrafts and carry them along, so they can see the damage inflicted first hand. Responding to the jibe, Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said, "I think he (VK Singh) should take (Keshav Prasad) Mauryaji in the flight next time."

As the day progressed and the politicking continued, Opposition leaders were quick to take the Centre to task over some media outlets claiming to have accessed IAF-provided satellite imagery from Balakot that showed the success of the mission. In a tweet, National Conference leader Omar Abdullah said, "TV channels claim to have accessed secret dossiers & reports related to #Balakot and the Govt has no problem with that. As with everything else this government is very selective with where it directs its outrage."

Abdullah was commenting in reference to the government claiming in the Supreme Court earlier in the day that secret Rafale documents had been "stolen" from the Ministry of Defence and given to a news publication, against which it was mulling invoking the Official Secrets Act. Meanwhile, sources have clarified to India Today Television that no satellite imagery has been shared with the media by the Indian Air Force, but evidence does exist to counter Pakistan's claims that India's 'Mission Balakot' had failed.

ALSO READ | Digvijaya Singh quotes foreign agency report, questions airstrike success

ALSO READ | Ab machchar kitne mare ye ginne baithu?: VK Singh takes jibe at Opposition

ALSO WATCH | Should I count dead mosquitoes or sleep comfortably: VK Singh on casualty numbers for Balakot airstrike
