RSS' crucial three-day meet in Madhya Pradesh's Gwalior from March 8

Ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) is holding a three-day annual meeting of its Akhil Bharatiya Pratinidhi Sabha (ABPS) – the highest decision making body of the Sangh – in Madhya Pradesh's Gwalior from March 8 where important resolutions on the contemporary situation of the country will be passed.

The ABPS meeting, which will begin at 8.30 am on Friday, will be inaugurated by RSS sarsanghchalak Mohan Bhagwat and sarkaryavah (general secretary) Bhaiyaji Joshi, said an RSS statement. The RSS sarsanghchalak will address the concluding session of the ABPS on March 10, it said.

According to RSS sources, the crucial meeting will be attended by the representatives of all 39 organisations of the Sangh including BJP, Vishva Hindu Parishad (VHP), Swadeshi Jagran Manch (SJM) and Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP). Around 1400 delegates, from across the nation, will attend the meeting, sources said. BJP president Amit Shah is likely to attend the meeting on March 9, party sources informed.

The meeting will be attended by all RSS national executives, zonal executives, prant sangh chalaks (state heads of the RSS), prant karyabahas (state general secretaries), prant pracharaks, bibhag pramukhs (zonal heads), bibhag pracharaks, sources said.

Ahead of the three-day meeting, RSS national executive members are meeting on Thursday to give a final touch to the ABPS agenda. "The ABPS meeting will evaluate the organisational works of the RSS in the last one year. In addition, it will chalk out strategy for the Sangh for the next one year," said RSS Akhil Bharatiya Prachar Pramukh Arun Kumar while addressing reporters in Gwalior.

The crucial ABPS meeting will discuss in detail about the contemporary situations of the country vis-a-vis national, social, political and religious, and pass some "important resolutions" to this effect, sources said. The ABPS is expected to bring resolutions national security, cross boarder terrorism and Kashmir issue, sources said.

In the run up to the 2019 elections, the RSS will instruct the swayamsevaks to take part in the "national festival of democracy" and encourage people to cast their ballot and ensure maximum polling, sources said. The ABPS will further ask the swayamsevaks to help bring the party to power which can really "protect" the "national interest", sources said.

The ABPS meeting assumes significance as it comes amid escalating tensions between India and Pakistan in the wake of the dastardly Pulwama terror attack, perpetrated by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), which snuffed out the lives of 40 CRPF personnel. India has avenged the attack by obliterating several terror lunch pads in Pakistan. The RSS has congratulated the Modi government and the Indian Air Force and for "translating the feelings and anger of millions of Indians".
