Give peace a chance

History teaches us that all wars have resulted in a high number of casualties and great levels of destruction. Wars have shattered countries’ infrastructure and their economies, displaced people from their homes and compelled them to live as a refugee in a foreign land. Countries go hundreds of years back due to destruction created by weapons and canons. This brings the younger generation to a state of depression. All dreams of a better life dissipate in the thin air. To maintain peace in the region, India and Pakistan should have proper dialogue to settle the Kashmir issue which has brought the two neighbours on the verge of war.

India should learn from history which explains how Japan lost two cities following an atomic bomb attack. The longest Afghanistan war has finally brought world leaders to the negotiating table. All countries have accepted that war settles nothing, but only brings destruction. India has to learn the hard truth and refrain from repeating the mistakes committed in the past.

Mujeeb Ali Samo

Larkana

*****

In response to India’s misadventure, PM Imran Khan made it clear that Pakistan wants peace. Following the Pulwama attack, India entered into Pakistan’s airspace with malicious intentions. Pakistan responded in a timely manner and shot down two IAF fighter jets and captured one Indian pilot. Even then Pakistan refrained from escalating the tensions and released the pilot as a peace gesture.

The Indian PM needs to rethink his jingoistic policy and stop spewing venom against Pakistan. He knows well that his government has lost its support base and to conceal his failures, he is shifting the Indians’ attention to war with Pakistan. His uncalled for diatribe against Muslims has allowed bigoted elements in India to ignite hatred against Indian Muslims. On the other hand, Pakistan is doing everything it can to safeguard the rights of its minority communities. Follwoing Fayyazul Hassan Chohan’s derogatory remarks against Hindus, the CM of Punjab asked the latter to step down from his post. The Modi-led Indian government will now have to decide whether it is serious about maintaining peace in South Asia.

Muhammad Fayyaz Nawrha

Mianwali

*****

The entire world is talking about the India-Pakistan dispute. In the entire episode, India has shown irresponsibility. Many voices from within India had no scruples in rooting for a full-fledged war. Without providing any evidence to back its claim, India has accused Pakistan of orchestrating the Pulwama attack. However, Pakistan assured India that it would take proper action if India provided credible evidence. It also invited India to conduct talks on the Kashmir issue. but India has not given any positive response.

A nuclear war between India and Pakistan will lead to great destruction. Millions of people will die and the economies of the two countries will suffer irreversible losses. Peace-loving people from both sides of the border must convince India to give peace a chance.

Farooque Ali

Larkana
