J&K: Terrorist gunned down in Handwara

Night and weekend curfew in Jammu and Kashmir 2022: Know guidelines, rules: What is allowed, what is not

J&K: Terrorist gunned down in Handwara

India

oi-Vikas SV

Srinagar, Mar 7: A gunbattle broke out between the security forces and the terrorists this morning in Jammu and Kashmir's Handwara. As per latest reports, one terrorist was killed.

The encounter began in Kralgund area of Handwara on Thursday morning with a brief exchange of fire. The internet was been suspended in the area in the wake of the gunbattle..

On March 5, two Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists were gunned down in Jammu and Kashmir's Tral area following a gunbattle between them and the security forces. Two terrorist were killed and one civilian was reportedly injured. He was caught in crossfire between the forces and the terrorists.

There have been at least five major encounters between the forces and the terrorists in Kashmir since India carried out a pre-emptive stike on JeM base in Pakistan's Balakot of February 26.

[Escalating tension as Pakistan mobilises additional troops, weaponry]

Two terrorists were killed in an encounter with terrorists in Babgund area of J&K's Handwara on March 3. The gunbattle went on for almost three days. The death toll of the security forces was five. The encounter began on Friday (March 1) morning when security forces launched a search operation in the area in north Kashmir, following information about presence of militants there.

[Indian Army needs free hand to counter Pakistani e-jihad in Kashmir]

Terrorists on Saturday (March 2) evening launched an attack on a camp of the 44 RR (Rashtriya Rifles) in Nagbal in Shopian district. Police were alerted immediately, who retaliated and fired back. The fresh encounters came amid heightened Indo-Pak tensions in the aftermath of Pulwama terror attack, the subsequent anti-terror operation by India and Pakistan Air Force's attempt to target Indian military installations in Jammu and Kashmir.
