Tailor-made mystery: Police solve murder using shirt tag

tailoring shop

Ujjjani forest

Bengaluru

Wife and paramour strangle victim for suspecting about their affairThe tag of aresulted in the detection of a brutal murder of a 30-year-old man after his disfigured body was found at thearea in Doddaballapura in the outskirts of the city. When the police found the body, there was no identity marker to determine his identity. Based on the tag of the tailor’s shop on the victim’s shirt, the police carried out the investigations and traced his identity. The victim’s wife and her paramour have been arrested on charges of murder.“Based on the details on the tag, we went in search of the tailoring shops in and around Hessaraghatta. The tag had just half informationas there was no name of the tailoring shop on that as the shirt had been torn. With this tag, we went to about 15 tailoring shops and got leads in one of the shops. Based on the lead, we found out the name of the victim to be Umesh. We then learned other details like he was a resident of Kodigehalli in Hessaraghatta,” said an officer on part of investigations.The victim is a plumber by profession and the murder took place on February 23. The police then obtained call records of the victim and his wife and found out that she had made repeated calls to one particular number. Through local intelligence the police found out that she had an illicit affair. After she was picked up for questioning, she confessed to having killed her husband along with her paramour and his minor brother.The accused are identified as Gayathri, 23, Kiran Kumar alias Gidda, 20. Kumar is a drummer by profession and often visited his mother who lived close to Gayathri. “The victim suspected his wife’s illicit relationship and regularly fought with her. Frustrated over the fights, the accused duo hatched a plot to kill Umesh. On February 23, Kumar managed to convince Umesh to attend a party at the Ujjani forest area and took advantage of the fact that Umesh was under the influence of alcohol. The two brothers then strangled the victim to death using a wire,” the officer reported.In order to conceal the identity of the victim, the two bludgeoned his face with a stone. The juvenile offender has been sent to a remand home and the other two accused are remanded to judicial custody. The Doddaballapura police of therural district have registered a case and further investigations are on.
