Salman Khan’s film with Sanjay Leela Bhansali will star Shah Rukh Khan in a pivotal role?

If there is something everyone wants to see on screen, it is Salman Khan and Shah Rukh Khan coming together in a film. The two mega stars of Bollywood have a massive fan following all across the globe who always wish to see them in a film together. Last they were seen together shaking a leg to Zero’s song Issaqbaazi. The audiences went crazy seeing Salman and SRK burning up the dance floor in the song and wanted to see more of them. Looks like their wishes might be coming true soon.

As already reported, Salman Khan will start shooting for Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s love story this year. Now, reports are coming in that Sanjay Leela Bhansali might also rope in Shah Rukh Khan for an important role in that film. Yes, as per a report in DNA, “It is believed that Shah Rukh will also be roped in for a pivotal part in the Salman-Sanjay film. Considering that the last time the two superstars did a film together was Hum Tumhare Hain Sanam, notwithstanding SRK’s cameo in Tubelight and Salman’s in Zero, the two Khans in a Bhansali film will attract audiences to theatres.”

Well, looks like the two biggest Khans might come together in this epic saga by Sanjay Leela Bhansali. Sanjay’s last film Padmaavat managed to become a blockbuster and was one of the greatest films of all times. This one with Salman Khan is a love story and will be from an angle which hasn’t been explored.

(Also Read: Salman Khan and Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s untitled film to go on floors in THIS month?)

Meanwhile, Salman Khan recently wrapped up the shoot for Bharat in which he will be seen alongside Katrina Kaif. The movie is an official adaptation of a South Korean film, An Ode To My Father. The movie also stars Disha Patani, Jackie Shroff, Tabu, Sunil Grover and Nora Fatehi. Bharat has been shot at multiple locations like Abu Dhabi, Delhi and Punjab. The last schedule was shot in Mumbai. Helmed by Ali Abbas Zafar, Bharat is slated to release on EID 2019.
