BMC offers to take in affected students

BMC

government recognition

civic-run schools

Right to Education Act

Brihanmumbai Mahapalika Shikshak Sabha

The schools have been declared unauthorised in the absence of necessary government recognition; fate of around 20,000 students still uncertain.The, which recently declared 211 schools across Mumbai unauthorised for not having, is ready to accommodate the students inor private ones.The BMC move has plunged the fate of around 20,000 students studying in the schools into uncertainty. The 211 schools don’t have mandatory civic sanction under theto conduct classes because the managements had not applied for it at the appropriate time. Their delayed proposals for approvals are now pending with the government.“Out of the 211 schools, the proposals for approval from 142 schools are pending with the government while seven schools have been given recognition. We are getting proposals from the remaining schools,” said Mahesh Palkar, BMC’s education officer, told Mirror.Palkar added that out of the 233 schools that were declared unauthorised last year, the civic body shut around five. However, no school from the new list has been asked to stop functioning.“The approval process for the fresh list is still on and is expected to be concluded by April end. In the meantime, we are ready to accommodate the 20,000 students from the 211 schools in BMC schools or nearby private schools,” he said.This year’s list has 163 English, 17 Hindi, 17 Urdu and 14 Marathi schools.Ramesh Joshi ofhas written to Palkar on Tuesday, urging him to act against the authorities of these school.However, due to lack of official guidelines, the civic body has not been able to take any action against the erring school managements.“We keep writing to the presidents, secretaries and principals of the schools. There is a provision for punitive measures, but there are no guidelines from the government as to how to carry out the process, which court to approach and how much fine to pay. Once the government issues direction, we will be able to follow the legal process. As of today, we do not have the guidelines,” Palkar added.The BMC has been releasing lists of unauthorised schools for the past three years to sensitise the parents. Joshi insisted that the education department should not leave the students and their parents at the mercy of the administration.He said that he had invoked the Right to Information Act in 2015 to obtain a list of schools without necessary recognition. “There were 4.18 lakh students who were at the risk of being out of school,” Joshi said.
