Indian sub didn’t enter our waters: Khattak

ISLAMABAD: Defence Minister Pervaiz Khattak Wednesday told the Senate that the Indian submarine had not intruded into the Pakistani waters and went into the deep sea when it sensed retaliation.

The government came under fire again in the House for allegedly not exposing the war-mongering and aggressive designs of India at the world foras and not taking the issue of Indian aggression to the UN Security Council.

Making a policy statement in the House in response to the opposition senators’ fiery speeches, Khattak explained that it was a great achievement of the Pakistan Navy to detect the enemy submarine and timely warned it to move away.

The minister said threat from India was till there and the armed forces were ready to thwart its aggressive designs.

He explained that Pakistan’s territorial waters were up to 12 nautical miles and indigenous zone to 24 nautical miles, whereas the Indian submarine was detected at 90 nautical miles in the extensive economic zone, which spread over to 200 nautical miles.

Reading out a statement, the minister said Pakistan reserved the right to target had the Indian sub entered its territorial waters.

“Detection of a sub-marine by Pakistan Navy is a great achievement and it would be accordingly recorded in history,” he maintained.

The minister said a conventional submarine could stay in water for 2 to 3 days and then it had to return.

The Indian navy and Pakistan Navy were ready and keeping an eye on one another and same was the case with the Pakistan Air Force and the armed forces.

He noted that the government had already given go-ahead to the armed forces to retaliate more vigorously in case of any aggression.

The minister said Pakistan was in safe hands and the entire nation, the political parties and Parliament stood behind their armed forces.

“It is Modi’s political stunt and drama for gains in elections,” the minister.

About ex-chairman Senate Mian Raza Rabbani’s concern over any agreement on the use of F-16 aircraft and the US announcement to find out whether these planes were used, the minister said he would check if any such agreement existed.

Earlier, opposition senators, mainly Senator Rabbani, Sherry Rehman, Javed Abbasi, Pervaiz Rashid, Mushahidullah, Abdul Qayyum and Mushtaq Ahmad slammed the government for not effectively exposing India at the international foras and not being able to take the matter of Indian aggression to the United Nations Security Council, the Commonwealth and the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation.

The joint opposition demanded an in-camera session to share details of the thwarted Indian bid to enter Pakistan waters and as to who was taking decisions that Pakistan would not respond in the face of Indian air space aggression, sub-marine’s bid to violate Pakistan waters and violation of the Line of Control.

They lamented that despite carrying out Pulwama attack, then committing violation of Pakistan’s air space, sending decapitated body of a deranged Pakistani citizen and then its bid to enter Pakistani waters, Pakistan was being held accountable.

The legislators slammed Pakistan’s ‘sleeping’ diplomacy in the given critical situation. They noted that while ministers found time to take part in TV talk shows and hold news conferences, they were shy of coming to Parliament to share vital information and take its input.

The senators questioned what they alleged the government’s silence in the face of Indian propaganda against Pakistan.

They decried US objections to Pakistan’s use of F-16s and wondered were these purchased for giving swings to kids.

“If Pakistan can’t use them for its defence, then what is their utility,” wondered one senator.

Earlier, Minister for Human Rights Shireen Mazari informed the House that an FIR was being registered in Pakistan against the Jail Superintendent of Jaipur jail for murdering Pakistani citizen Shakir Ullah by its inmates last week.

She said if Parliament adopted a resolution, seeking compensation for the family of slain Pakistani citizen, the government would comply with it.

She added the matter was taken up with India, as Pakistani mission was not allowed to be present at the time of his postmortem in India and, therefore, postmortem was again conducted in Pakistan. The minister added a written complaint was lodged with the ICRC about the killing of Shakir Ullah.
