Pakistan intelligence used Jaish-e-Mohammad to target India, says Pervez Musharraf

Former Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf said Jaish had tried to assassinate him twice.

Former Pakistan President Pervez Musharraf on Wednesday indicated that his country's intelligence had used the Jaish-e-Mohammad to carry out attacks in India during his tenure.

Welcoming action against the terrorist organisation, Pervez Musharraf told a Pakistani TV news channel that Jaish-e-Mohammad had tried to assassinate him twice in December 2003.

The telephonic interview has been shared on the Facebook and Twitter page of the journalist.

"Jaish is a terrorist organisation. Tough action by the government is a welcome move," Musharraf said during the telephonic interview. He added that it was Jaish that tried to assassinate him twice.

On being asked why didn't he act against the Jaish during his tenure, Pervez Musharraf remarked "those times were different".

"At that time, India and Pakistan were bombing each other's territory and even I didn't insist on action against the terrorist organisation," the former Pakistan President said. He, however, added that the Pakistan intelligence was engaged in the attacks.

Pakistan-based JeM, led by Masood Azhar, is believed to be behind the Pulwama attack that killed over 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir.

The Centre has also shared evidence related to the terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad's role in the Pulwama terror attack with Pakistan.

The government has also sent excerpts of the dossier shared with Pakistan to all its missions across the world.

India had also shared the dossier with Pakistan after repeated requests by the Imran Khan-government to share evidence of the involvement of JeM with it.

However, Pakistan has rejected India's claim that Masood Azhar-led JeM was behind the attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district.

ALSO READ | If we attack with one atomic bomb, India can finish us with 20: Musharraf

ALSO READ | Pakistan foreign minister hints that govt in touch with Jaish leadership

ALSO WATCH | Jaish-e-Mohammad does not exist in the country, claims Pakistan military spokesperson
