Thinking that its water, Class 5 girl drinks acid in Delhi school; Succumbs to internal injuries

SAT exam pattern changes, to go digital: All the details here

Thinking that its water, Class 5 girl drinks acid in Delhi school; Succumbs to internal injuries

New Delhi

oi-Vikas SV

New Delhi, Mar 7: In a horrifying incident, a 11-year-old school girl reportedly succumbed to internal injuries in a Delhi hospital after she allegedly drank acid mistaking it for her water bottle. Another student of her school had brought acid in a plastic bottle and 11-year-old class 5 student drank it during the lunch break, said reports.

She immediately felt a burning sensation in her throat and started screaming, a Hindustan Times report quoted Deputy commissioner of police (northeast) Atul Kumar Thakur as saying.

Delhi women's panel seeks complete ban on sale of acid in city

The horrifying incident took place at Deep Bharti Public School in Harsh Vihar. The nature of the acid is yet to be ascertained and the plastic bottle has been sent to forensic laboratory.

A case under Section 304A of the Indian Penal Code has been registered at the Harsh Vihar police station, said the HT report.

Police said that the negligence claimed the life of 11-year-old girl and a probe is underway to fix the responsibility for this.

Since the class teacher of class 4 was on leave, the students of classes 4 and 5 were made to sit together. While the class 5 girl was having her lunch along with a class 4 girl, she felt thirsty and asked the other girl if she could drink from her bottle. The class 4 girl gave the class 5 girl her plastic bottle.

"When Sanjana consumed the liquid, she felt a burning sensation in her throat and started screaming. By the time the school staffers rushed to the classroom, Sanjana began throwing up and fell unconscious," the report quoted Thakur as saying.

Delhi: Police officer shot at by two unknown assailants

She was rushed to Guru Teg Bahadur hospital and her parents were informed. She succumbed to internal injuries in on Tuesday (March 5) evening.

As per reports, the family members of the class 4 girl, who was sitting with the victim during lunch, have stated that they kept toilet cleaning acid in a bottle similar to class 4 girl's water bottle. The girl mistook it for her water bottle and took it to school, police said.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Thursday, March 7, 2019, 10:24 [IST]
