KCCI condemns attack on Kashmirs in Lucknow, seeks action

Srinagar

The Kashmir Chamber of Commerce and Industry condemned the assault on two Kashmiri dry fruit vendors in Lucknow on Wednesday.

A spokesperson of the KCC&I said that more condemnable than the attack was done by “goons and hooligans” in Uttar Pradesh and other States. The registration of the case under weak and feeble provisions of rioting and breach of peace, for which only one person has been “booked”, seems to have been intentionally done to facilitate the early release of the culprit.

The videos of the incident clearly show it to be a case of attempt to “murder” and how the Uttar Pradesh police interpreted it to be a case of one man riot is indicative of external influence.

The State of Uttar Pradesh has by its brazen patronage, shown scant regard for the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India issued to, among others, the Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary and Director General of Police, for taking prompt and necessary action to prevent incidents of threat and assault on Kashmiris.

Nasir Hamid Khan, Senior Vice President, KCC&I urged the Hon’ble Governor Satya Pal Malik to use his good offices for ensuring that cases are registered for an attempt to “murder” and other stringent provisions of criminal law against the goons and the organisations they belong to. There was enough evidence for invocation of these provisions and it would also act as a deterrent to others thinking of targeting innocent people in the future.

He said that the KCC&I was hopeful that the Hon’ble Supreme Court would take note of the complicity of various State’s who were registering cases under weak provisions of law. This conduct has resulted in goons and hooligans being emboldened to post videos of their murderous assaults on social media.

In the interest of providing justice to the growing number of victims of assault and intimidation, the KCC&I would also be consulting the J&K High Court Bar Association, Srinagar regarding demand for setting up of a Special Trial Court, registration of criminal proceedings in Srinagar or other legal remedies available as a free and fair trial outside Kashmir seemed impossible in the prevalent hostile condition.
