Ethical bankruptcy in Indian politics

Dr Shalini Saxena has done her Ph.D. from Lucknow University in March 2010. Prior to this, she completed her M.Phil. from Centre for International Politics, Organization and Disarmament, School of International Studies, Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi, in International Politics. She has done M.A. (Political Science) from Department of Political Science, University of Lucknow. Currently she is working as Associate Professor in Political science and international relations and Department Coordinator in Department of Political Science, Amity Institute of Social Sciences, Amity University, Sector 125, NOIDA, UP, India. Earlier she was a Lecturer in Guru Gobind Singh College (Punjab University), Chandigarh. Her core interest areas are international relations, State and local governments, international organizations, campaign management and polling, journalism, electoral politics, research and university and college teaching. She is the editor of Amity’s political science journal ,’Politica’ and has published many research articles and book chapters in reputed national and international journals. Besides convening National conferences and workshops, she has edited a book “ Rethinking Contemporary Indian Polity”. She appears as a Political Analyst in debates on television. She is a blogger in TOI “Voices” and has her own blog in Times of India with the name “ Reformist”. She is a course developer and content maker for Political Science and International Relations. She is also a member of IPSA and IIPA. LESS ... MORE

The current state of political affairs in Indian politics is going through immense upheavals as opposition parties are behaving precisely the same, as the ruling party wants it. All attempts by the opposition parties to cast aspersions on the ruling party like Rafale, Ram Mandir, demonetization & GST have backfired. Opposition in India is completely trapped within the circumstances of the current state of political affairs. The political mood in the country has changed. Post the Pulwama attack, the opposition parties have been forced to reform and reconceptualise the strategy to counter the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. The BJP is highlighting the opposition’s insecurities that the voters might not respond well to a political combine that doesn’t have a leader.

However, if its battle plans are based on this outlook, it is fighting in a defensive position instead of being offensive. In fact, the opposition is doing precisely what the BJP thinks — and hopes — it’ll do.

In the past three decades, India has faced the menace of cross-border terrorism. India has displayed its firmness and resilience in managing these challenges, the resolution aforementioned. “The entire nation speaks in one voice to specify its determination to fight these challenges. Today, we tend to stand united in commonness with our security forces in fighting terrorist act and in defensive the unity and integrity of the Republic of India.” Once showing unity at the time of the attack, the opposition’s game face was divulged the moment they demanded proof of the air strike. Indian opposition parties are not able to gauge the intensity of harm this strategy caused their political aspirations.

The upcoming elections are to be conducted on the basis of Nationalism while the opposition is playing on the ground of corruption, casteism, and sectarian politics, farmers, employment, GST, demonetization and failures of the ruling party. However, now the pitch on which the opposition was playing has been reset by the BJP and therefore the opposition is looking for ways in which to survive in this scenario.

The BJP’s influence on social and political discourse runs deep, associate degreed support makes it a more and more philosophic character. There are wide philosophic variations between opposition parties, partially, as a result of which the Congress is the principal rival of important regional parties. Efforts are on to bring national and regional rivals along to counter the ruling party. This can be the time when opposition parties should rethink their political ways and prepare well to throw a smart challenge to the ruling party. The current politics done by the opposition is nothing but moral bankruptcy.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
