Dozens injured and teenager killed in grenade attack on bus station in Indian-controlled Kashmir

A teenager has been killed and at least 32 people were injured by a grenade blast at a bus station in Indian-controlled Kashmir today.

The grenade was hurled at the main bus station in Jammu city and rolled beneath a bus, where it exploded, police said.

The injured were taken to a hospital, including at least four who were in critical a condition.

Initially authorities said at least 18 were wounded, but local media has reported as many as 32 people suffered shrapnel and bomb blast injuries.

A teenager was one of four critical patients rushed for treatment, but later died in hospital, reports the Times of India.

Police said they are investigating who was responsible for the attack.

In the past, Indian authorities have blamed rebels fighting against Indian rule in the disputed region for similar grenade attacks, often without producing any evidence.

An injured man being carried on a stretcher for treatment at the Government Medical College hospital in Jammu City after the grenade attack

A Jammu and Kashmir police officer sitting inside a damaged bus near a grenade blast site, at a general bus stand

Indian paramilitary soldiers stand guard near a grenade blast site at the bus station in Jammu City where at least 18 people were injured

Rebels have in turn accused government agents of carrying out the attacks to defame their movement.

Authorities rushed police reinforcements to the area and sealed off the road to try to apprehend the grenade-thrower.

This is the third grenade attack by terrorists at the bus station since May last year.

The latest grenade attack has come three weeks after Indian and Pakistan were nearly dragged into a war by a suicide bombing in the Indian-controlled region that killed 40 Indian troops.

Jammu police chief M.K. Sinha told reporters at the site of the blast: 'I request everybody to maintain calm. We are chasing all leads.'

The reason for the blast was unknown, but was labelled an 'attack' by a senior government minister.

Indian people gather as Jammu and Kashmir police officers stand guard today. The area was sealed off by authorities as police tried to apprehend the attacker

A man carries an injured civilian on a stretcher for treatment after a grenade attack that left four people in a critical condition in the Indian-controlled region

A Kashmir police officer inspecting a bus damaged during a grenade attack on the main station in Jammu City today

Indian Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said on Twitter: 'The grenade attack in Jammu is condemnable [sic]. I wish the injured a speedy recovery.'

Jammu, a Hindu-majority city, experienced days of protests following a February 14 bombing, the deadliest attack against Indian forces since the start of an armed rebellion in 1989 by mostly Muslim residents in the disputed Himalayan region.

Hundreds of Hindu nationalists attacked Muslim neighbourhoods in the city, burning vehicles and hurling rocks at homes. Authorities imposed a curfew for several days in the city.

Air raids took place after jihadist group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) claimed responsibility for a suicide bombing that killed dozens of troops in Indian Kashmir three weeks ago.

The strike raised the risk of conflict between the nuclear-armed neighbours, although Pakistan officials denied there had been casualties.

In an ensuing dogfight, at least one Indian aircraft was shot down and the pilot captured by Pakistan. India claimed it had also shot down a Pakistani fighter.

As fears rose that the two nuclear-armed nations might enter their fourth war, Pakistan released the pilot in what it called a 'gesture of peace'.

Yesterday doubt was cast on Indian government statements suggesting a 'terror camp' targeted with airstrikes was destroyed.

People carrying an injured civilian on a stretcher for treatment at the Government Medical College hospital where the injured were taken

The latest grenade attack at a bus station (pictured) came three weeks after a suicide bombing in the Indian-controlled region killed 40 Indian troops

A religious school thought to have been run by the extremist group in northeastern Pakistan was still standing, according to satellite photos, despite India claiming that its warplanes had ravaged the site on February 26.

High-resolution photos taken by Planet Labs Inc, a San Francisco-based satellite operator, show at least six buildings on the site of the school, known as a madrasa.

The photos were taken on March 4, six days after the airstrike that Indian authorities claimed they killed around 300 militants.

They cast further doubt on statements from the Indian government that the raids, early on February 26, had hit all intended targets at the site near Jaba village and the town of Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

Pakistan disputes its neighbour's statement, claiming that nobody was actually killed in the airstrike and no buildings were hit.

Arch-rivals India and Pakistan each administer part of Kashmir, but both claim the region in its entirety.

Most Kashmiris support the rebels' demand that the territory be united either under Pakistani rule or as an independent country, while also participating in civilian street protests against Indian control.

About 70,000 people have been killed in the uprising and the ensuing Indian crackdown since 1989.

Until now, no high-resolution satellite images of the madrasa's site were publicly available.

Indian paramilitary personnel were rushed to the site of the grenade attack as authorities hunted for the bomber. No group has yet claimed responsibility

Policemen and onlookers stand at the site of a grenade blast at a bus station in Jammu City

But the photos from Planet Labs, which show details as small as 72 cm, have revealed the structures the Indian government said it had attacked.

The image is virtually unchanged from an April 2018 satellite photo of the same facility.

The buildings appear undamaged and there are no signs of scorching, blown-out walls or even displaced trees around the area.

According to Reuters, India's foreign and defence ministries have yet to comment on the satellite images which raise fresh doubts about the attack.

The air strike near Balakot, a town 30 miles (50km) from the frontier, was the deepest cross-border raid launched by India since the last of its three wars with Pakistan in 1971.

India's Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said at the time that 'a very large number' of militants were killed in the strikes in northeast Pakistan.

'The existence of such training facilities, capable of training hundreds of jihadis, could not have functioned without the knowledge of the Pakistani authorities,' Gokhale said. Pakistan denies harbouring JeM.

Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was captured by the Pakistani Air Force after they retaliated to India's attack

The high-resolution satellite photos show a close-up of the madrasa site in northeastern Pakistan and were taken on March 4

Pakistani officials dismissed the claims, saying the Indian aircraft had dropped their bombs in a wooded area, causing no damage or casualties.

Villagers near the town of Balakot were shaken from their sleep by the air strikes.

They said only one person was wounded in the attack and they knew of no fatalities.

In response, Pakistan launched its own raid across the Line of Control which sparked a dogfight that ended in the capture of an Indian pilot.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was later returned to India by Pakistan as a peace gesture.

Pakistan intensified its crackdown against Islamist militants today, with the government announcing it had taken control of 182 religious schools and detained more than 100 people as part of its push against banned groups.

The move represents Pakistan's biggest move against banned organisations in years and appears to be targeting Islamic welfare organisations that the United States says are a front for militant activities.
