India-Pakistan CRISIS: Bus stop GRENADE BLAST rips through Indian city - tensions on BRINK

India Pakistan: Police cordon off area after blast in Indian city

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The blast comes just weeks after a Pakistan-based militant group killed 40 paramilitary police officers in nearby Kashmir, almost sparking a war between the two nuclear-armed countries. Jammu police chief MK Sinha said: "I request everybody to maintain calm. We are chasing all leads." The motive behind the grenade explosion is unknown but it was described as an "attack" by senior government officials in New Delhi.

Obviously the intention is always to disturb the communal harmony and peace MK Sinha

Indian Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said: "The grenade attack in Jammu is condemnable. I wish the injured a speedy recovery." Jammu and Kashmir is divided between Kashmir, a Muslim-majority region that sees a large number of militant activities, and Jammu, a Hindu-majority region and home to a city of the same name. MK Sinha said: “Whenever there is a heightened state of alert, we strengthen checking and frisking but there is always a possibility of someone slipping through and this one seems to be a case like that.

Indian paramilitary police stand guards after a grenade attack in Jammu

A bus stop was targeted by the grenade attacker

“Obviously the intention is always to disturb the communal harmony and peace.” He said police were collecting evidence vowed to “to hunt the attacker down”. A police spokesman said: “A grenade was hurled by an unidentified person which exploded under a bus in the main terminal. “The bus was about to leave to Pathankot city in Punjab.”

Police are hunting a terrorist after a grenade attack in Jammu

Tensions have been running high since the February 14 suicide bombing in Indian-controlled Kashmir. Pakistan-based militant group Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) claimed responsibility for the deadly attack which sparked retaliatory Indian airstrikes on an alleged terrorist training camp near the Pakistani town of Balakot. The conflict escalated further when an Indian aircraft was shot down by Pakistan defence forces and the pilot taken prisoner before being handed back in a “gesture of peace”. Both sides have continued to fire artillery and mortars over their de-facto border.

India: Pakistan could use nuclear force warns military expert
