Tags , United- Dunya News

India involved in terrorism in Pakistan: Munir Akram Munir Akram said that India is carrying out terrorism in Pakistan to sabotage CPEC ...

World must not turn away from Afghanistan: UN Grandi said the future of millions of Afghans depends on the outcome of peace negotiations ...

At least 74 migrants dead in shipwreck off Libya: UN The IOM said that in the past two days, at least 19 other people, including two children drowned...

AJK president pledges to carry forward mission of Jammu martyrs He said Muslims in Jammu were first disarmed, and then killed by marauding hordes in their homes...

US formally exits Paris pact aiming to curb climate change The next planned round of UN climate talks takes place in Glasgow, Scotland, in 2021....

UN chief deplores persistent lack of women in peace efforts Guterres said there had been "important changes" since the 2000 adoption of Resolution 1325...

UN must introduce legislation against disrespect to religious beliefs: Governor Punjab The Governor said Holy Prophet (PBUH) is the center of love and devotion for the Muslims...

Speakers seek world attention towards Modern day holocaust in Kashmir They demanded the United Nations Security Council to implement its resolutions on Kashmir...

AJK PM calls for implementation of UN resolution on Kashmir The PM said the fundamental objective behind the establishment of Azad Kashmir government...

Saudi Arabia fails in bid to join UN rights council Pakistan and Uzbekistan were elected with 169 votes while Nepal was also elected with 150 votes....

Virus measures strand almost 3 million migrants: UN The world needs to urgently step up cooperation to allow people to return in a safe manner....

Pakistan tops in Asia for highest response on social protection The study was conducted by UNICEF, United Nations and IPC-IG to assess social protection ...

Pakistan committed to protection, preservation of biodiversity: PM Imran PM Imran said Pakistan is among the top 10 countries most vulnerable to climate change. ...

PM Imran urges G20 countries to extend debt relief for at least a year PM Imran said that everyone in the world should have easy access to the coronavirus vaccine....

Heavy losses as Armenia-Azerbaijan defy calls for calm Renewed US calls echoed by Germany and Russia for a halt to the fierce clashes that erupted Sunday...

Afridi urges UNSC to stop India from harassing human rights organizations Shehryar Afridi said that the human rights watchdog had blamed the right-wing government of India...

Leaders to UN: If virus doesn't kill us, climate change will Main goal of 2015 Paris climate accord is to limit rise in global temperatures to 2 degree Celsius....

Indian diplomat walks out during PM Imran UNGA speech PM Imran Khan raised the Kashmir issue and criticized the Indian government....

Palestinian leader calls for UN-led peace conference early next year The Palestinians want a state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip with east Jerusalem as its capital...

PM Imran to address UN General Assembly via video link today FO spokesperson said the PM Imran will once again raise the issue of Jammu and Kashmir dispute. ...

For North Korea, UN membership is a key link to larger world The country’s propaganda services are prone to rhetoric meant to convey a sense of towering fury...

Govt committed to reduce poverty from 24.3pc to 19pc by 2023: PM Imran Khan said apart from the direct attack on poverty, they needed to address its systemic causes....

World must take steps to stop money laundering: PM Imran The PM said around 1 trillion dollars is transferred every year through white collar crime. ...

UN, Britain to co-host climate summit on December 12 We have champions and solutions all around us, in every city, corporation and country: Antonio ...

Saudi King Salman targets Iran during debut at United Nations He said Iran has exploited a 2015 nuclear deal "to intensify its expansionist activities. ...

Rouhani says US can impose neither negotiations nor war on Iran Iran has refused to hold talks with the United States unless Washington lifts sanctions on Tehran ...

Kashmir a 'burning issue', Erdogan tells world leaders Regime was engaged in systematically engineering demographic change in IIOJK through domicile rules....

At UN, Trump demands action against China over virus, Xi urges cooperation Trump accused Beijing of allowing people to leave China in the early stages of the outbreak...

UN's response on Kashmir has been disappointing: AJK President The AJK President said that the situation in IOJK is very dire and is deteriorating every day....

UN rights chief's statement on IIOJK just tip of iceberg: AJK President Sardar Masood Khan said it is an erroneous impression that there is no 3-G, 4-G internet in AJK...

Pakistan condemns General Bipin Rawat's provocative statement Chaudhri said the latest situation at the China-India border areas validates Pakistan's concerns...

Utilization of state resources for public welfare govt's priority: PM He lauded the services of UNDP in the field of human development in Pakistan ...

Increased warming closing in on agreed upon limit: UN report The world already has warmed nearly 2 degrees (1.1 degrees Celsius) since the late 1800s...

Syria Kurds transfer some IS-linked foreign families from camp So far 76 families have been moved since July from Al-Hol to the Roj camp...

UN detects virus cases in Syrian refugee camp in Jordan Experts and aid agencies have warned of potentially catastrophic outbreaks in world’s refugee camps...

No change in Pakistan's policy on Kashmir dispute: FO The spokesperson called upon India to reverse its illegal actions of 5th August last year...

PM Imran informs UNGA President-elect about Indian atrocities in occupied Kashmir FM and President-elect of the UN General Assembly are scheduled to address a joint press stakeout....

UN experts slam 'alarming' rights free-fall in Kashmir A group of UN rights experts urged India to address the "alarming human rights situation" in Kashmir...

UN hails 'historic' milestone in global drive to end child labour The number of child labourers worldwide has dropped to 152 million from 246 million in 2000...

U.N. chief warns world facing 'generational catastrophe' on education As of mid-July schools were closed in some 160 countries, affecting more than 1 billion students....

Srinagar cannot be liberated by making social media trend: Ahsan Iqbal He accused government of helping India become a member of the Security Council uncontested...

Moeed seeks media role to project Kashmir cause in befitting way He said the revocation of IIOJK’s special status was a violation of human rights of Kashmiris...

Peaceful protests a 'fundamental human right': UN watchdog worldwide protests in support of Black Lives Matter have underlined its importance: UN...

Pakistan elected president of UN Economic and Social Council The 54-Member ECOSOC is the third principal organ, along with General Assembly and Security Council....

Plastic pollution flowing into oceans to triple by 2040: study Roadmap for stemming runaway ocean plastic waste crisis is among detailed ever offered in a study. ...

Pakistan elected to lead principal UN organ ECOSOC Munir Akram said legacy of colonialism and racism is “a major systemic cause of inequality”...

40 million children miss out on basic education due to coronavirus The shutdowns have also left many parents struggling to balance childcare and paid employment...

Kashmiris must get right to self-determination like Darfur: Shehryar Afridi He said this is a nefarious design cooked up to violate the UN Security Council resolutions. ...

UN warns Yemen on brink of famine again UN raised only around half the required $2.41 billion in aid for Yemen at a June donor conference. ...

EU awards peacekeeping medal to Pakistani soldier Sepoy Amir Aslam was martyred in the Democratic Republic of Congo on a UN peacekeeping mission...

India increases oppression in IOJ&K undercover of COVID-19: Dr Moeed Dr Moeed said UNSC resolutions are the only mechanism to solve the Kashmir dispute....

New UN envoy warns closed borders embolden human traffickers Human rights groups have warned that mistreating migrants may drive them further into the shadows...

Armed group kills 20 villagers in northeast Congo The attackers fled after United Nations peacekeepers arrived at the village...

Children at risk as pandemic pushes them online warns UN agency ITU estimated that 1.5 billion children are out of school due to lockdown forcing them to go online...

UN hails services of Pakistani Peacekeepers in Congo The spokesperson said Pakistan is amongst the top contributors to the UN Peacekeeping. ...

War-torn Yemen braces for worst as five more virus cases reported The UN says more than 24 million Yemenis, more than two thirds of the population, need aid. ...

PM's debt relief call for developing nations welcomed at UN: FO Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council have welcomed the statement...

UN urges world to quickly scale up medicines, vaccines The UN resolution asked Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to work with the WHO ...

PM Imran appeals debt relief for developing countries amid coronavirus pandemic PM Imran said that developing countries lack resources to fight hunger and disease...

UN chief adds voice to calls for release of Kashmiri prisoners in IOK UN and Pakistan welcomed the joint statement by six international human rights organizations on IOK...

FM Qureshi recommends UN to restructure loans for developing countries New Delhi's steps are against the UN resolutions and international laws, he stressed: FM Qureshi...

Rehman Malik urges UN Secretary General for removing Pakistan from FATF's grey list He writes that he wanted to forward a letter which he has written to the President FATF...

Water is an under-used weapon in climate change fight: UN Water use has increased six-fold over the past century and is rising by about 1% a year...

Millions could die if virus allowed to spread unchecked: UN chief Antonio Guterres said global solidarity is not only a moral imperative, it is in everyone's interest...

High time for UN to act over Khashoggi killing, says fiancee Turkish officials say a 15-man Saudi squad strangled him and cut his body into pieces...

Coronavirus outbreak will slash global investment flows: UN Efforts to halt the spread of the virus, which has killed more than 3,500 people ...

Virus lockdowns and quarantines must respect rights: UN Bachelet's comments came as the number of people infected worldwide neared 100,000 across 85 nations...

Human rights under assault worldwide: UN chief UN rights chief Michelle Bachelet also stressed the need for urgent action on human rights....

UN secretary general reaches Lahore UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres reached Lahore on Monday on a two-day visit. ...

UN chief again offers to mediate Kashmir issue He said the basic right of the people of the occupied valley must be ensured at all costs....

Palestinians withdraw request for UN vote on US Mideast plan: diplomats The US is also seeking to eliminate language that equated East Jerusalem with occupied West Bank...

FM stresses upon resolution of IOJ&K issue under UN resolutions The foreign minister apprised her about the ongoing Indian atrocities in the occupied Kashmir ...

UNODC, Interior Ministry launch technical assistance framework UNODC has a mandate to provide technical assistance for preventing and countering terrorism...

Putin calls for summit of key UN Security Council members Putin said leaders of Russia, China, US, France and Britain could meet "in any place in the world"....

Pakistan is raising voice against Indian annexation of IoK: FO Pakistan on Jan 16 briefed Security Council's closed door session regarding situation in Kashmir...

UNSC again expresses concern over curfew, human rights violations in IOK: FO Pakistan will continue to play its role for reduction of tension and peace and stability in region....

UN Security Council holds closed door meeting on Kashmir The meeting is based on an old request raised by Pakistan in December 2019. ...

UN Security Council declares commitment to 'international law' as tensions flare The declaration was issued at the start of a debate on the UN Charter ...

UN raises 2020 budget, includes funds for war crimes probes The budget represents a slight increase from 2019's figure of $2.9 billion to $3.07 billion in 2020....

UNSG appoints Julien Harneis UN Resident Coordinator in Pakistan Julien has 31 years of experience in development cooperation, humanitarian assistance and management...

UN targets electrifying all of world's refugee camps The new UN challenge aims to mitigate that risk, and at the close of the summit Wednesday...

Rich nations urged to do 'fair share' at global refugee meet World owes all countries and communities that welcome large numbers of refugees a debt of gratitude....

PM Imran Khan to attend Global Refugees Forum in Geneva The premier will also have bilateral interaction with his counterparts, and with U.N. leadership....

Myanmar's Suu Kyi warns genocide case could reignite Rohingya crisis Suu Kyi told the court that army operation was in response to attacks by Rohingya militants....

Pakistan hopeful for resumption of direct US-Taliban talks for Afghan peace Ambassador Munir Akram at the U.N spoke about the Afghan peace process and Pakistan's role in it....
