Pak takes over control of 182 madrasas, detains 121 people

Islamabad: Pakistan on Thursday said that it has taken over control of 182 religious schools and over 100 people into “preventive detention”, as it intensified its crackdown on terror outfits.

In a statement, the country’s interior ministry said that the provincial governments have taken over the management and administrative control of the 182 schools run by the terror outfits and detained 121 people under the National Action Plan (NAP), Geo News reported.

Five hospitals, 163 dispensaries, 184 dispensaries and eight offices run by the terror groups have been taken over by the provincial governments, the notification said.

Amid international pressure to clamp down against terrorism, Pakistan began a crackdown against terror outfits operating in its soil.

On Tuesday, the Pakistan government proscribed 26/11 mastermind and UN-designated terrorist Hafiz Saeed’s Jamaat-ud-Dawah (JuD) and Falah-i-Insaniat Foundation (FIF).

Next day, the governments of Sindh, Balochistan and Punjab have taken administrative control or sealed several establishments run by the terror groups.

A seminary, hospital and two dispensaries run by JuD in Rawalpindi were sealed, while the Sindh government has taken administrative control of 56 facilities run by the groups, including schools, hospitals and madrasas.

“These outfits had four madrasas, schools and dispensaries in the city which have all been taken over by the district administration,” Quetta’s Deputy Commissioner Tahir Zafar Abbasi told Dawn.

Pakistan on Tuesday said that 44 activists of various outfits, including Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) chief Masood Azhar’s brother Mufti Abdur Rauf and son Hamza Azhar, have been taken into ‘preventive detention’ as part of a crackdown on terror groups.

Tensions have escalated between India and Pakistan following the Pulwama terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir on February 14, in which 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives when a suicide bomber rammed his explosive-laden vehicle into their convoy. JeM had claimed responsibility for the attack.

India recently shared a dossier with Pakistan and key foreign powers, specifying how JeM was involved in Pulwama and various other terror attacks in the country.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
