Mumbai police arrest woman for murdering husband's third wife with help from daughters from his first marriage

The victim's body was found wrapped in a blanket in Nalla Sopara on March 1 (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Police in Maharashtra have arrested a woman and three of her accomplices for murdering her husband's third wife. The matter had come to light when the victim's body was found wrapped in a blanket near a mall in Mumbai's Nalla Sopara on March 1. Locals upon discovering the body turned it over to police officials prompting an investigation in this regard.

A preliminary inquiry led investigators to identify the victim as one Yogita who lived with her husband, 45-year-old Sushil Mishra at their Link Road apartment. Police then discovered that Mishra, a labour contractor and resident of Nalla Sopara, had two other wives. He had two daughters from his first wife who lived in Uttar Pradesh and a second wife who lived in Don Lane.

Mishra married his second wife, Parvati Mane in 2017 and the two began living together in an apartment on Don Road along with the two daughters Mishra had from his first marriage. However, sometime last year, Mishra married the victim and stopped giving financial aid to Mane, the prime accused in the matter.

Inspector Jitendra Vankoti with the local crime branch told Hindustan Times that Mishra left for a business trip to Gujarat on February 28 which is when Mane along with two of her husband's daughters planned to get rid of Yogita. Mane, along with the two daughters and one of the daughters' boyfriends went to Mishra's Link Road apartment and strangled Yogita to death. They then wrapped her body in a blanket and dumped it near a mall in Nalla Sopara where it was found by locals.

A thorough examination of CCTV footage from the area led Mumbai police to the fact that Yogita's body was brought to Nalla Sopara in an auto-rickshaw. Investigators managed to identify and question the driver of that auto-rickshaw after scanning through as many as 4,000 auto-rickshaws. It was the driver who reportedly led police officials to the accused.

Must Read: Bengaluru: Wife murders husband with help of lover; tailor tag gives them away
