One person arrested in Jammu bus stand grenade attack

Jammu (Jammu and Kashmir) [India], Mar 7 (ANI): In a major achievement, the person who threw the grenade at the Jammu bus stand on Thursday morning, has been arrested by police, Jammu and Kashmir DGP Dilbagh Singh said.

A 17-year-old boy, a native of Uttarakhand succumbed to his injuries while 32 were injured in a grenade blast at Jammu bus stand that took place earlier in the day, said police.

The injured have been admitted to Government Medical College Hospital and the police have cordoned off the area, which comes exactly three weeks after the terror attack in Pulwama.

"Sad to inform that Md Sharik s/o Intijar R/o Toda, Kalyanpur, Ahatmal, Haridwar, Uttarakhand, age 17 y succumbed to the injuries that he suffered in the grenade blast at Jammu Bus Stand on 7.3.19," tweeted Inspector General of Police, Jammu.

It is the third grenade attack by terrorists in the bus stand area of the city since May 2018.

Taking cognizance of the grenade blast, Minister of State for Defence Subhash Bhamre said that forces have been given a free hand to take necessary steps.

"Local investigation has been initiated into the incident. The government has already given complete liberty to the forces to take all necessary steps," he told media personnel in Delhi.

Earlier in the day, Inspector General of Police, Jammu, MK Sinha told media, "It was a grenade explosion; it has caused injuries to approximately 18 people and all were shifted to the hospital".

"Seems like the grenade has been launched from outside. It possibly had rolled beneath a bus injuring many people", he had added.

One of the eyewitnesses, Prince Sharma told ANI, "I had just parked my bike when I heard a loud sound. I went to the spot of the explosion and saw about a dozen people were badly injured."

It comes a week after the Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out air strikes on the terror camp of Jaish-e Mohammad (JeM) in Pakistan's Balakot. The JeM took the responsibility for the February 14 Pulwama attack, which killed 40 CRPF personnel. (ANI)
