Seen Ranveer Singh's Comment On Deepika Padukone's BTS Pic From Ad With Ranbir Kapoor?

Ranveer Singh and Deepika Padukone in Mumbai

Highlights Deepika shared a BTS photo from an ad shoot

"Hello, dimple. We meet again," commented Ranveer on the post

Deepika's post garnered over 1.2 million 'likes' in a day

Deepika Padukone recently Instagrammed a BTS shot from the Asian Paints commercial she featured in with Ranbir Kapoor and a cute little comment from her actor husband Ranveer Singh on the post came as no surprise. "Hello, dimple. We meet again," wrote the Dil Dhadakne Do actor. In the behind-the-scenes photo, The Dimpled One can be seen smiling away to glory in a behind-the-camera moment. Later, Asian Paints, who re-posted the photo, shared how Deepika lit up the sets with her million dollar smile: "With a smile that adorns our set every time, it was a pleasure to have you shoot for us." Deepika Padukone's post garnered over 1.2 million 'likes' in a day with comments such as "Dimple queen" and "OMG, so cute" pouring in on her feed.

Here's what Ranveer commented on Deepika's post

See Deepika Padukone's actual post here:

Meanwhile, Deepika Padukone and Ranbir Kapoor's new advert was released on Wednesday and it turned out to be hit with the Internet.

Deepika and Ranbir reportedly began dating sometime during the shooting of their first film together - Bachna Ae Haseeno - in 2008. They broke up in 2009. Ahead of the advert's release, Deepika Padukone had shared many sneak-peeks from the shoot on her Instagram stories.

Well on Instagram, there are more instances of Ranveer Singh leaving adorable comments on Deepika Padukone's posts. We'll let these screenshots do the talking.

Glimpses of Ranveer's Instagram comments

On the work front, Ranveer Singh was last seen in Gully Boy, which soared past the Rs 100 crore mark within days of its release. The 33-year-old actor also has films such as '83 and Takht in his line-up. Deepika Padukone is yet to begin work on Meghna Gulzar's film Chhapaak, in which she will play the role of acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal.
