Kalank first poster look: Aditya Roy Kapur as Dev is fierce and intense – view pic

After Brahmastra stormed the social media few day back, today its Kalank that’s grabbing everyone’s attention. Since morning, the makers have been giving out first look of their main cast, one by one. In the morning, we were introduced to Varun Dhawan’s character Zafar and now Aditya Roy Kapur’s first look from the much-awaited film is out. In the film, which is directed by Abhishek Varman, Adi plays the role of Dev and going by the first look poster we think fans will get to see the handsome actor in an intense avatar. Interestingly, the poster shows two sides of Dev. While the close-up shot of his face shows him in a serious mood, there also a lot of depth in his eyes which is intriguing.

With the right amount of kohl in his eyes, Aditya’s character also gives out the aggressive vibe. In the same poster, we can also see Aditya in the backdrop, standing with a sword in his hand and showing his back. If you watch closely, you will also notice that a group of people seem to be running towards him whereas a vintage car on his side is burning. Visually, everything looks intense and the whole atmosphere created is fiery. Looking at the poster, it seems that the main element is fire and the makers have made use of it in the correct way to stir the right amount of excitement amongst the fans.

Yesterday, we had already informed you exclusively that the team Kalank will be giving out the first looks of the characters and earlier we had also told us you that Varun is named Zafar in the film. So far while two looks from the ensemble cast have been revealed, we will be waiting for the rest throughout the day. And we think next in line could be Sanjay Dutt. Kalank also stars Sonakshi Sinha, Madhuri Dixit Nene and Kiara Adwani. The film will be releasing on April 19 this year and the trailer might be out on March 11 for which Varun may fly down to India from London. For more such updates, stay tuned to CineBlitz.
