Pulwama attack a 'match-fixing' between PM Modi, Imran Khan: Congress leader BK Hariprasad's shocker

"If you look at the chain of events that has taken place after Pulwama, it looks like Modi had a match-fixing with Pakistan PM," Hariprasad claimed. Forty CRPF jawans were killed on February 14 after a Jaish-e-Mohammed suicide bomber rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a paramilitary bus in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. Following the incident, India bombed and destroyed JeM's biggest training camp in Balakot in Pakistan's restive Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, about 80-km from the Line of Control (LoC). Later, Pakistan carried out a retaliatory strike across the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir and attempted to target military installations. Last week, another senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh sparked a controversy when referred to the Pulwama attack as a "durghatana" (accident), later reviewing it to "terror attack" after being trolled on social media. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had slammed the opposition parties for seeking proof of the Indian Air Force's action on Jaish-e-Mohammed's terror camp last week, saying the air strike happened in Pakistan, but "some of those sitting in India were hit by it".

NEW DELHI: In a major embarrassment to the Congress party, its senior leader BK Hariprasad on Thursday stoked a controversy claiming there was a "match-fixing" between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan over the Pulwama attack. Hariprasad, a Rajya Sabha MP from Karnataka, said the chain of events that have taken place after Pulwama shows Narendra Modi had a match-fixing with Imran Khan and without their knowledge the attack would not have taken place. "(Union Minister) Ravi Shankar Prasad should clarify whether there is any match-fixing between Pakistan (Prime Minister) and Narendra Modi. Without their knowledge, this Pulwama incident would not have taken place," Hariparasad said. Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad had on Tuesday accused the Congress of trying to lower the morale of security forces for "petty political gains", saying comments by the opposition party's leaders on the Balakot air strike are part of a "conspiracy" that has the blessings of Rahul Gandhi.
