Paid trolls don't bother me: Sunil Grover on negative reaction to Kanpur Wale Khuranas on social media

Popular for playing Dr Mashoor Gulati, Gutthi and Rinku Bhabhi, Sunil Grover returned to TV with comedy series, Kanpur Wale Khuranas. The actor has now wrapped up shooting for the show and is now all set to resume the last schedule of his film shoot. In an exclusive conversation with the TimesofIndia.com, Sunil talks about the response he has received for Kanpur Wale Khuranas , the trolls and missing Kapil Sharma's Mumbai reception party."I am resuming the shoot for my film with Salman Khan from today (January 10) and it will be a month-and-a-half schedule. Hence, I won't be able to give my time to any new project now. The reason I had opted for 'Kanpur...' was because the channel had come up with an idea where they wanted to make a show about the highlights of 2018. I had a month in December and everything fell into place. The show was made with an idea of limited episodes which I had mentioned during the promotions as well. I am happy that the commitment has been fulfilled," shared Sunil.Kanpur Wale Khuranas has welcomed some of the most famous personalities of India like Ranveer Singh, Saina Nehwal and Parupalli Kashyap. It will also see megastars in the upcoming episodes as guests. Sunil is very grateful to these superstars for adjusting their dates and coming on Kanpur Wale Khuranas."I am grateful to people who came on the show like Ranveer Singh, Rohit Shetty, Vickey Kaushal, Yami Gautam, Rajkummar Rao and Govinda sir. They all pre-poned their promotions and began with our show. The team of writers and the creative team of Preeti and Neeti have worked really hard. Never in my life have I shot a show in this format. We shot two episodes per day which was a daunting task. To create a comedy show which is for more than an hour is not an easy job, but we all managed together," explained the actor.Though Sunil's performance and the new comedy series have been received well by fans and earned good reviews, but there were trolls who slammed the show. However, Sunil is unaffected."I am not worried about the paid trolls. The people I meet on a daily basis are liking the show. I have also received a lot of appreciation from the media. I can't comment about social media as they are partially real people and partially fake. I don't completely believe them or go by their word, even when I am praised. The first few episodes have also got decent TRPs. I am happy with the response. People are loving it, enjoying it and they personally tell me that. It makes me happy. The response has been very positive,"Talking about the comparisons drawn between Kanpur Wale Khuranas and The Kapil Sharma Show season 2, Sunil said, "If the criticism is genuine and not from fake ID's, they are welcome. I would like to tell fans that there are comedy shows on two different channels now and they have a choice between what they want to watch. There is more comedy, there's a good reason to laugh, so whatever makes them happy, they should watch it. I don't want them to spread negativity. I would rather suggest them to watch the show which makes them happy."He added further, "I don't know how someone can say anything without watching a show. Here, I am talking about the trolls with fake ID's. Right now, I am happy and content. The channel people are also happy now and they might come up with season 2. Now, I will be busy with the film shoot. I am glad that the channel gave me an opportunity to do a character like Pramod Kumar and other such parts. My new year resolution is to experiment with different roles."The actor also spoke about getting an opportunity of once again reuniting with his old co-stars Ali Asgar Sugnadha Mishra and Upasna Singh , "There's a comfort level with Ali bhai (Ali Asgar), Upasna Singh, Sugandha Mishra. We have that equation and understanding that we can go impromptu. There's a certain amount of ease and we also know how we function," he said.When asked, why he skipped Kapil Sharma's reception bash, Sunil dodged the question saying, "I wished him on social media that day itself. My wishes are always with him and I will always wish the best for him in life."The actor also shared how he has not been able to watch The Kapil Sharma Show Season 2 and also his own show, "I couldn't watch the show as I was busy shooting for Kanpur Wale Khuranas. I couldn't watch my own show because we had to wrap up the shooting of Kanpur Wale Khuranas before the shooting of my film."Before signing off, we asked Sunil if he will restrict himself from doing TV and focus on film, the actor responded, "I did not get time to do TV as I was busy doing live shows and shooting for my two films. Luckily, 'Kanpur...' came my way when I had time. I love experimenting with roles and I would continue doing it. I would never leave TV for anything."
