Petta Review: Rajinikanth doesn't take a single shot for granted, says director Karthik Subbaraj

Read AlsoPetta Movie Review

It is a very known fact that every time Rajinikanth comes on the big screen he makes his fans go crazy, but did you know his charm doesn’t even spare the filmmakers he works with. Karthik Subbaraj , the director of Rajinikanth's latest outing ‘ Petta ’ has some of the best words to describe the actor. According to Karthik what amazes him about Rajinikanth is that even after doing so many films he doesn't take a single shot for granted.Talking further about the thalaiva in an exclusive conversation with ETimes, Karthik Subbaraj says, “Rajinikanth is so humble and what surprised me was he is so passionate towards his job. After so many films and superstardom he doesn't take a single shot for granted.”“He asks a lot of questions about the character. He is always in the character mood. He reads the script many times. He reads more than 5 to 6 times. He already knows what's going to happen the next day. That preparation for the role is amazing.” adds the director.Karthik also mentions that directing Rajinikanth will remain as an experience of a lifetime. “It's going to be the most memorable experience. Every moment of the shoot will stay with me forever.” says the filmmaker.Though ‘Petta’ is a Tamil movie it has been entirely shot in the northern parts of India. Spilling the beans on why North over South India the director says, “It's not easy to shoot in real life locations with Rajinikanth. That's why we shot in North. In South India, it would have been very tough especially in Tamil Nadu. We have completely shot in North India; in Dehradun, Lucknow, Varanasi but even there it was not easy.”“I wanted the film to look real. I didn't want the film to look like completely shot in a studio. We shot in a particular village which was away from Lucknow but suddenly people got to know that Rajini sir is going to be there and the crowd became uncontrollable. The cops and everyone couldn't control. We didn't use that shot in the film because I could see the crowd. It was a challenge to shoot in public but we managed to do it.”, adds Karthik Subbaraj.While talking about keeping the movie as real as possible, Karthik also mentions how he tried not to go overboard with the action sequences. Since action in South is mostly considered as unrealistic, the director has been a little extra conscious on keeping the factor of reality intact. Throwing some light on the same, he says, “In this film, we have a lot of action but we wanted to keep it real. It has to be big, and people expect to have stunts in the film but at the same time, we thought it shouldn't go overboard. It has to be a real thing and we work like that. The stunts are very real in this.”‘Petta’ has made it to the 70mm today. The movie was making headlines right from the word go, which on one hand added to the excitement of the makers, and on the other, leveled up the expectation of the audience. Talking about the same, Karthik Subbaraj says, “I have seen this film many times now. Whenever we saw some scenes we used to discuss the response in the theatre. Now the time has come to watch it with the audience and see their response. I wanted this film to be a proper treat for Rajini sir's fans. There is a lot of expectation from the film. I am sure all will be happy watching it.”Along with Rajinikanth, the movie also features one of Bollywood’s renowned actors Nawazuddin Siddiqui . Karthik Subbaraj says that the role played by Nawazuddin is very strong and it was fun working with the actor.“Nawazuddin is a great actor and I have seen all his work. I used to think I should do a Tamil film with him because he has a very relatable face to Tamil. He is a great actor and luckily we got him for the role and it's a very strong character.” he concludes.
