#JammuBusStandBlast: Police arrest prime suspect questioning...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





#JammuBusStandBlast: Police arrest prime suspect; questioning underway

07 Mar 2019

The J&K Police have reportedly arrested the suspect who threw the grenade at the Jammu bus stand, killing a teenager and injuring over 30 others earlier today.

Director General of Police Dilbagh Singh has confirmed the prime suspect has been arrested; the police are currently questioning him.

The police have, so far, detained 15 persons in connection with the grenade blast case.

Here's more.

Suspect has been identified as Yasir Arhaan

Fact

The suspect has been identified as Yasir Arhaan, according to reports. Arhaan reportedly hails from Kulgam of South Kashmir and the police arrested him while he was fleeing.

Local investigation has been initiated into the incident: MoS Defense

Fact

"A local investigation has been initiated into the incident. The government has already given complete liberty to the forces to take all necessary steps," said Minister of State for Defense Subhash Bhamre on the grenade blast at Jammu bus stand.

Police are suspecting Jaish-e-Mohammed's involvement

Details

The police suspect that the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) is involved in the Jammu bus stand attack. Jammu & Kashmir has been on a high alert since the deadly Pulwama terror attack carried out by JeM in the state.

According to the IGP of Jammu, Manish Kumar Sinha, the police are now following leads for further probing into the matter.

Officials are inspecting the blast site

Fact

The grenade attack took place at the Jammu bus stand located at the heart of the city. The area has been cordoned off as officials are inspecting the blast site; the public has been asked to stay away from the area.

A teenager was killed; 32 others injured in the attack

Details

A 17-year-old boy, identified as Mohammad Sharik, a resident of Haridwar in Uttarakhand, was killed in the grenade explosion at the Jammu bus stand. He reportedly died "due to splinter injuries in the chest," according to officials.

Meanwhile, 32 others have been injured in the attack; the injured persons have been hospitalized of which five are critical, according to doctors.

Grenade was under a bus, say police

Grenade attack

According to police, the grenade was under a bus. Sinha said the grenade probably rolled under a bus parked at the bus stand before going off at around 11:30 am.

"I thought it was a tyre burst. It was a big blast. The locals took the injured to the hospital in an ambulance," an eyewitness was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

This is third such attack in last ten months

Looking back

This is the third such attack in the area in the last 10 months.

Last year, on December 28, suspected terrorists threw a hand grenade near the bus stand's police station.

Before that, a grenade was hurled on an under-construction bus stand along BC Road in May 2018. Three policemen and a civilian were injured in the attack and the accused were arrested soon.

Bus stand attacked amid rising Indo-Pak tensions

Details

Notably, this attack on the bus stand comes amid simmering Indo-Pak tensions. On February 14, a CRPF convoy was attacked on Jammu-Srinagar highway and 40 soldiers lost their lives.

The attack was orchestrated by Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammed. Subsequently, India launched IAF strikes across the border on February 29 which Pakistan called "an act of aggression".

Pakistan has been violating ceasefire since the airstrikes.
