Kitne aadmi the? 3 questions that loomed after Balakot airstrike

A satellite image shows a close-up of the Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp in Pakistan's Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa province. (Photo: Planet Labs Inc via Reuters)

A forested hill blanketed in darkness in Pakistan's northeast. The skies west of Rajauri in Jammu and Kashmir, lit by a morning sun climbing to its zenith.

The warplanes came and went last week, but the questions lingered.

A burgeoning tide of information stormed social media timelines, but not all of it was official. For this, in a nutshell, is what India's external affairs ministry and Air Force (IAF) have said or confirmed in public:

Indian Mirage 2000 fighter jets carried out a pre-emptive strike last Tuesday on a Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp inside Pakistan, within two weeks of a suicide bombing that killed 40 Indian soldiers in Kashmir. They hit their target. A "large number" of terrorists were killed, but care was taken to avoid civilian deaths.

The following morning, Pakistani jets breached Indian airspace in Jammu and Kashmir. They tried to attack Indian military installations but were foiled by IAF fighters. Pakistani bombs fell but did no damage. An Indian MiG-21 Bison shot down a Pakistani F-16, which fell on the other side of the Line of Control. Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's MiG-21 also went down. He ejected, was captured by the Pakistan Army after his parachute drifted into PoK, and released two days later.

We have Wg Cdr Abhinandan back with us.

Indian Air Force is proud of our Airwarrior #Abhinandan. (5/5)#WelcomeHomeAbhinandan Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) March 1, 2019

Pakistan contests all this on several counts -- including by claiming that it didn't even use F-16s, let alone lose one. (India says fragments of an AMRAAM missile are proof that it did.)

Now, how many terrorists were killed in Balakot?

The official account you just read contains no death toll numbers. Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa told reporters this week that Indian planes hit their target -- but also that the IAF does not count the dead. BJP leaders, however, have been quite specific. More than 250 were killed, said Amit Shah. Yogi Adityanath: 400. Two newswires quoted sources as saying hundreds were killed.

400 Yogi Adityanath (@myogiadityanath) February 27, 2019

"India's respected and authentic NTRO [National Technical Research Organisation] surveillance system has said that before Indian pilots dropped the bombs, 300 mobile phones were active there," Home Minister Rajnath Singh said. "There's no need to tell you how many were killed."

There's been skepticism in opposition ranks (Kapil Sibal, for example, cited international news reports saying no terrorists were killed.). The government, on the other hand, has made its annoyance quite plain.

Modiji :



Is international media :



1) New York Times

2) London based Jane's Information Group

3) Washinton Post

4) Daily Telegraph

5) The Guardian

6) Reuters



reporting no proof of militant losses at Balakot pro-Pakistan ?



You are guilty of politicising terror ? Kapil Sibal (@KapilSibal) March 4, 2019

What does satellite imagery of the Jaish-e-Mohammed camp show?

Interpreting satellite photos of the Jaish-e-Mohammed camp from a US-based firm, Reuters said on Wednesday that "the image is virtually unchanged from an April 2018 satellite photo of the facility".

But on the same day, sources said the IAF gave the government proof in the form of satellite and radar imagery -- it told the Centre that 80 per cent of bombs hit targets. (Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa asked this week why Pakistan would respond if Indian jets had dropped bombs in a jungle.)

India's Spice-2000 precision bombs caused internal damage after entering buildings, according to sources.

Meanwhile Col. (Retd) Vinayak Bhat, an expert, has said satellite images like the ones reviewed by Reuters indicate "likely damage" to the camp that wasn't "massive".

Asif Ghafoor and the mystery of the second pilot

Pakistan Armed Forces spokesperson Asif Ghafoor said after Wednesday's dogfight that two Indian planes were shot down "inside Pakistani airspace", and that two pilots were arrested. That changed quickly -- Ghafoor himself said there was only one pilot in Pakistan's custody, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman.

What happened? Why did the number change?

Remember, India also announced that two planes went down -- the difference being that it said one of them was a Pakistani F-16. (Top sources have said Abhinandan Varthaman fired the missile that brought it down.)

What became of the F-16? And its pilot?

An analysis by NewsLaundry has casts serious doubt on the buzz that he may have been killed by compatriots who assumed he was Indian.

So, if not that, then what?

The mystery remains.
