Pakistan seizes control of 182 schools and detains hundreds in Islamic militant crackdown

India Pakistan: Jet fighters appear to battle over Kashmir

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The intervention represents one of the country’s biggest against banned organisations in years and appears to be targeting Islamic welfare organisations. The interior ministry said law enforcement agencies had placed 121 people in "preventive detention”. The ministry in a statement added: "Provincial governments have taken in their control management and administration of 182 seminaries.”

The drastic measures were taken after Pakistan faced increasing pressure to act against the groups which carried out the suicide bombing in India on February 14. The attack in Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian troops. This increased already fragile tensions between the waring nations, which escalated last week when the Pakistan military shot down two Indian warplanes that had travelled into the Kashmire airspace.

Pakistani soldiers take part in a counter-terrorism drill

Meanwhile Pakistani officials maintain the crackdown is part of a long-planned drive and not a response to Indian anger. New Delhi has heavily criticised Islamabad's failure to rein in militant groups operating on Pakistani soil. The interior ministry added other institutions from different groups have also been taken over, including 34 schools or colleges, 163 dispensaries, 184 ambulances, five hospitals and eight offices of banned organisations. Many banned groups such as Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) run seminars, which counter-terrorism officials say are used as recruiting grounds for militant outfits.

A closed medical dispensary in Pakistan
