Rs 2 lakh compensation given to those hurt during Assam Agitation

GUWAHATI: BJP-led Assam government on Thursday distributed Rs. 2 lakh each to 268 people who sustained bullet injuries during the six year long Assam agitation 1979 to 1985.State government as a token of its deep rooted respect has already given Rs. 5 lakh each to the family members of all the 860 martyrs of Assam Agitation in 2016. However during the raging protest against the Citizenship Amendment bill in January last several families returned the citation as a mark of the protest against the bill which was passed in Lok Sabha on January 8.Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal said that the main objective of Assam Agitation, which was spearheaded by All Assam Students Union (Aasu) was to make Assam free from illegal immigrants. In the six year long agitation people irrespective of all caste, creed, language and religion plunged into the movement. Several lives were lost and so many people sustained permanent injuries. In order to make Assam one of the front ranking states in the country, the present State government for the last 2 years and 10 months has been working resolutely implementing all the clauses of the Assam Accord.Speaking at a function organized by Assam Accord Implementation Department, Sonowal said said that one of the most important clauses of Assam Accord is to seal the border completely. The previous governments did not take any pragmatic steps to seal the border. “However, realizing that without land swapping deal with Bangladesh complete sealing of the border is not possible, Narendra Modi-led Central Government executed the land swap deal in 2014 and took steps to completely seal 272 KM Indo-Bangla border. He also said that the present Central government took the help of technology to seal the 61 km riverine border in Dhubri sector.”Sonowal also said that the previous government for the implementation of Clause 5 of Assam Accord took no pragmatic steps. " The present government led by Narendra Modi is rendering all possible help for updation of National Register of Citizens (NRC), which is being carried out under the supervision of the Supreme Court of India. After the law and order problem erupted in Barpeta and Chaygaon during the run up to the pilot project of NRC updation process, the previous government did not take any follow up step. However, with the insistence of the present government and the direct supervision of the Supreme Court, after publication of the final draft NRC, the vexed foreigner’s issue will be solved once for all."He also said that for the implementation of Clause 6 of Assam Accord, a high powered committee has been constituted to recommend steps to safeguard jati, mati and bheti (race, land and hearth).Sonowal who is student leader turned politician said that the main aim of Assam Agitation was to build an Assam based high moral grounding. In memory of the supreme sacrifice of martyrs State government would construct a Swahid Udyan so that the supreme sacrifice does not go in vain".
