Day after video of Kashmiri youth being thrashed went viral, police arrest four in Lucknow

Lucknow's Senior Superintendent of Police Kalanidhi Naithani speaking on attack on Kashmiri in Lucknow | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: A day after an attack on two Kashmiri youths in Daliganj area, the Uttar Pradesh Police arrested four people including the main accused Bajrang Sonkar who has a criminal background with an alleged murder case against him.

Speaking to media on Thursday, Lucknow's Senior Superintendent of Police Kalanidhi Naithani said, "The main culprit Bajrang Sonkar has been arrested. Sonkar has a criminal background and has 12 cases including a murder case filed against him."

According to the police, they received information of two Kashmiri youths being beaten up by a mob near Daliganj bridge.

A case was registered after Mohd Afzal, a resident of Kashmir, filed a complaint against five-six unidentified persons under sections 147, 323, 504 of the Indian Penal Code.

A video of the incident had become viral on social media showing some men dressed in saffron clothes beating a vendor with a long stick. After receiving a few blows, the vendor managed to free himself from the attackers. The other vendor was seen collecting his things while being slapped and hit by one of the men. He was prevented from further assault after a few locals intervened.

Taking cognizance of the video, a police team was constituted. In a swift action, the team with the help of the general public cracked the case within 24 hours and arrested Sonkar, Anirudh Kumar, Himanshu Awasthi and Amar Mishra.

The SSP had earlier said that the accused had formed a trust called Vishwa Hindu Dal Trust and they were associated with the trust.

However, Sonkar's wife Prerna defended her husband, saying that the police should have done what her husband did. Protesting against his arrest, Prerna told ANI, "My husband didn't do anything wrong. He did something which should have been done by the police. It is the police who never took any action on Kashmiris who make an excuse to put their shops here so that they can collect information. I am opposing my husband's arrest."




