If govt can't protect a file, it shows its competence: Owaisi

Hyderabad (Telangana) Mar 7 (ANI): If the government cannot safeguard a file, this shows their competence, said Assadudin Owaisi here on Thursday.

"If the government is not able to safeguard one file its shows their competence. When the Defence Minister stood up in the parliament to speak on Rafale, could she not tell that one file has been stolen from the Ministry of Defence," Owaisi told ANI.

He accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of "only doing lip service".

"The Prime Minister can't even safeguard a file. He can only do lip service," Owaisi said.

The statement from the All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief comes after Attorney General KK Venugopal had said in the Supreme Court on Wednesday that certain documents pertaining to the Rafale deal were stolen from the Defence Ministry.

Venugopal had made the submission during the hearing on review petitions filed by various parties against its December 14, 2018, judgment in which it had refused to order a probe into the deal to procure 36 Rafale fighter planes from France.

Speaking on the grenade in Jammu bus stand, Owaisi said, "Every terror incident has to be condemned but the bigger issue is why is our intellegence failing every time?"

He further said that there should be some accountability of such failures. "The government is answerable," he added.

Talking about the incident in Lucknow where two Kashmiri youth were beaten up by a saffron clad people, Owaisi said: "If the government is serious in its working, then such attacks would stop. On one hand we say Kashmir is an integral part of India while on the other hand Kashmiris are beaten in broad daylight. These are attacks on our constitution and our enemies use such incidents against us."

Two Kashmiri vendors of dry fruit were thrashed by several men wearing saffron shirts on a busy road in Lucknow on Wednesday.

A day after the attack the Uttar Pradesh Police arrested four people including the main accused Bajrang Sonkar who has a criminal background with an alleged murder case against him. (ANI)


