Climbing mountains not a tall order for Surat sisters

SURAT: After scaling Aconcagua in Argentia, the highest mountain in southern and western hemisphere, Aditi Vaidya (25) and her sister Anuja (21) are preparing for their next big mountaineering expedition in April— climbing Mount Everest Aditi and Anuja are the first sister-duo from Gujarat to complete the expedition to climb the 6,962 mt high Aconcagua.“Our goal is to climb the highest mountain in all seven continents of the world and we have completed the first in South America. We are confident of scaling the Everest too after good practice in Argentina ,” said the Vaidya sisters, who hail from a family of mountaineers.It took them 16 days to climb Aconcagua after battling extreme weather conditions.Vaidya sisters have been familiar with the mountains since they were toddlers as their mother Anita, a native of Uttarakhand, is a mountaineer herself. She is also the founder member of Bhagirathi Seven Sisters Adventure Foundation, Uttarkashi in association with Bachendri Pal , the first Indian woman to climb Mt Everest.After getting married to Surat-based Ayurveda practitioner Anand, also a avid mountaineer, they settled here. “Our parents met during a mountaineering camp in Uttarkashi and they got married for the common love for mountaineering. Hence we got to learn about mountaineering before we started walking,” said Aditi, who did her MSc in international business from London Before embarking on Aconcagua expedition, they practised by climbing Draupadi Ka Danda II at 5,670 mt height in Uttarakhand. “We practised in Stok Kangri of Ladakh where temperature drops to minus 45 degree in winter before going to Aconcagua expedition. We have been practicing at multiple locations since our childhood to become expert mountaineers,” said Anuja, who completed her BBA recently.They did various mountaineering courses at Nehru Institute of Mountaineering at Uttarkashi before joining various expeditions. They never worry for the risk involved but practice hard to perform their best in every climb.“Sometimes the climate and climbing conditions are so harsh that one would desperately want to cut it short and return home immediately. But we can’t resist stop going to mountains at intervals of every few weeks. We would love to explore the field of mountaineering which is not so popular in Gujarat,” said Aditi.
