Rowdy hacked to death in broad daylight

rowdy sheeter

CCB sleuths

Police suspect Lakshmana may have been killed to avenge his killing of Manjunath, anotherA 40-year-old notorious rowdy sheeter identified as Lakshmana, has been brutally hacked to death in broad daylight, on RG Road behind Soap Factory near ISCKON temple. The incident happened in Mahalakshmipuram police station limits on Thursday afternoon at around 1 pm. The murder is suspected to avenge the killing of another rowdy sheeter by Lakshmana, a resident of Jnanabharathi, and his brother in 2005.According to police records, around six to seven people travelling in a Scorpio chased Lakshmana’s SUV and intercepted it. The accused then pulled the rowdy sheeter out of his Innova and hacked him to death. The police suspect that the victim was accompanied by somebody else in the SUV. The accused threw chilli powder into Lakshmana’s eyes before hacking him to death. Lakshmana who was arrested by thedue to his alleged involvement in a land grabbing case and nexus with land mafia kingpin Mirle Vardaraju had come out of the jail a few days back. The police have collected footage from CCTVs in the vicinity.Lakshmana, along with his brother Rama, were involved in over 10 to 15 murders, attempts to murder, extortion and other heinous cases. The victim is a rowdy sheeter in Kamakshipalya and Jnanabharathi police station limits. Cases against Lakshmana had been registered by the North, South and the West division police. “In 2005, Lakshmana along with his brother had brutally killed another rowdy sheeter Manjunath alias Machcha near Yelahanka. Manjunath was on his way to distribute his wedding invitation when he was murdered by Lakshmana. The police suspect that associates of Manjunath could have killed Lakshmana on Thursday,” said an officer who is a part of the investigation team.The victim was also a close aide of 55-year-old land mafia kingpin Mirle Vardaraju who was arrested in December last year by the Central Crime Branch (CCB) sleuths on charges of land grabbing. The CCB sleuths had seized property documents worth Rs 500 crores from the land grabber’s residence in Kengeri Satellite Town. Vardaraju was allegedly harassing and forcibly taking land documents from the victims and he was allegedly using the services of Lakshmana to threaten the victims. Lakshmana was also arrested by the CCB sleuths in this case and he had come out of the jail on January 21, earlier this year.Lakshmana along with his brother Rama, residents of Pipe Lane Road in Sunkadakatte, were active in crime since the last 15 years. Their other brother Hanumantha had distanced himself from them due to their criminal activities.It is alleged that Lakshmana and Rama were used as contact killers by a few politicians.After the city started witnessing growth in real estate, the two brothers started concentrating on litigated properties and would work on commission basis by settling the disputes. They are also alleged to have started grabbing lands of senior citizens whose children had settled abroad.During a recent rowdy parade by the CCB sleuths, Lakshmana had been warned to mend his ways by senior officers. The Mahalakshmipuram police have registered a case of murder under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and are further investigating.
