Decoded: Can India follow the US Osama playbook to eliminate Masood Azhar?

Decoded: Can India follow the US Osama playbook to eliminate Masood Azhar?

Azhar Masood and his terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammed has continued to be a thorn in India's flesh over a long period of time. Azhar Masood had to be let go by the Indian authorities to save the passengers of the hijacked IC-814 plane which was stationed in Kandahar nearly two decades ago.

Since then Masood Azhar has formed JeM and launched several terrorist attacks in India. Even Pakistan's former president Pervez Musharraf has admitted that Masood Azhar-led Jaish-e-Mohammed carried out attacks in India during his tenure on the instructions of the intelligence agencies.

Musharraf, 75, who is currently in Dubai, said that the Pakistan government's crackdown on the JeM, which also tried to assassinate him twice, was a good move. The JeM recently claimed responsibility for the February 14 Pulwama attack that left 40 CRPF personnel dead, increasing tensions between India and Pakistan.Last month, Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi during an interview with CNN said that Azhar is in Pakistan, but the government can act against him only if India presents "solid" and "inalienable" evidence that can stand in a court of law. Pakistan military, however, denied the terror group's presence in the country.

Azhar Masood who is reported to be Bahawalpur in Pakistan is enjoying a life of peace thanks to pliant Pakistani administration. There are reports that he is severely ill and even unconfirmed reports of his death had also surfaced in the media. But can India eliminate Azhar Masood like US fished out Osama Bin Laden and killed him with surgical precision? DNA's sister concern WION has done a deep dive speaking to several experts about the choices India have.

#Gravitas | Can India carry out an operation to eliminate #MasoodAzhar along the lines of Operation #NeptuneSpear that eliminated Osama Bin Laden?@palkisu assesses India's capabilities. pic.twitter.com/gP7fkDgLn6 — WION (@WIONews) March 7, 2019

Here we break it down them for you:

With PTI inputs
