Whatever SC decides, Sabarimala to remain a key poll plank for all parties

The controversies relating to Sabarimala temple don’t seem to end. On Wednesday, senior BJP leaders called on President Ramnath Kovind to inform him of the volatile situation in Kerala. They briefed the president on the “fall” in law and order situation in the state. This, on a day when a 35-year-old-woman—Manju Joseph from Kollam—claimed to have visited the hill shrine, disguised as an elderly woman. Women between the ages of 10 and 50 are struggling to enter the temple, even after the recent Supreme Court verdict that struck down their ban, due to intense protests from the BJP and a large section of devotees.

The BJP in Kerala is playing cheap politics, said Thomas Isaac, Kerala’s finance minister, to THE WEEK. “Most BJP leaders have absolutely no issue in young women entering Sabarimala. You can check the statements by these leaders before and after the verdict of the Supreme Court. They are contradictory in nature. The government of Kerala is duty-bound to implement the order,” said Isaac.

He said it was wrong to say the government is working in haste to implement the order. “The verdict by the apex court is a welcome step in favour of women’s equality. But we are not in a hurry to implement it,” said Isaac. He also rubbished allegations that the government was adopting double standards when it came to implementing other Supreme Court verdicts. The most notable being the issue that divides the Jacobite and Orthodox Christians in the state, after the Supreme Court dismissed petitions filed by the Jacobites seeking a review of an earlier verdict that had given the Orthodox group control over the churches of the Jacobites. “That is a different issue. That is a civil case and the government is planning to hold a discussion among the warring factions. The Sabarimala judgment cannot be compared with it. The judgment in the Sabarimala issue is by a constitutional bench and is more serious in nature,” said Isaac.

There have been frequent clashes between the BJP and the CPI(M) workers in Kerala after two women below the age of 50 were escorted by the police to the temple last week. Bombs were thrown at the houses of important leaders. The police have arrested close to 2,000 people so far. BJP MP Nishikant Dubey even sought the dismissal of the state government and the imposition of President’s Rule. “It is not just my view. It was a collective view of the party. The government of India will consider imposing President’s Rule in the state if the situation worsens,” said Dubey to THE WEEK, “The CPI(M) has been conspiring against the RSS from 1947. We have lost so many of our party workers. A judicial commission should be set up to look into the violence unleashed by the CPI(M) over the years on their political rivals.” Dubey represents the Godda constituency in Jharkhand.

The Supreme Court on September 28 struck down the custom of banning women aged between 10 and 50 from entering the Sabarimala temple, sparking off widespread protests | PTI

Union minister Thawar Chand Gehlot said to THE WEEK that the situation in Kerala was discussed in recent cabinet meetings. “We are keeping a close watch on the developments in the state. Regarding President’s Rule, it is the PMO and the home ministry that has to take a final call. I have nothing to say,” said Gehlot.

Former home minister of Kerala and senior Congress leader Thiruvanchoor Radhakrishnan said the CPI(M) and the BJP are equally to be blamed for the present situation in the state. “Leaders of both these parties have never really cared for Sabarimala. It is only the Congress that cares for the devotees and Hindus in the state,” said Radhakrishnan to THE WEEK. He said the LDF government should not have filed an affidavit in Supreme Court saying it favoured the entry of women of all age groups in the Sabarimala temple. “That weakened the case. When we were in power, we also had filed an affidavit, but one that supported the traditions at the temple,” said Radhakrishnan. He said the Congress-led United Democratic Front is on a strong footing in the state. “The BJP will never take our space in Kerala. Our base is that much strong. Hindus in the state and caste organisations are strongly behind us,” said Radhakrishnan.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will kickstart BJP’s Lok Sabha campaign in the state on January 15, with a meeting in Kollam. He will visit the state again on January 27 to inaugurate a conference of the youth wing of the party in Thrissur. The Supreme Court will hear the review petitions on the Sabarimala matter on January 22.

There is also a talk of the Central government bringing an ordinance on the issue, if the Supreme Court rejects the review petitions. But Union minister Sadanand Gowda denies it. “We are not thinking about an ordinance now. But beliefs have to be protected. The CPI(M) government, led by its chief minister, is trying to provoke devotees every now and then. It is trying to create fear in the minds of the people. This will not be tolerated,” said Gowda to THE WEEK.

Sources in the BJP said the Union government will never consider an ordinance on the Sabarimala issue, but the party will keep the issue alive in Kerala till the general elections, irrespective of what the apex court decides on January 22. “Sabarimala temple is not the real issue in Kerala. We will go by what the apex court has to say finally on this matter. We are primarily targeting the Communist government in Kerala for its anti-Hindu stand. We will consider declaring Sabarimala a national pilgrim centre at an appropriate time. But there is no question of bringing an ordinance to bypass any judgment of the apex court. The court will have the final word,” said a BJP leader.

Environmentalists point out how the focus on the Sabarimala temple has to shift from entry of women of all ages to destruction of the Western Ghats, where the temple is located. The Devaswom Board, that manages the temple, is pressing for development in the heart of the tiger reserve in the pretext of implementing the court order.

Environmental activist C.R. Neelakandan said to THE WEEK that the tiger reserve should be protected come what may. “I am not against entry of women of all ages to Sabarimala. But one should remember that environment is above all belief systems. We have to restrict the number of people who come to Sabarimala, like how it is in Kailash and Mansarovar,” said Neelakandan, “Even Lord Ayyappa wanted to remain in seclusion, that is why he went deep into the forest, or else he could have settled in places where people were more.”
