Man-animal conflict claims another life! Citizen killed by tiger in Chandrapur

During the past one year, more than 25 people have died in tiger attacks as per the information given in Lok Sabha recently. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: In another life being lost due to man-animal conflict, a youth who had gone to fetch fodder in forest died after a tiger attacked him in Chandrapur. The incident came to light on Wednesday afternoon. The deceased was identified as 35-year-old Raju Nageshwar Gujlawar.

On Wednesday morning, Raju, a resident of Lohara village, went to the forest to bring fodder from the border of Lohara and Mamala villages. During this, a tiger attacked him, killing him on the spot. After a search operation was launched, the forest department found Raju's body around noon. After the post-mortem, the dead body has been handed over to his family members.

During the past one year, more than 25 people have died in tiger attacks as per the information given in Lok Sabha recently. This information was given by the Union Minister of State for Environment, Mahesh Sharma, in the Lok Sabha. Till December 31, 2018, 27 people died in tiger attack across India. In Maharashtra, 15 people were killed and four people in Uttar Pradesh had lost their lives.

Man-eating tiger captured alive!

Last year, on December 12, a man-eating tiger was captured alive by forest rangers in Madhya Pradesh reportedly after it covered 510kms from the Chandrapur power plant in Maharashtra to Sarni in MP, killing two farmers on the way. Experts claim that it began the journey on August 15 of this year and it has emerged as the longest recorded dispersal of a tiger in India.

According to a report by the Times of India, the tiger had almost reached the Satpura Tiger Reserve in MP's Hoshangabad district but decided to move 40 kms away from the reserve towards Sarni where it was caught. Divisional forest officer (DFO), Sarni, Rakhi Nanda said that the majestic creature was first spotted near the fly ash pons and a marshy area on December 1.


