Be prepared for all eventualities: Army Chief to troops

Despite its avowed assertion to de-escalate tension, Pakistan is yet to open its airspace on its border with India even though New Delhi has placed no such restrictions. There are 11 entry and exit points along the India-Pakistan airspace boundary.

The Pakistani airspace was closed after the Indian air strikes against terror camps there on February 26 and the retaliatory action by the Pakistani fighter jets the next day when they intruded into India in Rajouri sector and tried to target military installations.

In this backdrop, the IAF is in a high state preparedness to proactively engage any perceived threat in the present security situation.

Moreover, the IAF has kept all its bases in Western sector on high alert and a SU-30 fighter jet shot down a Pakistani military drone in Bikaner sector earlier this week when it tried to gather intelligence about India’s military preparedness. The drone fell in Pakistani territory.

Moreover, Army chief General Bipin Rawat also visited forward locations along the Line Of Control(LOC) in Jammu & Kashmir and the international border in Rajasthan on Thursday to take stock of operational preparedness. He instructed troops to remain prepared for all eventualities in close coordination with the Air Force.

The Army had warned Pakistan on Wednesday that any “provocation or misadventure” will be responded to in a befitting manner with “dire consequences” after it started targeting civil areas and Indian posts in Rajouri and Poonch with heavy artillery weapons in the last few days. At least three civilians were killed and several others injured in shelling in the last one week since the air strikes. Also, more than 60 ceasefire violations by Pakistan took place in the same period.

As regards preparedness to thwart any threat from air, the IAF in a statement said here on Thursday it is “in a high state of preparedness, to proactively engage any perceived threat in the present security scenario.
