India releases Dictionary of Martyrs of its freedom struggle

NEW DELHI, Mar 8, 2019 (BSS) – India has published a five-volume of

Dictionary of Martyrs of the country’s freedom struggle containing an account

of the martyrs from the India’s First War of Independence in 1857 to its

independence in 1947.

Indian Ministry of Cultural Affairs and Indian Council of Historical

Research (ICHR) have jointly done the compilation of “Dictionary of Martyrs”

to commemorate the 150th anniversary of uprising of 1857, official sources

said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi released the Dictionary of Martyrs of

India’s Freedom Struggle, at an event in Lok Kalyan Marg here on Thursday.

The dictionary includes the martyrs of 1857 Uprising, Jallianwala Bagh

Massacre (1919), Non-Cooperation Movement (1920-22), Civil Disobedience

Movement (1930-34), Quit India Movement(1942-44), Revolutionary Movements

(1915-34), Kissan Movements, Tribal Movements, Agitation for Responsible

Government in the Princely States (Prajamandal), Indian National Army (INA,

1943-45), Royal Indian Navy Upsurge (RIN, 1946).

Besides, information about 13,500 martyrs, who died or who was killed in

action or in detention, or was awarded capital punishment while participating

in the national movement for emancipation of India, has been recorded in the

dictionary.

Speaking on the occasion, Prime Minister Narendra Modi asserted that a

nation that does not honour and remember those who created, or are an

important part, of its history, often does not have a secure future.

In that sense, he added that this effort, is not just a way to cherish

the past, but is also a way to secure the future. He said that youth should

especially be made aware of this effort.

He said effort of the Union Government is to nurture and recall the brave

deeds of the heroes of our freedom struggle. This has a positive influence on

the future generations, and inspires them to think of “India First”, he

added.

The Union Minister of State for Culture Dr. Mahesh Sharma was present on

the occasion.
