Death toll climbs to 2 in grenade attack in Indian Kashmir

People carry an injured civilian on a stretcher for treatment at the Government Medical College hospital in Jammu, the winter capital of Kashmir, India, Mar. 7, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/JAIPAL SINGH

A Jammu and Kashmir police officer inspects a damaged bus near a grenade blast site at a general bus stand in Jammu, the winter capital of Kashmir, India, Mar. 7, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/JAIPAL SINGH

People carry an injured civilian on a stretcher for treatment at the Government Medical College hospital in Jammu, the winter capital of Kashmir, India, Mar. 7, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/JAIPAL SINGH

One more person succumbed to shrapnel injuries on Friday, taking the death toll to two in a grenade explosion a day ago at a city bus depot in the Jammu region of the restive Indian Kashmir, police said.

On Thursday morning, a suspected militant, who was arrested hours after the explosion, had hurled a grenade at the crowded bus station in Jammu, the winter capital of Kashmir, and a Hindu dominated region in the only Muslim-majority state of India.

A man from north India was killed and 29 others were wounded in the attack that triggered widespread condemnation, including from Kashmiri separatist groups.

An official at the Police Control Room said one of the injured died on Friday morning at a hospital in Jammu, which is nearly 300 km, or 185 miles, south of Srinagar, Kashmir's summer capital.

Within hours of the blast, police said they arrested a young Kashmiri, who confessed to throwing the grenade.

Jammu's Inspector General Police MK Sinha identified the accused as Yasir Javed Bhat alias Arhaan of south Kashmir's Kulgam district.

The Joint Resistance Leadership, an amalgam of Kashmiri separatist leaders, in a statement said "the attack on unarmed civilians is an act which should be condemned by all civilized humans."

Meanwhile, the Kashmir Valley observed a complete shutdown on Friday to protest against the arrests of hundreds of separatist politicians, including Yasin Malik, who have been jailed under a controversial law that allows police to imprison suspects for up to two years without charge.

Malik was arrested on Feb. 22 from his home in Srinagar but was booked under the Public Safety Act on Thursday and shifted to a jail in Jammu, a police officer told EFE on condition of anonymity.

Police have also detained another separatist leader Mirwaiz Umar Farooq at his home in Srinagar to prevent him from participating in a scheduled protest march after congregational prayers on Friday.

Octogenarian and ailing separatist leader, Syed Ali Shah Geelani, has also been under house detention for years now.

Restrictions have also been imposed in different areas of Srinagar to prevent more such protests, the police officer said.

Kashmir, which is battling a three-decade-long insurgency, has been on the boil for some three weeks now after a suicide attack by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed militant group that killed 42 Indian paramilitary policemen in Kashmir.

The blast on Feb. 14 escalated tensions between India and Pakistan and brought the two South Asian nuclear-armed neighbors to the brink of a war.

Although military tension has eased over the last few weeks, but the two armies continue exchanging artillery fire and mortar shells across the Line of Control - the de facto border that divides Kashmir between the two countries.

India and Pakistan claim Kashmir, one of the most militarized regions in the world, in its entirety and have fought two major wars and several minor clashes over the region.

India accuses Pakistan of supporting cross-border terrorism and provoking separatist protests in Kashmir, although Pakistan denies the allegations.
