US urges Pakistan to take 'sustained, irreversible' actions ...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





US urges Pakistan to take 'sustained, irreversible' actions against terrorists

08 Mar 2019

The US has asked Pakistan to take "sustained and irreversible" actions against terrorist groups operating from its territory, according to a top State Department official.

The State Department statement came as Pakistan, under global pressure after the Pulwama terror attack and India's air strikes in Balakot, has started taking actions against some of the terrorist outfits and their leaders over the past few days.

121 members of proscribed groups taken into 'preventive detention': Pak

Fact

Following the Pulwama attack, the Indian Air Force bombed a JeM terrorist camp in Balakot, Pakistan, on February 26. In Islamabad, the Interior Ministry announced that a total of 121 members of the proscribed groups have so far been taken into "preventive detention" across Pakistan.

Take steps that will prevent future attacks: US to Pakistan

Statement

State Department Deputy Spokesperson Robert Palladino, in his biweekly news conference yesterday, said, "I would say that we, the United States notes these steps and we continue to urge Pakistan to take sustained, irreversible actions against terrorist groups that will prevent future attacks and promote regional stability."

He also asked Pakistan to abide by the UNSC obligations "to deny terrorists safe haven."

'Reiterate our call for Pak to abide by UNSC obligations'

Comment

"We reiterate our call for Pakistan to abide by its United Nations Security Council obligations to deny terrorists safe haven and block their entry to funds," said Palladino.

Responding to questions in the conference, Palladino refrained from giving a direct answer on the move in New York to designate Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) leader Masood Azhar as a global terrorist.

Jaish-e-Mohammed is a threat to regional stability, says Palladino

UN list

However, Palladino said that the US and its allies in the UN Security Council want to update the UN list of terrorist organizations and leaders.

"Our views on Masood Azhar and Jaish-e-Mohammed are well-known. Jaish-e-Mohammed is a United Nations-designated terrorist group that has been responsible for numerous terrorist attacks and is a threat to regional stability. Azhar is the founder of JEM," he said.

We'll ensure that the list is updated and accurate: Palladino

Comment

Palladino further said that the questions on United Nations sanctions committee deliberations are confidential and as such, it is not something that the State Department is going to be able to comment on specific matters in that regard.

"But we will continue to work with the sanctions committee to ensure that the list is updated and that it is accurate," he further said.

'We must work together to improve trade between our nations'

Fact

At the US Capitol, India's ambassador to the US Harsh Vardhan Shringla met Kevin McCarthy, the Republican leader in the House of Representatives. "We must stand strong against acts of terrorism and work together to improve trade between our nations," McCarthy said after the meeting.

Tensions between India, Pakistan escalated after Pulwama terror attack

The start

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based terror group JeM killed 40 CRPF personnel in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district in February 14.

India launched a counter-terror operation in Balakot.

The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 in aerial combat and captured its pilot, who was handed over to India on March 1.
