Bihar man-animal conflict: Rampaging elephant crushes 5 villagers to death

After the chaos for nearly eight hours that led to the extensive damage of several houses and crops, the elephant was pushed back to Ratnapura in Nepal. (representative pic) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Patna: In a tragic turn of events, five people were crushed to death when a stray elephant entered the Raghopur police station area from across the Nepal border. The incident took place on Wednesday and Thursday when one of the elephants from the herd of wild elephants was separated after which he went on a rampage across several villages in Supaul district

Going by the reports by Hindustan Times, on Wednesday morning, Yogeshwar, one of the deceased was trampled to death when he had gone to his agricultural field to irrigate his crops. This was the first incident that occurred at Karjain police station area.

Not only this, the tusker's rampage continued when the elephant attacked a house in Jahalipatti village. Chania Devi, a 55-year-old woman was crushed to death in this attack as well. After this the wild elephant reached Koriapatti village, resulting in the death of 45-year-old Ranjit Shah who happened to cross the path of the elephant.

Also Read : Mumbai: To satisfy relative's want for a boy, man abducts and sells one-year-old

The wild elephant reached Dharmpatti and Chowhatta villages on Thursday morning and attacked two more people. While trying to escape from the attack Shyam Lal Kamat of Chowhatta village was crushed to death. Also, Mohammad Jabbar of Dharmpatti village suffered various injuries and eventually passed away after the wild elephant attacked him.

In a statement to Hindustan Times, Mahendra Kumar, Sapaul's district magistrate, stated that a compensation cheque of Rs 5 lakh each has been handed over to the deceased's families.

After the chaos for nearly eight hours that led to the extensive damage of several houses and crops, the elephant was pushed back to Ratnapura in Nepal by police, forest guards and villagers. Reportedly, for the next few days, teams from forest departments of Patna and Purina will camp in the district.


