Cong leaders are Pakistan's 'poster boys' so far as terrorism is concerned, says Ram Madhav

Congress leaders have become "poster boys of Pakistan as far as the issue of terrorism is concerned," said BJP General Secretary Ram Madhav here on Friday.

"Congress leaders and their statements are being discussed all over in Pakistan. Their media is quoting only Congress leaders, who are issuing statements that are supportive of Pakistan's stand on terrorism and against India's interest," Madhav told ANI

"The Congress leaders are everywhere in Pakistan, starting from media to the Parliament. They have become poster boys of Pakistan as far as the issue of terrorism is concerned," Madhav said.

Madhav's response comes in view of the raging slugfest between the ruling and opposition leaders over the count of casualties after India's recent surgical strikes at Jaish-e-Mohammad's (JeM) largest training centre at Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.

Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out the daring anti-terror operation in retaliation of the debilitating attack on the convoy of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) in Pulwama in south Kashmir on February 14 in which 40 jawans were killed.

Senior Congress leader and former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Digvijay Singh stirred a political controversy by terming Pulwama terror attack as an "accident." He had also questioned the casualty claims with regard to Balakot anti-terror operation.

Hailing Balakot airstrike, Madhav said: "In response to Pulwama attack, we were successful in sending a strong message through multiple air strikes. We were successful in isolating Pakistan diplomatically as well."

"We want Pakistan to act sincerely against the terror outfits operation from their soil," said the BJP leader.

The former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister, who has made several controversial statements in the past, had also questioned the casualty claim in the February 26 strike in Balakot in Pakistan and asked Prime Minister Narendra Modi to all doubts in this regard.

"Prime Minister, some ministers of your government say 300 terrorists were killed. The BJP president says 250 were killed. Yogi Adityanath says 400 people were killed and your minister SS Ahluwalia says that no one died. And you are silent about this issue. The country wants to know who is a liar in this," Singh had said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
