Magisterial inquiry ordered into Madhabbari clashes; ban on SMSes, mobile internet extended

The Tripura government Thursday ordered a magisterial inquiry into the violence at Madhabbari in West Tripura district on Tuesday and extended the ban on SMSes and mobile internet services in the state.

At least seven people were injured when protesters opposing the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill clashed with police on Tuesday.

Police Thursday said situation in Madhabbari and adjacent areas is normal but prohibitory order under section 144 of CrPc would be further extended for another 48-hours.

Chief Minister Biplab Kumar Deb told a press conference here that a magisterial inquiry was ordered to look into how the incident took place and under what circumstances did the police open fire.

The state government on Tuesday had banned SMSes and mobile internet services for two-days apprehending law and order problem following the clashes. Deb said the ban would continue.

"I am also facing problem. When the suspension is lifted would depend on situation," he said.

Deb said, "Police are supposed to open fire below the knee. One Sumit Debbarma, who received gun shot on his shoulder...maybe he was in such a posture that the bullet entered through his shoulder and came out of his waist. Everything would be inquired into, including that how the situation turned violent."



Deb said Debbarma was shifted to Kolkata after his condition deteriorated and is now being treated at the R N Tagore hospital there. His condition was reported to be improving, he said.

The North East Students Organisation (NESO) had called an 11-hour Northeast bandh on Tuesday to protest against the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

The chief minister, who also holds charge of the Home department, said supporters of Indigenous Nationalist Party of Tripura (INPT), a tribal party in the state, was "involved" in the incidents of road blockade at Madhabbari.

"We have received police report that the supporters of INPT were behind blocking the road and involved in the incidents of pelting stones and bottles on police," Deb said.

State Revenue Minister N C Debbarma, who is also the president of Indigenous Peoples Front of Tripura (IPFT), an ally of ruling BJP, was present in the press conference.

When asked, if Twipra Student Federation (TSF), the student wing of IPFT had organised the road blockade to protest the Citizenship Amendment bill, he declined to comment.

Deb, who is also the president of the Tripura unit of BJP, said the bill seeks to provide Indian citizenship to non-Muslims, including Hindu, Sikh and Buddhists, from Bangladesh, Pakistan and Afghanistan.

"Those non-Muslim people...they are marginalised there. We think the bill was passed with a positive thinking. Tripura has also a long tradition of giving shelter to the refugees. The last king of Tripura gave shelter to many refugees in Tripura," he added.

The chief minister said if any person or organization or political party wants to oppose anything they should do it in a democratic manner, but anybody taking the law into their own hands would not be tolerated.

Meanwhile, SP (West Tripura) Ajit Pratap Singh said prohibitory orders under Section 144 of CrPc in Madhabbari would be extended for another 48-hour from Thursday evening.

The prohibitory order was clamped on Tuesday evening immediately after the incident.

"The situation in Madhabbari and adjacent areas are normal, but a huge deployment of police and paramilitary contingents is there. We are keeping a close watch on the situation. Section 144 CrPc would be further extended for another 48-hours," Singh said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
