India election latest: India PM Modi support is SOARING with tough stance against Pakistan

India: Pakistan navy claim Indian submarine is 'detected' nearby

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The missile strike was a retaliation for a suicide bombing in Kashmir, which killed 40 Indian paramilitaries. New Delhi had continued with their stance of “strategic restraint” over terrorist attacks but this has dramatically ended that policy. However, toughening up the response to such attacks may have sparked confidence in Prime Minister Modi, with the elections fast approaching.

Bandu Belkar, a 34-year-old farmer from Maharashtra who voted for the Hindu nationalist BJP in the 2014 general election, said he was unhappy with the government's lax attitudes towards farming and said he had almost made up his mind to vote for the opposition Congress this time.



Mr Belkar said: ”After the air strikes, I have changed my mind. We need a strong leader like Modi to defeat Pakistan.”



Vegetable farmer Ramkisan Dhavale said he will vote for Modi "if he teaches a lesson to Pakistan".



Mr Dhavale, whose cousin serves in the Indian army added: "I can keep personal interests aside and vote for Modi if he does something decisive for our country's security."

Read More: India and Pakistan 'can no longer rely on US to mediate'

India election latest: Prime Minister Modi may have gained support with a tougher stance on Pakistan

This sentiment was echoed by BS Yeddyurappa, an influential leader of the incumbent BJP.



After the missile strike, Mr Yeddyurappa said: “The whole country has welcomed this…youth are dancing and celebrating.



“It is easy for us to win more than 22 of the states 28 parliament seats here now.”



However, the BJP politician soon rescinded this, saying he had been misunderstood when opposition parties accused him of using the strike to gain political mileage.



India election latest: Tensions between India and Pakistan over Kashmir have grown in recent weeks

His own party was amongst the critics, with General VK Singh, deputy foreign minister tweeting that “action taken by our government is to safeguard our nation and ensure safety of our citizens, not to win a few extra seats.”



However, it seems Mr Yeddyurappa’s original assertion has given a voice to what many analysts and politicians already believe.



As the hostilities with Pakistan worsen, the firm stance India takes against the South Asian country will give a boost to President Modi - as he is cast as a tough on terror leader.



Ashutosh Varshney, director of Brown University’s Centre for Contemporary South Asia told the Financial Times: “No action was a non-option.

“Their whole ideology is about using state power to discipline Muslims and discipline Pakistan.

India election latest: Modi is hoping for re-election in the General Election next month
