Doctor battling sickle cell disease finds new method to fight it

sickle cell

medicine

Savitribai Phule Pune University

alizarin

A Pune-based doctor who has been fightingdisease since her childhood has finally discovered afor the illness.Sickle cell disease affects haemoglobin, the molecule in red blood cells that delivers oxygen to cells throughout the body.Dr Puja Jignesh Doshi, 45, who hails from Kolhapur city, is a professor at's bio-chemistry department. Her research has found a medicine calledthat effectively fights the disease.A sickle cell crisis is a pain that can begin suddenly and last anywhere from several hours to several days. While studying in Std X, Doshi was diagnosed with hip-joint necrosis, which limited her movement and also forced her to spend maximum time in the hospital.However, Doshi decided to fight and find a solution. Her efforts netted her a Rs 10 crore grant from the Centre for various bio-chemistry department projects. Finally, after years of effort, she has discovered alizarin medicine."The illness is a painful condition. It takes at least 7 to 10 days for a person to come to normal condition. Several people in tribal region have lost their lives due to unavailability of medicine. I have found the medicine so that others don't suffer like me. I am doing more research so that this medicine can be formally used. I have also found three more medicines and the work is in the final stage," said Dr. Pooja Doshi.Her research has been published in the January 2019 issue of US-based Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics.However, though the results of the medicine have been established, it is yet to be approved for formal use.The laboratory founded by Doshi in SPPU is the only sickle cell lab in the state. Due to unavailability of a lab in tribal region where maximum patients suffering from sickle cell disease are found, Doshi often ended up experimenting with her own blood.Doshi was supported in her effort by Dr Sudam Kate, who works in the tribal region; Dr Dilip Dhavale, who heads the physics department, and Doshi's husband, Dr Jignesh Joshi.Read this story in Marathi
