PM sets the tone on temple, 2019 elections

Putting to rest speculation about the government move to speed up the construction of Ram Temple in Ayodhya, prime minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday said an ordinance on the issue will be considered only after the Supreme Court ruling into the case. He also accused the Congress lawyers of delaying the judicial process and appealed to the party not to slow down the settlement.

In his first interview of the year to a news agency, the prime minister revealed that Reserve Bank of India (RBI) governor Urjit Patel had offered to step down on personal grounds much before he resigned.

The articulation of the government stand on Ayodhya is crucial as the BJP is under pressure from Hindu organisations and allies like Shiv Sena to bring an ordinance to pave the way for construction of the temple in Ayodhya.

The prime minister cited the case of triple talaq, saying the ordinance on the issue was brought in only after the Supreme Court judgment in the case. He said the government policy remains same on the temple issue, which is pending before the apex court.

The government had sought the proceedings to be fast-tracked. The next hearing in the case is scheduled on January 4.

On the upcoming general elections, the prime minister said he doesn’t want to highlight his achievements, and that he will wait for ‘janta ka janadesh.’

Speaking on the other contentious issue of sudden resignation of Patel as RBI governor, the prime minister claimed it was not a hasty decision and had nothing to do with pressure from the government. Modi said Patel had expressed his desire to resign around six months before he actually put in his papers. He claimed Patel also gave it in writing that he wanted to quit. The prime minister praised the work done by Patel.

“The governor himself requested (to resign) because of personal reasons. I am revealing for the first time, he was telling me about this for the past six-seven months before his resignation. He gave it even in writing. He wrote to me personally,” said the prime minister on the criticism that the government had put pressure on the governor to quit owing to differences.



Patel became only the second governor in the history of central bank to have resigned.

According to Arvind Chari, head (fixed income and alternatives), Quantum Advisors, the two moot points of disagreement between the government and the RBI were the accountability of the central bank and the role of its board and the transfer of excess reserves of the RBI to the government.

Chari has gone into the details of the two issues and compared RBI balance sheets with that of BRICS countries and three developed world central banks.

“The RBI does not have very high free cash reserves, which it can give back to the government,” Chari concluded in the report.

On the role of RBI board, he said the central bank is not a corporate and its board is not strategic. The government appoints the board members.
