Modi questions previous govt for not taking tough action against Pakistan after 26/11

Ghaziabad (Uttar Pradesh) [India], Mar 8 (ANI): Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday questioned the previous Congress-led government for not taking any strong action against Pakistan after the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack and slammed it for raising questions over the air strike carried out at Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror camp in Balakot.

"I want to ask you a question? When 26/11 happened, was it not the duty of the then government in Delhi to take some tough decisions against Pakistan", he said addressing a gathering after opening the Hindon Airbase for commercial use.

On November 26, 2008, 10 Pakistani terrorists came via the sea and carried out coordinated attacks in Mumbai, targeting the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus (CST) railway station, Cama Hospital, Nariman House business and residential complex, Leopold Cafe, Taj Mahal Hotel and Tower, and the Oberoi-Trident Hotel, resulting in the death of 166 people and injuries to over 300.

Talking about the Pulwama attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed, Modi said, "After the terror attack in Pulwama, should I have kept quiet? Should I have slept? Should I also have said that ‘we will see, we will consider action’? If you thought I would also act like the previous government, then why did you elect me?”

Targeting the Opposition parties for raising doubts over the impact of the air strike in Pakistan's Balakot, the Prime Minister said, "It was Pakistan which tweeted first at 5 am that an air strike had taken place (in that country), and our people are asking for proof. Is Pakistan a fool to accept that it has been hit?”

He went on to add, “I would request all of those, who are raising doubts over the air strike, not to do anything that makes Pakistan happy.”

Modi's comment came amid questions being raised by Opposition leaders like Rahul Gandhi and Mamata Banerjee over the casualties inflicted in the air strike of February 26 after some foreign media reports claimed that no damage had been caused.

On the occasion of International Women's Day, the Prime Minister said the Centre is fully devoted to women's empowerment.

Talking at length about the development projects, Modi said, "Metro projects in Lucknow, Agra, and Ghaziabad are being inaugurated/foundation stones being laid today. Tomorrow Noida metro's new route will be inaugurated and yesterday Nagpur metro was also started; Ahmedabad metro was also started this week."

"What is the reason that the previous governments gave no recognition to Ghaziabad and western Uttar Pradesh? But now, Ghaziabad is known for three Cs - Connectivity, Cleanliness and Capital," Modi said.

Modi inaugurated the Hindon Airbase for commercial use after wrapping up public engagements in Varanasi and Kanpur. (ANI)
