Woman power not by show casing but through action in the undulated terrain: CRPF shows the way

Report by Badal Tah ; Rayagada, March 8: The emancipated women of the tinsel town Rayagada are still celebrating International Women’s Day. There is slew of activities by women groups who are celebrating their womenhood, their achievements and struggles. A district level convention is held at Sanskruti Bhawan under the aegis of District Social Welfare Office(DSWO), Rayagada with a handful of Anganwadi Workers and Supervisors reflecting the lackadaisical attitude of the govt officials. At Centurion University extension centre, the students and staff jointly celebrate and emphasize the equity issue. The District Legal Service Authority(DLSA) has also not lagged behind in observing the Day with nursing students and para-legal volunteers and para-medical workers. Members of women cultural organization named Sanskruti donated blood on the eve of this day.

Though in all the above events hardly any common people were involved to understand this year’s theme “Think equal, build for smart & innovate for change” emphasizing BalanceForChange and to discuss women’s rights, inequalities and discriminations, Utkal Alumina International Ltd(UAIL) gathered around seven hundred women. Women achievers and entrepreneurs were felicitated by its Joint President Mr.Mazharullah Beig.

While the whole district was celebrating in some way or other and some showcased their achievements, the ever ready CRPF-4th Battalion was traversing through the dusty, undulated forest terrain in the hinterland of Rayagada keeping vigil of any untoward incident. Yes, the CRPF jawans led by Smt Mitu Ray, Second-in-Command could diffuse two tiffin bombs loaded with IEDs near Bada Gatuguda village under Bissam Cuttack police station. These were planted by ultra-left wing of the nearby Niyamagiri hills range. One bomb was destroyed at the spot and the other was handed over to the local police police station. We celebrated because they empowered us to do so. It was not celebration time for Smt Roy, epitome of women leadership in CRPF hailing from Patna, Bihar. Their action at ground zero level spoke volume of their achievements. They don’t have to showcase their achievements. The sniffer Belgian shepherd dog Axcel, which was injured and lost one eye while diffusing a bomb at Muniguda during 2016, with his master Sri Sambhu Prasad was still active in the operation. “On the eve of International Women’s Day Roy, as a single woman, led the all-men CRPF troops to the spot infested by Naxals and has proved that women can. Not only CRPF-Kashmir has shown the way, but also Rayagada”, said Sri Jogeswar Das, a union leader.
