Comfort precedes everything, says Vaani Kapoor

The Bollywood beauty was recently launched the latest collection from Dodo and Moa by Amazon Fashion and Zashed Fashiontech.

Glamorous actor Vaani Kapoor, who made her film debut in the year 2013 with Shuddh Desi Romance, was last seen opposite Ranveer Singh in Befikre (2016). The actor is back in action after a little hiatus as she begins shooting for director Sidharth Anand’s unnamed film starring Hrithik Roshan and Tiger Shroff, and Shamshera with Ranbir Kapoor.

Although Vaani takes her time to choose her work projects, the actress currently has two big projects in the pipeline. Speaking about her work-life balance, she says, “I am filming these two projects simultaneously and it is a great experience. Every project and role requires individual preparation and that comes along with these films as well. My work does keep me busy and I love it. It brings me happiness. In my free time, I do travel, watch films and learn on the go.”

The Bollywood beauty was recently launched the latest collection from Dodo and Moa by Amazon Fashion and Zashed Fashiontech. She stunned everyone as she walked the ramp in a dazzling black jumpsuit from the collection. “I love what I’m wearing, which is a very chic flowy jumpsuit with a bling element. I had the honour and the privilege to launch the brand Dodo and Moa together with Amazon Fashion at the Amazon Fashion Studio. The brand is a brainchild of Zashed Fashiontech. It is a new age brand for women with a collection that is contemporary, fun and modern. I personally love the label. The collection is everything that the modern day women would like to include in her wardrobe. It has print, colour blocking and more at extremely affordable prices. As a woman, I believe, there is something for everyone that this line has to offer and it is readily available online,” she says talking about the collection.

Vaani, who was seen portraying a chic, carefree Parisian in her last movie Befikre, spoke about her personal style as well. “I believe in comfort above all. Growing up, I loved shopping from the streets of Delhi and love a mix and match of designer wear and high street in my wardrobe. I feel, designer wear is great and is created after a lot of thought and effort but it’s essential that we are confident and comfortable with our fashion choices at all times whether it’s on social media or in real life,” sums up the actor.
