Deve Gowda backs Kumaraswamy's comment on shootout orders

Weathering criticism that has been sharp and widespread, Kumaraswamy (left) called his words an "emotional" reaction. (Photo: Twitter/@H_D_Devegowda)

Going one step further, former prime minister HD Deve Gowda defended his son and Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy calling for a shootout.

Speaking exclusively to India Today, HD Deve Gowda justified the Karnataka CM's shootout directions and said "When you know certain people are known criminals and circumstances demand, the government has to ask the policemen to go ahead. If it is inevitable, it is up to the officers who are on the field to know who is who, what is what."

Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy in December landed in a controversy after being caught on tape telling someone - most likely a senior police officer - to "mercilessly kill" and to avenge the killing of a local leader of his party, the Janata Dal-Secular or JDS.

"He (H Prakash) was a good man. I don't know who killed him in this way. Kill the miscreant mercilessly in a shootout. There would be no problem," he was heard saying in video clips recorded by local journalists.

Weathering criticism that has been sharp and widespread, Kumaraswamy called his words an "emotional" reaction.

"It was not my order, I was emotional at that moment. They (the killers) are the reason for two murders and they were in jail. They came out on bail two days ago and killed another person...this is how they are misusing bail," Kumaraswamy said.

BJP leaders have said Kumaraswamy's statement was irresponsible and that he should apologise. The state unit of the saffron party also accused the chief minister on Twitter of doing nothing as farmers in the state died or government officials were killed.

"CM HDK orders for anarchy and lawlessness by giving direct order of shootout on camera!! A clear case of provoking and instigating the system. Earlier he had called to create anarchy by openly calling for violence. Complete chaos and dictatorship in Karnataka, Highly condemnable act!!" BJP lawmaker Shobha Karandjale tweeted.
