Letters to the editor for March 9, 2019

Staff Writer

The Gainesville Sun

Beacon of equality

Gainesville is fortunate to have had courageous leadership that has transformed this city into a beacon of equality in North Florida.

One such leader is our current mayor Lauren Poe. Lauren helped defend equality when the city's entire human rights ordinance was threatened with obliteration. He participated in its defense, as he has every step of the way, including the successful effort banning the destructive practice of “conversion therapy” in which minors are coerced into trying to change a fundamental part of who they are: their sexual orientation and/or gender identity.

Likewise, District 4 Commissioner Adrian Hayes-Santos actively supported the conversion therapy ban as well as past accomplishments for equality.

Both Poe and Hayes-Santos have proven records in support of human rights. That's why the Human Rights Council of North Central Florida enthusiastically endorses both Poe and Hayes-Santos for reelection.

Robert K. Karp, president, Human Rights Council of North Central Florida, Gainesville

Complete transformation

Citizens of Gainesville have a great opportunity to vote in a complete transformation of city government this election cycle. That is why I am supporting Jenn Powell for mayor and Robert Mounts for election as District 4 city commissioner.

Powell will be courteous to citizens who appear before the commission and will not be dismissive of their views and opinions, especially if they differ from hers or other commissioners. She will be transparent in her effort to tackle the difficult issues of high utility rates, affordable housing and the massive debt that GRU currently faces.

Mounts’ vast resume of knowledge and experience will aid the City Commission in tackling some of its most pressing problems over the next 3 1/2 years. Mounts is a proven leader of neighborhood protection, having helped defeat the ill-fated GNV RISE proposal that was on a fast track for adoption by the City Commission.

Aaron Green, former mayor-commissioner, Gainesville

Scooter warning

One of the "wishes" for the Gainesville area is the ability to negotiate with prospective service providers for the placement of dockless bikes and e-scooters. A warning: I visited Fort Lauderdale this past Christmas for a week, and they have a pilot program in place. From what I heard, they are a real menace, especially the scooters.

Many of the so-called drivers of these scooters do not follow the rules of the road and zig-zag throughout the traffic lanes, which is extremely dangerous to vehicles, pedestrians and themselves. Also, the scooters are just left on sidewalks, in gutters or wherever the person feels like placing them when their ride is over, which also is a dangerous situation.

In my opinion, this is a perfect example of “be careful what you wish for.”

Jeani Valter, Gainesville

No glory in war

Britain created Hindu-majority India and Muslim-majority Pakistan by partitioning India in 1947 along religious lines. Rulers of princely states had the option to join the state of their choice.

The Hindu ruler of Kashmir, with a 77 percent Muslim population, joined India in starting the first Indo-Pak war and the division into Indian- and Pakistani-controlled Kashmirs. Both still claim the entire state and, hence, there are periodic wars.

Recently Muslim Kashmiris started an armed insurgency. A recent suicide attack in Indian Kashmir was carried out by a young insurgent. This is an election year in India, with right-wing politicians calling for revenge. Pakistan’s Prime Minister has offered to sit down with his Indian counterpart to resolve the conflict peacefully. As a goodwill gesture, Pakistan sent back the Indian pilot of a plane downed in Pakistan.

Everyday Indians and Pakistanis want peace. Let us encourage their leaders to follow their citizens. There is no glory in war.

Saeed Khan, Gainesville

Write a letter

Letters to the editor should be emailed to letters@gainesville.com. Letters should be 150 words or less and include the writer’s full name, city of residence and contact information.
