Jammu Blast Accused Was Paid Rs 50,000 By Hizbul Mujahideen For Hurling Grenade

Jammu and Kashmir is on high alert ever since the Pulwama terror attack took place on February 14. Encounters in Tral, Kulgam and Poonch districts have killed as well as injured not only the Indian armed forces but civilians as well.

In the most recent attack, two people were killed following a grenade attack at a bus stand in Jammu. 32-year-old Mohammad Riyaz, a resident of Anantnag district died in the early hours of Friday while undergoing treatment at the Government Medical College hospital in Jammu.

A 17-year-old teenager named Mohammad Sharik was also killed in the grenade attack who had arrived in Jammu to learn tailoring and become self-reliant.

Photo: AP/Jammu and Kashmir police officers walk with a suspected rebel who is accused of Thursday

The Jammu and Kashmir police arrested a teenager suspect who is believed to have hurled the grenade. Now, media reports have revealed that the suspect named Yasir Javaid Bhat was paid Rs 50,000 by terror outfit Hizbul Mujahideen for carrying out the attack.

IANS reported that Bhat confessed to interrogators on Friday that an overground worker of the terror group had paid him the money. Around 32 people were injured in the blast.

The suspect, belonging to Kulgam district, was arrested from Toll Plaza at Nag rota outside Jammu city when he was trying to escape to the Kashmir Valley. Eyewitness accounts and CCTV footage helped the police to set up checkposts.

Photo: AFP/Jammu Blast site

The suspect is yet to turn 16 on March 12 and if his Aadhaar and school records are correct then as per law, Bhat is still a juvenile. He is the eldest son of his parents and a student of class IX. His father earns a living as a painter.

Further interrogation revealed that Hizb district commander Fayaz Bhat alias Umer originally gave the task of carrying out the grenade attack to Muzammil at a crowded place in Jammu, however he failed to do so following which Muzammil handed over the task to Bhat who was code-named ‘Chhotu’.

The Pulwama terror attack in which over 40 CRPF soldiers were martyred was also carried out by a 19-year-old Indian Kashmiri Adil Ahmed Dar who was described as a responsible kid by his parents. He drove an explosives-laden SUV into the CRPF convoy as part of the Jaish-e-Mohammed terror plan.
