PM Modi, Justice AK Sikri voted to sack CBI chief Alok Verma, Mallikarjun Kharge voted to keep him

Alok Verma was first sent on forced leave by the government. The Supreme Court later quashed the government decision. Now a select committee that appoints CBI chiefs as fired him. (PTI photo)

The votes of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Supreme Court Justice AK Sikri were crucial in determining the fate of Alok Verma, who was sacked as the chief of the Central Bureau of Investigation today. Both PM Modi and Justice AK Sikri were part of a three-member select committee that has the exclusive power to appoint and fire a CBI director.

The third person on the committee -- leader of Congress in Lok Sabha Mallikarjun Kharge -- was not in favour of sacking Alok Verma. This committee traditionally includes the Prime Minister of India, the Chief Justice of India and the leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha.

CJI Ranjan Gogoi however chose to drop out of the meetings held to decide Alok Verma's fate and instead nominated Justice AK Sikri, who is the second senior-most judge in the Supreme Court, to the committee.

This committee had met after the Supreme Court in a verdict reinstated Alok Verma, who was earlier sent on forced leave by the government. Verma was sent on forced leave after his feud with CBI's No. 2 officer Rakesh Asthana became public.

The Verma-led CBI had filed a case of corruption against Rakesh Asthana, accusing him of accepting bribes. Rakesh Asthana in turn accused Alok Verma of being corrupt.

The Alok Verma and Rakesh Asthana feud, which came to be called CBI vs CBI, reached such proportions and got such negative press that the Narendra Modi sent both Verma and Asthana on forced leave, literally overnight.

M Nageshwar Rao, a joint director in the CBI, was appointed as the interim boss of the agency. The Supreme Court ruling reinstating Alok Verma had struck down his interim appointment.

The Supreme Court ruling also said that the government had now powers to act against a CBI director, since the post was protected from influence under the Indian law. The only body with the powers to act against a CBI director was the select committee comprising the PM, the CJI and the Leader of Opposition.

After the Supreme Court's verdict on Tuesday, January 8, this select committee met once on Wednesday (January 9) and then once again today.

During today's meeting, Justice AK Sikri said that the charges of corruption against Alok Verma were serious and required further probe. Congress leader Mallikarjun Kharge opposed these remarks.

But, Kharge's views did not prevail as both Justice Sikri and PM Narendra Modi voted to remove Alok Verma as CBI chief.
