JD(S) MLA under scanner after driver, who had eloped with his niece, found murdered

Bengaluru, Jan 10: K Gopalaiah, the Janata Dal (Secular) MLA from Mahalakshmi Layout in Bengaluru is reportedly under scanner following the murder of a 32-year-old man, who had eloped with former’s 18-year-old niece her two months ago.

Manu R, who was a rowdy-sheeter, was found brutally murdered in Tumakuru district on Tuesday morning. He had posted several videos on social media days before his murder, alleging that his life was under threat.

A resident of Kamakshipalya in Bengaluru, Manu was working as a driver for Guli Basava alias Basavaraju C, who is the brother of MLA Gopalaiah. Two months ago, Manu eloped with Basavarju’s daughter, Pallavi, and later married her. On Tuesday, his body was discovered lying in a pool of blood at Jatti Agrahara village near Koratagere in Tumakuru district by a few villagers who then alerted the police.

"He may have been killed at night. It appeared he was attacked with lethal weapons, including machetes, at the spot where the body was found," a police officer said.

Police said that Manu and Pallavi had eloped on October 22, 2018, and that Manu may have “paid the price" for daring to marry the MLA’s niece against the family's wishes. The cops had registered a missing person complaint for Pallavi on October 25, based on Basavaraju’s complaint, and later found out that Manu had also disappeared on the same day.

Since the last couple of weeks, Manu had posted videos on social media, alleging that he feared for his life and that he faced threats from Basavaraju and his son Kiran.

He also claimed that the cops were trying to hunt him down to arrest him for allegedly kidnapping Pallavi, however, he clarified that Pallavi had come with him of her own accord. He claimed that the cops were following Kiran’s order, though he later retracted the claim.

Meanwhile, a police probe is underway in the murder case and the Tumakuru police have formed a special team to arrest the culprits.
