Amid cancer treatment, Irrfan gets clicked for the first tim...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Amid cancer treatment, Irrfan gets clicked for the first time

09 Mar 2019

Bollywood actor Irrfan Khan, who underwent treatment for Neuroendocrine tumor in London, grabbed the headlines after he returned to India last month.

Even after his return, he maintained a safe distance from the media.

While we have been yearning to get a glimpse of the actor, Irrfan was clicked after eight months at the Mumbai airport today.

However, he chose to hide his face.

Irrfan goes incognito for the paparazzi

Snapped

According to the media reports, Irrfan is heading to an undisclosed destination today.

He was spotted wearing a white shirt with a light pink jacket and camouflage cargo pants along with a hat.

While the paparazzi was ecstatic to click the National Award Winning actor, he did not wish to show his face and hid it with a muffler.

Irrfan was diagnosed with a rare cancer

Diagnosis

To recall, Irrfan was diagnosed with high-grade Neuroendocrine tumor in March last year and flew to London soon after.

While it was speculated that the actor is battling with brain tumor, Irrfan cleared that air about his disease.

"I got to know, it was rare, and due to fewer study cases, and less information comparatively, the unpredictability of the treatment was more," he mentioned.

Irrfan undergoing a treatment at Mumbai's Kokilaben Hospital

Treatment

Ever since there have been several speculations about Irrfan's health.

Recently, it was reported that after his return, Irrfan was getting treated at Mumbai's Kokilaben hospital.

The media reports further suggested that the healing process from the deadly disease has been quite exhausting for him.

However, director Tigmanshu Dhulia, Irrfan's close friend, rubbished the reports and said that he is fine and recovering well.

Irrfan to make his comeback with 'Hindi Medium 2'

Comeback

Meanwhile, there are reports that Irrfan will soon be making his comeback on big screen with Hindi Medium 2.

Talking about the same producer Dinesh Vijan stated that the script of the movie is ready and they're waiting for Irrfan's recovery

"Irrfan has just come back to town. It's the script that's ready. Hopefully, in another month, we'll have clarity," Dinesh was quoted saying.
