See photos: 150 Kashmiri youth join Indian Army after Pulwama attack

Less than a month after the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 CRPF personnel, over 150 youth from Jammu and Kashmir have joined the ranks of the Indian Army.

The dauntless young soldiers of the regiment hail from all regions and religions of the state. The Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry (JKLI) Regimental showcased its latest batch of 152 passing out young soldiers in recruit course serial no. 117.

Ishfaq Rasool hails from Pulwama, where the dastardly attack took place. Amidst growing threat to locals joining forces, the 20-year-old solider had a wide grin while hugging his father soon after the passing out parade.

Speaking to India Today, he said, "I always dreamed to be part of the JKLI. Shy of speaking before the camera. It's a dream come true."

His brother Shabbir said, "Yes, we stay in Pulwama. There is no danger to the family." Ishfaq's entire family turned up at the Bana Singh Parade Ground. However, Ishfaq's father Ghulam Rasool, said, "Yes, there is threat, there is concern. But the government should look into this. A better environment needs to be created."

Another Valley youth, Ishfaaq Hussain hails from south Kashmir's Kulgam district, a hotbed of militancy. However, Hussain showed no sign of tension post the Pulwama incident.



Chatting with some of the other cadets, he said, "The josh amongst soldiers is very high. I have worked hard to be here. From a recruit, now I am a soldier, ready to serve my country."



Hussain too, is now living his childhood dream. He said, "I always saw the men in uniform and I admired them, today I adorn the same uniform.

Abdul Ghani, who proudly put a pin on the shoulder of his son Ahmed Ghani, said, "I am proud to send my son to the Indian Army. We are happy today."

The family hails from Tral, once known as the hometown of Hizb commander Burhan Wani, who was killed in July 2016, plunging Kashmir Valley into turmoil for nearly seven months.

Azmat Ali, who is a resident of Samba district near the International border (IB), followed into his father's footsteps. His father Subedar Liquat Ali served in JKLI since 1991. He had always dreamed of seeing his son donning an Army officer's uniform. However, Ali joined the Army on his terms, as a proud soldier.

Addressing the soldiers of JKLI and their family, Lieutenant General KJS Dhillon, GOC 15 Corps, took the platform to reiterate the Army's plea to Kashmiri mothers saying, "Do not let your sons join militants or terror ranks. I appeal to the mothers of those who have taken path of violence, ensure they do not join militancy or terrorism."

The passing out parade was attended by over 600 parents and relatives of the young soldiers from the state, besides the civil and military officers.

The JKLI follow the tradition of 'Balidanam veer Lakshnam' which means sacrifice is the motive of the brave. It was Nazir Ahmed Wani, a JKLI soldier from south Kashmir who made the supreme sacrifice in south Kashmir who was awarded an Ashok Chakra. Army soldier Aurangzeb, who was killed by terrorist, also belonged to JKLI and received a Shaurya Chakra in 2018.
