'Naya Pakistan' should demonstrate 'nayi action' against terror groups": Indian govt tells Imran Khan

New Delhi, Mar 9 (IBNS): Amid deteriorating relationship since the Feb 14 Pulwama attack in Jammu and Kashmir and a counter surgical strike from the Indian side, the External Affairs Ministry of India on Saturday said that if Pakistan claims to be a ‘Naya Pakistan’ with a new line of thought, it should walk the talk by taking real action against terror groups.

"Pakistan has failed to take any credible action against the Jaish-e-Mohammed and other terror organisations operating from its soil," said ministry of external affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar on Saturday.

"If Pakistan claims to be a naya Pakistan (new Pakistan) with a nayi soch (new thinking), it should demonstrate naya action (new action) against terror groups operating from its soil," Kumar said.

This comes a day after Pakistan Prime Minister Imran khan said his government would not allow Pakistan's soil to be used for any kind of terror activities against any country.

Concerning the meeting with Pakistan on the Kartarpur issue, Kumar said India will attend the meeting in the interests of the Sikh community in India and this does not indicate resumption of bilateral talks.

Pulwama Attack:

Jammu and Kashmir witnessed a dark Feb 14 this year, a day which is celebrated across the world as the day of love or Valentine's Day, when a terror attack by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad in Pulwama left 40 Indian paramilitary forces personnel killed.

The incident was condemned by top Indian political leaders as well as several others nations including the US.

India blamed Pakistan for the attack.

Airstrike and Abhinandan: New chapters in the tale of bitterness

Weeks after the Pulwama strike which had ignited anger across India, the country's air force targeted a terror camp across the Line of Control in the Pakistan side.

The Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out a "non-military pre-emptive" surgical strike across the Line of Control (LoC) in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK), a step which seemed to be a fitting reply to the Pulwama attack.

India swore revenge and launched surgical strike to destroy a Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camp in POK.

In retaliatory strike by Pakistan, the jet of IAF pilot Abhinandan was shot down though he parachuted down in Pakistan occupied territory.

Abhinandan was captured by Pakistan but was later released amid international pressure.
