Muslims attacked on petty pretexts like eating beef under BJP rule, says Mamata in her book

New Delhi: West Bengal chief minister and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee has questioned the Modi government on the terror attack in Pulwama where 40-odd CRPF personnel were killed, in her latest book titled “India in Distress” that was released here on Friday, in the presence of TMC’s parliamentary leader in Rajya Sabha, Derek O'Brien.Writing on the Pulwama attack, Banerjee sought to know whether there was intelligence failure on part of the security agencies and if such a threat was discussed in meetings with concerned officials.“…I was in Delhi...on my way to the Delhi Press Club when I got the news of this ghastly terrorist attack… I condemned the incident… I felt sad for the loss of the brave jawans and the bereavement of their family members. I was constantly asking myself how such an incident could happen… Few facts came to me which raised more questions,” she wrote in the last chapter that was added to the book after the Pulwama terror attack She goes on to ask: “Why the standard operating procedure (SOP) for convoy movement including sanitisation of the entire route was not followed? Why 78 vehicles were allowed in a convoy movement in a very sensitive zone? Why 'naka' (check post) checking at the point of barriers on frequent intervals en route was not carried out?”“It is reported that the CRPF had asked for airlifting their jawans, but it was not cleared. Why? Who are responsible for such glaring lapses and lack of coordination? I am constantly asking myself are the jawans and the people of this country safe and secure in the hands of the government?” she added.In the book that deals essentially with the state of affairs in the country under the present regime in the last four and half years, she claimed that a conspiracy was afoot to erase the memory of Mahatma Gandhi and secularism was being replaced by “violence and brutality.”“Organising programmes to celebrate Gandhiji's 150th birth anniversary cannot mask the fact that a plot is afoot to try and undo Gandhiji's contribution towards the making of a secular India,” she writes.Coming down on the ruling BJP she says, violence is being inflicted on the Muslim community on “petty pretexts” like eating beef under the BJP rule. India is being converted into a country of “religious orthodoxy” and its secular non-violent fabric is being distorted, she has claimed.“It is as if with the BJP in power, hooligans have got a license to practice violence and riots. They are not afraid of anyone anymore. We see that violence is being inflicted upon the minority Muslim communities across the country. We see that on various petty pretexts like eating cow meat to 'love jihad', Muslims are being slaughtered in various corners of the country.“They have launched a campaign to destroy the religious harmony that this country has always been proud of,” she writes.
