#News24 ICYMI: Probe into Laerskool Schweizer-Reneke, Usain Bolt surprises gym goers; and Jennifer Hudson chats to Channel24

Pitch Black Afro is charged in connection with his wife's murder, Bishop Timothy Ngcobo, who is often seen by former president Jacob Zuma's side, is starting a new party and the US is set to soon lose its crown as the world's top economy.

Here is a list of some of the stories making headlines today:

Viral race row picture only captured a single moment – Laerskool Schweizer-Reneke

The Laerskool Schweizer-Reneke governing body says the viral photo of separated children is not a reflection of the school ethos.

Pitch Black Afro charged with premeditated murder, case postponed

Pitch Black Afro has made his first court appearance in connection with his wife's murder.

OR Tambo Airport baggage handler suspended after being caught flinging suitcases onto floor

The OR Tambo International Airport baggage handler, who was caught on camera carelessly flinging suitcases from the carousel onto the floor, has been suspended.

KZN bishop, close friend of Zuma, to launch new political party

Bishop Timothy Ngcobo, who is often seen by Jacob Zuma's side, has explained to News24 why he's launching a new party.

NCOP adopts Electoral Laws Amendment Bill - what this means for 2019

The NCOP has adopted the Electoral Laws Amendment Bill during a special sitting. Among other things, the bill will enable voters to cast their votes even if their addresses aren't on the voters roll yet.

WATCH: Usain Bolt surprises gym goers in London

The fastest man on earth dropped in to surprise gym goers at Studio Lagree in Canary Wharf in London, making their special running class become super intense.

EXCLUSIVE: Jennifer Hudson explains why it's a good thing if she throws a shoe at you on The Voice UK

Superstar and Voice UK judge, Jennifer Hudson took a few minutes from her busy schedule to chat about the sizzling new season of the show.

The US will lose its crown as the world's top economy as soon as next year, and is unlikely to ever get it back

Once it falls behind China, it is unlikely ever to regain the top spot, and by 2030 it could also be behind India.

Fine Woolworths or get them to host a small business event? Fin24 readers weigh in



From calling on Woolworths to be fined for the 'striking similarities' with the Ubuntu Baba baby carrier to insisting that the retailer explain how 'unethical' practices took place, Fin24 readers had a lot to say.

*Would you like to subscribe to News24's Newsletters and get a wrap of the day's news? If so, click here.
