Rajnath Singh claims India conducted three cross-border strikes, ‘won’t reveal information on third’ - WATCH

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: In a shocking revelation, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday claimed that, in the past five years under the National Democratic Alliance government’s rule, India conducted three surgical strikes against terror outfits in Pakistan.

However, he said that India has knowledge of two of those strikes but information on the third one would not be released to the people of the country.

Speaking at a public gathering in Karnataka, Rajnath said, “Pichle 5 varsho mein, teen baar apni seema ke bahar jaa kar hum logon ne air strike kar kaamyaabi haasil ki hai. Do ki jaankari apko dunga, teesri ki nahi dunga (In the past five years, we have crossed the border thrice and conducted air strikes. I will tell you about two, not the third one).”

#WATCH Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh at a public rally in Mangaluru: Pichle 5 varsho mein, teen baar apni seema ke bahar jaa kar hum logon ne air strike kar kaamyaabi haasil ki hai. Do ki jaankari apko dunga, teesri ki nahi dunga. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/NZKeJPulrS — ANI (@ANI) March 9, 2019

Singh’s statement could potentially trigger a political storm as the central government has so far claimed only two surgical strikes into Pakistan’s territory, one back in 2016 after the horrific Uri attack and the other last month post the dastardly Pulwama attack.

The Home Minister earlier this week launched a fresh attack on those criticising the Indian Air Force’s airstrike in Pakistan’s Balakot on February 26 and the legitimacy of the number of casualties, and called the IAF strike “absolutely remarkable”.

“The way the IAF hit the terror camps is absolutely remarkable. But, there are a few people who are questioning it… I want to ask them, was it the duty of our pilots to land and then count the numbers to know how many were killed after the operation – 1,2,3,4,5?” he had said.
