Lucknow Embraces Kashmiri Vendors As They Are Back To Business After Being Attacked By Goons

Two days after an infuriating video of saffron-clad goons who beat two Kashmiri dry-fruit vendors black and blue went viral on social media, the vendors are back to business in the city.

The dry-fruit sellers were thrashed by two men with armed sticks who attacked them just because they were from Jammu and Kashmir. Ever since the Pulwama terror attack rocked the nation on February 14, Kashmiris have been the target of right-wing groups.

The Pulwama attack was carried out by an Indian named Adil Ahmed Dar following which cases of xenophobia were reported from various parts of the country. Kashmiris were forced to escape metropolitan cities and take shelter elsewhere.

Photo: Twitter/Prashant Sharma

The video drew a lot of flak on social media. One of the locals in the video comes to the rescue of the vendor asking the miscreants to not take the law in their own hands.

However, by Friday afternoon the vendors were back at the very same spot where they were attacked, HT reported. “There was a better response today when we re-occupied our spot to sell dry fruits after the Wednesday incident,”the duo told the publication. Earlier in the day, the vendors were invited at a market organised by the All India Democratic Women's Association or AIDWA. The women encouraged them to visit Lucknow again.

Photo: HT

Abdul Salaam, one of the traders who was attacked told NDTV that the police helped them a lot. "I have been coming to Lucknow for 22 years... People of Lucknow love us very much. We felt safer here than back home." said his friend Mushtaq.

Another native of Jammu and Kashmir named Khurshid Ahmed who frequents the U.P capital said that all of these attacks were happening due to the Pulwama attack. One fish dirties the entire pond, he was quoted as saying. Though, he added people of Lucknow have always welcomed them.

SHOCKING: Some goons in saffron kurtas throttle, assault a Kashmiri dry fruit seller in Lucknow. Passersby come to rescue of the Kashmiri. Case yet to be registered.

Hope @Uppolice @Igrangelucknow @lkopolice register an FIR and jab these goondas at the earliest. pic.twitter.com/zXjI3Anh2n — Prashant Kumar (@scribe_prashant) March 6, 2019

The two men who were attacked were identified as Abdul Salam Naik and Afzal Naik. Both of them belong to Hajipura area in Kulgam district in south Kashmir. Salam Naik reportedly said that he would sell dry fruits worth Rs 4,000 to Rs 6,000 between 10 am and 6 pm everyday. However, on Friday he was able to sell fruits worth the same amount in only four to five hours.

SECOND video of the attack. These cries of this Kashmiri should make us all hand our heads in shame. Truly disgusted to see these clips. This is not the #NewIndia anyone can hope for. India is big, our hearts are bigger. Kashmir is our and so are the Kashmiris. pic.twitter.com/L7nXAqL2vf — Prashant Kumar (@scribe_prashant) March 6, 2019

He also received Rs 20,000 as compensation from Lucknow district magistrate Kaushal Raj Sharma as a goodwill and confidence-building gesture.

Following the incident, the local police arrested five people including main accused Bajrang Sonkar. The men belonged to a Lucknow-based fringe group called Vishwa Hindu Dal whose chief named Ambuj Nigam was also arrested.
