UK Family Discovers Tipu Sultan's Gun & Sword That Lay Hidden In Their Attic For 220 Years

A UK family found that their ancestor, Major Thomas Hart, who was an army officer with the British East India Company brought certain artefacts back home after the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War in 1798-99.

The valuables they found in their attic turned out to be artefacts from Tipu Sultan's armoury.

Major Thomas Hart brought the artefacts after the Tiger of Mysore's defeat at Seringapatam in 1799 Now they are going under the hammer at an auction later this month.

Over two centuries later, Brits still gleefully profiting from the pillage of India https://t.co/wmWoWHXyg2 — Kanishk Tharoor (@kanishktharoor) 7 March 2019

The items were passed down generations and could fetch millions of pounds for the unnamed family in whose home it was discovered.

These are the list of things they found:

Tipu Sultan’s tiger-striped gun which was said to be on his person during his last battle in Seringapatam.

His father Haider Ali Khan’s gold-encrusted sword.

A gold betel nut casket with 3 nuts still inside.

"This is a very exciting discovery, made in an ordinary little home in Berkshire after lying wrapped up in an attic for 220 years," said Anthony Cribb, of Antony Cribb Ltd auctioneers who specialise in arms and armoury related sales.

UKMALAYALEE/Ali Khan’s gold-encrusted sword.

"The family is not motivated by money and sincerely hopes these items find their way back to India, maybe to a museum, for future generations to have access to it," he said.

The auction house will put up all eight items for auction on March 26 as individual pieces, without any price estimates, due to the "special" nature of the discovery.

Mr Cribb said it was impossible for him to put a price to any of the items and would rather let the market and buyers decide.

The lots came to light in January this year when the couple contacted Anthony Cribb Ltd about a sword they had in their attic.

Source

After an evaluation, a gold "Haider" symbol found on the sword confirmed that the sword belonged to Haider Ali Khan -- Tipu Sultan's father. Three other swords bearing similar gold markings were found soon after, along with a bayonet and gun.

"The gun is definitely the highlight as it not only bears the symbol of Tipu Sultan's armoury but is also battle-worn. There is a chance that this gun was among the weapons used by the ruler in his famous last stand against the British in the Anglo-Mysore battle," said Mr Cribb.

An intricately designed Betel Nut Casket and a shield belonging to Tipu Sultan as well as a Gold East India Company Seal ring belonging to Major Thomas Hart will also go under the hammer.

In 2014, a solid gold ring belonging to the 18th century ruler of Mysore had fetched 145,000 pounds at a Christie's auction in London and a collection of items associated with him sold at another auction for around 6 million pounds in 2016.

Inputs PTI
