Rahul Gandhi kick starts Cong campaign for LS Polls in North Karnataka

Haveri, Mar 9: Coming down heavily on Prime Minister Narendra Modi during whose five year term has allegedly led to high unemployment rate in the country, All India Congress Committee (AICC) President Rahul Gandhi said that if Congress comes to power at the Center in 2019, his party will enact a Minimum Guarantee Income Bill for the benefit of youth population of the country.

Addressing a largely attended 'Parivarthana Rally' organised by the Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) here on Saturday, Mr Gandhi charged that since last five years Mr Modi has worked for the benefit of few Corporate companies and did nothing for the benefits of crores of people belonging to poor and impoverished community, small and medium traders.

Referring to the Defence procurement Deal on Rafale, he alleged that "in this deal Narendra Modi had stolen over Rs 30000 crore and put it into the pockets of Ambani.

Narendra Modi also directed the France President to chose a private firm instead of State run Hindustan Aeronautics Limited".

Stating that if Congress comes to power, we will ensure that every youngster in the country will get a minimum guarantee income, he said that "Money would be transferred directly into the bank account of each beneficiary".

"If Prime minister Narendra Modi, can draw the money and put into the pocket of few Corporate companies why not we do it for the benefit of crores of unemployed youths of the country" he questioned.

He said that in Chhatisgarh the Congress government had implemented the Minimum Income Guarantee Bill and large number of unemployed youth getting its benefit.

"Scared about our programme, Prime Minister announced the 'Raitha Samman' scheme, in which Union government will remit a meager amount to the farmers bank account" he added.

Referring to demonetization, he said that every citizen of the country was hurt because of the decision of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. "While we can not do anything to reverse it I can assure that I will present a more simplified GST and one tax system for entire country".

Mr Gandhi also promised to enact the much delayed Women Reservation Bill. "My first priority will be to bring the Women Reservation bill, which would ensure adequate representation of Women in Assemblies and Parliament".

Criticising the BJP leaders on tackling the terrorism in the country, the Congress President charged that "Prime Minister Narendra Modi had blamed Moulana Masood for the Pulwama incident in which more than 40 CRPF soldiers were killed, however the BJP leaders were responsible for Masood's release from the jail and sent him in a military aircraft to Kandhar".

Mr Gandhi appealed to the party worker to support the Congress and JD(S) candidates in the coming Lok Sabha elections in Karnataka and help the party to come back to power at the Center. "The coming elections will be fought on two ideologies, one led by communal BJP and the other by the Congress which would work for the upliftment of downtrodden, farmers and empowerment of Women" he added.

Senior Congress leaders including Mallikarjuna Kharge, Siddaramaiah, AICC General Secretary, K C Venugopal, KPCC President Dinesh Gundurao, KPCC Working President Ishwar Khandre and others were also present on the occasion.
