AYUSHMANN’S COP LOOK

Actor Ayushmann Khurrana was spotted shooting in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, for the upcoming film Article 15 directed by Anubhav Sinha. It’s the first time that Ayushmann will be seen playing a cop on the big screen. The narrative draws its inferences from certain real-life events.

Spielberg vs Netflix, war continues

When Steven Spielberg speaks about the business of Hollywood, everyone generally listens and few dissent. But reports that he intends to support rule changes that could block Netflix from Oscars eligibility have provoked a heated, and unwieldy, debate online this weekend. It has found the legendary filmmaker at odds with some industry heavyweights, who have pointed out that the streaming service has been an important supporter of minority filmmakers and stories, especially in awards campaigns, while also reigniting the ongoing streaming versus theatrical debate. Spielberg has weighed in before on whether streaming movies should compete for the Western mainstream film industry’s most prestigious award (TV movies, he said last year, should compete for Emmys), but that was before Netflix nearly succeeded in getting its first best picture Oscar for Alfonso Cuaron’s Roma at last week’s Academy Awards. Netflix, of course, did not win the top award — Green Book, which was produced partially by Spielberg’s Amblin Entertainment, did.

Still, the streaming platform was a legitimate contender and this year, it is likely to step up its awards game even more with Martin Scorsese’s The Irishman, which The Hollywood Reporter said may also gunning for a widetheatrical release. A teaser ad aired during the 91st Oscars for the gangster drama said “in theaters next fall,” instead of the “in select theatres” phrasing that was used for Roma. But Netflix also isn’t playing by the same rules as other studios. The company doesn’t report theatrical grosses, for one, and it’s been vexing some more traditional Hollywood executives throughout this award season and there have been whispers in recent weeks that a reckoning is coming.
