Congress says PM Modi interview was just I, Me, Myself

Reacting sharply, the Congress party termed Prime Minister Narendra Modi's interview as "parody" and fired 10 questions that the Opposition party said, should have been answered by him.

"Bereft of ground reality, jumlas galore, Modiji's interview looks like a parody! It's the summary of Modiji's 'monologue' interview ," said Randeep Singh Surjewala, Congress communication department head. Randeep Singh Surjewala while addressing media minutes after the interview said, "The whole summary of PM Modi's interview was - 'I', 'me', 'mine', and 'myself'."

He asserted that the PM should instead have detailed progress on "10 promises that he made," including the one to deposit Rs 15 lakh in every bank account and bringing back black money from abroad. Surjewala described the PM's interview as a "monologue".

PM Modi during his interview attacked Gandhi family., and referring to this, former Union law minister and senior Congress leader, Salman Khurshid said, "PM doesn't know what means to be out on bail, there are people in his party who are put on bail on murder charges, so he shouldn't be pointing fingers." On PM Modi's statement on Ram temple, Khurshid said, "We don't control the Supreme Court of India. On what basis is he (PM) saying that Congress is creating an impediment in the Ram Mandir Case, we have always maintained that if a solution can be reached through talks that should be done, otherwise let the court decide."

Bhaiyaji Joshi of RSS said, "Our demand is to frame a legislation. Everyone wants a temple there. Let's see what government does." Juhie Singh, Samajwadi Party spokesperson also expressed disappointment as the PM did not talk about major issues that India is facing.

"We were expecting the PM to speak about unemployment, women security and law and order issue that has completely collapsed in the state from where he represents a parliamentary constituency. On Ram Mandir issue he and his party leaders did not give any statement. The PM chose not to answer real questions," Juhie said.

Senior TMC leader and power minister Sovan Dev Chattopadhaya said it seemed that the PM had forgotten how many people died after the demonetisation implementation.

"Modi and BJP have tried to divide the country on lines of religion. We follow, pray Ram, but never use the God as a political tool to win polls. The Ram mandir card has failed, so now the PM has got new reasons," Sovan said. N Chandrababu Naidu, Andhra Pradesh CM said, "The ED, CBI, I-T and RBI are completely destroyed. These are the main investigation agencies in India. The government is using these agencies as raiding tools against Opposition. You said the UPA rule was bad, now you tell us about the development in the country."

Sanjay Raut of Shiv Sena tweeted: "The PM has accepted that 'Ram temple is not an issue that needs attention now'. Seems Ram isn't bigger than law."

(India Today TV/PTI)
