‘Govt. has contained Naxalism to an extent’

BJP is committed to ensuring justice for all: Rajnath Singh

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday said that though the government will not claim to have ensured incident-free administration, there was massive improvement in internal security; Naxalism, which was earlier spread across 126 districts, is now limited to just about eight districts in the country while the North-East insurgency is down by 85 %. Addressing a meeting of intellectuals organised by Dakshina Kannada unit of the Bharatiya Janata Party here, Mr. Singh said that the Kashmir problem was persisting only because of Pakistan. There was massive violence just when the NDA government came to power in 2014 where over 60 tribal people were killed in Assam. “I wound up the unified command meeting post-violence in just one minute and you imagine what instruction I would have given,” he said and added that thereafter insurgency reduced considerably in the North-East.

He said that for every problem there is a solution and the government would definitely find one [for Kashmir]. “Our forces did whatever had to be done and accomplished the target-based mission.”

“We neither attacked their military nor civilians as after all they are our neighbours,” he said, quoting late A.B. Vajpayee who had said that one could change a friend but not a neighbour.

“However, following the air strike after the attack in Pulwama some in India were concerned and I don’t know what has happened to them. If any one is concerned about vote bank, that is not good. Politics should be for the country and not for power. They should be happy that the government did something,” he said. Mr. Rajnath Singh said that those indulging in vote bank politics are targeting the BJP as communal. “But we are clear — justice to all and appeasement of none,” he reiterated. Quoting economists, he said that the days are not far when India becomes one of the three super economic powers in the world.

Stating that various policies of the government have empowered the common man, he urged intellectuals to vote for a strong government. “Forming a government with a majority after three decades, that too a non-Congress party, is not a small achievement,” he said.

State BJP president B.S. Yeddyurappa, MPs Nalin Kumar Kateel and Shobha Karandlaje and others were present.
