India’s fascist face

Since 1947, the Indian government has bristled at any suggestion that the conflict in Kashmir could be resolved by international arbitration, insisting that it is an internal matter of India – says Arundhati Roy, an Indian author. The present Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, has demonstrated to the globe that Kashmir is potentially the most dangerous place on the earth. Kashmir issue has become the flash-point for nuclear war because Indian skirmishes against its nuclear rival, Pakistan, is increasing deliberately day to day. Even the peaceful gesture by Pakistan of releasing Indian combatant pilot, Abhinand, by Pakistani government has not worked in decreasing Indian aggression. For instance, tracing Indian submarine boat in the sea space of Pakistan by Pakistani Naval forces unequivocally gives the message that India’s focus is on the Pakistani borders.

Attack on a convoy of 2500 paramilitary soldiers of India in Pulwama, Kashmir, by Adil Ahmed Dar, a 20 years old Kashmiri suicide-bomber who – it has been declared by Indian government- belonged to the Jaish-e-Mohammad, is considered as Pakistan’s conspiracy and proxy war against India. But, indeed, Indian authorities have not yet provided any evidence through which Pakistan’s involvement in the incident could be shown at all. However, on 1 March, the Pakistani government received a dossier sent by Indian government, ironically, it did not give any authentic information that could prove Pakistan’s guilt. Owing to the incident many innocents in the valley have been facing the wrath of the Indian forces’ in the form of killings, stabbing to death, missing persons and brutal punishments.

The present Prime Minister of India, Narendra Modi, has demonstrated to the globe that Kashmir is potentially the most dangerous place on the earth. Kashmir issue has become the flash-point for nuclear war because Indian skirmishes against its nuclear rival, Pakistan, is increasing deliberately day to day

The attack that killed at least 40 men was yet another hideous chapter, however, more than seventy thousand civilians have been killed, disappeared, tortured and maimed in the conflict but, unfortunately, the international community has turned a deaf ear to it and become numb and dumb. The freedom fighters are labelled as terrorists and militants by India but, in fact, Kashmiri people proudly call them Mujahids. When they are killed, they become heroes for the populace. There are, hundreds, if not thousands, of young men in the Kashmir valley like Adil Ahmed Dar who have been born into war, who have seen such horror, carnage, genocide, missing persons and slaughtering, that they have become inured to fear and feel no hesitation in sacrificing their lives for freedom. There might be another such attack in the future worse than the Pulwama attack, if the government of India willing allows the actions of these young men to control the fate of the Indian State?

There is no difference between the present government of India and the Nazi fascists. Modi’s government has turned into a Hindu Fascist led ideology in the minds of ordinary people, and has even turned them using various tools of propaganda machinery. Some of his actions are very notorious like in 2002 when Modi was serving as chief minister, the incident of Ayudiah mosque massacre happened in which thousands of Muslims were killed and burnt alive in the train. Instead of taking effective actions against the accused ones, he openly favored Hindu criminals to wipe out Muslims from India.

The writer can be reached at asifshar115@gmail.com Twitter: @asifshar933

Published in Daily Times, March 10th 2019.
