Narendra Modi: Pakistan braced for land strikes, we surprised it with air raid

UPA had failed to respond to 26/11 terror attacks: PM

Pakistan started crying at 5am after Balakot strikes: PM Narendra Modi

GREATER NOIDA: Keeping the focus of his election season messaging firmly on Indian air strikes in Balakot , PM Narendra Modi on Saturday spoke of how his government had outwitted Pakistan, claiming it was bracing for a land retaliation from India after the terrorist attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama on February 14.“They were thinking that Modi carried out surgical strikes last time (in 2016, after the Uri attack) and the same would happen the second time. And then, at the LoC, they (Pakistan) had all kinds of things, tanks and what not lining up. And what did we do?” he asked his audience on the campus of Pt Deendayal Upadhyaya Institute of Archaeology in Greater Noida ’s Knowledge Park, referring to the air strikes on the Jaish camp at Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa.TOI had reported the day after the Pulwama attack that an air strike was the government’s most favoured option.Stating that " terrorist got an answer in their own language" , Modi said Pakistan had become “so scared that around 5 am, they told the world that Indian forces had hit them”. “They started saying Modi has hit (us). The world was informed by them, not us,” the PM said.During a rally in Hindon in Ghaziabad on Friday, PM Modi had said he hadn’t taken credit for the air strikes (a response to the opposition which has accused him and BJP of “politicising” the military operation for electoral gains).Modi, who inaugurated the archaeology campus, was visiting NCR for the second time in two days. On Friday, he had inaugurated the civil terminal of Hindon airbase and Red Line Extension in Ghaziabad. He also flagged off the Blue Line Extension in Noida on Saturday.Like in Friday’s rally, he once again lashed out at the UPA government for failing to respond to the 26/11 terrorist attacks in Mumbai. The PM said there were reports that the Army, IAF and Navy were ready to answer but were held back. “Their blood was boiling but Delhi was lying on a cold bed. Our forces were not given permission. Their hands and legs were tied. Can we counter terror by tying them up? Can this work?” he said, adding the country today follows “nayi reeti, nayi neeti” (new methods, new policies).“They were thinking they can keep wounding India, wage attacks, proxy wars and India would not respond. The reason the enemies of India could think this was because of the attitude of the ‘remote-controlled’ government prior to 2014. That is why the enemies could nurture this attitude,” he said, an oblique reference to the way the UPA regime functioned under PM Manmohan Singh with Sonia Gandhi as the alliance chairperson.The PM, who also inaugurated two power projects, likened Congress to the old machines being used at power plants in Kanpur. “Aj har bhrasht ko Modi se kasht hai (Today, every corrupt is upset with Modi),” he said.
