Terror funding: NIA closes in on Mirwaiz Umar Farooq

Closing in on the top separatist leadership, National Investigation Agency (NIA) has summoned Moderate Hurriyat Conference chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq for questioning in the terror funding case.



This is for the first time that Mirwaiz, one of the founders of Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) of separatists, has been summoned by NIA in any of the cases, though the agency raided his residence on February 26.



JRL is a conglomerate of Hurriyat hawk Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Moderate Hurriyat Conference Chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) chairman Mohammad Yasin Malik, who spearheaded the 2016 unrest in Kashmir.



Mirwaiz has been asked to report to the NIA office in Delhi on Monday in the case registered in 2017 under different sections of Indian Penal Code including 121 (waging war against the state) and 120B (criminal conspiracy) and others.



"Whereas it appears that you are acquainted with the circumstances of the case which is now under investigation by NIA. You are hereby required to report before the undersigned at the NIA New Delhi at 1030 hours for the purpose of your examination relating to the case," said Superintendent of Police, NIA in a notice to Mirwaiz.



It was not immediately known whether Mirwaiz, who is also the chief cleric of Kashmir, would fly to New Delhi and report to NIA. Efforts to contact Mirwaiz did not yield result as he either did not respond or disconnected the calls.



Last time Mirwaiz was arrested during 2016 unrest. However, he was lodged in the Cheshma Shahi huts which were designated sub-jail by the then Mehbooba Mufti government.



The notice has come 10 days after NIA launched a massive crackdown against separatists and raided seven locations including the residences of Moderate Hurriyat Conference chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and JKLF chairman Yasin Malik in Srinagar in the terror funding case.



The fresh summons to Mirwaiz comes less than a month after Jammu and Kashmir government withdrew the security cover of five top separatist leaders including him following the suicide attack on the CRPF convoy that left 40 soldiers dead at Lethpora in Pulwama district on February 14.



The notice has also come two days after J&K government booked Yasin Malik under Public Safety Act (PSA) and shifted him to the Kot Bhalwal Jail in Jammu.

Security Cover
