BSF hands over Pakistan national to Pak Rangers as goodwill gesture

If Pakistan can return Wing Commander Abhinandan, can India be far behind!

Border Security Force (BSF) handed over a Pakistani national who had crossed into Jammu from International Border (IB) to Pakistan Rangers as a goodwill gesture on Saturday.

Pakistani national was apprehended by alert BSF troops on Friday when he crossed the International Border in Ramgarh sector of Samba district in Jammu division. He was immediately taken into custody and after questioning it was decided to hand over the individual to Pakistan as a goodwill gesture.

"As a Goodwill gesture and maintaining peace and tranquility at International Border today at about 1540 hours, Border Security Force handed over Pakistan national to Pakistan Rangers. He was apprehended yesterday when he crossed the International Border in Ramgarh area of Samba district", said a BSF spokesman at Jammu Frontier.

The spokesman said Pakistan Rangers appreciated the humane approach of the Border Security Force. "BSF release the Pakistani national who was healthy and sound. Pak Rangers were also appreciative of the humane approach of Border Security Force", he said.

Even as BSF handed over the Pakistani national as a goodwill gesture to maintain peace and tranquility on IB, Pakistan army continued its ceasefire violations by pounding Indian forward positions along the Line of Control (LoC) in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district.

"At about 1800 hours, Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by resorting to shelling by mortars and firing of small arms along LoC in Sunderbani sector", said Lieutenant Colonel Devender Anand, defence spokesman at Jammu.

Indian army immediately swung into action and retaliated in equal measure to silence their guns. "India army is retaliating effectively", said Lieutenant Colonel Anand.

Four civilians including two women were killed and two others injured in cross border shelling since the tension gripped the LoC after Indian Air Force jets bombed the Jaish-e-Mohommad terror camps in Balakote area of Manshera in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan.

Official figures reveal that Pakistan carried out 1,599 ceasefire violations (CFV) along the Line of Control (LoC) in which 20 security force personnel were killed in 2018.

More than 109 people including 35 army soldiers and 21 BSF personnel were killed while 565 people were injured including 302 civilians and 263 security force personnel in the cross border firing since January 2016 to July 2018.
