Here's why Sunil Grover's comeback show 'Kanpur Wale Khuranas' is going off air

Sunil Grover made his comeback to Indian Television on December 13, 2018 with his own show - Kanpur Wale Khuranas where Team Simmba was the first guest. The ace comedian-turned-actor had quit his last show with colleague Kapil Sharma back in March 2017 post which he had been busy with his stage shows. Now, buzz is that Sunil's comeback show Kanpur Wale Khuranas is to go off air pretty soon.

Before you jump the gun and make your own conclusions, let us tell you that the reason why Sunil's show is going off air is because he had taken it up as a mini-series since he also has to shoot for his Salman Khan starrer film Bharat. While speaking to Pinkvilla, Sunil Grover shared the reason why his show will be going off air. He told the portal, "It is because of me. I had signed the show for eight weeks only because my dates were locked for Bharat, the movie. I had made this clear even during the press conference and interviews that I could only accommodate this much time."

The comedian has begun shooting for Bharat from Thursday. He also extended his heartfelt gratitude to the team of his show. He was quoted as saying, "I am kick-starting the last leg of shoot for Bharat from today, and I just want to thank the team who made this show happen including the channel and the guests who accommodated dates because of my schedule."

Resuming at @Bharat_TheFilm today . Next 40 days going to be fun looking forward. This is the grass where @BeingSalmanKhan would be walking on, in next 10 mins. pic.twitter.com/6AYwJQ3eqy January 10, 2019

Sunil further revealed how he was missing TV and so he squeezed in the schedule of eight weeks of the show and shot for it in just a month's time, before beginning to shoot for Bharat again. He told the portal, "Many stars came earlier then they started promotions because I had limited days. It is a month and a half schedule for Bharat, hence we shot the eight-weeks show in the span of one month. I was missing television and hence I took up this show in between, when I had the month gap."

Kanpur Wale Khuranas also had some other noted comedians associated with it like Ali Asgar, Sugandha Mishra, Upasana Singh. Farah Khan and Aparshakti Khurana also have been a part of the show's team.
