IAF airstrike in Balakot exposed Pakistan's nuclear bluff: Arun Jaitley

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley said India has "exposed" Pakistan's nuclear bluff by carrying out airstrikes to eliminate Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Balakot on February 26, reported news agency IANS.

FM Jaitley said India has fought several wars with Pakistan including 1965, 1971 and during the Kargil conflict. "Since then, Pakistan's army has realised that because of our huge economy and superior military strength, conventional wars cannot be won," he said.

Nuclear bluff exposed

Jaitley said the Pakistan army has selected two options to deceive India by fighting a proxy war with the help of terrorists and projecting a nuclear bluff.

"Since both the countries are armed with nuclear weapons, the nuclear bluff was their second option. But it has been exposed this time," Jaitley said.

The finance minister lauded Prime Minister Narendra Modi for changing the country's retaliatory stance against terrorism.

"Till now, Pakistan's policy was to send terrorists to carry out attacks, while our policy was to be defensive. Modi ji has brought a small change in that. While we will continue to defend, we will also attack the main sources of terrorism. The 2016 surgical strike was our first step, and the latest air strikes were the second," he said.

World supported airstrike on Jaish camp

Jaitley said the world extended support to India after the Indian Air Force carried out the attack on the Jaish terror camp in Balakot.

"Not only the US, the UK, Europe or Russia, even China released a neutral statement," he said.

Jaitley also slammed opposition parties who have been demanding evidence to prove how many terrorists were exactly killed by the airstrike.

He said: "These parties and leaders should know that operational details of the armed forces are never shared."

"The army or the air force doesn't share operational details in public anywhere in the world. The US carried out an attack in Abbotabad (Pakistan), killed Al-Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden, took his body away and threw it into the ocean. No operational details were shared," Jaitley added.

Jaitley said it was unfortunate that some political leaders from opposition parties were trying to politicise the issues and unknowingly becoming "witnesses for the Pakistan government".

"I feel people of India will teach them a lesson for raising the TRPs of Pakistani news channels, which are telecasting their statements. These leaders will have to face the wrath of the people in India," Jaitley said.

He further attacked Congress leader Kapil Sibal, who was one of the persons who questioned whether the IAF airstrike in Balakot was a success.

"It is unfortunate that such leaders are in public life," Jaitley said.

Pakistani army involved

Arun Jaitley further pointed out that news about the airstrike in Balakot was broken by its armed forces and not the civilian government.

"The air strikes were over by 4 a.m. and at 4.45 a.m. the Pakistan army spokesman tweeted that Indian aircraft violated their air space and struck using 1,000 kg payloads but were forced to flee," he said.

"There are two plausible reasons, why they first broke the news. First, the Pakistan army had created a big aura about its prowess among Pakistanis, and it did not want its image to be dented. That is why they tweeted that Indian aircraft came, dropped 1,000 kg payloads on an open area and fled.

"The second reason is more vital. Had the Pakistan army admitted that IAF aircraft crossed its air space and bombed its buildings, the first question that would have been raised was, what was the extent of damage? Experts would have come for a survey of the buildings and would have asked who were the people staying inside," Jaitley added.

"In that case, Pakistan would have been compelled to reveal names of scores of Jaish commanders and the old and new fidayeen who died inside. Also, look at the consequences. The UN Security Council is now going to impose sanctions against JeM, while the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has put Pakistan in the 'grey list'," he said.
