Packing a punch with cartoons

Vikas Sabnis

Maharashtra Navnirman Sena

political cartoonist

Russi Karanjia

Shiv Sena

Narendra Modi

Indira Gandhi

Some of Sabnis’ sketches through the years are still scathingly relevant in today’s time

Whenthumbs through his collection of A4-sized prints at his Dadar Chowpatty residence, it’s as if he’s watching the history of Indian politics play back in slow-motion — as if in a flip book.Last month, Sabnis was felicitated bychief Raj Thackeray at an event, for having completed 50 years as a. If he received a certificate or a trophy on the occasion, it’s not on display in his living room. For Sabnis, it’s obvious, the recognition of his work has never been as important as the significance of the work itself.“I miss the ’80s and the ’90s,” he says, calling it the ‘golden era of cartooning’. “Today, there’s almost no room for cartoonists in mainstream newspapers,” adds the 68-year-old, shaking his head gently as he leafs through his favourite sketches.Sabnis admits to being greatly inspired by Bal Thackeray and R K Laxman, and his cartooning style clearly borrows the bold strokes, flowing lines, and black-and-white palette of his icons. “When I was studying Commercial Art at Sir J J School of Art, I was deeply inspired by the achievements of the prolific cartoonists of the time. K Shankar Pillai would publish the popular Shankar’s Weekly, Balasaheb [Bal Thackeray] would put out fabulous cartoons in his political satire weekly Marmik, and R K Laxman was, of course, famous for his work in The Times of India. I loved all of their cartoons, and I thought to myself, ‘If they can earn both, a livelihood and fame through cartooning, why can’t I?’” Thus Sabnis flagged off his cartooning career in 1968, initially working with the Marathi edition of the iconic, investigative weekly tabloid thatfounded 20 years earlier. Then, a chance occurrence landed him on the territory of English media. “One day, on very short notice, I was asked to make a couple of sketches and show it to Karanjia. He glanced at them, ticked one and told me: ‘Make it final’. That cartoon was for the tabloid’s English version,” Sabnis recalls. Ten years later, he found work at another English publication, a newly-launched daily Mumbai tabloid. “I had a good, long innings wherever I worked, because people appreciated my work,” he says.Reflecting, Sabnis identifies the time he had to take over from his cartooning idol Thackeray in 1985 as the most daunting part of his journey. “When Balasaheb decided to quit being a cartoonist in order to concentrate on politics, he told me that I was the one who now had to ‘wield’ his brush. I told him it was a mighty test, but that I would certainly put in my best efforts,” says Sabnis. “Balasaheb handed me the cartooning responsibilities of both the centrespread titled Ravivaar chi Jatra, as well as the cover of Marmik. And, to his credit, I must say that in the 12 years that I was with the publication, not once did Balasaheb interfere with my work.”Despite his relationship with thesupremo, Sabnis emphatically states that he never took sides in battles between political parties. “I have always been on the side of the common man. I am neither pro-Congress nor pro-BJP, ” he says, and adds that he sees himself as a judge. “My sympathies are with the common man. I take aim at whichever party tries to walk all over him,” says Sabnis. He adds that “Cartoon is the best medium to highlight the common man’s woes. The beauty of a cartoon is that it presents the whole picture, in a light-hearted way.”Naturally, Sabnis is less than thrilled about the censoring of political cartoons, which, he says, happens covertly these days. “It’s not as bad as it was during the Emergency [1975-1977], when every cartoon would have to go through a censor authority, and would either come back stamped with an approval or a rejection. Today, the situation is somewhat tolerable. At least, we can criticise Prime Minister, at least up to a certain extent.” Sabnis is also quick to add, “I’ve been fortunate as no one has ever meddled with my work, to date.”The mention of the Emergency reminds him of one of his favourite sketches, one he created whenwas assassinated, and which was meant to serve as a pointed remark on how violence had escalated. “I drew Mahatma Gandhi, with a charkha and a goat, seated on a cloud representing heaven.Indira sits before him, and Gandhiji asks her: Has India progressed? Indira answers, ‘Indeed, Bapuji, India has progressed… from pistol to sten gun,’ — a reference to the weapons that were used to assassinate each of them.”Sabnis says he follows two rules when it comes to his work. “My cardinal rules are: Never strike below the belt; and, think before you ink. These have steered me clear of controversies, and they are the reason why the politicians I target recognise my criticism, without feeling like they’re being attacked personally. Balasaheb was my subject, too, on more than one occasion, and he always took my cartoons in the right spirit.” Today, Sabnis puts his political statements out there on social media, too, even while he continues his freelance work. “Social media is a boon for cartoonists, because cartoons provide exactly the sort of instant gratification that people today look for. Plus, people enjoy ‘sharing’ these humorous images,” he says. Several of his cartoons are, depressingly, still relevant today.“Today, you’re told, ‘Achche din aayenge’, but we’re still waiting for ‘achche din’,” says Sabnis, who holds on to that promise. “Indira’s slogan was ‘Garibi hataao’, and of course, poverty went nowhere. Corruption, false promises to people during elections…these things, sadly, never change.”
