'Looks like a terrorist': Cong's star campaigner Vijayashanti makes controversial remarks against PM Modi; BJP hits back

With Congress President Rahul Gandhi present, his party's star campaigner Vijaya Shanti on Saturday made controversial comments about Prime Minister Narendra Modi, comparing him to a "terrorist".

Speaking at a rally here which was also addressed by Rahul, the actress-turned-Congress leader claimed that people are scared of Modi as they don't know when he would throw a "bomb".

"People are scared as they don't know which kind of bomb Modi will throw when. Modi looks like a terrorist," she alleged, while speaking in Telugu.

Vijaya Shanti, Congress in Shamshabad, Telangana: Everyone is scared that at what moment Modi will shoot the bomb. He looks like a terrorist. Instead of loving people, he is scaring people. It's not the way how a PM should be. pic.twitter.com/1pDEvYHXH8 — ANI (@ANI) March 9, 2019

"The public should be loved but Modi scares them. A Prime Minister should not do such a thing," she added.

At the same rally, Rahul alleged that Modi was making "two Indias" - one for the poor and the other for wealthy and rich people.

"Since last 5 years, he (Modi) is making two Indias - one is of wealthy people like Anil Ambani who travel in private planes and achieve what they like. While in second India, farmers beg with folded hands for loan waiver while Finance Minister Arun Jaitley says that there is no policy of waving farm loans," the Congress chief said.

Hitting out the Congress party after controversial remarks against PM Modi, BJP said, "Now Congress is truly raising concerns & worries of terrorists in Pakistan. Welcome to New India. Yeh Dar Acha Hai."

Now Congress is truly raising concerns & worries of terrorists in Pakistan.



Welcome to New India.

Yeh Dar Acha Hai. https://t.co/5QJpdCv2t4 — BJP (@BJP4India) March 9, 2019

Rahul Gandhi also claimed that Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao is being "remote controlled" by Prime Minister Modi.

"KCR and his party (Telangana Rashtra Samithi) support BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi in every decision in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha. How many times has your Chief Minister commented on Rafale deal?

Did he ever say that Narendra Modi has stolen Rs 30,000 crore of public money? Did he ever ask for any inquiry or investigation? Why not? Because he wants Narendra Modi to become the Prime Minister (again)."
