LATEST | Akhilesh Yadav to take Metro ride from Munshi Pulia station to Hazratganj station with family today

New Delhi:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be the chief guest at the CISF Day Parade at CISF 5th Reserve Battalion in Ghaziabad's Indirapuram. Congress president Rahul Gandhi will hold a rally at the Rangareddy district of Telangana. India will play Australia in the 4th ODI in Mohali. Terrorism isn't an issue for India alone, says Vice President Venkaiah Naidu during an interaction with the Indian Community in Costa Rica. Stay hooked here for all the latest from India and around the world through the day.

14:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav to take Metro ride from Munshi Pulia station to Hazratganj station with family today.

12:41 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Punjab: Visuals from outside Punjab Cricket Association IS Bindra Stadium in Mohali where India and Australia will play each other in the fourth ODI of the 5-match series. India is currently leading 2-1.



Punjab: Visuals from outside Punjab Cricket Association IS Bindra Stadium in Mohali where India and Australia will play each other in the fourth ODI of the 5-match series. India is currently leading 2-1. #INDvAUS pic.twitter.com/XzUj9cFORQ

— ANI (@ANI) March 10, 2019



12:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Odisha chief minister Naveen Patnaik in an election rally in Kendrapara announces 33% quota for women in allocation of Lok Sabha seats for BJD.

09:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Madhya Pradesh Governor Anandiben Patel has approved ordinance to increase reservation for Other Backward Classes (OBCs) from 14 per cent to 27 per cent.

08:47 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Pro-Khalistani people allegedly supported by ISI attacked a number of British Indians who were standing outside the Indian High Commission in London on March 9.



Pro-Khalistani people allegedly supported by ISI attacked a number of British Indians who were standing outside the Indian High Commission in London on March 9. pic.twitter.com/orNSJipObs

— ANI (@ANI) March 10, 2019



08:15 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In At least 80 people injured after a high-speed boat collided with a "marine creature" off the northwest coast of Japan.

07:54 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Venkaiah Naidu: Our neighbor is aiding terrorists, open secret. Recently after Pulwama attack where 40 security personnel lost their lives, 4 of our Indian Air Force aircraft went to Pakistan, targeted that training camp, destroyed it & came back without any problem within 21 min.

07:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Vice-President: Terrorism isn't an issue for India alone. It's an international issue. Even America that never used to understand our pain are now understanding. Terrorism is enemy of humanity, terror has no religion. No religion whether Hindu, Muslim, Christian preaches terror.

07:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In V Naidu: We're a peace loving country. All time Dick & Harry came & attacked us, ruled us, ruined us, cheated us...But we never attacked anyone because we believe in the philosophy that entire world is one family....But we've a neighbour who is aiding,training, funding terrorists.



V Naidu: We're a peace loving country. All time Dick & Harry came & attacked us, ruled us, ruined us, cheated us...But we never attacked anyone because we believe in the philosophy that entire world is one family....But we've a neighbour who is aiding,training, funding terrorists https://t.co/IcJVABPjRT

— ANI (@ANI) March 10, 2019



07:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Vice-President M Venkaiah Naidu in an interaction with Indian Community in Costa Rica: While we are making phenomenal progress on all fronts, there is one festering challenge that continues to detract our attention from development.

07:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Lucknow: 2 Sub-Inspectors Pawan Mishra&Ashish Tiwari suspended by SSP Kalanidhi Naithani after they took Rs 1.58 cr from a coal trader calling it black money. SSP K Naithani says, "they were tipped off by one Madhukar Mishra. A case of loot registered against these three and few other people."

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
