'Plot bigger than Baahubali': Naidu alleges BJP-TRS-YSRCP nexus in data theft raids

'Plot bigger than Baahubali': Naidu alleges BJP-TRS-YSRCP nexus in data theft raids

AP CM Naidu alleged that the Election Commission had followed a script penned by YSRCP and raided IT Grids.

news Politics

Andhra Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu claimed that a conspiracy bigger than the Baahubali plot was being orchestrated by the BJP, TRS and YSRCP together.

Naidu claimed that the nexus of Modi, KCR and Jagan in the alleged data theft had been exposed due to a goof-up YSRCP Rajya Sabha MP V Vijaysai Reddy who is also the National General Secretary of the party. Naidu was referring to a petition filed by Vijaysai Reddy on February 19 to the Election Commission. The AP CM has alleged that the Election Commission followed a script set by Vijaysai Reddy by raising IT Grids on February 23.

“The memorandum submitted by Vijaysai revealed their entire conspiracy. They first approached ECI in New Delhi and three days later, the Telangana police raided the IT Grids office without even a complaint. Only after raiding the offices, they later found a complainant. Even the Telangana police's claim has been contradictory in this entire episode,” Naidu alleged.

Alleging that the TDP was collecting personal data of individuals like Aadhaar, caste, voting preference in their official mobile application -Sevamitra- Vijaysai had filed a complaint with the Chief Election Commissioner, Sunil Arora on February 19. The MP also listed out ‘focus points’ for the searches that the Election Commission should carry out at IT Grids Pvt Ltd., the technology firm which maintains the application.

In the list, Vijaysai asked authorities to ‘establish’ that the firm had a database of Aadhaar numbers and also establish a link between IT Grids CEO, D Ashok and Chandrababu’s son and Andhra IT Minister Nara Lokesh.

The office of IT Grids in Hyderabad was raided on February 23 by the Cyberabad police. Naidu alleged that without any complaint, based on the Vijaysai’s memorandum, the Telangana government raided the office and ‘stole’ the data of their cadre.

“Telangana police is not disclosing that they have raided and stole the data based on Vijaysai’s instruction. They later found one complainant and said that they took action based on his complaint,” Naidu said.

“The complaint was registered at 12.15 am, who will file a complaint about data theft at that hour?” he questioned.

Naidu alleged that Telangana police raided IT Grids office and investigated the CEO D Ashok without a warrant.

“These many conspiracies you won’t even have seen in movies. Even in Baahubali there wasn't so much of conspiracy, it is a grand conspiracy than that. They have surpassed the imagination of moviemakers.”

Naidu reiterated that if the Telangana police had received a complaint, they should have transferred it to them. “As a sovereign state, you should have transferred the case to us. The data belongs to us,” he said.
