Emotions running high but Bihar far from done deal

Jitendra K Shrivastava in Patna

Jitendra K Shrivastava in Patna

Much like the rest of the country, Bihar seethed with anger following the Pulwama attack that claimed the lives of over 40 CRPF jawans. People, particularly youth, wanted revenge. And when the Indian Air Force (IAF) bombed the Balakot terror camps inside Pakistan, they were thrilled, with patriotic sentiments hitting the crescendo.

Among the Pulwama martyrs, two were from Bihar. One more was martyred in an anti-terrorist operation soon after the ghastly attack. The state echoed with anti-Pakistan slogans as the angry and anguished people held impromptu protests and candle marches, demanding strong action against Pakistan. Nothing else, they said, would wipe tears from the faces of the families of the slain jawans. In the backdrop of such strong emotions, when the revenge was delivered by the IAF, followed by the safe return of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman from Pakistan’s captivity, the people were ecstatic and, understandably, appreciative of the Narendra Modi government for showing the gumption to attack the terror camps inside Pakistan.

“This surgical strike has galvanised people in favour of Narendra Modi. Like in the rest of India, the patriotic and nationalistic sentiments are soaring high here,” said former Bihar Chief Minister and Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) chief Jitan Ram Manjhi. Manjhi, though, didn’t like the way the BJP started “doing politics” over the issue soon after. “The Opposition comprising 21 parties extended support to the Modi government for its action against terrorism. But the Prime Minister and BJP president Amit Shah started doing politics over the surgical strike and claimed 300 terrorist were killed in the Balakot airstrike to take political mileage,” he said.

Patriotism and politics

As for the political upshot of the Balakot strike with regard to the upcoming Lok Sabha elections, the crackdown on terror seems to have swayed at least the youth towards the BJP. They seem quite impressed with Modi’s gumption to hit the terror camps inside Pakistan. “The Modi government did nothing (otherwise) but its act against the terror-nurturing Pakistan has won my heart and of other youths,” said Anil Singh, an east Champaran resident. “National security comes ahead of other issues. The Congress-led government dishonoured India when it failed to retaliate following the terror attack on Parliament and in Mumbai, but the Modi government has left no stone unturned in exposing Pakistan on the international stage.”

The Janata Dal (United), the BJP’s ally in Bihar, is understandably keen to interpret the prevailing mood in Modi’s favour. “Youth, mainly in the Hindi heartland, is very sensitive and serious about national security and integrity. Due to social media, they are aware of the action taken against terror and it appears they would go with Modi,” said JD (U) spokesperson Neeraj Kumar.

The Opposition, too, concedes the anti-Pakistan sentiment is extremely strong in Bihar. Yet, it can’t be ascertained how it will play out politically as the elections in Bihar are fought more on social equations.

“If the BJP claims 300 terrorists were killed in the Balakot strike, then it should have come up with proof too,” said senior Congress leader and party spokesperson Prem Chandra Mishra. “If it wants to exact political mileage out of it, then it must remember that polls in Bihar are contested on social equations. People are fed up with the policies of the Modi government, so the government is trying to use airstrikes to divert people’s attention from development, but they will not succeed.

“The BJP had made tall promises like providing jobs to youth, bringing back black money, etc., ahead of the 2014 polls but failed to fulfil them. So, the Modi government wants to keep the border tense till the elections, hoping to garner some votes,” said Mishra.

Many argue that the Pulwama tragedy and the subsequent actions should not be used for political advantage. “It is wrong to play with the patriotic sentiments of the people. There should not be politics over martyrdom,” says Mukesh Kumar Jha, a social worker from Darbhanga. “The BJP politicised the matter when Shah claimed 300 terrorists were killed in Balakot, even though the Air Force chief refused to get into the number game. As we saw after the 1971 War and the Kargil conflict, the patriotic sentiments do not necessarily translate into votes for the ruling dispensation.”

Echoing his thought, Purnea resident Vijay Kumar Sreevastav said: “Sentimentally, people are with PM Modi who retaliated against the terrorist attacks in Uri and Pulwama, but politically they are with those who talk of development.”

“The Modi government had lost all four Lok Sabha seats of Seemanchal (Purnea, Araria, Kishanganj and Katihar) in the last Parliamentary elections. People vote for those who keep their promises. PM Modi’s promises of a civil airport and Central School in Purnea stand unfulfilled.”
