Delhi Shocker! 6-year-old boy killed, man injured in firing at Inderpuri gym

Initial enquiry revealed that four people of JJ Colony in Inderpuri were involved in the incident, they said, adding a case has been registered in the matter and a hunt is on to nab the accused./Image: ANI

On receiving information at 8:45 pm about gunshots being fired, police reached the spot and found that the boy, Prince Raj, who was looking through the window of his residence above the gym has died while another person, Mahender, was injured while entering the building, an official said. #SpotVisuals: 6-year-old boy died in firing by miscreants at a gym in Delhi's Indrapuri area yesterday. The deceased was living on rent at gym owner's flat. Gym owner's brother injured in the firing. More details awaited pic.twitter.com/7zygfWVg24 — ANI (@ANI) March 9, 2019 Initial enquiry revealed that four people of JJ Colony in Inderpuri were involved in the incident, they said, adding a case has been registered in the matter and a hunt is on to nab the accused. WATCH:

: In a horrific incident that took place in Delhi’s Inderpuri area, a six-year-old boy died in firing by some miscreants at a gym, while a 29-year-old man was injured. A group of miscreants started pelting stones at a gym in West Delhi’s Inderpuri and later opened fire, triggering a stampede-like situation. The child named Prince who was looking below from second floor, got injured in the firing and died of the bullet wounds. The perpetrators also shot the gym-owner’s brother , who is injured. The shooters fled the spot after the incident and are still absconding, The deceased child was living on rent at gym owner's flat. As per locals, it is a case of personal animosity. The incident took place at 8:30 pm on Saturday night in Block C of Inderpuri when four unidentified men broke into the gym and got into an argument with people. As the argument escalated, one of the four men started pelting stone and another started firing in which the six-year-old Prince who was looking out of his window got injured. He was declared brought dead on reaching hospital.
