India demands Pakistan to take action against 'militants'

India on Saturday reiterated its demand that Pakistan take action against militant groups on its soil.

"If Pakistan claims to be a naya Pakistan [new Pakistan] with a nayi soch [new thinking], it should demonstrate naya action [new action] against terror groups operating from its soil," Raveesh Kumar, spokesman for the Ministry of External Affairs, said in a news conference in the capital New Delhi.

Tension between the two nuclear armed-neighbors escalated following a suicide bombing in Indian-administered Kashmir in mid-February that left more than 40 Indian troops dead.

The attack was claimed by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), a militant group that Pakistan has banned since 2002 but is accused by India of providing sanctuary.

Speaking about India’s airstrike inside Pakistani territory on Feb. 26, Kumar said: “Non-military counter-terrorism strike of 26th February achieved the intended objective. It has demonstrated our firm resolve to take decisive action against cross-border terrorism.”

On Feb. 26, India claimed to have killed “several terrorists” in a “preemptive action” on a camp of JeM inside Pakistani territory.

However, Islamabad denied there had been any casualties, saying Indian troops intruded into Pakistan’s airspace and dropped four bombs at empty forestland.

Relations between the two countries further soured when warplanes from both sides engaged in a dogfight along the border of disputed Kashmir on Feb. 27. India and Pakistan claimed to have downed each other's planes and an Indian pilot was captured.

A day later, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan announced to release the captured Indian pilot in what he called “as a peace gesture”.

The Indian External Ministry spokesman said the United States is examining Pakistan's use of F-16 fighter jet aircraft in the air combat with India.

"There are eyewitness accounts and electronic evidence that Pakistan deployed F-16 aircraft and that one F-16 was shot down by Wing Commander Abhinandan. We have asked the U.S. to also examine whether the use of F-16 against India is in accordance with terms and conditions of sale," he said.

Pakistan denies using F-16 aircraft during the air combat with India.
