PM Modi looks like terrorist, says Telangana party leader Vijaya Shanti

The ECI is set to announce the dates for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections today.

NEW DELHI (Dunya News) - With Congress President Rahul Gandhi present, Telangana party leader Vijaya Shanti on Saturday lashed out at Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and comparing him to a "terrorist".

The actress-turned-leader Vijaya Shanti, while addressing a rally in Telangana’s Shamshabad which was also addressed by Rahul Gandhi, claimed that people are scared of Modi as they don’t know when he would throw a "bomb".

"People are scared as they don’t know which kind of bomb Modi will throw when. Modi looks like a terrorist," she said while speaking in Telugu.

"The public should be loved but Modi scares them. A prime minister should not do such a thing," she added.

PM Modi looks like terrorist, says Telangana Congress leader Vijayashanti.#ITVideo

More videos: https://t.co/Nounxo6IKQ pic.twitter.com/p85GVdkTYA — India Today (@IndiaToday) March 10, 2019





Vijaya Shanti, Congress in Shamshabad, Telangana: Everyone is scared that at what moment Modi will shoot the bomb. He looks like a terrorist. Instead of loving people, he is scaring people. It s not the way how a PM should be. pic.twitter.com/1pDEvYHXH8 — ANI (@ANI) March 9, 2019

At the same rally, Rahul alleged that Modi was making "two Indias" - one for the poor and the other for wealthy and rich people.

"For the last five years, he [Modi] is making two Indias - one is of wealthy people like Anil Ambani who travel in private planes and achieve what they like. While in second India, farmers beg with folded hands for loan waiver while Finance Minister Arun Jaitley says that there is no policy of waving farm loans," the Congress chief said.

Meanwhile, the Election Commission of India is set to announce the dates for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections today. The poll panel will be holding a press conference around 5pm in New Delhi.

The term of the present Lok Sabha ends on June 3. The required electronic voting machines and paper trail machines are in place to be deployed in nearly 10 lakh polling stations across 543 Lok Sabha constituencies.
