Rohit Shetty, Karan Johar, Imtiaz Ali have a fixation of shooting at these locations

Director Rohit Shetty is in Goa working on his next film with Akshay Kumar titled Sooryavanshi. After the massive success of Simmba, Rohit has jumped into the preparations for this new cop drama. And let us tell you, Goa is Rohit’s favourite spot to shoot if you have noticed, a majority of his films are based there. From tossing cars in the air to showing amazing beaches and vibrant streets seem to be the directors pick. Filmmaking is a process that involves many things of which location is the most important aspect. To contribute to the film’s right tone, location matter a lot and many directors in Bollywood have their unique obsession with a few locations, check out five favourite ones here:

Rohit Shetty – Goa

The comedy franchise Golmaal, the rom-com Dilwale, both instalments of the action drama Singham, Rohit Shetty has taken the risk to set all his films in Goa. And the plus point is, the director makes it visually appealing every time. Known for flying cars and vibrant setups Rohit is one of the few directors who makes the no harm action-packed dramas in the current slot.

Imtiaz Ali – Snow-clad North

Be it Jab We Met, Laila Majnu, Highway or even Rockstar, most of these films have been set in snow clad regions. Director Imtiaz Ali seems to have a special affection with the snowy hills. This director has shown us amazing locations in his films which have only left us in admiration. Apart from our love for Imtiaz’s storytelling we also love how he makes us explore the world through his lens.

Karan Johar – London, New York

Known to make films based on NRI’s, Karan Johar and his love triangles have travelled throughout London and New York. Remember the beautiful song sequence Karan Johar gave us in Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna with Rani Mukherjee and Shah Rukh Khan romancing on the New York streets? His film Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham had an Indian family getting settled in foreign and even his last directorial Aae Dil Hai Mushkil was set in London, which proves how international locations are KJo’s favourite.

Madhur Bhandarkar – Mumbai

Realistic filmmaker Madhur Bhandarkar has always managed to capture the natural essence of Mumbai in his heart-wrenching stories. From exploring the dark side of the city Traffic Signal to capturing the city’s glamorous slice in Fashion, Bhandarkar has always shot his films in Mumbai. Some of his other amazing works are Heroine, Chandni Bar, etc.

Zoya Akhtar- Europe

Ever since you saw three friends head out on a trip in Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara, haven’t you dreamt of having one such vacation? Well, if Zoya Akhtar has tempted you to go on a cruise like the Dil Dhadakne Do cast, then let us tell you for both Imtiaz and Zoya world is their canvas. In fact, let us tell you that shooting for a Zoya Akhtar film is one fancy outing the actors get, but that is what is the beauty of this filmmaker.

Tell us which from the above is your favourite filmmaker? Comment in the section below. Also, stay tuned to CineBlitz for amazing Bollywood updates.
