Pakistan should join hands with India to ‘root out terrorism,’ tweets Rishi Kapoor

Rishi Kapoor | Photo Credit: Instagram

12 days after the Pulwama terror attack that resulted in the killing of at least 40 CRPF jawans, the Indian Air Force conducted strikes on terror launch pads in Balakot, Pakistan. While an average Indian mourned the insurmountable loss of lives, he also applauded the government’s stern action to eliminate terrorism.

Several eminent personalities from India, in the last couple of days, have shared their views on social media pertaining to the tensions between India and Pakistan. Veteran actor Rishi Kapoor, who is known for fearlessly voicing his opinions, is the latest entrant to the club. Mr Kapoor, on Twitter, said that Pakistan should join hands with India to “root out terrorism.”

His tweet read, “Agree with @arunjaitley If Pakistan truly wants to root out terrorism as they say so, they should join hands with India to do so. We and you have nothing against our respective civilians. If Imran cannot, Pakistan Army or ISI should do it. Think!”

Agree with @arunjaitley If Pakistan truly wants to root out terrorism as they say so,they should join hands with India to do so. We and you have nothing against our respective civilians. If Imran cannot, Pakistan Army or ISI should do it. Think! — Rishi Kapoor (@chintskap) March 10, 2019

Rishi is currently in New York and is getting treated for an unknown disease. While it was earlier reported that the actor was planning to come back to India, the actor denied the reports saying he had no plans to return anytime soon.

Earlier, news agency IANS quoted a source as saying, “Rishi is homesick and very eager to return home. They have a wedding to plan (son Ranbir Kapoor is reportedly set to marry Alia Bhatt). And he’s counting the days. But he’s not ready yet to return. His treatment is slow but steady. Hopefully, he can come home in a few months.”

Although fans won’t get to see their beloved actor coming back home anytime soon, Mr Kapoor’s wife and actress Neetu Kapoor shared a photo of the actor’s latest look. Captioned “Kapoor Saab’s hair all buzzzzed !!! Josh is great !!! Love this look,”

Take a look at the photo below:

The actor was last seen in Anubhav Sinha’s Mulk that released last year. The film co-starred Taapsee Pannu.
