Lok Sabha Elections 2019: Election Commission lays down guidelines for social media poll battle

The EC has announced it will keeping tabs on social media campaigning.

India will not only head to 2019 elections on the ground but also on social media. As political parties use the quick, accessible and low-cost platform to gather support, the Election Commission has prepared itself to battle the onslaught of poll campaigning on social media.

Declaring the poll dates for the Lok Sabha elections, Chief Election Commissioner Sunil Arora announced the steps the Election Commission will take to monitor online campaigning. According to the Election Commission, political advertisements on social media will need pre-certification. These ads will also be part of the poll expenditure of the party.

The CEC informed that social media platforms -- Google, Facebook, YouTube and Twitter have said all political advertisements will be certified.

He said that Twitter, Facebook and Google will also highlight political ads on their platforms specifically. Facebook and Google have also deputed a dedicated grievance officer to receive complaints of any violation of EC guidelines.

Social media(SM) expert is also going to be part of Media Certification and Monitoring Committee; candidates are required to furnish details of SM accounts; all expenditure on SM campaigning to be part of election expenditure account: CEC Sh Sunil Arora#LokSabhaElection2019 pic.twitter.com/nxdVCIjZ5r PIB India (@PIB_India) March 10, 2019

CEC Sunil Arora also said that a social media expert is also going to be part of the Media Certification and Monitoring Committee.

In order to fight the scourge of fake news, all candidates standing for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections will have to declare their social media accounts to the Election Commission as part of their affidavit.

All advertisement on social media will also require pre-certification. All expenditure on campaigning advertisement in social media is to be included in the election expenditure account, said Sunil Arora.

The Election Commission has expressed its concern over the impact of fake news and inflammatory content on social media on poll outcomes.

Sunil Arora has continued to stress over the need to bring in social media campaigning into the ambit of the Election Commission's functioning. Previously he had told India Today that the EC is looking into including social media in the 'silence period' that exists 48 hours prior to polling in a region.

"The [Election] Commission has also asked that print and social media be brought within the ambit of Section 126(1) of the Representation of the People Act so that the concept of 'silence period' is honoured and opinion polls are restricted," he had said.

FOLLOW LIVE COVERAGE OF THE 2019 LOK SABHA POLLS ANNOUNCEMENT HERE

FULL SCHEDULE OF LOK SABHA POLLS: Lok Sabha election dates: Voting from April 11 to May 19, result on May 23

WATCH: Lok Sabha polls from April 11 to May 19, vote count on May 23: EC
