Opposition rattled by surgical strike : Rajnath Singh

UNI

Unnao, Mar 10 (UNI) In a veiled attack against opposition parties, Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh said that it is a mystery as why some leaders of opposition parties are rattled by the surgical strike II carried out by the Indian Air Force in Pakistan and have started questioning government.

“The surgical strike has caught Pakistan unawares. It got the lesson it deserved. Pakistan is disturbed, which is understandable because of global condemnation it has got. But it is surprising that the IAF strike has rattled many opposition leaders and they are questioning government,” he said during his interaction with farmers during a programme called Gaon mein Man ki baat in Bhagwant Nagar here on Sunday.



Some Congress and TMC leaders have asked Union Government to furnish proof of the strike.



He said that the non-military strike by Indian Air Force was aimed against terrorists. We achieved the desired result that gladdened hearts of Indians. But many political leaders are upset and are questioning Indian Government which is very confusing, he said.



Singh said that India is led by a towering personality like Narendra Modi. The world recognizes his effort for bringing the poor and farmers in the main stream. The work done by his government in social sector is unparallel. The poor he did not have house over his head has a house now and also has electricity in his house, he said.

He also asked the farmers to tell about their problems so that it could be incorporated in the election manifesto of the party.

“I am the chairman of that committee which will write the election manifesto. I have come to you to know what exactly you want,” he said.



Singh, who is MP from Lucknow, said that it is for the first time in the history of Indian politics that a political party is preparing its election agenda after discussion with people.

“Your views are important because these will form the part of our Sankalp patra,” the Union Home minister said.
