Since Pakistan was not acting against terror groups, we decided to act: Raksha Mantri Nirmala Sitharaman

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman. | Photo Credit: ANI

Chennai: Continuing the clarifications on the Indian Air Force’s strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot to destroy terror training camps of Jaish-e-Mohammed, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Sunday stressed that since Pakistan failed to tackle the terrorism menace, India had to launch the attack.

“Pakistan was not acting on terrorism and continued to train, fund, endow and support them. Since Pakistan did not take a call on terrorism, we took a decision to hit out at the nerve centre which was training, funding and giving capacity to what they call ‘Fidayeen’. Since we had enough intelligence to say that this is where it is coming from, we pre-emptively attacked their terror camps,” she said at an event in Chennai, according to news agency ANI.

She reiterated that it was not a military action, but a targeted attack on terrorists which Pakistan should have done, adding that Pakistan continues to be the country where “terrorists are trained, funded, supported by military establishment and sent across”.

Defence Minister: We took decision to hit that nerve centre which was training, funding & giving capacity to what they call Fidayeen. Since we had enough intel information to say that that's where it is coming out of, we acted on terror so that no longer goes unattended. https://t.co/5fEbDI5pqN — ANI (@ANI) March 10, 2019

“Prime Minister Modi has been, since 2014, going around the world and meeting with countries to talk about how Pakistan needs to be isolated for not taking concrete action against terrorism. There have been constant efforts by us to isolate Pakistan and identify their terror camps,” the Defence Minister said, adding that “Pakistan is kept at the grey list, short of being blacklisted anytime.”

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman in Chennai: It was not a military action, it was a targeted attack on terrorists which actually Pakistan should have done, they didn't. pic.twitter.com/uWff3ClK0s — ANI (@ANI) March 10, 2019

Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot that falls in the Khyber- Pakhtunkhwa region, along with Muzaffarabad and Chakothi in PoK. The terror group is responsible for the dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14 where 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The attack was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.

The very next morning, Pakistan Air Force jets entered Indian airspace from Nowshera sector but were immediately sent back by IAF jets on February 27.
