‘Expect Pulwama-like attack before elections’: Raj Thackeray

The Maharastra Navnirman Sena (MNS) Chief Raj Thackeray on Saturday claimed in view of the Lok Sabha elections in April and May, there could be “Pulwama-like attack organised within a couple of months, PTI reported.” He also said that Assembly elections in four states were due when the terror attack in Pathankot took place in 2015, implying there was a connection .

“Expect another Pulwama-like attack before the Lok Sabha elections,” claims Mr. Thackeray.

MNS chief also said that Assembly elections in four states were due when the terror attack in Pathankot took place in 2015, implying there was a connection.

While criticizing Prime Minister Narendra Modi for suggesting the result of the dogfight between Indian and Pakistani air forces could have been different if the Indian side was equipped with Rafale jets, he said,“If the prime minister himself says that results would have been better had the country had Rafale jets, it was an insult to our jawans,”

Mr. Thackeray was addressing the party workers on the 13th Foundation Day of the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena. Disputing that terrorists were killed in the air raids, Mr. Thackeray said, ‘had that been the case, Indian Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman would not have been allowed to return home from captivity by Pakistan.’

According to a report by PTI, Thackeray claimed political leaders were lying to win elections. “In a bid to win upcoming elections, there will be another Pulwama like attack carried out within the next 1 to 2 months, and once again all these lectures about patriotism will begin.”

Forty personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force were killed in a terror attack in Pulwama district on February 14. Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad had claimed responsibilty for the attack. On February 26, the Indian Air Force carried out air strikes on a Jaish-e-Mohammad camp in Pakistan’s Balakot. A day after the cross-border strike, India and Pakistan engaged in aerial skirmishes.
