3 JeM militants killed in Tral - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Shutdown in parts of Srinagar

Fayaz Bukhari

Srinagar, Mar 10 : Three militants of Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) were killed in a gun battle with security forces at Pinglish village of Tral in South Kashmir’ s Pulwama district today.

A joint team of Army’s 42 RR, 180 batallion of Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and Police launched cordon and search operation in Pinglish village after reports about presence of three militants in the village including one local Mudasir Ahmad and two foreigners.

As the search party reached near the house in which militants were hiding, they were fired upon by militants from inside the house, triggering a gun battle. The troops encircled the house trapping them inside.

The intermittent firing continued throughout the day and the house in which the militants were hiding was razed to rubble. Three militants were killed and two bodies of the militants were recovered from the debris of the house along with two AK-47 rifles and one pistol.

The identities of the slain militants are yet to be ascertained. The search operation is still going on in the area.

The bodies were charred and beyond the recognition as the house where the militants were hiding was set on fire.

The internet services in the Awantipora area was suspended to prevent any violence during the operation.

And parts of Srinagar city observed shutdown today against summoning of Hurriyat Conference chairman Mirwaiz Omar Farooq to New Delhi by the National Investigating Agency (NIA).

The shutdown in the area was called by the traders of the area in protest against his summoning. Authorities had imposed restrictions in parts of the city to prevent any violence in the area.

The separatists termed the NIA summons to Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Syed Ali Geelani’s son Syed Naseem Geelani and asking them to present themselves before NIA court in New Delhi on Monday, as sheer political vendetta.

They said that NIA raids on the residences of leaders and their relatives followed by summoning them to New Delhi is a fresh attempt to build pressure on the leadership to push them into submission.

They strongly denounced the arrest spree, ban on Jamaat-e-Islami, slapping of PSA on JKLF chairman Muhammad Yasin Malik and many others, harassing and intimidating the youth and elderly, vandalizing Properties, injuring the youth in peaceful protests, imposing curbs and restrictions in down town.

The leadership hailed the support extended by the traders, transporters and other segments of the society to the leadership and thanked them and asked that normal life should be resumed on March 11.
