Brains behind the Pulwama attack is a 23-year-old

Mudasir Ahmed Khan, an electrician with a graduate degree from Pulwama, arranged the vehicle and explosives used in the attack



SRINAGAR A lesser-known Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist Mudasir Ahmed Khan, alias ‘Mohd Bhai’, has been identified as the brains behind the audacious terror strike in Pulwama that left 40 CRPF personnel dead on February 14, officials said on Sunday.



Piecing together evidence gathered so far, security officials said that 23-year-old Khan, an electrician with agraduate degree hailing from Pulwama district, arranged the vehicle and explosives used in the terror strike.



A resident of Mir Mohalla of Tral, Khan joined the Jaish-e-Mohammed sometime in 2017 as an overground worker and was later drawn into the JeM fold by Noor Mohammed Tantrey, alias ‘Noor Trali’, who is believed to have helped in the revival of the terror outfit in Kashmir Valley.



Suicide attacker Adil Ahmed Dar, who blew his explosive-laden vehicle next to a bus in a CRPF convoy on February 14, had been in constant contact with Khan, they said.



After completing his graduation, Khan did a one-year diploma course as electrician from an Industrial Training Institute (ITI). The eldest son of a labourer, Khan is also believed to be involved in the terror strike at the army camp in Sunjawan in February 2018, in which six personnel and a civilian were killed.



His role had also come under lens in the Lethpora attack on a CRPF camp in January 2018 that left five CRPF personnel dead.



Meanwhile, on Sunday, an encounter broke out between security forces and militants in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district on Sunday, police said.



Security forces launched a cordon and search operation in Pinglish area of Tral in south Kashmir district after receiving specific intelligence input about presence of the militants in the area, a police official said.



He said as the forces were conducting the searches, the militants fired upon them. The forces retaliated the firing, triggering an encounter, the official said.



Indian team’s visit for Indus River basin inspection put off



Amid heightened tensions between New Delhi and Islamabad, a reciprocal visit by the Indian team to Pakistan for inspection of projects in Indus river basin this month has been postponed, senior officials said Sunday. During the 115th meeting of the Permanent Indus Commission held in Lahore from August 29-30, 2018, both the commissioners had agreed to undertake the treaty-mandated tours of the Indus basin on both sides, the official said.



The tour of the Pakistani side was originally scheduled in October 2018 but was postponed because of local body elections in Jammu and Kashmir. Subsequently, the Pakistani team visited India in the last week of January to inspect projects in the Chenab basin in the state.



The Indian team was supposed to visit Pakistan this month, a senior official said.



Cong leader quits over party's demand for air strike proof



In what could be seen as a jolt to Bihar Congress ahead of the parliamentary election, senior leader and spokesman Vinod Sharma resigned on Saturday, contending that the party should not have demanded evidence of Balakot air strike.



In a letter addressed to Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Sharma said the party high command has hurt the sentiments of ground-level workers and the common people by raising questions over the ‘pre-emptive’ strike on the terror camps in Balakot, days after the Pulwama attack on a CRPF convoy. The senior leader also said he wrote to Gandhi several times in the last one month, apprising him of the sensibilities of the party workers in the state, but his requests were not entertained.



......................................................................................................................



Enough is enough, India cannot suffer terrorism till eternity: PM



GHAZIABAD Prime Minister Narendra Modi Sunday sent across a strong message to terrorist forces targeting India, saying the country cannot keep suffering forever and that his government has taken some ‘strong decisions’ against such elements.



“For many decades, the country and numerous families have suffered the wounds and pain given by terrorism, Naxalism and insurgency. What happened in Pulwama and Uri was heartbreaking. We cannot bear this pain till eternity. Enough is enough,” the Prime Minister said while addressing CISF personnel at its base in Ghaziabad.



He said the government has adopted ‘a new policy’ to act against terrorism and that it was its responsibility to live up to the expectations of the families of the personnel killed in the line of duty.



........................................................................................................................



You hunted the hunter’: IAF praises Abhinandan Varthaman



NEWDELHI Continuing with its poetic praise on its personnel, the Indian Air Force on Sunday described Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman as someone who “hunted the hunter”.



Posting a poem on its official Twitter handle @IAF_MCC, ‘Sabke Bass Ki Baat Nahi’, written by Bipin Allhabadi, the IAF described the fighter pilot’s feat as something that is not possible for everyone.



What Abhinandan Varthaman did is not everyone’s cup of tea. He hunted the hunter, the Hindi poem read.








