Congress Alliance: Congress & allies set to retrace UPA-1 alliance route

The announcement of Lok Sabha poll schedules will add impetus to the negotiations the Congress is holding with allies in seven to nine states to give final shape to the opposition front, even as the party is getting ready to name more candidates soon.While Lok Sabha MP and AICC general secretary (organisation) KC Venugopal on Sunday opted out of the race by citing pan-India organisational responsibility, many other AICC general secretaries and PCC presidents are being persuaded to enter the fray along with some Rajya Sabha members, sources said.Sources in various opposition parties said the hitherto tedious seat sharing talks between various parties will be soon settled in Bihar, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, where broad agreements are already in place (see GFX). With EC announcing LS polls in J&K, Congress and NC may form an alliance.Barring Kerala, Congress-led/partnered alliances in these states had broken down ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, bolstering the Modi-led BJP’s electoral surge. Revival of alliances in these states for an anti-BJP coalition resembles the UPA-1 experiment of 2004. Yet, Andhra Pradesh (now divided into AP and Telangana), which powered the Congress-led UPA in 2004 and 2009, remains the party’s biggest trouble spot in the south. The pressure of the election dates is also making the Congress and AAP to give yet another shot to the Delhi pact. Rahul Gandhi is expected to make his interaction with the Delhi Congress booth presidents on Monday an opportunity for a ‘referendum’ on the alliance question.Even AAP seems ready for a standalone pact in Delhi by giving up its earlier claims for alliances in Punjab and Haryana.The Congress-Left alliance in Bengal is being finalised, dictated more by AICC’s eagerness to resist yielding the anti-Trinamool space to the BJP. If the battered Marxists are again left to fight alone, the CPM votes may crash, something the BJP is banking on for a better show in there. The Congress is trying to placate Deepa Dasmunsi with a Rajya Sabha nomination for giving up Raiganj, which CPM won last time courtesy a rift in the Dasmunsi family and the local Congress. The AICC, however, is keen to keep a post-poll option to tango with the Trinamool. While second list for UP is ready, a Congress CEC meet on Monday may clear more names.The announcement of Sonia Gandhi ’s candidature, sources said, was an indication that the leadership was “expecting” many senior organisation leaders and PCC chiefs to fight this round of crucial polls. Ghulam Nabi Azad , Ambika Soni, Oommen Chandy, Harish Rawat, Luzino Falario, Mukul Wasnik, sources said, “are welcome to contest” along with MPs Mallikarjun Kharge and Jyotiraditya Scindia. AICC is keen that the PCC chiefs of many states including Haryana (Ashok Tanwar), UP ( Raj Babbar ), Kerala (Mullappally Ramachandran), Delhi (Sheila Dikshit) , J&K (GA Mir) and Jharkhand (Ajoy Kumar) enter the fray and if Maharashtra party chief Ashok Chavan is ‘benched’ in order make him lead the state polls, his wife could fight LS polls, sources said. While sons of both MP and Rajasthan chief ministers are in the race for LS tickets, actor Ashutosh Rana and some BJP rebels too are on the shortlisted Congress list.
