UNSEEN PIC! Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan look lost in thoughts in this BTS picture from Love Aaj Kal 2

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan look lost in thoughts in this BTS pictures from Love Aaj Kal 2

Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan have earned a huge fan base rooting for their Jodi especially after the actress debuted on Karan Johar’s chat show Koffee With Karan 6 and revealed that she has a crush on Kartik Aaryan. Ever since fans have been wanting to see the two together and it is happening with Imtiaz Ali directorial Love Aaj Kal 2. While the release date of the film hasn’t been revealed yet, the shooting has begun and pictures and videos from behind the scenes keep surfacing the internet making it more difficult for the fans to wait.



Read Also this Story in Hindi and See Pics: Click Here

After the leaked video of the kissing scenes, another picture has surfaced on the internet in which Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan are seen shooting on the set of Love Aaj Kal 2. In the picture, the two can be seen sharing a conversation as Kartik is looking her with a smile. On the other hand, Sara Ali Khan looks sizzling hot in a red dress. Check out the picture here-

It is not long ago that the news confirmed that Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan will be seen together in Imtiaz Ali’s Love Aaj Kal 2. The duo even left for Delhi to begin shooting as soon as the news broke the internet. It is said that the couple will stay for a month in Delhi to complete the schedule with director Imtiaz Ali. Soon after they started shooting, a blurry video which allegedly shows Kartik Aaryan and Sara Ali Khan kissing went viral on the internet. It is being said to be from the sets of Love Aaj Kal 2. However, nothing can be said to comment on the authenticity of the video. Fans are well convinced that they are no one but Sara and Kartik locking lips. Watch the video here-

Love Aaj Kal is a 2009 hit film which had Sara’s father Saif Ali Khan and Deepika Padukone in the lead role. The film is getting a sequel after 10 years with Saif’s daughter in the lead role. Earlier it was reported that Saif will also be the part of the film however, he refuted the reports sayind, “I’m happy to sell my stake and not be a part of the film. It’s a business deal."

On a related note, Sara Ali Khan made her Bollywood debut last year with Abhishek Kapoor’s Kedarnatha nd was next seen in Rohit Shetty Simmba. Both the films worked like magic for the actress and she managed to impress the audience as well as critics with her performance. On the other hand, Kartik Aaryan rose to fame with his monologue in Pyar Ka Punchnama series and got recognition for his performance in Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety that released last year.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
