5 injured in group fight over land dispute

Ludhiana: Five persons received injuries, one of them seriously, after two groups fought with each other over a land dispute, even as one of the persons fired many shots in air at Fatehgarh Jattan village. The injured were identified as Harjinder Singh, Maggar Singh, Buta Singh, Jobanpreet Singh, and Gurpreet Singh.

Police officials said Maggar Singh had bought around 15 marlas of land from Kewal Singh, uncle of Harjinder Singh, from their land, in which Harjinder also had a part of the land. They added that Maggar Singh had been occupying a part of the land belonging to Harjinder Singh, as well after buying land from his uncle.

Cops said that on Sunday afternoon, Harjinder and his servants went to the land in two tractors and a jeep to plant saplings on his land. They added that as they were starting the plantation work, Maggar and his accomplice attacked them with bricks and swords. Police officials said in the clash, Harjinder received serious injuries, while his jeep and tractors got damaged. They added that on the receiving end of Maggar’s group, Harjinder took his revolver and fired many gunshots in the air.

Cops said as they received information about the incident, their team reached the crime spot, and added that five injured were already shifted to a hospital in Koom Kalan. Police officials said whereas Maggar Singh, Buta Singh, Jobanpreet Singh, and Gurpreet Singh had received less injuries as compared to Harjinder, they were given treatment by doctors at the hospital in Koom Kalan. They added that Harjinder was referred to a hospital in Doraha, and was undergoing a CT scan there.

Koom Kalan police station SHO Devinderpal Singh said preliminary investigation suggested that Maggar was trying to encroach on the land owned by Harjinder. He added that Harjinder had fired two gunshots in the air in self- defence, or other party members would have caused grave injuries to him. The police officer said they would record a statement of various persons involved in the incident, and take necessary legal action into the matter after that.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
