2 youths booked for rape, murder of minor; body found from godown

Ludhiana: In what can be described as a shocking incident, two miscreants, including cousin of a minor girl, allegedly raped her and then murdered her after taking her from home on the promise of getting her toffees in Doraha on Saturday night. Police in the wee hours of Sunday registered a case in the matter and had launched a manhunt for the duo.In her police complaint, a 35-year-old woman, who is a homemaker and a native of Bihar but lives in Doraha, said that she has seven children of which four are sons. She added that on Saturday, she and her husband were at home when the accused, who happens to be her husband’s nephew, came there between 3pm and 4 pm with half bottle of liquor. The complainant said that the accused then had liquor with her husband and after some time his husband went out for some work.She added that the accused then took her seven-and-a-half-year-old daughter along by wooing her with the promise of getting her toffees. Mother of the victim said that when her daughter didn’t return, she started searching for her daughter. She added that she suspected that the accused had allegedly raped her daughter, murdered her and then threw her body somewhere.The complainant further said that the she had come to know that apart from their relative, there was another person with him. It was only after the mother of the deceased visited the police station in the wee hours of Sunday that it got information about the body of the deceased being found in a vacant godown near the railway lines near Doraha. Police officials said that a team, including ASI Mohinderpal Singh of Doraha police station, reached the spot and took the body in custody. Later, it was shifted to the civil hospital in Ludhiana.They added that after they received a complaint from the mother of the deceased and found the body, it decided to register a case in the matter. It later booked the accused under Sections 302 ( murder ), 376-A (punishment for causing death or resulting in persistent vegetative state of victim) and 34 (acts done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC.Doraha police station SHO inspector Karnail Singh said that post-mortem examination of the deceased was being carried out at the civil hospital and the report would confirm about the cause of death. He added that the deceased had injuries on the face and there were indications that she might have been raped.The SHO further said that they had heard that the accused (relative of the deceased who belongs to Uttar Pradesh) was around 21-year-old while his accomplice was younger than him but was not a minor. He added that the deceased wasn’t studying in a school.The police officer said that they were conducting raids to nab the accused. He added that the accused used to work as a labourer and had settled in Doraha.Some other casesOctober 2, 2018: A seven-year-old succumbed to a head injury after being attacked by the live-in partner of her mother after she was allegedly sexually assaulted by him in Shimlapuri area.April 12, 2017: In a shocking incident in the city, a seven-year-old girl was kidnapped by an unidentified man from outside her house, raped at an isolated place and then left at Mullanpur bus stand in serious condition in the evening. Police had booked the accused for kidnapping and rape and later arrested him after some days.April 9, 2017: Father of three children had allegedly raped a five-year-old girl and later murdered her in Sherpur area while she was alone at her home.
