Can't deny medico stipend for changing college: High Court

prisoners

jail

High Court

stipend

Bengaluru

As per law, eveninhave to be paid wages for the work they do. So it is not right to ask a medical student to forego her stipend, thehas said. It has struck down a condition imposed on the student that she would not be givenfor changing college mid-course.Dr Samhita Ullod, daughter of Justice Sreenivas Harish Kumar approached the High Court after she was saddled with such a condition by the authorities. She had migrated from the Sri BM Kankanawadi Ayurveda Mahavidyalaya, Shahpur, Belagavi to the Government Ayurvedic College,. A condition was imposed on her that she should not claim the Internship Stipend. Other students who had similarly migrated were not imposed such a condition.The Directorate of Ayush, the college and the Department of Health and Family Welfare opposed the petition on "the gound that she had agreed to the condition subject to which migration was permitted and therefore, the petitioner cannot turn around and complain."After considering the arguments from both the sides, Justice Krishna S Dixit cited five reasons for allowing the petition and ordering the payment of stipend to Samhita Ullod. One, the rules prescribe stipend for internship students as some amount of public service is put in by such students. The Constitution also prohibits 'begar' and other such forms of forced labour.Two, the Supreme Court in a 1998 judgement ruled that "even the prisoners serving the sentence need to be paid some reasonable wages." That judgement had also cited the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution of United States.Three, "the authorities had no competence to stipulate the condition that the medical students migrating from one college to another shall not claim the stipend during the internship."Four, there was also the question of discrimination as migration had been allowed for other students sans such a condition. "Thus, the petitioner's Fundamental Right to Equality has been violated."Five, the stipend during internship has trappings of a Fundamental Right. "A Fundamental Right cannot be waived since they arise from Constitutional Pact between the State and the civilised society," the HC said.Quashing the government order the HC issued a Writ of Mandamus ordering the authorities "to pay or cause to be paid to the petitioner all that amount that would have otherwise accrued due by way of internship stipend," within eight weeks.
