'Nobody can dare touch me’: Kannada actor Yash refutes contract killing rumours

'Nobody can dare touch me’: Kannada actor Yash refutes contract killing rumours

Sections of the media had reported that gangsters had been contracted to kill Yash.

news Cinema

Playing down fears that gangsters had been given a supari (contract) to kill him, Kannada actor Yash said that he had been assured by police officials that he did not face a threat to his life. Sections of the media had reported that gangsters had been contracted to kill the actor.

Yash is a popular Kannada actor who most recently appeared in the blockbuster hit KGF: Chapter 1 where he played the role of a gangster. Over the years, he has starred in several commercially successful films and is also known by the moniker 'Rocking Star'.

The rumours about a threat to his life circulated following an interrogation by a team of officials from the Central Crime Branch (CCB) of Bengaluru Police led by ACB Balaraj over a contract given to kill an unnamed Sandalwood actor.

Social media and news channels reported the news claiming that Yash was the actor in question. However, a visibly upset Yash addressed media persons and clarified that this was not the case. "I have personally checked with the police, home department officials and everybody has denied my name being in the hit list of these gangsters. My family, friends and well-wishers have been disturbed by these rumours. I would like to clarify that nobody can even dare touch me. There is a government, police and people out there. I do not think it is that easy for someone to kill me so easily," Yash said as per Deccan Herald.

CCB officials had earlier arrested four persons near the BDA office in Sheshadripuram who told the police that their leader Bharat alias Slum Bharat, who is currently in prison, had taken a supari to kill an eminent Sandalwood actor. "Probe revealed Bharath was all set to kill a noted actor in the Kannada film industry. But Yash's name is being circulated and it is false news," Additional Commissioner of Police (Crime) Alok Kumar told Times of India.
