Opposition Leader Calls Indian Prime Minister Modi a "Terrorist"

Congress' Vijaya Shanti made these comments before Rahul Gandhi’s speech in Shamshabad, Telangana today. She said, "Everyone is scared at what moment Modi will shoot the bomb. He looks like a terrorist. Instead of loving ppl, he's scaring ppl. It's not the way how a PM should be" pic.twitter.com/jJSOqtXnk8 — ANI (@ANI) March 9, 2019

She further claimed, "Modi wants another five-year term to continue ruling like a dictator, but people will not afford him another term".

The ruling party, BJP, to which Prime Minister Narendra Modi belongs, took to Twitter to lash out at Vijayashanti and her party accusing them of "raising concerns and worries" of terrorists in Pakistan. "This fear is good," said the party handle on Twitter implying that there are "genuine" reasons for the opposition to fear Modi.

Now Congress is truly raising concerns & worries of terrorists in Pakistan.



Welcome to New India.

Yeh Dar Acha Hai. https://t.co/5QJpdCv2t4 — BJP (@BJP4India) March 9, 2019

Since the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 Indian paramilitary policemen and escalated Indo-Pakistani tensions into aerial fights including the downing of fighter jets from each side, many have denounced Vijayashanti for her comments and tweeted in support of the prime minister.

For people of India PM Modi is looking as the true leader and for Vijaya Shanti he looks like terrorist. What an apprehension in Congress. — P Raghunadha Rao (@PRaghunadha) March 9, 2019

Bjp doing great job….

Some even accused the principal opposition party of having its headquarters at Balakot in Pakistan.

Congress's Terrorist Head Quarters Balakot disappeared from earth. — Kumar Gowda (@KumarGowda1954) March 10, 2019

READ MORE: India Conducted Three Attacks Beyond Its Borders in Five Years — Home Minister

India launched an aerial attack and dropped bombs on alleged terror hideouts in Pakistani territory after a suicide attack that killed 40 soldiers in Indian-administered Kashmir on 14 February. Pakistan retaliated by launching a counter-strike in Indian territory and shot down an Indian fighter jet in an ensuing dogfight.
