Latest Bollywood News March 11: Sara Ali Khan-Kartik Aaryan unseen pictures, Zoya Akhtar confirms Gully Boy 2

Follow us on Sara Ali Khan-Kartik Aaryan unseen pictures, Zoya Akhtar confirms Gully Boy 2

Latest Bollywood News and Updates March 11: Bollywood’s latest couple Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan are breaking the internet once again as their behind the scenes unseen pictures go viral from the shoot of Love Aaj Kal 2. On the other hand, Zoya Akhtar who is basking on the success of her last released film confirms that she will come up with a sequel to Ranveer Singh and Alia Bhatt starrer Gully Boy. Also, as Natasha Dalal stole away the limelight at Akash Ambani and Shloka Mehta’s post wedding bash by posing with Varun Dhawan’s parents, the actor claimed that they have given up on him. Check out more latest Bollywood news and updates here.

PIC: Varun Dhawan claims ‘my parents gave up on me’ after Natasha Dalal poses with them

After Varun Dhawan’s girlfriend Natasha Dalal stole away the limelight as she posed with the actor’s parents at Akash Ambani and Shloka Mehta’s wedding reception last night, the actor has claimed that his parents have given up on him. Since Varun is shooting in UK for his upcoming dance-based film ABCD 3, he couldn’t accompany his parents to the grand bash, but his girlfriend Natasha was there and all eyes were on her. She accompanied filmmaker David Dhawan and Karuna Dhawan to the celebration wearing a gorgeous grey embroidered lehenga.

After the actor saw the pictures, he himself shared the most talked about picture of the evening on his Instagram story and wrote, “my parents gave up on me and adopted another.” Varun Dhawan kept his relationship a secret when he entered Bollywood however recently when he appeared on Karan Johar’s chat show Koffee with Karan 6, he opened up about Natasha Dalal and how she has changed his life. Check out the story here-

Varun Dhawan claims ‘my parents gave up on me’ after Natasha Dalal poses with them

Zoya Akhtar confirms sequel of Ranveer Singh, Alia Bhatt starrer Gully Boy. Read details

Ranveer Singh and Alia Bhatt starrer Gully Boy is touted to be the best performance in the career of both the actors. While Ranveer stepped into the shoes of a gully rapper named Murad, Alia portrayed the role of strong-willed Safeena in Gully Boy and they won hearts instantly after the film hit the theaters. Directed by Zoya Akhtar, the film was loosely based on the lives of Indian street rappers Divine and Naezy, who also contributed to the film’s songs with lyrics, vocals and music. Recently, Zoya Akhtar revealed that she still thinks there is a lot about the rap culture that needs to be told to the audience which is why she will be coming up with the sequel of the film.

Zoya Akhtar in an interview with Deccan Chronicle said, “My co-writer Reema Kagti and I do feel there’s so much more to be said on the entire hip-hop culture in our country. And another film exploring the theme is being scripted and planned.” She also confirmed that her brother Farhan Akhtar will not be a part of the sequel’s cast as well. Zoya said, “He just didn’t fit into Gully Boy. And we’re both sorry about it.”

She added, “Also, his image from the Rock On series is affiliated to an entirely different genre of music. It would have been a bit of a culture shock for the audience to suddenly see him swerve from stadium-rock to hip-hop.”

UNSEEN PIC! Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan look lost in thoughts in this BTS picture from Love Aaj Kal 2

Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan have earned a huge fan base rooting for their Jodi especially after the actress debuted on Karan Johar’s chat show Koffee With Karan 6 and revealed that she has a crush on Kartik Aaryan. Ever since fans have been wanting to see the two together and it is happening with Imtiaz Ali directorial Love Aaj Kal 2. While the release date of the film hasn’t been revealed yet, the shooting has begun and pictures and videos from behind the scenes keep surfacing the internet making it more difficult for the fans to wait.

After the leaked video of the kissing scenes, another picture has surfaced on the internet in which Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan are seen shooting on the set of Love Aaj Kal 2. In the picture, the two can be seen sharing a conversation as Kartik is looking her with a smile. On the other hand, Sara Ali Khan looks sizzling hot in a red dress. Check out the picture here-

It is not long ago that the news confirmed that Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan will be seen together in Imtiaz Ali’s Love Aaj Kal 2. The duo even left for Delhi to begin shooting as soon as the news broke the internet. It is said that the couple will stay for a month in Delhi to complete the schedule with director Imtiaz Ali. Soon after they started shooting, a blurry video which allegedly shows Kartik Aaryan and Sara Ali Khan kissing went viral on the internet. It is being said to be from the sets of Love Aaj Kal 2. However, nothing can be said to comment on the authenticity of the video. Fans are well convinced that they are no one but Sara and Kartik locking lips. Watch the video here-

Khatron Ke Khiladi 9 winner: Dancer-choreographer Punit Pathak beats Aditya Narayan, takes home winning trophy

On Sunday night, Rohit Shetty’s blockbuster adventure-based reality show came to an end with dancer-choreographer Punit Pathak emerging as the ultimate winner. While the grand finale stunts were performed months back in Argentine, the last episode of the show was premiered LIVE last night with Akshay Kumar adding on to the excitement with his presence.

Punit Pathak was the most deserving contestant on the show with a consistent performance on the show. The show rounded up with its six finalists for teh finale week: Bharti Singh, Punit Pathak, Ridhima Pandit, Aditya Narayan, Aly Goni and Shamita Shetty. In the first two tasks, Shamita Shetty and Aly Goni got eliminated and the final round was played between Aditya, Punit and Ridhima. With the least time, Punit Pathak became the winner of the ninth season of Rohit Shetty's show.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
