The 2019 electoral battle will not be an easy one for ruling BJP

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Vibha Sharma

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 11

The 2019 battle is on and it is expected to be a tough fight for the ruling BJP in the Hindi heartland where it almost peaked in the 2014 election along with bastions like Gujarat and Maharashtra and has no further scope of improvement.

The leadership knows it well, which is why for 2019 it appears to have evolved different strategies to tackle different parts in the election.

The country has officially stepped into the election mode but the BJP is long into it and is already according extra attention to states like Kerala, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, West Bengal and the North-East—parts it did not do well in 2014. And in areas that gave it a resounding response last time—the Hindi heartland for instance—it has decided to be brutal and weed out the party’s “NPAs” completely or assign them some other seats to beat the anti-incumbency factor.

There are two ways to circumvent any anger against the party. One is the tried and tested BJP way--changing the candidate--and two, shifting him or her to some other seat. Sources say senior leaders could be shifted but many MPs stand to lose the chance of contesting the Lok Sabha election.

Meanwhile, veteran politicians, those aged above 75, and sitting Rajya Sabha members could be fielded based on popularity and the winnability factor. The BJP may have an undeclared rule of not giving ministerial/organisational position to those above 75 but is unlikely to follow it while distributing tickets.

However, priority in allocation of the Prime Minister’s time will be given to states where the saffron party has so far been out of league. “There is no way the BJP can outperform its 2014 performance in states like Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh so it needs to do well in other parts,” say observers.

In 2014, the majority of BJP seats came from the north—the Hindi heartland and western regions like Maharashtra and Gujarat. It did well in its only southern bastion Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, which it fought in alliance with now-a-foe Telugu Desam Party. Its rainbow alliance in Tamil Nadu managed only two of the 39 seats; in Odisha the BJP won just one of the 21 seats, in West Bengal two of the 42 seats and in Kerala nothing out of 20.

It was the Hindi heartland—states like Haryana, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand, Delhi, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Uttar Pradesh—where it outdid its expectations. In other northern states—Himachal Pradesh, Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir—it did well. The heartland itself accounts for around 221 Lok Sabha seats of which the BJP won 185 in 2014.

So, it is a huge number that the BJP has to keep intact. Whether star campaigner Narendra Modi, who continues to be the BJP’s biggest trump card, can deliver them singlehandedly is the big question.

A section of political observers believes the BJP is expected to lose seats in the heartland, which will be picked up by Opposition parties—the Congress, BSP, SP, RJD, AAP and others. This is one reason why the BJP is looking towards Coromandel states, West Bengal and the northeast, to make up for expected losses from here.

It is also the reason why despite resistance from allies like the JD(U) and regional partners from the northeast, the ruling BJP remained firm on its stance on the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill.

For the saffron party, the build-up around the Bill was important to make inroads in West Bengal and firm up Assam. Leaders talk of the BJP’s success in local bodies elections in Assam to underline the argument that people there welcomed the move. Bengali Hindus constitute a large section of the northeast that contributes around 25 seats to the Lok Sabha, of which the BJP is aiming at at least 21 along with 23 of the 42 seats from West Bengal.
