Wife Of Soldier Martyred In Jammu And Kashmir Joins The Indian Army As An Officer

It's not easy to cope with the loss of a loved one. When a soldier is martyred in the battlefield, his family is left to struggle with grief so profound, it becomes hard to get on with life. But you'd be surprised by how much spirit such families have.

Sangeeta Mall, the wife of a rifleman who was killed in action in Jammu and Kashmir while battling terrorists was recently commissioned into the Indian Army after passing out from OTA (Officer’s Training Academy) in Chennai on March 9.

Twitter- TOI

Sangeeta worked as a teacher before she got married to Shishir Mall in 2013. Shishir was part of Gorkha Rifles and was posted in Baramulla sector of Jammu and Kashmir when he was martyred in 2015 during a gun battle. After his death, Sangeeta quit her teaching job to be with her mother-in-law.

Talking about her journey, Sangeeta’s brother-in-law Sushant Mall told TOI, “Our family had to face several challenges but now, it is a matter of pride for us that she has become a commissioned officer. We are planning a grand welcome for her once she returns home.”

Not only did Sangeeta lose her husband but she also lost her unborn child in a miscarriage. A few months before Shishir passed away, her father-in-law - also an ex-serviceman - died.

#ThoseThatWait

This is a newly commissioned Lt Sangeeta Mall.

Her husband, Rifleman Shishir Mall was martyred in Baramula in September 2015.

She suffered a miscarriage post his martyrdom.

Yet, determined to succeed, here she is today.

A tough breed, the fauji wife!

God Bless! pic.twitter.com/s9Nk8lhzpX — Harpreet (@CestMoiz) March 11, 2019

“My mother supported her and encouraged her to study further and do a banking job,” said Sushant. He added that Sangeeta became motivated to join the army after she attended an investiture ceremony in Ranikhet in 2016 where Shishir was awarded Sena Medal posthumously. "She worked hard and cleared the OTA examination.”

The Darjeeling Chronicle

After training at the academy, Sangeeta was commissioned in the army as a Lieutenant in the short service commission. She is expected to come home to Dehradun soon before reporting for duty.
