Major attack averted in Jammu and Kashmir: Army detains man with grenades in Poonch

New Delhi:

A major attack has been averted by the Army in Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir after a person namely Rajinder Singh was arrested with two grenades. Army has handed him over to the Jammu and Kashmir for further investigation. “Today a person who had come to attend recruitment rally in Surankote organised by Territorial Army namely Rajinder Singh Krishan (33), resident of village Dhalyote, Tehsil Kalakot, district Rajouri was apprehended near Army town gate Surankote and during search C- 90 grenade, UBGL grenade and detonators were recovered from his possession,” official said.

Balakote in Poonch’s Mendhar area has been witness to intense shelling and small arms fire by Pakistani troops on many occasions since last month.



Earlier, Pakistan violated the ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) in the Balnoi and Mankote areas of the Poonch sector Jammu Kashmir on Sunday around 4.30 am onwards by resorting to shelling with mortars and firing of small arms. The Indian Army retaliated and firing stopped around 7.30 am. The Indian Army retaliated effectively. On Saturday, Pakistan had violated the ceasefire in the Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district. Pakistani troops had violated ceasefire along the LoC on Saturday by targetting forward post in Keri Battal area of Akhnoor, Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan has used heavy artillery guns prompting strong and effective retaliation by the Indian Army.



There has been a spurt in ceasefire violations by Pakistan after India's pre-emptive air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camp in Balakot on February 26 following the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

Four civilians, including three members of a family, were killed and several others injured as Pakistan targeted over 80 villages in over 100 incidents of ceasefire violations along the LoC in the state since then.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
