We need to fight Terrorists, not each other: Upen Patel

Actor Upen Patel says it is great to see both the countries saying no to war, because we need to fight the terrorist, not with each other.

Multi-lingual actor Upen Patel raises some valid points in his recent social media post. The actor shared a series of video, where he is seen saying, India-Pakistan doesn't need to fight each other but combine forces to fight terrorist.

"It is great to see tweets from both the sides, Pakistan and India, saying No To War, and that is wonderful because this is not about war, this is about a fight against terrorists, who are killing innocent people," says Upen Patel.

In the wake of Pulwama Terror Attack, Indian Air Force and Pakistani Air Force have been engaging in aerial battle, and one Indian Air Force Pilot has been captured behind the enemy lines. The Pakistan Army released a video that shows a blindfolded man, identifying himself as a Wing Commander-rank IAF officer and his service number.

Talking about the Pilot, Upen said, "Just saw the video of Indian pilot, who is being held in Pakistan, what a brave man. He is doing what he was ordered, representing his country. I am glad Pakistani authorities have treated him well.





It is important to remember that this isn't about two nations, nor it is about religion, it is about coming together as nations and fighting terrorists, fight terror and those who cause terror."

The Indian Government has strongly objected to Islamabad putting out photographs and videos of the pilot who was missing in action after he engaged with Pakistani jets that violated Indian airspace on Wednesday morning.

After appearing in five back-to-back Tamil films in the last two years and working with top directors such as Shankar, AR Murugadoss and R Kannan, actor Upen will soon make his debut in the Telugu film industry.

The mega project, which has already begun shooting in Jaisalmer, is being directed by Thiru.

Actor Upen will be seen playing the main antagonist in the film, which also stars Gopichand. The action spy thriller will reportedly be shot at a massive budget.
