Boman Irani: 'I find Rajasthani language attractive and fascinating. I like how people speak here'

Actor Boman Irani gave a pleasant surprise to his Jaipur-based cousin Behroze Singh as he flew down to the Pink City on Friday to attend a wedding. It was Behroze’s daughter’s wedding and the actor was not going to attend the wedding initially as he was slated to travel to South America for work. However, the plan changed and Boman decided to attend the wedding. Behroze was unaware about the plan change and was in for a surprise to see the actor. Boman, who had a lot of fun attending the wedding with his wife, Zenobia Irani was all praise for the city as he shared, “I love visiting Jaipur. I like how people speak here. I find Rajasthani language to be very attractive and fascinating. Also, I love the way the city has made sure to leave the heritage and its structure intact while fitting in all the comforts of the modern world.” One cannot talk about Rajasthan without mentioning its delectable food.Boman Irani with his wife Zenobia Irani in JaipurSharing his favourite Rajasthani dish, Boman said, “I love gatta curry; it is delicious. I am also a fan of the spicy laal maans. Our country has so much to offer in terms of culinary experiences other than biryani and chicken tikka.”The actor recalled his shooting days during Eklavya: The Royal Guard in Rajasthan and said that it was during the shoot of the film that he explored Rajasthan to the fullest. “We shot in Jaipur, Jodhpur, Jaisalmer and a few other parts of Rajasthan. We shot a lot of palace sequences in Jaipur. When we were not shooting, we used to roam around like tourists,” said the actor. Alexander Dinelaris and Boman Irani in UdaipurThe actor has also taken a plunge into production and recently launched his own production house.“I think the most important aspect of filmmaking is screenwriting, which we don’t take rather seriously. I feel the writers have not been getting their due for long. Through my production house, my focus is and will be to nurture as many writers as I can, to try and produce quality cinema. Even at the time of the launch, I invited the celebrated writer Alexander Dinelaris to share his experience with us. I arranged a day-long workshop with Dinelaris and invited writers, directors and students from filmmaking schools to be a part of the workshop,” said Boman.
