India uncovers another 'mastermind' of Pulwama attack

23-year-old Mohammad Bhai has done graduation and by profession, he was an electrician.

SRINAGAR (Dunya News) – Indian government on Monday has uncovered another mastermind of Pulwama blast and claimed that Mudassar Ahmed Khan aka Mohammad Bhai was involved in the attack.



According to Indian media, 23-year-old Mohammad Bhai has done graduation and by profession, he was an electrician.

Mohammad Bhai had arranged vehicle and explosives used in the attack. Suicide attacker Adil Ahmed Dar, who blew his explosive-laden vehicle next to a bus in a CRPF convoy, had been in constant contact with Khan, the media claimed.

The Indian government said that Khan is also believed to be involved in the terror strike at the army camp in Sunjawan in February 2018.



At least 44 Indian paramilitary soldiers were killed on February 14 in Indian-occupied Kashmir in one the deadliest attacks. The attack saw explosives packed inside a van rip through buses in a convoy of 78 vehicles carrying some 2,500 members of the paramilitary CRPF.



Two blue buses carrying around 35 people each bore the brunt of the massive blast, heard miles away, around 20 kilometres (12 miles) from the city of Srinagar on the main highway to Jammu.



Indian government had blamed Pakistan for Pulwama attack and threatened to isolate it at international level. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said those behind the terror attack would pay a "very heavy price" and had made a "huge mistake".



Union Minister Arun Jaitley said they will take all possible diplomatic steps to ensure "complete isolation" of Pakistan and had withdrawn Most Favoured Nation status to the country.

India intrudes Pakistan’s airspace

On February 26, Indian warplanes intruded in Pakistani airspace inside Balakot and New Delhi claimed of killing of a "large number" of militants, including commanders, and had avoided civilian casualties on what New Delhi alleged were militant camps. Islamabad denied any such camps existed.

ISPR Director General Major General Asif Ghafoor said the strikes caused no casualties. He tweeted that Pakistani jets were scrambled and forced the Indian planes to make a "hasty withdrawal", dropping their payload in an open area.

He said Indian aircrafts intruded from Muzafarabad sector. Facing timely and effective response from Pakistan Air Force released payload in haste while escaping which fell near Balakot. No casualties or damage.

PAF downs two Indian fighter jets

On February 27, in a response to Indian Line of Control (LoC) violation, Pakistan Air Force (PAF) had destroyed two Indian fighter jets. The wreckage of one aircraft fell in Central Kashmir’s Budgam while the other’s in Pakistan territory.

The ISPR Director General said that Pakistan Air Force engaged six targets from across the Line of Control in Occupied Kashmir.

He said Pak armed forces have capability, will, resolve, people backing and all resources. But being a responsible state, we decided that we will not aim any military target. We also wanted to ensure that no human loss or collateral damage is done during our engaging the targets.
