Special court adjourns Samjhauta blast case until Thursday

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Tribune News Service

Panchkula, March 11

A special court on Monday adjourned hearing in the 2007 Samjhauta Express blast case until Thursday.

The development came after a Pakistani woman moved an application asking the court for allowing witnesses from her country to depose before the court. The National Investigation Agency has been asked to respond to the application.

Wakeel, the daughter of blast victim Muhammad Wakeel of Dhingrawali village in Hafizabad district of Pakistan filed the application through her Indian counsel Momin Malik, who told the court that he received his client's application though e-mail.

She said her co-nationals either did not receive proper summonses from the court or were denied visas by authorities to appear before it.

"The eyewitnesses/Pakistani witnesses do not have any knowledge about the ongoing stage of the trial because no proper summons were served to them,” she said in her plea, filed after lunch break.

Arguments in the trial concluded on March 6 and Special NIA court judge Jagdeep Singh was supposed to read out his verdict on Monday.

An explosion in the train that runs between India and Pakistan on February 18, 2007, near Dewana railway station in Panipat killed 68 people, mostly Pakistanis.The NIA, which took over investigations in the case in 2010, said in its chargesheet that the explosion targeted Pakistani Muslims.

The NIA submitted its chargesheet blaming the blast on Hindu leader Swami Aseemanand and four other people on June 20, 2011. The chargesheet claims Aseemanand, Lokesh Sharma, Sunil Joshi, Sandeep Dange and Ramchandra Kalasangra alias Ramji of conspiracy in the case. Of 290 witnesses, 30 turned hostile.

Aseemanand and Sharma were accused and acquitted in two other blasts cases—the Malegaon blasts of 2006 and the Mecca Masjid blast of 2007.

Sunil Joshi was shot dead in Madhya Pradesh’s Dewas in 2007—while the case was still being investigated. Police are still unable to trace Dange and Kalasangra. With PTI
