New twist in Samjhauta train blast case, Pakistan resident moves case as witness

Sixty eight persons including four Indian Railway officials had died and a dozen others were killed when an IED went off in two of the bogies of the Lahore-bound Samjhauta Express on February 18, 2007. (Photo: Getty Images file photo)

In a new twist to the 2007 Samjhauta Train Blast case - the final verdict of which was expected to come on Monday - a Pakistan national Rahila Wakil moved an application through an Indian advocate and requested the Pakistan based eyewitnesses and witnesses be summoned to depose before the court.

The applicant who hails from Dhingrawali village under Hafizabad district in the Punjab province of Pakistan claimed her father Mohammad Wakil died in the train blast that had left 68 dead.

Rahila Wakil also claimed that the Pakistan based eyewitnesses were not issued summons and they were willing to appear before the court. She also said the eyewitnesses had 'no knowledge' about the developments in the case.

"All eyewitnesses belong to Pakistan and are ready to appear before the court for their evidence and without their evidence, this trial cannot be decided on the merits. If the Honorable court accepts this application and not grant the chance to the eyewitnesses, then it will be irreparable loss to the victims and the eye witnesses," Rahila said in her application.

"The case was fixed for final judgement today. Some lawyer appeared on behalf of a lady and filed an application under section 311 of CRPC and has requested that some witnesses be examined who were acquainted with the facts of the case. The court asked him why the witnesses were not summoned before, particularly when summoned were served through embassy of Pakistan no reply was filed. Whether they were coming or not. After hearing him the court in its wisdom adjourned the case for reply to that application. Now on March 14 after receiving replies from all the concerned parties, arguments would take place on that application... whether it will be allowed or dismissed. In case it is dismissed, verdict can come on March 14. In case this application is accepted more witnesses will be summoned," SC Sharma, Aseemanand's advocate, said.

Earlier the accused Aseemanand, Lokesh Sharma, Kamal Chauhan and Rajinder Chaudhary appeared in court.

Aseemanand refused to comment on the case. Supporters of Lokesh Sharma shouted 'Bharat Mata Ki Jai'.

The judgement in the 12 year old case was expected on Monday which was deferred due to the application moved by the Pakistan resident.

Aseemanand's advocate said the application was nothing but a deliberate attempt to delay the court judgement. Advocates of Aseemanand and other accused are confident that they will be acquitted as NIA did not have sufficient evidence against them.

Sixty eight persons including four Indian Railway officials had died and a dozen others were killed when an IED went off in two of the bogies of the Lahore-bound Samjhauta Express on February 18, 2007 at Diwana railway station near Panipat.

Swami Aseemanand was acquitted in the Mecca Masjid, Hyderabad and Ajmer blast cases. He had denied the allegations and had said his earlier confession was under pressure and torture at the hands of NIA officials.

In the Samjhauta blast case too, Aseemanand is accused of providing logistic support to the persons who carried out the blasts. NIA in its chargesheet had said Aseemanand was one of the brains behind the blasts which were the outcome of attacks on Hindu temples.
