With Indian Foreign Secretary in US, Qureshi dials Bolton

Islamabad [Pakistan], Mar 11 (ANI): Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi on Monday discussed regional security situation with US National Security Advisor John Bolton during a telephonic conversation, which also coincided with Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale meeting US Secretary of State Michael R Pompeo.

Gokhale is on a three-day visit to Washington, the first visit of a top Indian functionary to the US after Pulwama terror attack in Pulwama in south Jammu and Kashmir in which 40 jawans were killed. The suicide attack was carried out by the suicide bomber of Pakistan-based terror outfit—Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM).

A statement issued by Pakistan’s Foreign Office on Monday noted that the purpose of the phone call was to provide Bolton with Pakistan’s perspective on the recent regional developments.

During the call, Qureshi said that Indian aggression of February 26 was the violation of Pakistan’s territorial integrity and sovereignty as well as of the UN Charter. He also said that Pakistan’s response on February 27 was purely in self-defence against external aggression, the statement read.

Qureshi further informed Bolton about the de-escalatory measures taken by Pakistan, including Prime Minister Imran Khan’s decision to hand over Indian pilot Abhinandan Varthaman as a gesture of goodwill towards India. Pakistan was also ready to continue weekly contacts at the Military Operations Directorate level, the statement said.

On the other hand, Bolton said that he actively monitored the developments between India and Pakistan and kept contact with the leadership of two countries to ensure that the security situation in South Asia did not deteriorate. He appreciated Pakistan measures which had helped to diffuse the tension and urged continued restraint on both sides, the statement said.

The two leaders further emphasised the need for dialogue between the two neighbouring countries to find a peaceful resolution to all disputes.

During the conversation, the Foreign Minister also cautioned against any Indian misadventure, keeping in view the forthcoming elections.

India’s Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale is in connection with the bilateral Foreign Office Consultation and Strategic Security Dialogue with the US.

During his three-day visit, the Foreign Secretary is slated to meet US Secretary of State Pompeo at the Department of State on Monday morning (local time) and discuss bilateral, regional and global issues of common interest.

Gokhale would also hold Foreign Office Consultation with his US counterpart, the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs David Hale, and the Strategic Security Dialogue with the Under Secretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Andrea Thompson. (ANI)
