Gujarat ex-MLA Jayanti Bhanushali murder case: SIT seizes bike used by killers

In the high profile murder case of Jayanti Bhanushali, the investigating team has recovered a bike which was used by the assailants to flee the spot, after jumping off the train. During the investigation, it was revealed that the bike had been stolen by the assailants. A total of 10 teams have been formed to investigate the Bhanushali murder case, which involves the ATS, the Ahmedabad crime branch, CID, Railway Protection Force and Gandhidham LCB, among others.

During the investigation on Thursday, ATS officials recovered a motorcycle with a Kutch registration number plate near Samakhiali which was used by the assailants.

The assailants had planned the entire murder and had even made plans to escape the train. Police officials suspect the assailants got on the train at Gandhidham but the exact location is not clear yet. They had parked the bike near the railway tracks between Gandhidham and Samakhiali to run away from the spot.

As per the plan, Bhanushali was shot inside the train between 12:30am and 12:55am by the two assailants. At around 12:55am, the chain was pulled by the assailants and they jumped from the train. Police said the plan was to stop the train close to the area where the assailants had parked. But since it took the assailants more time than expected to kill Bhanushali (due to an argument with the victim), they ended up pulling the chain far away from where they had parked their vehicle. As a result, after jumping off the train, they had to walk 2km to their bike before escaping. The assailants had abandoned the bike near Samakhiali, which was recovered by ATS officials.

Assailants took Bhanushali's mobile

As per police officials, after killing Bhanushali, the assailants took his mobile phone and his copassenger Pavan More's bag, thinking that it was Bhanushali's. The bag was recovered from the spot where the bike was found abandoned, while the phone has still not been found.

The police suspect that the assailants had been told to kill Bhanushali and to recover his phone and bag. But in their haste to escape, they accidentally took the co-passenger's bag. As per the police, Bhanushali's bag was recovered from the train, in which his licensed revolver and some land documents were recovered.

INSIDE THE CRIME
