Mehbooba: Govt must hold talks with Pakistan and separatists

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) India should talk to Pakistan and separatists in Kashmir to defuse tension raised by a suicide attack on a paramilitary convoy that was claimed by Pakistan-based militants, a former chief minister of the state said.

Mehbooba Mufti, who was chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir from early 2014 to June last year when Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party withdrew support for her People's Democratic Party, said an ongoing crackdown on militants and those supporting secession could further alienate the people.

India has vowed to kill all the militants in the country's only Muslim-majority state if they don't give up arms, after a 20-year-old local man killed at least 40 paramilitary troopers in a suicide attack last month.

Security forces have killed 18 militants in Kashmir since then, the army said yesterday. The attack nearly led to another war between India and Pakistan.

'I strongly feel that there has to be a dialogue process internally as well as externally, with Pakistan, Mufti said in an interview on Friday.

'The situation is going to get worse if some kind of political process is not initiated on the ground now.

Indian officials have repeatedly ruled out talks with Pakistan unless it acts on militant groups based there.

India says its warplanes late last month bombed a militant camp in Pakistan, which responded with an aerial attack the next day.

Indian Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale said on the day of the strike that it had killed many Jaish-e-Mohamed 'terrorists.

Pakistan said no one was killed.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, who has sought to speak with Modi amid the hostility, said no militant group would be allowed to operate from his country to carry out attacks abroad, days after his government announced a sweeping crackdown against militant organisations.

'This confrontational attitude - no talks, no discussion - has an impact, Mufti said.

'Whatever relationship we have with Pakistan, it has a direct impact on Jammu and Kashmir and we are the worst sufferers of this animosity.

Mufti, whose father was also a chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir, said the tough stance by India would only lead to 'some calm on the surface.

India killed 248 militants in Kashmir in 2018 - the highest in a decade.

'Once you start choking the space for dissent in a democracy, people feel pushed to the wall and then it leads to further dissent and alienation, she said.

Mufti said India's general election - starting on April 11 and whose results will be declared on May 23 - could delay the process of any inter-party talks on Kashmir.

MENAFN1103201900670000ID1098239115
