BJP to field political heavyweight from Karnal

With the announcement of schedule of general elections 2019, speculations have started on the possible names of candidates to be fielded on 10 Lok Sabha seats in Haryana.

Among the 10 seats, a surprise may be in store for Karnal Lok Sabha seat as the ruling BJP is looking to field a political heavyweight from the constituency.

The names of Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley and Union Women and Child Development Minister Maneka Sanjay Gandhi are doing the rounds from the seat.

Karnal Lok Sabha constituency is seen as a safest bet for the BJP with Manohar Lal being an MLA from the Karnal assembly seat.

The saffron party is looking for a winning candidate in the constituency currently represented by media baron Ashwini Kumar Chopra.

BJP’s rebel Ashwini Chopra’s differences with the Chief Minister is well known and the former’s article in a newspaper showering praise on the Congress following Priyanka Gandhi’s entry into politics, had also upset the BJP leadership.

Political experts feel, “With Karnal being Chief Minister Manohar Lal’s hometurf, the parliamentary seat is likely to witness a prestige battle in the Lok Sabha polls and the CM will play a key role in deciding the party’s candidate from there.”

“Manohar Lal is keen to field a political heavyweight especially a current Union Minister, having enough clout in the Central Government as well as central BJP leadership. If a political heavyweight wins from his constituency, this would be helpful for the Chief Minister as well as his state in the future,” political experts say.

The state party leadership is learnt to have requested Union Minister Arun Jaitley to contest from the Karnal seat and also gave assurance of his victory from the seat.

Jaitley had unsuccessfully contested from Amritsar Lok Sabha seat in the 2014 elections, being among the few heavyweights who had lost despite the “Modi wave” in the country. In the keenly-watched contest, Jaitley had lost his first parliamentary election against current Punjab’s Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh and is currently a Rajya Sabha MP from Uttar Pradesh.

On the other hand, Union Minister Maneka Gandhi, the seven-time BJP MP has expressed interest to contest from Karnal constituency. She currently represents Pilibhit Lok Sabha constituency in Uttar Pradesh.

Some party leaders have also proposed the name of Swami Gyananand, founder of Shri Krishan Kripa Sewa Samiti from the parliamentary seat. Swami Gyananand is stated to be close to the Chief Minister.

Interestingly, the voters in Karnal have elected “parachute candidates” in the past many elections. BJP’s Ashwini Kumar Chopra, Congress’ Arvind Kumar Sharma, Congress’ Chiranji Lal Sharma among others were tagged “outsiders” and had yet managed to register victory from Karnal.

In 2014 polls, BJP’s Ashwini Kumar Chopra while riding high on Modi-wave had won the Karnal seat by a margin of more than 3.6 lakh votes defeating his closest rival Congress’ Arvind Kumar Sharma.

“The party is looking to field a political heavyweight from the Karnal parliamentary seat. In initial discussions, names of Union Ministers Arun Jaitley, Maneka Gandhi and Swami Gyananand have been suggested by the party leaders,” said a senior party leader.

The party is yet to finalize the list of probable candidates, he added.

The Karnal parliamentary constituency has nine assembly segments including Nilokheri (SC), Indri, Karnal, Gharaunda, Assandh, Panipat (rural), Panipat city, Israna (SC) and Samalkha. At present, Karnal, Nilokheri (SC), Indri, Gharaunda, Asandh, Panipat city, Panipat (rural) and Israna (reserved) are represented by BJP MLAs while Samalkha is represented by independent MLA.

Notably, the Karnal parliamentary constituency has seen fierce electoral battles with several heavyweight candidates ending up on the losing side in the past.

Union External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj, who belongs to Haryana state, had unsuccessfully contested the Lok Sabha elections from Karnal thrice. The BJP heavyweight Sushma Swaraj, was defeated by Congress’ Chiranji Lal Sharma in the Lok Sabha elections in 1980, 1984, and 1989.

Former Haryana Chief Minister Bhajan Lal had also faced defeat for the first time in his political career in 1999 when he had lost the Karnal seat to his BJP rival ID Swami.
