Apsara Reddy becomes first transgender office-bearer in Congress

transgender

Rahul Gandhi

Mahila Congress

University of London

Laxmi Narayan Tripathi and other Kinnar community people take part in a yatra during the Peshwai ceremony for the Kumbh Mela

Akhil Bharatiya Akhara Parishad

Apsara Reddy was appointed the general secretary of Mahila Congress on January 8

The firstoffice-bearer in Congress opens up about her hard childhood, previous stints in AIADMK and BJP and her new role.During her childhood, she was the talk of the town because she was “different”. People made fun of her, humiliated her and discriminated against her just because she didn’t behave like a boy despite looking like one. Today, she is again the talk of the town, but not for her sexuality, but because she is the new general secretary of the Congress’s wing.For Apsara Reddy, 34, a transgender activist, the achievement is no small feat considering the numerous battles and prejudices that she had to fight on her way to create her own space in national politics.Perhaps, that’s why she couldn’t control her emotions when, in a first-ofits-kind move,appointed her the general secretary ofon January 8. “I burst into tears with my 86-year-old grandmother and 64-year-old mother. They had called me up, and I put the phone on loudspeaker,” Apasra said as she recalled “the most emotional moment” of her life.Apsara was raised by her mother, Anuradha, and grandmother with her trans identity. “For any family, is very difficult to raise a transchild. My father was an alcoholic. I dropped out from a school for one year because my mother could not afford the fees. We had some income from agriculture and nothing beyond it,” Apsara said.But Apsara overcame the financial hardships to pursue her BA in journalism from City,. She then did her MA in economics from Monash University, Melbourne.Apsara believes that her higher education opened the doors for her as she went on to work with BBC World Service and the commonwealth secretariat in London. Back in India, she was associated with Deccan Chronicle and New Indian Express. “In the initial days of my career, I wrote for The Hindu as a student. I had done freelancing too,” she said. For three years, she had worked as the national spokesperson for former Tamil Nadu CM Jayalalithaa’s AIADMK. “After her death, the party was in tatters with internal politics. My purpose of being in politics was not bearing any fruit,” said Apsara.She also had a brief stint (two weeks) with the BJP after meeting Amit Shah, but found the party as “regressive”. However, she didn’t want to get into the details of her experience.Three months ago, Sushmita Dev, the Congress’s women’s wing president, approached her, offering her the plum post in the party’s women’s wing.“I think the Congress is a liberal party. A mandate is given to me to make women aspire for leadership, skill them for upliftment and expand the Mahila Congress at the grass-roots level. I will travel across the nation… Sisterhood is strength and it is my job to bring the women together for my party,” Apsara said while outlining her new role.Speaking about the RSS, she said, “Waha, mahilaon ke liye darwaja bandh hain (There, the door is closed for women)”. As for the issues plaguing the country, she said, “Rural issues and unemployment are major problems. Hence, energising women and working for policies is crucial for the nation’s growth. I don’t think India will vote for aregressive party again, where humanity is not respected,” she said.Apsara is not the only transgender making “history” in the new year. Giving her company is senior transgender rights activist Laxmi Narayan Tripathi, who created a record of sorts by recently forming the Kinnar Akhara at Kumbh Mela in Allahabad and taking out a religious procession in Prayagraj.Even though thehas not given recognition to Kinnar Akhara, Laxmi’s pageantry on Sunday was welcomed in the Peshwai. “I am leading my community to be true Indians.”While her move is considered as a huge leap towards getting dignity and religious identity for the transgender-Kinnar community, Laxmi said she did not support any political party. “I only openly support construction of Ram temple in Ayodhya. I have said nothing wrong and that doesn’t make me a BJP supporter either,” she clarified. She congratulated Apsara for her new role.
