TDP comes down heavily on TRS

Musheerabad: Hyderabad district TDP leaders held a meeting, presided by Hyderabad district TDP president MN Srinivas Rao, here at the party office on Monday.

Speaking on the occasion, MN Srinivas Rao accused TRS government of ignoring public issues although it was given complete mandate by the people in the recently assembly elections. The law and order situation in the city has worsened ever since the new government was formed, with increasing atrocities on women, murders and burglaries each day, he added. Land encroachments too have increased, and government seems to have lost control over the administration, he said. Citing the recent incident in the Nilofer and Koti maternity hospitals, he said the people were facing severe inconvenience due to irregularities in healthcare services. While the city secured sixth rank in the previous Swachh rankings, it has come down to 36th place this year, which clearly indicates lack of commitment from the government, he said. He ridiculed KTR for showing more interest towards grabbing MLAs from other parties rather than focusing on administration. Referring to KTR's appeal to people to given them 16 Parliament seats in the ensuing elections to pressurise the centre, he questioned the status of the projects which were promised during the elections. He alleged that TRS government had failed to take any preventive measures to save city residents from drinking water issues this summer.

The meeting passed a unanimous resolution that the party should contest independently without any alliances in the ensuing Parliament elections. The meeting further decided to celebrate the party foundation day in all the constituencies and hoist party flags on March 29. As part of celebrations, tributes would be paid to the founder NTR and programmes would be conducted to raise awareness among people on development, TDP leaders said. They exuded the confidence that the party would continue to fight for resolving public issues despite several attempts to destroy the party.
