How the political discourse has changed in 100 days

The 100 days before Lok Sabha elections were announced on March 10 have been very eventful. From reservation to economically weaker sections to war clouds, the political narrative kept changing. ET takes a look at the major events that could impact the polls:Congress waived farm loans soon after it formed government in MP, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan. In December, West Bengal, Odisha and Jharkhand announced direct cash transfers for farmers, ranging from Rs 5,000 per acre to Rs 10,000 per family per year. It forced the Centre to rethink and come up with a PM Kisan scheme in the Budget to provide Rs 6,000 per year to every farmer who has up to five acres.The SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act became an election issue in MP and Rajasthan. To contain BJP’s losses, the NDA government introduced 10 per cent reservation for economically backward class with annual income up to Rs 8 lakh. Rajasthan introduced a bill for 5 per cent reservation to Gurjars and four other communities above existing OBC quota on February 13. Andhra implemented EWS reservation with 5-10 per cent quota to Kapus who make 27 per cent of the state population. MP issued an ordinance to raise state OBC quota to 27 per cent from 14 per cent on March 6. The Centre overturned a court verdict to restore 200-point roaster system for faculty reservation in universities on February 28.The Supreme Court restored Alok Verma as CBI director on January 8 overruling the Modi government’s decision to bench him. On January 11, Verma quit after he was shunted out from CBI. Before this, the CBI extradited Christian Michel from Dubai on December 6 in the Agusta Westland case. In another case on February 3, the CBI team which reached the residence of Kolkata police commissioner Rajeev Kumar to examine him in the Saradha chit fund case was detained by the Kolkata police leading to a government-opposition show down.BJP raised the Mandir pitch during the last round of assembly elections and several party leaders demanded an Ordinance for construction of a Ram Temple. Hearing on the Ayodhya title dispute continued in the apex court and on February 1, the Vishva Hindu Parishad put off the demand on Ram Temple till Lok Sabha elections concluded. The decision was endorsed by the RSS. On March 8, SC ordered formation of a mediation panel to look for an out of court solution.On December 14, the Supreme Court dismissed a plea to probe the Rafale jets deal. On February 13, CAG tabled its audit report which claimed that the NDA deal was 2.86 per cent cheaper. However the CAG also said that the deal could have been even cheaper as banking guarantees were waived. It gave some ammunition to the opposition but the Balakot air strike saw erasure of the discourse. Prime Minister Modi said that Rafale could have made a difference in India’s air capability. Publication of Rafale documents in The Hindu led to fresh controversy on March 4, with the AG claiming that it was stolen documents. He later denied that the documents were not stolen.The terror attack on CRPF convoy on February 14 in Pulwama was followed by February 26 bombing of Jaish-e-Mohammad camp in Balakot by the Indian Air Force. Pakistan fighter jets entered Indian border the next day, resulting in a dog fight. In the process, Pakistan captured Wing Commander Abhinandan but released him on March 1. Pulwama and Balakot gave fresh political momentum for the ruling BJP, while the opposition got together to redraw strategies.On January 23, Priyanka Gandhi joined active politics and was made general secretary in-charge of East UP. On February 11, she went on a road show in Lucknow with her brother, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, and held meetings of party workers from East UP. There has been no word about her activities post-Balakot. Her joining politics coincided with legal teams of the Enforcement Directorate examining her husband Robert Vadra.RLSP quit NDA on December 10 and joined the opposition grand alliance in Bihar. BJP quickly finalized seat sharing with JDU on December 23. On February 18, BJP sealed an alliance with Shiv Sena in Maharashtra and a day later it sealed an alliance with AIADMK and PMK in Tamil Nadu. SP and BSP announced alliance on January 12 leaving two seats for RLD. RLD and SP announced alliance on March 5 to contest three seats. SP left one seat for RLD.Despite several meetings, the Opposition, especially Congress, has not been able to announce its alliances. On February 13, opposition leaders met at Sharad Pawar residence and decided to have prepoll alliance and a common minimum programme. The strategy was hit after the Pulwama attack the very next day. Congress partners in Bihar, Karnataka and Maharashtra want more seats and the party is yet to concede space to smaller parties. Congress has only announced an alliance in TN and with Mahan Dal in UP. The party has announced it was not tying up with AAP in Delhi, on March 11, after much back and forth. In Bihar, RJD has given a March 13 ultimatum to Congress to resolve its issues.While addressing a rally on January 28 in Raipur, Congress president Rahul Gandhi announced that if Congress returns to power, the party would implement a scheme that would ensure minimum income for every poor family of the country. The scheme was being planned as part of Congress manifesto. Anticipating a similar announcement in the budget, Gandhi unveiled Congress’ plan for an early lead.The NDA government introduced income-tax waiver for employees earning up to Rs 5 lakh per annum in the interim budget.On February 28, the Union Cabinet cleared five ordinances. Apart from law to restore faculty reservation in universities, another ordinance was to amend the Aadhaar Act, allowing individuals to voluntarily use it for identification. On February 19, ordinance for banning instant triple talaq was repromulgated. The bill passed twice by the Lok Sabha has been stuck in the RS. Another ordinance was to ban unregulated deposit schemes to curb ponzi schemes. There was a speculation the Centre may promulgate an ordinance for amending the Citizenship Act but following severe opposition from parties in the northeast, it was not considered.
