Key suspect in Pulwama attack shot dead: police

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) Police said yesterday that one of the 'key conspirators behind a suicide attack that killed at least 40 paramilitary troops in Jammu and Kashmir had died in a shootout with security forces.

Mudasir Ahmed Khan, who was shot dead on Sunday, was described by authorities as a top commander with Jaish-e-Mohamed (JeM), the militant group behind the deadly February 14 bombing in Kashmir's Pulwama district.

That attack on a convoy of Central Reserve Police Force was the deadliest in decades, and provoked a retaliatory air strike against what New Delhi called a JeM training camp on Pakistani soil.

Pakistan, which denied supporting JeM, responded by shooting down an Indian warplane and capturing the pilot, whose return two days later pulled the nuclear-armed rivals back from the brink.

Police said yesterday that an investigation had 'revealed that Mudasir, 23, was one of the key conspirators of the deadly attack on the CRPF troopers.

Mudasir was shot in Tral - a town in Pulwama - along with another gunman the police claimed was from Pakistan.

K J S Dhillon, the local army commander in Kashmir, said yesterday that 14 alleged JeM militants, including six commanders, had been eliminated in a crackdown in the aftermath of the bombing.

Police said the mastermind of the convoy attack was killed on February 18 along with two other JeM associates in a shootout in Kashmir.

Investigations are ongoing into who provided the explosives and the total number of militants involved in the attack.

'We have started aggressive operations to eliminate the JeM leadership in the Kashmir Valley, Dhillon said.

CRPF Inspector General Zulfiqar Hassan said the killing of Mudasir and his accomplice was 'very significant as they had been involved in attacks on the paramilitary force.

He, however, added that the security forces' job had not been fully accomplished because some key players, including those who indoctrinated Mudasir and provided explosives to him, were still at large.

Police said that Mudasir hailed from Midoora village in Tral area.

His body was identified by his family.

Resistance to Indian rule in the Muslim-majority state has spiked in recent years, with public demonstrations turning violent and soldiers pelted with stones in clashes that have seen civilians killed.

Kashmir has been ruled directly by New Delhi since June last year when Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party pulled out of an alliance with the People's Democratic Party governing the state.

Local parties had been advocating for a fresh state ballot, but the Election Commission said on Sunday no such poll was scheduled in the near future.

Rebel groups seeking independence for Kashmir or its merger with Pakistan have been waging an insurgency against half a million Indian troops stationed there for 30 years.

Tens of thousands have died in the fighting, mostly civilians.

l Separatist leader Mirwaiz Umer Farooq, who was summoned by the National Investigation Agency to appear before it yesterday, has decided not to and submit a written statement instead.

'The Hurriyat Conference has decided that the Mirwaiz will not appear in person in New Delhi before the NIA. Instead, a written statement would be submitted to the agency, a spokesman said.

The NIA had summoned Farooq in connection with a 2017 terror funding case.

The agency has also summoned Naseem Geelani, son of senior separatist leader Syed Ali Geelani.

MENAFN1103201900670000ID1098239114
