"PM Dividing People, Playing With Their Emotions," Says Congress

Sonia and Rahul Gandhi with former PM Dr Manmohan Singh at CWC meeting in Ahmedabad

Highlights Congress leaders hold a prayer meet at the Gandhi Ashram in Sabarmati

A massive Jan Sankalp rally to take place in Ahmedabad

Congress kicks off election campaign from PM Modi's home turf

The Congress today hit out at Prime Minister Narendra Modi, accusing him of "trying to divide the people and playing with their emotions for political gains". The party whose top policy-making body met in Gujarat's Ahmedabad also accused the ruling BJP of destroying the country's institutions, hours after the PM targeted the main opposition party in a blog.

Congress spokesperson Anand Sharma, quoted party chief Rahul Gandhi who said, "We will not allow PM to once again mislead, befool people."

"It is regretful for India that the PM is trying to divide the nation and put the country in a bad light for his political gains," Mr Sharma added.

Sources say, the UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, in her address lashed out at the Central government for "politicising" issues related to national interest. She also called for highlighting the achievements of the previous UPA government along with emphasizing on the need to move forward in providing a new vision for the country.

Mrs Gandhi alleged that the Prime Minister is playing the "victim card" but it is the people of the country who are the victims of his "wrong policies".

Former prime minister Manmohan Singh, who also addressed the meeting, highlighted the agrarian crisis, slow industrial growth and unemployment under the present regime at the Centre.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and his mother Sonia Gandhi sat with former prime minister Manmohan Singh at the head of the table as the Congress Working Committee (CWC) held strategy discussions at Sardar Patel National Memorial in the city.

Further down the table was a third Gandhi, who joined as Congress general secretary last month. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra sat with other Congress general secretaries, away from her mother and brother, at her first CWC meeting.

Patidar leader Hardik Patel, who shot to fame by spearheading a quota stir in Gujarat joined the Congress in the presence of Rahul Gandhi today.

Before the meeting, the three Gandhis and other Congress leaders rode a bus to Sabarmati for a visit to Mahatma Gandhi's ashram. They also paid tribute to soldiers at a memorial before heading to Sardar Patel National Memorial for the CWC meeting.

The Congress is looking to send out a strong political message to the entire nation from the land of Mahatma Gandhi and Sardar Patel.

The meeting was postponed after the Pulwama terror attack on February 14 and the air strikes by India across the Line of Control on a terror camp in Balakot.

The CWC meeting was held in Gujarat after a gap of 58 years. It was also held to commemorate the anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi beginning a new chapter in India's Independence struggle by launching the 'Salt Satyagraha' to Dandi on March 12, 1930.

The Congress in Gujarat, battling infighting, has alleged that the BJP has been "engineering defections of party legislators", with three of them quitting in the last four days. Sources say, a few more Congress lawmakers may quit to join the BJP before the elections, scheduled to begin on April 11.
