Sara Ali Khan rejects Vicky Kaushal starrer Shaheed Udham Singh biopic for Love Aaj Kal 2?

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Sara Ali Khan rejects Vicky Kaushal starrer Shaheed Udham Singh biopic for Love Aaj Kal 2?

Sara Ali Khan has become the talk of the town ever since her Bollywood debut in the film Kedarnath. The actress charmed the audience with her innocence in Kedarnath and then enticed them as Shagun in Ranveer Singh starrer Simmba. Due to her stellar acting abilities, she has become every director’s favorite and has been showered with many films. Latest reports suggest that Sara Ali Khan was even approached for Vicky Kaushal starrer Shaheed Udham Singh biopic but she rejected it and chose Love Aaj Kal 2.

Going by the reports in Deccan Chronicle, Sara Ali Khan was approached for the biopic but she declined the film as it doesn’t has a creative role for her to play. The report suggested that the actress wanted to do roles which would offer her more creative space and since the role in Udham Singh biopic didn’t give her much opportunity to explore herself as an actor, she said no to it. Earlier it was said that because of the same reason, Sara Ali Khan rejected Tiger Shroff starrer Baaghi 3 as well.

Also, the dates of Udham Singh biopic were clashing with Sara’s current film Love Aaj Kal 2 which is why she refused to go ahead. The actress is currently in Delhi along with Kartik Aaryan to shoot the first schedule of Love Aaj Kal 2 and many pictures and videos of the same have been surfacing the internet. Just recently, a picture had surfaced on the internet in which Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan were seen sharing a conversation on the sets. Before that, a kissing scene from the movie between Sara and Kartik also went viral.

On a related note, Vicky Kaushal announced that he will be seen in Udham Singh’s biopic a few days ago. He shared a picture with Shoojit Sircar and wrote, “An absolute honour to be roped in to play Shaheed Udham Singh, in his biopic to be directed by @shoojitsircar sir... the man who was sitting right at the top of my wish list of Directors to work with. Can’t wait for this journey to start next month. Produced by Ronnie Lahiri.”

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
