Suleman Bakery case trial makes little progress

1992-93 riots

Pydhonie police station

Ram Dev Tyagi

BN Srikrishna Commission

Investigating officer fails to appear, witness discharged without being examined.The difficulties in trying those accused of having committed a crime 26 years ago came to the fore yet again on Monday, during a hearing of the Suleman Usman Bakery case, as two hours of the court’s time was spent without the trial advancing any further.Seven policemen are being tried in the Sessions Court for having allegedly shot dead eight unarmed men during the raid conducted on the bakery and the adjacent madrasa during theOn Monday, a witness was produced but was discharged without being examined. Assistant Police Inspector Arun Hande was the man who had typed out the FIR filed after the shooting that took place on January 9, 1993. But he was neither the author of the FIR nor had he signed it.This FIR (in CR No. 46/93 Dongri police station), was filed against 78 Muslims found inside and around the bakery and madrasa on January 9, 1993, including those injured in the raid. It accused them of attempt to murder and rioting. The police had at that time claimed that they had raided the bakery because “terrorists’’ had been shooting at them from its rooftop.However, this FIR was quashed by the Bombay High Court in 2011, and the accused were discharged. Justice RP Sondurbaldota had described the FIR as a case of “the protector becoming the predator’’.The charge sheet in the current case against the policemen punches holes in this FIR, describing it as a “got-up document, attempting to justify the deaths caused by the police”.Asked by Additional Sessions Judge UM Padwad when he could produce the police officer who had actually filed the FIR, Police Sub Inspector Kadam ofwas hard put to answer. The officer concerned, Anant Ingale, is now retired.Also an accused in this case, Ingale was among the eight policemen discharged in 2003, along with prime accused, who as joint commissioner of police, had led the raid on the bakery which left eight dead.Kadam informed the court that the Investigating Officer (IO) in the case, Prahlad Sonawane, to whom notice had been issued, did not appear on Monday. He was in Nagpur.Annoyed at the waste of the court’s time, Judge Padwad ordered that an officer of the Special Task Force (STF) be assigned to the case to assist the Public Prosecutor Ratnavali Patil. It was the STF that investigated the case in 2001 after the then Chief Justice of India, A S Anand, asked the Maharashtra government what action it had taken against Tyagi.The Supreme Court asked this question while hearing a petition urging implementation of theof Inquiry report. The report, tabled in 1998, indicts Tyagi and two of his assistants for the murder of unarmed innocents during the raid. The two assistants were also discharged in 2003.In his order, the judge also directed the prosecution to prepare a list of witnesses that they proposed to examine and give a copy to the defence.On Monday, the original log book of wireless messages exchanged between Tyagi and other policemen involved in the raid, and the police control room, was produced in court. The last hearing had been held up despite the presence of a policeman who had been working in the control room, because only the photocopy of the log book was available in court.
