New York Times calls Pulwama bombing an explosion. Twitterati ask: Was 9/11 a plane crash?

Indian soldiers examine debris after the terrorist attack in Pulwama on February 14, 2019. (Photo: Reuters)

The New York Times made two spectacular errors on Monday while publishing and tweeting a story about this year's Lok Sabha elections. Indian Twitter users found the first mistake so outrageous that few of them seemed to notice their prime minister's name was spelt "Narandra".

"In India's Election Season, an Explosion Interrupts Modi's Slump," read the headline of the article. By "explosion", the newspaper meant the suicide bombing that killed 40 Indian paramilitary soldiers in southern Kashmir last month.

Here's a screenshot.

Screenshot of tweet, now deleted, from @nytimesworld.

In response to the headline, Twitter users expressed the following sentiment in myriad sarcastic ways: So 9/11 was a plane crash?

if pulwama was an explosion, 9/11 was a plane crash? it's very insensitive of NYT to make light of the losses we suffer from islamic terrorism! vivek singh (@vivekbabaji) March 11, 2019

If the incident in Pulwama was just an explosion, then 9/11 was a plane crash. My condolences to the Al-Qaeda workers who lost their precious lives just because of a stupid building. Sanjay Gautam (@Sanjayg551) March 11, 2019

If Pulwama Attack is just an explosion then 9/11 is just accident made by drunk pilot. BHARATH KN (@BharathRF) March 12, 2019

So for @nytimesworld #Pulwama was an just an explosion! And of course 9/11 must have been just a plane crash.... https://t.co/4JfzNkDMYq March 12, 2019

Here are some other reactions.

An explosion, I Guess going by NYT’s lexicon the twin towers fell due to a mishap. American media outlets have lost the plot when it comes to reporting in the sub continent. https://t.co/Tt3eEZC8Ep ishaan prakash (@ishaan_ANI) March 11, 2019

Suicide terrorist who killed 40 humans ....is rather more than an explosion.

Tell us @nytimes , is a prerequisite to calling it a terror attack is white people dead ? https://t.co/8lrSOmlRVg Harini Calamur (@calamur) March 12, 2019

This is a former Pakistani ambassador to the US.

Troubling that @nytimes chooses to describe a terrorist suicide attack as an explosion.’ What’s next? Describing a beheading as loss of a human head?’ @gettleman @nytimesworld https://t.co/1qolfH4KAy Husain Haqqani (@husainhaqqani) March 12, 2019

The story's headline has since changed: "In India's Election Season, a Bombing Interrupts Modi's Slump".

The Pakistan-based terrorist group Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed responsibility for the bombing in Pulwama, and the Indian Army has accused Islamabad's spy agency ISI of involvement. Within two weeks of the terrorist attack, Indian Mirage 2000 fighters struck a Jaish training camp in Pakistan.

The counterterrorism operation was described by India's Ministry of External Affairs as a pre-emptive strike, but it was widely seen as revenge for the bombing on February 14. The terrorist death toll has been a topic of vigorous political debate, where opposition skepticism clashed with the government's annoyance.

A mosque worker, Mohammad Naeem, has told India Today TV's investigative reporters that several Pakistani soldiers were killed in the airstrikes.
