Complaint filed against Tamil actor Vemal for allegedly assaulting another actor

Complaint filed against Tamil actor Vemal for allegedly assaulting another actor

Virugambakkam police are currently on the lookout for Vemal who fled the scene after allegedly assaulting actor Abhishek on Monday.

Flix Assault

While actors are seen fighting and brawling on screen most of the time, it is not often that you get to watch one in real life. For those at a serviced apartment in Chennai’s Virugambakkam area, the events of Monday morning were indeed a rare sight.

Tamil actor Vemal, who shot to fame with films like Pasanga (2009), Kalavani (2010) and Kalakalappu (2012), has landed himself in the midst of a controversy. A complaint has been filed against the actor and three of his friends under sections 323 (Punishment for voluntarily causing hurt) and 294b (Uttering obscene language) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) by another actor Abhishek for allegedly physically assaulting him.

The incident was reported in the wee hours of Monday following an altercation between Vemal and Abishek that allegedly resulted in physical assault. It is also being alleged that the two might have been inebriated when the incident took place.

Vimal had come to the serviced apartment at Baskar Colony, Virugambakkam, with a few of his friends requesting for a room to stay in. Abhishek who was staying at the complex for a month was apparently lounging on the sofa while ignoring Vemal and gestured the latter to wait until he finished the call.

According to a report in the Times of India, Vimal was irked by Abishek’s behaviour when the latter continued to ignore him and speak over the phone. He then began attacking Abhishek along with his friends. Abhishek who sustained injuries to his eyes and face was taken to a private hospital following which he filed a complaint against Vemal and his friends.

Vemal has been absconding since the incident, and the Virugambakkam police are currently on the lookout for the actor.

Vemal who was last seen in Evanukku Engayo Matcham Irukku last year has Kanni Raasi and Kalavani 2 under different stages of production. His Rendavathu Padam with director CS Amudhan has been put on the back burner for some time now.
