‘No place for illegal Bangladeshi Muslims in Karbi Anglong’- Dr Himanta Biswa Sarma

A Correspondent

Donkamukam: State Finance Minister Dr Himanta Biswa Sarma kicked off his election campaign for the forthcoming Lok Sabha election by attending a mass rally at Donkamukam DSA Stadium in West Karbi Anglong on Monday. “There is no place for illegal Bangladeshi Muslims here in Karbi Anglong. If they are given a space to stay here, within a short time their number will multiply and they will get chance to change the demographic pattern of the district,” he said.

He thanked KAAC CEM Tuliram Ronghang for evicting illegal Bangladeshi migrants from Langkaijan area (bordering Hojai and East Karbi Anglong) few days back. “Indigenous people need to stay united in order to protect our land and soil and at the same, let us work and build Assam together beautifully,” he added.

The minister highlighted the development schemes taken up during the BJP rule. “India has now emerged as a powerful country under the leadership of Prime Minister Modi and has shown its power to the world recently by bombing the militants’ camp in Pakistan. I request voters of Karbi Anglong to give Prime Minister Modi a chance to lead once again,” he added.

CEM Tuliram Ronghang said that whoever gets the BJP ticket would emerge a winner from No. 3 Diphu constituency due to the development works executed there within a short time. Later when reporters asked him if he was interested to contest the LS election, he said, “I have to stay here as a lot of work remains to be done.”

In the mass rally, MLA Dr Mansing Rongpi, Speaker of KAAC, Longki Timung, all EMs of KAAC, MACs, BJP president of West Karbi Anglong district, Arun Terang, BJP president of East Karbi Anglong district, Ratan Teron, former MLA Bidyasing Engleng and thousands of supporters were present. In the meeting, over 500 members from other political parties, led by Glintson Teron, joined the BJP. Karbi Anglong will go to poll on April 18.

Also read: Assam news
