Twitter users did not react well to Rishi Kapoor's stance over Indo-Pak tension

Several eminent personalities from India, in the last couple of days, have shared their views on social media relevant to the tensions between India and Pakistan

Kapoor, who is known for voicing his opinions quite strongly, is the latest addition to the club. He took to his Twitter handle and said that Pakistan should join hands with India to “root out terrorism.”

Agree with @arunjaitley If Pakistan truly wants to root out terrorism as they say so,they should join hands with India to do so. We and you have nothing against our respective civilians. If Imran cannot, Pakistan Army or ISI should do it. Think! — Rishi Kapoor (@chintskap) March 10, 2019

He expressed his thoughts after the Indian Minister of Corporate Affairs,Arun Jaitley, gave a few anti-Pakistan statements in a recent talk show in India.

People on both sides of the border did not react well to his comments. Indians were infuriated by the idea of dropping arms and joining hands with Pakistan.

Keep aside Pulwama, what did Pakistan do with Mumbai terror attackers? -Kasab's identity was confirmed by Pakistan -Pakistan has thrice rejected voice samples of Mumbai attack handlers. Why did Pak reject if it was not involved? Only talks & no action isn't peace, it is bullshit — khoob bhalo (@vikasmishra436) March 10, 2019

These lessions all over , india have to take over on pakistan because their politicians can not handle the problems of civilians. Except unable to deliver veggies like tamoto. So now india have take control on pakistan and solve their problems. #Pakistan #civilproblems #India — M K (@Mukeshdwr) March 10, 2019

It's your Govt. Who always steps back. Take examoke from ongoing situation. We are fighting against terrorism since the first terror attack. And @ImranKhanPTI CAN DO IT and he is DOING IT. Pakistani nation, Army and Govt are always united and on front to fight against terrorism. — GulRukh Yousafzai (@megulrukhay) March 10, 2019

Agree with @arunjaitley If Pakistan truly wants to root out terrorism as they say so,they should join hands with India to do so. We and you have nothing against our respective civilians. If Imran cannot, Pakistan Army or ISI should do it. Think! — Rishi Kapoor (@chintskap) March 10, 2019

Our PM and Armed Forces have categorically told the whole world for millions of times that we are ready for the mutual investigation regarding pulwama. It is your govt and forces who do not come forward in this everytime, instead accelerate war. You THINK Mr. @chintskap — Muhammad Wamiq Ansari (@doctorsahab_edu) March 10, 2019

http://

Indian govt cannot protect their own ppl from cow lynchings, mob lynchings and they want to help Pakistan. You guys need to focus on election. — Saadia Faheem (@SirfSaadia) March 10, 2019

Meanwhile, Rishi is currently in New York and is getting treated for an unknown disease. It was earlier reported that the actor was planning to go back to India, the actor denied the reports saying he had no plans to return anytime soon.

On the work front, Rishi Kapoor last appeared in 'Mulk' and 'Rajma Chawal'.
