EXCLUSIVE | Congress will be a non-entity in UP, Priyanka Gandhi won’t impact LS polls: Rita Bahuguna Joshi

Rita Bahuguna Joshi, UP Cabinet minister | Photo Credit: IANS

Lucknow: She may have spent the better part of her decades-long career with the Congress party, however, Rita Bahuguna Joshi believes that the party, under the leadership of Rahul Gandhi, will be a “non-entity” in Uttar Pradesh after the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. “Congress has lost its roots. Congress has lost its focus. They are not very sure of their policy on any issue,” said Joshi, Cabinet Minister for Women Welfare, Family Welfare, Mother and Child Welfare and Tourism in the Uttar Pradesh government.

After being with the Congress for nearly 24 years, during which she was also the president of the Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee from 2007 to 2012, Joshi joined the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in 2016. While speaking to timesnownews.com, Joshi lauded PM Narendra Modi and UP CM Yogi Adityanath for their “stable leadership and good governance”.

“Everybody feels that 5 years was a very small time to give full results. So, I feel that when it comes to leadership and stable govt, it will be ‘Modi, Modi’ all along,” the cabinet minister said. She also stressed that her government believes in “Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas” and emphasised that the Yogi government has worked to reach out to members of all communities and strata.

Joshi, who served as a mayor of Allahabad from 1995 to 2000 and has been a professor at the University of Allahabad, is a self-confessed workaholic. “I love working and I also keep squeezing in programmes to take the best advantage of my time. I think I work not less than 16 to 17 hours a day,” she told timesnownews.com one mildly cold February morning in Lucknow, as she interacted with members of the public near KKC College and then attended a ‘Bharat ki Mann ki Baat’ event at Charbagh railway station in a span of an hour.

Here are the excerpts from the interview:

Saumya Trivedi: You have spent almost two decades of your life with Congress and now you are with BJP. So what’s the difference that you see? Why do you think people should vote for BJP?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: Congress has lost its roots. Congress has lost its focus. They are not very sure of their policy on any issue. Secondly, they had a long time, five to six decades to perform and prove themselves. Unfortunately, they could not fulfil the aspirations of the people.

And in UP, caste politics has become so strong, that only a strong developmental agenda can wean the people away from it. So I would say, people should vote because (PM Narendra) Modi is there and because our focus is correct.

In UP, the Congress has totally been wiped off. They have only 5 per cent votes. So, I feel that to keep away these two regional parties (SP and BSP), which were thrown out by the people on the grounds of corruption, misgovernance, of pushing the state into the hands of mafia and contractors, UP does not have Congress cause it’s extinct. SP and BSP are totally discredited, and we have done excellent work.

Saumya Trivedi: Given the unique insights that you bring in, having worked with Rahul and Priyanka Gandhi in the past, do you think Priyanka’s entry into active politics would be something that BJP should worry about?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: Congress is not the Congress which I had known with my father and mother and seen with them. It started transforming in the late 70s, and now in the 21st century, it is completely transformed. And I have worked with Rahul ji and Mrs. Gandhi, not with Priyanka ji but I have watched her movements.

Congress is nearly finished in UP. They have a total lack of ground and field workers. They won’t impact this election at all, as I can see. They will still remain a minuscule presence, with 4 to 6% votes, that is it. As far as Priyanka ji is concerned, it is good that she is trying to enter politics, but I don’t see her having an impact in this election because she has been there earlier as well. Last time she campaigned so extensively, not only in Rae Bareli but in Amethi as well. But the Amethi result was not very resounding.

I feel UP knows her and I don’t see any appreciable impact. Congress will be a non-entity.

(UP Cabinet minister Rita Bahuguna Joshi interacting with coolies at the Charbagh railway station. Pic credit: Times Now)

Saumya Trivedi: Do you think Akhilesh-Mayawati alliance has the potential to give a stiff competition to BJP in the upcoming elections?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: No, it’s a ganging up of opportunists and they feel that caste-combinations can win elections. And this idea has been defeated thrice – 2007 when elections were held, SP was swept off; in 2012, Mayawati was swept off and again (in 2017) Akhilesh was swept off. And this is the reason that people are now focusing on development and they are looking at leadership. Now they know that these two people can never stay together. People understand this. They (SP’s Akhilesh Yadav and BSP’s Mayawati) are traditional rivals, and not just politically, even caste-wise. Their vote-banks never gel together. So, it’s a very unstable alliance and people want stability nowadays.

Saumya Trivedi: Considering that the BJP recently faced defeats in the three states of Hindi heartland, how confident is the party of repeating its stellar 2014 performance in UP in 2019 polls?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: Listen, these defeats have been misleading. Two defeats we were anticipating, not publicly claiming, but those defeats are not defeats. They are kind of like a victory because we were not expecting that we will be able to retain our full vote-bank. It was tiredness, you could say. The tiredness of the people with the government and they just wanted a change. It was not anti-incumbency.

But when it comes to forming the national government, the ballgame changes. It depends on who leads the government. And I feel that Modi has no match.

We are very confident of forming a government. We are very confident given our effort to reach out and to ensure the benefits of the social welfare scheme to the villagers. We are very sure that even if we don’t increase our tally, our present tally will remain with us.

(UP Cabinet minister Rita Bahuguna Joshi addressing the crowd at 'Bharat ki Mann ki Baat' event at Lucknow's Charbagh station. Pic credit: Times Now)

Saumya Trivedi: Opposition parties have also often slammed Yogi Adityanath govt of giving more priority to cow vigilantism and cases of cow slaughter than mob lynching. What has the BJP govt done to counter this alleged perception?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: This perception has been created by the opposition. So these are aberrations. And there are strong laws against lynching. Even the PM has spoken that law will take its course if you take the law in your hands. Take the case of Bulandshahr, everybody on both sides have been arrested. Whenever a clash happens, my government has never sided with any community. We are against lawlessness and anybody who commits a crime will be punished. My chief minister has gone by ‘Sabka saath, sabka vikaas.’

Saumya Trivedi: In the last two years, what are the initiatives undertaken by your departments which you think have been the highlights of your tenure?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: It’s for the first time in independent India that tourism has been taken up as an industry in UP. My government’s biggest achievement is that the Kumbh was organised in such a big way that over 200 million people have already attended. And UNESCO gave us the brand of being the intangible cultural heritage of humanity. Besides this, we are creating a lot of infrastructural facilities for the pilgrims who come for all over the world.

We have also done a very good job for women’s safety. In the past one and half-two years, in the past eighteen months, we have attended to over 4 lakhs distress calls out of which some were through counselling over the phone, some were through calling them to the One-Stop Centres (where there are counsellors and a small police desk to help destitute women) and interacting with them.

In the family welfare department, we can boast that under the vision and guidance of Chief Minister, you can see that the incidents of JE and AES (Japanese Encephalitis and Acute Encephalitis Syndrome) have been substantially reduced. It’s a huge success, and next year we want the number to be zero. So we are again starting the JE campaign this month.

(Rita Bahuguna Joshi at Charbagh Railway station, Lucknow. Pic credit: Times Now)

Saumya Trivedi: What have been the biggest achievements of the Yogi Adityanath government that you think could help the BJP’s prospects in the 2019 polls?

Rita Bahuguna Joshi: One of the highlights of the Yogi government would be the loan waiver to farmers. Rs 37,000 crores were given to 75 lakh farmers in one go. UP is the only state in India which has been able to do this. Others declared but they did it piecemeal over five years. We did it in one go.

We have cleared a huge backlog of sugarcane farmers. Imagine, in 20 months, we have paid Rs 54,000 crores to the sugarcane farmers. We have very strongly implemented the Swacch Bharat Abhiyan. 1.10 crore women have got LPG connection through Ujjwala Yojana. 2.5 crore toilets have been built by us. The previous government had done only 21,000 in two years.

We have brought electricity connection through Saubhagya Yojana to every village. Almost 98 per cent electrification has been done in the state. So, you see, there is no sector where we are not working.

Saumya Trivedi: Thank you.


