Modi govt's 5 years a period of false promises and betrayal: Congress

The Congress on Tuesday accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP of insulting the struggle, sacrifices and contribution of leaders like Mahatma Gandhi, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru in nation building by brazenly seeking to hijack their legacy and pretending to be champions of their values.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi and former Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh were among a host of national party leaders who were present at the Congress Working Committee meeting held in Ahmedabad. The CWC meeting was held in Gujarat after 58 years.

Briefing media persons after the closed door CWC, party leader Anand Sharma said that in the meeting it was reaffirmed to defend the foundational values of India as an inclusive society in which diversity is celebrated and citizens enjoy the rights guaranteed in the Constitution.

According to Sharma, the Congress president said that they (read Modi and the BJP) were attempting to paint a different picture of India than that envisaged by Gandhi and others.

He further said that the CWC also reaffirmed to restore the health of Indian economy that “has been collapsing due to monumental mismanagement under PM Modi and his government, not withstanding tall boastful claims”.

The CWC noted that the terrorist attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama was a grim reminder of the serious threat posed by the forces of terrorism to the unity and integrity of the country. Condemning the attack, the CWC expressed solidarity with the soldiers and armed forces. The Congress president offered party's support to the government in the hour of national crisis.

The CWC made it clear that dissent and articulation of ideological differences are integral to India's political narrative, especially during elections. “These must not be mistaken as weakness or disunity of the country,” it said.

The CWC also sent a strong message to the “enemies of India” that India stands united and resolute as one nation to confront and defeat their nefarious agenda. It said that India will never be defeated by forces of violence and terror.

However, the CWC expressed strong disappointment that the Prime Minister is cynically exploiting the issue of national security, on which all stood united, to divert attention from colossal failures, bogus claims and persistent falsehoods.

The CWC noted that last five years of Modi-led BJP government has been a period of false promises and betrayal of people's trust and confidence. Bringing in GST and the decision of demonetisation, the CWC said disrupted Indian economy, trade and industry.

The leaders also discussed about what they believed was the atmosphere of fear and insecurity in the country.

The CWC called upon all democratic and progressive forces to unite and pool their energies to relentlessly fight and expose anti-people's policies of the BJP government, its failure to deliver on the promises made in 2014 and not allow the nation's political narrative to be vitiated and focus deflected from the real issues concerning people.

The members also noted that the party delivered what it promised and gave an example of farm loan waiver in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Chhatisgarh.

The CWC said that the Congress party would approach the people of India with humility to seek their support in the forthcoming election for itself and its allies in different states. It also sought for a mandate for better governance and accountability, to repair the grave damage caused to our democratic polity, economy and society by the Modi government, a mandate for change to restore the health of Indian economy, for job creation, social justice and harmony.

The CWC endorsed the promise made by the Congress president to ensure minimum income support to the support to the poor, weak and marginalised sections of society when the Congress party comes to power.
