Dehradun boy stolen at birth, recovered from surrogate mom's relatives in Meerut after a four-year hunt

Dehradun: After four years Doons parents finally found their lost child | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Dehradun: On Sunday evening, a four-year-old boy born who had been stolen at birth by a surrogate mother was reunited with his family. The lost boy was recovered from Meerut's Sadar Bazar area where he was living with a relative of his surrogate mother who had gone underground after giving birth to twins in 2015. The woman who had delivered the babies in a faraway town of West Bengal (Alipurduar) had lied to the boys' parents that one of them died during delivery.

The happy recovery and reunion happened when Dehradun Police's Special Operational Group and cops from Rishikesh Kotwali in Uttrakhand raided a location in Meerut's Sadar Bazar area on a tipoff that a relative of the suspect was behaving strangely about the presence of a boy in the house, sometimes hiding him from public gaze.

According to the reports in the Times of India, in 2014, the couple who belongs to Dehradun hired a woman, Anita (name changed) for surrogacy.

Also Read: Air pollution EPIDEMIC! 8.8 million people dying worldwide every year

In 2015, Anita delivered twin boys at a nursing home in her native district Alipurduar in West Bengal but claimed to the couple that one of them died during the delivery. Reportedly, The couple suspected that the surrogate mother was lying and started hunting for the child. During their investigation, they went to West Bengal and several other parts of the country in search of some proof. However, earlier, the police in West Bengal and UP refused to file a case unless the parents could furnish some evidence some evidence to bolster their claim of kidnapping against the woman. A case was finally registered in Dehradun last year.

Pramendra Doval, Supretended of Police(Rural), Dehradun told TOI that after the case was registered, a team of Uttrakhand police began piecing together the evidence and facts. Meanwhile, the accused was arrested last year from Alipurduar district on charges of cheating. But the Dehradun police could get no information from her about the whereabouts of the child as she kept giving evasive answers.

Finally, the investigation team began an operation to recover the child began, with the Special Operational Group and cops from Rishikesh Kotwali leading the way.

Moreover, the search of the child has now ended four years after the child's birth as the boy was found in Meerut with the relative of Anita. That relative was a regular visitor at the Kali temple in Meerut where most members of the Bengali community visit. The relative was caught accompanying the stolen child to the temple.
