Trump budget sets up farm bill feud

Trump budget sets up farm bill feud Presented by Feeding America

With help from Catherine Boudreau and Liz Crampton

Editor's Note: This edition of Morning Agriculture is published weekdays at 10 a.m. POLITICO Pro Agriculture subscribers hold exclusive early access to the newsletter each morning at 6 a.m. To learn more about POLITICO Pro's comprehensive policy intelligence coverage, policy tools and services, click here.

— President Donald Trump and some farm-state lawmakers are on a collision course when it comes to the Agriculture Department’s budget. Trump’s new fiscal 2020 spending blueprint calls for shrinking USDA programs that were just endorsed by Congress in the 2018 farm bill, from food stamps to conservation efforts and commodity subsidies.

— The proposed budget cuts would hit close to home for Trump’s base: Many rural housing and development programs would be on the chopping block if the White House gets its way, though Trump’s recommendations for expanding broadband access and battling the opioids crisis were well received.

— Trump also requested more funding for core trade functions, as negotiations with a handful of major partners ramp up in the months ahead. With the new NAFTA 2.0 deal expected to come before Congress soon, Speaker Nancy Pelosi is calling an all-hands meeting of House Democrats to hear from Trump’s trade chief on Wednesday. But first, he’ll appear before the Senate Finance Committee today.

A message from Feeding America: Struggling families can’t weather hunger alone. The pandemic, supply chain issues, rising food costs, and the cold winter months all threaten to increase the number of hungry families. No one should have to choose between keeping the heat on and putting food on the table. Feeding America is asking Congress to invest an additional $900 million in TEFAP food purchases to help food banks meet the continued need that exists in our communities. Learn More.

HAPPY TUESDAY, MARCH 12! Welcome to Morning Ag, where we recommend this story about the messy history of daylight savings in D.C. Send tips to [email protected] and follow us @Morning_Ag.

TRUMP BUDGET SETS UP FARM BILL FEUD: Top Democrats on the House and Senate Ag committees on Monday were quick to bash Trump’s new budget request as a betrayal of the 2018 farm bill he signed in December, H.R. 2 (115). The ambitious fiscal blueprint proposed shrinking USDA’s budget by 15 percent compared with spending estimates for fiscal 2019, including steep cuts to major farm bill programs the Agriculture panels spent months negotiating.

Like virtually all presidential budgets, most of Trump’s plan is going nowhere. But key Democrats and some industry groups are still taking it like a jab in the eye — setting up a renewed clash between Congress and the White House in the months ahead of the Sept. 30 funding deadline, your host writes.

“This budget was concocted by a bunch of ideologues who can’t see what’s clearly going on in the farm economy,” House Agriculture Chairman Collin Peterson said in a statement. Senate Agriculture ranking member Debbie Stabenow was similarly critical, noting the “economic instability and trade uncertainty” facing farmers and ranchers.

Farm bill fissures: Trump’s budget targets conservation programs for $8.9 billion in spending cuts over a decade, including elimination of the Conservation Stewardship Program, Pro Ag’s Liz Crampton reports.

— Crop insurance and commodity subsidies would face $28 billion in proposed cuts, per our Catherine Boudreau. A coalition of trade groups representing the crop insurance sector called it “short-sighted” in a statement, arguing the policies would become unaffordable for farmers.

SNAP back in the spotlight: The budget would trim nearly $220 billion from the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program over 10 years, driven by stricter work requirements and a revival of last year’s widely panned “Harvest Box” idea to replace some SNAP benefits with monthly deliveries of nonperishable foods.

— Fanning the flames: Trump and Agriculture Secretary Sonny Perdue were already butting heads with Congress over USDA’s proposed rule to clamp down on states issuing SNAP work waivers for able-bodied adults without dependents. The budget plan offers fresh ammo.

— Unexpected boost for AFRI: One area Trump wants to boost is a competitive research grant program known as the Agriculture and Food Research Initiative. The White House requested $500 million, a bump of $85 million. (The farm bill authorized up to $700 million annually for the initiative, but appropriators haven’t allocated the full amount.)

From the GOP side: House Agriculture ranking member Mike Conaway praised Trump’s budget for boosting military and border spending, but even the Texas Republican appeared skeptical of the USDA proposal.

“On agriculture, as the president knows, the farm safety net accounts for less than a quarter of one percent — a rounding error by Washington standards,” Conaway said in a statement. “So when the chips are down we must keep our promise to farmers and ranchers and rural America made under the five-year farm bill, and I fully expect the president to be onboard.”

Perdue defended the cuts as necessary, given the $22 trillion national debt.

Bottom line: The White House blueprint won’t become law, but it will shape the budgetary battle among ag policymakers (and potentially factor into the debate over farm bill implementation) in the months ahead.

RURAL HOUSING IN TRUMP’S CROSSHAIRS: Among the programs that would be gutted under the spending plan are initiatives aimed at helping rural America, the heart of Trump’s political base, Liz writes this morning.

USDA’s Rural Development branch is targeted for a 12 percent cut, and the bulk of rural housing and economic development programs would be scrapped altogether. That includes funding for home repairs or direct home ownership loans for low-income families; initiatives to help farm workers find housing; and programs to preserve affordable housing in rural areas and help low-income residents pay rent.

On the other hand: Some spending recommendations were well received, including on USDA’s broadband pilot program and continued efforts to battle the opioid crisis.

“The administration’s budget proposal is a mixed bag for rural America,” the National Rural Electric Cooperative Association said in a statement.

Read up: Our Pro Budget team breaks down the winners and losers under Trump’s plan, and how the proposal sets up another shutdown battle this fall.

LIGHTHIZER TO BRIEF SENATE FINANCE, HOUSE DEMS: U.S. Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer will appear before the Senate Finance Committee at 10:15 a.m. for a hearing on the World Trade Organization — though lawmakers are likely to pepper him with questions about the administration’s broader agenda, especially the new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement and ongoing U.S.-China talks. Lighthizer is also set to meet with members of the New Democrat Coalition, a generally pro-trade group of House Democrats.

Coming up next: Pelosi invited Trump’s trade chief to directly address the full House Democratic caucus on Wednesday, as the administration continues preparing to send USMCA to Congress for ratification.

— Wednesday’s meeting will be the first in a series of briefings with trade experts, labor leaders, environmental advocates, businesses and other stakeholders, Pro Trade’s Adam Behsudi reports.

With a busy year of trade talks already underway, Trump is seeking extra funding for his trade agenda in fiscal 2020. The coming months could see a flurry of action on multiple fronts, from Europe and the U.K. to Japan and beyond, report Adam and Sabrina Rodriguez.

Take a look: Trump on March 1 called for China to drop its retaliatory tariffs on U.S. farm goods, citing recent progress in the negotiations. The duties have caused ag exports to China to plummet, as Pro DataPoint’s Taylor Miller Thomas breaks down with this nifty graphic. Check it out below, or view the full graphic here.

POLITICO Pro DataPoint

Want to add DataPoint to your Pro account? Learn more.

— The EPA has dropped its bid to delay implementation of the Obama administration’s Waters of the U.S. rule. The move temporarily leaves a patchwork of Clean Water Act regulations across the country, Pro Energy’s Annie Snider writes. Trump on Monday proposed bulldozing the agency’s budget by nearly a third, per Annie and Alex Guillén.

— USDA and the beef industry are collaborating on a full life-cycle analysis of U.S. cattle production to help inform strategies for reducing its environmental footprint. The first part of the study found that the sector accounted for 3.3 percent of all U.S. emissions. The second set of data, expected to be made public within six months, will determine the environmental impact of the rest of the beef supply chain, such as processing, consumption and waste. More from Catherine here.

— EPA Administrator Andrew Wheeler said he’s aiming this week to sign a proposed rule allowing year-round E15 sales. “It’s in the final stages of OMB review, but we should have it out this week,” Wheeler said in Houston, our Pro Energy pals report.

— It’s “absurd” to suggest Trump isn’t a reliable partner in trade negotiations with China, White House Press Secretary Sarah Huckabee Sanders said Monday. Beijing is looking to wrap up a trade agreement before Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping meet at Mar-a-Lago, to avoid the potential spectacle of Trump walking away from a deal. Pro Trade’s Megan Cassella explains.

— USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service is seeking public comment on its conservation practice standards as it works to implement the farm bill. The comment period ends April 25.

— India has lowered royalties paid by local seed companies to Bayer AG’s Monsanto unit, the third such reduction in four years, Reuters reports.

THAT’S ALL FOR MA! Drop us a line: [email protected] and @ryanmccrimmon; [email protected] and @ceboudreau; [email protected] and @hbottemiller; [email protected] and @liz_crampton; [email protected] and @jmlauinger; and [email protected] and @pjoshiny.

You can also follow @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Ag on Twitter.

Follow us on Twitter Pradnya Joshi @pjoshidc



Greg Mott @gwmott



Helena Bottemiller Evich @hbottemiller



Ximena Bustillo @Ximena_Bustillo



Meredith Lee @meredithllee
