Chef carves out IAF hero Abhinandan’s face on watermelon at Delhi culinary event

Chef Jitender, who was taking part in the Fruit and Vegetable carving category, even secured a medal for his attempt.

Over the past few days, Indian Air Force (IAF) hero Abhinandan Varthaman's valour has been celebrated through many gestures after he was released by Pakistan.

While some wrote poems and songs for the braveheart IAF pilot on social media, others sported his iconic gunslinger moustache. Now, a chef has carved out the IAF Wing Commander's face on a watermelon on day 1 of 14th Culinary Art of India (CAI) in Delhi's Pragati Maidan.

Chef Jitender, who was taking part in the Fruit and Vegetable carving category, even secured a medal for his attempt.

He successfully carved the face of Abhinandan Varthaman and juxtaposed it brilliantly with the message "Jai Hind" on a watermelon. It was one of the highlights of the day according to many who had attended day 1 of the four-day event.

Abhinandan has become so popular after over the past few days that Rajasthan Education Minister Govind Singh Dotasra said state textbooks will have chapters and stories on the courageous act of the IAF pilot as it will inspire future generations.

Varthaman was one of the IAF pilots who chased away Pakistani fighter jets which intruded to attack Indian military instalments. However, Varthaman's Mig-21 Bison jet was shot down by Pakistan after he crossed the Line of Control during the aerial dogfight.

Before his plane was shot down, Abhinandan destroyed one Pakistani F-16 fighter jet.

While in captivity, Abhinandan showed immense courage and refrained from answering most of the questions he was asked by Pakistani Army, showed a video released by the neighbouring country's army.

Abhinandan Varthaman has already undergone a series of medical tests upon his return and it was revealed that he suffered injuries while ejecting from his plane.

Air Chief Marshal Birender Singh Dhanoa said a few days ago that Varthaman will fly a fighter jet again only if he is found to be physically fit.
