Chai jo dushman ko dost banaye: Pak tea stall owner uses image of IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman sipping tea

Photo was first shared by a Twitter user named Omar Farooq | Photo Credit: Twitter

Islamabad: Indian Air Force pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan's heroics have not only made him an icon in India but also in Pakistan where he's being presented as a friend. A photo of a Pakistani tea stall with Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's image on its banner has gone viral. What's interesting is that on the banner, Abhinandan can be seen sipping tea in a bold and confident manner with an Urdu text at the bottom that says, "Aisi chai ki dushman ko bhi dost banaye" which translated, means: Tea so fine that it can make a friend out of a foe.

The photo was first shared by a Twitter user named Omar Farooq with a caption "Somewhere at a Pakistani tea stall."

Wing Commander Abhinandan returned to India after spending at least 60 hours in Pakistan's captivity after his Mig-21 Bison crash-landed across the Line of Control (LoC). Abhinandan was chasing an F-16 of Pakistan after it tried to intrude the Indian airspace in the early hours of February 27. During the chase, Abhinandan shot down the Pakistan Air Force's F-16 but had to himself eject from his plane that had taken a hit.

India Air Force had carried out air strikes in Pakistan across Jaish-e-Mohammed's camps in response to the dastardly Pulwama attacks in which 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives on February 14. IAF's Mirage 2000 crossed the LoC and struck the JeM camps deep inside Pakistani territory, till Balakot.

The failed intrusion attempt by Pakistan's F-16s into the Indian Air Space came a day after the IAF carried out the strikes. Times Now has also learnt that as many as 263 terrorists had assembled at the Balakot facility, that the missiles fired from the IAF jets on 26 February struck. A total of four missiles were dropped at the Balakot JeM camp by Indian Air Force Mirage-2000 fighter jets.

Pakistan has been obstructing access to international media as well as UN bodies to the said site while continuously denying that there was a JeM camp at the Balakot facility. Pakistan has been trying to deny that the missiles found their mark in the terrorists under training there.
