Pilots of doomed Ethiopian jet 'was having flight control problems'

The pilots of the doomed Ethiopian Airlines jet said they were having 'flight control problems' before the crash which killed 157 people, the carrier's CEO has said.

The comments by Tewolde Gebremariam suggest that the plane's equipment may not have been responding to the air crew's commands before it came down.

Flight tracking data showed the plane's vertical speed fluctuating wildly in the moments before the disaster on Sunday morning.

Speaking to CNN, the airline chief also said that the pilots had received extra training since the Lion Air disaster last year, when another Boeing 737 Max crashed in Indonesia.

Ethiopian Airlines CEO Tewolde Gebremariam (pictured on Sunday) said the pilots of the jet which crashed on Sunday had reported 'flight control problems'

Fears over the safety of the Boeing 737 Max 8 aircraft (file photo) have led airlines and governments around the world to close their airspace to the jets

The Ethiopian Airlines pilot had sent out a distress call and was given the all clear to return, according to the Mr Gebremariam.

The crew were aware of the new directive that U.S. officials had issued about the jet after the Lion Air crash, he said.

The 'emergency airworthiness directive' published last November warned that a faulty angle of attack (AoA) sensor could cause problems controlling the plane.

An AOA sensor provides data about the angle at which wind is passing over the wings and tells pilots how much lift a plane is getting.

A faulty sensor could cause 'excessive nose-down attitude, significant altitude loss, and possible impact with terrain', the Federal Aviation Administration had warned.

A report into the Lion Air disaster found the system repeatedly forced the plane's nose down despite it not stalling.

Some 189 people died when the Lion Air flight crashed into the Java Sea shortly after taking off from Jakarta on October 29.

Boeing jets heading for Britain have turned around mid-air after the UK barred 737 Max planes from its airspace following the Ethiopia disaster. This map shows Turkish Airlines flight THY3HN heading from Istanbul to Birmingham, which turned back over Germany

This map shows another Turkish Airlines flight, with the call sign THY4TW, which was heading for London Gatwick but turned back over the Czech Republic

Mr Gebremariam also revealed that the black box data recorder would be examined outside Ethiopia.

Ethiopia did not have the technology to read the data but experts in another country - possibly in Europe - will try to find answers from the black box, it is reported.

Concerns over the plane's safety have led the UK and the rest of the EU to ban the Boeing 737 Max 8 from their airspace today.

The UK's Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) said its ruling was 'a precautionary measure' and would remain in place 'until further notice'.

A pair of Turkish Airlines 737 Max 8 services to London Gatwick and Birmingham returned to Istanbul mid-flight after the ban was imposed.

The European Union Aviation Safety Agency later announced a ban which covers the entire bloc.

India, China and Australia have also suspended the jets' operation but they are still flying in the United States and Canada.
