Wanted, Allies: Congress must display flexibility to anchor a strong opposition challenge to BJP

Officially sounding the poll bugle, Congress’s highest decision-making body, the Congress Working Committee (CWC), met in Gujarat’s Ahmedabad to finalise strategy for the 2019 Lok Sabha campaign. The choice of venue was interesting. CWC was meeting in Gujarat after 58 years and the optical suggestion was of raiding Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s own den. Further, CWC resolved to “defeat the RSS/BJP ideology of fascism, hatred, anger and divisiveness” and affirmed that no sacrifice was too great in this endeavour.

This is a bold statement but the way Congress has been approaching the poll battle is somewhat listless. Its narrative of saving India’s institutions from BJP’s authoritarian ways lacks convincing detail. Its highlighting of issues such as joblessness, agrarian distress and communal strife has been piecemeal. Instead of marketing an alternative positive vision, it appears content with simply criticising the failings of the Modi government. BJP, meanwhile, has hit the ground running. Realising it could face much anti-incumbency in the upcoming polls, it has quickly adjusted its position vis-à-vis allies and completed seat-sharing arrangements in important states like Bihar and Maharashtra by displaying flexibility.

Plus, after the Balakot surgical strike, it’s once again looking to cash in on its nationalist narrative with the PM being projected as the only leader who can keep India safe. In order to overcome the BJP electoral juggernaut Congress really needs to build smart alliances. It has been dragging its feet here, caught between a desire to rebuild the party long-term in crucial states such as UP and putting together winning combinations for the polls around the corner. But, except in states where it is basically in a one on one contest with BJP, Congress has no choice but to yield to potential alliance partners, and even play second fiddle, if it’s to mount a serious challenge come April.

AAP in Delhi wanted an alliance but Congress’s state unit has been resisting. In UP, it has failed to sweeten a way aboard the SP-BSP alliance. On tying up with the Left, it is still struggling to resolve the opposing imperatives of Bengal and Kerala. And in Karnataka, Congress and JD(S) are still undecided over the seat split given old local rivalries. But it’s Congress that has to walk the extra mile to become the fulcrum of the opposition challenge. Sonia Gandhi did it in 2004. Rahul must aim a repeat in 2019.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
