FATAH: 900 million Indian voters will teach us democracy in April

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

FATAH: 900 million Indian voters will teach us democracy in April Photo by PRAKASH SINGH / AFP/Getty Images

Article content As Indians head to the polls next month to elect their 17 th ‘Lok Sabha’ (House of the People), the numbers involved are staggering, beyond the imagination of most people on Earth. So vast is the country, the voting will be conducted in seven phases starting April 11 and ending on May 19 with the votes counted on May 23.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content But for Indians and their diaspora scattered in Canada and around the globe, the elections will be one more chance to embark on the world’s biggest exercise in democracy; a luxury denied to most of the developing world, but one Indians have enjoyed since their country gained independence from Britain in 1947, marking the end of over 800 years of foreign occupation. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or FATAH: 900 million Indian voters will teach us democracy in April Back to video The size of the electorate is 900 million eligible voters. Imagine that. In 2014, the last time Indians voted and elected Prime Minister Narendra Modi, over 830 million people were eligible to vote — and more than 550 million cast their ballots . Indians will cast their votes at one million polling stations where an army of 10 million election officials will manage the polling as it unfolds over several weeks, culminating on May 19 in the vote-rich states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab and West Bengal.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content And if the figure of 900 million voters is difficult to comprehend, try to fathom the fact 464 political parties participated in India’s last general election back in 2014. True, most of these parties are regional, based in one or more of India’s 29 states, but that does not make the task of governing India any easier. To illustrate the complex juggling of election alliances, just in the state of Punjab one left-wing electoral coalition called the Punjab Democratic Alliance is comprised of nine parties contesting under one flag for seven seats. Of course, there are a handful of national parties — including Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the opposition Congress Party led by Rahul Gandhi and the two Communist parties, who have lost much of their lustre after the late-1980s.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content While elections in next door Pakistan are often rigged and ballot boxes stolen or stuffed with manufactured votes, India stands out as a sharp contrast to the thuggery next door. India has eliminated the concept of the paper ballot and the ballot box. Every Indian voter will be using an Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) to cast their vote, making voter fraud impossible and empowering even the illiterate peasant to choose his or her candidate by simply pushing a button. As for the election itself, it is being held under the cloud of war with New Delhi’s hostile neighbour Pakistan. The tensions between the two countries erupted on Feb. 14, when the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammad jihadi terrorist group killed 44 Indian soldiers in a suicide bombing.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or India retaliated with an airstrike deep inside Pakistan territory to destroy what New Delhi described as a terrorist training camp, a claim denied by Islamabad. Since then tensions have remained high and Prime Minister Modi has benefited in popularity because of his action to call Pakistan’s nuclear bluff and raid a terrorist camp. In December, Mr. Modi’s BJP took a beating, losing to the opposition Congress in four state elections and the contest for the Lok Sabha seemed anyone’s game. But if polls and the social media are any measure, Mr. Modi seems on his way to a second term in office to lead India to its rightful place as a dominant voice in world affairs while shedding the inertia caused by nearly a millennium of occupation. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Your Midday Sun From our newsroom to your inbox at noon, the latest headlines, stories, opinion and photos from the Toronto Sun. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Your Midday Sun will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
