After knife attack, activist files attempt to murder case

VADODARA: Activist Gulab Rajput , who was attacked at his shop on the evening of March 10, has registered a case of attempt to murder against the accused identified as Sanjay Savaara. Interestingly, Sanjay too has filed a case of assault against three to four unidentified persons who had thrashed him after he attacked Rajput. The police said that it is investigating the case from all angles and will question Rajput and Sanjay.Rajput in his complaint told the police that Sanjay had visited his handicrafts shop on January 9 and inquired about some products. He had offered to buy some goods but left as he didn’t have enough cash. On the afternoon of March 10, when Rajput wasn’t at the shop in Shamal Becharji ni Pol, Sanjay again came there and inquired about Rajput. Rajput son told Sanjay that his father will come to the shop later.In the evening Sanjay arrived at the shop with two other men who waited outside. Rajput told the police that Sanjay first inquired about the products and then asked him if he doesn’t have any employee in the shop. Within moments, Sanjay asked Rajput to hand over his gold chain, wristwatch and ring. When Rajput resisted, Sanjay took out a knife from his pocket and attacked him.Rajput suffered grievous injuries on his neck and shoulder following which he raised alarm and ran out of the shop. Locals rushed to help Rajput and caught hold of Sanjay who tried to flee. He was thrashed by the locals resulting in injuries on his head. Sanjay has filed complaint against two to three unidentified men who assaulted him. Rajput, who was operated on in a private hospital on Sunday night, is in stable condition.“We have arrested Sanjay. He is a labourer and our investigations have shown that Sanjay had done recce of Rajput’s shop. His intention was to loot Rajput,” said D G Sosa, city police inspector. Sosa said that investigations are on to track down two others who had accompanied Sanjay. On Tuesday, police presented Sanjay before a judicial magistrate’s court seeking his custody for a week. The court remanded him to the police custody till March 15.
