Sense of hatred prevails: Priyanka

Cong leader assails Modi Govt for ‘unkept promises, destroying institutions’

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Tuesday used her first public rally after assuming charge as Congress general secretary to launch a scathing attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi at his home turf over “unkept promises and spread of hatred” in the country.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi too slammed the Modi Government in his concluding speech, but focus of the day was definitely on Priyanka.

“Our institutions are being destroyed. Wherever you see, hatred is being spread,” Priyanka said amid a round of applause from the massive crowd.

“Nothing matters more to us that you and I protect this nation, work for it and move forward together,” the Congress leader said in the presence of her sibling, Rahul, and mother, UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi, at the rally near Adalaj village in Gandhinagar.

Priyanka said the Modi Government did not fulfil its promises of providing jobs to crores of people in the country and advised people to be vigilant, treat their vote as a “weapon” and ask right questions. With this mega rally, the Congress sounded its poll bugle for the April-May Lok Sabha elections.

“I am saddened by what is happening in our country today. I want you all to be more aware. That is the best sign of patriotism. Your vote is your weapon. You are not supposed to harm someone with that weapon. But it will make you stronger,” she said.

In her address, she asked people not to fall prey to “meaningless issues” and asked them to broach the right questions. “You are going to decide your future in this election. Don’t fall prey to meaningless issues. Focus on issues that will make you grow, like how youth will get jobs, how women will feel safe and what should be done for farmers,” she said.

Launching an attack on the Modi regime in the Prime Minister’s home State, Priyanka said it did not “fulfil” its promises of providing jobs to crores of people.

“You need to take decisions wisely. Question those who made tall promises. Ask what happened to the promise of creating two crore jobs. What happened to the promise of depositing Rs 15 lakhs in your bank accounts?” she said.

On the ensuing Lok Sabha polls, Priyanka said people should raise the right issues and take wise decisions.

Rahul accused the Prime Minister of corruption in the deal for 36 Rafale jets with France and said the PM gave Rs 30,000 crore to his “friend” Anil Ambani.

With Lok Sabha polls due in a month now, the Gandhi scion said the party has decided to do something historic in 2019. “If they can give all the money to rich, we can give money to the poor. I want to assure everyone, we will form the Government in 2019 and will implement minimum income guarantee,” Rahul Gandhi said.

He also recalled how Modi announced notes ban without any discussion. “And in one day he broke the spine, the entrepreneurial spirit of Gujarat. He made crores of people jobless, and he did so while laughing. And he said he was doing to wipe out black money. Did you see any one with black money in those lines? It was the common people, mothers and mazdoors,” Rahul Gandhi said in over Modi’s demonetisation announcement

Without naming the fugitive billionaires like Vijay Mallya, Nirav Modi and Mehul Choksi and others, Rahul Gandhi said while Modi can waive Rs 3.5 lakh crore debt of 15 individuals but cannot waive farmers’ loans. “Arun Jaitley (Finance Minister) says it is not our policy. Farmers pay insurance premium and only those 15 people benefit,” he mentioned also taking on Jaitley.

On the choice of Gujarat for the CWC meeting and first public rally of Priyanka, Rahul Gandhi said the party chose Gujarat because India is witnessing a fight between two ideologies and you’ll find both of them here.

“On one side, there is Gandhiji, who gave everything he had to make this country what it is today. Mahatma Gandhi and Gujarat has made this country. And today there other powers trying to weaken the country,” he said. He also raked up the issue of unemployment and said is at a 45-year-high.
