‘Khan’ surname hounded me like a ghost, claims MP bureaucrat

BHOPAL: Niyaz Khan, a bureaucrat from Madhya Pradesh has taken to social media to air his anguish by accusing his senior officer of misbehavior.

It was reported that Khan, posted in the public health engineering department had a heated exchange with the principal secretary Vivek Agrawal and the latter asked him to get out of the official meeting on Wednesday.

The deputy secretary rank official in a series of tweets on Thursday wrote about his frequent transfers and alleged that ‘Khan’ surname hounds him like a ghost and also gave a vent to his frustration.

“There was a time when I was on the verge of depression but literature saved me from fall. I have transformed all discrimination against me into creation and now I am an English novelist with five novels,” he said tweeted.

“17 years in government service, transfer in 10 districts and 19 shiftings. I was always made to feel uncomfortable like a German Jew. Khan surname hounded me like a ghost,” read his another tweet.

17 years in government service, transfer in 10 districts and 19 shiftings, I was always made feel untouchable, like a German Jew. Khan surname hounded me like a ghost. — Niyaz Khan (@saifasa) January 10, 2019

There was a time when I had reached on the verge of depression but literature saved me from fall. I have transformed all discrimination against me into creation and now I am English novelist with five novels. — Niyaz Khan (@saifasa) January 10, 2019

Khan has complained to the state Chief Secretary about his alleged insult and seeks a transfer to other department.

Khan, who is also an anti-corruption crusader shot into limelight after he exposed a scam in Swachha Bharat scheme in Guna district. The MP official also went to the underworld don Abu Salem hometown to pen about the gangster’s life.

In one of his other tweets he said, “In Guna I exposed biggest ODF scam of the country and brutalities against Saharia tribe. Got built 600 muktidhans as a result I was sent to loopline and guilty officers were given a better opportunity to work. What sort of justice is this?” he wrote.

In Guna district I exposed biggest ODF scam of the country and brutalities against Saharia tribes. Got built 600 Muktidhams and results: I was sent in loop line and guilty officers were given better opportunity to work. What sort of justice is this? — Niyaz Khan (@saifasa) January 10, 2019

Khan is a novelist and has penned five novels so far in another tweet claimed to be busy penning his sixth novel to show how the Muslim officers are regarded second class citizens. “It’s based on my own experiences,” he claimed.

https://twitter.com/saifasa/status/1083180299364626432

It’s important to note that Agrawal was counted among the most reliable and trusted bureaucrats of former CM Shivraj Singh Chouhan.
