Doc writes to CP seeking audit of towing firm

Ludhiana: At a time when commuters are in daily battle with the city’s traffic chaos, towing away of vehicles parked outside hospitals, banks etc. is adding to their woes.

Irked by the issue, city-based dentist Dr Amandeep Singh Bains has written to the police commissioner Sukhchain Singh Gill seeking an audit of the towing company’s working.

Bains claimed that vehicles are being towed away in specific areas like around hospitals, banks and ATMs where there is more footfall. “The tow-away vehicles are working as per their convenience. They are moving vehicles from outside hospitals and banks. People coming to hospitals are already in distress and there is not enough authorised parking space in the city especially around such places. The authorities should practice vehicle clamping in such areas instead of towing the vehicles away,” Bains said.

“Moreover, the working of the towing vehicles is restricted to certain areas only while seven areas of old city need attention. Thus, I have asked the police commissioner to audit the work of private firm,” he added.

Bains had written to the police commissioner after his car was once towed away from Pakhowal Road where there was no parking and once outside a doctor's clinic when he was suffering from dengue and was visiting the doctor for treatment.

When asked about the letter, Gill said, “I have received the mail and will surely look into the matter.”

Areas that need focus

Areas around schools, Gokul Road near railway station, Kesar Gunj Mandi, Shubhani builidng road, Field Gunj, Gill Road, Model Town market, Dugri Road, Kochar Market road, Dandi Swami road.

What the rule was earlier

Keeping in view Ludhiana’s traffic scenario, in 2017, then police commissioner Kunwar Vijay Pratap Singh had announced that no vehicle would be towed by the traffic police without warning, especially around hospitals. However, the project was aborted after his transfer.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
