Maharashtra: Sex racket busted in a high-profile colony of Ahmednagar, four arrested

All the four women caught are non-Maharashtrians and the main accused was a resident in the same colony.

Mumbai: Keeping up with their crackdown on flesh trade in the city, Ahmednagar Police busted a high profile sex racket in high-level colony of Savedi. Police raided and exposed a sex racket that was running in the bungalow. Four women and two men have been arrested by the police in this case.

As per the initial information, police had received a tip-off that a sex racket was being run in a bungalow at Savedi suburbs in Mahavirnagar. The accused had rented the property and was using it as a front for flesh trade. The colony is a posh one and many doctors and businessmen reside here and also, there are some hospitals on the stretch.

This sex racket was being run in Ratnaprabha bungalow in the area. On Thursday evening, a police team raided this bungalow and arrested two men and four women.

Also Read : High-profile sex racket running under garb of a beauty parlor busted, woman broker arrested

All the four women caught are non-Maharashtrians and the main accused was a resident in the same colony. An offense has been registered under the relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. The city police have been on a major crackdown on flesh trade activities for many months now.

Sex racket busted in Nagpur

Three days ago, Nagpur Police busted a high profile sex racket in Vishwakarma Nagar. The sex racket was running under the garb of a beauty parlour and spa. Police officials raided the beauty parlour and arrested a woman broker identified as 22-year-old Kajal along with her accomplice, 45-year-old Amol Madame from the spot.

Also Read: Maharashtra: Sex racket busted in Palghar, 'broker' arrested

As per the initial information, 'Glory Parlor and Spa' was operating out of Vishwakarma Nagar area of Nagpur City. It was noticed that from the last few days, the number of visiting youths to this establishment increased and along with that, some minor girls were seen entering this parlour. Suspicious of this, locals informed the Deputy Commissioner.
