Surprise twist in Lakshmana murder

CCB

London-educated woman held in connection with rowdy's murder; police believe she disclosed his movements to the accusedClose on the heels of the arrest of notorious goon Cat Raja for his role in the brutal murder of rowdy Lakshmana, Central Crime Branch () sleuths have arrested another rowdy sheeter in a similar operation by shooting on his legs at Annapurneshwarinagar in the wee hours of Tuesday.CCB have also arrested six more persons, including a woman, for reportedly sharing the information of Lakshmana’s movements to the rival group. The woman is said to be the daughter of a regional political party leader. She allegedly knew one of the accused. She is also alleged to have obtained huge monetary benefits from Lakshmana and with the money she helped the accused financially.On Tuesday morning, CCB sleuths arrested rowdy Hemanth Kumar alias Hemi, 32, of Muddaianapalya. Hemanth is involved in rowdy activities in Ramanagar and Channapatana areas. He is reportedly involved in murder, extortion and other heinous crime cases. The sleuths found out that Hemanth was near the Hanumagiri temple in Annapurneshwarinagar. Around 5.45 am, when the cops went there, he attacked constable Anand with a machete. In defence, the police shot on his right leg. He has been shifted to Victoria Hospital for surgery.Out of the other 11 accused, six accused have been arrested. These are Alok, 24, of Maddur, Devaraj alias Kariya, 24, of Nagarabhavi, Varun Kumar, 24, of Hosahalli in Vijaynagar, Madhu Kumar, 26, of Sunkadakatte and Roopesh, 25, of RR Nagar and Varshini, 22, of Mariyappanapalya. This woman is said to have played a key role in Lakshmana’s murder.“Varshini has done her Masters in Psychology in London and was staying near Lakshmana’s house in Mariyappanapalya. Her mother is a leader of a political party. Roopesh met Varshini when she was going for dance classes and is alleged to be close to her,” said an officer.Varshini’s mother, who came to know about Roopesh, had warned him to distance himself from her daughter. She had also told Lakshmana to warn Roopesh.Lakshmana had warned Roopesh around three times to keep away from Varshini. Frustrated about the warnings, Roopesh hatched a plot to kill Lakshamna. He then contacted his aide Hemanth Kumar and was successful in getting Lakshmana killed within two days of his release, after he was arrested with land mafia kingpin Mirle Vardaraju in December last year.Roopesh, who hails from Maddur, was reportedly involved in a theft at the residence of an MLA in Mandya in May 2018. Police are probing the exact role of Varshini in Lakshmana’s murder. Senior police officers suspect she shared information of Lakshmana’s movements to Roopesh. Police also said there is a chance she had no idea about the murder.“On March 7, Varshini is suspected to have called Lakshmana to a hotel on the Tumakuru Road. The victim, who came to the hotel around 11.30 am left after talking to her for an hour. After he left, she is suspected to have passed the information to Roopesh,” said the officer.
