Ex-chiefs of armed forces defend action

India needs to strike the beehive as Pakistan will never walk its talk, said former Army chief General Bikram Singh at Aaj Tak Suraksha Sabha in New Delhi on Tuesday.

"Pakistan is like a beehive And you cannot just throw a stone to eliminate bees but the best way to destroy the beehive is to get rid of all the honey bees," he said. The former Army chief advocated maintaining pressure on Pakistan and its Army through defence and diplomatic action in the global community.

While speaking on terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir, Singh said: "There should be no doubt that terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir will continue as you have to understand that Pakistan, which is sponsoring the terrorism, is also shielding and protecting terror organisations like Jaish-e-Mohammed. Remember despite the reward announced by the United Nations and declaring Hafiz Saeed a global terrorist, Pakistan is protecting him."

Singh said terrorists are empowered in Pakistan as the people support them to some scale owing to the NGOs and schools being run by these organisations.

"These terror organisations pay Rs 3000 per month to the local boys to pick up gun against India and terrorism is now a business in Pakistan," he added.

The former Army chief warned that terror organisations will not attack the security forces for the next few days but their target will be civilian institutions such as factories and car parkings. "And as long as we don't destroy their bases, their attacks on us will continue," he said.

Singh said: "India is not a country which believes in warmongering but we have to be prepared for everything and along with military action, the political and diplomatic strategy must continue against the enemy. Any nation does not invite war but always think of the consequences at third and fourth level post war. India being a democratic country does calculate the consequences post-war."

Former Chief of Air Staff Air Marshal AY Tipnis, who was also present in the session, said if the IAF had Rafale, it would have destroyed half of Pakistan's fighter jets. "The aim of the 24 Pakistan jets was to attack Srinagar, Awantipora base. If India had Rafale at that time, IAF would have destroyed at least 12 of them. Rafale will boost the morale of the IAF," Tipnis said.

Calling for a grand strategy to tackle terrorism, Tipnis said, "India should not remain silent. This strategy should not change with the change in government. It should move in a uniform direction."
