Fire breaks out at Brijbasi's Greater Noida plant

A massive fire broke out at the factory unit of Brijbasi Art Press, located in Ecotech 3, Udyog Vihar, Greater Noida, around 5 am on 11 March. It took the fire department nearly 14 hours to control the flames. However, no injuries have been reported owing to the fact that workers were not present on the press premises in the early hours.

As of 13 March, 5 to 10% of the fire is yet to be doused.

Though the total extent of loss in the fire is yet to be determined, according to Apurv Garg of Brijbasi Art Press, to rebuild the plant, along with the machinery and stock, it will require at least Rs 200-crore.

“The fire took place in the early hours of Monday as the result of a short circuit,” Apurv Garg of Brijbasi Art Press said. “Since the factory was closed on Sunday, no human life was harmed in the incident.”

According to the police, a security guard on duty at the factory first heard loud blasts, before the fire erupted. He then informed the police who immediately alerted the fire department.

“We were informed about the fire around 5.25 am by the police patrolling van. Fire tenders were rushed to the spot immediately. The fire destroyed around 90% of the factory, including all the machinery. It took us around 14 hours to control the fire,” said Shesh Nath Yadav, fire safety officer, Ecotech 3 fire station.

He said 18 fire tenders were rushed to the spot and some of them were called in from neighbouring Ghaziabad district.

According to fire officials, huge stocks of paper in the premises caused the fire to spread through the whole building and this made it difficult to control the fire.

Brijbasi Art Press has two print production units in Noida and Greater Noida. The company specialises in poster printing and has a dedicated design studio. The company is also into books and other commercial jobs.

The Greater Noida facility, where the fire broke out, housed three Heidelberg presses, and production was in full swing.

“The factory occupies four acres of land. At the factory, we publish children books meant for export,” Garg said.
