Assault in guest house to joint press meet in Hotel Taj: The love-hate-love relationship of SP and BSP

It's not the newsy disclosures about coming together to take on the BJP that make the SP-BSP alliance interesting, but the catty details of a bitter past shared by the two parties.

As the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) and the Samajwadi Party (SP) inch closer towards a grand alliance in Uttar Pradesh ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha election -- they are expected to announce their alliance tomorrow -- it's difficult to forget what made the two parties sworn enemies.

Back in 1993, the two parties had contested the 1993 UP assembly elections in an alliance -- the BSP had contested 164 seats and won 67 while the SP had contested 256 seats and bagged 109 in the then House of 425. This was before Uttarakhand was carved out of Uttar Pradesh. The state assembly now has 403 seats.

The government was formed with Mulayam Singh Yadav as the chief minister. However, the SP-BSP alliance lasted only for two years. As the relationship soured, the BSP withdrew support, resulting in the fall of the Mulayam Singh government in 1995.

The break-up is particularly remembered for the infamous guest house incident. It all happened as an unruly mob of SP workers barged into a guest house in Lucknow on June 2, 1995, where Mayawati was holding a meeting.

According to various news reports from the time, not only was her room vandalised, but the SP leaders attempted to assault her at the VVIP guest house and hurled casteist slurs and sexual abuses at her. Even the BSP MLAs present in the room failed to protect her. It was a BJP MLA -- BD Dwivedi -- who eventually entered the room and escorted Mayawati to safety.

After the bitter episode, Mayawati went on to form the government with the BJP’s help.

Since then the BSP supremo remained adamant in not mending ties with the SP. It is said that even when BSP founder and her mentor Kanshi Ram was alive, attempts to cobble up an alliance couldn't fructify as Mayawati would not relent.

But twenty-three years later, the SP-BSP came together to defeat the BJP in Gorakhpur and Phulpur bypolls in March last year. Eyeing a repeat performance of the bypoll victories, SP chief Akhilesh Yadav and BSP supremo Mayawati have now announced to come together for the Lok Sabha poll in Uttar Pradesh.

Even though the BJP is exuding confidence that the SP-BSP alliance will not have any adverse impact on the saffron party's prospects in the upcoming elections in the state, poll pundits believe the two parties make a formidable alliance. With the consolidation of Dalit and backward votes, there is a chance it could checkmate the BJP, which won 71 of the 80 seats in the last Lok Sabha elections. While BJP ally Apna Dal won two seats, the BSP failed to win a single seat. The SP won five, the Congress two.

In the 2017 assembly elections, which the SP fought along with the Congress, the two parties together won just 54 seats (out of which the SP won 47). The BSP won only 19 seats, down from 80 in 2012. The BJP despite sweeping the polls -- the party and its allies won 325 seats in a 403-member House -- suffered a serious setback in last year's bypolls.

Aiming to repeat their bypoll performance, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav and Bahujan Samaj Party chief Mayawati have forged an alliance for the 2019 Lok Sabha poll in Uttar Pradesh. They, however, have left the Congress out of it.

The two leaders are set to address a joint press conference on Saturday, to be held at Lucknow’s Hotel Taj at 12 pm.

Now that the two parties seem to have put the past behind, some are still wondering if Mayawati -- known for her vacillating choices -- would let go of the not-so-fond memories of the past so easily.

Well, as they say there no permanent enemies in politics. So is true about permanent friends.
