11 Good Things That Happened This Month So Far

We're halfway through March and we've already had a lot of good news! From Sanjana Singh becoming the first transgender to get a government job in MP, to a Mumbai artist bringing colours to the lives of people living in slums, there are a lot of good things to be happy about.

On International Women's Day on March 8 too, there were numerous inspiring, positive and noteworthy stories . So here are some of the best things that happened this month, so far:

1. Sanjana Singh became the first transgender to get a government job in Madhya Pradesh. Read More

ANI

Sanjana Singh, a transgender woman, has been appointed the Personal Secretary (PS) to Krishna Gopal Tiwari, Director, Department of Social Justice and Disabled Welfare (DSJDW), Madhya Pradesh government.

2. Dipa Karmakar - India's first female gymnast to win a Commonwealth medal - got her own Barbie. Read More

Twitter

Indian gymnast Dipa Karmakar became the first Indian female gymnast to win a medal at the Commonwealth Games. At the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow, Karmakar did India proud by winning a bronze medal. So, this year on Barbie's 60th anniversary, Mattel in an effort to honour female role models in their respective fields, launched a Dipa Karmakar-inspired Barbie.

3. Bihar bride called off her wedding after the groom arrived drunk and misbehaved at the mandap. Read More

Representational Image- Reuters

A brave bride in Bihar called off her wedding as the groom allegedly turned up drunk to the wedding. Rinki Kumari told her family to ask the groom to leave as he was so unaware of their surrounding that he didn’t even know why he was there.

4. 9-YO girl bought 30 CCTV cameras using her savings worth Rs 1.5 lakh and donated it to the Chennai police. Read More

Facebook

9-year-old S Srihita, who is a student of class 3, got to know that CCTV cameras were very important and ‘third eye’ of the police. So, she and her father bought 30 CCTV cameras with the money which her father had kept for her birthday celebrations, and donated it to the police.

5. Wife of soldier martyred in Jammu And Kashmir joined the Indian Army as an officer. Read More

THE DARJEELING CHRONICLE

Sangeeta Mall, the wife of a rifleman who was killed in action in Jammu and Kashmir while battling terrorists was recently commissioned into the Indian Army after passing from OTA (Officer’s Training Academy) in Chennai on March 9.

6. A Mumbai artist brought colours to Pune slums with the aim to change mindsets. Read More

Slums in Pune being coloured under 'Misaal Mumbai', an initiative of Rouble Nagi- a Mumbai-based artist & founder of NGO Rouble Nagi Art Foundation; Nagi says,"I want to connect to these people through arts. Main aim is not to colour the walls but bring a change in their mindset" pic.twitter.com/snFRH6lFeD — ANI (@ANI) March 7, 2019

A Mumbai-based artist started a unique initiative to help people living in the slum areas of Pune. Under the 'Misaal Mumbai' initiative, the artist came up with the idea to paint huts in slums in different colours.

7. Agra Railway Division celebrated Women's Day by operating an all-woman crew train to Delhi. Read More

Representational Image- Twitter

The Agra railway division celebrated International Women's Day in a unique way. On March 8, they handed over train operations to an all-woman crew for a day as a token of respect.

8. This video of a lost leopard cub reuniting with its mom in Nagpur moved everyone to happy tears. Read More

In a heartwarming incident, a lost leopard cub and his mother reunited after it was separated from its mother. In a Nagpur village, the villagers spotted a tiny cub who was no larger than a kitten and estimated to be no more than two months old. They informed the forest officials of the same and the cub was reunited with its mom.

9. This dad turned his 4-YO dying son into a superhero and wrote a series of 10 books about him. Read More

Facebook

After his 4-year-old son was diagnosed with Krabbe disease, Darren Garwood turned him into a superhero in a series of books that are now available in book stores and also online. Jackson’s parents, Darren Garwood and Rebecca Garwood were devastated after their boy was diagnosed with the disease.

10. Vistara became the first Indian airline to provide free sanitary napkins on-board. Read More

This #InternationalWomensDay, Vistara is proud to be India’s first airline to provide sanitary pads aboard all domestic flights, starting 8th Mar ’19. These pads are organic & bio-degradable. #PadsOnBoard #VistaraForWomen #VistaraWomanFlyer #WomensDay #NotJustAnotherAirline pic.twitter.com/A1jmmoYYky — Vistara (@airvistara) March 6, 2019

Vistara announced a #PadsOnBoard initiative under which they will provide free sanitary napkins to women passengers on request and started this initiative on International Women’s Day on March 8.

11 . Brave ITBP soldiers exercised in the snow without any warm clothing. Read More

The Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) is called Himveer for a reason. A video on ITBP's official Twitter account shows the jawans exercising in the snow, that too without any warm clothing whatsoever. The jawans are seen exercising sans their shirts as snow continued to fall. While the rest of the country complained about the cold, these brave men are training themselves for the worst.
