Secret Rafale Papers Available To Enemy, Security Risk: Centre To Court

Home >> Noida Secret Rafale Papers Available To Enemy, Security Risk: Centre To Court

Photograph of Rafael`s sensitive documents were copied without the consent of the government Venugopal had said that three documents have been filed in the petition of Yashwant Sinha, Arun Shourie and Prashant Bhushan Those who have photocopied the documents have "offended India`s agreement with foreign country

New Delhi: The Defense Ministry has filed an affidavit in the Supreme Court about the famous Rafael Paper leak and said that there has been an agreement with the country`s sovereignty. Actually, the remarks of Attorney General K.K. Venugopal in the top court had brought the political agitation that documents of the deal of the Rafael Fighter aircraft were stolen. Although the Attorney General subsequently claimed that the Rafael document was not stolen from the Ministry of Defense and his talk in the Supreme Court meant that the petitioners used the photo copy of the original papers in the application which are confidential. In this case, the Ministry of Defense has kept its side.

In the affidavit filed in the Rafael Paper Leak case on Wednesday, the Ministry of Defense said that the agreement with the country`s sovereignty has happened. Photograph of Rafael`s sensitive documents were copied without the consent of the government, which was taken out of stealing from the office. It was further said, `Sovereignty and foreign relations have been adversely affected. Internal investigation of the case has been started. In the affidavit, the Defense Ministry said that in the Rafael review case, the documents put forward by the petitioners are sensitive to national security, which are related to the combat capability of the combat aircraft. Significantly, the opposition parties were attacked by the government on the leak of Rafael`s documents.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi, while targeting the government on the theft of sensitive papers, demanded an investigation. However, Venugopal, while trying to handle the situation, said, "I was told that the opposition has alleged that (in the Supreme Court) argued that the files were stolen from the Ministry of Defense. This is completely wrong. Venugopal had said that three documents have been filed in the petition of Yashwant Sinha, Arun Shourie and Prashant Bhushan seeking reconsideration on the order of the top court to quash the request for investigation of the Raphael deal, which is a photo copy of the real documents. Official sources had said that the use of the term `theft` by the attorney general was probably `very strict` and could be avoided.
