Prominent Dalit leader Paswan faces pressure to contest polls

Patna: Prominent Dalit leader and federal minister Ram Vilas Paswan has been facing immense pressure from the top tier of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leadership to change his decision not to contest the forthcoming Lok Sabha polls amid fears his replacement may not be able to retain his seat.

Septuagenarian Paswan, who also happens to be the president of the Lok Janshakti Party (LJP), had announced his withdrawal from the campaign trail in view of his continuing health complications, saying he would rather be nominated to the Rajya Sabha, or Upper House of the Parliament.

When the Lok Sabha seats were being distributed among the three National Democratic Alliance (NDA) partners in December last year, BJP chief Amit Shah even announced he would send Paswan to the Rajya Sabha, fulfilling his wish.

However, the BJP leadership has been exerting pressure on Paswan to reconsider his decision and join the poll arena again to prevent the seat from going into the hands of the opposition.

This comes after a recent survey conducted by the BJP revealed widespread fears of Paswan’s replacement perhaps not being able to retain this crucial north Bihar seat, informed sources said.

Time to move on?

Reports said Paswan wanted to field his younger brother, Pashupati Kumar Paras, a minister in the Bihar government, from his most trusted seat, which he had been contesting for the past five decades.

Paswan gave his assent for his brother after his wife refused to join the poll fray but the new development has left him in a dilemma again as he has not been keeping good health.

“He [Paswan] is being told to just file his nomination from this seat and visit his constituency barely two-three times. The rest will be done by the NDA leaders,” a top LJP leader confided.

Paswan has been contesting the Hajipur Lok Sabha seat since 1977 and, except for a few rare defeats, emerged victorious each time.

He has held the seat eight times — including four times in a row from 1996 to 2004.

He became an international hero right on his Lok Sabha poll debut in 1977 when he won the elections with a record margin of 424,000, sending him straight into the Guinness World Records.

Between 1977 and 2014 when the last general elections were held, he lost his elections only thrice — in 1984 when he was defeated by Congress candidate Ram Ratan Ram amid the massive sympathy wave in the aftermath of assassination of former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, as well as in 1991 and 2009.

He faced the last two defeats at the hands of Ram Sundar Das, a socialist leader who died in 2015.

However, the present scenario looks really challenging for the NDA.

With the major opposition parties uniting against Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s party, and the anti-incumbency factor gripping the ruling coalition, the NDA faces a tough battle to retain most of its Lok Sabha seats in Bihar this time.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the NDA won 31 out of Bihar’s total 40 Lok Sabha seats.
