‘Is calling JeM chief Masood Azhar ji patriotism for you?’ BJP stumps Rahul Gandhi with five questions

Congress president Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Amid the ongoing intense election campaign wherein charges are being levelled at each other by politicians belonging to all political parties, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on Wednesday posed five questions to Rahul Gandhi, president of the main opposition Indian National Congress (INC).

The questions came on a day when Rahul attacked the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and said the latter feels “he can capture any Indian institution and control any state by blackmail and pressurising states from Delhi”.

The five questions posed by the BJP are:

1. Does referring to a terrorist as ‘ji’ come under the criteria of patriotism?

It may be recalled that speaking at an event, Rahul Gandhi had referred to Jaish-e-Mohammed chief as “Masood Azhar ji”.

"In Pulwama, there was a bomb explosion. 40-45 of our CRPF personnel were martyred. Who carried out the bomb attack? Jaish-e-Mohammed. You might remember Masood Azhar. During the previous government of the 56-inch people, today's NSA Ajit Doval went in an aircraft with Masood Azhar ji and handed him over," Rahul said at a party event, according to news agency ANI.

It may be noted that Rahul has been hitting out at the BJP for releasing Masood Azhar in a swap for passengers during the Indian Airlines IC-814 hijack of 1999.

2. Does asking for proof of surgical strikes from the security forces also qualify as patriotism?

In the wake of the air strikes conducted at a JeM terror camp in Pakistan’s Balakot last month, Rahul Gandhi has lauded the security forces but has questioned the claim that more than 250 terrorists were killed in the operation. He has been demanding proof from the government.

3. Is asking for proof of air strikes patriotism for Congress?

The BJP went on to ask if the Congress as a party was also demanding proof for the air strikes.

4. Not giving permission to forces to strike back at Pakistan after 26/11 attacks, does this also qualify as patriotism?

In the wake of the Indian air strikes in Pakistan, it emerged that the Indian Air Force was ready to strike at Lashkar-e-Taiba terror camps across the LoC but were prevented by the then Congress-led UPA government from doing so.

5. Is supporting tukde tukde gang patriotic?

The BJP also sought to corner the Congress and Rahul Gandhi over the party’s support to activists and persons allegedly involved in anti-national activities.
