Priyanka meets Bhim Army chief, attacks BJP

Meerut, March 13 : Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Wednesday met Bhim Army chief Chandrasekhar Azad and attacked the BJP, saying the government has become "arrogant" and it is trying to suppress the voice of the people.

Priyanka arrived at Anand Hospital here where Azad is undergoing treatment, along with western Uttar Pradesh in-charge Jyotiraditya Scindia and Uttar Pradesh party chief Raj Babbar.

Speaking to reporters after meeting Azad, she told the media: "Yeh ahankaari sarkaar hai (this is an arrogant government). The government wants to suppress the voice of the youth."

She alleged that the government does not want to listen to the voice of the youth. "They have not given employment to the youth. So if they are raising their voice, let them do that... Why suppress their voice?" she said.

Asked if Azad would be inducted into the Congress, she said: "We loved the way he was raising the issue of employment and fighting for a cause."

Pressed further, she said: "Please do not give any political connotation to the conversation."

Azad, after the Congress leader left, said he will not seek support from the Congress or any other party and that he only wants the "rule of Bahujan Samaj".

"I won't to seek support from any party. I was born in 'Bahujan Samaj' and I want the rule of 'Bahujan Samaj'. And I will defeat the dictator ruling the country by contesting against him from Varanasi, if he contests from there," he told the news channel NDTV.

Asked again if he would seek support from the BSP and the SP, he said he will not seek anyone's support but if they want to defeat Narendra Modi, then they should support him.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is the sitting MP from Varanasi constituency.

Azad was arrested by Uttar Pradesh Police on Tuesday for allegedly violating the model code of conduct by using more than stipulated number of motorcycles at a political rally. However, Azad fell ill soon after being detained, following which he was admitted to the hospital.
