How is this going to work?

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

She speaks. The crowd remains transfixed. He gets up to speak. The crowd melts away.

Priyanka Gandhi speaks at the Congress Working Committee meeting. Most of its members are hoping that she, not Rahul, lead them into battle. But keep your hopes pinned to your chest. If you say anything, Big Ma is watching with a big stick.

All of us saw the surging, swelling crowds in Varanasi. Had they come to see Priyanka or Rahul? Or the completely overshadowed Jyotiraditya Scindia? Or the pale self of his former self, Raj Babbar? Your guess is as good as mine.

On the opposing side, there is no such confusion. Narendra Modi and Narendra Modi alone is leading his troops into battle. But the PM too seems a pale self of his former self. He triumphed in Balakot, but that remains the only thing for him to talk about now.

As a friend said, people are tiring of his lectures. The same headgear, the same hands gesticulating in the air, the same seemingly empty promises, the same few accomplishments to crow about. Now that the Election Commission has taken Wing Commander Abhinandan out of the picture, even Balakot has lost its sheen.

People have short memories. And spats with Pakistan, there have been, and will continue to be.

On the other hand, Rahul keeps ranting and raving away about Rafale. Once again people are not interested in this obtuse deal. Sometimes Rahul talks about jobs, sometimes demonetization, sometimes GST. Perhaps it is not what he talks about, it is he himself who talks about what he talks about.

Rahul has become a good public speaker. But people are simply not interested in him. It is as if he wears a crowd repellent. He has come a long way, but there is still a long way to go.

And the elections are less than a month away.

Priyanka was supposed to have been confined as the lioness in the cage of eastern UP to make sure Narendra Modi remained tethered there to protect his constituency of Varanasi. Instead, a chorus has gone out within the Congress: Bring her here, bring her there, bring her to Gujarat, bring her to Karnataka. At every place, she overshadows her brother. How then can he be expected to lead his troops into battle?

Add Robert Vadra to the mix. After doing nothing against him for five years, Mr Modi has launched full-throated investigations against him the moment Priyanka jumped into the fray. But Robert’s seeming shenanigans do not affect Priyanka. It is as if she has a Teflon coating. Robert has said only one right thing since Priyanka entered politics: People, please keep her safe.

Other than that he’s making a complete fool of himself by promising to enter “active” politics. What was in until now, in “dormant” politics, just by being a member of the Gandhi family. And he, one of the most reviled men in India, is posing as if there is a clamour for him to join active politics.

Why can’t Priyanka ask Robert to just keep quiet? Why can’t Rahul? Why can’t Sonia? If the Gandhi trio cannot keep their own house in order, how can they be expected to lead the nation?

So you have a commander-in-chief (Rahul) who still reports to Big Ma. You have a sister who everybody wants to be led by into battle. For the troops know that they cannot afford another bruising 2014 in 2019. And then you have a tainted husband, son-in-law, brother-in-law (whichever way you want to cut it) who’s running riot and providing free ammo to the opposition.

How is all this going to work?

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
