Uttar Pradesh police failed to provide protection to Muzaffarnagar riots witness shot dead by armed men

Ashbab was an eyewitness to the murder of his two brothers during the 2013 riots (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Close to six years have passed since communal riots in Muzaffarnagar district of Uttar Pradesh claimed the lives of 60 innocent civillians. However, the law and order apparatus in the state of appears to be weakening despite assurances by Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and his cabinet of ministers.

A prime example of the lack of fear of law in Uttar Pradesh came to light today when a milkman, who was a prime witness to the brutal murder of his two brothers during the Muzaffarnagar riots, was shot dead by armed assailants in broad daylight. The victim, Ashbab who worked as a milk vendor was murdered in his native village of Khatoli.

Why did the State fail to protect the key eyewitness in the #Muzaffarnagar riots case? @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/mF4L3TiF0r — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) March 13, 2019

What is even more shocking is that Ashbab was considered by the prosecution as a key witness to the devastation caused during the riots in August and September of 2013. Senior Superintendent of police (SSP) of Muzaffarnagar, Sudhir Kumar Singh told Mirror Now that two bike-borne assailants pumped five bullets into Ashbab's chest as he was returning home from work which led to his instant demise. Ashbab was supposed to appear before a bench hearing cases pertaining to the Muzaffarnagar riots two weeks from now.

#MuzaffarnagarWitnessDeath | If the police know that this is a sensitive trial, they need to provide protection to the witnesses: Aniket Nikam, Criminal Lawyer to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/vRxaiun2ps — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) March 13, 2019

Ashbab had accused six people by name for the murder of his two brothers, aged 18 and 23. The accused were arrested based on his complaint but later let off on bail. It has also been reported that Ashbab had approached police as recently as last month claiming that he was getting death threats by the accused who he said were trying to pressurise him to reach a 'compromise'. Despite his requests and complaints, it is evident that the Uttar Pradesh police failed to provide protection to a key witness such as Ashbab which led to his brutal murder, barely metres away from the nearest police station.

#MuzaffarnagarWitnessDeath | 'The Court decides who is the culprit, not the Chief Minister. Why did Yogi Adityanath recommend that 38 cases against the 100 people charged in #MuzaffarnagarRiots will be withdrawn?'



@fayedsouza to at BJP's @aalok_aawasthii pic.twitter.com/qeDd0mT9dg — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) March 13, 2019

Must Read: Pollachi sexual assault case: Matter transferred to CB-CID; Goondas Act slapped on accused
