KCF militant, accomplice of the late Bhindranwale, arrested

Was planning to reconstitute group in the country; was in touch with terrorists lodged in jails

A member of the banned terrorist group and an accomplice of Jarnail Singh Bhindranwale, who was killed by the Army in ‘Operation Blue Star’ in 1984, was nabbed by the Delhi police, officials said on Wednesday.

The accused — Gursewak Singh (53) — is a member of Khalistan Commando Force (KCF) and was planning to reconstitute his organisation on the directions of KCF chief Paramjeet Singh Panjwad based in Pakistan, the police said.

Singh was also in touch with Jagtar Singh Hawara and other terrorists lodged in various jails in the country, including Tihar jail, the police said adding Singh was arrested by the Crime Branch from ISBT Delhi on Tuesday where he had come to meet one of his accomplices.

Singh was previously involved in more than 50 cases of terrorist activities, murders of police officers and informers, robberies in banks and police station among others, said Additional Commissioner of Police (Crime) Ajit Kumar Singla. He remained in jail for more than 26 years in different cases and was in regular touch with some Pakistan-based terrorists.

The police said Singh was born in a farmer’s family residing in Raikot village in Punjab’s Ludhiana district. His elder brother Swaran Singh was a member of a terrorist group led by Bhindranwale in Punjab in 1980s. Singh also joined the group in 1982, the police officer said.

In 1984, when Bhindranwale was killed, most of his accomplices fled to Pakistan where they were trained and supported by the ISI. During that time, Singh joined the newly formed KCF constituted by terrorist Manveer Singh Chehdu and actively participated in anti-national activities.

Singh, along with his accomplices, remained involved in a dozen cases of murders of suspected informers of security agencies and bank robberies in Punjab, Delhi and Rajasthan.

In May 1984, the accused along with his accomplices, Labh Singh, Gurinder Singh and Swaranjit Singh had also killed group editor of Hind Samachar newspaper Ramesh Chander in Jalandhar, Mr. Singla said.

In 1986, they attacked the residence of former DGP of Punjab in Jalandhar Julio Riberio. In the same year, they killed eight police personnel of Punjab Police while freeing the KCF chief General Labh Singh and terrorists Gurinder Pal Singh Bhola and Swaranjit Singh from police custody at the Jalandhar court complex after a shootout, the officer said.

The accused persons had also attacked a police station in Punjab and robbed 16 rifles, six carbines, cartridges, two revolvers, a police van and a car. They also killed all nine members of a family in Punjab, Mr. Singla said.

Singh remained in jail and most of the time in high-risk ward of Tihar jail till 2004 for a period of about 18 years. While at Tihar jail, he planned to smuggle arms, including AK-47 and explosives from Pakistan in order to carry out an attack in Delhi. However, the conspiracy was foiled by the Crime Branch, who arrested two terrorists from Punjabi Bagh on July 9, 1998, the officer said.

After coming out of jail in 2010, he remained involved in several cases of robbery and was arrested thrice by the Ludhiana police in 2014, 2015 and 2016 respectively.

During this period, he remained in contact with Paramjeet Singh Panjwad.

He was again arrested by the police in 2017 under the Arms Act. He is facing a trial in a case in Patiala House Courts and was not attending the proceedings following which the court issued non-bailable warrants against him, the police said.
