Puducherry horror: Man kills mother, lives with her corpse for a week before surrendering

Man stabs mother to death. (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Puducherry: In a ghastly murder case reported from Puducherry, a 28-year-old man murdered his mother on suspicion that she had an affair with several men. After spending almost a week in the house with her corpse, the accused surrendered himself at Orleanpet police station on Wednesday.

The accused identified as J Amalorpavanathan is a graduate in computer applications. Wherein the deceased women were identified as J Jayamary. According to the reports in the Times of India, the deceased was the second wife of Jayasekara Udaiyar, who passed away in 2013.

After the death of Udaiyar, his first wife and J Selvi and Jayamary were engaged in a bitter property dispute. The deceased was engaged with a gang and murdered Selvi's brother, Manivannan, an AIADMK functionary from Kallakuruchi. Manivannan was staying with her sister. Jayamary along with eight others were arrested in the matter.

Meanwhile, the woman came out on bail and settled at a newly-purchased house at Krishna Nagar where his son Amalorpavanathan joined her. However, soon after they had a regular fight over the affairs of the deceased with several men, and in one of the quarrels a week ago, the accused in a fit to rage attacked his mother with a dining chair.

Police officials told the TOI that the accused allegedly stabbed her neck several times with a sharp weapon and dumped the body in the room and locked the room. The deceased sustained several injuries on the head and died in a pool of blood.

He further mentioned that after the incident he went on his regular routine for a week. He then approached the Orleanpet police station where he surrendered himself revealing that he murdered his mother.

Meanwhile, the team from Lawspet police station recovered the highly decomposed body. The body of the deceased was sent for an autopsy to the Indra Gandhi government medical college and research institute.
