No crackdown on terrorists in Pakistan, only critics punished: Bilawal Bhutto slams Pakistan PM Imran Khan

Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, PPP chief, during a press conference at Sindh Assembly | Photo Credit: Twitter

Islamabad: Opposition leader Bilawal Bhutto Zardari on Wednesday lambasted Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan over his government’s inaction against terrorist groups operating from the country’s soil. In a stinging rebuke of the government of the country, Zardari asserted that there was no crackdown on terrorists in Pakistan but instead critics of the government were targeted.

Speaking to reporters at Sindh Assembly, the Pakistan Peoples Party chief drew a sharp comparison to the punishment meted out to his parents – former PM Benazir Bhutto and former president Asif Ali Zardari – and lack of any action against terrorist groups killing children in Pakistan and carrying out terror attacks in other nations.

“What message are we sending to the world? That banned organisations have immunity..... How is it that you can pronounce the punishment for late Benazir Bhutto and Asif Ali Zardari over a phone call? But you cannot take action against terrorists who kill children in my country and who spread terror in other nations.” Bilawal said, during a fiery press conference targeting Pakistan PM Imran Khan.

.@BBhuttoZardari: In #Pakistan a three time elected #primeminister is in jail but banned [#militant] organizations are free to commit #terror on our soil and other countries.



- Powerful msg from the #PPP chairman to the #military establishment and its selected govt pic.twitter.com/QOijTLQgiw — Taha Siddiqui (@TahaSSiddiqui) March 13, 2019

In the aftermath of the Pulwama attack and strained ties between India and Pakistan, Khan had announced that no terrorist group would be allowed to operate from Pakistan's soil. His government had officially 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed's terror organisation Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) and its subsidiary, Falah-i-Insaniyat Foundation (FIF).

Tensions between Pakistan and India escalated after Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) carried out a terror attack in Pulwama, attacking a CRPF convoy and killing 44 CRPF jawans on February 15. Pakistan is yet to take any strong action against Masood Azhar, the chief of JeM.

On Wednesday, Pakistan-ally China blocked India’s request to declare Azhar as a “global terrorist” at United Nations Security Council (UNSC) by putting a “technical hold” on the proposal.
