Pakistan Jets Detected Close To LoC

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) JAMMU — Pakistani fighter aircraft were monitored flying very close to territory controlled by New Delhi near Jammu and Kashmir late last night.

Their aircraft were monitored closely by the Indian Air Force that has been keeping a close watch of the area.

The planes were flying at high speed and even broke the sound barrier in the area causing panic.

Speaking at the Aaj Tak security summit on Tuesday, former Chief of Air Staff, Air Marshal AY Tipnis said the Indian Air Force needed more squadrons and if the IAF had Rafale, it would have destroyed half of Pakistan's fighter jets.

"The aim of the 24 Pakistan jets was to attack Srinagar, Awantipora base. If India had Rafale at that time, IAF would have destroyed at least 12 of them. Rafale will boost the morale of IAF," Air Marshal AY Tipnis said.

Earlier, Finance Minister Arun Jaitley had said India has "exposed" Pakistan's nuclear bluff by carrying out airstrikes to 'eliminate Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) camp in Balakot' on February 26.

FM Jaitley said India has fought several wars with Pakistan including 1965, 1971 and during the Kargil conflict. "Since then, Pakistan's army has realised that because of our huge economy and superior military strength, conventional wars cannot be won," he said.

Hundreds Flee For Lives

Over 250 people had to flee for their lives as the Trade Facilitation Centre (TFC) at Chakan da Bagh came allegedly under Pakistani shelling on Wednesday afternoon, police sources and eyewitnesses said.

They said that the panic gripped labourers and staff at Trade Facilitation Centre Chakan da Bagh after several mortar shells landed in the area.

The labourers and staff were seen jumping into the river while some were forced to crawl on the ground to save their lives, eye-witnesses said.

A police officer said that the panic gripped the area soon after the Pakistani army targeted Indian army posts in Krishna Ghati sector, Balakote Sector, and Gulpur sector.

At Gulpur sector, several mortar shells fired by Pakistan landed at the Chakan Da Bagh trade centre resulting in minor damage to one building.

Custodian Chakan da Bagh, Fareed Ahmad Kholi said that soon after the shells landed at TFC "staff and labourers fled towards safety."

Cross-LoC Trade Suspended

The cross-LoC trade was suspended on Wednesday after Pakistan Army allegedly violated the ceasefire along the Line of Control by resorting to mortar shelling and small arms firing Poonch district, officials said.

Five mortar shells hit the trade facilitation centre at Chakan-da-Bagh, damaging a few sheds, including the one housing the X-ray scanner, custodian of LoC trade centre, Poonch, Fareed Kohli said.

He said the shelling took place around 12.30 pm, when the process of scanning of the trucks was almost complete.

There were no casualties but the shelling caused panic among those present at the centre, he said, adding that the main building remained safe.

Kohli said the cross-LoC trade was suspended for the day in view of the shelling.

Officials said the shelling started in Krishna Ghati sector around 10.30 am and later spread to Poonch sector.

The Indian Army retaliated strongly and effectively, they said, adding that the shelling was continuing when last reports were received.
