This Sonepat Doctor Busted Over 60 Sex-Determination Centres, Helped Improve Sex Ratio From 830 to 925

When the threats fell on his deaf ears, they tried to lure his conscience with money, but nothing worked. With the help of his Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (PNDT) cell, he busted over 60 Pre Natal Gender Screening aka ultrasound centres. Here the sex of the unborn children was being determined and the successful raiding of these centres helped prevent scores of illegal abortions in past three years.

This is the story of Dr Adarsh Sharma, the District Family Welfare Officer (DFWO) of Sonepat district in Haryana who played an instrumental role and helped improve the district’s sex ratio from an abysmal 830 per 1000 boys in early 2015 to a respectable 925 at present.

IndiaTimes

Dr Sharma spearheads ‘Beti Padhao Beti Bachao’ campaign in Sonepat and is now a terror for those who are involved in prenatal sex-determination in the district and surrounding areas.

Not only Sonepat, but Dr Sharma and his team have also work as far as Delhi, Ghaziabad, Noida, Meerut, Saharanpur, Amroha, Rohtak and other areas where they conduct raids with the help of local administration.

Dr Adarsh has busted 45 odd ultrasound clinics, apart from 15 odd cases of Manual Vacuum Aspiration (MVP) aka illegal abortions carried out by doctors.

afp

“It’s a crime but people are still doing it which explains to what extent the girl child is unwanted in the society. We are trying our best to stop it but unless people change their thinking, nothing is going to help,” said Dr Adarsh.

IndiaTimes went to Sonepat to learn more about Dr Adarsh’s story but had to wait for a while as the doctor had gone to the district court attending one such case as a witness. “Busting a racket is the beginning of the whole process and after that, the law takes its own course and there too we have played our part as witnesses. But I am contented that I am doing my job,” added Dr Adarsh.

Nabbing people and busting a racket isn’t a one-man job and neither did Dr Adarsh claim all the credit. “It’s a team job and right from an Asha at the local PHC centre in the villages to the DC of that particular district where that ultrasound centre is located - all are involved. I just managed the resources including police and the decoy client we use as the bait,” added

How does it work?

1. Ashas zeroing on the potential targets

“We have sex-ratio of all villages at the district level and we select 50 such villages where the sex ratio is abysmally low. And then we ask Asha (Accredited Social Health Activist) working on respective PHCs to inform us about families that are expecting their second or third child with girls being their first and second child. Because usually, people don’t go for sex-selection in the first pregnancy.”

2. Facebook scanning

After zeroing on the potential customers of the ultrasound centres, Dr Adarsh, based on the information provided by Asha check the Facebook and other social media profiles of the people.

“It helps us to know them because it has been seen that the poor and the lesser educated don’t go for sex-selection and by using the social media, we filter to potential targets,” added Dr Adarsh.

3. The decoy client

“At any given time, we have a decoy client ready; some of them are from previous raids who we assure to protect from the law if they help us nab these centres. We give them money to give to the centre. After identifying a centre, we just follow the decoy client and as soon as she comes out of the centre we raid it with police,” added Dr Adarsh. The decoy client gets an award of Rs 1 lakh after busting of one centre.

4. The synergy of tech and men

Dr Adarsh has an tablet which helps him do all the discreet work that ultimately results in busting the racket.

“We give the decoy client a phone with an internet pack and we track her location through GPS because following the decoy client grows suspicion. The moment we enter a particular district, we inform the DC to send the team of nodal officers. As soon as the decoy client comes out the centre, we along with police raid the clinic and seize the machine and other equipment apart from arresting responsible people. It seems easy but takes an enormous amount of planning and almost flawless execution,” explained Dr Adarsh.

Serving the people

Most doctors who serve in government hospitals have their personal clinics as well, but Dr Adarsh who is a paediatrician, is an exception. When he isn't raiding illegal clinics, he attends patients in the Civil hospital OPD.

afp/IndiaTimes

He remains available for the patients even after OPD timings.
