Chandrababu’s Non-stop Nonsense Mode Reaches Peak

Kommineni Srinivasa Rao

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu shoots off his mouth every other day. He speaks for at least four hours every day with the sole intention of being seen on television and wanting to say something. In the process he ends up making bizarre statements. His political opponents criticise him for uttering lies most of the time. However, the TDP chief does speak the truth on some occasions. Some days ago, at a media conference, Chandrababu Naidu was asked about his role in the notes for votes case and whether he thought that there was an intelligence lapse at that time. Chandrababu Naidu's response would leave anyone stunned. He redefined democracy by saying that people spend money or collect funds for elections.

In fact, there should have been a follow question to this. Mr Chief Minister, what do you have to say about buying MLAs? Was it proper on the part of your MLA Revanth Reddy to be involved in notes for vote case? But no media person ventured to ask such questions. And that is a different story. The point here is whether Chandrababu Naidu as chief minister can speak the way he did. What kind of a message is he sending out? Is he saying that votes can be bought?

Back then, Chandrababu Naidu, through the BJP got KCR to strike a deal on the subject. He foresook the rights of AP citizens on Hyderabad which was to be a joint capital for ten years and came away to Amaravati. Not only did he bruise the self-esteem of Andhras but also wasted public money to the tune of hundreds of crores.

Chandrababu Naidu appears to say that all these things are a part of democracy and that the people can be fooled. The comments made by one of the middlemen in the notes for vote case, Sebastian have sent ripples across the two Telugu states.

Sebastian said that while Chandrababu Naidu agreed to pay Rs 3.5 crores, it was him who convinced the TDP chief to hike the amount being paid to Stephenson to Rs 5 crores. As things turned out, the plot went awry and Revanth Reddy, along with his boss got caught red-handed. In the bargain, Chandrababu Naidu’s idea of democracy and buying votes got exposed, the TDP supremo who claims to be a man of unblemished reputation, found it difficult to defend his dark deeds. Moreover, in recent days, Chandrababu Naidu himself admitted that he was forced to make a compromise on Hyderabad as a joint capital. He, however, struck a different note when he tried to portray his relocation to Hyderabad as a sacrifice made in the interests of the people of AP. Employees know the extent to which they had suffered in the process.

Similarly, in the data theft case, Chandrababu spoke incoherently and questioned how the Telangana govt could file a case against IT Grids which was working for its people. At a media conference, he pulled out YSRCP Rajya Sabha member Vijaysai Reddy's complaint to the Election Commission as if it was a secret document describing it as a conspiracy against him. The Yellow Media created a big hype around the plot that was going to be revealed by Chandrababu Naidu. However, true to form, the TDP supremo held a routine media conference which had no substance and making wild allegations to mislead people.

Chandrababu Naidu has no far not answered the key question here. How did government information get into the seva mitra app? How could the state government transfer sensitive personal information to private companies.

Also Read: Nara Lokesh Joins The Land Mafia Bandwagon
