Ayushmann Khurrana lands in legal trouble over his next film Bala, makers accused of stealing the script

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Ayushmann Khurrana lands in legal trouble due to his next film Bala

Ayushmann Khurrana is living the most successful time in his Bollywood career with 2018 officially dedicated to his blockbuster films. The actor was seen in Andhadhun and Badhaai Ho which became super-successful for their powerful storyline and a stellar performance by the actor. Unsurprisingly, the actor was loaded with a number of projects as his next and one of them is Amar Kaushik’s film titled Bala. But before Ayushmann Khurrana start the film, he has found himself in legal trouble along with the makers of the film as they have been accused of staeling the script.

A report in Navbharat Times suggests that Ayushmann Khurrana along with director Amar Kaushik and producer Dinesh Vijan have been accused by Kamal Kant Chandra for stealing his story for Bala. The film is based on a man who suffers from pre-mature balding. The report further suggests that Kamal Kant claims to have shared the idea of the same story with the actor over Whatsapp. He further claims that Ayushmann has given his nod for the film, but Kamal Kant never heard from him after that. Later he announced a film on the concept of a balding man.

The report also quoted director Amar Kaushik talking about the same as he claims, "I have no idea about this, we have been scripting the story since the past four-five months. There is a possibility that the characters could be the same. I don’t know his script, nor have I met him. I have been writing this story since day one and it could be a tale about any balding man. And as far as the legal case is concerned, the producers will take care of it."

The case has been filed in Bombay High Court. As far as the film is concerned, it was supposed to go on floors this month. Bala also stars Bhumi Pednekar as a small town girl. On a related note, Ayushmann Khurrana is currently in Lucknow where he is shooting for his next film directed by Anubhav Sinha called Article 15.

Earlier, reports in Mumbai Mirror suggested, “A chunk of the film will be shot in Kanpur. Like other Ayushmann-starrers this one too is high on content and on a socially-relevant topic. It is based on a true incident and Ayushmann will play a cop for the first time.” It was also said that the film was earlier titled as Kanpur Dehaat and might hit the screens later this year.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
