Retaliate against China, Swadeshi Jagran Manch to Modi

New Delhi, March 14 : The Swadeshi Jagran Manch (SJM) - the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh's economic wing - on Thursday urged Prime Minister Narendra Modi to "retaliate" against China for blocking the UN resolution to declare Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist.

In a letter to the Prime Minister, the SJM requested him to withdraw most favoured nation (MFN) status from China, impose more restrictions on Chinese products and to take immediate action to raise tariff duties on all Chinese imports.

Noting the "whole nation is in anger against China" over its protection to Azhar, the SJM's All India Co-convener Ashwani Mahajan termed China's action "highly deplorable" and "against the global struggle on terrorism".

"This is the time to make use of all possible measures, diplomatic and economic, to make China conscious of the repercussions of its irresponsible action," he said in the letter.

Mahajan said the time has come to withdraw the MFN status from China, as the government has already done in case of Pakistan and impose further restriction on Chinese products, especially telecom, electronics and defence equipment, due to security concerns.

The SJM leader said that there is need to work harder to discourage Chinese imports as the group's research reveals that the average tariff being applied on Chinese imports is much lower than bound tariff rates on various commodities.

"The government needs to take immediate action to raise tariff duties on all Chinese imports to discourage Chinese imports. China, which is already under economic stress, thanks to trade war initiated by US and other trade partners of China, will definitely realize the implications of unjust action of protecting terrorists. This action of India will help our and global fight against terrorism," Mahajan said in the letter.

He said India has been importing more than $76 billion worth of goods from China and has been running huge trade deficit, which is impacting Indian economy in general and manufacturing in particular.

"It is appreciable that in the past, the government has adopted various measures to curb Chinese imports by way of anti-dumping duties, countervailing duties, increase in tariffs, imposition of tariffs and invoking reciprocity clause to stop Chinese companies taking infrastructure projects in India," he said.
