India and Pakistan hold tense meeting - 'it is no way a resumption of a bilateral dialogue

India Pakistan: We are ready for war says Imran Khan

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The meeting aimed to come up with a way for pilgrims to easily access a Sikh shrine inside Pakistan. The Ministry of External Affairs in India said the talks began after a Pakistani delegation went over to the Indian side. The Ministry added Indian people who are Sikh should be able to go through the corridor by the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev, who founded the Sikh religion.

A joint press statement issued after the meeting on Thursday said: "Both sides held detailed and constructive discussions on various aspects and provisions of the proposed agreement and agreed to work towards expeditiously operationalising the Kartapur Sahib Corridor.”

Ministry of External Affairs spokesman Raveesh Kumar tweeted during the meeting: "Commitment to fulfill a dream!

"Talks begin between India and Pakistan to discuss and finalise the modalities for the Kartarpur Corridor, that will facilitate Indian pilgrims to visit the holy shrine of Gurudwara Darbar Sahib Kartarpur.”

The shrine was built after Guru Nanak died in the 16th century.

Meeting between the delegations of Pakistan and India held to discuss draft agreement of corridor

The shrine can be seen from the Indian side of the border and Indian Sikhs often gather to view the site from their side. Officials have not revealed how long the construction of a border corridor will take or when it will open.

But My Kumar added this was not a “resumption of bilateral talks”.

He said: “Let me make it very clear that it is not in any way a resumption of a bilateral dialogue.

Muhammad Faisal, the director-general of South Asia at Pakistan’s Foreign Office, said this was the first of many meetings.

Tensions have been growing between India and Pakistan recently

He said: "Continuing with our spirit of constructive engagement and flexibility and in line with our sincere efforts to deescalate the situation for regional peace and stability.

"We hope this initiative of the Prime Minister (Imran Khan) will not only facilitate Sikhs, especially from India, but will be a step forward in the current direction from conflict to cooperation, animosity to peace and enmity to friendship.

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated last month following a suicide attack which killed 50 Indian paramilitary soldiers in the Indian-controlled Kashmir.

The Indian airforce then carried out an airstrike on Pakistan and said it was targeting militants that caused the bombing.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan retaliated by shooting down two Indian air force planes
