Mumbai bridge collapse: CM Fadnavis announces ex-gratia of Rs 5 lakh for kin of those dead, Rs 50,000 for injured

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis on Thursday announced an ex-gratia of Rs 5 lakh for the families of those who lost their lives and Rs 50,000 for those who got injured after a foot overbridge collapsed in Mumbai. The incident occurred at around 7:30 pm in when a part of foot overbridge connecting CST platform number 1 with BT Lane near the Times of India building.

At least 6 people (including 3 women) were killed and 33 injured after a major portion of a foot overbridge near a train station in south Mumbai collapsed. All the injured have been rushed to a nearby hospital. A high-level inquiry has been ordered by the chief minister.

Speaking on the bridge collapse, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis said, "It's unfortunate. I've ordered a high-level inquiry. A structural audit of the bridge had earlier been done & it was found to be fit. Even after that if such an incident happened, it raises a question on the audit. An inquiry will be done and strictest action will be taken."

Sharing his condolence for those who lost their lives and injured, PM Narendra Modi took to his Twitter and said, "Deeply anguished by the loss of lives due to the foot overbridge accident in Mumbai. My thoughts are with the bereaved families. Wishing that the injured recover at the earliest. The Maharashtra Government is providing all possible assistance to those affected."

Deeply anguished by the loss of lives due to the foot overbridge accident in Mumbai. My thoughts are with the bereaved families. Wishing that the injured recover at the earliest. The Maharashtra Government is providing all possible assistance to those affected. March 14, 2019

An eyewitness who saw the bridge collapsing said that the death toll could have been more had a traffic signal light would have turned green. Since the traffic was halted due to the red light at the signal, the lives of many have been saved.

Apart from PM Modi, Devendra Fadnavis, Home Minister Rajnath Singh, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Railway Minister Piyush Goyal, and other leaders have also shared their grief for the victims.

This bridge which collapsed was also known by the name of Kasab Bridge (Mumbai 26/11 terrorist) because Kasab had used this bridge to exit from the CSMT station after the attack. The terrorist was pictured near this same bridge while running towards Cama hospital lane where he killed senior ATS officials.
