Big Power, Big Fail

By Anand K Sahay

China scuttled a move in the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) on Wednesday to have a key Pakistani terrorist guru, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) chief Masood Azhar, listed as an ‘international terrorist’.

This is an expression of surprising agnosticism on questions of war and peace, given the specific context in which Azhar was being sought to be punished by the international community.

Such an act of sheer irresponsibility by a major power raises the question of its suitability to play a constructive part in regional and world affairs, including in Afghanistan (which shares borders with both China and Pakistan), where a peace deal with the Taliban is being sought to be negotiated in preparation for the departure of US troops from that country.

Terror Trigger, Made in China

Using its position as a veto-wielding UNSC member, Beijing had bailed out Azhar in 2009, 2016 and 2017. But this time around, given the background in which Azhar was given a lifeline, China’s action has the potential to instigate Pakistan — and the thousands of trained anti-India terrorists who harbour in that country — to continually engage in brinkmanship in its India dynamics, unconcerned about regional peace and stability.

After the JeM mounted a terrorist attack in Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir, last month, and New Delhi’s request to Islamabad to act against the outfit fell on deaf ears, the Indian Air Force bombed a suspected JeM training centre inside Pakistan. In response, Pakistani planes crossed Indian airspace and dropped ordnance inside a military compound near the border before being chased away.

Fortunately, no real damage was done, or the strategic calculus could have taken on an unpredictable and undesirable turn. But it was a tense military moment. The use of air power can have escalatory consequences.

No two countries with proven nuclear weapons have engaged in an air battle inside the territory of one of them before. Without losing time, two sets of actors acted behind the scenes to calm things down and stanch escalation fears.

Leading western powers took the matter to the UNSC to chasten Azhar. His outfit has already been proscribed by the UN. So, it was logical that international restraints be placed on Azhar also. This was not an action against Pakistan, China’s ‘all-weather’ and ‘ironclad’ friend, but against a leading ‘non-State actor’ who routinely wreaks havoc inside India.

And, still, Beijing could not bring itself to back the move. It can now be safely said that China has flunked the terrorism test.

China was the only holdout on the Azhar issue in the UNSC. The resolution to list the terrorist was authored by France, the US and Britain. Among its co-sponsors were not only key Europeans, Australia and Japan, but also South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (Saarc) members Bhutan, Bangladesh and the Maldives.

Thus, today, China presents the picture of a brazen State that has no compunction in giving moral and political solace to a dangerous non-State actor, not unlike Pakistan with which its friendship, in its own words, is “as high as the mountains, as deep as the seas”.

The second set of actors that tried to play a helpful role in the crisis set off by the action of a terror group was from the Gulf region. Saudi Arabia, which carries weight with Pakistan since it bankrolls the latter heavily, was active at the highest level with supportive counsel.

China in a Bull Shop

In a first, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), which earlier this month hosted the ministerial meeting of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) in Abu Dhabi, specially invited India’s external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj to be a ‘guest of honour’.

This was patently a gesture meant to cool the India-Pakistan environment — for, shortly afterward, the OIC went back to taking its decades-old standard line on Kashmir, which is to criticise India. China remained impervious to the wide import of these developments, and the concern in international circles about nuclear-armed countries taking the first steps toward conflict.

It is no surprise that Beijing should wholly disregard the spirit of the deliberations at the ‘informal summit’ at Wuhan in China between Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Xi Jinping in April 2018, which was meant to normalise frayed Sino-Indian ties in the wake of the Dokalam border crisis.

The third paragraph of the statement issued by the ministry of external affairs on the Wuhan talks, issued on April 28 last year, speaks of the two countries “respecting each other’s sensitivities, concerns and aspirations”.

This was not to be. India frequently refers to the ‘Wuhan spirit’, taking Chinese commitments too seriously. A subsequent paragraph reiterated the “resolute opposition” of the leaders “to terrorism in all its forms and manifestations”. Modi and Xi also “committed themselves to cooperate on counter-terrorism”.

It is evident that China’s massive infrastructure investments — which will culminate in a naval base in Pakistan’s Gwadar port — pre-dispose it to unmindfully back Pakistan. But, at the UNSC, the issue was that of punishing a key terrorist whose outfit routinely kills people in India. Evidently, Beijing’s strategic disposition to contain India with Pakistan’s help, even through the instrumentality of terrorism, has not dimmed. But this is a dangerous game.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
