7 Interesting Facts About The Vicky Kaushal Starrer 'Uri: The Surgical Strike'

Vicky Kaushal starrer 'Uri: The Surgical Strike' has hit the screens today, and it officially marks the beginning of Bollywood releases in 2019. The movie has been gaining a lot of momentum owing to its theme and the film's timing.

While some are calling it political propaganda, others are largely moved by the nationalist fervour that the movie represents. The audience has even upheld the movie as an earnest tribute to the Indian Army.

© RSVP Movies

'Uri: The Surgical Strike' is based on India's successful surgical attacks of 2016. The plot sheds light on the numerous terrorist attacks that took place on the Indian side of the Line of Control (LOC), which eventually prompted the government to plan the surgical strikes.

This jarring historical and militaristic episode forms the basis of Aditya Dhar's 'Uri: The Surgical Strike'. While most of you might already be aware of this, there still remain a few interesting bits you might be unaware of about the Vicky Kaushal, Yami Gautam and Paresh Rawal starrer.

Here are 7 interesting facts about the movie, you probably didn't know about:

1. 'Uri' Is Vicky Kaushal's First Action Movie

If you look at Vicky Kaushal's career trajectory so far, you will find that this piece of trivia is as true as it is obvious. Vicky plays the role of Major Vihaan Shergill, the man who executed the surgical strike on the battlefield. Therefore, this also happens to be Vicky's first action movie, and he called it “the most physically demanding film” of his career so far.

© RSVP Movies

2. Paresh Rawal's Character In The Film Is Based On A Real Person

Paresh Rawal is seen essaying the role of Ajit Doval who happens to be India's National Security Advisor in real life! The man, by the same name, is the real inspiration for Rawal's character and had also formerly been the Director of Intelligence Bureau from 2004 to 2005.

3. Vicky & The Supporting Cast Trained With Army Personnel For Months

In an interview, Vicky shared that, “I go to gym and train at the naval base in Cuffe Parade (in Mumbai). Army men help me with training. As of now, they are helping us. I have to gain some weight.”

"I am training for five hours every day. Then there is three to four hours of military training, you get to enhance your stamina, go through obstacle training, you are slithering. I am receiving gun training right now," he added.

© RSVP Movies

Additionally, it was reported that the supporting cast was also trained at Mumbai's Navy Nagar where Army Captains and Majors taught them slithering, use of arms and ammunition, and other drills used by the armed forces.

4. Yami Gautam Plays An Intelligence Officer

It is said that Yami underwent a major makeover for her role in the film, where she will be seen as an Intelligence Officer. This will be the first time we see Yami in such a belligerent avatar. Earlier in an interview with The Telegraph, Yami spoke about the complexity of her character and said that she did MMA and strength training for the role.

5. Mohit Raina's Special Appearance Is Set To Make Things Interesting

Mohit Raina, who is more popularly known as Lord Shiva from 'Devon Ke Dev: Mahadev', will be seen portraying the role of Captain Karan Kashyap. The few glimpses of the man that people received in the trailer, confirmed that his character shall play an interesting part in the movie.

© RSVP Movies

6. A Major Part Of The Movie Was Shot In Serbia

While the movie is about militant attacks in Kashmir, the filming of the movie capturing the fights and struggles were shot in Serbia. Apart from the many Serbian locations, some parts have also been shot in Mumbai.

7. Directorial Debut Of National Award Winner Aditya Dhar

'Uri: The Surgical Strike' happens to be the directorial debut of National Award winner Aditya Dhar, who is better known for his short film 'Boond'.

© RSVP Movies

The 2016 militant attacks in Uri, Jammu & Kashmir were carried out by four armed militants who allegedly belonged to a terror outfit called Jaish-e-Mohammed. The Uri terror attack was declared as one of "the deadliest attack on security forces in Kashmir in two decades".

Eleven days after the attack, the Indian Army announced that it has successfully carried out retaliatory surgical strikes on the launch pads being used by militants in Pakistan occupied Kashmir.

'Uri: The Surgical Strike' has tried to recreate the sequence of events of the attack in the film, and bring the larger story related to the strike to its audience.
