At least 4 dead, 28 injured in India bridge collapse

Injured people are rushed to an ambulance after a foot over bridge adjacent to Chhtrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus railway station collapsed, in Mumbai, India, Mar. 14, 2019. EPA-EFE/DIVYAKANT SOLANKI

A general view of the partly collapsed foot over bridge adjacent to Chhtrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus railway station, in Mumbai, India, Mar. 14, 2019. EPA-EFE/DIVYAKANT SOLANKI

Indian fire brigade personnel clears the debris of a collapsed foot over bridge adjacent to Chhtrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus railway station, in Mumbai, India, Mar. 14, 2019. EPA-EFE/DIVYAKANT SOLANKI

At least four people have died and 28 others were injured on Thursday when a pedestrian bridge near a railway station in the western Indian city of Mumbai collapsed, a spokesperson for the city's Disaster Management Department told EFE.

The incident happened at around 7.30pm local time (2pm GMT) when a section of an elevated pedestrian footbridge gave way during the height of rush hour in the Asian country's business capital, said Ramesh Kamble, a spokesman for the Department of Disaster Management of the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai.

The people who were injured in the accident were taken to two hospitals nearby as authorities cordoned off the area.

Images released via EPA showed emergency services workers at the scene near the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus railway station, assisting victims and wading through the rubble of the fallen footbridge.

"Deeply anguished by the loss of lives due to the foot overbridge accident in Mumbai," Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Twitter.

"My thoughts are with the bereaved families," added the Prime Minister.

Modi said he hoped the people who were injured in the accident would make a speedy recovery, adding that: "The Maharashtra Government is providing all possible assistance to those affected."

A similar incident took place in Mumbai in July last year when a flyover collapsed on top of railway lines, leading to the deaths of two people.

Last September, at least one person died and 30 others were injured when a bridge in the eastern city of Kolkata collapsed.

In 2016, a two-kilometer-long (1.24-mile) overpass collapsed in Kolkata, killing 26 people and injuring dozens of others.

More than 30 people died in September 2017 when a residential building collapsed in the western city of Mumbai, while in December a shop collapsed in the same city, killing 14 people.

Such building collapses, fires and industrial accidents are not uncommon in India, often due to the precarious state of infrastructure and lack of maintenance, factors fueled by corruption and illegal practices in the construction sector.
