Ex-Chambal Malkhan Singh bandit vies for Congress ticket

Malkhan settled down in district headquarters of Shivpuri in Madhya Pradesh after his surrender before former MP CM late Arjun Singh in 1982.

Bhopal: Thirty seven years after he bade farewell to arms, ex-Chambal bandit Malkhan Singh is now toying with the idea of fighting the Lok Sabha elections with a mission to combat dacoit menace in Chitrakoot region comprising Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.

The redoubtable ‘emperor of dacoits’ of Chambal of 1970s, Malkhan (74) has approached Congress for ticket for Banda Lok Sabha constituency, which falls under dacoit-infested Chitrakoot region, in Uttar Pradesh in the upcoming polls.

“I have applied for Congress ticket for Banda LS constituency. I have a vote base comprising my community, Khangar Rajput, in the constituency. The entire region is battling dacoit menace causing untold miseries to local people. I promise to crush the terror industry being run by some dreaded bandits in the area if I am elected from the constituency,” the mustachioed Malkhan told this newspaper on Thursday.

Malkhan settled down in district headquarters of Shivpuri in Madhya Pra-desh after his surrender before former MP chief minister late Arjun Singh in 1982. According to him, Banda has 2.33 lakh Khangar Rajput voters.

“Besides, the community has a population of around 55 lakhs spread over several LS constituencies in UP. I can influence the voters of my community in favour of Congress in other constituencies if I am given ticket for Banda by the party”, he said.

The ex-bandit who had amassed 94 cases, including 17 cases of murder, 19 cases of attempt to murder, 28 cases of kidnapping and 18 cases of robbery by the time he surrendered, was currently leading a religious life.

He had earlier been associated with BJP for over two decades.

“I a”nt ticket from frontline political parties like Congress or BJP, not from other small parties. I hardly bother if I am not considered by them”, Malkhan, in his characteristically ‘care a hoot’ style, observed.
