iWITNESS: ‘I can’t leave’: An injured woman’s plea

Harshada Waghre

CST footbridge

Kalbadevi garment bazaar

CSMT: FOB bridge collapses,CM Devendra Fadnavis announces compensation of Rs 5 lakh 01:28

St George’s Hospital

iWITNESS

Five people dead as FOB outside CSMT collapses 00:11

An injured commuter being helped by passers-by (PHOTO BY RAJU SHINDE)

Public foot over bridge near CSMT collapses 00:29

Sachin Haralkar recounts the moment he helped a 40-year-old woman who fell from the bridge.Please let me find my purse... I can’t leave without it.” This was the first plea of, 40, after she fell about 30 feet from theon Thursday evening.Even as blood streamed down her face, she urged her rescuers — Mirror photographer Sachin Haralkar and another man — not to place her in an ambulance until she secured her meaningful belongings. The appeal revealed the deep anxiety of Mumbaikars who are conditioned to think about urgent steps and means to carry on even in the most painful situations.Harshada, the mother of a fiveyear-old girl, works as a phone operator with a firm in. Like tens of thousands of commuters, she was rushing to catch a train from CST to Parel, her home, when a portion of the bridge collapsed.Haralkar and another person hauled her to safety and signalled to authorities at the scene to rush her to a hospital. But Harshada insisted on finding her purse first, saying it contained not only money but her phone and Aadhaar card. Haralkar tried to calm her down, saying he would call her family and inform them.She was taken to. Her purse was not found.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------Mirror’s Lata Mishra was 20 mt from the CSMT FOB when it collapsed yesterday.A phone call made me stop in my tracks, right outside my office in The Times of India Building, barely 20 mt from the foot overbridge that collapsed around 7.33 pm yesterday. There were at least two loud explosions, followed by screams and incessant honking. Despite witnessing the mayhem first-hand, it took me a few seconds to realise what had just occurred.The bridge, which connects the Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus’ (CSMT) Platform No 1 to the BT Lane, is known as the ‘Kasab Bridge’, and the lane as ‘Kasab Gully’, after the 26/11 Mumbai attack terrorist took this route during his killing spree. For thousands of daily commuters like me, the bridge is a part of the daily routine.Yesterday, I had the misfortune to witness the mangled bodies of two of the victims, both women, getting extricated from the rubble. I also witnessed a woman sobbing hysterically near her unconscious husband, and scores of people, blood splattered all over their bodies, being put in taxis and rushed to hospitals.As I went across to help the victims, I spotted a woman in a taxi whose bonnet was completely crushed. The driver said a huge slab had collapsed on his cab; fortunately, he and the passenger escaped unhurt. “There was a red light at a nearby signal when the bridge collapsed. The situation would have been worse had the light been green,” another eyewitness said.While this is the first time that I witnessed such a tragedy, I have reported on several such disasters, including the Elphinstone Road stampede, and on each occasion, I have noticed that the real heroes are the passers-by and those in the shops, shanties, and buildings near the disaster spots.It was no different yesterday, when scores of people rushed to lift large slabs to pull the victims from under the rubble. They stopped taxis and private cars and rushed the injured to hospital. They comforted the hapless victims, and even tried to control the panic to the best of their ability. They were not from the BMC’s Disaster Management Cell, or the police, or the fire brigade. They were just real heroes.
