Trio caught with Rs 20 lakh at Hubballi airport

HUBBALLI: The Gokul Road police have seized Rs 20 lakh from three persons at the airport on Thursday evening as they were not carrying any document to prove it belonged to them.As the model code of conduct is on force, a person carrying more than Rs 50,000 to Rs 10 lakh cash must carry valid proof for the cash.Hubballi tahsildar Shashidhar Madyal and Gokul Road police inspector D P Nimbalkar told TOI that Jagadish Gurgunti, Nagappa Sanade, Devan Appasaheb Desai, all from Jamakhandi in Bagalkot district were about to board a Bengaluru bound flight on Thursday evening. The airport staff found bundles of cash in their baggage while scanning them and alerted police.Police from Gokul Road police stations and members of the flying squad rushed to the airport and began qustioning the three passengers. They asked them why they were not carrying any document regarding the money.“When police asked them why they were carrying such huge money with them, Jadish Gurgunti claimed that all the money belonged to him and that he handed over part of that money to Sanade and Desai. He also said he was carrying the money for his personal expenditure. We grew suspicious about his answer and informed income tax officials,” said Nimbalkar. “The income tax department will investigate the case and we will file a case based on their findings,” he said.Nimbalkar said if any person is caught carrying more than 10 lakh even with valid proof, then the case will to be handed over to the Income Tax department.Liquor worth Rs76 lakh seized near GadagExcise department officials seized 14,800 litres of liquor worth Rs 76 lakh near Achamatti Cross in Naragund taluk in Gadag district on Thursday.Gadag district excise deputy commissioner Mohammad Abid Husain said staff deployed at a check post intercepted a vehicle carrying whisky and rum that was heading to Karnataka State Beverages Corporation Limited in Gokak from Sahayadri distilleries in Hassan. During the search it was found that the driver had violated the transit permit route. During elections, changing transit permit route is an offence, he said.“If the vehicle was to go to Gokak, then why did the driver enter Gadag district? it was not necessary and raised suspicion among us. The driver was to clearly mention an end to end route map in the permit but that was missing. We have booked a case against the driver and seized the vehicle and liquor. Nargund police are investigating the case,” Abid Husain told reporters.
