Indian Air Force fighter jets go supersonic over Line of Control in major combat drill

New Delhi:

Amid the ongoing tension between India and Pakistan, the Indian Air Force carried out a major combat drill on the intervening night of March 14 and 15. The IAF fighter jet went supersonic over border areas in Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir along the Line of Control. According to news agency ANI, “the reason for carrying out the combat drill was to be prepared for thwarting any misadventure by the Pakistan Air Force (PAF) to intrude into the Indian air space.” The drill comes days after two Pakistani fighter jets intruded in the Indian airspace in Poonch sector. The IAF has been on high alert since the February 14 Pulwama terror attack.

Interestingly, there were some reports that people in Amritsar had woken up in dead of night after hearing ‘loud explosion’. With the report about IAF’s drill coming out in public, it is safe to say that those ‘blast sounds’ were the combat jets. At that time, Jagjit Singh Walia, ADCP Amritsar had said that, “I appeal to the people to not believe in rumours on social media. Everything is okay, as per our information nothing has happened.”

India and Pakistan have seen the worst standoff in recent years ever since the Pulwama attack and Indian Air Force’s subsequent air strike in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa’s Balakot. For the first time in more than four decades, India went deep inside Pakistan to destroy the terror camp. Though there has been no official statement on number of casualties, several reports have said that the number of terrorists killed in Balakot terror camps can range from anywhere between 250 to 300.

Latest media reports by two news channels have revealed how Islamabad tried to get rid of the terrorists’ bodies after the Indian Air Force air strike on the terror camp run by Jaish-e-Mohammed. According to Republic TV, an eyewitness have come forward and talked extensively about the way authorities across the border tried to doctor the site. Bodies of some terrorists were thrown in river while others were set on fire.

Meanwhile, Times Now, another news channel ha also aired some incriminating details about the Balakot air strike. According to the news channel, 263 terrorists had gathered at the terror camp. These terrorists were categorised according to a strict hierarchy, the channel reported. 18 senior Jaish commanders were present at Balakot facility to train the terror recruits. While 83 terrorists had assembled for Daura-e-Aam — the beginners’ training course, 91 terrorists had assembled for Daura-e-Khas — advanced training, the channel reported.

As many as 25 terrorists were selected for special fidayeen training. A total of four missiles, which have now been identified as SPICE bombs were dropped at the Balakot JeM camp by Indian Air Force Mirage-2000 fighter jets. Among those killed were IED expert, video expert of the Jaish-e-Mohammed. Those injured were send to a local hospital in adjoining Waziristan.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
