State misses deadline to file reply on implementing report

Maharashtra government

Srikrishna Commission Report

1992-93 Mumbai riots

Shiv Sena-BJP government

Suleman Usman Bakery

Thehas failed to comply with Supreme Court orders to file a reply on its implementation of the Justice BN. On February 11, Justices SA Bobde, Sanjay Kishan Kaul and Deepak Gupta directed the government to file a status report on the matter within four weeks.On January 25, 1993, the Maharashtra government constituted a commission of inquiry headed by Justice BN Srikrishna to look into the causes of the. In 1995, though theexpanded the report to include the March 1993 blasts, it disbanded the commission in January 1996 for undue delay in submitting the Report and reconstituted in May that year after pressure from the Centre and civil groups. The recording of evidence that had started in 1993, resumed in 1996 and ended in 1997.The matter is pending before the apex court since 1998, the year the Report was tabled. It came up in December 2018 after a gap of more than two years.In 2001, the government gave an undertaking to the SC that it would set up a Special Task Force (STF) to investigate the offences mentioned in the Report. So far, the STF has filed cases against nine of the 31policemen indicted by the Commission for offences ranging from “unnecessary and excessive firing resulting in the deaths of innocents” to “collaboration with rioting Shiv Sainiks” to “overwriting records”. Six policemen were acquitted and two discharged. The outcome of the case against the remaining policeman, Inspector Wahule, is not known.Of the rest, ten were exonerated without an inquiry. Ten were “punished”. The action taken against them ranged from keeping them at the minimum pay scale for two years to a “reprimand”. One died and another was sacked before the report was published.The last affidavit filed by the state government was in 2008, to which petitioner Fazal Sha’d had filed his reply, pointing out that the recommendations of the Report: action against the policemen indicted by the Commission; reopening of 1,358 closed cases, and compensation to those missing in the riots, had yet to be implemented. Of the closed cases, the STF reopened only five. All ended in acquittal.Since 2008, the matter has been listed umpteen times for final disposal, without being heard. Meanwhile, Anis Suhrawardy, counsel for the original petitioner, Naseem Arif Khan, passed away, and it took time for a new counsel to be appointed. The ongoing trial of seven policemen charged with murder in theraid is the result of a case filed by the STF. Nine policemen, including two named by Justice Srikrishna – former police commissioner RD Tyagi and B V Lahane – were discharged in this case.Senior Adv Yusuf Muchhala, who represents one of the intervenors in this case, pointed out that the petitions were filed in the SC for the Report’s implementation because the Sena-BJP government had rejected it when it was tabled. “It’s unlikely that the same ruling combine will now act on it,” he said, adding that even the Congress-NCP government that ruled for 15 years did nothing substantial.The current ruling party, he pointed put, had shown in its reaction to the Sabarimala judgment that it didn’t care what the SC said. So it was not surprising that it had not obeyed the directions of the court in the Srikrishna matter, too. “Now it’s up to the Supreme Court to assert its authority.”
