Real-life TikTok: Drunk man tests wife's love by standing in middle of busy road, gets hit by van

There are various ways to know if someone loves you or not, however, this Chinese man took things to a new level by standing in the middle of a busy road at night as he tried to put his wife's love to test.

He did not think the entire process through and ended up getting hurt by a silver speeding van.

The incident took place on the streets of Lishui in Zhejiang Province, China. The traffic camera on the streets captured the entire scene that went on for 40 minutes.

Watch the video here:

Husband, whos surname is Pan and wife, who goes by the surname of Zhou are seen having an argument in the video. Pan was drunk and kept going and standing in the middle of the busy road as his wife who is seen in her pyjamas tried to pull him again and again to the corner but to no avail.

Pan told the local police, "My wife and I were arguing, so I went out for a few drinks. On the way back I called her and we started fighting again."

He added, "I wanted to see if she would try and stop me. I wanted to know whether she really loved me and if she would pull me back. But then I got hit by a car and now I'm injured." Pan confirmed that he regretted the test.

Local police also said that Pan suffered serious head injuries and multiple fractures in his chest.



This incident reminds us of a scene in the film Barfi when Ranbir Kapoor's character tries to test Priyanka Chopra's love by cutting a light pole and standing under it.

However, his character thought the whole thing through and everything was happy in the end but so was not the case with drunk Pan.

The case is also reminiscent of several TikTok-related accidents that we have seen in the recent past. Remember the three college students from Chennai who were tripling on a bike and recording themselves on TikTok... and met with an accident? Here is that story for you.

ALSO SEE | Jacqueline Fernandez beats Priya Prakash Varrier at wink game. TikTok video is viral now
