Ayushmann Khurrana braves leech attack during shoot of Article 15 in Lucknow

Actors getting injured during shoots of their films is common but braving a leech attack is something unheard of. Ayushmann Khurrana while shooting a scene for his upcoming film Article 15 survived a leech attack, recently. Earlier this morning, the actor posted about the incident on Instagram.

Ayushmann wrote, "Today was a true test of my love for my craft. We are in the middle of shooting Article 15, being directed by the super talented Anubhav Sinha. Yesterday, we had a challenging day - a shot required us to enter into a swamp and do a gripping scene. We realised that the swamp was filled with leeches only when we were in the middle of the shot! I would like to salute my brave team of investigative officers (it’s an honour to act with these talented actors) for finishing the scene despite a vicious leech attack! @anubhavsinhaa hum aapke liye khoon bahane ko tayaar hain. #Article15."

The actor is currently shooting for Article 15 directed by Anubhav Sinha. Yesterday, for a gripping scene, the crew had to shoot in a swamp. Unaware of the presence of leeches in the swamp, the actor entered the swamp and realised that the swamp is filled with leeches only in the middle of the shot. Ayushmann also applauded his co-actors, who are playing his fellow investigative officers in the film, for completing the shoot.

Ayushmann Khurrana is playing a police officer in Article 15, which is being shot in Lucknow since March 1. The film is about Article 15 of Indian Constitution which is about prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. The film stars Isha Talwar, Manoj Pahwa, Sayani Gupta, Kumud Mishra, M Nassar, Ashish Verma, Sushil Pandey, Shubrajyoti Bharat, Ronjini Chakraborty and Zeeshan Ayyub.

Anubhav Sinha said that Article 15 is an investigative drama where the audience is also an accused party. About casting Ayushmann in the film, Anubhav said, "A very challenging film that needed an extraordinary actor like Ayushmann. Delighted to have him on board with an explosive bundle of such talented and acclaimed actors."
