Akshay Kumar dedicates Kesari to Bharat Ke Veer – the Indian Armed Forces and the martyrs

Akshay Kumar’s Kesari is one of the most anticipated films and after its trailer release, we are eager to watch the film. Kesari is based on the true story of the Battle of Saragarhi. Recently, Akshay Kumar dedicated Kesari to Bharat Ke Veer. Bharat Ke Veer is a website that was launched two years ago during the Valour Day of the CRPF. We all know Akshay takes much pride when it comes to saluting the soldiers and hence his idea to provide a degree of financial security to the community of our soldiers who make the ultimate sacrifice in protecting our country.

Akshay’s involvement with Bharat Ke Veer is very personal and deep-rooted. He said, “I am an army man’s son and probably, deep down in my heart, I wanted to follow my father’s footsteps. I stepped into show business, but my heart lies with the armed forces. Whenever I see men and women in uniform, I am filled with pride and also a sense of responsibility.” Khiladi Kumar will be dedicating his upcoming release and Anurag Singh’s directorial Kesari to the martyrs. He also said, “My producers and I are happy to dedicate Kesari, based on the Battle of Saragarhi, the second bravest battle ever fought, to Bharat Ke Veer. It is a film that showcases valour and the highest degree of desh bhakti. It is a befitting tribute to our soldiers, who have laid down their lives for the nation.”

The Gold actor also asked the Ministry of Home Affairs to see if a part of the Bharat Ke Veer funds could be utilised for the rehabilitation of the soldiers who have been scarred in war. A source added, “While the families of martyrs currently receive help, the authorities are studying the possibility of providing monetary help to the men in uniform who suffer injuries. After all, there are many who find it hard to earn a livelihood because of a lost limb or other health ailments. If this happens, it will mean more soldiers will get looked after by the establishment.”

Kesari is slated to release on March 21. It is produced by Hiroo Yash Johar, Aruna Bhatia, Karan Johar, Apoorva Mehta, Sunir Kheterpal and presented by Zee Studios. Akshay is also working on Housefull 4 opposite Kriti Sanon and Bobby Deol and Hera Pheri 3 co-starring Paresh Rawal and John Abraham. Keep reading CineBlitz for more.
