Director Sukumar and Mahesh Babu sort out differences, to work together soon

Director Sukumar and Mahesh Babu sort out differences, to work together soon

The director reportedly met the actor in Chennai on the sets of the latter’s upcoming ‘Maharshi’.

Flix Tollywood

While there were expectations that Mahesh Babu will be teaming up with director Sukumar for his next, an announcement from the director that he will be making a film with Allu Arjun came as a surprise. Mahesh Babu also went on to tweet that he is not collaborating with Sukumar due to creative differences, which fuelled speculations that all is not well between the two.

But now we hear that Sukumar, along with Naveen Yerneni and Y Ravi Shankar who are producing his next with Allu Arjun, was on the sets of Mahesh Babu’s Maharshi in Chennai recently to meet the star. During this meeting, the differences between the two were sorted out and looks like they will team up in the near future. Apparently, Mahesh Babu asked the director to write a story for him so that they can work together.

Mahesh Babu’s Maharshi, which is directed by Vamsi Paidipally, is a high budget project with a major portion of the film being shot in the United States. The story revolves around three friends, played by Mahesh Babu, Allari Naresh and Pooja Hegde. Veteran actor Jayapradha will be seen playing a pivotal role in the film as well.

Maharshi is produced jointly by Dil Raju, C Ashwini Dutt and Prasad V Potluri under their banners Sri Venkateswara Creations, Vyjayanthi Movies and PVP Cinema. The technical crew of the film includes Devi Sri Prasad for music, KU Mohanan for cinematography and Praveen KL in charge of the editing.

There is a buzz that Mahesh Babu will be appearing in five different looks in the film. Maharshi will reportedly showcase the transition of his character from a college student to an entrepreneur. However, the filmmakers are tight-lipped about any details. The film is scheduled for release next month to cash in on the summer holidays.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
