YS Vivekananda Reddy death: YSRCP leader YS Vivekananda Reddy murdered in Andhra's Pulivendula

YSRCP leader YS Vivekananda Reddy found dead, family alleges murder

TIRUPATI: Former minister and YSRCP leader YS Vivekananda Reddy died in suspicious circumstances at his native Pulivendula village in Kadapa district . Preliminary investigation by the police revealed that Vivekananda was murdered late on Thursday night. Post mortem examination showed seven injuries on Vivekananda’s body caused by a sharp weapon. He was 69.The AP government formed a special investigation team (SIT) to probe the murder case. Chief minister N Chandrababu Naidu, who spoke to senior police officials on Friday, ordered the SIT. Naidu condoled the death of Vivekananda and conveyed his heartfelt sympathies to the members of the bereaved family. Naidu said those involved in the incident will be booked however big they are.Vivekananda Reddy is the younger brother of former chief minister YS Rajasekhar Reddy and uncle of YSRCP president YS Jaganmohan Reddy. He went to Pulivendula two days ago. Incidentally, YSRCP is scheduled to release the list of party candidates for state assembly and Lok Sabha polls on Saturday.The police took up investigation after Vivekananda’s family members suspected foul play behind the death. It was initially believed that he died of massive cardiac arrest. The body was found lying in blood in the bathroom of the house. There were injuries on the forehead, back of the head, thighs and wrists. The police pressed a dog squad to identify the culprit.Vivekananda’s personal assistant MV Krishna Reddy lodged a complaint with Pulivendula police. The police first registered it as a case of unnatural death and shifted the body to local government hospital for post mortem examination.Meanwhile, YSR Congress demanded a high-level probe by the CBI into the death of Vivekananda Reddy. YSRCP spokesperson Vasireddy Padma told media that the CBI should be given the case to investigate into the circumstances leading to the death.It was only a couple of days ago that Vivekananda Reddy was spotted at YS Jagan's Lotus Pond residence in Hyderabad where he was taking active part in party related meetings as well. Even on Thursday, Vivekananda took part in an election campaign of the YSRC at Pulivendula. He was alone when the incident took place.Vivekananda's nephew and former MP, YS Avinash Reddy, also demanded a detailed investigation into the death. "He sustained two injuries in the head, one on the front side and one in the back. Police should also probe the conspiracy angle to establish the actual cause of death", he demanded.Jaganmohan Reddy and other family members rushed to Pulivendula after hearing the sudden demise of his uncle. Vivekananda Reddy is survived by his wife and a daughter.
