YS Vivekananda Reddy death: Police suspects murder

YSR Congress Party leader and former Andhra Pradesh Minister YS Vivekananda Reddy, who was found dead at his residence on Friday morning, is suspected to have been murdered.

"This morning Pulivendula Urban police station received a complaint about the demise of YS Vivekananda Reddy. We visited the scene. There are blood marks at the scene. It seems as if murder. Further, there are two injuries on the head and one on hand. A special investigation team has been constituted led by additional SP (Operations)," said Kadapa SP Rahul Dev Sharma.

"We have started an investigation with the available clues. We will find out how it took place. We have collected some fingerprints. Dog squad has also been deployed... See, the back door was not locked, it was open, whether anybody entered house will be known only after investigation. Vivekananda came home at around 11.30 pm last night. And the matter of his death is known at around 5.30 am to 6 am this morning. Who would have come in that time, whether watchman was there... we will investigate all details," he added.

Sharing further details, Sharma said: "Once we get post mortem report, we will get more details. Another expert team is coming from the headquarters. The Kadapa team gathered some clues. We preserved fingerprints. I appeal to all to remain calm, and cooperate in maintaining law and order. A SIT is formed in this regard. We will complete the investigation."

YSR Congress Party had earlier today demanded CBI probe into the death of YS Vivekananda Reddy, brother of former Chief Minister YS Rajasekhara Reddy.

Alleging a conspiracy in his death of YS Vivekananda Reddy, YSR Congress Party said that YS Rajasekhara Reddy was a victim of a helicopter crash and recently Leader of Opposition YS Jagan Mohan Reddy was attacked at the Vizag airport.

YS Vivekananda Reddy had returned from election campaign at Jammalamdugu on Thursday. He was given the Kadapa Lok Sabha ticket.

He is survived by his wife and a daughter. Reddy was elected as an MLA from Pulivendula constituency in 1989 and 1994. He became a Member of Parliament from Kadapa Lok Sabha seat in 1999 and 2004. In 2009, he was elected as MLC.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
