CAPSULES: Relocation throes - EMA @ Amsterdam

Against the backdrop of the Brexit vote, the European Medicines Agency has said it is now operating from Amsterdam. EMA left its London premises on March 1, and following a transitional week of teleworking, its staff will gradually move throughout this week into the Spark building in Amsterdam Sloterdijk. The Agency has been working in close cooperation with the Dutch authorities, to ensure these temporary premises would be ready to move into before March 30, when EMA’s seat formally changes from London to Amsterdam. EMA will operate out of the Spark building until its final, tailor-made premises in Amsterdam Zuidas becomes available. By Monday, March 18, when EMA will be settled in the Spark building, close to 350 staff members will have already relocated to the Netherlands. A number of EMA staff will telework from London to allow them and their families a smooth transition to Amsterdam in the second half of 2019. Overall, EMA still anticipates losing approximately 25 per cent of its total workforce (of around 900 staff members).

Roche, Jothydev’s tie-up

Diabetes CoE planned

Roche Diabetes Care and Kerala’s Jothydev’s Diabetes Research Centre have joined together to develop a Centre of Excellence to fight diabetes, across South India, a note from Roche said, adding that the partners have their visions aligned in having a patient-centric approach to healthcare.

The Centre of Excellence will deepen education and raise awareness about diabetes and the different ways it can be treated. Roche will facilitate training and education for healthcare professionals at this Centre in order to upgrade their skill sets by teaching them about iPDM (Integrated Personalised Diabetes Management), a new model of diabetes treatment. The company will also provide clinical research and patient support. About 425 million people are globally affected with diabetes and India is second only to China, with almost 73 million Indians living with diabetes.
