Mumbai Bridge Collapse: Stop the buck

Six persons, including three nurses from Gokuldas Tejpal Hospital, were killed and 31 were injured as a portion of the Foot Overbridge (FOB) outside Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus (CSMT) collapsed during peak hours on Thursday evening. One person is said to be critical. The dead have been identified as Apoorva Prabhu (35), Ranjana Tambe (40), Bhakti Shinde (40), Zahid Shiraj Khan (32), Tapendra Singh (35) and Mohan Kayagunde.

The FOB bridge, the only one to carry commuters to and from the platforms at the north end of the terminus, connects to BT Lane near Azad Maidan Police station. It was constructed in 1980 and in 2016, the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation tiled it with granite in 2016, adding to its weight. A 2016 audit of FOBs gave the 'Kasab' bridge (commonly called thus as the terrorist passed through it during the 26/11 Mumbai attack) a clean bill of structural health.

A slab collapsed at around 7.30 pm, sending commuters plummeting, and crushing pedestrians and vehicles passing underneath. Bystanders promptly rushed to help the injured, taking them to GT, St George and Bombay Hospitals even as the fire brigade rushed to the spot. All three nurses worked at GT Hospital and were headed there for the night shift, but were carried there after the accident. "After hearing about the accident, our head sister tried calling them," said one of the staff nurses.

Raiz Parmar, a hawker at the station, took Zaid Khan and his father who were walking under the bridge to St George Hospital. The 32-year-old son sustained severe injuries on his leg and shoulder, but his father was only mildly harmed and didn't need hospitalization.

Eyewitness said a red signal saved the lives of many motorists who would have been crushed by the collapse otherwise. They also added that the overbridge was being used despite repairs being carried out this morning. Traffic on the stretch has been affected and commuters have been advised to avoid DN Road and use alternate routes. Efforts to clear the traffic were on at the time of this report going to press.

6 – persons dead, including 3 nurses headed to the night shift at GT Hospital

31 – persons injured. Taken to St George, GT and Bombay hospitals

’16 – audit gave it a clean bill of health, BMC tiled it same year
