Mobile phones recovered from Nigerians during during raid in Patiala jail

RTI Information to TOI

PATIALA: Around half a dozen mobile phones were recovered from Patiala Central Jail during checking inside the barracks. The mobiles were recovered from the Nigerians who all are lodged under NDPS cases after the drugs were allegedly recovered from them.The checking was conducted for 250 inmates in the jail where around 950 under-trials and prisoners are lodged under NDPS Act. The jail officials claimed that all the five accused identified as Domilola of Kharar, Frankeamest, Nopukings lei chikerio, Chukwuemeka igwe, Christopher okee, Frank, Ujoubikasykerarneston, Ujouboshka, and James William, all residents of New Delhi, will be handed over to the police on production warrant for further investigation. The case against all the nine accused has been registered at Tripuri police station under sections of Prisons Act after recovery of mobile phones.Jail Superintendent Jaspal Singh who had conducted several surprise check in the jail said, "We are conducting surprise checking randomly and during every checking we are recovering mobiles or other things from the inmates. These five mobiles were recovered from Nigerians around three days back when they were shifted to Patiala Central Jail from Ropar Jail. The accused are lodged in NDPS cases separately and we had kept them in the barracks. We are providing all the facilities to the jail inmates but no stone will be left unturned to counter the mobile phones or drugs inside the jail.”Inspector Rajesh Kumar , Tripuri Station House Officer, said, "We are conducting an inquiry into the matter and a technical investigation will be done to find out how the mobile phones reached the precincts of jail.However, this is not the first time that mobiles have been recovered from Central Jail Patiala. As per the information availed under RTI Act by TOI, there are a total of 1856 jail inmates lodged in Central Jail Patiala of which 450 are convicts and 502 are under-trials under sections of NDPS Act. The RTI information revealed that a total of 294 mobile phones were recovered and 223 cases registered separately between 2007 to February 2018.However, no case was registered against any of the inmates in the Jails like Open Air Jail Nabha having total 41 inmatesThe scenario in the jails of some other districts is no different as in Central Jail Ludhiana out of total 3116 jail inmates there are 285 convicts and 560 under-trials lodged under NDPS Act. A total of 279 mobile phones were recovered from 2013 to April 2018.In women jail Ludhiana there are 173 inmates. A total of 11 cases under section 52A of Prisons Act were registered against some inmates following the recovery of 27 mobile phones during the period of 2007 to May 2018.
