Qatar- Naidu accused of role in former minister's murder

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) The YSR Congress Party (YSRCP) yesterday alleged that Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu and his son Nara Lokesh were behind the murder of party leader Y S Vivekananda Reddy.

YSRCP leader Vijay Sai Reddy told reporters here that Naidu and Lokesh were conspirators of the murder while Co-operation Minister Adinarayana Reddy executed the conspiracy.

He demanded a probe by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) into the murder of Vivekananda. Stating that they have no trust in the state police, he said only a probe by a central agency could bring the guilty to the book.

Vivekananda, a former state minister and former MP, was found dead under suspicious circumstances at his home in Pulivendula town of Kadapa district yesterday morning.

After preliminary investigations, police said they were treating this as a case of murder and had constituted a special investigation team (SIT) to probe the matter. Vivekananda was younger brother of former chief minister Y S Rajasekhara Reddy and uncle of YSRCP chief Y S Jaganmohan Reddy.

Vijay Sai Reddy said Vivekananda's murder was part of the conspiracy by TDP to finish off YSR family.

He said the TDP was involved in the murder of Y S Rajasekhara Reddy's father Y S Raja Reddy in 1998. He claimed that the murderers had taken shelter in the TDP office.

The MP claimed two days after Naidu told Rajasekhara Reddy in the Assembly that he will see who finishes whom, the latter was killed in a helicopter crash.

He said the attempt on S Jaganmohan's life at Visakhapatnam Airport in October last year was also part of the conspiracy to target YSR family.

On Adinarayana Reddy's claim that the dispute in YSR family led to Vivekananda's murder, Vijay Sai Reddy blasted the TDP leader.

Meanwhile Jaganmohan claimed that the TDP leadership was in power or the leadership was aware of the conspiracy whenever a death occurred in his family.

'When my grandfather Y S Raja Reddy was murdered, TDP was in power, when there was an attempt on my life at Vizag airport, TDP was in power and when this murder happened, TDP was again in power, he told reporters after paying tributes to Vivekananada.

'Two days before the helicopter crash in which my father Dr Y S Rajasekhara Reddy died, Chandrababu Naidu told the assembly that you (YSR) will not return and his remarks were boldly published in his favoured media, Jaganmohan said.

He alleged that the police were trying to divert the attention with wrong leads and fabricated evidence. 'They have brought out a letter purported to be written by my uncle before dying which defies all logic, he said.

MENAFN1503201900670000ID1098260237
