PA condemns Kashmir Jamaat ban, New Zealand mosque attack

PESHAWAR: The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly on Friday condemned the ban on the Jamaat-i-Islami in the India-occupied Kashmir and attack on a New Zealand mosque.

With Speaker Mushtaq Ahmad Ghani in the chair, the house unanimously passed a resolution against the New Zealand mosque gun attack and demanded of the federal government to condemn the incident at all international forums.

The resolution expressed solidarity with the families, whose members were killed and injured in the attack, and said only members of the Muslim community were targeted.

Opposition leader criticises govt over gas, power outages, excessive billing

The house also passed a resolution against the ban on Jamaat-i-Islami in the India-held Kashmir with a majority vote after the Awami National Party abstained.

Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal MPA Inayatullah Khan, who has an affiliation with the JI, tabled the resolution, which was supported by all parties, including the ruling Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf.

He said the Indian government had banned a political party, seized its Rs4 billion assets, and sealed charity offices and mosques affiliated with it after the Pulwama attack.

Mr Inayatullah said the JI was a political force, which had nothing to do with terrorism.

ANP parliamentary leader Sardar Hussain Babak said his party neither supported nor opposed the resolution.

He said the JI ban was an internal matter of India and therefore, the MPAs should not interfere in domestic issues of other countries.

Mr Babak said the ANP strongly condemned the use of force against civilians and violation of human rights in the India-held Kashmir.

The session was requisitioned by the joint opposition.

Beginning debate on power and gas loadshedding and excessive billing, opposition leader Akram Khan Durrani criticised the federal government’s policies.

He said KP produced gas and oil but even then, its people were subjected to loadshedding.

Mr Durrani said the province produced 60 percent of the country’s total oil.

He said the Peshawar Electric Supply Company didn’t have funds to repair or install transformers.

The opposition leader said consumers repaired power transformers on the self-help basis, while the residents of rural areas were subjected to 16-18 hours loadshedding daily despite regular payment of bills.

He said the PTI had formed governments in the centre and KP but even then, the latter didn’t get fair treatment.

Mr Durrani claimed that the federal government had refused to release Rs45 billion net hydel profit dues to the province saying the payment would be made next year.

He said the PTI government had neither installed any oil refinery in the province nor did it increase the oil and gas production in the province during the last five years.

The opposition leader said though the province had sufficient gas reserves and made large-scale production, the provincial government didn’t provide its residents with new gas connections.

He said the opposition was ready to support the provincial government in taking up payment, loadshedding and other issues with the centre.

Mr Durrani regretted the government’s policies and non-seriousness of the treasury members, especially Chief Minister Mahmood Khan, towards the assembly business.

“Chief Minister Mahmood Khan neither comes to the assembly nor does he fulfil his commitments made with the opposition,” he said.

The opposition leader asked the chair to summon the Pesco chief executive to brief house about loadshedding and other issues.

Mr Babak said KP produced around 4,000MW electricity and consumed 1,500MW.

He complained that the federal government increased electricity charges twice, while Wapda sent inflated bills to consumers.

The ANP leader said the chief minister held 17 portfolios but didn’t have powers and therefore, he didn’t come to the house.

Information minister Shaukat Ali Yousafzai blamed the previous governments for the current financial and power crises.

He said the PTI government had inherited Rs30,000 billion loans and circular debts due to the massive corruption and wrong policies of the previous governments.

MPAs Maulana Ahmad Kundi, Maulana Lutfur Rehman and Sardar Aurangzeb Nalotha also participated in the debate. The sitting was later adjourned until 2pm on Monday.

Published in Dawn, March 16th, 2019
