9 Indian-origin people missing after New Zealand shootings that killed 49

Among the missing nine people of Indian origin are Ahmed Jahangir, who hails from Hyderabad and who has family in the city.

Nine people from India or of Indian origin have been missing after Friday’s shooting at two mosques in Christchurch in which 49 people have died, the Indian envoy in New Zealand said. (Photo: AP)

New Delhi/Christchurch: Nine people from India or of Indian origin have been missing after Friday’s shooting at two mosques in Christchurch in which 49 people have died, the Indian envoy in New Zealand said.

Read: ‘Darkest day’: 49 dead in NZ mosque shootings, gunman an Australian

Two Indians have died in the attacks, a third is battling for his life, Asaduddin Owaisi, the leader of AIMIM (All India Majlis-E-Ittehadul Muslimeen Party) said.

During the Friday prayers, a gunman live-streamed footage of him going room-to-room, victim to victim, shooting the wounded from close range as they struggled to crawl away. He has been identified as an Australian extremist, the gunman had also published a “manifesto”, in which he referred to immigrants as “invaders”.

Read: Brenton Tarrant: ‘A regular white man’ who wanted to rid Europe of immigrants

"As per updates received from multiple sources there are 9 missing persons of Indian nationality/ origin. Official confirmation still awaited. Huge crime against humanity. Our prayers with their families," High Commissioner Sanjiv Kohli tweeted.

As per updates received from multiple sources there are 9 missing persons of indian nationality/ origin. Official confirmation still awaited. Huge crime against humanity. Our prayers with their families — sanjiv kohli (@kohli_sanjiv) March 15, 2019

The High Commission has also tweeted, offering help.

Owaisi has sought help from foreign minister Sushma Swaraj for the brother of one of the victims. The family is from Hyderabad.

Indian shot in New Zealand mosque attack, his Hyderabad family seeks urgent visa https://t.co/2Q8EYFnZ6F — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

Owaisi tweeted: "A video from #ChristChurch shows one Ahmed Jehangir who was shot. His brother Iqbal Jehangir is a resident of Hyderabad & would like to go to NZ for Ahmed's family."

A video from #ChristChurch shows one Ahmed Jehangir who was shot. His brother Iqbal Jehangir is a resident of Hyderabad & would like to go to NZ for Ahmed’s family.



I request @KTRTRS @TelanganaCMO @MEAIndia @SushmaSwaraj to make necessary arrangements for the Khursheed family — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

In another tweet, Owaisi said: "His brother is serious and his family has little support. I'm only requesting the immediate support of your good offices in expediting his visa process. He'll make all arrangements to travel to NZ by himself."

These are Mr. Khursheed’s passport details. His brother is serious & his family has little support. I’m only requesting the immediate support of your good offices in expediting his visa process. He’ll make all arrangements to travel to NZ by himself pic.twitter.com/vXMbnZeJ2X — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

UPDATE: I’d like to thank @SushmaSwaraj for personally updating me about MEA’s efforts in assisting Ahmed’s & Ahsan’s families reach NZ in time



We are in touch with @MEAIndiaMEA & they have assured us that they’re making all efforts to get the visa process expedited https://t.co/pJ2O8a4BgL — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has condemned the shooting, described as the country’s worst ever mass shooting, as a terrorist attack.

PM @narendramodi strongly condemns the heinous terrorist attack at the places of worship in #Christchurch today https://t.co/6IviTxd2Pk pic.twitter.com/xCxNUpNNEL — Raveesh Kumar (@MEAIndia) March 15, 2019

In the evening, the foreign ministry issued a statement that read, "The Prime Minister stressed India's strong condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and of all those who support such acts of violence. He stressed that hatred and violence have no place in diverse and democratic societies".
