Both Vashi bridges to get suicide barriers

Public Works Department

steel suicide barriers

Vashi bridges

Thane Creek

PWD department

#MeToo: KWAN co-founder Anirban Das Blah attempts suicide at Vashi bridge Co-founder of talent management agency KWAN Anirban Das Blah was rescued by the Vashi Traffic Police in the small hours of Friday after he was found attempting to jump off the old Vashi bridge.

FOB collapses near Vashi Creek bridge; traffic choked for five hours A crane was dismantling an inoperational FOB near Mankhurd octroi naka when a slab fell, causing the crane to overturn; no injuries were reported

Past cases in 2018

This is being done at the request of the police as there are over 20 suicides or suicide attempts on average from the old and new bridges each year.At the request of the Navi Mumbai Police, the(PWD) has decided to installalong the railings of the old and newspanning. Several suicides have been reported from these bridges since 2015, and the police had been requesting such barriers for years.Every year, there are more than 20 suicides or suicide attempts from the bridges, which connect Mumbai and Navi Mumbai. While some people are saved by fishermen, not everyone who jumps off the bridge survives.In 2015, 21 people jumped off the old Vashi Bridge, while 15 were rescued. In 2016, too, 15 people jumped off the bridge, while at least eight leapt off it and died in 2017, said a police official from Vashi police station.“We have been following up on the issue with the. Finally, they have come up with an international design that is installed at several bridges outside India to prevent suicides,” said Dr Suresh Kumar Mekal, joint commissioner of police, Navi Mumbai. “We have agreed to the design and hopefully this year, the railings will be installed.”Officials said the railings will be around 1,863 m long, and will be installed on both the new bridge, constructed in 1995, and the old one, that was inaugurated in 1971.PWD executive engineer Shrikant Bangar said, “The Navi Mumbai Police has been repeatedly asking us for suicide barriers at the Vashi bridges as there have been a number of suicides. We will finalise the design and estimates for the barriers by January 10.”“The barriers will be 9-feet tall and have a curvature at the top to prevent anyone from climbing them. We are planning to design the barriers such that they add to the new bridge’s beauty. On the old bridge, we will be able to install suicide barriers only on one side, as it has a gas pipeline on the other side,” he said.The police said they had held several meetings with PWD officials to zero in on the designs.The PWD will soon begin issuing tenders for the barriers, an official said.In the past, the police had put up banners on the old bridge. “The banners were motivational, so that people who came to the bridge to jump off it reconsidered the decision. Later, the police even started patrols on the bridge using private security guards appointed by the PWD. We even kept a boat on standby under the bridge in Thane Creek, but the water level there fluctuates, making things difficult,” said a police official from Vashi police station.,17, the son of a BARC scientist, was found dead on Elephanta Island. He had jumped off a Vashi bridge on September 23official from a celebrity management agency who was facing sexual harassment allegations had come a Vashi bridge intending to jump off it, but was the police rescued him.son of an income-tax inspector who had gone missing from Nerul was found dead in Thane Creek, under the Vashi bridges
