Bahubalis in Bihar want better halves in poll fray

(This story originally appeared in on Mar 16, 2019)

PATNA: Don-turned politician Anand Mohan has warned the Mahagathbandhan of RJD, Congress and others that it will have to pay a heavy price if his wife Lovely Anand was denied a ticket from Sheohar to contest the forthcoming Lok Sabha election.Lovely, a former Vaishali MP, joined Congress in January this year. She is willing to contest from Sheohar where Rajput voters are in sizeable number. Interacting with media during his deposition in a case in the Saharsa civil court on Thursday, Anand said Lovely was capable of winning the election from anywhere in the state. Anand is serving life term in former Gopalganj DM G Krishnaiya murder case.“Lovely has her vote base across the state. But her supporters want her to contest from Sheohar. It will take a day or two for the Mahagathbandhan constituents to decide on the seats,” said Anand, the former chief of erstwhile Bihar People’s Party. He said his vote base was no less than any other Mahagathbandhan partners, except one or two parties. “Though I am behind bars for the past 12 years, my vote base has not dwindled,” the former Mihisi MLA said.Lovely had shot into fame after defeating Kishori Sinha, the wife of former CM Satyendra Narain Sinha and mother of former governor Nikhil Kumar, in the byelection from Vaishali Lok Sabha seat in 1994. Her supporters said she joined the Congress only when senior party leaders promised her a ticket from Sheohar.Anand Mohan is not the lone Bahubali (strongman), who is flexing muscle to get a ticket for his better half. Anant Singh is also vying for a Congress ticket for his wife Neelam Devi from Munger. Though his supporters claimed Neelam would be the second option if the party denies Anant a ticket due to his criminal antecedents.Anant, known for his muscle power, parted ways with the ruling JD(U) and won the assembly election from Mokama as an independent candidate from jail in 2015. Neelam had then campaigned for her husband. Anant, who is on bail, had actively participated in the February 3 Congress’s rally in Patna addressed by party president Rahul Gandhi.Surajbhan Singh alias Suraj Singh, another politician known for his muscle and fire power, is not lagging behind so far giving support to his wife is concerned. In 2014, Surajbhan’s wife Veena Devi was elected from Munger Lok Sabha seat on LJP ticket by defeating Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lallan Singh of JD(U). Veena is now set to contest from Nawada from where Union minister Giriraj Singh had won in 2014.Another strongman Rajesh Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav’s wife Ranjeet Ranjan is an MP from Supaul. She had won the 2014 general election on Congress ticket. Pappu is also an MP from Madhepura. Though he had won the election as an RJD nominee, he was expelled from the party in 2015 for his anti-party activities. He had defeated former Union minister Sharad Yadav in 2014.“The bahubalis still play pivotal role in Bihar politics. Either they are fielded as party nominees or their wives are given tickets in the elections. So, they still continue to rule either directly or by proxy,” said a social scientist and former director of A N Sinha Institute of Social Sciences, Prof S Narayan.
