A contest between economy and nationalism

A contest between economy and nationalism

What are the issues that trouble 900 million Indian voters who are going to elect 543 members of the Lok Sabha between April 11 and May 19? Do they expect the new parliamentarians to keep the promises they make or the government they bring in improve their lot? Is there much excitement in the air or do the people expect their life to continue without major changes or deterioration? Be that as it may, there is much excitement among the politicians and the parties they belong to change their fortunes for the better in two months from now. But what are the prospects of the people of India at election time? Is there hope or lack of it?

The key question is whether Prime Minister Narendra Modi faces an anti-incumbency in his quest to remain in power. He is entitled to believe that Opposition threats to his rule have diminished or vanished after the February 26 air strikes on the Balakot Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp, but continuing shelling across the line of control continues unabated and even schools are being hit; Kashmir remains without peace. Eighteen terrorists have been shot dead in 21 days since February 18 and the hunt for more of them continues.

Is the Prime Minister taking into account the recent setbacks in three State Assembly elections, preceded by setbacks in Punjab and Karnataka, besides Gujarat where the BJP managed to retain power in spite of loss of seats in several constituencies. Certain BJP alliances, as in Andhra, have broken up.

U.P. will be a test case as the Opposition parties, particularly Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party, have stitched up an alliance even though they have yet to join hands with the Congress there. U.P. gave Mr. Modi 72 of the 80 Lok Sabha seats. Will the BJP be able to retain that commanding position? In Bihar, the RJD led by Laloo Prasad Yadav does present a threat to the BJP, which is now in alliance with Mr. Nitish Kumar's JDU leading the coalition government. The loss in these two States could be crucial; yet some BJP hotheads are boastful and claim to increase the Saffron party's tally to 300 to 400 even though Mr. Modi makes no such projections because he knows that to reach 282 Lok Sabha seats, as at present, is a tough call.

In Tamil Nadu, BJP's alliance partner for the Lok Sabha, AIADMK, faces a strong anti-incumbency factor after the demise of Jayalalitha and the DMK led by Mr. Stalin has already pledged support to the Congress, especially Rahul Gandhi.

In Maharashtra, which will elect a new Assembly by the end of the year, does the BJP face some internal problems, not just with the Shiv Sena, but with Mr. Nitin Gadkari hoping that the RSS may help him become Chief Minister any time soon to replace Mr. Fadanavis to keep the Shiv Sena in good humour. He has repeatedly announced his lack of Prime Ministerial ambitions as he may be doubtful if the BJP will win the Lok Sabha elections.

The action against terrorist masterminds in Pakistan and their lackeys in India has generated a sense of hope that the government is tough and means business nor will it relax its vigil, no matter what the cost. But the mischief mongers, whether in Pakistan or elsewhere, are always on the move to create mayhem, regardless of Pakistan's leadership disclaiming involvement,. Yet it refuses to restrain its troops from gun battles across the line of control or international border in Jammu.

Have the air strikes at the Balakot terrorists' camp in the north-west frontier of Pakistan driven any lessons to curb the menace that continues to hurt India? Will there be new trouble during the elections and will the para military and armed forces besides the local police be able to keep the vigil and ensure peace during the world's largest exercise in democracy, with more than four times the voters than in the USA? India has carried out the exercise for 70 years quite peacefully.

Aside from terrorism, there are questions of survival that many of the 1.5 billion Indians face. It is not just food, health, shelter, education , jobs, but the larger question of an economy, which is now being described as the world's third largest in terms of purchasing price parity, is far from stable or bouncing. Had the economy been turning away from growth 26 months ago that the Prime Minister thought that he had to deliver a jolt by declaring 88 per cent of the currency null and void to try and give it a push, but it caused turmoil and chaos. Were millions of jobs lost suddenly, with no cash to pay for services and often to buy their basic needs? In the third year since that un-glorious event, have the people recovered from its shock? Has unaccounted money been curbed or is it multiplying merrily as before because wheelers and dealers are too smart for the authorities to book them? Have the 2,000-rupee currency notes become the new hoarding device as they are hardly visible?

But the BJP is looking more confident than ever because the Opposition to it is questioning the veracity of the actions taken against terrorists and demanding proof of the claims made by the ruling party. The government reminds them that they took no steps to curb terrorists after the Mumbai attacks of November 26, 2011 and they have the cheek to demand proof when the Congress had relaxed the vigil.

An exciting election to elect a new Parliament lies ahead of India and the contours of the results are far from easy to predict.

Lalit Sethi is a Journalist of long standing and a commentator on Political and Social Issues.

—[IFS]
