'Many More Would've Died,' Indian-Origin NZ Attack Survivor Lauds Man Who Confronted Gunman

On 15 March, a gunman opened fire in two mosques in New Zealand's Christchurch, taking the lives of 49 innocent people.

In the midst of the dastardly attack, an unidentified man helped avoid a much bigger tragedy by confronting the attacker.

“We were in a small mosque - measuring about a hundred square metres - and when you have a gunman coming in and opening fire in such circumstances, your heart beats faster and you can’t feel anything," an NDTV report quoted the Indian-origin survivor, Faisal Sayed, as saying as he recounted the horror that unfolded during the shooting.

Reuters/NDTV

In the interview, Faisal Sayed, who has been living in New Zealand for more than 10 years, said that he and his friend witnessed a "gentleman creep up behind" the gunman and held him until he dropped his gun.

This attack took place at the place of worship in the suburb of Linwood.

A New Zealand Herald report states that the unnamed hero pounced on the gunman and snatched his gun. He even chased the fleeing gunman who ultimately fled in a car waiting outside the mosque.

"If that hadn't happened, many more would have died and I wouldn't be here now. Hats off to that man; I will definitely try and look him up," he added.

The attack killed one of his friends and another one has been hospitalized with serious injuries.

An armed police officer stands guard in a perimeter outside Linwood mosque/Reuters

But Sayed, this one incident is not enough to change his mind about New Zealand as a country, a place that's been his home for a decade.

"I don't see my loved ones, my family or even my community facing any challenges. I will never be the one to pass judgement based on a single incident," said Sayed who coincidentally was also part of the 2008 terror attack at the Taj hotel in Mumbai.

The mosques targeted in Friday's attack, the worst mass shooting in the country's history, were the Masjid Al Noor in central Christchurch and another place of worship in the suburb of Linwood

Seven people were killed at the Linwood Islamic Centre and 42 were murdered at the Masjid Al Noor, also in Christchurch.
