Masood Azhar is ALIVE! 'I am fully well. All are well. My kidney, liver are perfectly fine', writes JeM chief

Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar | Photo Credit: PTI

Islamabad: Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar claimed that "no damage" was done by the air strikes carried out by the Indian Air Force across the Line of Control and refuted reports about his ill health saying that he was fully well and his kidney and liver were perfectly fine. Azhar's column has been published under his known pen name "Saadi" and published in the latest weekly edition of terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed's mouthpiece "Al-Qalam".

In his column, Azhar claimed that all of his supporters were well and no harm was done to the JeM as claimed by India. Evoking the dastardly February 14 Pulwama attack, Azhar said that Kashmiri like Adil Ahmad Dar, the suicide bomber who carried out the attack, are going a great work in the valley. "The fire started by Dar will no be extinguished soon," said Azhar. In the Pulwama attack, at least CRPF personnel had lost their lives.

Later in the column, Azhar talked about the current situation in Afghanistan and said that he was pained by the suffering of the Afghanistani people. However, taking a potshot at PM Modi, Azhar said that he was ready to have competition of archery and shooting to prove his good health.

Earlier this month, a Pakistani minister in the Imran Khan government had claimed that Azhar was "very critical" and was undergoing treatment at an Army hospital in the country. Minister's comments fueled fire about Azhar having died in the air strikes carried out by the IAF in Balakot. However, later the Jaish had issued a statement saying that the terror commander was alive and doing well.

India had carried out air strikes across the LoC on February 26 and Times Now has learned that a total of 263 terrorists had assembled at the facility days before the unprecedented action. According to IAF chief BS Dhanoa, the Mirage 2000 hit their target making a strong case for a large number of JeM terrorists, at least 250 claimed by BJP President Amit Shah, being neutralised in the air strikes. So far no official number, on how many terrorists were killed, has been given by the Indian government.
