Applications Invited For Round Three Of Delegate Applications Of GLCMUN'19 [22nd-24th March]

The 11th edition of Government Law College Model United Nations is scheduled to be held from 22nd to 24th March 2019 at Government Law College, Mumbai.



The third round of delegate applications has been opened.

The theme for the 11th GLCMUN 2019 is "A Global Mission for Peace and Human Rights".

GLCMUN is also collaborating with the Teach for India Foundation to inculcate in students from the TFI classrooms diplomacy and the concept of United Nations.

Committees and Agendas for GLCMUN'19:

UN Security Council:

The situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo, and review of the MONUSCO mandate.

Maintenance of International Peace and Security: Non-proliferation of weapons of Mass Destruction.

Ukraine-NATO Inter-Parliamentary Council:

Russian aggression against NATO allies

Solution to the Ukrainian conflict

United Nations General Assembly (DISEC):

Discussing the issues pertaining to the drafting of the Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism.

Possibility of a Nuclear Weapons Free Zone in the Middle East

World Economic Forum:

Strengthening the Public Private Partnerships to combat money laundering and financial crimes.

Advancement in the fourth Industrial revolution with emphasis on cyber security.

United Nations General Assembly (Legal):

Safeguarding ocean space for present and future generations.

Legitimacy of economic sanctions under international law.

United Nations Human Rights Council:

Human Rights of Civilians and Non Combatants in Conflict Zones with special reference to Women and Children.

Preparing for the Aftermath of Syrian Conflict.

Lok Sabha:

Laws relating to Fugitive Economic Offenders.

Discussion on the Personal Data Protection Bill, 2018

Registration Fee: INR 2000

Optional Accommodation Fee: INR 4500 for 3 Nights at Astoria Hotel, Mumbai. (

Awards:

Best Delegate: Rs. 10,000

High Commendation: Rs. 5,000

Best Reporter: Rs. 8,000

Best Photographer: Rs. 8,000

Queries can be addressed to [email protected].

To register, click here.

For further information, click here.
