Pakistan Army shoots down Indian spy drone at LoC

RAWALPINDI – Pakistan Army troops on Saturday shot down an Indian spying quadcopter in Rakhchikri Sector along Line of Control, according to the military's media wing.

The quadcopter had come 150 meters inside Pakistan, Inter Services Public Relations (ISPR) chief Major General Asif Ghafoor said in a tweet.

Pakistan Army troops shot down an Indian spying quadcopter in Rakhchikri Sector along Line of Control.

The quadcopter had come 150 meters inside Pakistan. pic.twitter.com/iOayvEZEff — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) March 16, 2019

Earlier this year, Pakistan Army troops shot down two Indian spy quadcopters within a span of two days in different sectors of Azad Kashmir along Line of Control.

“Not even a quadcopter will be allowed to cross [the] LoC, In Shaa Allah,” Maj-Gen Asif Ghafoor wrote on ISPR’s official twitter handle in January.

Pakistan Army downs another Indian spy drone ... 09:59 PM | 2 Jan, 2019 RAWALPINDI - Pakistan Army troops have shot down another Indian spy quadcopter in Azad Kashmir's Satwal Sector along ...

According to military observers, the Indian military uses quadcopter for aerial photography of Pakistani posts along the LoC as part of its intelligence-gathering operations and target selection before carrying out cross-LoC shelling.

Pakistan shares a 3,323-km-long border with India of which 221 km of the International Boundary and 740 km of the Line of Control fall in Occupied Jammu and Kashmir.

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated last month, after the Pakistani military shot down two Indian warplanes in the disputed region of Kashmir, responding to an earlier airstrike by Indian aircraft against what New Delhi said was a camp of Jaish-e-Mohammad group, considered terrorists by both the nuclear-armed rivals.

While India has accused Pakistan of supporting the militants and having a "direct hand" in the incident, Pakistan, in turn, has rejected the allegations.

Jammu and Kashmir is a region that has been disputed by India and Pakistan since 1947 when both countries gained independence from the British Empire. The two countries have gone through three wars over the region, but the conflict has not been resolved. The unstable situation in the region has led to the emergence of rebel groups, who are fighting against the brute Indian forces for past many decades.
