SPO Khushboo Jan shot dead by terrorists outside her house in J-K's Shopian

New Delhi:

In yet another awful terror attack, a lady Special Police Officer (SPO) was shot dead by suspected terrorists at the Vehil area of south Kashmir's Shopian district on Saturday. The SPO, identified as Khushboo Jan, was fired upon by unidentified gunmen from close range around 2:40 pm at her Shopian residence. Immediately after the incident, Jan was evacuated to a hospital where she succumbed to her injuries. Meanwhile, a joint team of Army, Special Operation Group of Police and CRPF cordoned off the area and launched a search operation to nab the assailants.

Denouncing the gruesome terror attack in the heart of Kashmir Valley, the Jammu and Kashmir police said, "Terrorists today fired on a policewoman Khushboo Jan at her village in Vehil area of Shopian district. She sustained critical injuries and was evacuated to a hospital where she succumbed. We condemn this gruesome terror act and stand by her family at this critical juncture".

Read | Pakistan violates ceasefire in Mankote sector of Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch

"Separately, police have registered a case and initiated an investigation in the matter," they added.

Jammu and Kashmir police: Separately, police has registered a case and initiated investigation in the matter https://t.co/Hf3GKTuuQw — ANI (@ANI) March 16, 2019

The development comes barely hours after Pakistan violated ceasefire yet again in the Mankote sector of Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district this afternoon. Pakistan troops used heavy artillery to hit areas in Mankote sector of the district, prompting the Indian Army to retaliate strongly. However, no casualty has bee reported from either side in the cross-border firing till the time.

The India-Pakistan border skirmishes witnessed a sudden spurt following India's preemptive air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Balakot on February 26 to avenge the February 14 Pulwama terror attack, which left 42 CRPF personnel dead and dozens of others injured.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
