Afghanistan’s vulnerability in India-Pakistan’s escalated Skirmish

India and Pakistan be influenced by mounting tensions between the two nations? Well, not at all.

Since; the terror attack on Indian convoy in the Indian administered Kashmir took place on February 14, political tensions between India and Pakistan have flared up, the incident resulted in a number of significant consequences that includes the pre-emptive air strike by the Indian air force on February 26 on a training camp in Balakot Pakistan, which left 300 JeM militants were killed.

Nevertheless, on February 27 Pakistan air forces retaliated back and shot down one Indian aircraft in Pakistan occupied Kashmir and arrested one wing commander Varthaman Abhinandan, luckily he was released on March 1 after being in Pakistan Army’s custody for three days.

Although, Pakistani authorities claimed no loss in the clash, Pakistan appealed the United Nations and United States to mediate in the ongoing skirmish between Pakistan and India in order to put an end to the concerns between the two neighboring countries.

The escalated tensions not only affected the two nations but, unfortunately, had negative impacts over Afghanistan.

Afghanistan, the country which has been victimized due to the political games of the regional nations, can avoid the same scenario from being repeated. Since; the Afghan government, United States and the Taliban are into peace negotiation for the last several months to end the 18 years devastating war in Afghanistan. Pakistan known for being one of the huge supporters of the Taliban in the region, plays a vital role in the ongoing peace process of Afghanistan.

The mounting concerns between India and Pakistan affect Afghanistan both economically and politically. Pakistan attempted to deter the strategic alliance between India and Afghanistan, this time again, due to the economic predicament going on over there and the poor military budget the government and intelligence agency warned the likelihood of hindrance in the ongoing peace talks being in progress between the USA, Afghanistan and the Taliban in Qatar.

The ambassador of Pakistan to Afghanistan recently expressed in a press conference that; the peace negotiation between the US, Afghanistan and the Taliban can be affected if the tensions between Pakistan and India are not resolved, Afghanistan’s foreign Minister reacted to the statement and many people went on to social media calling the statement out of place and a threat.

Secondly, Pakistan blocked the aerial route to every sort of internal and external went from $150 to$200 up to $500.

The Pakistan Army and the police started arresting the Afghan refugees residing over there for decades, to show the world and India as if they are retaliating against the terrorist groups.

Afghan refugees were banned from going out to Kohat Bazar, while the Pakistan Army forcefully compelled the refugees to protest in the favor of Pakistan. It is reported that many of them had been paid a certain amount of money to do so.

The Afghan government must adopt a marginalized status in the Indo-Pak complications, and rather focus on the issues being continued within Afghanistan, one of them being the peace negotiation.

Otherwise, the Afghan refugees and the Afghans in Afghanistan will see negative consequences as always.

Hits: 0
