Varun Dhawan gets special surprise from fan and it has a Kalank connection. See pic

Varun Dhawan, who holds the enviable record of giving only hits in his seven-year-long career, has a massive fan following around the world. Recently, he was in London to shoot for Remo D'Souza's Street Dancer, and he received an extremely special surprise.

One of Varun's fans gifted him a denim jacket with Zafar, his character in Abhishek Varman's Kalank, hand-painted on it. The actor took to Instagram to express his gratitude for the thoughtful present.

Sharing a picture of himself posing in the jacket, Varun wrote, "Zafar is one of the most iconic characters I have played and just before leaving London, I got gifted a hand painted Zafar jacket. I feel quite cool. Thank you @naxvii @nayna_diya #kalankthemovie."

Kalank is, according to producer Karan Johar, "the story of turbulent relationships and eternal love". Set in 1940s India, the epic tale directed by Abhishek Varman features Varun Dhawan as Zafar, Alia Bhatt as Roop, Sanjay Dutt as Balraj Chaudhry, Madhuri Dixit as Bahaar Begum, Sonakshi Sinha as Satya Chaudhry and Aditya Roy Kapur as Dev Chaudhry.

Interestingly, Kalank was actually supposed to be directed by Karan's father, the late Yash Johar. In fact, a decade and a half ago, the period drama even went into pre-production and was supposed to star Shah Rukh Khan, Kajol and Ajay Devgn. However, it ended up getting shelved.

Now, after 15 years, Karan passed on the baton to filmmaker Abhishek Varman. "A film that was born in my heart and mind 15 years ago....a film I passionately believe in...the last film my father worked on before he left us....it was his dream to see this film come through," he revealed in an Instagram post.

"I couldn't fulfil his dream then....my spirit was broken....but today his wish has found a relationship with celluloid....the story of turbulent relationships and eternal love has found a voice....the film has been woven, nurtured and visualised by Abhishek Varman," the post added.

Kalank is scheduled to open in theatres on April 17 this year.

ALSO SEE | Varun Dhawan calls Deepika Padukone and Ranveer Singh his adopted parents

ALSO READ | Why Varun Dhawan is Bollywood's most bankable young star
