Group calls Montrealers to Sunday vigil for victims of Christchurch attack

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Group calls Montrealers to Sunday vigil for victims of Christchurch attack Mouvement des droits du Citoyen hopes people will turn out in large numbers 'in solidarity against hate and Islamophobia.' Photo by Veronica Henri / Veronica Henri/Toronto Sun

Article content A group called the Mouvement des droits du Citoyen is calling on people to attend a vigil to be held Sunday afternoon in downtown Montreal for the victims of the mass shootings carried out at mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content The vigil is scheduled to take place at 2 p.m. Sunday at Victoria Square, at the corner of du Square-Victoria St. and Viger Ave. W. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Group calls Montrealers to Sunday vigil for victims of Christchurch attack Back to video In a release, the group stated that it “condemns with the strongest words the act of terror against Muslim worshippers in Christchurch mosques. This act is not directed only at Muslims, but it is an act of terrorism against all of humanity and all values.” The group hopes people will turn out in large numbers “in solidarity against hate and Islamophobia.” Gatherings both formal and informal have been taking place across Canada and around the world since at least 50 people were killed and dozens more were injured when a man opened fire in two on Friday in mass shootings carried out in two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand. It is the worst mass killing in N.Z. history.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content In Quebec City, where just over two years ago six died when their own community was attacked , painful memories and fears were rekindled. “Life had returned to normal, people had started to breathe, to rest, our activities had resumed,” Boufeldja Benabdallah, president and co-founder of the Quebec City mosque, told the Montreal Gazette Friday. “Now with this, we again have to rethink security, vigilance and to relive the pain. People are remembering the funerals, the weeks some spent in hospitals, the children who don’t have their fathers. Many things. A great weight that people are feeling once again today. It’s very, very painful.” In Ottawa, Muslims gathered in support and sadness on Friday, but also fear . When Abdel Felfel told his daughter, Rahmah, that he was going to prayer at the Ottawa Mosque on Friday, the nine-year-old became very concerned for her father’s safety. He told her not to worry and assured her that Canada was a much better place and that what happened in Christchurch couldn’t happen here. But Felfel, a trustee of the Ottawa Muslim Association, wasn’t convinced that what he told her was true.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Montreal Gazette Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Montreal Gazette, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Montreal Gazette Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
