#PrimetimeWatch: TV Downplays NZ Shootings and Islamophobia, Forgets Bridge Collapse

New Delhi: Forty-nine people were killed in terrorist shootings at two mosques during Friday prayers in New Zealand’s Christchurch on Friday. Nine Indians were reportedly missing after the attack.

How did Indian TV media report the attack? Was it given importance during the primetime hours? Did they highlight the threat of growing Islamophobia and right-wing terror? Was it linked to other such attacks in different countries?

On yesterday’s Primetime Watch, we looked at how channels covered the Mumbai bridge collapse. Was that issue followed up the next day?

Hindi channels

Zee News

In its primetime show DNA, the channel talked about the Christchurch attack and played a small portion of the video recorded by the assailant – while claiming “censor” all the parts it deemed unfit.

However, there were no messages about the harms of Islamophobia, even though India has seen a rising number of attacks against minorities.

The channel also ran stories on the Supreme Court issuing summons to the Election Commission on a petition filed by various opposition parties seeking the tallying of at least 50% of all EVM votes with VVPAT slips.

Zee News also ran a small story on how the BJP is likely to release its first list of candidates on Saturday.

Another political story centred around Bhim Army chief Chandrasekhar Azad announcing his decision to contest the polls opposite Narendra Modi in Varanasi.

NDTV India

The channel ran a story on the repercussion of China blocking action against Masood Azhar in its programme Chunav India Ka. The programme, with the headline ‘Atanki Masood Azhar par Shikanja (Noose tightens around terrorist Masood Azhar)’, discussed how China has been isolated due to its pro-Pakistan stance.

Aaj Tak

Along with its main story on SP-BSP and RLD drawing up plans for 11 joint rallies, the channel ran a historical background of relations between the SP and BSP.

Noting that it was SP leader Akhilesh Yadav whose overtures towards BSP supremo Mayawati, whom he often described as his bua (aunt), were responsible for the old rivals coming together, the channel noted that SP founder Mulayam Singh Yadav was still opposed to the alliance. It ran headlines like ‘Mayawati par Netaji abhi bhi Mulayam nahin (Netaji is still not soft on Mayawati)’.

Other headlines spoke of Mayawati’s improved relations with Akhilesh Yadav. ‘UP main rang laya bua-bhatijay ka gathbandhan (In UP, the tie up between aunt and nephew is spreading its wings)’ was one of them.

ABP News

ABP news ran a brief story on the shootings in New Zealand and how nine Indians were missing. It also reported how two engineers were suspended for the foot-over bridge collapse in Mumbai.

The channel’s special story was on the bitter rivalry between nine-time MLA Azam Khan and two-time MP Jaya Prada in Rampur. Titled ‘Rampur Returns’, the programme spoke about how the two former SP leaders were this time pitted opposite each other, with the BJP planning to field former leading actor Jaya Prada from the Muslim-majority seat.

It also ran another story on Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi planning to be in Varanasi for Holi, with the headline ‘Priyanka ki Holi Banaras wali’.

English channels

Times Now

In its India Upfront programme, the channel ran a hashtag #MasjidForVotesSting, along with a story which it said was the “Biggest 2019 Pre-Election Exclusive”.

The story claimed that there was an “underhand anti-Modi ploy” under which Muslims were being wooed openly by the Congress in Uttar Pradesh. Through other headlines like “They’re even willing to break laws”, “Preach secularism, oppose Hindutva”, “But use Islam to win 99% Muslims” and “Murky tactics to win Uttar Pradesh”, it sought to explain this aspect. The idea behind the story was clear as indicated by another tagline: “Cong hypocrisy exposed”.

India Today

Campus Face Off with Rajdeep Sardesai provided a refreshing look at West Bengal politics, as the channel ran a Kolkata special. It dealt with the issues in the state and asked, “Is Mamta in PM race?” Another question was “What does young India want?” The programme used the tagline “millennials join poll debate” and stated that 8.4 crore new voters have been added this time.

It featured Garga Chatterjee of the Trinamool Congress talking about how the unemployment levels now are the highest in 45 years. He was pitted against Babul Supriyo of the BJP. The questions ranged from fear among voters as reflected in the low voter turnout in civic body and panchayat polls, to the TMC often accusing the Centre of misusing the CBI against the state government.

“Opposition faceless in Bengal” was a tagline as the programme also questioned who BJP’s face is in the state. Likewise, “Why quota if no jobs” was a jibe at BJP’s reservation policy.

Republic TV

The channel used its primetime show to eulogise the prime minister. It ran a story-discussion on “150 Rallies: PM goes all out” with the hashtag #ModiVsWho. During the discussion, BJP leader Nalin Kohli said while Modi was BJP’s choice as the prime ministerial candidate, the opposition had no such face.

Another headline was “Super NDA versus Who in 2019?”

The programme had nearly 10 debaters, leading to the expected cacophony. Anchor-editor Arnab Goswami had the last word: “Whether you like it or not at the national level Narendra Modi is a big big big factor – the only problem with BJP is that they do not have the capacity to build on it.”

The anchor also asked the opposition to spell out “who is your real alternative”.

NDTV 24X7

In its primetime show “The Big Fight – Road to 2019”, the channel discussed “Stitching Alliances: BJP ahead of Opposition?”

With sub-headings like “Race for alliances: NDA leads UPA” the programme indicated that the ruling party has been moving fast to get more allies on board.

It also ran headlines like “Rahul: Vadakkan is not a big leader” and “Congress goes solo in UP: Advantage BJP” .

Vikram Chandra asked several relevant questions during the discussion featuring K.C. Tyagi of Janata Dal (United) and Ghanshyam Tiwari of the Samajwadi Party among others. They also debated if the recent defections from the Congress – of Vadakkan in Kerala and of four legislators in Gujarat – were an indicator of the way the wind was blowing.
