PM sends strong message to terror outfits eyeing India

Modi talks of his government’s strong decisions, which included an apparent reference to the IAF strike on terror camps after the Pulwama attack, at the 50th Raising Day celebrations of CISF, reports Tehelka Bureau

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who attended the 50th Raising Day celebrations of Central Industrial Security Forces (CISF), at Indirapuram in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh has sent across a strong message to terrorist forces targeting India. The CISF is mandated to provide security to major infrastructure installations — nuclear installations, airports, seaports, power plants, government buildings, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation of the country.

Among the 35,000 policemen who sacrificed their lives serving the nation since independence, 4,000 are from paramilitary forces. That shows the sacrifice of CISF and other paramilitary forces. On February 14, a convoy carrying CRPF men was attacked by a JeM terrorist in the Pulwama, killing 40 jawans. Following the attack, India destroyed JeM terrorists camp in air strike inside Pakistan.

On September 18, 2016, heavily armed terrorists stormed an army base in Uri in Kashmir killing 17 jawans, prompting India to conduct surgical strikes on terror launch-pads across the LoC. The country cannot keep suffering forever and that his government has taken some strong decisions against such elements. He was apparently referring to surgical strikes in Pakistan. He said that “For many decades, the country and numerous families have suffered the wounds and pain given by terrorism, Naxalism and insurgency. What happened in Pulwama and Uri was heartbreaking. He said “We cannot bear this pain till eternity. Enough is enough.”

The CISF is celebrating the 50th year of its raising and this is the first time Prime Minister, Narendra Modi attended the event of any of the five Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) since he took charge in 2014. Raised in 1969, the Central Industrial Security Force presently has about 1.56 lakh personnel in its ranks. The PM said that following dastardly acts of terrorist violence, his government has taken some strong decisions, in an apparent reference to the IAF strike on terror camps after the Pulwama attack.

Modi said, “Someone, sometime, has to take a big decision (against such terror acts). It is my privilege that with the support of the crores of people of this country, we took some strong decisions.” He said the government has adopted “a new policy” to act against terrorism and that it was its responsibility to live up to the expectations of the families of the personnel killed in the line of duty. “Our government is purchasing all modern gadgets required by our security forces to tackle such challenges,” Modi said, mentioning the creation of a new facility in UP’s Amethi to manufacture modern guns.

The PM lauded the valour and dedication of CISF men and women who protect “vital assets” of the country in the face of a “hostile neighbour which does not have the capacity to fight a war.”

“Various conspiracies hatched within the country are getting encouragement from across the border and ghastly picture of terror comes to light, in different forms,” Modi said, keeping his apparent reference on Pakistan.

Modi also hit out at the abuse of “VIP culture”, saying it was wrong on part of such people to throw their weight around, get angry and humiliate security personnel, a major brunt of which is faced by the CISF. The VIP culture at times is the biggest threat to security quipped the Prime Minister. He said “When you frisk, some people get annoyed and even say ‘I will see you’ and you have to tell them that it is your duty which has to be done.” He added “I would dare tell such people to be disciplined and cooperate with the security personnel in carrying out their task.”

The CISF gets a number of complaints from legislators and others categories of VIPs alleging high-handedness by their staff at various airports. The Prime Minister said, “I am myself very disciplined and I would urge the CISF to train and inform citizens about their security systems so that the appreciate the hard work put in the job by the people in uniform. Position does not come in the way of disciple. And it is the duty of every citizen to be disciplined. If citizens don’t maintain discipline, your task gets complicated.

The PM asked the CISF to “monitor and study in real time global trends and techniques of terrorism” so that a better preparedness is ensured against it.

He also directed the force to install ‘digital museums’ or electronic walls at airports so that people get to know about CISF’s history, role and its expectations from the citizens.

Congratulating the CISF, the PM said it’s very difficult to protect any institution where there is a daily footfall of 30 lakh (Delhi Metro) or where eight lakh people commute every day (airports). The CISF is mandated to provide security to major infrastructure installations — nuclear installations, airports, seaports, power plants, government buildings, Delhi Metro Rail Corporation of the country.

The Prime Minister said “You are not only standing at the gate, you are contributing to the country’s growth.” Modi also reviewed the parade of the CISF personnel. He presented the service medals for distinguished and meritorious services. He laid wreath at the Martyr’s Memorial and signed the visitor’s book.

Addressing the CISF personnel, the Prime Minister congratulated the forces for its Golden Jubilee. He praised the role of CISF in safeguarding and protecting the vital institutions of the country. He added that the responsibility of safeguarding the modern infrastructure built for New India is in the safe hands of CISF.

The Prime Minister urged the citizens to cooperate with the security personnel. VIP culture creates hurdle in security architecture. Hence, it’s important that the citizens cooperate with the security personnel, PM said. To create awareness amongst the general public regarding the role and functions of CISF, Prime Minister suggested the idea of starting digital museums at airports and metros, showcasing the work of CISF.

Hailing the role of CISF in securing the critical infrastructure of the country, Prime Minister said that the force is also involved in disaster response, ensuring safety of women and many other activities. In this context, Prime Minister spoke about the disaster relief operations of CISF during Kerala floods and also during Nepal and Haiti earthquake

The Prime Minister said that his government is committed towards ensuring the safety of its security forces. In this context he mentioned about the initiatives of the Government to modernize the forces and the actions taken for their welfare.

Stating that duty is the festival for the armed forces, Prime Minister said that the role of CISF has increased, due to the challenges posted by terrorism. He added that his government is committed towards eliminating terrorism.

The Prime Minister said that the National Police Memorial is a dedication to the valour and sacrifices made by the police and paramilitary forces. He said the monuments like National War Memorial and National Police Memorial will create awareness amongst the citizens regarding the contributions of security forces. He hailed the efforts of CISF in inducting many women soldiers into its force and observed that as India grows, the roles and responsibilities of CISF will also grow commensurately.

letters@tehelka.com
