Army refutes Pak's claim of shooting down its quadcopter across LoC, says, ‘they keep lying on such issues'

Pakistan claimed that the spy quadcopter belonged to the Indian Army. | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: A day after Pakistan claimed to have shot down Indian Spy Quadcopter in Bagh Sector along Line of Control, New Delhi dismissed the report and accused Islamabad of lying on such issues. The claim was made by Pakistan Army's Inter-Services Public Relations in-charge Major General Asif Ghafoor on his official Twitter handle.

"Pakistan army troops shot down Indian spy quadcopter in Bagh sector area along the line of control. Not even a quadcopter will be allowed to cross LOC, in Sha Allah," he tweeted on Tuesday.

Pakistan Army troops shot down Indian Spy Quadcopter in Bagh Sector along Line of Control. Not even a quadcopter will be allowed to cross LOC, In Shaa Allah. pic.twitter.com/CIT2ORe9eA — Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor (@OfficialDGISPR) January 1, 2019

Used for surveillance and reconnaissance by military and law enforcement agencies, quadcopter unmanned aerial can silently observe people and objects on the ground and have been deployed across the world by law enforcement agencies.

Ironically, Pakistan had also denied that 2016 surgical strikes ever took place even after Prime Minister Narendra Modi, officially declared and shared the details about the strikes carried out by Indian troops on terror launch pads in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. Around 50 terrorists along with Pakistan Army troops were killed in these operations.

Meanwhile, in Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan Army violated the ceasefire in Poonch along the Line of Control on January 1 and targeted forward positions. However, no casualty or injury was reported. The latest ceasefire violation comes just days after India lodged a strong protest against continuous ceasefire violations across the LoC by Pakistani Rangers.

India also summoned a Pakistan High Commission official and registered a strong protest for the loss of many Indian lives. 1,962 incidents of unprovoked ceasefire violations were reported last year by India in which about 50 Indians lost their lives.
