Inside the growing group planning 'mega church' in Hull

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up to the Hull Live newsletter for daily updates and breaking news

There is often suspicion around new "trendy" religious groups amid fears of cults and brainwashing.

In an ever-increasingly secular society we take solace, if not a lot of interest, in the traditional world of Anglican and Catholic churches with their dreary hymns and solemn sermons.

So, when we come across Christian groups looking to be relevant in the modern world, it often leaves us uncomfortable.

But Hull's Revive Church is bucking that trend, which is evident in the numbers it attracts. Many in Hull may not have even heard of Revive but it is quietly making waves in the city and beyond.

In the past 12 years the organisation has seen the congregation more than triple from 200 to 650. Such is the popularity, that plans have been unveiled to build a ‘mega-church’ at Kingswood.

(Image: Revive Church)

The church’s charismatic leader Jarrod Cooper insists the denomination could not be further from any cult. “I grew up in the 1970s when the denominations were still quite new and it seemed like they were cults,” Mr Cooper said.

“But it is different today and there is much less suspicion. Our church is full of life, normal people and young families.

“The core issue with a cult is the sense of manipulation. But God gives us free will and no one has a right to take that away.

“There is no feeling of money-grabbing or manipulation in our church.

Being inclusive

Mr Cooper insists the key to being successful is having something to say to today’s society. “It is about being relevant and creating a bright and warm environment, allowing everyone to enjoy it.

“It is also about convenience which is why we have opened premises in different parts of East Yorkshire so people do not have to travel so far.”

The church also has a multicultural feel and represents a wide spectrum of society.

“There is a lovely spread of people in the congregation from children to those in their 80s,” Mr Cooper said. “We also have a cross section of nationalities. Most are British-born but we have members from Africa, Eastern Europe and India.

(Image: Revive Church)

“It can be a lonely, disconnected society for many people and the church provides the family many people need.”

Revive began in 1924 as a Christian group for young people and grew into a community church which eventually moved into premises on Bridlington Avenue in Hull.

The building has since been extended and in the last few years the church expanded to the likes of Goole, Driffield and Cottingham with seven other premises in all.

Revive Church’s vision is to transform communities through social action, city transformation, youth work, schools and outreach projects.

The church is run by 17 members of staff and around 200 volunteers.

New 'mega-church'

Revive is part of the wider The Assemblies of God Pentecostal denomination and it came to the fore in Hull with its plans for a huge new church.

Planning permission has been granted for Revive Church to go ahead with an ambitious scheme to build an “attractive and striking” church in an industrial estate near Kingswood Retail Park.

It will have an 850-seat auditorium and an artist’s impression shows detailed 3D images of how the church will retain a modern look in line with the group’s more contemporary stance on Christianity.

“Like all big projects, people in our congregation see it as a generational need and the next step for our church,” Mr Cooper said. “It is a big commitment and will cost a lot. We have no council funding nor have we even applied for any grants.

“The support from the congregation has been incredible. During one collection alone we raised £155,000 and in five years we have raised around £500,000.

“The church will cost £2-3m but we only ask the congregation what they can afford. Some have plenty of money while others have none at all.

“But we have had fantastic support from our quantity surveyors Delaney Marling.”

The church has now outgrown its premises in Bridlington Avenue. “We will have the main auditorium along with a lobby and coffee shop,” Mr Cooper said. “There will also be a further five breakout rooms of various sizes for the different uses.

“This building will be open as a community centre to the whole of Kingswood and it is something that is really lacking in the area.”

Spirituality as popular as ever

(Image: Revive Church)

Mr Cooper dismisses the idea that few people are interested in religion anymore and Christianity just needs to find a way to attract more people.

“All brands of Christianity share the same message but it is just packaged differently,” he said. “It is like coffee shops. Costa and Caffe Nero are branded differently but, ultimately, they sell coffee.

“We are classed as a new church which basically means the pastor goes around in jeans rather than robes and we sing what people might call ‘happy clappy’ modern music rather than hymns. But the message of letting Jesus into your life remains the same.”

Mr Cooper admits churches like Revive has had to change the brand. “Many people do not relate to the traditional way anymore,” he said. “We have worked hard not to change the message but just the packaging.

“We have around 350 young people and children in the congregation and we provide other services, such as debt counselling, life skills and groups for those with disabilities.

“It is a myth that people are not interested in spirituality. Globally, atheism is in a minority.

“For many, the world does not make sense and they need to find their place in the world and that can be Christianity.

“It is not such a stigma any more to turn to Jesus. Justin Bieber attends a church similar to ours and there are other stars too.

“Christianity is not always like the Mr Bean sketch where we mumble the words to a hymn. You can still believe in God and remain cool.”

Making a practical difference

(Image: Revive Church)

But being part of Revive is not just about attending services and singing modern songs. “It is not just about preaching but doing something practical in the world,” Mr Cooper said. “We have one Hessle Road lad who ended up in prison where he found God.

“When he came out he got himself a university education and learnt Spanish before heading to South America.

“He has now set up seven schools in Colombia which is benefiting hundreds of the poorest children in the country.

“We have a Cottingham girl who is campaigning to change adoption law in Eastern Europe and South America to help combat human trafficking.

“Christianity is best when it is put into action.

“We all feel like we are part of something which is having a positive influence in Hull, the East Riding and the world.

(Image: Revive Church)

Mr Cooper, who is also an author and songwriter, has led Revive since 2005. He also regularly appears on the Christian channel TBN and radio network UCB. He has advice for anyone who is considering turning to Christianity.

“Try Jesus,” he said. “You do not need to go to church to pray.

“But if it is for you then try church. Just sit at the back or even watch a service online and begin to get a feel for what spirituality is about.

“It might be more rewarding and relevant than you ever thought.”

Follow Hull Live

Our daily newsletter - To get the latest headlines direct to your email inbox every day, click here .

Follow Hull Live on Facebook - Like our Facebook page to get the latest news in your feed and join in the lively discussions in the comments. Click here to give it a like!

Follow us on Twitter - For breaking news and the latest stories, click here to follow Hull Live on Twitter.

Follow us on Instagram - On the Hull Live Instagram page we share gorgeous pictures of our stunning city - and if you tag us in your posts, we could repost your picture on our page! We also put the latest news in our Instagram Stories. Click here to follow Hull Live on Instagram .
