Naidu tells TDP cadres to defeat conspirators

TDP workers can never be cowed down by conspiracies, he says

Telugu Desam Party national president and Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu on Saturday gave a clarion call to the party cadres to effectively repudiate the “conspiracies” of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao and the YSR Congress Party president Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy to destablise the TDP government in the State.

Formally launching the election preparedness meeting christened “Mee Bhavishyath Naa Bhadyatha”, at the SV University Stadium here, Mr. Naidu said the TDP cadres, who never cared for the “bombs and bullets”, could never be cowed down by conspiracies.

The TDP chief said the mission of winning 150-plus Assembly constituencies and all the 25 Parliamentary constituencies in the State was before the cadre.

Mr. Naidu observed that the TDP cadres would never tolerate any move of the conspirators to demean the “self-respect” of the Telugu people. In a sarcastic tone, terming Narendra Modi as “electricity” in New Delhi, Mr. Chandrasekhar Rao as “switch”, and Mr. Jagan as “fan”, the TDP chief said that the TDP cadres would never allow the fan to function.

Viveka murder

Mr. Naidu alleged that out of sheer “frustration” and fear of defeat, the YSR Congress Party leaders had hatched yet another “drama” through the brutal murder of former Kadapa MP Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy.

Mr. Naidu said that Mr. Jagan was deliberately pitching for a CBI probe into the murder, knowing well that the case could be watered down with the support of Prime Minister Modi.

Invokes Lord’s name

Mr. Naidu went nostalgic about Sri Venkateswara University, where he was a student. “Whenever I come to Tirupati, I remember the glory of Lord Venkateswara. I was born at his feet here in Tirupati. It was He who gave me rebirth, protecting me from Alipiri blast,” he said. Mr. Naidu repeatedly mentioned the name of NTR, to the overwhelming response from the gathering.
