Three Indians among 49 killed in New Zealand's Christchurch shootings

New Delhi:

At least three Indians are reportedly among the 49 people killed in the Christchurch terror attacks, claimed their families. Mohammad Farhaj Ahsan, Musa Wali Suleman Patel and Anshi Karippakulam have been identified so far. "Death of Anshi Karippakulam (27) has been confirmed and her family has been intimated," a top police official told news agency PTI.

At least 49 worshippers were killed on Friday in attacks on the Al Noor Mosque in central Christchurch and the Linwood Mosque in the city's outer suburb, in what appeared to be the worst attack on Muslims in a western country.

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan in a Facebook post termed the incident as shocking, the news that a Kodungallur native was among those who were killed in the terror attack in New Zealand.

"We have been trying to contact the embassy through Non-Resident Keralites Affairs Department (NORKA-ROOTS) to gather more information. We share the grief of the family," Vijayan said.

According to reports, the woman was pursuing her MTech at a university there.

Her husband Abdul Nazer hails from Kochi.

Television channels also aired a visual of a man purportedly saying he was from Moovattupuzha in the State and that he had a narrow escape.

"I had come to the mosque along with a friend. I had a phone call and suddenly heard gun shots and saw a man shooting people and entering the mosque," the man is heard saying in the footage.

He also said he and his friend had a "narrow and lucky escape."

The gunman at one mosque was an Australian-born citizen, Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison said in Sydney, describing him as "an extremist, right-wing, violent terrorist".

Approximately 200,000 Indian and Indian-origin people live in New Zealand. There are over 30,000 Indian students in the country, according to the Indian High Commission's data on its website.

Besides Karippakulam, Musa Wali Suleman Patel, Indian citizen from Gujarat, has died in the attack, said his brother Haji Ali Patel.

“My brother and sister-in-law are not able to contact. They are not informing her anything. My brother is in a critical condition. I urge the Central government, PM Modi, Sushma Swaraj and the Gujarat CM to help them reunite,” Haji Ali Patel had earlier said.

"It is currently 24 hours but hospital administration or New Zealand government is not giving any answer. I have been trying to contact my sister-in-law but there is no response," he had said.

The confirmation of his death came even as Farhaj Ahsan, Indian-origin man, succumbed to his injuries while undergoing treatment at a hospital, said his family residing in Hyderabad said on Saturday. Mohammed Sayeeduddin, the father of Farhaj Ahsan, has earlier said: “My son went to the mosque to offer Friday prayers. My son has not returned yet. About 17 people are still missing. I request government to find about the whereabouts and well-being of my son.”

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
