Fuel prices, rupee depreciation some of the main ills affecting aviation sector

Of the 638 total big passenger airplanes in Indian skies, 18 Boeing 737 Max aircraft are grounded. That's bad news, but it dwarfs in the face of the many deep air pockets that India's aviation sector is facing now.

High aviation fuel prices, rupee depreciation, excessive parking and landing charges, loads of debt and fare wars, even some inefficient operations, have been the millstones around the airline industry. Just last quarter there were indications that the industry was on the verge of a mild recovery, even though the distress is far from over.

Airlines such as Jet Airways, IndiGo, SpiceJet, GoAir and Air India continue to struggle when it comes to financial and operational performances. "Jet's operating fleet has nearly halved; Air India's fleet is down by almost 20 per cent, and the 737 MAX grounding is the most unfortunate thing to have happened to the aviation sector. Six airlines that had bid under the UDAN scheme have shut down operations. With all these developments, the passengers will be affected because of lesser number of flights and higher fares. Ticket prices are already costing an arm and a leg on some sectors," says Mark Martin, founder of Martin Consulting.

Take the case of Jet Airways. The Mumbai-based full-service carrier has been battling its biggest financial crisis in history. Recently, the Naresh Goyal-controlled carrier has defaulted on its foreign loan repayment due to liquidity crunch, and is staring at a fault of $109 million which it has to pay by March 28 to the HSBC Bank Middle East. Its lenders have prepared a resolution plan which includes Goyal's shareholding coming down to about 20 per cent from the present 51 per cent. Under the plan, the banks will take control of the airline and appoint a new board. The plan is still stuck in the approval stage. The problems with IndiGo are not as complex as Jet.

Besides facing a pilot crunch, the airline has been struggling with rising costs, particularly aircraft rentals, fuel and finance costs. The marginal improvement in the fares has moved up the yields in the last quarter, but they are still lower than 2014-15 levels. In the quarter ended December 2018, IndiGo, which has 42.5 per cent market share, registered a 75 per cent drop in net profits.

Its rival carrier SpiceJet, which has been affected the worst by the recent groundings of Boeing 737 MAX 8, reported 77 per cent drop in net profits to Rs 55.1 crore for the same quarter. SpiceJet, which was flying 13 Boeing MAX 8 till recently, is likely to face issues with capacity additions. It has placed an order of 205 such planes, including 50 aircraft that the airline has the option to convert into a firm order later.

Experts believe that external factors - fuel prices and rupeedollar exchange rates - are difficult to control, and the current situation can be salvaged by the government by lowering import duties. "The government can lower the excise duty on jet fuel further (from 11 per cent now) to bring down the operational costs of the airlines. With the grounding of aircraft, the DGCA could make the wet leasing process easier, which is not the case right now," says an aviation consultant who doesn't want to be named.

While some parameters have improved, the outlook for the domestic sector looks weak. Australian aviation consultancy Center for Asia Pacific Aviation (CAPA) forecasts that Indian carriers will lose a collective $550 million to $700 million in the financial year 2020 as compared

to an estimated $1.7 billion loss for the 2019 year-ending in March. In a January note, ratings agency ICRA too had predicted a bad year for the aviation sector. "The profitability of all airlines in 2018-19 is expected to be weaker than in 2017-18. Some of the airlines have large capacity

expansion plans, which may be either owned (through debt funding) or on operating lease. Thus, the aggregate industry debt level is expected to increase to about `61,000 crore by March 2019. Many of the industry players have a weak balance sheet structure; and with rising losses

in the near term, the industry would need about `35,000 crore equity infusion over the next three-four years," the report said. Globally, the profitability of the aviation industry is likely to face some issues. The International Air Transport Association (IATA) forecasts the global airline industry net profit to be $35.5 billion in 2019 as against $32.3 billion expected net profit in 2018. However, the industry association remains cautiously optimistic, and believes that there are downside risks as the economic and political environments remain volatile.

(Business Today)
