Four Gujaratis killed in Christchurch terror attack

VADODARA: Four Gujaratis including a father-son duo from Vadodara, an NRI from Bharuch and an Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) with roots in Navsari were among the victims of Friday’s terror attack on two mosques in Chirstchurch, New Zealand that claimed 49 lives.Arif Vohra and his son Rameez Vohra from Vadodara, who were reported missing after the shooting at the Al Noor Mosque in Christchurch on Friday were declared dead on Saturday. Initial reports had indicated that they were missing and family members were making desperate attempts to locate them.Arif’s elder son Rahil who lives in Australia rushed to Christchurch and later confirmed that Arif and Rameez had died in the attack. He informed the family members in Vadodara about the duo’s death.Sources said that Rameez’s wife had delivered a baby girl only a few days back. She was to be discharged from the hospital on Friday. Arif and Rameez decided to complete the discharge formalities after attending prayers at the mosque, but became victims of the shootout.The Vohra family lives in Dhanani Park in the Memon Colony area of Vadodara. Arif had gone to New Zealand about a month ago with his wife Rukhsana. Rameez had shifted to New Zealand for studies some years ago and then settled in Christchurch.Family members of the victims approached Vadodara MP Ranjan Bhatt to ensure that they got visas to New Zealand at the earliest. Arif’s brother Mohsin Vohra and the parents of Rameez’s wife were granted visas on Saturday itself and were to go to New Zealand soon.Another victim of the terror attack was Hafiz Musa Vali Patel (52), a native of Luvara village of Bharuch district. He was grievously wounded after an extremist opened indiscriminate firing at two mosques in Christchurch. He succumbed to his injuries in a hospital after 20 hours of treatment.Patel had migrated to Fiji in the Pacific Ocean 35 years ago and was a priest in a mosque in Lusaka city. About 15 days ago, he had got permanent residency in New Zealand and was staying with his elder daughter in Christchurch. Patel and his wife Sayra (50) were in the mosque when it was attacked. Patel received bullet injuries on lower part of his spine and died on Saturday, family sources in Bharuch said.Patel’s elder brother Aiyebbhai Patel told reporters in Luvara, “I was informed by my cousin Ikram from Australia that his father and my brother were seriously injured in a firing. Sayra escaped unhurt. Hafiz and Sayra have three daughters and two sons and they are settled in New Zealand and Australia.”An Indian origin man having roots in Navsari town of South Gujarat was also among the victim of Christchurch terror attack. The deceased has been identified as Junaid Kara (38), a New Zealand national.Junaid’s family is originally from Adada village of Navsari. They had migrated to New Zealand several years ago. Junaid’s death was confirmed by their distant relatives in Adada village of Navsari on Saturday.“I came to know about Junaid’s the death today morning. His family is widely respected because of their contribution to welfare of the village. Majority of the family members have migrated in New Zealand long ago,” said Piyush Desai, BJP MLA from Navsari.
