For a compelling agenda: Congress has done a better job of attacking BJP than explaining why it deserves to rule India

Is India speeding toward the restoration of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty to where its supporters think it belongs: at the pinnacle of political power?

If you’re a Congress loyalist, the signs look more promising than at any time in the past five years. But one thing should give the party pause. It remains easier to build a case against Prime Minister Narendra Modi than to build one in favour of Congress president Rahul Gandhi. Congress can feed on the disappointment generated by Modi’s underwhelming performance as prime minister. But can it seriously hope to unseat him without offering a credible promise of its own?

As the story goes, for Modi 2018 was a political annus horribilis. Early in the year, by-election defeats in Bihar, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh were compounded by the shock of losing Lok Sabha seats in Phulpur and Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh. A comfortable BJP win in tiny Tripura offered slim consolation.

Then came Karnataka, where Congress showed that it remained nimble enough to throw a wrench in BJP president Amit Shah’s supposedly unstoppable electoral machine. BJP came up short in terms of assembly seats, in part because its message failed to resonate in cosmopolitan Bangalore. Then the party found itself outmanoeuvred in the grubby business of cobbling together a government.

For Modi and Shah, Karnataka offered an opportunity to deliver a fatal blow to a resource-starved Congress reeling from a string of defeats. Instead they ended up giving India’s oldest party a lifeline. Now, after last month’s 0-3 drubbing in the Hindi heartland, BJP faces an energised opposition guerrilla army. What looked like a walk in the park has turned into a contest.

In the end, all campaigning is a form of story telling. Modi made the mistake of handing Congress a story with legs.

The first big blunder was demonetisation. After a burst of initial euphoria, it quickly became clear that the government’s sudden cash ban in November 2016 was no silver bullet to slay corruption. It will instead go down in history as one of the cruellest and clumsiest economic decisions inflicted upon a democracy. Paradoxically, the more that BJP-affiliated pundits defend this bizarre move – effectively adding insult to injury – the more it could end up hurting their party.

In 2017, a great electoral victory became a source of trouble. Uttar Pradesh has turned into a fount of endless bad news for BJP: cow vigilante lynchings, encounter killings, self-appointed anti-Romeo squads out to battle so-called love jihad. Modi’s chosen chief minister, Yogi Adityanath, no doubt gladdened the hearts of some of the party faithful. But choosing someone whose main claim to fame was Muslim baiting to lead India’s largest state may prove to be Modi’s single biggest mistake.

Finally came the goods and services tax, a fine idea marred by poor execution. Around the world, the central principle that defines a good GST is simplicity. Australia, for instance, boasts a single 10% rate for most goods and services. Modi may have touted the GST as a “good and simple tax”, but in reality India’s version turned the idea of simplicity on its head. Among those hit hardest were small businesses that could not afford to hire accountants and software consultants to help them make sense of what only a committee of squabbling bureaucrats could have concocted.

At the same time, the government’s run-ins with two successive Reserve Bank of India governors, and the bizarre feuding at the Central Bureau of Investigation, have dented Modi’s reputation for administrative efficiency. The failure to create jobs has dimmed hopes that the man from Gujarat could effect an economic miracle.

Congress has taken advantage of these missteps by Modi. It has also exploited the prime minister’s preference for one-way communication – and his aversion to any kind of public cross-examination – to present Rahul Gandhi as an open and accessible leader. On social media, BJP’s permanently angry mode drives away moderates and fence sitters. As often as not, Congress sets the agenda on Twitter and in TV studio debates these days.

Will all this be enough to unseat the BJP? The trouble for Congress is that its appeal rests more on what Modi did wrong than on what Gandhi promises to do right. On economic policy, for instance, the Congress scion has correctly pinpointed jobless growth as an existential problem. But he offers no viable solution. And it’s not clear if Gandhi’s allegations about corruption in the Rafale fighter deal are gaining traction, or if he’s wasting valuable campaign time on an issue that leaves most people cold.

Complicating matters further, many people do not buy the story of BJP recklessness and ineptitude narrated above. They see instead a clean government that has delivered tangible economic and social progress to millions of people in the form of roads, toilets, bank accounts, gas cylinders and houses.

Whipping up anger against the incumbent, rather than hopes for the challenger, could work if India in 2019 votes like it did in 1977 or 1989 – to toss out an unpopular government. In the absence of a compelling agenda of his own, this is the high bar that Rahul Gandhi will have to scale.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
