49 Muslim worshipers martyred in New Zealand mosque attack – KashmirWatch

Srinagar, Mar 15 CNS: New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said 49 people have martyred in the Christchurch shootings.

Ten were martyred at Linwood and 39 at the Deans Ave mosque near Hagley Park. A further 27 people were injured.

Ardern said it was an “unprecedented” situation and described it as a terrorist attack.

Those in custody had not been on any watch list: “It’s not a matter of someone having slipped under the radar.”

She said it was obvious the attacks had been planned for some time.

The National Security Threat Level had been lifted from low to high.

The Defence Force was transporting more police to Christchurch.

Ardern said New Zealand was a place of safety where they raise their families.

“Those values will not and cannot be shaken,” she said.

“This is a place where people should feel secure.”

Gunmen opened fire at mosques in Christchurch earlier today. Four people are in custody – three men and one woman.

The Police Commissioner Mike Bush said “there have been some absolute acts of bravery” in the arrests of the four attackers.

A number of IEDs that were attached to vehicles in Christchurch have been defused by the Defence Force.

Bush said there were multiple casualties – a “significant” amount.

“This is absolutely tragic. So many people are affected.”

“We don’t have the identities of those who have died yet because those places are in lockdown.”

He said he would not assume there aren’t other attackers.

Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison confirmed one of the gunmen was an Australian citizen living in New Zealand.

Morrison said he was “shocked, appalled and outraged,” at the attack.

“We stand here and condemn absolutely the attack that occurred today by an extremist, right wing, violent terrorist.

“[He] has taken the lives,” he said, before correcting to: “they have stolen the lives in a vicious, murderous attack that has claimed so many New Zealanders.

Morrison said the attack reminds us about the evil that is ever present and would seek to “strike us out at any time.”

The lock down of schools throughout Christchurch was lifted at 5.50pm.

When asked if it was true that a person had been arrested wearing wired explosives, Bush said that person had been made safe.

“We’re still working through that but we believe there was a claim but that person has been made safe.”

Bush said he was aware that footage of the Al Noor Mosque shooting was on social media and police were doing everything they could to get it removed.

“It shouldn’t be in the public domain.”

Facebook Australia-New Zealand policy director Mia Garlick said the videos have been taken down.

“New Zealand Police alerted us to a video on Facebook shortly after the livestream commenced and we quickly removed both the shooter’s Facebook and Instagram accounts and the video.”

He said police did not have conclusive information about the motivation behind the shootings.

He would not call it a terrorist attack but said it did not get any more serious in this country.

“We are currently dealing with an unprecedented situation in New Zealand. It’s very grave, it’s very serious.”

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern called it “one of New Zealand’s darkest days”.

A body has been seen lying near Al Noor Mosque in central Christchurch and a second gunman has been seen near Linwood Masjid mosque.

One of the gunmen broadcast live as he shot victims.

One of the gunmen is believed to be an Australian who has written a manifesto declaring his intentions.

In it, he says “it is a terrorist attack.”

Ardern described the event as “extreme and unprecedented violence”.

She will be flying to Wellington where she will speak with agents as soon as she lands.

“I’m not currently in a position to confirm the number of deaths or injuries,” Ardern said.

“This is and will be one of New Zealand’s darkest days.”

Ardern looked to be struggling to keep her emotions in check as she spoke.

Bush said Police are pouring resources into the Christchurch area.

He said they were also setting up a facility so that people could get phone in and get more information about their loved ones as a priority.

Bush said Defence Force aircrafts in Wellington were ready to fly more resources into the area.

“I want to assure the public we are doing everything we can to make sure there is no more harm to their communities.”

There was no indication there were other shooters at large.

The multiple fatalities were at two locations – a mosque at Deans Ave and one at Linwood Ave.

St John said there have been multiple fatalities.

People suffered injuries ranging from minor through to critical gun shot wounds.

A number of helicopter and road ambulances are on standby to provide support, including transporting patients to other ICUs around the country.

St John has deployed resources from throughout the country to provide cover for the next few days.

A Christchurch Star reporter saw a dead body lying close at Palazzo Lane near Al Noor Mosque.

The body has been covered with clothing.

A witness has seen a child lying in the middle of Deans Ave and another man has told the Herald his relative was shot inside the mosque.

It is understood the shooting at the mosque lasted six minutes and that the shooter may have returned to his car to retrieve more ammunition before opening fire again.

Christchurch attack reaffirms that terrorism does not have a religion: Imran Khan

Islamabad, Mar 15, CNS: Prime Minister of Pakistan, Imran Khan has strongly condemned the Terrorist attack on two mosques in Christchurch killing at least 40 people and injuring scores others.

While taking to his Twitter, he said, “Shocked and strongly condemn the Christchurch, New Zealand, terrorist attack on mosques. This reaffirms what we have always maintained: that terrorism does not have a religion. Prayers go to the victims and their families.”

At least 49 Muslims were killed in terrorist attack at two Christchurch mosques. Ten died at Linwood while 39 at mosque near Hagley Park. Four people had been arrested, including one woman. One of the gunmen live streamed shooting at Al-Noor Mosque in chilling 17-min video.

Friday prayers in Jamia Masjid allowed after two weeks, Mirwaiz condemns attack on New Zealand mosque

Srinagar, Mar 15, CNS: After the restrictions for two consecutive weeks, the Friday prayers were offered in historic Jamia Masjid in Srinagar today.

Reports said that Mirwaiz Umar Farooq led the prayers. The sermon started on 12: 30 and the prayers were offered around 2:00 pm.

“After two weeks of restrictions Friday prayers to be offered at #JamaMasjid Srinagar while @MirwaizKashmir will start Friday sermon from 12:30 pm onwards InShaAllah,” Mirwaiz wrote on his twitter handle.

Meanwhile, Mirwaiz expressed a deep shock over the attack at twin mosques in Christchurch New Zealand.

“Shocked and deeply grieved by the barbaric attack at twin mosques in #Christchurch New Zealand. Multiple fatalities feared. Once again Humanity becomes a casualty. Condemnation beyond words. prayers for the victims,” Mirwaiz tweeted.

KEA condemns deadly New Zealand attack on Muslims

Srinagar, Mar 15 CNS : Kashmir Economics Alliance Friday condemned the deadly shooting at two mosques in New Zealand city of Christchurch.

Forty-nine people were killed and at least 20 suffered serious injuries in the shootings targeting the mosques during Friday prayers.

In a statement, KEA Co-Chairman Farooq Ahmed Dar and Vice President Ajaz Shahdhar said that terrorism has no religion. They said the heinous attack illustrated the growing hostility towards Islam “idly” watched by the world.

“With this attack, hostility towards Islam, that the world has been idly watching and even encouraging for some time, has gone beyond individual harassment to reach the level of mass killing,” they said and expressed sympathies with the victim families.

“This attack shows the point which hostility to Islam and enmity to Muslims has reached,” they said and demanded stern punishment for the terrorists involved in the attack.

JKLF leaders and activists stage a peaceful protest at Abi-Guzar Lal Chowk

The terrorist attack on Muslim worshipers at New-Zeeland a horrible and condemnable act.

Srinagar, Mar 15 CNS: Detention of JKLF chairman Muhammad Yasin and others under draconian PSA and bullying Mirwaiz Muhammad Umar Farooq, Syed Naseem Geelani, and others by NIA are all manifestation of state-sponsored violence. The Kashmiri nation cannot be intimidated by such mean tactics. Carnage at New-Zealand has once again exhibited the ugly face of extremism and casteism and putting an immediate end to it is the need of the hour. Our hearts go to the families that have lost their loved ones in this act of savagery. This was stated by the vice chairman of Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) Showkat Ahmad Bakhshi and others while addressing protesters at Abi-Guzar Srinagar today.

Terming the terrorist attack on Muslim worshipers in New-Zealand that has taken lives of more than fifty humans inside a Masjid today as heinous, JKLF leaders said that this terrorist act has once again proved that barbarism has no religion and faith and clubbing this to any religion or community is also criminal which can perpetrate crimes like today’s. JKLF leaders said that this carnage has once again turned our attention towards rising extremism in the name of religion, Casteism, culture, region, language, color, and ultra-nationalism. All this is happening because extremism and ultra-nationalism are being promoted, practiced and propagated not only by any fringe but by the rulers and states today and if we intend to make this world a peaceful place to live on, we will have to make efforts to eradicate every sort of extremism from our world immediately. JKLF leaders said that armed terrorists have butchered dozens of innocents at New-Zealand today but some of us are seen even reluctant to call this act of terrorism which is highly condemnable and also indicates about the sick mentality of these people. While praying for the heavenly abode of those martyred and speedy recovery of those injured in today’s attack, JKLF leaders also expressed solidarity with the bereaved families.

Massacre in New Zealand handiwork of anti-Muslim agencies: Alama Hami

Calls for mass public campaign against growing liquor, drug abuse in Kashmir

Srinagar, Mar 15 CNS: Expressing serious concern, shock and grief over the killing of innocent Muslims in New Zealand, Karwani Islami patron Alama Ghulam Rasool Hami said that the attack on Muslims is the direct outcome of the propaganda being carried out by the national and international media against Muslims. He said a 25-year-old suicide bomber entered into the mosque and blew up himself to kill Muslims in large number stating the move deserves highest form of condemnation.

Addressing a massive gathering at Masjid-e-Shareef Ameer-e-Kabir Mir Syed Ali Hamdani (RA) at Kralpora, Budgam here, Alama Hami said that conspiracies are hatched across the globe against Muslims to create a wedge among the Muslim Ummah on one or the other pretext but Muslims need not to worry as Islam was a religion of peace and truth and falsehood never wins.

Alama Hami said strongly condemned the crackdown on religious leaders and activists and stated that the move needs to be condemned by all forms. The Karwan Islami patron also denounced the forces’ move of stopping the ambulances and school buses during the convoy movement stating that it has come to fore that people including patients and students are kept waiting for hours together when convoys move with the result students reach late to their schools and patients to suffer due to delay in reaching to the respective hospitals.

Alama Hami also stated that the society in Kashmir was neck deep in the menace of liquor and drug abuse and that it’s high time that Kashmiri society rises to the occasion to root out this growing abuse among the youth including the school and college going children.

In a statement, Hami said it was due to the efforts of Khawja Moinudin (RA) that Islam reached to every nook and corner of India. He said revered saint at young age had mastered knowledge of various subjects including Theology, Philosophy and Sufism repute, a mystic and a perfect saint. “He spent his life in propagating Islam and undertook several extensive tours through difficult terrains and over hazardous routes,” he said.
