Poll code in place, cops to go hard with weapon holders

Ludhiana: In the wake of increasing firing incidents and the model code of conduct coming into effect, the Ludhiana police commissionerate has decided to get strict with holders of licensed weapons.

Police are also trying to collect to collect information on illegal weapons by questioning habitual offenders and persons who have also been facing trials in previous such cases.

A week after the poll code was imposed, holders have submitted nearly 10,000 licensed weapons out of the total 18,000 such arms registered in the commissionerate.

And for those who have not submitted the weapons yet, the SHOs of all police stations have been asked to send cops to the doorsteps of weapon holders, asking them to submit their arms either with the respective police stations or with the gun houses as early as possible.

In the recent times, the firing incidents have witnessed a rise in the city. Both licensed and illegal weapons have been used in these incidents.

Assistant commissioner of police (licensing unit) Harjinder Singh Gill said, “There are nearly 18,000 licensed weapons in commissionerate out of which approximately 10,000 weapons have been submitted by the weapons holders. Further, senior officials have given written directions to all SHOs to approach licensed weapon holders in their respective areas and get it submitted as soon as possible.”

On asking if there is any deadline to submit the weapons, the ACP said though there is no deadline, the cops have been asked to get the work done as soon as possible.

The ACP said the person who would not surrender his licensed weapon may face cancelation of his licence and would be booked under Sections of 188 (Disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the IPC.

Talking about a check on illegal weapons, additional deputy commissioner of police (crime) Jagatpreet Singh said, “There is no data over illegal weapon. Illegal weapons are seized on secret information of tip-off. Our agencies are on the job to collect information on illegal weapons in the city.”

“Besides, habitual offenders and persons who have also been facing trials in previous such cases are being questioned. The police are keeping surveillance over the suspicious persons.”

Box: Licensed weapons used in crimes

March 7 | Jagdev Singh, a resident of Noorwala village, shot his neighbor Balbir Singh with his .32 bore licensed revolver. The victim’s nephew, a sarpanch of the village, had lodged a complaint with police against the accused for firing in the air

February 2 | Gurbhej Singh fired in air from his licensed rifle to support his brother Harbhajan SIngh in a spat with his wife in Chitti Colony of Salem Tabri area. Although nobody was injured, the police arrested both the accused

Box: Illegal weapons used

February 19 | A 30-year-old Baljinder Singh of Kurukshetra sustained injuries during a function when an unidentified man allegedly fired in the air during a marriage function in New Janta Nagar.

January 21 | Lakhwinder Singh and Baljit Singh were booked for firing during a birthday party in Jassiyan Colony

January 14 | Following old rivalry, a group of assailants — Amandeep Singh Assa, Jaskaran Singh, Banduman Singh (all of Jawaddi Kalan); Arman Sidhi of Rajguru Nagar; Bikranveer Singh of BRS Nagar and five unidentified man fired at former Congress councillor Satwinder Singh Jawaddi, 52, of Jawaddi Kalan



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
