7 Indians Killed As More Heart Breaking Stories Emerge From New Zealand Mosque Massacre

The death of 50 innocent people in Christchurch shooting attack has left the world stunned and mourning and India is grieved by the loss of seven of its own. One from Kerala, one from Hyderabad and two from Gujarat are among the seven Indian died in the terror attack in New Zealand on Saturday. The three others also belonged to Gujarat and Telangana.

The family of Fahraj Ahsan, the 30-year-old soft engineer was among the 50 victims identified on Saturday as authorities are now shifting bodies to preliminary investigations. Ahsan was born in Warangal, and his father lives at Mehdipatnam and his in-laws at Dilsukhnagar.

Ahsan had been living in New Zealand with wife and two children- a three-year-old daughter and seven-month-old son.

afp

The 25-year-old from Kerala Ancia Alibava was among the victims and she was at the mosque of the attack along with her husband Thrivallur Ponnath Abdul Nazar when the terrorist opened fire.

While her husband managed to escape Ancia was in women section and family till now hasn't received any official information yet from either of the governments.

“We are yet to receive an official information on the incident from New Zealand authorities or from the Indian government,” a family member said.

The dead also includes four Gujaritis which also include a father-son duo. An NRI from Bharuch and an Overseas Citizens of India (OCI) with roots in Navsari, were among the victims killed by the Australian terrorist.

afp

Arif Vohra and his son Rameex Vohra who were from Vadodara were reported missing after the attack but later were found dead. Arif's elder son who loves in Australia rushed to Christchurch and later confirmed the death of his father and brother in the attack.

Hafiz Musa Vali Patel (52), a native of Luvara village of Bharuch district was another victim of the attack and he succumbed to the injuries in the hospital after 20 hours of treatment.

Mohammed Imran Khan (47), a native of Karimnagar in Telangana was also among the dead.

afp

Hafiz Musa Vali Patel (52), a native of Luvara village of Bharuch district was another victim of the attack and he died of injuries during treatment.

Mohammed Imran Khan (47), a native of Karimnagar in Telangana was also among the dead.

(With The Times of India inputs)
