10 Hindi films that take you on a journey through India

Inspired by the beauty of India’s cities and hinterlands, many filmmakers these days opt to step out of the studio walls and head to real locales that add a distinct look to their stories. Be it bustling metro cities or small towns, filmmakers now go an extra mile to hunt for the most suitable location across the length and breadth of the county, which is not only used as a backdrop but is an essential part of the narrative. Here is a snapshot of a few films where you can just sit back and admire the landscape, or even get inspired to pack your bags and travel.A compelling film about the state of affairs in the nation, Rang De Basanti takes the viewers through an emotional as well as a visual journey. This story follows a group of friends studying at Delhi University and their collaboration with a British filmmaker to make a historical documentary, and captures some of north India’s most scenic spots. One of the most soul-stirring scenes is the ride around the iconic India Gate, and of course, the candle march. In addition to these, Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra’s film also captures the Golden Temple in Amritsar, the Nahargarh Fort reservoir (where Aamir Khan and Sharman Joshi compete in a beer-gulp challenge), and the capital’s winding alleys bathed in the winter-morning sunrise glow.From Jaipur’s iconic Raj Mandir cinema and colourful street markets to Jodhpur ’s majestic Mehrangarh Fort and hidden blue-tinted alleys—Maneesh Sharma’s Shuddh Desi Romance not only showcases but also establishes the pink city as a character in the film. The title song was shot at the highest point of Mehrangarh Fort that overlooks the Jodhpur city skyline.This love story between an Indian Air Force officer and a Pakistani girl is laden with incredible vistas of Indian landscapes. Yash Chopra’s signature shots (of heroines clad in chiffon saris dancing in verdant fields and hilltops) and Anil Mehta’s picture-postcard cinematography showcase Punjab’s hinterlands, Delhi’s Purana Qila and the Wagah Border in a stunning spectacle. The golden fields, azure skies, small ponds, gushing rivers, street carnivals and rural life—all come alive on the silver screen.Bordered by dense forests and sparkling in their white glory, Gulmarg’s snow-clad peaks are as breathtakingly beautiful as they are adventurous. Even though Gulmarg was depicted as Manali in the first half of Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani, Ayan Mukerji’s film not only unveiled these spectacular Himalayan landscapes but also inspired many folks to grab their backpacks and venture out on daunting treks. The film subsequently unfolds as a holiday romance in landmark heritage sites such as Hadimba Temple in Manali, Udaipur’s City Palace and Chittorgarh Fort.A light-hearted entertainer with a message, Rajkumar Hirani’s 3 Idiots is shot across numerous scenic locales across India. From Chail Palace in Shimla (shown as Javed Jaffrey’s residence) to the campus of Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore (depicted as the Imperial College of Engineering, Delhi), the film is peppered with realistic locations. Shot at the Pangong Lake, the climax flaunts Ladakh’s daunting peaks and turquoise-blue lakes.A charming introduction to Darjeeling , Barfi takes you through the hill-station’s misty mornings, muddy slopes and beautifully fenced pathways. Captured in Ravi Varman’s remarkable cinematography, each frame of the movie is composed delicately, and brings the town’s simple life, colourful streets and spectacular landscapes to the forefront. The clock tower, the famous Glenary’s Café and the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway— Barfi presents the hill town at its best.Amidst the bundle of laughs and chaotic turns that stretch throughout Chennai Express, director Rohit Shetty gives his audience several spectacular landscapes to admire. Shot lavishly with aerial views, the majestic Dudhsagar Falls in Goa are a sight to behold. Besides the magnificent waterfall, the lush hill town of Munnar in Kerala was also a backdrop for major portions of the film.A journey from Delhi to Kashmir , Kunal Kohli’s Fanaa captures the best of both destinations. The first half of the film is a walk-through of Delhi’s most stunning heritage sites. The leading pair of Aamir Khan and Kajol traverses from Qutab Minar, Red Fort, Humayun’s Tomb to India Gate and Purana Qila (best seen in the song Chand Sifarish). In the latter half of the film, the action shifts to Kashmir’s snow-laden Himalayan peaks and quaint wooden houses.Dalhousie’s natural beauty and gentle pace of life shines through in Vikramaditya Motwane’s Lootera. The hill town’s snow-laden winding roads, charming old wooden houses, and valleys covered with oak, deodar and pine trees, are all brilliantly captured and add to the melancholic mood of the film.Aptly named, Imtiaz Ali’s Highway was shot along the highways connecting Delhi, Haryana, Rajasthan, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Kashmir. Captured remarkably by cinematographer Anil Mehta, Highway is a collection of vistas that are enthralling enough to inspire you to drop everything else you’re doing and venture out on a road trip. Of these, the Aru Valley in Kashmir is the setting for one of the most breathtaking shots in the film.
