Pakistan will become a part of India after 2025: RSS leader Indresh Kumar

RSS leader Indresh Kumar has claimed that Pakistan will again become a party of Hindustan after 2025.

Senior RSS functionary Indresh Kumar has said that Pakistan will become a part of India after 2025. According to a report in The Indian Express, Kumar while addressing a gathering on the subject of ‘Kashmir-Way Ahead’ in Mumbai on Saturday said that he is hopeful of a ‘Akhand Bharat’ taking shape on the lines of European Union.

“You can take it down that five-seven years later, you will get a chance to buy a house or do business somewhere in Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi and Sialkot,” he said.

“There was no Pakistan before 1947. People say it was a part of Hindustan before 1945. It will again be a part of Hindustan after 2025,” he said.

On Kashmir, he said that the political willpower has changed and government has taken a tough line on Kashmir issue for the first time.

“This, he said, is because the Army acts on political willpower, and now, the political willpower has changed. So, we have dreams of settling in Lahore and not needing permission from China to go to Mansarovar. We have ensured a government in Dhaka of our liking… A Bharatiya Union of Akhand Bharat on the lines of European Union can take shape,” he said.

He also came down heavily on the opposition parties for demanding proof of IAF’s operation in Pakistan. Kumar said that opposition leaders were surprised by the action taken by government post-Pulwama attack.

“While praising the Army, they start seeking proof. Opposing Modi, they start praising Pakistan. We need a new law for traitors such as this, whether they are studying in JNU or are in Maharashtra. Then there won’t be a Naseerudddin, Hamid Ansari or Sidhu,” he said.

On China backing Pakistan, Kumar said that Beijing supports Islamabad because India won a battle against it without gun.

“We removed China from Doklam. While the world knew China as unbeaten, we defeated it, which is why it is angry,” he said.

He also questioned the special status for Jammu and Kashmir saying “the Constitution talks of one country, one citizenship and one flag”.

“The entire country is open to Kashmiris, then why is Kashmir not open to all Hindustanis,” he said.
