New Zealand mosque attack: Hyderabad man succumbs to injuries, Asaduddin Owaisi asks Sushma Swaraj for help

The attacker, identified by authorities as Brenton Tarrant, 28, reportedly targeted immigrants during Friday prayers. Witnesses said victims were shot at close range.

At least 50 people were killed when an Australia-born gunman opened fire with assault rifles during Friday prayers in Christchurch, New Zealand. Indians were also among the victims of the attack on worshippers at two mosques, in the worst attack on Muslims in the country’s modern history.

Farhaj Ahsan, who was reported missing after the deadly terror attack, succumbed to his injuries while undergoing treatment on Saturday.

Reportedly, Ahsan’s father, Mohammed Sayeeduddin, has also confirmed his son’s death, who had gone to the mosque to offer prayers but did not return.

ALSO READ: After close shave during Christchurch mosque attack, ‘shaken’ Bangladesh cricket team leaves New Zealand

Taking to Twitter, AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi, who had sought help from Minister of External Affairs Sushma Swaraj, said, “It is with a heavy heart that I have to inform that Farhaj Ahsan, one of the two Hyderabadi #ChristChurch victims has passed away. He’s left behind his parents, spouse & children. I request everyone to pray for Farhaj & his family, as they deal with this great difficulty,” he tweeted.

“Farhaj Ahsan, a person of Indian origin, was also reported to have gone to the same mosque and is currently missing. His family in Hyderabad, I request immediate assistance to his family as well. His family’s contact details are available with me & I’ll share the same with you,” he had tweeted earlier.

UPDATE: I’d like to thank @SushmaSwaraj for personally updating me about MEA’s efforts in assisting Ahmed’s & Ahsan’s families reach NZ in time We are in touch with @MEAIndiaMEA & they have assured us that they’re making all efforts to get the visa process expedited https://t.co/pJ2O8a4BgL — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

Farhaj’s father, MOHAMMED SAYEEDUDDIN can be reached at

Yans residency,flat no.101,Nadeem colony, tolichowki-500008

Contact no.9866217401

8121618763. Request urgent assistance madam @SushmaSwaraj — Asaduddin Owaisi (@asadowaisi) March 15, 2019

The attacker, identified by authorities as Brenton Tarrant, 28, reportedly targeted immigrants during Friday prayers. Witnesses said victims were shot at close range.

Mohammed Juned Kara (34) from Navsari in Gujarat was the first victim of the attack.

Among the victims, was Ancy (23) from Kodungallur in Kerala’s Thrissur district and the wife of Ponnadathu Abdul Nazar. Nazar works at a supermarket in Christchurch. The couple had moved to New Zealand a year ago after they wed in 2017.

About 200,000 Indian and Indian-origin people live in New Zealand. Over 30,000 of them are students, according to the Indian High Commission’s data available on its website.
