After Pulwama, Indian Navy deployed aircraft carrier, nuclear submarine to stave off threat from Pakistan

Aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya and its battle group consisting of nuclear submarine were deployed in Northern Arabian sea after Pulwama I Photo credit: BCCL | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: At the height of tensions with Pakistan after the Pulwama attack in Jammu & Kashmir, India was prepared not only on land and air but also at sea. As tension escalated between the two nuclear-armed rivals, New Delhi deployed the aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya and nuclear submarine INS Chakra in the Northern Arabian sea off Pakistan coast.

To stave off any threat to the aircraft carrier, the nuclear attack submarine INS Chakra was deployed as part of the aircraft carrier’s battle group. The battle group also consisted of warships giving a tactical edge to Indian Navy’s assets providing 360-degree protection from air, water and underwater.

Indian Navy sources: India had deployed nuclear attack submarine INS Chakra as part of the Aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya Carrier Battle Group in the operational deployment after the Pulwama attack. The INS Chakra was deployed to provide protection to the aircraft carrier. https://t.co/Kn8aA6dpdz — ANI (@ANI) March 17, 2019

The overwhelming superiority of the Indian Navy in all three dimensions restricted Pakistan Navy to remain deployed close to Makran coast and not venture out in the open sea giving a tactical advantage to India.

Marine commandos have been deployed in the disputed Sir Creek area and a considerable amount of patrolling is taking place there, Times Now learnt.

The two nations came to the brink of a full-scale war after India launched an airstrike on a Jaishe-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Pakistan’s Khyber Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province on February 26. The counter-terror measure by India came within two weeks of the attack on a CRPF convoy in which 40 Indian paramilitary troops were killed. Pakistan-based proscribed terror outfit claimed the responsibility for the attack forcing the Indian hand.


