‘Bua-Bhatija can’t stop BJP getting more seats’

NEW DELHI: A day before Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party are expected to announce an alliance, BJP chief Amit Shah said "bua-bhatija ( Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav )" joining hands would fail to prevent a saffron victory and the party would retain its impressive tally of 71 seats in UP."I am in touch with the UP unit and our workers. I can tell you that they are ready to fight the battle of 50% (votes). Based on the work that we have done, our government has done, I can say that our numbers will go up from 71 to 74 but not slide to 72," Shah told the BJP national convention on Friday. He added that BJP was on its way to win more than 50% votes in UP.Looking to fire the cadre, Shah pitched the 2019 Lok Sabha polls as a clash of ideologies, likening the election to the third battle of Panipat in 1761where a Maratha rout at the hands of Afghan Ahmad Shah Abdali seriously eroded the Peshwa's power, ending prospects of a Hindu power dominating north India.The choice seemed deliberate with its innate reference to humiliation at the hands of a foreign invader and the consequence of a weakened polity eventually leading to the victory of colonial forces. The undercurrent of polarisation was evident as Shah warned that the fallout of elections lasted years.The BJP chief dismissed the proposed grand alliance (mahagathbandan) of opposition parties against BJP as a "sham", saying they were a disparate group with neither a leader nor policy. "They know that Modiji cannot be stopped and so they are forming an alliances despite having little in common," he said.In the aftermath of a setback in three state elections, Shah called on the party to have faith in its main vote-getter, hailing PM Narendra Modi as a leader who was "ajeya" (undefeatable). At the same time, he made it clear that there was no room for complacency and there could be no rest for party workers for the next several months till the results of the Lok Sabha elections were declared."For then, no one can stop India from becoming the world leader," he said, dwelling on the government's successes in welfare and development as well as India's rising prestige. "Now, the value of having an Indian passport is becoming evident," he said.Shah said he had worked with Modi since 1987 and could vouch for not losing a single election under him.Lashing out at opposition's allegations of corruption, Shah said no corruption allegation could stick on the PM. "This has frustrated the opposition, since Congress cannot campaign against Modi without levelling corruption charges… they are making false charges on issues like the Rafale deal," he added."Out on bail in a corruption case, (referring to the Herald House case) Rahul Gandhi and his mother (Sonia Gandhi) are levelling baseless allegations of graft against the Modi government. People are wiser than him," he said.With the PM seated beside him, Shah said the party had the "world's most popular" leader in Modi and asked party delegates to go with the pledge of bringing the government back to power.Shah coined BJP's war cry to win the next polls, claiming that people will vote for a "majboot sarkar" (strong government) when the opposition stands for a "majboor sarkar" (helpless government).
