Top news of the day: Former SC judge Pinaki Chandra Ghose tipped to be India’s first Lokpal, five Indians confirmed dead in Christchurch attack, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Former SC judge Pinaki Chandra Ghose tipped to be India’s first Lokpal

The name of former Supreme Court judge Justice Pinaki Chandra Ghose is said to be in active consideration for appointment as the chief of country’s first Lokpal, the anti-corruption ombudsman, officials said on Sunday.

Christchurch terror attack: five Indians confirmed dead

Five Indians were among the 50 people killed by a gunman who opened fire on worshippers at two mosques in Christchurch, in the worst attack on Muslims in New Zealand, the Indian High Commission said on Sunday.

NDA announces seat-sharing for Lok Sabha polls in Bihar

After much deliberations, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) on Sunday in Bihar officially announced seat-sharing among its three constituents BJP, JD(U) and Lok Janshakti party (LJP).

Manohar Parrikar successor: Congress accuses BJP of indulging in speculation

MLAs and core committee members of Goa BJP on Saturday met to discuss the political situation rising out of the health condition of Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar.

PM Modi adds "Chowkidar" to his Twitter handle name

Stepping up the "MainBhiChowkidar" campaign, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has added "Chowkidar" to his Twitter handle name. Mr. Modi had only on March 16 tweeted that everyone who was "fighting corruption, dirt, social evils" and all those "working hard for the progress of India" was a Chowkidar.

Lok Sabha 2019: AIADMK banks on western Tamil Nadu

The ruling All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) has chosen to contest in most of the Parliamentary constituencies in the western region of Tamil Nadu, considered its traditional stronghold.

U.N. meet dilutes Indian plan to phase out single-use plastic

An ambitious resolution piloted by India to phase out single-use plastics by 2025, was watered down at the United Nations Environment Assembly (UNEA) that concluded on Friday in Nairobi.

Theresa May hopes to be third time lucky with Brexit vote

British Prime Minister Theresa May on Sunday called on her rebellious MPs to do the patriotic thing to strike an honourable compromise over Brexit as she prepares to table her twice-defeated withdrawal agreement to another Parliament vote next week, hoping it would prove third time lucky for her.
