Manohar Parrikar, the chief minister who served Goa ‘till last breath’

Politicians joined President Ram Nath Kovind to mourn the death of Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar on Sunday.

“ Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity,” President Kovind wrote on Twitter.

Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity. An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and of India will not be forgotten #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) March 17, 2019

President Kovind’s predecessor Pranab Mukherjee praised Parrikar saying he worked for the nation till his last breath.

Deeply saddened at the passing away of Shri Manohar Parrikar.He fought bravely against his disease & I always hoped that he will beat it.Despite his deteriorating health,he put Nation first & worked for it till his last breath. May he rest in peace. My prayers are with his family — Pranab Mukherjee (@CitiznMukherjee) March 17, 2019

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said Parrikar was an unparalleled leader, a true patriot and exceptional administrator and was admired by all.

Shri Manohar Parrikar was an unparalleled leader.



A true patriot and exceptional administrator, he was admired by all. His impeccable service to the nation will be remembered by generations.



Deeply saddened by his demise. Condolences to his family and supporters.



Om Shanti. pic.twitter.com/uahXme3ifp — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 17, 2019

Union home minister Rajnath Singh said Parrikar was known for his honesty, integrity and simplicity.

Deeply saddened and pained by the demise of my dear friend & Chief Minister of Goa, Shri Manohar Parrikar. He was known for his honesty, integrity and simplicity. He served the nation and the state of Goa with great diligence. My heartfelt condolences to his bereaved family. — Chowkidar Rajnath Singh (@rajnathsingh) March 17, 2019

BJP president Amit Shah said Parrikar “showed the entire nation how a BJP Karyakarta, even during his toughest time is committed to the philosophy of Nation First, Party Next and Self Last”

Parrikar ji has shown the entire nation how a BJP Karyakarta, even during his toughest time, is committed to the philosophy of Nation First, Party Next and Self Last.



He will always be remembered for his contributions as India’s Defence Minister and as CM of Goa. pic.twitter.com/jiKNGoOZrj — Chowkidar Amit Shah (@AmitShah) March 17, 2019

Congress president Rahul Gandhi said he was saddened by the news of Parrikar’s death after bravely battling a debilitating illness for over a year. His sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra joined him in condoling Parrikar’s death.

I am deeply saddened by the news of the passing of Goa CM, Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji, who bravely battled a debilitating illness for over a year.



Respected and admired across party lines, he was one of Goa’s favourite sons.



My condolences to his family in this time of grief. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 17, 2019

My condolences to the bereaved family of Shri. Manohar Parrikar. I met him only once, when he graciously visited my mother at the hospital two years ago. May his soul rest in peace. — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) March 17, 2019

National conference leader Omar Abdullah said Parrikar’s “untimely demise has left a void that will be difficult to fill.” PDP leader Mehbooba described the late Goa chief minister as a “true fighter who despite battling cancer, worked tirelessly for the welfare of his people with a sense of duty and dignity.”

Saddened to hear about the passing away of Shri Manohar Parrikar. He was a true fighter who despite battling cancer, worked tirelessly for the welfare of his people with a sense of duty & dignity. Condolences to his loved ones & family. — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) March 17, 2019

Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal also took to Twitter to mourn Parrikar’s death. “Extremely saddened at the news of passing away of Goa CM Sh Manohar Parrikar ji. A symbol of simplicity in politics who led a humble life is no longer with us. May his family bear the irreparable loss with courage. Prayers with them,” he wrote.

The Aam Aadmi Party’s Goa Convenor Elvis Gomes said that with the passing away of Parrikar, Goa has lost a politician who had changed the political discourse from the time he ascended into power.

“Having closely seen him work, I can say that he showed the right intentions in the beginning though political pulls and pressures affected the direction of his governance. We parted ways on ideological differences, but still saw him as a buffer against the divisive designs of the party he belonged to. We pray that his soul rests in peace” Gomes said.

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee said she was saddened by Parrikar’s death.

Saddened at the passing away of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar ji. He patiently endured his illness. Condolences to his family and his admirers — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) March 17, 2019

Karnataka chief minister H D Kumaraswamy said Parrikar was respected by all across party lines.
