Goa CM Manohar Parrikar passes away

Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar died at his private residence near here on Sunday. He was 63.

Parrikar is survived by two sons and their families.

“Chief Minister passed away around 6.40 pm Sunday,” a senior state government official told PTI.

The BJP stalwart’s health, which has been fluctuating for a year, took a turn for the worse in the past two days.

In a tweet, President Ram Nath Kovind said, “Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, chief minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity.

Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity. An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and of India will not be forgotten #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) March 17, 2019

“An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and India will not be forgotten,” the President tweeted from his official handle.

Sources said former defence minister Parrikar had been on life support system since late Saturday night.

Parrikar had been unwell since February 2018 when he was diagnosed with a pancreatic ailment

Rahul tweets

In his tweet Congress president Rahul Gandhi says "I am deeply saddened by the news of the passing of Goa CM, Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji, who bravely battled a debilitating illness for over a year. Respected and admired across party lines, he was one of Goa’s favourite sons. My condolences to his family in this time of grief."

I am deeply saddened by the news of the passing of Goa CM, Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji, who bravely battled a debilitating illness for over a year.



Respected and admired across party lines, he was one of Goa's favourite sons.



My condolences to his family in this time of grief. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 17, 2019

Political leaders condole his death

"Saddened at the passing away of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar ji. He patiently endured his illness. Condolences to his family and his admirers." -- West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee

"Entire BJP stands firmly with Parrikar ji’s family. I along with millions of BJP karyakartas and importantly the people of Goa, who were his family, express my deepest condolences. May God give the bereaved family strength to withstand this tragic loss. Om Shanti Shanti Shanti." -- BJP president Amit Shah

"Deeply saddened and pained by the demise of my dear friend & Chief Minister of Goa, Shri Manohar Parrikar. He was known for his honesty, integrity and simplicity. He served the nation and the state of Goa with great diligence. My heartfelt condolences to his bereaved family." -- Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh

"Saddened to know about the demise of senior BJP leader Shri Manohar Parrikar ji, Chief Minister of Goa. He always led by example in his public life & was loved by masses. He will be missed by everyone of us. May God render peace to the departed soul. Om Shanti" -- Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley.

"Shri Manohar Parrikar is no more. A sincere, honest & sensitive political activist. Was simple and down to earth, I learnt a lot from Shri.Parrikar. As Raksha Mantri his contribution to making the armed forces a modernised, lean & mean fighting machine will remain unparalleled." -- Union Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman

"My heartfelt condolences to the family, friends & colleagues of Manohar Parrikar Sahib. His untimely demise has left a void that will be difficult to fill. May his soul rest in peace." -- Former J&K Chief Minister Omar Abdullah

"My condolences to the bereaved family of Shri. Manohar Parrikar. I met him only once, when he graciously visited my mother at the hospital two years ago. May his soul rest in peace." -- Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra.
