Goa Chief Minister and Former Defence Minister Manohar Parrikar Dies

New Delhi: Goa chief minister Manohar Parrikar, who has been seriously ill for several months now, passed away on Sunday evening. He was reportedly at his son’s home in Panaji.

In a tweet earlier in the day, the Chief Minister’s Office had said:

Chief Minister @manoharparrikar‘s health condition is extremely critical. Doctors are trying their best. — CMO Goa (@goacm) March 17, 2019

Parrikar was 63 years old.

President Ram Nath Kovind tweeted his condolences.

Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity. An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and of India will not be forgotten #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) March 17, 2019

Several other political leaders also expressed their sadness on Twitter.

Saddened to hear about the passing away of Shri Manohar Parrikar. He was a true fighter who despite battling cancer, worked tirelessly for the welfare of his people with a sense of duty & dignity. Condolences to his loved ones & family. — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) March 17, 2019

Extremely saddened by the untimely demise of my good friend Manohar Parrikar ji. An epitome of impeccable integrity, a down to earth personality, the first IITian to become CM of a state, great son of India gone too soon… RIP my dear friend… — Chowkidar Suresh Prabhu (@sureshpprabhu) March 17, 2019

My condolences to the bereaved family of Shri. Manohar Parrikar. I met him only once, when he graciously visited my mother at the hospital two years ago. May his soul rest in peace. — Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) March 17, 2019

Just heard a very sad news that Goa CM @manoharparrikar is no more. Huge ideological and political difference notwithstanding..The nation has lost an upright politician. #RIPManoharParrikar ji — Manoj K Jha (@manojkjhadu) March 17, 2019

I am deeply saddened by the news of the passing of Goa CM, Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji, who bravely battled a debilitating illness for over a year. Respected and admired across party lines, he was one of Goa’s favourite sons. My condolences to his family in this time of grief. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 17, 2019

Shri Manohar Parrikar is no more. A sincere, honest & sensitive political activist. Was simple and down to earth, I learnt a lot from Shri.Parrikar. As Raksha Mantri his contribution to making the armed forces a modernised, lean & mean fighting machine will remain unparalleled. — Chowkidar Nirmala Sitharaman (@nsitharaman) March 17, 2019

Parrikar, who was suffering from pancreatic cancer, had been treated in the US and at AIIMS in New Delhi. The Wire had learnt from reliable sources at the Goa Medical College that the chief minister spent the last few nights hooked on to a ventilator at the hospital’s ICU unit.

There was heavy security outside Parrikar’s residence on Sunday.

Panaji: Visual from outside the residence of late Goa Chief Minster Manohar Parrikar. pic.twitter.com/zVsnmlIPCv — ANI (@ANI) March 17, 2019

The former defence minister’s health, which had been fluctuating for a year, took a turn for the worse in the past two days. Several party leaders and allies in the state government had rushed to meet him on Saturday.

Alleging that there is a serious “leadership vacuum” in the state, the Congress has been pushing for the BJP government’s dismissal. On Saturday, the party wrote to Goa Governor Mridula Sinha asking her to dismiss the current coalition government that Parrikar was heading.
