PM Modi did what Manmohan couldn't: Defence Minister Sitharaman

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Sunday said that India had to take action against terrorists in Pakistan because Imran Khan led country did not do so and as a result, Prime Minister Narendra Modi did what former Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh couldn't.

Addressing a gathering here, she said: "We gave Pakistan evidence in 2008 as well but you (Pakistan) did nothing. Jaish-e-Mohammed itself claimed responsibility for Pulwama terror attack. What else do you need? Take action. We took the action that Pakistan should have taken. If you (Pakistan) are a victim of terrorism, why don't you remove it? That's why Modi Ji did what Manmohan Singh Ji didn't do."

She also attacked the Congress party for raising questions over the Central government. "The Congress party cannot list any such steps taken during their tenure. Our government has met leaders in the entire world to isolate and demand action from Pakistan against terrorists. Post Pulwama, post-February 26 every country has given the statement in our favour. If the Congress is questioning us, then I would like to ask them--is this how they support the cause of the nation?"

Tensions between India and Pakistan heightened following a terror attack on a Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, on February 14 in which 40 security personnel lost their lives.

On February 26, India had carried out air strike at a Jaish-e-Mohammed training camp in Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, eliminating a "large number" of terrorists, according to Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale.

The very next day, Pakistani jets violated Indian air space and dropped bombs in the Rajouri sector in the state. India said that it foiled an attempt by the Pakistan Air Force to carry out strikes in the state by shooting down an F-16 fighter plane.

Sitharaman also launched a scathing attack on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for asking evidence for the air strike carried out by the Indian Air Force in Balakot.

She said: "The Bengal government wants proof of the air strike carried out in Balakot. Are they on India's side or on our enemies' side? The statements made by the Bengal government help Pakistan and not us."

She also alleged that the state government is not cooperating with the Centre and is not extending the benefit of welfare schemes like Ayushman Bharat to the people of the state.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
