Goa CM Manohar Parrikar dead

Goa Chief Minister and senior BJP leader Manohar Parrikar died on Sunday evening after a prolonged battle against cancer at the age of 63.

A four-time Chief Minister of Goa who was known for his simplicity and had good relations across the political spectrum, Parrikar breathed his last at his residence here.

"We inform with deep grief that our beloved Chief Minister of Goa Shri. Manohar Parrikar passed away today evening, after a spirited battle against cancer," the Chief Minister's Office tweeted.

Parrikar, a former Defence Minister, had been in and out of hospitals in Goa, Mumbai, Delhi and New York since February last year. It was in October that the state government made a formal announcement about the BJP leader suffering from a pancreatic ailment.

He is survived by two sons -- Utpal, an electrical engineering graduate from Michigan State University, and Abhijat, a local businessman. His wife Medha passed away in 2000.

His cremation will be held at Miramar Goa at 5 pm on Monday. As a mark of respect, the central government declared a mourning on Monday.

After the news about the demise of the popular leader broke, condolences poured in from across party lines.

In a message, President Ram Nath Kovind tweeted, "Extremely sorry to hear of the passing of Shri Manohar Parrikar, Chief Minister of Goa, after an illness borne with fortitude and dignity. An epitome of integrity and dedication in public life, his service to the people of Goa and of India will not be forgotten".

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, "India will be eternally grateful to Shri Manohar Parrikar for his tenure as our Defence Minister. When he was RM, India witnessed a series of decisions that enhanced India's security capacities, boosted indigenous defence production and bettered the lives of ex-servicemen."

"Shri Manohar Parrikar was the builder of modern Goa. Thanks to his affable personality and accessible nature, he remained the preferred leader of the state for years. His pro-people policies ensured Goa scales remarkable heights of progress," Modi said on Twitter.

The Prime Minister said, "Shri Manohar Parrikar was an unparalleled leader. A true patriot and exceptional administrator, he was admired by all. His impeccable service to the nation will be remembered by generations. Deeply saddened by his demise. Condolences to his family and supporters."

Congress president Rahul Gandhi, in his message,"I am deeply saddened by the news of the passing of Goa CM, Shri Manohar Parrikar Ji, who bravely battled a debilitating illness for over a year. Respected and admired across party lines, he was one of Goa's favourite sons. My condolences to his family in this time of grief."

Parrikar took charge as the Chief Minister on March 14, 2017, and held the office till his end. He had previously served as the Chief Minister of the state from 2000 to 2002, 2002 to 2005 and from 2012 to 2014.

An engineer from IIT-Bombay, Parrikar led BJP in 2012 to victory and became the Chief Minister. He was made the Defence Minister in 2014 and was succeeded by Laxmikant Parsekar as the Chief Minister of Goa.

Considered close to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Parrikar, a former Rajya Sabha member from Uttar Pradesh, served as the Defence Minister from May 2014 to March 2017.

Born in Mapusa in the coastal state of Goa in 1955 when it was under Portuguese control, Parrikar studied at Loyola High School, Margao. In 1978, he graduated in metallurgical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology.Portuguese control,

Parrikar was also one of those leaders who rose in ranks from RSS to BJP. Parrikar had joined RSS even during final years of his school days and later became the Sanghchalak at the age of 26.

Often referred to as the 'Chief Minister of the Common' by many, Parrikar was known for his simple style of living and for being easily approachable by the people.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
