Hero police reveal how they brought New Zealand mosque massacre to an end

Advertisement

The heroic police officers who brought an end to the New Zealand mosque killer's rampage have revealed how they tracked down the shooter - after coming straight from a training session on how to deal with armed criminals.

Yesterday, an image emerged showing two officers surrounding 28-year-old Brenton Tarrant after he allegedly opened fire on hundreds of worshipers at two mosques in Christchurch on Friday.

The brutal killing spree, which the shooter sickeningly live-streamed on Facebook, left 50 dead including children, a renowned heart surgeon and a talented sportsman who were murdered as they prayed.

Today, the officers who brought the horrific incident to an end have revealed the snap decisions they had to make when trying to bring the gunman's car to a stop, as he weaved in and out of lanes with his hazard lights on.

Police were able to stop the suspect by wedging their station wagon between a cop car and a gutter in a residential street

They were seen approaching with their weapons drawn before pulling a person in dark clothing out of the vehicle

Footage showed the moment hero police took a suspect into custody after the horror massacre at a Christchurch mosque

Brenton Tarrant was arrested after allegedly gunning down dozens of worshippers on Friday

Accused Christchurch massacre gunman Brenton Harrison Tarrant (pictured) made a white power gesture from behind a glass window, during a brief appearance in court on Saturday

Speaking to The New Zealand Herald, Senior Sergeant Pete Stills, of New Zealand Police, said the officers had been dispatched to search for the killer while at a training session on how to deal with armed offenders.

He said: 'They had their work vehicles there with them with firearms in them. They operationalised themselves and got into one car, they decided to skirt the city, they thought that's what the offender would do - rather than drive through the central business district.'

The officers then made the decision to drive along Brougham Street, as they thought if he'd just been to Linwood - the second mosque he attacked - that would be a likely route he might take.

And their decision paid off, just moments later they spotted a suspicious car driving along the road - with a man fitting the description of the offender coming right for them.

Stills continued: 'They were trying to catch up with him, they were discussing tactics - did they want to pursue him?'

Considerations racing through their minds included whether the gunman might get away and hurt more innocent members of the public, or, should they decide to ram him, whether a crash might hurt innocent road users.

Police allege that Tarrant began his shooting rampage at the Al Noor Masjid Mosque in the city's east, before driving across town to the Linwood Masjid Mosque and again opening fire

Nearly three days since the horrific terror attack in Christchurch which left 50 worshippers dead, new details about the innocent victims are emerging

But they decided to go ahead with bringing the alleged gunman's vehicle to a stop, and so rammed it on the driver's side until it came to a halt.

Yelling at members of the public to get back, both officers - who have 40 years of policing between them - had to drag Tarrant to the ground, claiming he was 'non-compliant' when they approached him.

And dramatic footage captured the moment the arrest took place, with the two officers restraining the alleged attacker on the ground.

Praising his officers' behaviour, the Sergeant said: 'I was surprised how calm and collected they were.

'They wouldn't have been scared, we practice for this stuff - to be honest, it was lucky two officers with that amount of service and experience were there.'

And added that without their brave actions, more people would likely have been killed.

As of Monday morning local time, only one person remained missing and the remaining 49 victims had been identified.

They include, Junaid Ismail, 36, who left behind a wife, three young children and a mother who relied on him to care for her.

Another, Ansi Alibava, 25, was eagerly awaiting her graduation ceremony from her masters degree in May, while Hussein Al-Umari, 36, was a regular at the Masjid Al Noor mosque.

Also among the dead is Tariq Omar, 24, who is remembered for his kind and humble nature and was a former student of Cashmere High School in Christchurch.

Ozair Kadir (pictured), 24, was a student pilot at the International Aviation Academy of New Zealand and had been in Christchurch for just a year when he was killed on Friday

Syed Jahandad Ali, 43, from Pakistan was one of the 50 victims killed in the terror attack in Christchurch on Friday

Maheboob Allarakha Khokhar (left), 65, who was due to return to India on Sunday after visiting his son in Christchurch and Husna Ara Parvin (right), who was reportedly gunned down as she tried to save her quadriplegic husband from the shooter

Ashraf Ali (pictured) a respected imam at the Masjid Al Noor mosque who was originally from Fiji, is also thought to be among the dead

Kamel Darwish, 38, who moved to Christchurch from Jordan six months ago and was awaiting the arrival of his wife and three children - was convinced to go to New Zealand by his brother, who had lived there since 2007 and said it was a 'safe place to raise a family'.

Sixty-year-old Abdelfattah Qasem, from Palestine, was also killed on Friday at the Masjid Al Noor mosque - he was the Muslim Association of Canterbury's former secretary.

Another among the dead is Musa Vali Suleman Patel, 60, who was visiting Christchurch to see his son and was a highly respected leader of the Fiji Muslim League - he left behind his wife Saira Bibi Patel, three daughters and two sons.

Ramiz Arifbhai Vora, 28, and his father Arifbhai Mohamedali Vora, 58, were both shot dead on Friday.

The 28-year-old lived and worked in Christchurch and had a baby daughter a week before he was killed in the vicious attack - his father was visiting him from India at the time.

Ozair Kadir, 24, was a student pilot at the International Aviation Academy of New Zealand and had been in Christchurch for just a year when he was killed on Friday.

Another among the victims is Maheboob Allarakha Khokhar, 65, who was due to return to India on Sunday after visiting his son in Christchurch.

Four-year-old Abdullahi Dirie was also named among the dead after both he and his father Adan were shot at one of the mosques, while four of his siblings escaped unhamed.

Syed Areeb Ahmed (pictured), 26, from Karachi, Pakistan lost his life in the horrific shooting attacks in Christchurch on Friday

Linda Armstrong (left), 65, and Tariq Omar, 24, were also brutally killed by the shooter on Friday in Christchurch

Sixty-year-old Abdelfattah Qasem from Palestine was also killed on Friday at the Masjid Al Noor mosque - he was the Muslim Association of Canterbury's former secretary

Ali Elmadani (right), 65, was a retired engineer who immigrated to New Zealand in 1998. Sohail Shahid (left), from Pakistan was also killed

National-level futsal player Atta Elayyan (right) was reportedly killed on Friday. He is being remembered as an 'inspiration'

A recently identified victim is 38-year-old Kamel Darwish who moved to New Zealand from Jordan six months ago (pictured)

Ramiz Arifbhai Vora (left), 28, and his father Arifbhai Mohamedali Vora (right), 58, were both shot dead by the gunman on Friday

Mohammed Omar Faruk (pictured), 36, from Bangladesh was shot dead on Friday at the mosque attacks in Christchurch

Abdullah's family fled Somalia in the 1990s and made New Zealand their home, he was the youngest in his family.

Before he was brutally killed, Amjad Hamid, 57, was a senior Medical Officer and Rural Hospital Consultant at Hawera Hospital who has been remembered for his kindness, compassion and sense of humour.

Another among the victims is Mounir Soliman, 68, from Egypt who was a design engineer working at Scotts Engineering in Christchurch since 1997.

Zeehan Raza, 38, is also among those killed and was a mechanical engineer who moved to New Zealand from Pakistan in 2018 - both he and his parents Ghulam Hussain and Karam Bibi, were killed at the Linwood Masjid mosque.

Another believed to be among the dead is Bangladeshi Husna Parvin, who was reportedly gunned down as she tried to save her wheelchair-bound quadriplegic husband from the shooter.

Three-year-old Mucad Ibrahim died in the arms of his father and brother, who only survived because he played dead.

Mucad Ibrahim was attending Friday prayers with his father and older brother Abdi Ibrahim when a gunman stormed the al Noor mosque in Christchurch and opened fire on the worshippers.

Ansi Alibava (pictured) came to New Zealand to pursue a Master of Agribusiness Management at Lincoln University

Lilik Abdul Hamid, 58, from Medan, Indonesia (pictured), who died in the mosque left behind two children

Three-year-old Mucad Ibrahim (left) was also named among the dead after he passed away in the arms of his father and brother, who only survived because he played dead. Cardiologist Amjad Hamid (right) was mowed down after moving to New Zealand 23 years ago because he wanted a better future for himself and his wife

Haji Daoud Nabi (pictured), 71, a father-of-five and retired engineer, moved to New Zealand from Afghanistan in 1977 and set up a new life as one of the 'first Muslims in New Zealand'. He is thought to be among the dead in the Christchurch shooting

Khaled Mustafa (pictured) arrived in New Zealand only a few months ago from Syria with his family, his son Hamza, 16 also died

Osama Adnan Abu Kwik, 37, from Palestine (pictured) was in the process of applying for New Zealand citizenship when he was killed

Mojammel Hoq, 30, from Bangladesh (left) and Musa Vali Suleman Patel, 60, from Fiji (right) also died in the shooting on Friday

Talha Naeem, 21, (pictured) was shot at the Masjid Al Noor in Deans Ave, his father was also killed on Friday

Hussein Al-Umari, 35, (pictured) was a regular at the Masjid Al Noor in Deans Ave, Christchurch, where he was killed

Muhammed Abdusi Samad, 66, from Bangladesh (pictured) was a lecturer at Lincoln University and frequently led prayers at the Masjid Al Noor in Deans Ave

Naeem Rashid (pictured), from Abbottabad in Pakistan, was hailed a hero after he tried to wrestle the gun from the Christchurch shooter on Friday. But he was badly wounded after sadly died later in hospital

Cashmere High School student Sayyad Milne (pictured), 14, who was at Friday prayers when the shooting started, is believed to be dead. Although it's not been officially confirmed, his father has spoken of his loss

Dr Haroon Mahmood (pictured) leaves a wife and two children aged 13 and 11

A spokesman for Pakistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed that five Pakistani citizens are missing (pictured missing person Syed Jahandad Ali)

It's believed that at the time of the horrific attack, Mucad ran from the gunman while his father and brother played dead.

It comes as New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, 38, visited the Kilbirnie mosque to comfort those affected by the tragic shooting.

Hundreds of tributes had been left at the mosque in Wellington, and at the Al Noor Mosque and Linwood Masjid Mosque in Christchurch where the shootings took place, after Tarrant's alleged shooting spree.

The Prime Minister's appearance in Wellington comes as Tarrant's grandmother, Marie Fitzgerald, 81, joined Brenton Tarrant's grandfather Joyce in voicing her incredulity that her grandson was potentially capable of murder.

Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern hugs a mosque-goer at the Kilbirnie Mosque on Sunday, as she meets with members of the Islamic community

Ms Ardern (pictured with a mosque-goer) visited the Wellington based mosque to pay her respects and comfort those affected by the tragedy - New Zealand's worst ever mass shooting

The Prime Minister lays a wreath at the mosque, as 50 people are confirmed dead following the tragic shooting including children, a renowned heart surgeon and a talented sportsman

Speaking for the first time on Sunday from her living room in New South Wales, Mrs Fitzgerald said she was 'gobsmacked' when she learnt of the Christchurch attacks.

'It's just so much for everyone to take in that somebody in our family would do anything like this,' she told Nine News.

Mrs Fitzgerald described an adolescent Tarrant as a computer enthusiast who didn't pay much attention to girls growing up.

She said he would focus on the 'ins and outs' of a computer because talking to girls was 'too hard'.

Regardless, she said he was a 'normal, happy child' growing up in Grafton.

Tarrant faced Christchurch District Court on Saturday morning where he was charged with one count of murder.

Flanked by two much taller armed security officers, Tarrant smiled faintly as he stood behind a small glass barrier which came up just above his eyes.

Grandmother of Brenton, Marie Fitzgerald (pictured) says her grandson was a computer enthusiast uninterested in girls growing up

Joyce Tarrant, 94, said the alleged cold-blooded killer who filmed himself gunning down Muslims during Friday prayers was not the grandson she knew

From behind the glass window he made a white power gesture to those inside the court room.

Police allege that after opening fire inside the Al Noor Mosque Tarrant drove to the Linwood Masjid Mosque across town and continued his rampage.

Short of stature with a stocky build, with thinning hair and beady brown eyes, Tarrant stood squarely in place throughout the entire hearing.

He swivelled his torso around to repeatedly glance at the media, at District Court Judge Paul Kaller and out the windows of the Christchurch District Court.

At the beginning of the hearing he appeared to have a faint smile on his face, but it faded into a neutral expression as the hearing continued.

He has been charged with one count of murder but police say many more charges are expected to be laid when he appears in the High Court on April 5.

The hearing was over within minutes, with Tarrant taking one final look at those gathered and marched away.
