India is respected and regarded world over for its age-old values of peace and harmony embedded in its philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam: Vice President

India is respected and regarded world over for its age-old values of peace and harmony embedded in its philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam: Vice President

New Delhi: The Vice President of India, Shri M. Venkaiah Naidu has said that India is respected and regarded world over for its age-old values of peace and harmony embedded in its philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam.

Speaking at a felicitation function organized by the committee of Friends and Well Wishers, in Hyderabad today, following the conferment of Doctor Honoris Causa upon him by the Peace University of Costa Rica in recognition of his contribution to the rule of law, democracy, sustainable development and peace, the Vice President said that the horrific shooting of defenceless worshippers in New Zealand once again highlighted the need for all countries to come together to eliminate the scourge of terrorism. “It is a global challenge which requires a global response. No country is immune to these threats”, he added.

Pointing out that India had been victim of mindless violence and facing the menace of cross-border terrorism for the past many decades, he expressed his disappointment over China’s decision to block the proposal of UN Security Council to list Jaish-e-Mohammed Chief, Azhar Mahmood as a global terrorist. “This once again underlines the need for expanding the Security Council”, he added.

The Vice President wished that he would undertake a nationwide campaign to promote peace; strengthen democracy, fight corruption, create greater awareness on sustainable development and encourage social harmony through various forums across the nation.

Shri Naidu said that the quest for industrialization and modernization has pushed the atmospheric carbon dioxide to dangerous levels leading to climate disruption and global warming.

Quoting the latest report of Global Environment Outlook which mentioned that poor environmental conditions were causing about 25 per cent of global diseases and mortality – around 9 million deaths in 2015 alone, the Vice President said “all of us must strive to protect environment, reduce pollution, promote greenery, conserve water bodies and ensure that development does not disrupt natural resources”.

Referring to the conferment of the Honorary Doctorate, she Naidu said it was not for an individual, but reflected the global acknowledgement and recognition of the age-old Indian values of peace and harmony embedded in our philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam.

Following is the text of Vice President’s address:

“I am grateful to all of you for felicitating me upon the conferment of Doctor Honoris Causa by the University for Peace based in Costa Rica in recognition of my contribution to the rule of law, democracy, sustainable development and peace.

I am of the opinion that the Doctorate conferred upon me is not for an individual but reflects the global acknowledgement and recognition of the age-old Indian values of peace and harmony embedded in our philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam. I felt doubly honored that it was given at a time when the world is commemorating the 150th birth anniversary of Gandhiji, who had demonstrated to the world the power of non-violence

Dear friends, our quest for industrialization and modernization has pushed the atmospheric carbon dioxide to dangerous levels leading to climate disruption and global warming. We have to reverse this trend urgently. Words like sustainable development and peace might sound esoteric and far removed to you. Please remember that you are contributing to green house gas emissions when you switch on your air conditioner. Similarly, you are aiding global warming when you switch on the ignition of your car.

Only the other day, the latest Global Environment Outlook report has mentioned that poor environmental conditions were causing about 25 per cent of global diseases and mortality—around 9 million deaths in 2015 alone.

All of us must strive to protect environment, reduce pollution, promote greenery, conserve water bodies and ensure that development does not disrupt natural resources. Please remember that all of us have an onerous responsibility cast on us to make this planet greener and safer so that the lives of future generations are not jeopardized.

As regards peace, I have always maintained that peace is the foremost prerequisite for progress. Any kind of conflict or strife will prevent development. I have been consistently saying that one cannot pay attention to development if there is tension. Again, it is the duty of every citizen to ensure that the social harmony in our country is not disturbed in any way.

On the external front, India has been facing the menace of cross-border terrorism and has been a victim of mindless violence for the past many decades. Terrorism can never be treated with kid gloves. The horrific shooting of defenceless worshippers in New Zealand once again underscored the need for all countries to come together to eliminate the scourge of terrorism.

It is truly disappointing that China has once again blocked the proposal of UN Security Council to list Jaish-e-Mohammed Chief, Azhar Mahmood as global terrorist. This once again underlines the need for expanding the Security Council.

The time has come for the UN to speedily conclude the deliberations on the proposed Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism, which was proposed by India at the UN in 1996 and is pending since then.

India has been a votary of peace and non-violence from time immemorial. We wish to have cordial relations with all countries and peoples around the world. But peace will not thrive if the forces of terror continue their unchecked run.

The harsh reality today is that terrorism is raising its ugly head in different parts of the world. It is a global challenge which requires a global response. No country is immune to these threats.

The world community must rally behind the forces of peace to quell the forces of terrorism.

The United Nations should evolve a common strategy to combat these forces.

Friends, I have also decided to launch a nationwide campaign to promote rule of law and peace; strengthen democracy, fight corruption, create greater awareness on sustainable development and encourage social harmony.

Jai Hind!”
