Tibetan Migration to India Before the Fourteenth Dalai Lama

Confronted by the magnitude of political disturbances in Tibet, the Indian government had to reconsider its open policy for Tibetans. It required Tibetans to obtain permits for entry and stay in India, and those who were already here were required to register themselves as foreigners.

In April 1951, four months after the new regulation had come into effect, over three-fourths of already resident (1,433 out of 1,939) and recently-arrived Tibetans (2,650 out of 2,835) were concentrated in the state of West Bengal, which bordered the kingdoms of Nepal, Sikkim, and Bhutan.

Despite the change in regulation, entry permits were relatively easy to acquire at the time and the government did not take any particular steps to discourage the increasing numbers of Tibetans coming to India in the wake of political changes in Tibet.

Asked if and how many had been refused entry into India, the Home Minister C Rajagopalachari referred to the customary nature of Tibetan travel to India: “They are ordinary trading people and no question of refusal arises.”

He also countered allegations of “Communist infiltration” along the Tibetan border with Uttar Pradesh by pointing out that the supposed “infiltration” was by Tibetans who routinely came to collect wood from the jungles of Garhwal for making utensils (10 April 1951).

The government at the time was thus sensitive to the relative porosity of India’s border with Tibet, and the customary nature of movement across it.

A day before the Dalai Lama reached India on 31 March 1959, Nehru pointed out that it was customary for Buddhist monks from Ladakh to travel to Lhasa for religious instruction. Four head abbots from Leh in Lhasa, and anywhere between 30-100 monks were thought to be in Tibet.

Nehru was unable to provide specific figures to the Lok Sabha because they were not required to register: “They simply come and go, and do not report to us.”

All this would soon change. Archival records of Tibetans coming into India after 1959 reveal the Indian State’s growing anxiety about the rise of Communism in the region, as well as its concern about protecting the long eastern border with China.

This sensitivity to historical interconnectedness and the porosity of borders would make way for a gradual tightening – of borders, and of relations.
