Small parties hold influence over forming government in Goa

Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar, 63, breathed his last on Sunday evening as his battle against pancreatic cancer from February 2018 came to an end even after a series of treatments in the US, Delhi and Mumbai. Parrikar’s health had started deteriorating from Saturday afternoon as his blood pressure had come down to zero.

The doctors had placed 16 oxygen cylinders at his residence in Panaji and had put him on ventilator.

As Parrikar was battling for life, the Goa politicians had taken steps on formation of the next government.

Sensing an opportunity, the Congress air dashed its former CM Digambar Kamat to Delhi to discuss the permutations and combinations of government formation. Kamat, however, denied that his Delhi visit had anything to do with politics.

In a letter to Governor Mridula Sinha on Saturday, Congress had staked its claim to form the government being the single-largest party with 14 MLAs. At present, four seats are vacant in the 40-member Goa Legislative Assembly.

The by-elections to three of them are scheduled on April 23. If BJP wins all three seats, its strength in the House will go to 16 four short of simple majority. If Congress wins any of these seats, it will remain the single-largest party.

In this case, with three MLAs each two smaller BJP allies Maharashtrawadi Gomantak Party (MGP) and Goa Forward Party (GFP) will play an important role in the next government. GFP has included three independents in its team forming a group of six which could be crucial in deciding the next CM. GFP chief Vijai Sardesai had made it clear that they would back BJP till Parrikar was alive.

BJP is trying to convince MGP to back out from the by-elections in Mandrem and Shiroda giving it a cakewalk against Congress. If MGP remains adamant on its plan BJP might find it difficult to win these seats. The Goa BJP tried to put a brave face in the time of crisis.

Our leadership in Delhi and Goa is very strong and stable and is already thinking on Goa’s political transit phase. We will come out of all things with great success, read a statement issued by BJP media coordinator Sandesh Sadhale.
