Navy was ready to tackle any situation in wake of Pulwama attack

A scene after the Feb 14 Pulwama terror attack by Jaish in which 40 CRPF men died. The JeM attack had prompted rapid deployment of subs.

The INS Chakra nuclear submarine was deployed in operational role with the INS Vikramaditya aircraft carrier to tackle any situation’ with Pakistan in wake of the Pulwama attack on February 14.

India had deployed both its submarines during the crisis with Pakistan in their first ever deployment. The Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) sponsored terrorist attack on the CRPF convoy in Pulwama led to a rapid re-deployment of the Indian Navy for Operations in North Arabian Sea.

Admiral Sunil Lanba, chief of the Naval Staff will be in Kochi on Monday to preside over the debriefing of the largest War Game of the Indian Navy’ the Theatre Level Operational Readiness Exercise (TROPEX 19). The exercise had commenced January 7 and was planned to be terminated by March 10.

The major combat units of the Indian Navy including the Carrier Battle Group with INS Vikramaditya, nuclear submarines and scores of other ships, submarines and aircraft swiftly transited from exercise to operational deployment mode as tensions between India and Pakistan escalated.

A clear and resolute message regarding the operational posture of the Indian Navy to prevent, deter and defeat any misadventure by Pakistan in the maritime domain was also issued during the triservices press conference conducted on February 28.

About 60 ships of the Indian Navy, 12 ships of the Indian Coast Guard and 60 aircrafts were part of the TROPEX 19. Amongst the key attributes of Naval forces are the Versatility’ to change roles, Mobility’ and Poise’.

The availability of such a large number of combat ready assets in the theatre of operations for the TROPEX 19 allowed the Indian Navy to expeditiously respond to the developing situation in synergy with the three services.

The overwhelming superiority of the Indian Navy in all three dimensions forced the Pakistan Navy to remain deployed close to the-Makran coast and not venture out in the open ocean.

Earlier, the TROPEX 19 had commenced with Tri-services Amphibious Exercise in the Andaman and Nicobar islands with the participation of the Army and the Air Force.

This was followed by the largest Coastal Defence Exercise code SEA VIGIL’ on January 19, 22 and 23 with the participation of all 13 Coastal States and Union Territories along with all maritime stakeholders.

The TROPEX was thus far the largest in terms of geographical spread covering the IOR and also with regard to the number of participating units.

This day-long review of the TROPEX 19 by the Chief of the Naval Staff with all Operational Commander’s is intended to examine the conduct of the exercise and to assess the operational preparedness of the Indian Navy.
