Man catches wife with lover, they kill him, dump body

GHAZIABAD: A 33-year-old man with a criminal record was allegedly murdered by his wife and her lover after he found them in an objectionable position on March 12.The two accused, along with a third accomplice, dumped the man’s body in the Hindon canal. A day later, to avoid suspicion, the man’s wife visited Vijay Nagar police station and lodged a missing person’s complaint.The woman, however, gave in to sustained police questioning and confessed to having murdered her husband, Ajay Nagar, with her lover Guddu’s help.Ajay’s body was fished out of the canal in Vijay Nagar on Sunday, based on information from his wife. While the woman has been arrested, her lover and the third accomplice, who helped them in disposing of the body, are untraceable. According to police records, Ajay had gone to jail several times in cases related to robbery and under provisions of the Gangsters Act.A year ago, when he was in a jail in Meerut , he met Guddu and became friends with him.However, after being released, Ajay shifted to Ghaziabad’s Siddharth Vihar and started running a transport business from Kirana Mandi. He lived here with his wife and two children. Guddu, police said, started visiting the victim’s house often and soon developed an illicit relationship with the latter’s wife.Around a month ago, he had even asked the woman to sever all ties with her husband.Subsequently, the woman had gone to her parents’ house in Nandgram and started staying with them along with her two children.Two days before the alleged murder, Ajay had taken his wife to Delhi for shopping. She came back to Siddharth Vihar on March 12.As Ajay would often return from work late, Guddu would frequent his house in his absence, police said. On March 12, however, Ajay came home around 10.15pm and found his wife with Guddu in a room. The third accomplice was also present in the house. An argument soon snowballed into a fight between Ajay and Guddu, and he, with the help of his accomplice, strangled the former.The trio then put the body in a gunny bag, took it in Guddu’s car and dumped it in the Hindon canal.SP (city) Shlok Kumar said a manhunt has been launched for the woman’s lover and the third accomplice.
