India confirms five nationals killed in NZ mosque attacks

Foreign ministry official in New Delhi denies an earlier media report that said seven Indians had died



CHRISTCHURCH/NEW DELHI Five Indian nationals were among the 50 worshippers killed in the Christchurch mosque attacks, with at least two others reported to be injured, the Indian High Commission said on Sunday. India’s embassy in New Zealand confirmed the deaths in a tweet, following the devastating shootings at the twin mosques.



“With a very heavy heart we share the news of loss of precious lives of our 5 nationals in ghastly terror attack in #Christchurch,” it tweeted.



It identified them as: Maheboob Khokhar; Ramiz Vora; Asif Vora; Ansi Alibava; and Ozair Kadir.



An Indian foreign ministry official in New Delhi told AFP they are “in process of ascertaining information about all Indians affected by the terror attack”. The official denied Indian media reports that claimed seven people were killed in the attack.



Three of the dead from the mass shooting at Al Noor mosque were from Gujarat. They were father and son Asif and Ramiz Vora, and 65-year-old retiree Mahboob Khokhar. Ansi Karippakulam Alibava, 23, from Kerala, who had lived with her husband in Christchurch since last year as she studied for a masters , was also confirmed dead. The fifth victim, Ozair Kadir, was an aspiring commercial pilot from Hyderabad.



Mohsin Vora, Asif’s brother, told AFP they were initially told his brother and nephew were injured in the attack, before a relative identified their bodies when they flew to New Zealand. Vora said his 56-year-old brother had gone to meet his new grandchild a month ago. “The parents of Ramiz’s wife and I have been granted visas. We will be leaving for New Zealand soon,” Vora said.



Australian white supremacist Brenton Tarrant, 28, allegedly launched his murderous rampage on Friday. The body of the 50th victim of the attacks was discovered at the Al Noor mosque, where most victims were killed, when officials removed victims’ bodies on Saturday, New Zealand Police Commissioner Mike Bush told reporters on Sunday. While a preliminary list of the victims has been shared with families, Bush said their bodies have not yet been released. The number of wounded also increased to 50, he said. Of those, 34 remain hospitalised in the Christchurch Hospital and 12 are in critical condition, Greg Robertson, the hospital’s chief of surgery, said.







Web page for visa help



»In a tweet, the High Commission said Immigration NZ has set up a web page to expedite visas for victims’ families (https://www.immigration. govt.nz/about-us/mediacentre/news-notifications/family-members-of-mosqueincident). It said its helplines — 021803899 & 021850033 — are available around the clock. It also said those needing assistance transiting through Auckland may contact 021531212.







Victim’s wife and son camp outside hospital



Imran Khokhar, 27, had dropped off his father Maheboob Khokhar, at the Al Noor mosque in Christchurch and was in the parking lot when he heard the screams. He raced toward the mosque to reach his father, who was visiting from India, when locals stopped him.



Imran was yet to see his father’s body, he told his older brother Altaf, who lives in Surendranagar.



He said hi s father had retired as an area manager at a state-owned power utility in Gujarat, and was on his first visit to New Zealand with his wife. Local police had not confirmed Maheboob’s death to the family, Altaf said.



Imran and his mother were camping outside the hospital.



“We saw his name on television but the police there are not telling us anything,” Altaf said. Maheboob was scheduled to fly back to India on Sunday with his wife.



Altaf doesn’t have a passport, so can’t go to New Zealand. “Nothing is clear to us,” he said.


