Upcoming movies: Akshay Kumar's Kesari, How To Train Your Dragon 3 and more releasing this week

Kesari, How To Train Your Dragon 3 | Photo Credit: Twitter

For all cinephiles, Friday is the best day of the week. It brings new stories and dreams to the big screens as a lot of wishful thinking is fulfilled. Nothing better than sitting in a cushioned chair and watching a movie on a 70mm screen. Having this special day every week helps to release all tension and just sink into a seat with a tub of popcorn while the silver screen entertains us. This week is all about fun and might be a thrill of most of us.

This week is all about animation and some small town stories. From Akshay Kumar and Parineeti Chopra's Kesari, this week is all about spending quality time with your family on Holi. While the day can bring you down by all the celebration, going to the cinema hall can be the perfect stress-buster. Besides this, the fantasy film How To Train Your Dragon is there with the third instalment. Take a look at the upcoming movies for this week...

Bollywood movies releasing this week

Kesari

Starring Akshay Kumar and Parineeti Chopra, Kesari is a historic film that tells the story of 21 Sikhs who fought against 10,000 Afghan invaders at the Battle of Saragarhi. Directed by Anurag Singh, this film is based on one of the greatest battles ever fought in the history of India. It is set to hit theatres on March 21.

Mard Ko Dard Nahi Hota

Starring debutant Abhimanyu Dassani and Radhika Madan, Mard Ko Dard Nahi Hota is an action comedy written and directed by Vasan Bala and produced by Ronnie Screwvala under his banner RSVP Movies. It will hit the screens on March 21.

Hollywood movies releasing this week

How To Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World

In this next chapter of this epic fantasy, Hiccup and Toothless will finally discover their true destinies. Starring Djimon Hounsou, Gerard Butler and Cate Blanchett, the third instalment is directed by Dean DeBlois and is slated to hit theatres this Friday.

Stay tuned for more news on ZoomTV.com.
