Gujarat High Court hands probe in Bopal custodial death case to CID

In a major embarrassment for the Ahmedabad rural police, the Gujarat High Court on Friday transferred the probe in the controversial Bopal custodial death case to CID (crime), remarking that it is a "brutal murder" in police custody.

The court also remarked that truth has inconvenient ways of coming out while expressing its unhappiness on the shoddy probe that has been carried out in the case by a special investigation team (SIT) headed by deputy superintendent of Ahmedabad rural police KT Kamariya.

Notably, the order came from the single judge bench of Justice Sonia Gokani after the victim's brother Mahavirsinh Zala moved the high court demanding justice, and a fair and transparent probe in the case.

Kamaria had earlier informed the court that under the oral instructions of the superintendent of police, the victim Surubha Zala, who was working as a driver with a transport company, was held by the local crime branch (LCB) in a Rs 2.5 crore gold theft case and brought to Bopal. He had clarified that the victim was kept as a suspect and not arrested. The LCB interrogated him and then special operations group (SOG) took over the probe of the gold theft. The police officer had stated that three SOG personnel tortured the victim in the midnight and when his condition deteriorated, he was taken to the primary health centre, where he was declared brought dead on October 14, 2018.

During Friday's hearing, the court after going through the case papers asked several questions from the investigation officer and held that the investigation was not moving in the right direction. It also remarked that there were blatant lacunas in the probe. The court also raised serious questions over the functioning of the police and lambasted senior police officials for not maintaining entries in the station diary and absence of CCTV cameras in police stations.

TRUTH ABOVE ALL

The court also remarked that truth has inconvenient ways of coming out while expressing its unhappiness on the shoddy probe that has been carried out in the case by a special investigation team (SIT) headed by deputy superintendent of Ahmedabad rural police KT Kamariya.
