Indian Army jawan killed, 3 injured in Pakistan shelling in Jammu and Kashmir's Sunderbani sector

New Delhi:

An Indian Army jawan was killed and three others were injured in heavy shelling by Pakistan on the Line of Control on Monday. The ceasefire violation took place in Jammu and Kashmir’s Sunderbani Sector of Rajouri. According to the army sources, at about 5:30 am, Pakistan initiated an “unprovoked shelling with mortars”. It was also accompanied by small arms along LoC. Firing stopped two hours later at around 7:15 am.

The Valley has witnessed a troubled start of 2019. The situation turned rather grim after Pulwama terror attack. There has been no let-up in the cross border firing from Pakistan. On Saturday, a Special Police Officer was gunned down by suspected terrorists at the Vehil area of south Kashmir's Shopian district. The SPO, identified as Khushboo Jan, was fired upon by unidentified gunmen from close range around 2:40 pm at her Shopian residence. Immediately after the incident, Jan was evacuated to a hospital where she succumbed to her injuries. Meanwhile, a joint team of Army, Special Operation Group of Police and CRPF cordoned off the area and launched a search operation to nab the assailants.

The India-Pakistan border skirmishes witnessed a sudden spurt following India's preemptive air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Balakot on February 26 to avenge the February 14 Pulwama terror attack, which left 42 CRPF personnel dead and dozens of others injured.

Even as Pakistan continues to deny the February 26 air strike in its Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, sensational proofs unmask Islamabad’s doublespeak. Latest media reports by two news channels have revealed how Islamabad tried to get rid of the terrorists’ bodies after the Indian Air Force air strike on the terror camp run by Jaish-e-Mohammed. According to Republic TV, an eyewitness have come forward and talked extensively about the way authorities across the border tried to doctor the site. Bodies of some terrorists were thrown in river while others were set on fire.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
