PM’s #MainBhiChowkidar takes Twitter by storm

With less than a month to go, political campaigning has started in all earnest across mediums. Media observers see the campaign battle shifting to digital in a major way in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is one of the most connected politicians on social media today, with over 46.3 million followers on Twitter. He himself follows 2,121 people. Sounding off the poll bugle, Modi released BJP’s digital campaign on March 15, 2019 via a video film of 3.44 minute duration – ‘Main Bhi Chowkidar’ – which has already garnered 436,862 views. The ‘Main Bhi Chowkidar’ topped global trend on Twitter within hours of its launch.

Your Chowkidar is standing firm & serving the nation.



But, I am not alone.



Everyone who is fighting corruption, dirt, social evils is a Chowkidar.



Everyone working hard for the progress of India is a Chowkidar.



Today, every Indian is saying-#MainBhiChowkidar — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 16, 2019

The film starts off with Modi’s Independence Day speech, where he had called himself the nation’s ‘chowkidar’, “standing firm & serving the nation”. The film showcases people from all walks of life declaring themselves to be the nation’s chowkidar – fighting corruption, poverty, dirty surroundings, and striving to bring in self-employment, education for all, equality and progress. Everyone declares themselves “Main Bhi Chowkidar’.

Reaction to the campaign has been overwhelmingly positive on Twitter with over 1 lakh impressions and 45K retweets at the time of filing this article. Several BJP leaders as well as people on Twitter have pre-fixed ‘Chowkidar’ to their Twitter handles.

A few days prior to this, Modi had caused another stir on Twitter went he launched 29 tweets from his official handle, addressing industry leaders across the spectrum of the country to raise voter awareness for the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections.

The official Twitter handle of Modi also kept the momentum of the campaign alive by sending an automated response to the citizens, who pledged their support for the campaign in a personally signed ‘Thank You’ note by the Prime Minister.

PM @narendramodi has changed his Twitter handle to "chowkidar Narendra Modi" #ChowkidarPhirSe pic.twitter.com/GXFJFddrxd — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi177) March 17, 2019
