AP CM Chandrababu takes pot shots at PM, KCR and YS Jagan

Nellore: Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu took potshots at the Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and also YSR Congress chief YS Jaganmohan Reddy as part of his Ennikala Sannahaka Samavesam in Nellore on Monday. He said the 'watchman at Delhi' (Prime Minister Narendra Modi) hasn't been focusing on the development of the country and was only trying to protect thieves (political offenders).

"Eve as these offenders are looting public money the Prime Minister has been supporting them. He is protecting them from such crimes. The PMO had finally turned out to be a lobbying centre for such leaders," said Chandrababu.

He asked why YS Jaganmohan Reddy is failing to raise voice against the PM and Chief Minister of Telangana though they were making adverse comments against Telugus and the State. "We are giving Pusupu Kumkuma to lakhs of women. But, the opposition leader is removing them.

Why they had tried to hide the murder of his own uncle? Why they described it as a heart attack even though evidence for murder were obviously there? He died at 5.30 am and still they were telling it as a death due to heart attack up to 9.15 am, and why? Killers used lethal weapons for eliminating the senior leader," said the Chief Minister.

He asked the gathering of booth level leaders and others on any need for electing such leaders and use to the people. He said opposition leaders are adopting murder politics and they would reverse it with a ballot. When the TRS government filed a writ for obstructing the mighty Polavaram project, the opposition leader is working hand in hand with them, he said.

Chandrababu said once KCR was his follower and now is making adverse comments against the ruling party and the state conniving with the opposition in the state. He asked the TS Chief Minister KCR whether he was from the sky (Akasam numchi udipaddadaa)? He said they are trying to destabilize Andhra Pradesh and are trying to install their puppet in the power and they won't allow it.

Chandrababu appealed to the party cadre to work for winning the ruling party in all 25 LS seats in the state and they would decide the candidate for the PM position. Even if 2-3 seats are won by the opposition, they would become B-Team to KCR, he said. Now, they were trying to deploy temporary officers to AP as their agents. He said there has been anti-Modi wave across the country and their address will disappear.

He said they had managed with low finances for state's development even though failed to get Rs. 1 lakh crores from TS as share and no support from the Centre after bifurcation. He thundered the KCR for interfering in the affairs of the state and making comments saying 'Khabardar'.

The Chief Minister introduced party candidates of various assembly and Lok Sabha seats to the participants and said they have the support of 65 lakh TDP family members, 1 Cr SHG women; 50,000 farmers and a huge beneficiary of various welfare schemes such as pensions, youngsters and others. He said they were responsible for paddy cultivation in the district even during the crisis for water due to famine. He said they had shifted 43 TMC of water to Somasila for bailing out the farmers from a difficult situation.

Chandrababu also criticized Prashant Kishor, political advisor of YSR Congress, as he is like a 'Bihar bandit leader' who encouraged the opposition to steal valuable data. He said they had appointed a SIT for investing the issue and also booked cases under Cyber Laws.

He announced City Mayor Abdul Aziz as a candidate for Nellore Rural constituency and particularly focused on YSR Congress LS candidate Adala Prabhakar Reddy who shifted his loyalties to the opposition after his name was declared for the constituency.

He asked the participants whether they accept such tendencies. He appealed them to put concerted efforts for winning of 10 assemblies and 2 LS seats from the district. He also criticized Nellore Rural and Venkatachalam YSR Congress, candidates.
