Magazine editor found murdered underneath bridge in Bhiwandi, cause of death unclear

Preliminary investigation suggests that Pandey may have been murdered on the spot (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Thane: Police in Thane district on Saturday discovered the body of a 44-year-old man who has been identified as Nityanand Pandey. The editor of a news portal and monthly magazine, Pandey's body was found dumped underneath a bridge in Bhiwandi Taluka area.

Thane Rural Police said that Pandey had head injuries and a preliminary inquiry suggests that he may have been murdered on the spot. However, the same is yet to be confirmed awaiting a post-mortem report. Pandey's family registered a missing person complaint after his phone was switched off at 7.30 pm on Friday evening and did not return home. He was last seen with friends on Friday evening. Police summoned his family to identify the body based on the missing person complaint and confirmed that it was Pandey.

Additional SP Thane (Rural): Group Editor of 'India unbound,' Nityanand Pandey's body was found underneath a bridge in Bhiwandi Taluka area, yesterday; he was missing since 15th March. Investigation is going on. #Maharashtra — ANI (@ANI) March 17, 2019

Pandey was the editor of India Unbound, a news portal and bilingual magazine with offices in Andheri and Mira Road. His publication featured interviews with senior bureaucrats and government officials. However, a report by Indian Express asserted that Pandey had several cases of extortion against him in Mumbai's Mira Road. He is survived by his wife and two children who live in his Mira Road residence.

At this time in the investigation, police officials suspect that Pandey's death may have been the result of personal enmity. However, the cause of death and the motive are yet to be identified pending further inquiry. Investigators confirmed that two people have been held in this regard but refused to divulge any more details.

Must Read: WATCH - Gangster makes selfie videos in Tihar jail; gives an inside ‘tour’
