Concern over use of brutal tactics in IOK

Srinagar, March 16, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani has expressed concern over the unabated use of repressive measures by India against peaceful civilians, resistance leaders and activists in the territory.

Syed Ali Gilani in a statement issued in Srinagar said the Indian authorities are hell bent upon curbing and strangulating the popular aspirations for the right to self-determination through nocturnal raids, mass arrests and invoking of draconian Public Safety Act on freedom-loving people. However, the APHC Chairman said the peoples’ sentiment for freedom has touched the pinnacle and the liberation struggle emerged as invincible, against all odds.

The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat Jammu and Kashmir, Mohammad Ashraf Sehrai in a statement condemned the slapping of draconian Public Safety Act on religious scholar, Maulana Mushtaq Ahmed Veeri and said that such undemocratic act could not weaken the sentiment of Kashmiri people for their right to self-determination.

Meanwhile, scores of students from Islamia College Srinagar, today, took out a protest rally against the summoning of Hurriyat forum Chairman, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq by the National Investigation Agency to New Delhi and the crackdown on Jamaat-e-Islami and other religious leaders and activists. The protesting students said that the Muslims of Kashmir, irrespective of their political ideologies, had a deep emotional and religious association with the pulpit of Jamia Masjid and religious head, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq.

The students of the SSM College of Engineering also held a protest at Pattan, Baramulla against the terror attack at two New Zealand mosques and held prayers in absentia for the people who were killed.

The Delhi-based Enforcement Directorate has summoned Naseem Gilani, son of APHC Chairman Syed Ali Gilani, to appear at its New Delhi headquarters in a fake case. The ED notice to Naseem Gilani came less than a week after the India’s National Investigation Agency summoned him in another such case.

Unknown gunmen, today, shot dead a woman police officer at her house in Vehil village in Shopian district. As many as 11 people were killed and five injured in a tragic road accident near Kunda nallah in Ramban district of Jammu region.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
