Poster launch of biopic PM Narendra Modi by Amit Shah postponed due to Goa CM Manohar Parrikar’s demise

PM Narendra Modi biopic will release on April 12. The poster launch by Amit Shah was postponed

After the first poster of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s biopic was released by Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis in Mumbai in January this year, BJP president Amit Shah was supposed to launch the second poster of the film today in Delhi. But the event was postponed as news of the demise of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar was received

Amit Shah had to leave for Goa today to attend the last rites of Parrikar, who had been battling prolonged illness and passed away at his residence on March 17. Hence, the poster launch was shifted to a later date. IANS quoted an official as saying, “We are extremely sorry to inform that the poster launch of our film PM Narendra Modi, which was scheduled for March 18, 10.30am, has been postponed due to the death of Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar. Our heartfelt condolences to his family in this time of grief. Rest in peace.”

The biopic, PM Narendra Modi, stars Vivek Oberoi as PM Modi. It has been directed by Omung Kumar and will release on April 12. Earlier today, it was revealed that Vivek will be sporting nine looks in the film denoting the different time periods in the PM’s life. Check out the looks here:

Vivek Anand Oberoi's different looks in the biopic #PMNarendraModi... Directed by Omung Kumar... Produced by Sandip Ssingh, Suresh Oberoi and Anand Pandit... 12 April 2019 release. pic.twitter.com/lkIMrbBhJT — taran adarsh (@taran_adarsh) March 18, 2019

Apparently, Vivek had to give 15 look tests for the film. Even during the shoot, according to a source, the actor used to sit through 7-8 hours of makeup process each day and could only consume liquids during the shoot because of the prosthetics. Apparently, it took Vivek a year of prep work before the actual shoot of the film began.

PM Narendra Modi also features Boman Irani, Zarina Wahab, Barkha Bisht Sengupta and Darshan Kumaar in important roles.


