Firozabad rape, murder: 8-year-old girl's body found in wheat field

Police have launched a search for the absconding suspect (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Agra: In a case of sheer brutality which has come to light from Firozabad district of Uttar Pradesh, an eight-year-old girl was allegedly raped and murdered in Chandpura village under the jurisdiction of Sirsaganj police. The body of the minor girl was found by her younger sibling in a wheat field no more than 200 metres from their residence.

The girl's family members told police that she stepped out of the house at around 9 pm on Sunday night to attend a function organised by one of the family's neighbours. She was last spotted with by locals roaming with one Bantu Singh at around 9.15 pm. A search operation was launched after she did not return home and Singh was confronted by the girl's kin. Bantu Singh told them that he gave her Rs 10 and asked her to get him a packet of tobacco which was the last time he saw her.

A case was then registered with the police and a first information report (FIR) was lodged in this regard against the suspect. Locals also told police personnel that they saw Bantu Singh returning to the village at around 1 am on Sunday night. The girl's family members launched an extensive search and found her body dumped in a wheat field at 6.30 pm Monday morning. Her mother told the national daily that the minor was bleeding from her abdomen and her undergarments were found lying a few metres from her body.

Enraged at the news of her death, suspecting villagers rushed to Bantu Singh's house only to find him missing. Rajesh Kumar, superintendent of police (SP), Ghaziabad said that the case prima facie seems to be one of sexual assault and strangulation. The girl's body has been sent for post-mortem examination and vital evidence has been collected from the scene of the crime by a team of forensic officials, added Kumar while reiterating that a search operation has been launched to search for Bantu Singh.

News of this incident comes barely hours after a 17-year-old girl was allegedly raped by five youths in UP's Muzaffarnagar district. A video of the heinous act was also recorded and shared on social media by the miscreants. The incident was reported from Phulat village in Muzaffarnagar district which falls under the jurisdiction of the Ratenpuri police station. Kin of the survivor told officials that the girl had gone to the fields to collect fodder for cattle when the accused apprehended and raped her.
