Andhra Pradesh doesn't require Jaganmohan Reddy: Chandrababu

Ongole: The YSR Congress Party president YS Jaganmohan Reddy, who do not live in Andhra Pradesh, has no interest in coming to Andhra Pradesh assembly, has no confidence in Andhra Pradesh police, has no respect to the Andhra Pradesh officials but wants votes of Andhra Pradesh public. Andhra Pradesh public doesn't require Jaganmohan Reddy, announced Telugu Desam Party president N Chandrababu Naidu. He participated in the TDP Election Preparatory Meeting with the party booth level conveners, Sevamitras and other party workers and leaders in Ongole on Monday.

Chandrababu Naidu announced that the TDP has the support of 65lakh members of Pasupusainyam, one crore DWCRA women, 60 lakh pensioners, 5lakh unemployment allowance beneficiaries, 15 lakh drivers who benefitted from the government paying the motor vehicle tax and 3rd party insurance and 45 lakh farmers who are receiving Annadatha Sukhibhava benefits.

He listed out various successful schemes like Chandranna Bima, Pelli Kanuka, sanitary napkins for adolescent girls, Adarana for craft workers, Anna Canteens, Pasupu Kunkuma, interest-free loans for women, pensions for old aged etc and claimed credit for changing the villages' atmosphere. He said that the government is implementing welfare schemes for the baby in the womb of the mother to the last moment to pay rich tributes to dead people by shifting them in Mahaprasthanam vehicles. He said that the beneficiaries should come forward to vote and the party members should motivate the public to vote for TDP. He said that there is no right to others to ask for the votes of public except the Telugu Desam who is implementing such welfare schemes.

The TDP supremo alleged that the YSRCP president is making baseless allegation on his party when the fault is with their family members. He said that Vivekananda Reddy's dead body was found in blood by his PA and maids but the relatives of Jaganmohan Reddy wanted to propagate it as a heart attack and blood vomiting. He said that the relatives of the YSRCP chief have advised the SP that there is no need for investigation by the police and cleaned the clues by mopping the room. But after the news broke out, they alleged that the murder was done by the TDP men and later in the evening they handed over a letter involving the driver in the murder, said the TDP president. He asked the police department to conduct a flawless and thorough inquiry and take action on the people involved, including the murders and people who tried to erase the clues, no matter who they were. He alleged that the YSRCP leaders have a history of murders and murder attempts but TDP never resorted to such criminal politics.

He said that the TRS president KCR is trying to put the finger in the AP politics through the YSR Congress and under the direction of Narendra Modi. He alleged that the KCR resorted to the theft of sevamitra app data and gave it to YSRCP. He said that they may get the details of the sevamitras but cannot influence them to vote against TDP. He said that the KCR is trying to stop the Polavaram with the support of Modi and Jagan by filing a writ in the Supreme Court. Chandrababu said that every vote polled for YSRCP is to support the KCR and Modi. He said that voting them means obstructing the construction of Polavaram and development of Andhra Pradesh.

The TDP president said that he is ready to take any burden and work for hours for the state. He said that to stop gaining power again, people from Telangana joined the tahsildar offices in Andhra Pradesh as outsourcing employees and deleted thousands of votes while YSRCP tried the same by using Form 7. He said that to control Andhra Pradesh, KCR is threatening business people from Andhra in Hyderabad and forcing them to work in favor of YSRCP. He alleged that Jaganmohan Reddy has involved in many corruption activities even without power and warned the public to be careful to vote for him.

Chandrababu said that the party workers are his army and as the General of the Army, he has given them very sharp weapons to fight the ballot war and win it. For the development of the state and continuation of welfare programs, he asked the public to give him 25 MPs and 150 plus MLAs in the state.
