Lucknow: Bakery owner approaches police stating extortion; shot dead five days later

The two accused fled from the scene after the incident (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Lucknow: A shocking incident recently surfaced in Uttar Pradesh when a man was shot dead at his shop by two bike-borne men. The 31-year-old man was identified as Yogesh Jaiswal on Saturday. The incident took place at the bakery owned by the deceased, situated in Gauri Bazaar, Deoria.

Jaiswal had approached the police five days before the incident, telling them that a man was allegedly trying to extort Rs 50,000 from him. The victim was a resident of Rudrapur, Deoria. According to the Indian Express' report, the Station House Officer of the Guari Bazaar police has been suspended by Rathod Kirti Kumar Haribhaithe Superintendent of Police, Deoria, for negligence.

Allegedly, the deceased was at his bakery when two men on a bike reached there. The two bike-borne allegedly shot Jaiswal with a country-made pistol. The bakery of the deceased is situated two kilometres away from his residence. The two accused fled from the scene after the incident. Though Jaiswal was taken to a hospital, he was declared brought dead by the doctors.

Following the incident, the locals resorted to protest. The protesters blocked the Rampur crossing and even pelted stones at vehicles passing through the area. It was only after the police promised action against the accused that the protest was called off. The younger brother of the deceased approached the police and lodged an FIR. The FIR was lodged against Vivek Singh and his ally who has not been identified yet. The two accused have been booked for murder.

The deceased had filed a complaint against Singh and his ally on March 11. In his complaint, the deceased had alleged that he was being extorted for Rs 50,000 by the accused. He had also mentioned that the accused had warned him of dire consequences. The police did not arrest anyone after the complaint. The police are trying to nab the accused.

A similar was reported from Patna earlier this year when a bakery shop owner was shot dead in broad daylight. The victim, Purshottam Kumar was shot dead by four armed bike-borne men who attempted to rob him. The deceased was carrying a bag full of cash when the assailants tried to rob him. When the deceased tried to resist and raised an alarm, the accused allegedly shot him in the chest and then fled the scene.
