Unnithan launches campaign from Kallyot

Choice of area, where two Youth Congress workers were killed recently, could galvanise party cadre

The Congress candidate for the Kasaragod Lok Sabha seat could not have had a more symbolically poignant launch of his campaign in the constituency.

By starting his electioneering from Kalyott, where two Youth Congress workers were murdered on February 17, Rajmohan Unnithan hopes to galvanise the Congress cadre in the district ahead of the Lok Sabha polls. The United Democratic Front (UDF) is sure to highlight political violence during the campaigning.

After a rousing reception given to him by the UDF workers at the Kasaragod railway station and at the District Congress Committee (DCC) office on Monday morning, Mr. Unnithan went straight to Kallyot to lay wreaths at the spot where the youths were cremated near the place where they were hacked to death by alleged Communist Party of India (Marxist) workers.

“The entire party machinery in the district is now poised to work for the victory of Mr. Unnithan,” said DCC president Hakkim Kunnil. The enthusiasm of the party workers at various places during Mr. Unnithan’s visit was an indication of the UDF’s battle preparedness, he added.

Surprise selection

The decision of field Mr. Unnithan was a surprise to some Congress leaders in the district. Many thought that young party leader B. Subbayya Rai, who has Kannadiga background, would be the Congress candidate. A section of the Congress leaders even blamed the DCC president after the announcement of the candidate on March 16. “I am confident of winning as the people of Kasaragod are outraged by the murders of Kripesh and Sarath Lal,” said Mr. Unnithan. He said he had gone to Bandadka and Cheemeni from Kallyot to “pay homage to those killed by the CPI(M) in the past.”

The 63-year-old Congress leader, a familiar face for voters because of his appearance on TV channels as the Congress spokesman in the State, will secure votes of people who are angry over the twin murders and the government’s handling of the Sabarimala issue, among others, local leaders of the party say.
