India v Pakistan: Nuclear-armed rivals ON BRINK OF WAR - only US intervention saved crisis

Indian Air Force (IAF) Mirage-2000 fighter aircraft drops bombs during the 'Vayu Shakti 2019' fire p

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Sources in New Delhi, Islamabad and Washington said if not for the US defusing dangerously high tensions between Pakistan and India, a huge conflict between the two nations would have broken out. Anonymous sources told Reuters threats of war came about after Pakistan downed an Indian plane and captured its pilot following a spat over warplanes flying over Kashmir. The February 27 air battle then came to a head when New Delhi claimed there was a terrorist camp in Pakistan, which was denied by Islamabad, who in turn then claimed Indian bombs had exploded on an empty hillside. Sources confirmed India had threatened to fire six missiles on Pakistan targets as a result, with Islamabad responding saying it would counter any Indian missile attacks with "many more launches of its own".

India Pakistan: We are ready for war says Imran Khan

An unnamed Pakistan minister said: “We said if you will fire one missile, we will fire three. Whatever India will do, we will respond three times to that.” Another source said US security advisor John Bolton was speaking on the phone with Indian National Security Adviser Ajit Doval to attempt to defuse the situation. The US focussed on securing the release of the pilot from India while also getting the assurance that New Delhi would scrap its missile threat.

The pilot was handed back to India on March 1. Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan called the pilot’s safe return a “peace gesture”. A senior Trump administration official said: “We made a lot of effort to get the international community involved in encouraging the two sides to de-escalate the situation because we fully realised how dangerous it was.”

Supporters of the All Pakistan Muslim League Quid (APMLQ)

President Trump, who was in Hanoi at the time with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, told reporters the India-Pakistan crisis would soon end. He said: “They have been going at it and we have been involved in trying to have them stop. Hopefully that is going to be coming to an end.” Mr Trump’s statement came as Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov said Moscow was ready to calm tensions between Pakistan and India.
