NZ MOSQUE MASSACRE

Killer visited Israel in 2016





The Australian white supremacist accused of carrying out a massacre at two mosques in New Zealand briefly visited Israel in 2016, Israeli officials said yesterday.



Brenton Tarrant arrived on a three-month tourist visa and stayed in Israel for nine days in October 2016, immigration authority spokeswoman Sabine Haddad said.



She was not able to provide further details on the visit by the 28-year-old. Tarrant grew up in the small town of Grafton in Australia, but had travelled widely in recent years.



Social media posts suggested his travels included trips as far afield as Pakistan and North Korea. He had also visited Greece, Croatia and Bulgaria, among other countries.

Terrorism film pulled from NZ cinemas

Following the recent terrorist attacks in Christchurch on Friday, upcoming film Hotel Mumbai has been pulled from New Zealand cinemas.



Hotel Mumbai, which stars Dev Patel and Armie Hammer, is based on a co-ordinated terror attack carried out in 2008 by a Pakistani terrorist cell in Mumbai, which left more than 160 people dead.



In a press release, Icon Film Distribution announced the suspension of the film from all New Zealand cinemas following the Christchurch mosque shootings. They have also suspended all advertising around the film.

'Egg Boy' now a worldwide hero

An Australian teen who egged a far-right senator over his offensive comments about the Christchurch mosque attacks has been hailed as "heroic" by internet users, who have raised thousands of dollars in support of his protest.



William Connolly, now better known as "Eggboy", cracked an egg over Fraser Anning's head at a press conference in Melbourne Saturday, prompting the senator to hit him in the face repeatedly.



The controversial politician had a day earlier triggered outrage by claiming the attack in New Zealand that killed 50 people at two mosques was the result of Muslim immigration to the country.



Connolly's act has spawned viral memes and drawn support from social media users around the world, with one setting up a GoFundMe page which quickly raised Aus$44,000 (US$31,000) to cover "legal fees" and "more eggs".
