Jawan killed, 3 wounded in Pak shelling in Rajouri

Jawan killed, 3 wounded in Pak shelling in Rajouri

RAJOURI, Mar 18: An army soldier was killed and three others injured as Pakistan resorted to heavy shelling targetting forward Indian posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district on Monday.

“Pakistan army heavily shelled forward posts and civilian population violating the ceasefire for the second consecutive day along the Line of Control in Jammu's Rajouri district this morning,” police officials said.

“Around 5.30 AM, the Pakistani army initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling mortars bombs and firing of small arms in Keri Battal forward area in Sunderbani sector,” a defense spokesperson said. He said Indian army retaliated effectively and the firing stopped at 0715 hours.

“In ceasefire violation, Rifleman Karamjeet Singh was critically injured and succumbed to injuries later,” he added. Rifleman Singh, 24, belonged to Janer village under the Dharam Kot tehsil of Moga district, Punjab. He is survived by his parents.

The army later paid tribute to slain Rifleman. “Rifleman Karamjeet Singh was a brave and sincere soldier. The nation will always remain indebted to him for the supreme sacrifice and devotion to duty. GOC and all ranks of Crossed Swords Division salute the braveheart and offer deepest condolences to his family,” the spokesman said.

In the meanwhile another army source added, “Three other jawans were injured in cross border shelling in Keri Battal area this morning.”

There has been constant exchange of fire across the LoC since the Pulawama terror attack on February 14. Two weeks ago, the army had said that Pakistan had targetted civilian areas with mortar bombs and heavy artillery guns in Krishna Ghati and Sunderbani sectors. In 2018, there were 2,936 cease fire violations, the highest in over a decade.

Earlier, on 6.30 PM on Sunday Pakistani troops violated ceasefire triggering a strong response from the Indian army. This came after Pakistan on Wednesday violated ceasefire in Poonch sector of the state.

Earlier, Pak troops also shelled Chakkan Da Bagh crossing point in Poonch where the Line of Control trade centre is located. On March 16, the Pakistani army had violated ceasefire by resorting to unprovoked firing along the LoC in Poonch district.

The border skirmishes witnessed a spurt after India's preemptive air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camp in Balakot on February 26 following the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

Four civilians, including three members of a family, were killed and several others injured as Pakistan targeted dozens of villages in over 100 incidents of ceasefire violations along the LoC in the state, especially in the twin districts of Poonch.
