Fed up with sexual assault, receptionist hatched editor’s murder plot in Bhiwandi

With help of printing press owner, she strangled him, dumped the body in a lake

The Thane Rural Police Crime Branch on Sunday arrested two persons for allegedly murdering an editor of a publication and dumping his body in Bhiwandi last week. The prime accused, a 24-year-old receptionist, has said in her confession that she hatched the murder plot as the editor had been sexually exploiting her for the last two years.

Nityanand Pandey was the editor of India Unbound, a biweekly publication circulated in the Thane and nearby districts. Pandey went missing on March 15 and his wife Poonam filed a missing person’s complaint with the Kashimira police the next day.

On March 17, his body was found in a lake at Khardi in Bhiwandi, and after his family identified the body, the Bhiwandi Taluka police registered an FIR of murder against unknown persons.

According to Crime Branch officers, the needle of suspicion first pointed to his receptionist-cum-assistant Ankita Mishra (24), as she was the last person to see him alive.

“In her initial statement to the Kashimira police, Ms. Mishra had claimed that she had been in office with Pandey till 7 p.m. on March 15. After that he asked her to go home and told her that he was meeting someone at a nearby restaurant for a drink. Cellular location mapping, however, did not corroborate this and we decided to question her intensively,” an officer who is part of the investigation said.

Using the classic ‘good cop, bad cop’ approach, some female personnel won Ms. Mishra’s confidence, hinting that they were sure she had a good reason for wanting her employer dead.

“Ms. Mishra said around two years ago, by which time she had been working for Pandey for a year, he forced himself on her, threatening her job security. As her paralysed father and two younger siblings depend on her, Ms. Mishra suffered the abuse silently. However, as Pandey’s demands grew, she soon found herself desperately looking for a way out,” the officer said.

Meanwhile, she grew close to Satish Mishra (35), in whose press India Unbound was printed, and confided in him about her predicament. Mr. Mishra urged her to file a police complaint, but as Pandey would always be boasting about his contacts in the police and the government, she was doubtful as to whether the law was indeed her best option. Finally, the duo decided to get rid of him.

“On March 15, the duo told Pandey that there was a row house in Uttan that he might like to buy and all three of them set out in his car. On the way, Ms. Mishra offered him a protein drink laced with sedative, which rendered him unconscious. The duo strangled him after which they threw his body off the bridge at Khardi, into the lake,” the officer said.

Both the accused were arrested following Ms. Mishra’s confession and charged with murder and attempted destruction of evidence under the Indian Penal Code.
