Nehru and the Kashmir Conundrum

Nehru and the Kashmir Conundrum

Note: This is a follow-up post to a previous blog post, “Performance Appraisals of Indian Prime Ministers (by an Indian Citizen)”

I received an array of responses to my blog post from readers. I had of course not expected anyone to agree with me entirely on all aspects of the appraisals of the prime ministers, but by and large readers felt that these were fair and balanced, with some suggesting minor changes to some ratings. There were two major exceptions.

The first was the assessment of Narendra Modi, which evoked extreme reactions. Some people insisted that he was the best PM ever (two notches above my rating), others were equally sure he was the worst (two notches below my rating). Their arguments (or lack of it) only convinced me that I was probably right in my assessment of him as average overall, with some obvious strengths and achievements, and equally clear weaknesses and failures.

The second disagreement related to Jawahar Lal Nehru. Since this came from a distinguished retired diplomat, who is now associated with a New Delhi based think tank, I engaged with him at some length to understand his view point better. To recap, I had rated Nehru C+ overall (i.e. average), with A on institution building, C on economic development and poverty reduction, and D on foreign relations and defence. But this former Indian ambassador felt that Nehru deserved much better on economics and foreign relations, giving him an overall best PM rating.

On economics, he felt that Nehru’s policies were appropriate for the times. We had just got independence from two centuries of British rule, (which had started as a commercial enterprise of the East India Company of UK), so the Indian people would not support entry of foreign capital once again into the country. Moreover, the only country with surplus capital at end of WW II was the USA, and they were interested in investing only in those countries which were allied to them against the Soviet Union. Since India’s decision was to follow a non aligned policy in the Cold War, it would never have attracted any foreign investment anyway. Hence restriction on imports, self reliance, and tight control over domestic capital (to avoid wastage due to overcapacity and production of non priority goods), were necessary at that time.

My counter argument was that given the extreme poverty in the country at the time of independence, the top-most priority of the government should have been to create jobs in the industrial sector to reduce the huge unemployment — both visible and disguised — in the agricultural sector. If we could have employed these resources in producing simple, low tech, high labor content products for export to the US and other advanced countries, this would have kick started a process of generating not only jobs for millions, but also foreign exchange, which would have permitted import of food, oil, and some manufactured necessity goods. The extreme export pessimism prevailing in the Indian leadership left the field clear for the likes of Japan and Taiwan (1950s), then South Korea, Thailand, Malaysia (1960s), and finally China (1978 onwards) to grow much faster than India and to reduce poverty. We kept brushing off the Asian miracle economies as “small countries”, and the “export to prosperity” idea as unworkable for India, and even China’s massive growth in 1980s did not open our eyes and minds. Today when we talk of “Make in India”, it remains just a slogan, since world trade is now slowing down amidst general protectionism, and the world is awash with cheap suppliers (Vietnam, Bangladesh, Indonesia being the latest to join the race). Meanwhile we continue to have high unemployment and rural distress, and all our leaders can think of are loan waivers, dole handouts, and other such “solutions”. Hence the C rating on economic management is justified.

On foreign relations and the specific failure of relations with China and Pakistan that I had written about, the diplomat said that Nehru was obliged by the constitution of India not to trade any territory of India even as part of a deal, without the approval of Parliament. Hence he placed the entire correspondence on the border issue with his Chinese counterpart, before Parliament, which rejected the Chinese terms. Hence he was obliged to defend our borders as per our claims. His mistake was to underestimate Chinese intentions and he never expected them to go to war to enforce their claims, and suffered huge defeat in the 1962 border war. This mistake does not merit a D rating in foreign relations.

Regarding Pakistan and the Kashmir dispute, he said that even if Kashmir had been presented to Pakistan on a platter by India, they would still have followed a policy of unrelenting hostility towards India, hence better relations with them were never possible. This was because Pakistan had inherited an army much bigger than its size or economy could sustain, and has treated it as one of the three pillars of its nationhood (Islam, and alliance with USA being the the other two). The army needs an enemy to justify its existence, and India fits in nicely in that role. Lately China has taken over the role vacated by the USA, and some Islamic oil-rich countries also provide frequent hand outs.

I said that Nehru should have used his considerable goodwill in Parliament to get approval for a quid pro quo deal with China (around the same time, Pakistan and China sorted out their border dispute, with Pakistan handing over considerable territory to China, and they have been all weather friends thereafter, with India as the common adversary). If India’s relations with China were normal, Pakistan would have been less emboldened to fight India on every issue, hence our relations with them would not be as bad as they are. Hence in my view the D rating was justified.

There is merit in both views on Nehru above, and each individual will no doubt reach their own conclusions.

Some young readers have asked about the Kashmir dispute and why I said it can never be solved.

The genesis of this dispute goes back to 1947 when the British left India and partitioned it into India and Pakistan, the latter comprising districts where Muslims were in a majority. While areas directly under British rule were easy to partition, there were also about 600 small and large princely “kingdoms” which were under British protection and paid a royalty to them, but had local “rulers” with some autonomy on domestic matters. The last British Viceroy asked the rulers to join either India or Pakistan, based on the wishes of their people, and on geographical contiguity. He strongly discouraged anyone asking for independence as the states would be unviable, both militarily, and economically.

Most of the rulers followed this advice and had signed the accession agreement with India or Pakistan by the time the British left in August 1947. There were a few hold outs — Junagadh ruler was a Muslim and he decided to join Pakistan despite over 90% population being Hindu and his territory surrounded by India on three sides with Arabian Sea on the fourth. This was prevented by India sending its troops there in November 1947, followed by holding of a plebiscite, where 91% voted to stay with India. Surprisingly, Pakistan had accepted the ruler’s accession, despite the state neither being contiguous to Pakistan, nor the population being in favor of it, claiming that the ruler had absolute legal right to join either of the two countries. Hyderabad was another state surrounded by India on all sides and overwhelmingly Hindu in population, which the ruler wanted to retain as an independent country. Here again Pakistan encouraged the ruler (Nizam) to remain independent and even promised them military assistance to be sent by air! After trying to persuade the Nizam for over a year, in September 1948 the Indian army marched into Hyderabad and in just a few days had taken over the state. The Nizam signed the accession in favor of India and the chapter was closed. Pakistan had its own problems in Kalat (part of Balochistan) and Pakhtunistan (bordering Afghanistan), but used its army to take over the territories in 1947 itself, and India did not interfere.

The princely state of Jammu and Kashmir was surrounded by Pakistan on its west, China on the North, Tibet on the East, and India to the South. It had a large Muslim majority population, but Hindus were in a majority in the Jammu districts bordering India, and Buddhists in areas bordering Tibet. The ruler (Maharaja Hari Singh) was a Hindu, and looking at the state’s unique location and religious mix, was in favor of remaining independent of both India and Pakistan. He was hoping to make it the “Switzerland of the East”, and relying on the state’s natural beauty to generate tourism income to survive, provided India and Pakistan left him in peace. The independence struggle, being spearheaded by the Congress party in British India and in the other princely states, was led by Sheikh Mohammad Abdullah in J&K, head of the National Conference party. He was very close to Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, but not a member of the Congress party. He had been imprisoned by Hari Singh for some years, for demanding transfer of power from the Maharaja to the political leadership. India was initially quite content to leave J&K alone, or even let it join Pakistan, but Pakistan government’s support to the rulers of Junagadh and Hyderabad infuriated the Indian government. If Pakistan’s stand was that the ruler’s decision was final in the matter of joining India or Pakistan, then why should Kashmir not join secular India, despite Muslim majority, if the ruler so wished and as the state was contiguous to both countries. Meanwhile Pakistan was impatient to absorb J&K, and as early as September 1947, was preparing to send para military forces from its North West Frontier Province to enter J&K from the North West border. The plan was to incite the local population to rise against the Maharaja, and use their support to quickly capture Srinagar, capital of J&K, and get the Maharaja to sign the accession documents and join Pakistan. On 29th September, on the advice of the Indian government, the Maharaja released Sheikh Abdullah from prison, to mobilize public support against the invaders. On 22nd October, Pathan tribals armed with Pakistani army weaponry, invaded J&K. As news of their advance towards Srinagar reached Hari Singh, he desperately asked India for military help. India offered to send in its forces but only if he signed accession in favor of India. On 24th October Hari Singh shifted to Jammu, the winter capital of J&K, and on 26th he signed the accession documents. Over the next few days the Indian army was airlifted into Srinagar using every available aircraft, civil or military. They were able to prevent the fall of Srinagar, and also pushed back the invaders and recaptured Baramulla, Mahuta, and Uri. The Indians were welcomed as saviors by the local population, as the tribals had indulged in wanton violence and looting, and also ransacked a Christian missionary establishment and killed some of its residents, in their march toward Srinagar. Severe winter mid November onward brought the fighting to a halt, with the intruders still holding on to a portion of J&K towards the North West. This portion with minor changes remains with Pakistan till today and rest of J&K with India.

On 27th Nov, the PMs of India and Pakistan met in Delhi. Nehru agreed to hold a plebiscite in J&K in the same manner as in Junagadh, but Ali wanted the Indian army withdrawn, and the Maharaja and Sheikh Abdullah to be removed from power, before the plebiscite, to be held by the UN. This condition was rejected by Nehru.

In January 1948, Nehru took the dispute to the UN, and asked for a resolution to get Pakistan to vacate the portion still held by it. He said that after this was done, Sheikh Abdullah would head an interim government which would conduct a plebiscite in the entire state to decide its final status. After several rounds of debates, discussions, and visits to all the involved parties by a UNSC delegation, the UNSC finally passed a resolution in August 1948, which listed the sequence of actions to be carried out:

i) Pakistan to withdraw its citizens from the areas occupied by it, both civil and military;

ii) Subsequently India to reduce army presence in J&K to only what was required to maintain law and order;

iii) Thereafter plebiscite to be conducted under UN supervision by Sheikh Abdullah government. The options would be to join India or Pakistan. Independence was not an option.

Since Pakistan did not take the first step which was required above, the plebiscite never took place. Surprisingly Pakistan till this day keeps demanding implementation of “UN resolutions” in international forums, despite the fact that the resolutions could not be implemented because of them. Since they have changed the demographics now, with Pathans and Punjabis brought into their portion of Kashmir, even as Hindus have fled the Indian portion, it is now impossible to implement the resolutions anyway.

The ceasefire line in J&K remained intact till the 1965 war, and was restored by the Tashkent agreement of January 1966. In 1972, under the Simla agreement between the two PMs, it was renamed Line of Control and is a de facto international border between India and Pakistan.

The accession documents signed by all the princely rulers were identical in all respects. As the constitution of India which would finally determine the division of power between the central and state governments, was still being formulated, the accession documents gave central government the power to govern only defense, foreign policy, communications and currency, with respect to these states, leaving the other matters temporarily with the states to decide. All states had representatives in the constituent assembly, and some of them also had a separate assembly for drafting a constitution for their state. But when the constitution of India was promulgated, on 26th January 1950, all states decided to adopt it in totality, and dissolved their state constituent assembly, thereby completing their merger with India. The exception was Jammu & Kashmir. While accepting J&K accession to India as final, and its description as a state of India in the constitution of India, Sheikh Abdullah requested Nehru that because J&K was a Muslim majority state, it needed a higher degree of autonomy than other states. Despite objections from many in his own party, Nehru agreed to the introduction of Art 370 in the constitution which gave certain special powers to the state of J&K. This provision was described as temporary and transient in the constitution itself. It limited the powers of the central government in making laws for J&K, and these would need to be ratified by the J&K assembly. Nehru probably thought that Sheikh would need the Art 370 to garner support for the merger of his state to India, and when the dust settled down it could be withdrawn, supported even by a resolution of the J&K assembly itself. But this never happened and the Art survives till now.

Instead Sheikh Abdullah set up a constituent assembly to draft a constitution for the state in 1951, and started negotiating with the centre for a status just short of full independence. This the central government could not agree without similar demands coming up elsewhere which would have led to eventual disintegration of India — something that Churchill and his friends were forecasting from day one. In 1952, the Delhi agreement was reached under which the state was allowed to define permanent residents of the state who alone could buy land there and hold state government jobs. But J&K residents could buy land or work anywhere in India as Indian citizens. Even this did not satisfy Sheikh. It was becoming clear that while the Sheikh did not want a merger with Pakistan, even with India he seemed to want only its protection and aid. He was discussing the possibility of full independence with the US ambassador in Delhi. Perhaps he was being guided by personal ambition rather than by the wishes of his people.

In summer of 1953, Adlai Stevenson of USA visited Srinagar, and said to have offered $15m aid and US support for full independence (denied by Stevenson who says he only listened and did not talk during the meeting). Anyway, Sheikh Abdullah now started publicly airing his grievances and threatened that “time will come to bid India goodbye”. There were reports that on 21st August, Sheikh would announce independence and seek UN/US protection from India and Pakistan. In a preemptive move the Indian government dismissed Sheikh through the Governor, and appointed his deputy Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad as the PM of J&K. Sheikh was imprisoned, and Bakshi assured India of full support. The National Conference party was split between supporters of Sheikh Abdullah (pro independence) and Bakshi (pro India). Section 35A was added to the constitution of India in 1954, by a Presidential order, which formalised the Delhi agreement of 1952. In 1957, J&K assembly finalised its constitution which differed from the Indian one, as it had no mention of fundamental rights of citizens, or any special provisions for minorities. As it did not dissolve Art 370, this temporary provision became de facto permanent. J&K government used its powers to acquire land without compensation from landowners ( not permitted under Indian constitution), and redistributed it to the landless. Section 35A has meant that industrial development was very slow and unemployment high in J&K, as outside businessmen cannot buy land. The state survives on subsidies from the central government on food, fuel and health care. The cost of defending and maintaining J&K has been very high for the Indian tax payer. There are periodic demands in India that Art 370 and Section 35A should be removed as they are now irrelevant, and may even be hurting the economy of J&K, but this is fiercely opposed by J&K politicians, so they remain.

By hindsight, it is clear that 1950–53 was the most crucial period. Either J&K should have been allowed to become an independent state with US/UN protection, and maybe it would have survived as a secular country, (seems unlikely given the record of most Muslim majority countries), or Sheikh Abdullah should have clearly been told that J&K would be treated like any other state that had merged with India with no special autonomy. The autonomy given has failed to satisfy many Kashmiri Muslims. And Pakistan has fished in troubled waters to make the situation worse.

In 1964, Nehru’s health started deteriorating and he released Sheikh Abdullah from prison. He spent a week in Nehru’s house as his personal guest and is said to have found some acceptable solution. He then went to Pakistan to discuss it with Gen Ayub Khan, the President, but the move got aborted by Nehru’s sudden death on 27th May. Ironically, Sheikh Abdullah was the most inconsolable mourner at his funeral.

In 1965, Sheikh Abdullah visited UK and Mecca, and had a meeting with Chinese Premier Chou en lai at Algiers on his way back, which aroused great suspicions in India as India had fought a war with China not long ago. He was arrested on arrival and imprisoned once again.

Pakistan launched Operation Gibraltar in August 1965 exactly in line with its 1947 strategy, of sending paramilitary troops from the North West border, expecting public support from the locals, and then sending the army with tanks from the West to cut off Srinagar and areas North of it from Jammu and India. As a SEATO and CENTO ally, it had received American tanks and fighter jets (mostly left over from the Korean campaign of the 1950s), and generous financial aid as well, so felt confident of success against India, still suffering from the humiliation of the 1962 war with China, and without a leader of Nehru’s stature. India surprised Pakistan by counter attacking across the international border in Punjab, apart from vigorously defending in J&K. The local support which Pakistan was expecting never materialised. The Tashkent agreement restored status quo on all fronts. The Simla Agreement of 1972 described J&K as a bilateral issue to be resolved peacefully between the two countries by discussion. Numerous attempts to resolve the matter thereafter have all failed.

Pakistan from late 1980s has resorted to state sponsored terrorism to achieve its aims, as war was not an option, but this has hurt the people of J&K more than anyone else. In 1990, in a vicious campaign, local separatists supported and armed by intruders from Pakistan, went on a rampage killing the Hindu minority in the areas where Muslims were in majority, and resulted in ethnic cleansing of the area. Kashmiri Hindus fled for their lives to the safety of Jammu and rest of India, driven out from their homes. After this it has become impossible for India to consider making any concession to the separatists, as it would be rewarding them for the rapes and murders committed by them. India is satisfied to maintain status quo, while Pakistan is not prepared to give up its claim, disguising it as “right of self determination of people of Kashmir”. Meanwhile elections have been held periodically in J&K, and first Sheikh Abdullah’s son, and then his grandson became chief ministers in the state or sometimes ministers in the central government. PDP is the other major party in J&K, and both parties accept the Indian constitution with its special provisions for their state, and participate in state and central elections, which are boycotted and threatened with violence by the separatists. However even these parties adopt soft separatist stance when not in power !

Post 1989, Pakistan has created a number of terrorist organisations from the remnants of the successful Afghanistan campaign which ousted the Soviets from there.These have been deployed in J&K, and they have systematically killed all secular minded leaders even if they were pro Independence, but not pro Pakistan. Groups like J&K Liberation Front have gradually got replaced by the likes of pro Pakistan Lashkar e Taiba, Jaish e Mohammad, Hizbul Mujahideen, and others. They hide behind civilians to create mayhem in J&K, but blame the Indian forces for human right abuses when they retaliate in self defence. Now there are no moderate separatists in J&K. Either there are mainstream parties like NC and PDP which have ruled the state for most of its history, or there are those who want to establish “Nizam e Mustafa” or sharia law in an independent, or merged with Pakistan, J&K.

After Kargil (1999), Bombay attacks (2008), and Bin Laden’s death (2011), Pakistan’s international credibility is at an all time low. Without US aid, both direct and through multilateral agencies, their economy is in dire straits, relying on China and Saudi Arabia for daily survival. Its insistence on matching India’s military expenditure, despite an economy one tenth the size, has driven it to bankruptcy. Until those who wield the real power in Pakistan realize that this is a futile race (described by some as equivalent of Belgium trying to match France) enduring peace between India and Pakistan is not possible. But both have invested too much in this issue to make any concessions, and the people of J&K have been the biggest sufferers in this dispute. It is for this reason that I had written that this issue can never be resolved to everyone’s satisfaction. It can only be managed, and that is what India is doing.
