Lanjigarh Vedanta News: 2 die at Vedanta Odisha plant in police-protesters clash

BHAWANIPATNA: At least two persons, including an Odisha Industrial Security Force personnel, died and many were injured in clashes between police and protesters outside Vedanta Ltd’s aluminium plant at Lanjigarh in Kalahandi district on Monday.The incident comes less than a year after police opened fire on demonstrators protesting against the operation of another Vedanta plant, its copper smelter in Tuticorin in Tamil Nadu , killing 13 people.The deceased were identified as Dani Batra, a protester, and Sujeet Kumar Minz, an OISF jawan. OISF is a state security force under police command.A group of around 70 local people, who are likely to be displaced due to the commissioning of a proposed project by Vedanta, were on a dharna outside the company’s main gate in Lanjigarh, demanding contractual jobs and education for their children in a public school free of cost. The agitators alleged that the police, along with OISF personnel, resorted to lathicharge to stifle their voice and threaten them to withdraw the protest.“We were on a peaceful dharna. But police forcibly tried to evict us from the spot. When we resisted, they resorted to lathicharge. This left one Dani Batra dead and several injured,” a protester from a nearby village, who refused to be named, said.Maheswar Pati, another villager, alleged the violence broke out after few police personnel misbehaved with the agitators.Police, however, denied the allegations of high-handedness. “Our personnel used utmost restraint. The mob went on a rampage, vandalized the company premises and attacked our staff. The protesters even set several articles on the company campus on fire. Many of our personnel were injured in the mob attack. A OISF jawan died due to the mob attack,” Kesinga’s sub-divisional police officer, Gupteswar Bhoi, said. Ashok Kumar Roul, an inspector of OISF said, “The agitators pelted us with stones. They were extremely violent and refused to calm down despite several attempts by us.”Union minister Dharmendra Pradhan hit out at the state government and police over the unrest. “The police supported the company’s goons and attacked poor protesters,” he tweeted.Vedanta, in a press statement, said, “We are deeply saddened by the news and offer our condolences to the families of the deceased. We will fully cooperate with the authorities who will be looking into the incident. We sincerely appeal to the protesters to not to resort to such acts when a situation can be resolved amicably through discussions.”
