The night of terror in Fathui village

SRIGANGANAGAR: No sooner had the clock struck 8pm on March 9, the first spy drone made its appearance and circled around swiftly over Fathui village. Indian security forces fired immediately to bring it down.For the villagers, it was the beginning of a night of peril. Families listened in complete silence till the cadence of Indian shelling gradually began to fall at the crack of dawn.Alka (29) sat next to her sleepless family in the corner of a dark room even as the Indian security forces continued to rain fire on the aerial intruder. The shelling sent shudders across the village, shaking up doors, beds, rattling cutlery and tin shades.As a pack of stray dogs outside began to wail, Ram Khiladi (29) gulped down the last of his milk. “The thought of leaving the village never crossed my mind all through that night. I pulled my blanket over my knees and hummed verses from Hanuman Chalisa . The grit of our soldiers outside was far more overwhelming than the threat of drones above,” he says.Even before the entire country woke up to the consequences of the Pulwama attack, the villagers knew all too well how it would put them in the kind of personal peril as a village located on the edge of the India-Pakistan border.The night became the forewarner of similar such scenes that followed in the coming days.“When the shelling actually began it seemed like a déjà vu. I turned on the television to check if the war had already begun,” says Ravi Banga.“As the firing raged on well past 9pm on that day, I clambered on to the roof after switching off the lights. Then I saw a fiery object falling down over the village,” he said.That object landed at another house barely a few metres away from Banga’s house and crashed into the courtyard where Jyoti was making last rotis for dinner.“I sprinted to another room where my family had sat huddled. There was a loud explosion and smoke was billowing out of the courtyard. In the morning, when I checked, there was a hole in that place,” she says. The officials visited the family the next day and told them that the object was part of some shell fired at the drone.Around 2am, there was a fleeting pause in the shelling. “I saw one drone that night. There could have been many more,” Banga said.As the night of dread and silent prayers and gave way to a hopeful sun, Fathui buckled up for many more days of light and fire show.
