Old friends set to square off in Chamarajanagar as it’s Siddaramaiah versus Srinivasa Prasad again

MYSURU: It was then chief minister Siddaramaiah’s decision to drop him from the state cabinet that prompted senior Dalit leader V Srinivasa Prasad to sever ties with the Congress. Now, more than two-and-a-half years later, the latter, regarded as the Chamarajanagar strongman, is all set to return to electoral politics, two years after a drubbing in the bypolls to the Nanjangud assembly constituency, in what looks like an attempt to settle scores with Siddaramaiah Prasad represented Chamarajanagar, a reserved constituency for Scheduled Castes, five times in the Lok Sabha , and his re-entry to the fray promises to turn the battle for the seat in the Old Mysore Region into one of the most enticing ones in the state. The upcoming battle could well be an encore to the 2017 bypoll, the loss in which forced Prasad into semi-retirement in politics. Two years earlier, the battle for Nanjangud turned into a prestige battle for both Prasad and Siddaramaiah, who campaigned with fervour for the Congress. Siddaramaiah had said that the bypoll to Nanjangud was an unnecessary exercise, and one that was being played out because of what he called Prasad’s pride. By and large, the former CM had, two years ago, refrained from attacking Prasad directly, making veiled jibes that were clearly intended for the leader. However, Prasad pulled no punches, accusing Siddaramaiah of misgovernance and charging him with enfeebling the Congress in Karnataka.Prasad, who returned to Mysuru on Monday, after confirming his candidature from the Chamarajanagar Lok Sabha constituency with the BJP Karnataka president and former CM BS Yeddyurappa in Bengaluru, declared his readiness for battle.Interacting with the media at the Mysuru City Railway Station soon after his arrival in the Heritage City, Prasad said, “I will contest the elections to take the Congress on. I was not too keen on contesting the elections, but I was forced to reverse my decision owing to pressure from my supporters and party workers. I had declined to contest the Lok Sabha elections in 2004 and ’09 although there was much pressure to do so.”On his opposition to Siddaramaiah, the Dalit leader said that he was duty-bound to take the former’s mistakes to the people. Prasad is all set to square off against his one-time follower R Dhruvanarayan for the Chamarajanagar seat. Dhruvanarayan has successfully contested the elections from the reserved seat twice, and is hoping to score a hattrick in the upcoming elections. “That Dhruvanarayan was once my follower is a thing of the past. He is now my opponent,” Prasad declared.Prasad said that the loss in the Nanjangud bypoll had left him deeply disappointed. “But, when I managed to help BJP win the seat in the 2018 bypolls, I felt as if I had had my political revenge. I focused my anger at the loss in the bypoll to win the Nanjangud seat for my party,” he added. The triumph in Nanjangud was historic for both Prasad and the BJP, since it was the saffron party’s first win in the constituency.Taking a not-so subtle swipe at Siddaramaiah, Prasad said, “The person who dropped me from the cabinet lost the assembly election from Chamundeshwari by a huge margin. But, he is behaving as though nothing has happened. I was cheated by Congress leaders, and I will have to explain to the people.”The former CM, on the other hand, too is pulling all stops to ensure that the Congress retains the Chamarajanagar seat, besides reclaiming the Mysuru Lok Sabha constituency. Siddaramaiah has handed the job of ensuring victories in these two seats to his longtime friend and former minister HC Mahadevappa . In a tactic reminiscent of his campaign in the 2017 bypoll, Siddaramaiah is steering clear of attacking Prasad directly, deciding instead to make veiled barbs at the latter.
