India and Iran will UNITE against Pakistan ‘to combat terror’ as tensions SOAR says expert

India Pakistan: We are ready for war says Imran Khan

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistan-based Islamist groups reportedly carried out attacks in Tehran and New Delhi in February suggesting the two nations could become allies. Last month, Iran's Deputy Foreign Minister Abbas Araghchi met with India’s External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj and both agreed “on close cooperation to combat terrorism in the region”. Chairman of Iran's parliamentary national security commission Heshmatollah Falahatpisheh warned Iran its unwillingness take action against terrorist groups might prompt Iran to heighten security forces with India.

Middle East expert Mahmoud Pargoo highlighted Pakistan’s plans to get closer with Saudi Arabia. He wrote in Al-Monitor: “Pakistan — in pursuit of much-needed cash and in tandem with its Sunni ideology — has chosen to get closer to Saudi Arabia in areas that Iran perceives as strategic threats. “Saudi oil company Aramco has agreed to build a multibillion-dollar refinery in Gwadar Port, about 105 miles east of Iran's Chabahar Port. “Pakistan has also opened the Reko Diq gold and copper mines, less than sixty miles from the Iranian border, to Saudi investment. READ MORE: Pakistan FURY: India warned of huge response if war is imposed

Terrorist attacks in Iran and India will see the two nations team up against Pakistan

Both countries agreed “on close cooperation to combat terrorism in the region”

“Both projects have sounded alarm bells in Tehran, as they are located in the lawless province of Baluchistan in Pakistan. “Iran is concerned that Saudi Arabia might use these projects as bases to destabilise Iran, in which case it would also jeopardise the future development of the India-backed Chabahar port.” The Chabahar port allows India access to Afghanistan and Central Asia without needing to go through Pakistan. Mr Pargoo added: “At least on this strategic issue, Iran and India naturally stand together against the destabilising influence of Saudi-backed militias within Pakistan.”

India: Pakistan could use nuclear force warns military expert

The potential new allegiance follows two attacks on February 13 and 14
