New Zealand attack: Hyderabad man Farjan Ahsan to be laid to rest in a mass burial on Tuesday

New Zealand attack: Mourners lay flowers outside Al Noor mosque where a gunman killed many worshipers during Friday prayers on March 15 I Photo credit: AFP | Photo Credit: AFP

Hyderabad: Farjan Ahsan, the man from Hyderabad who was killed in the Christchurch terror attack on mosque in New Zealand will be buried on Tuesday. Ahsan, 31, a software engineer by profession, was one of the 50 worshippers killed in Christchurch carnage at a mosque during Friday prayers on March 15.

He is survived by his wife, a three-year-old daughter and a six-month-old son. Ahsan’s parents and in-laws left for New Zealand on Sunday and will be attending the today. Ahsan’s father Mohammed Sayeeduddin told the news agency IANS that they decided to conduct hold Ahsan’s last rites in New Zealand as it was difficult to bring his body back to India.

Sayeeduddin said he is not sure if the burial will take place on Tuesday or later as the bodies of the 50 victims of the Christchurch will be laid to rest in a mass burial. New Zealand authorities informed Ahsan’s wife Insha Aziz and her uncle about Ahsan’s death who was initially reported missing after the attack.

Ahsan was at the Al Noor mosque for Friday prayers in Christchurch when an Australian white-supremacist opened indiscriminate fire on worshippers. Ahsan often visited the Al Noor mosque for Friday prayers. He lived in a nearby neighbourhood.

He left for New Zealand nine years back and did his MS from Auckland University and had shifted to Christchurch five years ago.

"He worked for various companies and had recently completed a project in Christchurch. For last six months, he was searching for a new job," Sayeeduddin told IANS.

Another Indian man from Telangana, Mohammed Imran Khan died in the attack. Imran was a businessman in Christchurch while his family was settled in the US.

Another Indian from Hyderabad Ahmed Iqbal Jehangir was injured in the attack. He is currently recuperating in a Christchurch hospital. He sustained bullet wounds on chest and shoulder.


