Road Rage: Delhi resident murders man with spade following argument over parking

The accused tried to dispose of the murder weapon, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: The national capital is no stranger to violent after-effects of road rage. In fact, a recent report asserted that last year saw a decline of 23.43 per cent in road rage cases as compared to 2017. However, yet another ghastly tale of a road rage-related crime has come to light from outer Delhi's Samaypur Badli area.

City police officials said that a local resident murdered a man on Thursday reportedly after an argument over the right of way. The matter came to light after a security guard alerted police about the assault which led to the death of his uncle's son. The accused, who has been identified as one Sanjay, is currently at large.

In his complaint, security guard Inderjeet Mishra told Delhi police that he was on his way to visit his uncle at around 7.30 pm on January 10 when he saw his uncle's son, Gautam, approaching him. Inderjeet parked his motorcycle in a narrow lane and the two began talking.

Soon after, Sanjay drove towards them and hit Mishra's motorcycle. The complainant claims that the accused hurled expletives at them and said that he would hit the two-wheeler with his car if it is parked "like that". The victim, Gautam engaged in an argument with the accused following which the accused went into his home and returned with a spade.

I tried to intervene but Sanjay managed to land a fatal blow on Gautam's head, said Mishra. He further added that the accused then fled the scene and even tried to dispose of the murder weapon on his way. Gautam was rushed to a nearby hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. Based on Mishra's complaint, a case has been registered in this regard under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Police has launched a search to nab the accused.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Autorickshaw driver beaten to death by colleague for charging passengers 'lesser fare'
