Caught in the act: Wife, paramour nearly get away with murder

paramour

forensic reports

FSL

A 30-year-old woman and herwere arrested for reportedly killing her husband, a year after they committed the crime. Their luck ran out afterconfirmed their involvement in the husband's death.The victim was an alcoholic and would be inebriated every day. After he and their two children went to bed, the woman would signal her neighbor and paramour to come to her house. One night the victim woke up and found his wife and the neighbour in a compromising position. When he questioned them, both attacked him and smothered him to death, making it look like a natural death.However, the victim’s uncle had suspected foul play and had voiced his suspicion to the police. Based on the findings of the forensic science laboratory () report, the police arrested the woman and her paramour on Sunday.The deceased Uma Shankar, 35, a resident of Dasenahalli in Hesaraghatta was killed on February 26 of last year. Shankar’s uncle Ashwathappa, had approached the Soladevanahally police and had raised suspicion about the death. The accused are identified as Sakitha, 30, and her paramour Srinivas, 31.Shankar was a daily wage labourer and his wife worked in a garments factory. Srinivas worked as a school van driver. The victim had two children, a 13-year-old girl and a 11-year-old boy.“Assuming that the two had escaped from the being accused, Srinivas boldly came home to be with Sakitha. After the pathology report indicated their involvement, we questioned Sakitha and during the interrogation, she confessed to the killing her husband, after he caught her and Srinivas in a compromising position,” said an officer on part of investigations.The police had earlier registered a case of unnatural death and later changed it to the case of murder under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. The two accused have been remanded to judicial custody.The Soladevanahally police has registered a case and further investigations are on.
