‘I’m a victim of organ trafficking, not a criminal’

organ trafficking

kidney transplant

fake documents

In application to court seeking discharge, donor Shobhna Thakore says she was exploited by a cartel.Should someone on the verge of “illegally” donating her kidney be tried for commercial dealing of organs or be recognised as a victim of, a court is likely to decide soon.On July 14, 2016, the Powai police stopped aoperation midway at HL Hiranandani Hospital after learning that the recipient, Surat businessman Brijkishore Jaiswal, had submitted forged documents claiming that the donor was his wife. The actual donor, in fact, was Shobhna Thakore, on whom the surgical incision had been made (but the kidney not removed) when the police raided the hospital.From an economically backward village in Gujarat, the 43-year-old had allegedly agreed to give her kidney for a payment of Rs 2 lakh, which she never received. She was arrested along with five doctors, including the hospital’s CEO Dr Sujit Chatterjee, and charged under sections of cheating, forgery and conspiracy of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). She was also charged under sections related to commercial dealings under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act (THOA), 1994. The whistleblower in the case, Sunder Singh Jadhav, was found hanging at his home in Diva in January this year.Living a hand-to-mouth existence with two minor sons and a daughter, Thakore has sought discharge from the case, claiming that she is actually a “victim” and was exploited and deceived by organ transplant agents and the other accused, who took advantage of her circumstances. When Thakore travelled to Mumbai last month to file her discharge application, she had to be admitted to the hospital for weakness and fever that she said stems from the half-performed operation.According to Thakore, no one in her family knew about the transplant, and she agreed hoping to rid herself of debts. “My husband was an alcoholic and died just six months after the case, when I was marking my attendance in court. My sons were forced to drop out of school, and my daughter was abandoned by her in-laws. I was told I was helping someone, who would in turn help my sons get some work. But today my condition is worse,” said Thakore, adding that it was only after she was arrested that she realised that, like the Aadhar card, were made in her name.Thakore’s application seeking discharge from the case relies on an amendment in section 370 of the IPC. Under this section, human trafficking for prostitution now also includes ‘organ trafficking’. Her lawyers from an NGO argue that it doesn’t apply to her as she is not part of a “cartel dealing in commercial organ trafficking” but a victim herself.The application also includes statements of witnesses from the chargesheet that point toward her innocence. The first statement is of another victim of trafficking who has talked about Thakore’s background and illiteracy. Another witness has testified that Thakore owed her money for which she was introduced to the agent through a chain of people.“The documents on record fail to show that the Applicant (Thakore) had any intention or knowledge that she was impersonating as recipient/Jaiswal’s wife, to whom the kidney was supposed to be donated,” the application states further.Most importantly, Thakore has argued in the application that section 19 of the THOA, which deals with ‘punishment for commercial dealings in human organs’, is not applicable to her as the intent of the act “is to punish cartels and persons who indulge in organ trade, and cannot be read to penalise a victim”. Under section 19 of the THOA, those offering to supply any human organ for payment could be punished with two years in jail.
