Pollachi case: Thirunavukkarasu lodged in prison; police seek custody of other three

COIMBATORE: Accused in the Pollachi sexual harassment case P Thirunavukkarasu, 26, was produced by the CB-CID police before the chief judicial magistrate S Nagarajan at his residence at 8pm on Monday, following which he was lodged in the Coimbatore central prison . The plan to produce him at the magistrate’s house was kept under wraps fearing an attack on him by the public. Police had to defer their plans twice in the past to produce him in court as people had started gathering on the court premises to gherao him.Last week, the CJM court had granted four-day custody of Thirunavukkarasu to the investigation agency. He was kept at the office of the CB-CID where he was questioned by superintendent of police Nisha Parthiban and other officials.“We cannot reveal the police custody details. He has given some information during the interrogation and everything was handed over to the court. It’s a sensitive issue and we cannot talk about the developments to the media,” said a CB-CID officer.A police officer said there was so much anger all round and they were worried the accused persons would be attacked if they were produced before the court. “If we get custody of Sabari Rajan, Vasanthakumar and Sathish (other accused), they too will be produced before the court through video conferencing,” said the officer.In the meantime, CB-CID police are discussing with legal authorities custody of the trio. If the lower court denies police custody of the three, the investigation agency plans to approach the Madras high court. Otherwise, police will have to get a new complaint from another victim to register a fresh FIR. Only then, the investigation agency will get police custody.“Only if we get custody of the trio, we can dig out more evidence,” said a CB-CID source.The investigation agency was not able to get custody of the three accused as they were arrested earlier, and their judicial custody also has been extended.Coimbatore city based advocate R Kalairasu told TOI that the first FIR was registered by the Pollachi East police and it was transferred to the CB-CID. But the CB-CID registered a new FIR. If the case goes to the CBI, the investigation agency too will register a new FIR. The case is one, but the FIRs will be three. So, it would affect the case and it will favour the accused.“In November 2013, the apex court ordered that police can register a suo motu FIR and don’t need to get a complaint to initiate action. These offences included dacoity, rape, murder and rape. The order was over a writ petition (criminal) no 68 of 2008 filed by Lalita Kumari vs Government of UP. The women victims’ obscene videographs were circulated on social media by various persons and it was also a cognizable offence. Based on the order, the CB-CID police can register a suo-motu FIR against the accused and they have to trace the victim women and get a statement from them. Then the police can get custody of the four accused again,” said Kalaiarasu.
