What have you done in 5 years? Priyanka Gandhi's terse comeback at BJP's '70 years of inaction' charge

New Delhi:

On Day 2 of her ‘Ganga Yatra’, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra reached Bhadohi on Tuesday. She began her public interaction with a special ‘pooja’ at Sitamarhi Mandir. Later talking to reporters, Priyanka slammed the BJP leaders over their ‘70 saal’ rant. “What did they do in 70 years?' argument also has an expiry date. Now they (BJP) should tell what they have done in their five years when they are in power,” Priyanka said. She also hit out at the Yogi Adityanath-led Uttar Pradesh government over its law and order claims and said that, “'Report card, promotions, all of it sounds good but there's nothing on ground, I'm meeting people everyday, all the people are in distress.”

Th Congress general secretary for Uttar Pradesh-East begin her 140-km-long ‘Ganga yatra’ from Prayagraj to Varanasi on Monday. Ahead of her visit, Priyanka on Sunday wrote an open letter to the people of Uttar Pradesh and promised to have an honest conversation about their grievances.

Meanwhile, a group of lawyers on Monday handed a letter to the district magistrate, claiming that Priyanka should not be allowed to enter the Kashi Vishwanath temple as she is a Christian. The letter claimed that Priyanka was a Christian and she should be stopped from entering the temple, keeping in mind the ancient values of Sanatan Dharma. The letter, addressed to Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, stated that her place of worship was a church.

After a night halt in Sitamarhi in Bhadohi district, the Congress leader will resume her onward journey tomorrow morning that will culminate in Varanasi on Wednesday. The party's newly appointed general secretary had said she would contact the people using various means of transportation, including waterways and padayatra (on foot).

The BJP, meanwhile, ridiculed Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's boat campaign, saying every election is a "picnic" for the Gandhi family. "They come, they see and resort to rhetorical speeches. After the elections are over, they head towards Switzerland or Italy," BJP leader and UP Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma said. Polling will be held in seven phases in Uttar Pradesh from April 11 to May 19. Results will be announced on May 23.
