Watching Varun Dhawan and Nora Fatehi groove to Dilbar is making our Tuesday better! : Bollywood News

Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor starrer Street Dancer 3D recently wrapped up their London schedule and the team had a blast in the wrap up party. The shooting schedule had Varun Dhawan and Shraddha juggling between the countries trying to balance their other commitments along with Street Dancer 3D. The team, during their schedule even shot at the rooftop of London’s famous O2 Arena. With the kind of fun they are having while making the film, we can’t wait to see how the biggest dance movie ever made in India turns out.

The movie also stars Nora Fatehi in a pivotal role and she will be seen in a dance-off with Shraddha Kapoor. Nora has already won a lot of hearts with her perfect dancing skills and just like Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor, Nora has two big releases to look forward to in this year. The cast and crew were seen partying in London post the wrap up and the videos soon surfaced on the internet. One such video of Varun Dhawan grooving with Nora Fatehi on her famous track ‘Dilbar’ has come out and it is beyond perfect. Varun Dhawan happily joins Nora to show off his belly dancing skills and we don’t know who did it better!

Take a look at the video.

On the other hand, along with this Remo D’Souza’s directorial; Varun Dhawan has his upcoming period drama Kalank to look forward to. While Shraddha Kapoor has the action packed Saaho and Nora has Salman Khan starrer, Bharat as their upcoming releases. Street Dancer 3D is slated to release on November 8 under Bhushan Kumar’s T-Series banner.

Also Read: Here’s how Varun Dhawan REACTED when a fan proposed to him [watch video]

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES

Catch us for latest Bollywood News, New Bollywood Movies update, Box office collection, New Movies Release , Bollywood News Hindi, Entertainment News, Bollywood Live News Today & upcoming movies 2021 and stay updated with latest hindi movies only on Bollywood Hungama.
