Post Balakot: Calling Rahul Gandhi’s Bluff

To reiterate, both Captain Singh and PM Modi have been very good administrators and leaders of their respective states as CMs. The core voters of Congress and BJP will anyway vote for the respective party candidate. However, it is the third segment of voters that can make a difference. While PM Modi undoubtedly has been a strong supporter of the armed forces, Captain Singh has the additional credentials of being a war veteran himself.

The Catch 22 situation for Rahul Gandhi is this – while he has a candidate in-house in Captain Singh who can probably remove PM Modi from the prime ministerial chair. And the flip side is that Captain Singh will not be a puppet Prime Minister like Manmohan Singh during the United Progressive Alliance era. He would likely be a man of his own destiny, instead of being remote controlled. Between the two candidates for PM position in the Congress, Captain Singh wins the contest hands down. While this may not necessarily guarantee that Modi will surely lose the elections if Captain Singh is made the PM candidate, the odds for the party will drastically increase in its favour by doing so. In the above context of post Balakot scenario, a war veteran like Captain Singh is more likely to stop Modi in his tracks rather than a dynast Rahul Gandhi.

If at all Rahul Gandhi believes in the concept of “Nation and party being bigger than individuals”, then he already has a winner in hand. But this comes at the expense of his own dreams and ambitions of being the PM of India. If Rahul Gandhi truly puts the Congress party above himself and his family interests and the nation, then the logical sequence of action would be anointing Captain Amarinder Singh as the challenger to PM Modi.

If Modi and Amit Shah have perfected the art of surprise manoeuvres, here is a great chance for Rahul Gandhi. The drama of “inner voice” will have no takers if done as a farce, as was the case in 2004, after the results are announced. Will Rahul Gandhi bite the bullet and make Captain Amarinder Singh the PM candidate, NOW?

History of the ‘first family’ in the Congress tells us that the party will let go of this opportunity ONLY for the reason that “asardar Sardar” (effective Sikh) like Captain Singh will be a leader in his own right and not be a puppet PM remote-controlled by the first family.

Sad that the Congress first family always puts the interest of an individual above that of the nation in stunning contrast to the BJP which follows the mantra of ‘nation first - party next-self last' which therefore allows strong capable individuals (even a chaiwalla, so to speak) to rise to the highest level possible in the Indian political system as the PM of India.

Balakot strike not just proved that Pakistan’s nuclear blackmail is a bluff, but also Rahul Gandhi’s claims that he is willing to put the interests of the party and country above his own personal interests. Not putting up Captain Singh as the Congress PM candidate is a sure shot signal that the Congress ‘first family’ was and is always a private limited firm and not into public service.

Will the real Rahul Gandhi, please stand up?
