Indian Boy Murders 14-year-old Girl & Texts Ransom to Parents

"When she didn't die, he hit her on the head with a stone."

An Indian boy, aged 17, from Delhi, allegedly murdered a 14-year-old girl at an abandoned building on Saturday, March 16, 2019.

After committing the murder, the suspect sent a text message using the victim’s mobile phone to her parents and demanded a ransom.

According to the post-mortem, the girl was strangled and then hit on the head with a stone, which is what killed her.

Police officers have stated that the suspect may have murdered the girl because she embarrassed him during a school lesson.

It was a grudge that he held for three years, according to DCP Meghna Yadav. After losing touch, officers claimed the two began speaking to each other again in January 2019.

On March 16, 2019, they went to go see a film after which the boy killed her.

An officer said that according to the post-mortem report: “The girl died of a head injury. He mixed her drink with a sedative, took her to the building and strangled her.

“When she didn’t die, he hit her on the head with a stone. The post-mortem report has ruled out sexual assault.”

He then used her phone to send a ransom message to her parents which read:

“Wait for my next message. Make ready the cash, don’t try to call. There is no need to call anyone.”

The girl’s family said that they received three messages at around 7 pm on the day of the incident, however, none of them mentioned a ransom amount.

DCP Yadav said: “It seems the juvenile panicked after allegedly strangling the girl and sent these messages from her phone.

“He did this either to mislead police or to genuinely get hold of some ransom money.”

The victim had told her parents that she was going to a friend’s birthday party but then her phone was switched off for a few hours before the ransom demands were sent.

The victim’s grandfather said: “Her exam result came out that day and her elder sister messaged her the score, to which she replied: ‘Okay, I will see.’

“After that, her phone was switched off for a few hours. Around 7 pm, we got these messages asking for money.”

The victim’s body was found on March 17, 2019, at the abandoned building next to a Metro station.

The teenager was arrested but no action has been taken as he identified a man who was his accomplice.

Police will take action against the boy after the man has been questioned.

A police officer said: “The man is not known to the boy or the victim. He is a homeless drug addict who lives near the isolated building.

“The juvenile divulged his name during questioning, but he is missing. We have to establish his role before we take any action.”
