Mamata Banerjee’s dare to PM Narendra Modi, Amit Shah: ‘Come, have a competition on Sanskrit mantras’

Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: With Lok Sabha elections just weeks away, West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee launched a fresh attack against the Bharatiya Janata Party and dared its top leadership for a competition on Sanskrit mantras.

Speaking in the state capital Kolkata, Mamata said merely ‘sporting a tilak’ cannot be taken as one’s allegiance to a religion.

She said, as per ANI: “Puja does not only mean sporting a tilak; Amit babu and Modi babu, come have a competition of mantras with me. Let's see who knows more Sanskrit mantras.”

Mamata’s “Sanskrit mantras’ dare to PM Modi and Amit Shah came amid a growing war of words between the TMC and the BJP in the run-up to General Elections.

Speaking on Monday, Mamata stressed on the need to maintain communal harmony on the occasion of Doljatra and Holi. She asked the people to stay alert and not let any attempt to disturb peace succeed.

"Let the festival of colours be celebrated in a peaceful manner, in an atmosphere of amity and tranquillity," Banerjee said.

"We declare holidays both on Durga Puja and Chhat, we declare holidays on Buddha Jayanti, on Guru Nanak's birthday. We celebrate Eid. Bengal is a melting pot of different religions and communities who are living here for ages. We will maintain that at all costs," she stated in a press briefing at the state secretariat.

Mamata’s remarks also came as her party described the Lok Sabha elections as a contest between the TMC supremo and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Abhishek Banerjee, senior TMC leader said, the General Elections have turned into a battle to save the country from the BJP's divisive politics.

"It is a battle between Mamata Banerjee and Prime Minister Narendra Modi to save the country from the divisive politics of the BJP. The country is standing at the crossroads and we all have to unite to save the country, its culture of unity in diversity," Banerjee, who is also Mamata’s nephew, said while addressing a rally at Bankura.

He alleged the BJP had a hand in "fuelling riots" in the country and in West Bengal.

"Our leader Mamata Banerjee has given the call for a secular and a progressive government in the country by ousting the BJP. So, it is our duty to stand by her and give her strength," the MP said.

Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal will be spread over all seven phases from April 11 to May 19. The counting of votes will be taken up on May 23.
