Will scrap Citizenship Amendment Bill if voted to power: Rahul Gandhi

GUWAHATI: The Congress will scrap the Citizenship Amendment Bill if voted to power in the upcoming general elections, party president Rahul Gandhi said on Tuesday."We will not allow the Citizenship Amendment Bill for it is detrimental to the interests of people of the Northeast. We will scrap the bill once voted to power,” Gandhi said while addressing an election rally in Itanagar.In January, the Citizenship Amendment Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha. The government, however, did not introduce it in the upper house due to stiff resistance from the opposition parties and NDA allies.The Congress chief also criticised the BJP for doing away with the special status of North-eastern states.“There are some states in the county which require special status due to there unique problems, including connectivity, terrain, and infrastructure. We will restore the special category status of Arunachal Pradesh if once voted to power,” he said.The Gandhi scion also said that the RSS and the BJP were trying to push one political and cultural ideology and thought process across the country thereby destroy the unique cultural, history and heritage of Northeast India.“Just see the universities, It is not the merit which determines who will be the vice chancellor but how close the person is to RSS. Planning commission was replaced by Niti Aayog, no one knows what this Aayog does,” he said.Promising special industrial policy for the northeast, Rahul said: “Prime Minister Narendra Modi wants Congress-free India, however, just see how much hatred he has in his mind and heart. We do not want to spread hatred. We don’t want to destroy BJP and RSS. However we will not allow them to impose their ideology on people.”The Congress chief also attacked the PM saying he chose to shoot for a film till the evening of February 14 despite the Pulwama attack taking place in the afternoon that day.“Modi talks about patriotism however after the February 14 terror attack in Pulwama, Modi was busy shooting over three hours while we cancelled all our programmes,” he said."A few years back Chinese president came to India. Modi was sitting with him in Gujarat. At that time, Chinese army entered Dokalam. Modi did not utter a word. After that he went to China without any agenda. This is patriotism of Modi,” he added.Referring to the recent killing of three people in police firing during the agitation against permanent residency certificates to some sections in Arunachal Pradesh, Gandhi said: “Why was bullets fired? Can't there be a dialogue.”Election to the 60-member Arunachal Pradesh Assembly and two Lok Sabha seats will be held on April 11.
