Deepika Padukone didn’t ask Scarlett Johansson about Avengers Endgame – find out why

Deepika Padukone and Scarlett Johansson recently appeared together on the cover of a magazine | Photo Credit: Instagram

Fans have been buzzing off late about Deepika Padukone’s latest cover shoot for Vogue magazine. While, Deepika looks her gorgeous self on this one as well, but that isn’t the only reason that fans got excited. It was because, other than Deepika, Hollywood diva, Scarlett Johansson too is on the cover with her. This has made everyone wonder that when the two actresses met, what was the conversation like.

In fact, Scarlett Johansson will be seen next on the big-screen in the upcoming Marvel Cinematic Universe film Avengers: Endgame. And while the fan world of Marvel has been busy with speculations and fan theories about what is in store for the Avengers in the upcoming film, we were wondering if Scar Jo revealed any spoilers to the Bollywood diva about her upcoming film?

Unfortunately, the Padmaavat actress isn’t a fangirl of the Avengers franchise and wasn’t really keen to know about the film. In an interview with Anupama Chopra, Deepika revealed that when she meets another star, she is never curious about the most obvious reasons, rather she is curious about the person herself. Check out her full quote below:

“I’m not a fangirl. I didn’t want to come across like that. When I meet other actors, I treat them like colleagues and people just like me, especially actors. Whenever I meet successful people, I’m never curious about the most obvious things that are out there for everyone to see. So, I’m not curious about The Avengers and how she did that. I’m never really talking about characters. I’m more interested in getting to know someone beyond the obvious and beyond what someone else would have access to. Also, a large part of me does these things organically. I don’t have questions in my head or a plan in my head like, ‘When I meet her, it will be like this…’ It was very honest and organic. She asked me a lot about India. In fact, we didn’t talk much about film at all,” Deepika Padukone said.

Well, it is sad for us fans of the Avengers that Deepika wasn’t up for knowing spoilers and plot details of the upcoming MCU film Avengers: Endgame, because if we were left with Scar Jo, we would have probably bombarded her with all sorts of questions about her film.

Nevertheless, we will find out all that happens in Avengers: Endgame in little over a month considering the film will hit theatres on April 26. It was also a delight to find out that Scarlett Johansson was keen of knowing about India. We certainly hope that the Hollywood diva takes an interest in Bollywood movies as well and may be one day we can see her in a Bollywood film.
