Ajay Devgn Is Done Playing The 'Aata Majhi Satakli' Cop, Make Way For IAF Wing Commander Devgn

Over the years we have come to think of Ajay Devgn as being synonymous to Bollywood's most sought-after action hero. Sure, Akshay Kumar is also a leading name in the category, but when it comes to someone who has been acing each and every role in this category, we can only think of Devgn.

Ajay made the entire country eat out of his hands when he first graced the screen as Bajirao Singham, the righteous and daring cop who would go to the end of this world to bring the culprits to justice.

We have loved him and his daredevilry in the 'Singham' series, and feel that no one could have done it better than the man himself, but as per latest reports, it seems Ajay is all set to explore other aspects and roles in the action category and he will next be seen portraying the role of an IAF Wing Commander in the film titled 'Bhuj: The Pride Of India'.

The film is reportedly based on true incidents, wherein Ajay will be seen essaying the role of Squadron Leader Vijay Karnik who was in charge of the Bhuj airport during the Indo-Pak war in 1971. The airstrip was destroyed by Pakistani air strikes and Karnik mobilised 300 local women to rebuild it for the Indian Air Force aircrafts to make a safe landing. Karnik played a pivotal role in helping keep the airstrip operational amidst heavy bombing from Pakistan.

The film has been written, and will be directed by Abhishek Dudhaiya and talking about Vijay Karnik and the feat he achieved during the war, producer Bhushan Kumar told the media, “This courageous tale needs to be told because we want the current and the coming generation to know about this brave soldier, Squadron Leader Vijay Karnik, who played a significant role in India's victory in the 1971 war. He was heroic enough to take this bold step of involving civilians in a war. Also, who better than Ajay Devgn for the role of Vijay Karnik?”

Karnik recalled the events from the eventful incident and he is glad that Ajay has agreed to play his character in the film. Talking to the media he said, “We were fighting a war and if there had been any casualties of any of these women, it would have been a great loss. But I took the decision and it worked out. I had briefed them where they could take shelter if attacked and they followed it bravely. Also, I could only see Ajay Devgn essaying my character and I'm glad that he's on board.”

We can't wait for this one.
