'Opposition looking to form majboor govt but citizens want majboot leaders': Narendra Modi at BJP national convention-Politics News , Firstpost

On the second and last day of the BJP National Convention in New Delhi, Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched attacks on the Congress and other Opposition outfits over various issues, including the Rafale deal and the Ayodhya issue.

On the second and last day of the BJP national convention in New Delhi, Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched attacks on the Congress and other Opposition outfits over various issues, including the Rafale deal and the Ayodhya issue. Speaking at Ramlila Maidan, Modi said that Congress is only looking to serve its own interests, while the BJP is working to better the nation.

The prime minister in his speech expressed pride that the BJP government, unlike the governments before it, "has not been accused of corruption."

"It has happened for the first time in the history of the country that a government that came into power with an absolute majority hasn't been accused of corruption," he said.

Modi said that during the Congress' tenure, there were only two ways to get a loan — the common process, and the Congress process. In the common process, one could ask a bank for a loan, and in the Congress process, banks were forced to give money to their "greedy friends."

One could ask for a loan of Rs 10 lakh to set up his or her home as part of the common process. But in the Congress process, loans worth hundreds of thousands of rupees were given over a phone call, Modi said. "You would need a second loan to pay off the first loan in the Congress process, a third to pay off the second, and so on," he added.

Modi also responded to Congress' continued "chowkidar chor hai" jibes over the Rafale deal, and said that the 'chowkidar' will not stop at anything to expose the Congress' lies and games. "No matter how much the Congress resorts to name-calling, the 'chowkidar' will not stop," he said, amid cheers and applause.

Speaking about the controversial Ayodhya issue, Modi said: "Look at the Ayodhya matter. Congress is using their lawyers to stall the issue. Congress was even ready to impeach the CJI. We should not forget what Congress is doing and we should not let anyone forget it."

Criticising the Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and Chhattisgarh governments' decisions to block the CBI from entering the respective states without permission, the prime minister alleged that they have something to hide. "What wrong have they done that they're feeling scared? Today they don't accept CBI, tomorrow they won't accept some other institution. Army, Police, SC, EC, CAG all are wrong, only they are right," he alleged.

Addressing talks of a united Opposition, he said that Opposition parties are only coming together so that a 'majboor (dependent)' government can form, and they can continue in their corrupt endeavours. But the average citizen wants a 'majboot (dependable)' government that will end all corruption, he said.

"The nation should decide if it wants a pradhan sevak who spends months on vacation abroad or one who works tirelessly without taking a break," he said.

BJP leaders laud Modi government

BJP president Amit Shah, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman, Railways Minister Nitin Gadkari, and Finance Minister Arun Jaitley were among those who addressed the gathering of 12,000, which comes ahead of the Lok Sabha polls

Shah in his address on the second day of the BJP national summit said that the Narendra Modi government has been working towards freeing India from the Congress' three contributions to India: nepotism, classism, and appeasement.

Adding to his attack on the Opposition, Shah said that the mahagathbandhan was formed out of greed. "It is good that this contest is taking place. I know that our cadres will lead this fight for us and ensure us a victory," he said.

Gadkari lauded the progress made by the Centre on various issues, and said that previous governments in India have only been guilty of corruption and non-performance. "But after we came to power, good governance, ease of business development has been delivered, just as we promised in our manifesto," he said.

Sitharaman, while speaking at the summit, said, "We have not had one major terrorist attack in this country after 2014. This government, under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi has ensured one thing — that there shall not be an opportunity for terrorists to disturb peace."

Jaitley in his speech said that the prime minister has saved thousands of crores of rupees in the Rafale deal, and is working to bring back all the money that the Congress blew up, which should have gone to the poor.

He further stated that the BJP-led government has nothing to be ashamed of. "The Bharatiya Janata Party government has not done a single act that allows our workers to tilt their heads," he said.

Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath also addressed the gathering, and listed the BJP government's achievements in Uttar Pradesh. "Within 1.5 years, the UP government has built houses for 18 lakh poor individuals irrespective of their caste or religion, under Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana."

He added that meanwhile, in the five years of the previous SP government, only 63,000 houses were built.
