Christchurch terror attack: Woman 'brutally' killed as she went to check on her husband

A member of Christchurch's muslim community says he does not feel safe returning to his place of worship.

A woman who was killed as she crawled on the footpath outside the Al Noor Mosque pleading for help was running back to the scene to check on her husband when she was shot.

Ansi Alibava, 25, from Kerala in India, initially escaped the mosque with a group of women and children. However, she went back for her husband and was shot as she walked past the fence. The alleged gunman then ran out to Deans Ave, and shot her as she crawled on the ground pleading for help.

Her husband, Abdul Nazer Ponnath Hamsa, spoke to Stuff on Tuesday with the assistance of his friend Renju Scaria George translating.

George said the couple had not been to the mosque for about nine months before Friday due to Hamsa's work commitments. However, on Friday he was sick, so the couple decided to attend.

READ MORE:

* Christchurch shootings: Full coverage

* Christchurch attacks: Live blog

* The end of our innocence: The victims

SUPPLIED Ansi Alibava died on Friday after she was shot outside the Al Noor Mosque during the terrorist attacks.

The couple arrived about 12pm for the preliminary prayer before the main prayer was due to start.

Just as the main prayer was beginning Hamsa, who was near the emergency exit, heard what sounded like a balloon popping. Seconds later he realised it was gunfire.

"One of the people broke the glass and started to run and all the other people actually fell over him," George said.

Hamsa managed to escape the mosque, jumping over a fence of a nearby property. A resident was initially reluctant to let him inside fearing he was a terrorist, George said.

With blood all over his hands Hamsa told the man he had no weapons and was let inside the home to call police. About 10 minutes later Hamsa decided he needed to go and look for his wife.

MONIQUE FORD / STUFF Abdul Nazer Ponnath Hamsa at his friend's home on Tuesday.

"He walked out and then he could see a child and a mum lying on the street and then his wife next to them so he went to wake her up and she was not responding, all he could see was a pool of blood.

"One of the guys standing there said 'who's that'? And he said 'it's my wife', and then [the other man] said she's dead."

Hamsa sat beside his wife for about a minute before police arrived and told Hamsa it was not safe and he needed to leave.

"He was completely blank," George says when Hamsa is asked about his emotions at the time.

"He thought she might have some injuries, but the moment the other person said she was dead he was completely blank and he was not sure what he was doing."

Hamsa was struggling to sleep in the days after the terror attack and was now taking sleeping pills. He does not want to go back to his home and is sleeping on a mattress on the floor in one of George's rooms.

MONIQUE FORD / STUFF Ansi Alibava's husband Abdul Nazer Ponnath Hamsa, middle, surrounded by his friends and work colleague.

Hamsa and Alibava married two and a half years ago in their hometown of Kerala. Coming to New Zealand to study was "one of her biggest dreams", George said.

Alibava went to Lincoln University to pursue a Master of Agribusiness Management at Lincoln University. She recently completed her degree while the couple also financially supported their families back home.

Alibava was "a very bubbly, loveable person," who loved to read George said.

George, who watched the video of the terror attack, said the footage of Alibava being killed was "shocking".

"A man with a heart can't do that. If someone is asking for help you should be helping that person rather than trying to take their life off them.

"I watched the whole thing, but the last bit, it's something you never want to think about - she was brutally killed."

Hamsa was now waiting for news from police as to when he could see Alibava while also trying to get permanent residency as his wife was the primary applicant on their visa.

"We're talking to Immigration to see if we can get him to stay here and get along with their dreams and look after her family and his family."
