Those questioning job data have an axe to grind: Jaitley

Arun Jaitley.

NEW DELHI: Finance minister Arun Jaitley on Tuesday criticised the 108 economists who have questioned the validity of the country’s economic data by suggesting that they were not unbiased academics but a group with a political axe to grind against the Modi government.

Jaitley said an analysis of credentials of the 108 showed that 70% of those were “compulsive contrarians” — critics of the government who had signed multiple memoranda against the NDA government in the last five years.

“Most of these memoranda are on the issues of politics and not economy. As against this, credible international institutions like the IMF and the World Bank have always accepted our data,” the FM said, adding a fake campaign was being carried out that the Indian economy had not created jobs.

On Friday, a group of 108 economists and social scientists had shot off a letter alleging political interference in economic data and had said data which cast a doubt on the government’s achievements was being suppressed or revised.

On Monday, a group of 131 chartered accountants joined hands to debunk allegations of government fudging economic data.

The FM detailed the achievements of the economy and the country’s recent record on infrastructure.

“Our infrastructure growth has been the fastest. When you build 10,000 km of highways every year, when you electrify every village, when you provide sanitation to every home, when you build houses, when you create urban infrastructure, unprecedented growth of Metros, flyovers, roads, when the construction industry grows by 10%, when electronics where we essentially relied on imports is today having monumental growth as far as India is concerned and, lastly, huge infrastructure being created in rural areas, in urban areas, manufacturing going up in various sectors, economy is the fastest growing and a fake campaign that all these growth doesn’t create jobs… I think nothing could be further from the truth,” he said.


