16-year-old Kashmiri boy awarded Shaurya Chakra by President for fighting militants in Shopian

President Ram Nath Kovind conferring the Shaurya Chakra to Irfan Ramzan Sheikh of Jammu and Kashmir. | @rashtrapatibhvn | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: In what could prove as a decisive factor to discourage youths from joining militancy in Jammu and Kashmir and assure them more of India’s inclusiveness, President of India Ram Nath Kovind on Tuesday conferred a 16-year-old boy from the Valley with the prestigious Shaurya Chakra for fighting militants in Shopian district.

Irfan Ramzan Sheikh was awarded the third highest peacetime gallantry award, conferred upon usually to armed forces and para-military personnel for courage in the face of the enemy.

Militants had cordoned off Irfan’s house on the intervening night of October 16-17 in 2017. When he opened the door of his house, he found three militants outside armed with rifles and grenades. Irfan’s father Mohammad Ramzan is a former sarpanch with connections to Mehbooba Mufti’s People’s Democratic Party.

President Kovind presents Shaurya Chakra to Irfan Ramzan Sheikh. He exhibited courage and maturity and fought off militants, safeguarding the life of his father and other family members in Jammu & Kashmir pic.twitter.com/FVnWkOaOja — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) March 19, 2019

“Sensing that the militants could harm his family, he exhibited highest degree of courage and faced the militants for sometime so as to avoid their entry inside the house. In meantime, his father came out and the militants pounced on him, resulting in scuffle,” the citation for his award read.

Irfan pounced on the militants without fearing his own life, with the only focus on his mind being protecting his father and other family members. His father succumbed to injuries but Irfan continued to fiercely engage with the militants, resulting in injuries to the militant as well.

After seeing one of their accomplices injured, when the militants tried to flee, Irfan chased them, as a result of which they were forced to leave the body of their fellow militant behind, PTI reported.

“Irfan Ramzan Sheikh exhibited the extraordinary show of bravery and maturity at such a small age,” the citation read.

Irfan is a 10th standard student and aspires to become an Indian Police Service officer.
