Woman shot dead as she begged for help on the pavement outside Christchurch mosque had escaped

A woman who was shot dead while crawling on the pavement outside a Christchurch mosque only returned to the bloody scene to check if her husband was alive.

Ansi Alibava, 25, was among a small group of women and children who managed to escape the mosque as a gunman stormed the building on Friday.

She had turned back to check on her husband, who she thought was still inside the building, when she was struck by a bullet.

As the young woman crawled on the pavement pleading for help, the gunman ran to the street and shot her once more.

Ansi Alibava (pictured), 25 was among a group of women and children who managed to escape a mosque as a man allegedly stormed the building firing shots at worshipers on Friday

Mourners have placed a picture of Ms Alibava in a shrine dedicated to the 25-year-old

Her husband Abdul Nazer Ponnath Hamsa has spoken to Stuff about the horrifying day, with the assistance of Renju Scaria George who translated.

The couple, from India, hadn't been to the mosque for about nine months when they decided to attend on Friday, Mr George said.

Mr Hamsa, who had been near the emergency exit in a separate room from his wife during the main prayer, was quick to realise the popping sound he heard was gunshots.

After someone had managed to smash a window, Mr Hamsa and others escaped.

Covered in blood, he fled to a nearby property, where he begged them to let him inside to phone the police.

After calling for help he then went in search of his wife.

'He walked out and then he could see a child and a mum lying on the street and then his wife next to them so he went to wake her up and she was not responding, all he could see was a pool of blood,' Mr George said.

Mourners spelled out Ms Alibava's name in candles as part of a shrine dedicated to her. They also placed flowers and pictures for the young woman

Ms Alibava has been remembered as a 'bubbly and loving' young woman. Mourners stand in silence at the shrine set up for her

'One of the guys standing there said 'who's that'? And he said 'it's my wife', and then (the other man) said she's dead.'

Mr Hamsa went blank after hearing the news.

The pair had married two and a half years ago in India before moving to New Zealand to study.

Ms Alibava had just completed her masters in Agribusiness study at Lincoln University.

Ms Alibava was one of 50 people killed in Christchruch, on New Zealand's South Island, on Friday. At least 50 other victims were injured in the terrorist attack.

Mr George had seen footage of the attack which was livestreamed on social media. The footage showed Ms Alibava being killed. Mr George said he was shocked at what he saw.

Flowers have been laid outside the Al Noor mosque in Christchurch, New Zealand following the shooting

Members of the the public grieve at a makeshift memorial at the Al Noor Mosque on Deans Rd in Christchurch

The community in reeling after the tragedy, that saw 50 people killed and multiple others injured

'A man with a heart can't do that. If someone is asking for help you should be helping that person rather than trying to take their life off them.'

Some of the victims have been formally identified and are ow being made available to their families, NZ Police Commissioner Mike Bush said on Wednesday.

He said he expected the process of identifying majority of the victims to be completed by Wednesday, however, some of the vicitims will take a little longer, Mr Bush said.

Australia Brenton Tarrant, 28, has been charged in relation to the attacks.
