Cop probing the matter ‘not efficient enough’: HC

CPI leader Govind Pansare

Addl SP Tirupati Kakade; Govind Pansare

Dabholkar murders

journalist Gauri Lankesh

Bombay High Court slams tardy investigation, says Kolhapur Addl SP Tirupati Kakade doesn’t appear to be properly guided.The Bombay High Court has slammed the probe into’s murder in February 2015 and called it ‘eyewash’. In the 35th hearing in the case on March 14, the court also termed the attitude of the current investigating officer, Additional Superintendent of Police Tirupati Kakade, ‘lacklustre’ and said that “there is an impression that the accused are being systematically shielded by administrative or political bosses”.The HC Bench comprising Justice SC Dharmadhikari and BP Colabawalla remarked that Kakade is “not efficient enough to conduct the investigation, for he feels inhibited and is reluctant to give reason to this court. He does not appear to be guided properly”. The judges also asked why the “slow investigation” is not worrying the state. For an answer, they have summoned the Maharashtra Additional Chief Secretary (Home) Sanjay Kumar on March 28.In its order following the hearing, the HC said that the Bench does not find any attempts being made by the state police to nab the absconding accused. “The same old story is repeated in this report and we are sorry to say, it is nothing but eyewash. By the methodology adopted, the absconding accused will not be arrested for years together,” reads the order. The order also states that if the Special Investigating Team (SIT) keeps highlighting the details of the accused, as it has been doing in these past few years, then the accused will expectedly not reside in one state and will always remain on the run.According to the order, the accused have possibly been uprooted for the acts committed and also sometimes disowned by their families. “It’s a huge country and they are bound to seek shelter anywhere and everywhere,” the Bench remarked in the order, adding that when the investigating team visits places near the scene of the crime, it is often misled by people shielding the accused and the agency “returns clueless”.“By then, the accused have already left that place after the commission of the crime. Thereafter, if nothing has been done or the investigating machinery only acts at intervals, or when reminded of their duty by the court, such absconding accused and those shielding them are emboldened to move the accused to another acquaintance,” said the order, adding that “it is not impossible in this country to change names, designations and place of residence and obtain new identification. In such circumstances, we express our strong displeasure with harsh remarks for we have given enough opportunity to the officials concerned to show their bona fides”.Kakade is the fourth investigating officer in the case and has been probing Pansare’s murder since January 2018. The first three investigating officers were Ankit Goyal, S Chaitanya and Suhail Sharma. The high court’s monitoring of Pansare’s murder investigation is being conducted in conjunction with rationalist Narendra Dabholkar’s murder probe. While Dabholkar was killed August 20, 2013, in Pune, Pansare and his wife were shot at by unknown assailants on February 16, 2015 in Kolhapur; Pansare died five days later. Dabholkar’s murder case is being handled by the CBI.The investigating agencies have linked the motive, weapons and the conspirators in the Pansare andto the killings of author MM Kalburgi in Dharwad on August 30, 2015, and murder ofon September 5, 2017, in Bangalore. The agencies probing these murders are the CBI, Kolhapur SIT and Karnataka SIT.The HC order also brings the Dabholkar murder investigation into focus and states, “We find that if with the assistance of the police party in the neighbouring state the alleged shooters can be nabbed and arrested, then why can’t those assisting and helping them – particularly in destroying the arms and weapons used in the crime – cannot be apprehended, and when sufficient clues are available. These are not only clues, but materials pointing towards involvement of others.” The CBI has filed a supplementary chargesheet in the Dabholkar murder case against Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar, the two men who allegedly pulled the trigger. But the central agency is yet to take any action against lawyer Sanjeev Punalekar, who according to the CBI chargesheet, aided and abetted the duo and tampered with evidence. Without naming Punalekar the court has clearly expressed disappointment with the agencies for not taking any action against the lawyer.
