Rajkot Murder News Today: Drishyam-style murder cracked, five arrested

Building site in Simandhar City from where remains were found

RAJKOT: A mysterious case of a woman in Bhuj, missing since June last year, has turned out to be a gory murder plotted by her own husband, who seems to have taken cues from racy Bollywood flicks, especially Ajay Devgn-starrer ‘Drishyam’.

The sensational case was cracked with the arrest of six persons and police recovering the remains of the victim Ruksana who was murdered and buried in an under-construction building. Those arrested were Ruksana’s husband Ismail alias Malo Hussain Majothi, his cousin Javed Majothi, Javed’s friend Sajid Khalifa and his wife Saima, Shabbir Jusab and Altaf Majothi.

Ismail decided to eliminate Rukhsana due to bitter squabbles between them over his second marriage to a woman named Nazia from Mumbai in January 2018. He contracted his cousin brother Javed who stabbed her to death in his car and buried her in a plot near Aisha Park with the help of Shabbir and Altaf on June 9. They burnt the car’s seat cover which was full of blood to destroy the evidence.

However, six months ago they had removed her body after government took over that plot and started clearing illegal encroachment. Ismail with the help of Mamad Kumbhar dug out her body and shifted it to another under-construction building site in Simandhar City from where the remains were found.

In order to avoid any suspicion on him, Ismail had even filed a missing persons complaint with Bhuj B-division police station on June 10. After about four months, Ismail even went to the extent of filing a petition in the Gujarat High Court seeking directions to the police to investigate the complaint thoroughly.

D B Vaghela, border range IG told TOI: “On June 10, Ruksana’s brother and mother too had filed an application in Bhuj court. We were suspecting Ismail from the beginning, but carried out the investigation secretly so that accused don’t get the chance to destroy the evidence or flee.”

The entire plot was unearthed with the arrest of Javed from Meerut few days ago.


