Three brothers, uncle booked for raping and beheading 12-year-old girl in Madhya Pradesh

The victim's eldest brother, aged 20, is still at large (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Indore: Police in Madhya Pradesh's Sagar district has made a shocking revelation in connection with the brutal rape and murder of a minor girl whose body was found in an agricultural field on March 14. Sagar Police have charged three of the girl's brothers along with her aunt and uncle for the heinous crime. The latest reports in this regard assert that while four of the five accused have been arrested, a search operation is still underway for the girl's 20-year-old brother who is still at large.

A student of Class 6, the 12-year-old girl's severed body was discovered by locals in a field outside Berkhedi village on March 14. Officials with Sagar Police launched an investigation in this regard. They even declared a cash reward of Rs 10,000 for any information on the accused which was later increased to Rs 25,000.

During a preliminary investigation, the girl's aunt accused a neighbour of the crime. However, police officials soon discovered that her allegations held no substance and that the accused neighbour was innocent. This prompted investigators to suspect the girl's family members which led them to interrogate her three brothers, uncle, and aunt. Based on a tip-off, police questioned the victim's 19-year-old brother who confessed to the crime.

The boy told investigators that the elder brother, who is currently absconding, took advantage of the fact that no one else was at home on March 13 and raped the girl. Soon after, the two other brothers, one of whom is a minor, witnessed the crime and also took turns to rape her. They were followed by the uncle who upon finding out, scolded the brothers but then himself raped the minor. When the girl said that she would tell people about what they had done to her, the brothers and the uncle beheaded her and dumped her body in a field from where it was retrieved the next day.

Police officials said that they have reason to suspect that the eldest brother, who is still at large, might have raped the girl on previous occasions. They also said that the aunt had complete knowledge about the heinous crime committed by her husband and the girl's brothers but decided to hide that information from investigators and even tried to mislead them by falsely accusing a neighbour.
