India, Pak trade heavy fire in Akhnoor, Rajouri for 3rd day

India, Pak trade heavy fire in Akhnoor, Rajouri for 3rd day

RAJOURI, Mar 19: India and Pakistan Tuesday for the third consecutive day traded heavy fire when the latter violated ceasefire by shelling forward areas and posts along the Line of Control (LoC) with mortar bombs in Akhnoor and Sunderbani sectors.

“There was continuous ceasefire violation as the Pakistani troops resorted to heavy firing and mortar shelling in Akhnoor sector in Jammu district and in Sunderbani sector in Rajouri district Tuesday,” the officials said.

At 10.45 PM on March 18, the Pakistan army initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by resorting to shelling with mortar bombs and firing of small arms along the LoC in Akhnoor and Sunderbani sectors, a defence spokesman said. “The Indian army retaliated strongly and effectively,” he said, adding that “the firing continued till March 19 morning”.

On Monday, an army jawan was killed and four others were injured when the Pakistan army violated ceasefire, resorting to heavy mortar shelling and firing along the LoC in Rajouri district.

“In the incident, Rifleman Karamjeet Singh was critically injured and later succumbed to injuries,” the spokesman said, adding that four other soldiers were injured and condition of two of them was stated to be critical.

As per the officials, the casualty was caused in the Pakistani shelling along the LoC in Keri Battal forward area in the Sunderbani sector.

On March 17 too, the sector was targeted by the Pakistan army in unprovoked ceasefire violation. Pakistani troops violated ceasefire over 110 times along the Line of Control (LoC) this year. The border skirmishes witnessed a spurt after India's air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Balakot on February 26 in response to the February 14 Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The year 2018 witnessed the highest number of ceasefire violations, numbering 2,936 by Pakistani troops, in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border. Pakistan continues to violate the 2003 ceasefire agreement with India despite repeated calls for restraint and adherence to the pact during flag meetings between the two sides.
