Actor Pooja Gandhi, BJP politician face police complaint for not clearing hotel bill

Actor Pooja Gandhi, BJP politician face police complaint for not clearing hotel bill

Pooja Gandhi, a Kannada actor, however alleged that the complaint for was filed with the intention to malign her reputation and that she had nothing to do with the dues owed to the Bengaluru hotel.

news Controversy

Actor Pooja Gandhi found herself in a spot of bother when the security manager of The Lalit Ashok, a luxury hotel in Bengaluru, filed a complaint against her and a BJP politician Anil P Menasinakai for pending bills running up to Rs. 3.35 lakh.

On March 11, a complaint was made at the High Grounds Police Station after the security manager claimed that Pooja and her friend Anil fled the hotel without paying the full bill. The security manager alleged that Pooja and Anil had fled the hotel without paying the complete bill after staying along with a film crew in March and April 2017. While Rs. 22,83,129 was paid over time till 2018, the remaining Rs. 3.35 lakh was yet to be paid when the security manager of the hotel decided to approach the police on March 11.

The police took up a non-cognisable report (NCR) case based on the complaint however Anil's associates rushed to the hotel to settle the dues on Tuesday following the complaint, as per Deccan Herald.

Pooja alleged that the complaint was filed with the intention to malign her and that she had nothing to do with the dues owed to the hotel.

"I stayed at the hotel for a while during the pre-production of JD Chakravarthy’s movie, and paid the service bill through my credit card. When I came to know about the false case, I contacted Bhaskar, general manager of the hotel, and he agreed that there was miscommunication over the development. I know Anil Menasinakai as he is a politician but I am nowhere connected with paying the bill of the hotel. It is a clear intention to tarnish my image,” Pooja Gandhi said speaking to The New Indian Express.

Pooja Gandhi is a Kannada actor who shot to fame after debuting in the commercially successful film Mungaaru Male in 2006. She has acted in more than fifty films including Milana, Accident, and Dandupalya. She has also acted in Hindi, Bengali, Malayalam and Telugu films.
