Armie Hammer says his 2017 film Call Me By Your Name was 'so special' there shouldn't be a sequel

He starred in the Oscar-nominated film Call Me By Your Name.

But Armie Hammer says that it's unlikely there will be a sequel to the story of the love affair between a 24-year-old American, played by Hammer, and a 17-year-old Italian, played by Timothee Chalamet, over the course of an Italian summer.

The actor, 32, told Vulture in an interview published Tuesday that he thinks the original is so special, it should be left to stand alone.

No part 2: Armie Hammer says it's unlikely there will be a sequel to his 2017 film Call Me By Your Name, telling Vulture he thinks the original is so special, it should be left to stand alone

Asked if a sequel could be in the offing, Hammer replied: 'The truth is, there have been really loose conversations about it, but at the end of the day — I’m sort of coming around to the idea that the first one was so special for everyone who made it, and so many people who watched it felt like it really touched them, or spoke to them.'

'And it felt like a really perfect storm of so many things, that if we do make a second one, I think we’re setting ourselves up for disappointment. I don’t know that anything will match up to the first, you know?'

Hammer acknowledged, however, that if Chalamet and director Luca Guadagnino were on board and there was 'an incredible script,' he would be 'an a**hole to say no' to a sequel.

Call Me By Your Name, which was nominated for a best picture Academy Award in 2018, did win an Oscar for James Ivory for best adapted screenplay. It's based on the novel by André Aciman.

Romance: The movie tells the story of the love affair between a 24-year-old American, played by Hammer, and a 17-year-old Italian, played by Timothee Chalamet, during an Italian summer

Hammer's comments come as he is busy promoting his latest big screen role.

He stars as an American caught up in the 2008 terror attacks in the Indian city of Mumbai in the based-on-a-true-story Hotel Mumbai.

At least 174 people died, including nine of the attackers, and more than 300 were wounded during the four-day incident.

The film centers around the Taj Palace hotel where Indian staff went to incredible lengths to try and protect their foreign guests from the Islamic terrorists.
