In drought-hit Maharashtra, three farmers die after inhaling poisonous gases while looking for water

Maharashtra government has declared drought in 151 tehsils and 318 revenue circles (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Aurangabad: Water scarcity has plagued several areas of Maharashtra where drought-like conditions have prevailed in recent weeks. This shortage of access to water on Monday led to the deaths of three farmers in Aurangabad district with authorities expecting the death toll to likely rise. The latest reports state that a total of six farmers entered a water pipe, out of which three have been declared dead, one is critical and one is yet to be rescued. However, the exact number is yet to be confirmed since this is a developing story.

Locals said that one farmer entered the water pipe around 12 pm on Monday afternoon looking for water. When he did not return after a while, three other farmers entered the water pipe to rescue him. In the confusion that ensued, two other farmers reportedly entered the pipe. It was only when all six men did not return did locals alert fire department officials who arrived at the scene and launched a rescue operation.

Maharashtra: 3 farmers died due to poisonous gas after entering in a manhole in Aurangabad yesterday. Raju Shinde, Councillor says, "3 dead due to gas in a manhole, 1 person missing. Search operation underway." pic.twitter.com/evEjQrgW9G — ANI (@ANI) March 20, 2019

Rescuers managed to pull out the body of four farmers, three of whom were rushed to the nearest hospital and declared dead upon arrival. Meanwhile, the fourth man is critical as per latest inputs. It is also being reported that one person is yet to be rescued from the water pipe.

Corporator Raju Shinde told media personnel that the deceased are most likely to have inhaled poisonous gases inside the water pipe which led to breathlessness and their eventual demise. A relative of one of the deceased said that he went inside the pipe to clear the motor of garbage. He further added that the water motor in question was being used by the farmer to pump out water for use in the fields.

As many as 4,518 villages across the state of Maharashtra have been hit by severe drought. Estimates suggest that these conditions have affected around 21,000 villagers. Responding to the situation, the state government had earlier this year announced drought in 151 tehsils and 318 revenue circles. Since each tehsil comprises between 50 and 80 villages and each revenue circle about 20-40 villages, the state government announced relief measures for the drought-affected regions.

A similar incident had come to light in January of 2017 from Latur district of Maharashtra where seven workers died after inhaling poisonous gases while cleaning a tank. Fire department officials who pulled out the bodies of the deceased had told media personnel that the incident took place at Kirti Oil Mills at Latur Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC).
