From Emergency to CBI and inner-party politics, PM Modi blogs attack on Cong

In his latest attack on the Congress, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has said that India’s institutions have been the biggest casualty of dynastic politics.

PM Modi on Wednesday wrote in his blog that the people voted decisively in the 2014 general elections for “honesty over dynasty” and “development over decay”.

“As you go to vote- remember the past and how one family’s desire for power cost the nation so greatly. If they could do it then, they can surely do it now. Eternal vigilance remains the price of liberty,” he said.

PM Modi further said, “The sense of entitlement can be seen in their conduct towards routine legal processes. At present, their top leadership is on bail vis-a-vis a major scam. When the authorities seek to question them on their dealings, they do not even bother to reply. Are they scared of accountability or do they not believe in it?”

Watch: ‘People are not fools’: Priyanka Gandhi’s counter attack on PM Modi

The Prime Minister also targeted Congress for their “contempt for the courts”.

“Congress’ modus operandi is simple- reject, discredit and threaten. If a judicial verdict goes against them, they reject it, then they discredit the judge and thereafter, talk about bringing impeachment motions against the judge,” said PM Modi in his blog.

This comes amid attack by the Congress alleging that the Modi government has been undermining the institutions. PM Modi has responded to the criticism saying, “Former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi called the Planning Commission led by Dr. Manmohan Singh, ‘A bunch of jokers’. This comment gives you a glimpse of how Congress treats government institutions.”

Also read: Priyanka Gandhi says Modi govt’s argument to blame Congress has an expiry date

He also targeted Congress president Rahul Gandhi referring to the “ordinance tearing” incident of 2013. PM Modi said, “A policy decision taken by no less than the Union Cabinet was torn into pieces by someone who was not a member of any ministry and that too, in a press conference.”

Gandhi had intervened to stop an ordinance meant to save the convicted legislators from disqualification. He had called the ordinance a “complete nonsense” that should be “torn up and thrown away”.

The Prime Minister continued with his attack citing the creation of the National Advisory Council led by UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi. He said, “The NAC was created as a body parallel to the Prime Minister’s Office. And then, Congress talks about institutions?”

Also read: Congress culture is ‘anti-thesis of Gandhian thought’: PM Modi

Indians were tired, PM Modi writes in his blog, of the country being in the “Fragile Five”, where corruption, cronyism and nepotism made headlines instead of anything positive. He said India voted to shed the baggage of the past in pursuit of a better future.

“Over the last five years, the Indian economy has been the cynosure of the world’s eyes,” PM Modi

PM Modi highlighted, in his blog post, the BJP-led government’s achievements in the last five years. “India has made remarkable achievements in sanitation coverage (from 38% in 2014 to 98% now), banking the unbanked, financing the un-financed, building futuristic infrastructure, homes for the homeless, providing healthcare for the poor and educating the youth,” he said.
