Dead body buried beneath under-construction building; Rajasthan police crack murder similar to film 'Drishyam'

The victim's remains were recoved from an under-construction building in Simandhar city (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Rajkot: Police in Rajasthan's Rajkot district has managed to crack a case concerning the murder of a woman who disappeared in June of last year from Bhuj. An investigation led us to the woman's husband who we discovered had hatched a devious plan to murder her and conceal her body by burying it under a building, said a police official familiar with the case. He also said that the accused, who is currently under arrest, told officials that his plot to murder his wife was inspired by Hindi film 'Drishyam' which stars actor Ajay Devgan and Tabu.

Ismail alias Malo Hussain Majothi, the victim's husband, married his second wife Nazia from Mumbai in January of 2018. This led to regular arguments between him and the victim, Ruksana. Ismail wanted to get rid of Ruksana and sought the help of his cousin Javed Majothi who roped in his friend Sajid Khalifa and Sajid's wife Saima along with one Shabbir Jusab and Altaf Majothi to hatch the crime.

The devious murder plot began unravelling with the arrest of Javed Majothi from Meerut in Uttar Pradesh earlier this month. Javed told investigators that he was contracted by his cousin Ismail, the victim's husband to murder her. "I stabbed her in Ismail's car and buried her in a plot near Aisha Park with help from Shabbir and Altaf on June 9 of last year," said Javed in his confession.

Javed further told police officials that they burnt the seat cover of the car in which Ruksana was murdered in a bid to destroy the evidence against them. We removed her body from the spot once the government took over the plot and began an encroachment drive around October of last year, said Javed adding that they dug out Ruksana's body and shifted it to another under-construction building site in Simandhar city.

Based on Javed's confession, Rajasthan police arrested six people, including the victim's husband Ismail. What is even more shocking is that Ismail himself filed a missing person complaint with the Bhuj B-division police station on June 10, one day after his cousin murdered his wife at his behest. He even went to the trouble of filing a petition in the Gujarat High Court in this regard seeking directions to the police to find his missing wife.

Speaking to Times of India, Inspector General of Police (border range) DB Vaghela said that the victim's mother and brother had also filed an application in Bhuj court in this regard on June 10. He also said that investigators had their doubts about Ismail from the very beginning but carried out the investigation without spooking him into destroying evidence.
