Pulwama attack fallout: India called off dialogue with Coast Guard of Pakistan

India cancels dialogue with Coast Guard of Pakistan | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: In the wake of Pulwama terror attack, India had cancelled the dialogue between the Coast Guards of India and Pakistan scheduled to be held from March 6 to 9 in Pakistan.

Indian DG Coast Guard, Rajendra Singh was supposed to visit Pakistan for the dialogue but it was scrapped in lieu of the attack, news agency ANI quoted its source as saying.

Sources: India had cancelled dialogue between the Coast Guards of India and Pakistan scheduled to be held from March 6-9 in Pakistan. Indian DG Coast Guard, Rajendra Singh was supposed to visit but it was scrapped in wake of the Pulwama attack. pic.twitter.com/lhYlMilKHs — ANI (@ANI) March 20, 2019

On February 14, 40 CRPF jawans lost their lives and several others were injured in a terror attack carried out by a Pakistan-based suicide bomber in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district.

Following the attack, India had withdrawn the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status accorded to Pakistan. The Indian government also asked Pakistan to take stern action against terrorists and terrorist groups operating on its soil.

Several world leaders also condemned the attack and called out Pakistan for nurturing and harbouring terrorists.

The tension between India and Pakistan also came to the verge of war after India carried out air strikes on terror camps in Pakistan’s Balakot on February 26 to avenge the Pulwama terror attack.

Earlier this month, considering the escalated tension with its neighbouring country, India deployed the aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya and nuclear submarine INS Chakra in the Northern Arabian sea off Pakistan coast.

To stave off any threat to the aircraft carrier, the nuclear attack submarine was deployed as part of the aircraft carrier’s battle group. The battle group also consisted of warships giving a tactical edge to Indian Navy’s assets providing 360-degree protection from air, water and underwater.
