TN-LD PALANISWAMI

TN CM rejects allegations against him in Kodanad break-in case

(Eds; adds Chief Minister's quotes, Opposition reaction)

Chennai, Jan 12 (PTI): Tamil Nadu Chief Minister K

Palaniswami Saturday rejected allegations made against him by

those accused in the Kodanad estate break-in case, saying the

police would probe the matter.

Referring to former Tehelka editor Samuel Mathew

releasing a video in Delhi on Friday, in which the accused

allegedly linked him to the break-in, Palaniswami denied his

involvement.

The All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK)

Joint Coordinator further said that a police case had been

filed in the matter and that "strong action" would be taken

against those who released the video.

He suspected a "political" motive behind the matter,

even as the opposition DMK demanded that he step down to

facilitate a 'fair' probe.

"Yesterday (Friday), former Tehelka editor Samuel

Mathews had released a video which links me to an incident

(break-in) that happened in Amma's Kodanad estate on April 24,

2017. This (charge) is completely contrary to facts and there

is no iota of truth in it," he said.

Making a statement before the media here, Palaniswami

said the probe who reveal who was behind the incident, even as

he charged that it was an attempt to "malign Amma", referring

to late chief minister J Jayalalithaa.

In April 2017, the security guard of the Kodanad

estate, Jayalalithaa's retreat home in the hilly district of

the Nilgiris, was found dead.

It emerged during the probe that Jayalalithaa's former

driver C Kanagaraj and K V Sayan had allegedly plotted the

crime.

A total of 10 people had been arrested in the case,

with a charge sheet also being filed later.

However, Kanagaraj and Sayan's wife and daughter were

killed in separate road accidents during the probe, even as

another employee of the property was found dead, in a case of

suspected suicide.

On Saturday, Palaniswami said the accused people, some

of whom reportedly spoke in the video, had appeared in court

22 times in connection with the case so far, and questioned

why they did not share the same in the court.

"They are saying such new things in an attempt to

divert the case,"he said,adding that some of them were already

facing other cases, including under POCSO, besides robbery.

He also denied Jayalalithaa had stored documents

received from party functionaries in the estate as purportedly

claimed by them in the video on Saturday, saying she never

obtained any such papers.

"Those unable to take us on politically are resorting

to such cheap cowardice," he said and asserted that a probe

would reveal those doing so.

"I believe there is a political motive. So a case has

been filed and only it will reveal the truth. The truth will

emerge," he said.

Responding to the developments, the DMK demanded that

Palaniswami step down to ensure a 'fair' probe, since the

police comes under the Home portfolio held by him.

"In order to ensure a fair investigation, the Chief

Minister should first step aside, or at least part with the

Home portfolio," DMK Propaganda Secretary and former Telecom

Minister A Raja said.

Speaking to reporters, he said the party could seek a

CBI probe later, if required.

He claimed that there was lack of police presence on

the night the guard at the estate was killed and that power

was snapped, despite the presence of a dedicated power line.

The CCTVs were also not working, he claimed, adding,

"all these create suspicion."

Meanwhile, Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam founder T T V

Dhinakaran called for a court monitored probe into the entire

case.

The CPI (M) state unit demanded that the Kodanad guard

murder and break-in probe be transferred to the CBI, while

MDMK founder Vaiko wanted the chief minister to step down

following the accusations against him. PTI SA APR

APR APR
