Meet Gauri Sawant, India’s First Transgender Election Ambassador

As you know, India will be heading to the polls soon, with the results to be announced on May 23, 2019. In a bid to boost voting, the Election Commission has appointed 12 election ambassadors from Maharashtra. In a first, the EC has appointed a transgender woman, Gauri Sawant, as an ambassador.

Speaking to Mumbai Mirror, Gauri said: "I felt relieved to know that I was appointed as one of the election ambassadors for the general elections. Casting a vote is not just an individual's constitutional right but a social responsibility. It is important that every citizen who's eligible to vote must do it responsibly. Along with my members of Sakhi Char Chowghi, we help people cast their vote at the polling booths across the city during every election. EC's decision for the Lok Sabha possibly has given me an added responsibility. Polling days are holidays for housewives. But I want to ensure that each one of them go and vote; not just housewives but also women who are into sex work and every transgender in this country. They've equal rights to have their say in the government they wish for. I got appointed for my work and not my gender.”

If you find Gauri’s face familiar, it’s because she was in the viral ad for Vicks titled #TouchofCare that highlighted the story of her adopting a sex worker’s child in 2001.

Born as Ganesh Sawant in Pune, to a father who was a policeman and a homemaker, Gauri revealed to a portal that she was an unwanted child and her effeminate ways would bring much shame to her father. At 17, she fled their home and landed up in Mumbai. She soon found work with Humsafar Trust, one of India’s oldest LGTBQ NGOs.

In 2001, after hearing about a sex worker’s young daughter who was being pushed into the flesh trade after her mother’s death, she decided to adopt Gayatri, who was five then. Speaking about it, Gauri reveals: “I was strongly against that. At that time, I did not know that I would become a mother, that I would raise her and be narrating my story one day. I just knew that this little, motherless, vulnerable girl needed protection and care.”

Congratulations to Gauri for adding another feather to her cap!
