Beijing says the reincarnation of Dalai Lama, 83, should follow Chinese laws and regulations

The reincarnation of the current Dalai Lama must comply with Chinese laws and regulations, China's Foreign Ministry said on Tuesday.

The 14th Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism, told Reuters in an interview published on Monday that it was possible his incarnation could be found in India, where the 83-year-old has lived in exile for 60 years, before adding that the Chinese government could try to intervene and choose a successor it approves of.

'Reincarnation is the unique way of Tibetan Buddhism and has fixed rituals and systems,' Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang said while responding to press questions at a regular briefing.

'The Chinese government has adopted policies on freedom of religious belief. The reincarnation system is respected and protected by such legal instruments as "Regulations on Religious Affairs" and "Measures on the Management of the Reincarnation of Living Buddhas",' he added.

The 14th Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism, told Reuters that it was possible his incarnation could be found in India, where the 83-year-old has lived in exile for 60 years

Above, the iconic Potala Palace in the regional capital of Lhasa in Tibet Autonomous Region. China's Foreign Ministry said on Tuesday that he reincarnation of the current Dalai Lama must comply with Chinese laws and regulations and religious rituals

Geng stressed in his 'authoritative answer' that the reincarnation system has been in existence for several hundred years.

'The 14th Dalai Lama himself was also recognised following religious rituals and historical conventions and his succession was approved by the then central government. Therefore the reincarnation of Dalai Lama should abide by national laws and regulations, religious rituals and historical conventions,' he added.

China enacted the New Regulations on Religious Affairs and the Rules on the Management of Reincarnation of Tibetan Living Buddhas in 2018 and in 2007 respectively, according to CGTN.

According to the regulation, Buddhist institutions should apply to the government if they intend to reincarnate a monk.

Born in 1935, the current Dalai Lama was identified as the reincarnation of his predecessor when he was two years old.

The Dalai Lama arrives at Tezpur, Assam in India on April 18, 1959. He fled to India from the Tibetan capita Lhasa after a failed uprising against Chinese rule

The Dalai Lama receives the Nobel Peace Prize from Egil Aarvik, chairman of the Norwegian Nobel Committee on December 10, 1989 at Oslo University. This year marks 60 years since the spiritual leader went into exile after fleeing a Chinese crackdown in Tibet in 1959

He fled to India in early 1959 from the Tibetan capita Lhasa after a failed uprising against Chinese rule, and has since worked to draw global support for linguistic and cultural autonomy in his remote and mountainous homeland.

China, which took control of Tibet in 1950, brands the Nobel peace laureate a dangerous separatist.

Pondering what might happen after his death, the Dalai Lama anticipated some attempt by Beijing to foist a successor on Tibetan Buddhists.

'China considers Dalai Lama's reincarnation as something very important. They have more concern about the next Dalai Lama than me,' he told Reuters in an office next to a temple ringed by green hills and snow-capped mountain.

'In future, in case you see two Dalai Lamas come, one from here, in free country, one chosen by Chinese, then nobody will trust, nobody will respect (the one chosen by China). So that's an additional problem for the Chinese! It's possible, it can happen," he added, laughing.

Many Tibetans - whose tradition holds that the soul of a senior Buddhist monk is reincarnated in the body of a child on his death - suspect any Chinese role as a ploy to exert influence on the community.

The Dalai Lama leads a group meditation at the Bercy arena in Paris on October 14, 2003. He said contact between Tibetans living in their homeland and in exile was increasing, but that no formal meetings have happened between Chinese and his officials since 2010

Supporters of the Dalai Lama chanted and prayed at the Buddhist shrine in mountainous Dharamsala - home to Tibet's government in exile in northern India

Many of China's more than six million Tibetans still venerate the Dalai Lama despite government prohibitions on displays of his picture or any public display of devotion.

The Dalai Lama said contact between Tibetans living in their homeland and in exile was increasing, but that no formal meetings have happened between Chinese and his officials since 2010.

Informally, however, some retired Chinese officials and businessman with connections to Beijing do visit him from time to time, he added.

He said the role of the Dalai Lama after his death, including whether to keep it, could be discussed during a meeting of Tibetan Buddhists in India later this year.

He, however, added that though there was no reincarnation of Buddha, his teachings have remained.

'If the majority of (Tibetan people) really want to keep this institution, then this institution will remain,' he said. 'Then comes the question of the reincarnation of the 15th Dalai Lama.'

If there is one, he would still have 'no political responsibility,' said the Dalai Lama, who gave up his political duties in 2001, developing a democratic system for the up to 100,000 Tibetans living in India.

'China - great nation, ancient nation - but it's political system is totalitarian system, no freedom. So therefore I prefer to remain here, in this country,' he said, adding that he wasn't expecting to visit while China remained under Communist rule.

The Dalai Lama was born to a family of farmers in Taktser, a village on the northeastern edge of the Tibetan plateau, in China's Qinghai province.

'Our strength, our power is based on truth. Chinese power based on gun,' the Dalai Lama said. 'So for short term, gun is much more decisive, but long term truth is more powerful.'
