New £4m Asian supermarket in Sneinton will create 30 jobs

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Our free email updates are the best way to get headlines direct to your inbox

An Asian supermarket is set to bring a new lease of life to a building which has set empty for almost a decade - and create 30 new jobs in the process.

Leicester-based company Falcon Cash and Carry is spending £4m to crack the Nottingham market.

The firm, which has been family-run since 1980, is moving into a disused building in Carlton Road, Sneinton, a former Co-Operative supermarket.

The new store will also mean 30 new jobs will be created, across various different areas of the business.

Positions will include cashiers, customer sales assistants, management and warehouse operations.

Falcon describes itself as offering a complete range of authentic Asian foods, alongside their own Falcon brand items and fresh produce.

Cuisines include Asian, Carribean and Chinese and whilst their existing stores have been branded as 'cash and carry', the company is now looking to market itself as a superstore.

The own brand items offers a range of handpicked spices, lentils, whole and ground spices, blends, and flours directly sourced from India and other parts of the world.

Sachin Patel, 18, the store manager, said these were amongst the most popular products.

He said: "The building really was just a shell, so no water, no electrics, it all needed doing.

"The money will cover the refurbish costs for the inside and outside, repairs to the ceiling, and the products needed to stock the store."

(Image: Nottingham Post)

Mr Patel said work had begun on the site, he was happy with the progress being made, and had hopes that the store would be ready by mid-May.

He added: "This is our biggest project to date and locals have already said how excited they are.

"We chose this location as our first venture in Nottingham as it has a good community.

"We are also bringing 30 new jobs to the area, and will be hiring all new employees."

The site also includes a large car park with more than 100 spaces, which is both ground level and underground, so customers travelling further distances are catered for.

There are also plans for Falcon to sell products through an online store that aims to go live the same day the store opens.

For people still wanting to visit in person, there will also be a click and collect option.

Mr Patel said the store will utilise the footfall of the neighbouring Lidl supermarket, by offering good quality and budget prices for their products and sticking to similar opening hours.

The opening of the store will include an event which will be announced on the Falcon supermarket Facebook page.
