Have you seen these pics of Kareena Kapoor, Janhvi Kapoor and Arjun Kapoor?

A host of celebrities were spotted in Mumbai on Wednesday. Dhadak actor Janhvi Kapoor was seen post her dance class. The actor is currently working on the Gunjan Saxena biopic and looked tired after her practice session. She will play Gunjan, the first female Indian Air Force combat pilot and first female Shaurya Chakra recipient in the film.

Janhvi Kapoor spotted post her dance class. (Varinder Chawla)

Malaika Arora spent the day dining with her parents and her son Arhaan. The reality show judge had walked the red carpet at the Zee Cine Awards a day before in a red silk gown. She then went on a dinner date with rumoured boyfriend Arjun Kapoor post the event on Tuesday.

Malaika Arora with Arjun Kapoor at a restaurant on late Tuesday and with her parents and son Arhaan on Wednesday. (Varinder Chawla)

Varun Dhawan visited his father David Dhawan’s office in Juhu. He is looking forward to the release of his upcoming film Kalank.

MS Dhoni: The Untold Story actor Kiara Advani was spotted in vibrant co-ords at a cafe, while Total Dhamaal actor Esha Gupta was seen on an outing in the city. The media also caught a glimpse of DJ Snake of Lean On fame at the Mumbai airport. He was seen visiting the Dharma Productions office during the day.

Varun Dhawan, Kiara Advani and Esha Gupta spotted in Mumbai. (Varinder Chawla)

DJ Snake at the Mumbai airport and then at the Dharma Productions office.

Parineeti Chopra and Akshay Kumar, who are currently busy with the last-minute promotions of their film Kesari, were also spotted in the city. The film is set to release on Holi, March 21.

Kareena Kapoor and Saif Ali Khan are busy with their work commitments but took out time for their son Taimur. They family was clicked by the paparazzi outside their residence. The little one was later seen playing with his cousin and Soha Ali Khan and Kunal Kemmu’s daughter, Inaaya.

Kareena Kapoor and Saif Ali Khan with son Taimur. (Varinder Chawla)

Taimur and Inaaya spotted playing together in Bandra. (Varinder Chawla)

Taimur and Inaaya spotted in Bandra. (Varinder Chawla)

Follow @htshowbiz for more
