‘Jagan has sold his soul to Modi, KCR’

‘In return, the duo are safeguarding his interests’

Chief Minister and Telugu Desam Party (TDP) national president N. Chandrababu Naidu alleged that YSRCP president Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy has a tacit understanding with PM Narendra Modi and Telangana CM K. Chandrasekhar Rao.

During a teleconference with party leaders, cadres and Seva Mitras on Wednesday, Mr. Naidu said Mr. Jagan did not utter a word on Special Category Status (SCS) only to get relief in corruption cases. The slow investigation in cases involving him was ‘a gift’ from Mr. Modi. Safeguarding the properties of Mr. Jagan located in Telangana was a gift from Mr. KCR.

‘Deafening silence’

“The YSRCP president had mortgaged the State’s interests to Mr. Modi and Mr. KCR. Why Mr. Jagan targets me alone? Why is he silent on Mr. Modi? He never objects to the hurdles being by put up by Mr. KCR,” Mr. Naidu said.

The TDP supremo said that Mr. Jagan did not utter a word on a petition filed by Telangana government opposing the Polavaram project. Also, he was silent on the Kadapa steel plant, the CM alleged.

Mr. Naidu said selection of candidates was well received from all quarters and a congenial atmosphere was prevailing everywhere. He had never seen such favourable conditions during the last 37 years, but there should be no room for laxity as it would harm the interests of the State.

Lashing out at Mr. Jagan, he said the threat posed by ‘criminals’ should be tackled effectively.

‘TS targeted AP NGOs’

Later, addressing the 42nd anniversary programme of the State government pensioners Association here, the CM said NGOs were harassed in Hyderabad by the TRS government after bifurcation. They claimed the NGOs home as a property of Telangana. The TS government was trying to attack the economic foundations of Andhra people residing in Hyderabad.

The Telangana government was conducting raids on IT companies and passed on the data of A.P. to the YSRCP. The elections should be one-sided. “We have to win all the 25 Lok Sabha seats to teach a lesson to Mr. Modi, Mr. Jagan and Mr. KCR,” he added.

MLC P. Ashok Babu, AP pensioners association president Someswara Rao and AP NGOs association president Chandrasekhara Reddy were among those present.
