Maoists apologise after murdering school teacher, say thought he was cop

Maoists in Maharashtra have issued a letter seeking apology for murdering an innocent school teacher. They said they killed him as they suspected he was a policeman.

The letter has been issued by the Communist Party of India (Maoist). It was circulated among people in Korchi tehsil of Gadchiroli district in Maharashtra on Wednesday. The letter has been issued by Pavan, who is the divisional Commander of North CPI (Maoist) for North Gadchiroli area.

On March 10, Yogendra Meshram, a school teacher, was shot dead in the market area of Dholdongri by armed maoists. Meshram died on the spot. He was a teacher at the Jawaharlal Nehru Municipal School in Gadchiroli and would visit Dholdongri in Korchi tehsil every Saturday to meet his wife Kasturba Devgade.

His wife is a contractual nurse at the primary health center in Botejhari.

Meshram had come to meet his wife and had gone to buy some vegetables and meat for dinner when he was shot dead by Maoists.

In the letter sent to Meshram's family, the Maosits say it was a case intelligence failure. The letter describes Meshram as an "innocent" man. It said the Maoist cadres shot him as they suspected that he was a cop.

The Maoists said they suspected that he was gathering information about Maoist cadres active in Korchi tehsil.

"We bow down to you and seek forgiveness for the murder. We are also grieving with the family in these tough times. This has shown our weakness," the letter said.

It said: "We seek forgiveness from journalists, teachers, health department employees, and shopkeepers they don't have to live in fear. This incident is our fault and in future it will never be repeated."

The letter concludes saying: "We will keep fighting against the corrupt system which has been targeting and harassing the poor. This system, which is only for the capitalists and those in power, will be thrown off. Lal salam."

ALSO READ | Maharashtra: Maoists kill villager in Gadchiroli, say police informers will get capital punishment

ALSO READ | Nine injured as Naxals blow up SUV using IED in Chhattisgarh

ALSO WATCH | In Maharashtra's Gadchiroli, 16 naxals killed in police encounter
