Feeding you the josh: Politics has not just entered Bollywood, it has become Bollywood

After decades of apolitical caution, not naming names, and sugarcoating controversial ideas, Bollywood is now letting it rip. It is no longer afraid to take sides. Next month, the ‘PM Narendra Modi’ biopic hits theatres, right before voting. So will ‘My Name is RaGa’, which looks like a parody movie, going by the trailer.

These are polarising times, and the film industry has also been buffeted by political winds. There is a cluster of actors, filmmakers and artistes who are ardent BJP supporters. The entire A-list of Bollywood recently posed for a selfie with the prime minister. And the connection has been explicit sometimes: the PM and BJP have repeatedly invoked “how’s the josh” from the movie Uri, an homage to the surgical strike and its planners.

Uri was a perfect piece of guts-and-glory propaganda, meant to inflame and mobilise the “naya India” and those currently in power. Movie propaganda under this government has taken other forms too, including Toilet: Ek Prem Katha, or the movies mocking or vilifying the opposition: Indu Sarkar, The Accidental Prime Minister and so on. These are direct political projects, doing BJP’s work for it.

But at a broader level, Hindi movies simply reflect social consensus and churn. Movies and movie stars move with the times, like the rest of us. Imagine: at one time even the Kapoors were committed socialists. In the 40s and 50s, there was a progressive vanguard of writers, actors and filmmakers who formed Bombay cinema – the social values, sentiments, music, and plots came from a left-influenced political tradition. Through the 70s, 80s and 90s, Hindi movies embodied the pulls and tugs of society – the ethic of the state and ‘vardi’, secularism, labour union repression, unemployment, the remote legal system, the gangster ‘underworld’, liberalisation and NRI fantasies.

But despite the few who resisted the Emergency, the movie industry has always played it safe, not alienating anyone, tending to appease power. They pal around with politicians, seek patronage and protection. When faced with public protest or political bullying, they remake, delete, apologise – because they lack the institutional strength, solidarity or state support to stand up to it.

Compare this to Hollywood, which has had an activist left and right for decades. In the early years, movie stars spoke against fascism and Nazism while studio bosses were actively Republican. The Cold War and the Red Scare gave ballast to the right wing, while the left spoke up for civil rights and against war. While the left fundraised and made movies, from Charlie Chaplin to Jane Fonda and George Clooney, the right aimed for electoral power, from Reagan to Schwarzenegger.

Of course, many of our movie stars have plunged into electoral politics too. Some worked alongside Jawaharlal Nehru, many joined Congress. In Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh, movie stars turned their careers into vehicles for social and political messaging, then won elections on the basis of that image. BJP and TMC have leaned heavily on their movie star legislators. Almost all parties have used celebrities as force multipliers in their campaigns, to draw wider attention.

The real crux of the matter is not movie stars entering politics or movies siding with a party – the fact is, politics itself is being eaten alive by the image industries. It is being packaged for spectators, just like the movies are. Think of that picture of Barack Obama and his aides monitoring Osama bin Laden’s capture, from the White House – wasn’t it just like a situation room from the movies? Donald Trump, of course, is made by TV – his image of a deal making businessman was created by a reality show.

In India, it is the Modi-led BJP that is most sensitively attuned to mass sentiment, that has the snappiest campaigns and storylines. Narendra Modi is Hero Number 1, the leading man in public life. Even when the government polls low, his popularity is intact, because he is seen as separate from all that. He sounds like Amitabh Bachchan in his glory days, his rhetoric plonks the whole range of filmi emotions. When celebrities throng around him, when movies are made about him, it only makes him shine brighter.

This kind of image driven, performative politics cuts leaders loose from parties. It creates a larger than life appeal through billboards and media spectacles, social media campaigns, PR firms and salesmanship. It goes directly to a large public, who are seen as media consumers or spectators. It tries to evoke sentiments, an emotional connection with individual politicians – like all the talk about Priyanka Gandhi looking like her grandmother.

Party politics, in the traditional sense, operates less excitingly. Parties and their organisations were once in your life, they sought your civic participation. You got things from them, they mediated your relationship with the state, and you were involved with them too, as a citizen. Voters are seen as blocs, as representing specific social or economic interests. Politics is the vital interplay between these groups; a party represents and serves them. It is not simply “optics” or “perception”.

Right now, our politics is a mix of both models, but the image-driven style is winning over the organisation-driven one. The danger with this charisma-driven politics is that it distorts our expectations, makes us forget that a leader is one actor in a huge ensemble cast. It turns critical assessment into adulation, into a current of feeling. When citizens think and behave like fans, democracy looks the worse for it.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
