Tensions SURGE after US attacks Russia's ally Iran for wanting to 'annihilate' Israel

Iran seeks the 'ANNIHILATION' of Israel says Mike Pompeo

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo hit out at Iran during his tour of the Middle East where he met Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. The top diplomat argued Iran is pursuing Israel’s “annihilation and destruction". He added: “We maintain our unparalleled commitment to Israel’s security and firmly support your right to defend yourself."

Mr Netanyahu said the pair discussed “close coordiation to roll back Iranian aggression across the Middle East”. He added: “There is no limitation to our freedom of action and we appreciate very much the fact that the United States backs up our actions." The increased presence of Iran in the region has sparked threats of military action between the theocratic regime and Israel. Iran has since expanded into Iraq and Syria. READ MORE: India and Iran will UNITE against Pakistan ‘to combat terror’

Global tensions rise as US vow to support Israel against Iran

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo hit out at Iran during his tour of the Middle East

Russia has been critical of Israel’s campaign despite trying to maintain ties to both Israel and Iran. Russia hardened its stance against Israeli strikes in Syria after the accidental downing of an aircraft by Syria during an Israeli raid. The Russian ambassador to Iran told Tasnim News Agency: “There is no doubt that we are committed to our friendship with the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which the United States and its allies criticise." President Vladimir Putin said all foreign forces should eventually leave Syria but has yet to implement a time this will happen.

Russia has been critical of Israel’s campaign despite trying to maintain ties to Israel and Iran
