Worker booked for killing friend

Ludhiana: The Sadar police have booked a 22-year-old man for allegedly killing his friend by attacking him with a brick on his head. Initially, the accused tried to project it like an accident. However, after the statement of another friend and kin of the deceased, the police have registered a case under Section 302 (murder) of the IPC on Wednesday.

The accused has been identified as Shivam Kumar (22), a labourer living in LIG flats of Dugri. It is alleged Shivam had killed his friend Ravi Kumar — also a labourer — of the same locality. The in-charge at Lalton police post, ASI Ashwani Kumar, said that on the night of March 14, the police got information that a bike had met with an accident near Kheri village, in which one man had sustained injuries.

During investigation, it was identified that Shivam — with Ravi Kumar, and another friend (Rajinder Singh of Dugri) — had gone to Dolon Kalan village in one motorcycle. On the way back home near village Kheri, there is a sharp turn where the bike which Shivam was driving skidded, and the trio fell off. “It was identified that all the three were drunk. In this accident, Ravi sustained severe head injuries. He was undergoing treatment at a private hospital where he succumbed to his injuries on Tuesday evening. After Ravi’s death, his kin accused Shivam of the murder, because a few days ago, the duo had a fight over some monetary issue,” said the ASI.

He added that Ravi’s father Ashok Kumar stated to police that Shivam and Ravi had a fight over money a few days ago. However, later they again started talking. “It was not a major accident, which is why Shivam or Ranjit did not get injured, but Ravi sustained severe injuries,” added the ASI.

Ravi’s father has accused Shivam of attacking his son and killing him. Moreover, Ranjit — who was in an inebriated condition — stated that Shivam was holding a brick in his hand. The police suspect that Shivam had thrashed Ravi with a brick, and have launched a manhunt to arrest him. The ASI stated that the exact motive of the murder would be ascertained after the arrest of the accused.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
