Sitharaman claims no terror attacks in India since 2014, Congress asks ‘what about Pathankot, Uri’

Very suprising to hear Raksha Mantri’s outrageous claim that there has been no terrorist attack since May 2014 Wis… https://t.co/cN3o9q2FZ4 — Ahmed Patel (@ahmedpatel) 1547280672000

Quick reminder to Smt. @nsitharaman. In the last 5 years there have been terrorist attacks in Pathankot, Uri, Gurda… https://t.co/XWR4hxbhk2 — Congress (@INCIndia) 1547282521000

NEW DELHI: Congress on Saturday trained its guns at defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman for claiming at the BJP’s national convention in Delhi that there have not been any major terrorist attacks in this country after 2014.Leading a steady stream of fire at the defence minister, Congress MP Ahmed Patel pointed out the incongruity in Sitharaman’s claims. “Very suprising to hear Raksha Mantri’s outrageous claim that there has been no terrorist attack since May 2014. Wish to remind her that over 400 jawans lost their lives in terror attacks in Pathankot , Amarnath Yatra, Uri & elsewhere in last 55 months,” Patel said on Twitter Sitharaman, during her speech at the convention had claimed PM Modi ensured that terrorists find no opportunity to disturb India’s peace.“We have not had one major terrorist attack in this country after 2014. This government under the leadership of PM Modi has ensured one thing that there shall not be an opportunity for terrorists to disturb peace,” Sitharaman said.Mounting an all-round attack on the government for its claims, Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari accused the Modi government of wilfully misleading people of the country. “If there were no terrorist strikes in India in the last 55 months, then why did the government have to launch surgical strikes. What about terror strikes in Uri and Pathankot? And who is responsible for the prevailing situation in Jammu and Kashmir?,” Tewari said, demanding PM Modi’s clarification.Congress was quick to mount an attack on the defence minister on social media and to remind her of Modi government’s brush with terror since they came to power in May 2014. “Quick reminder to Smt. @nsitharaman. In the last 5 years there have been terrorist attacks in Pathankot, Uri, Gurdaspur, Amarnath Yatra & 1094 incidences in J&K. Clearly the lives of Jawans & Indian civilians matter little to her,” Congress tweeted from its official handle.
