Murder victim’s family demand arrest of accused

Ludhiana: Accusing police of inaction in the murder case of Akashdeep (22) of Civil City, his kin on Wednesday approached the commissioner of police (CP), Sukhchain Singh Gill, demanding arrest of the accused. Gill has further sent a complaint to Division 4 police station.

On March 6, Akashdeep of Civil Lines had gone to meet a woman with whom he had an affair. However, she had got married recently. When he reached her house, her in-laws, brother, and husband had a spat with him. As tempers frayed, the woman’s kin started beating Akashdeep with sticks.

To save himself, Akashdeep ran away from there, and hid himself in an auto parked near Buddha Nullah. However, the accused managed to catch him there, and started thrashing him with a stick. Then, Akash started running and jumped in the nullah and died. A CCTV camera installed in the area has captured the woman’s kin chasing and thrashing Akash.

Division 4 police had registered a case under sections 302 (murder) and 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intension) of the IPC against the woman’s husband, father-in-law, brother, and cousin. Next day, the police arrested her cousin. However, the other accused are still at large.

Akashdeep’s father Ganesh Kumar said: “The accused are roaming free. However, the police are not arresting them. Therefore, I have given another application to the police chief for quick action and justice. Further, we have also stated to the police that on March 6, the woman had asked Akash to come to her house, and she was also involved in the murder conspiracy. However, police are not taking any action against her.

Division 4 SHO inspector Jaspal Singh said the other accused were absconding. However, the police have conducted several raids for the arrest of the accused. Talking about the involvement of the woman, the police say so far they have found no such clue to take action against her.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
