CIA ‘kills’ suspected robber

LAHORE : CIA killed a suspected robber during a raid on his house and later declared it a suicide in the Harbanspura police limits on Wednesday.

The deceased person has been identified as Ghulam Bari. CIA Ghaziabad raided his house. His family claimed that as he opened the door, police opened firing and killed him. On the other hand, police claimed the accused person committed suicide by shooting himself in his temple.

The CIA SP said the accused person was involved in a dacoity-cum-murder in Defence. Police also recovered foreign currency and a bike used in crime. Further investigation is underway. The body was removed to morgue.

suicide: A 20-year-old youth committed suicide over protracted illness in the Sanda police area on Wednesday. The victim has been identified as Abdullah, a resident of Hakeeman Wala Bazaar. Police reached the scene after being informed and collected evidences. Further investigation is underway. Police said the victim was mentally ill. On the day of incident, he got dejected and committed suicide.

transferred: Inspector General of Police, Punjab, Amjad Javed Saleemi has issued transfer orders of a police officer. The services of DSP Shahid Mehmood Butt has been placed at the disposal of the deputy inspector general of police, Traffic Punjab, Lahore, for further posting.

OPC: Overseas Pakistanis Commission Vice-Chairperson Ch Waseem Akhtar said Overseas Pakistanis were playing a pivotal role in boosting the economy of this country and deserves great admiration for their positive role.

We must in return facilitate them that is why Overseas Pakistanis Commission is working hard for the timely resolution of their issues. Over the past 175 days, 77 complaints have been resolved by the efforts of Overseas Pakistanis Commission (OPC) Punjab and the property worth Rs34 crore has been retrieved. It is pertinent to mention a total of 5,823 complaints have been resolved since the inception of the commission.

Waseem expressed these views while briefing media regarding the performance of OPC where he also discussed future roadmap to facilitate Pakistani expatriates. Condemning severely horrible act of terror in Christchurch, New Zealand, Waseem lauded the statement issued by Prime Minister Imran Khan and said, “Pakistanis have rendered more sacrifices than any other nation for peace in the world.”
