Government orchestrated Pulwama carnage for votes: SP leader Ram Gopal Yadav's shocking allegation

Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav claimed government orchestrated Pulwama attack to win votes | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: Samajwadi Party (SP) leader Ram Gopal Yadav on Thursday made an explosive allegation against the government ahead of the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections. The SP leader said that the Pulwama carnage was orchestrated by the NDA government at the Centre in order to win votes. He said he is saddened at the sacrifice of the jawans for votes and questioned how it is possible that there were no security blockades on the Jammu-Srinagar highway.

He even claimed that senior officials in the paramilitary forces had requested to be transported either by air or in armoured vehicles but instead they were transported in normal buses.

“Dukhi hain sarkar se, jawan maar diye gaye vote ke liye,checking nahi thi Jammu-Srinagar ke beech mein, jawano ko simple buses main bhej diya,ye sazish thi, abhi nahi kehna chahta, jab sarkar badlegi, iski jaanch hogi, tab bade-bade log phasenge (I’m sad that soldiers were killed just for votes, there was no checking between Jammu and Srinagar. The soldiers were being transported in normal buses – this is a conspiracy. I don’t want to say right now but there will be an investigation when the government will change),” the veteran SP leader said.

Irked by the SP leader's statement, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath

Ramgopal Yadav ka bayan ghatiya rajniti ka bhadda udharan hai, unhe CRPF ke jawano ki shahadat pe prashn khada karne, aur desh ke jawano ka manobal todne wale is bayan ke liye, janata se maafi maangni chahiye.

On February 14, a 20-year-old Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorist Adil Ahmad Dar rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into one of the buses plying with the 78-vehicle Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) convoy on the Jammu-Srinagar road.

All the 40 jawans on board died in the attack. Pakistan-based JeM claimed the responsibility of the attack after which Indian Air Force bombed a madrasa or Islamic school run by Masood Azhar-headed proscribed terror outfit in Pakistan’s Balakot on February 26.

Pakistan claimed that IAF’s Mirage 2000s were forced to drop their payloads on a desolate hill leading to the destruction of many trees. Islamabad said will lodge a complaint with the UN against India for “eco-terrorism” for the destruction of trees.

After the India airstrikes in Pakistan, the two nuclear-armed rivals came dangerously close to a full-fledged war as Pakistan retaliated the next day by entering into Indian airspace and locking down on Indian military installations. India repelled the attack but lost a Mig-21 Bison in the dog fight that ensued.

The pilot of the downed Mig-21 Wing Commander Abhinadan Varthaman destroyed a Pakistani F-16 before crashing in Pakistan. He was taken into custody by Pakistan authorities and was released on February 1 and handed over to India.




