Delhi celebrates Holi with colours, best wishes

The gleeful 'Holi hai (Its Holi) filled the air as smiling young children and elders played Holi with complete abandon. The entire city looked joyous and intoxicated with a celebratory fervour.

People enjoyed with families and friends the festival of colours. They smeared each other with dry gulal and colours with full fervor.

Children were happy to generously use their spray guns -- something that is a no-no otherwise -- and pichkaris (water guns).

They were also seen on by-lanes of their residential areas and on top of their buildings throwing water-filled balloons and shouting "bura na maano Holi hai" (Don't mind, it is Holi).

Nobody mind the liberty friends and even casual acquaintances take with one on Holi. That is the spirit of the Hindu spring festival, also called the festival of colours.

Dressed unusually and with coloured faces and funny headgears, people were seen roaming around in groups. Some were also dancing to the beats of drums and Bollywood songs.

The busy roads of the national capital were nearly empty.

THe Delhi Police had increased the security across the city to control any incident of hooliganism during the celebrations and ensure a happy festival.

The police had requested people to obey rules for safe celebration and had put up pickets at various points to keep check traffic rules violations.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal extended his greetings on the occasion of Holi.

"A very Happy Holi", the Chief Minister tweeted, though he stayed away from the celebrations as a mark of respect to the CRPF troopers who were killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

Holi, an ancient Hindu spring festival originating from the Indian subcontinent, is celebrated predominantly in India but has also spread to other areas of Asia and parts of the Western world through the diaspora from the Indian subcontinent.

The festival of colours also signifies the victory of good over evil, the beginning of spring season, end of winter bringing in the air the fragrance of flowers and aura of warmth, gaiety and joy.

--IANS

akk/mak/oeb/pcj

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
