Amazing! Plan your vacation in these 17 countries without a visa

Whenever we have to go roaming in another country, then there governing rules prevents us from going there. This is because in every country there is a visa and there is a different rule of visa applied in all the countries. Many people, even after having time and money, will take only this time for the other country to not get into this affair.When asked if you can get an entry in a country without having a visa as an Indian, you will definitely take the name of Nepal and Bhutan. If we say that apart from this there are many countries where you can go without a visa, then your reaction will be astonishing. There can be great news for Indians, without visa you can make entries in these 17 countries. Read about it in detail.



Vanuatu

It is basically a country of South Pacific Ocean. People of India can stay here for 6 months without visa, but the entry will require a passport.

Trinidad and Tobaco

In this country of the Caribbean Sea many people of Indian origin live here and there can be 6 months without visa. Provided that your passport's validity should be valid for next 3 months.

St. Vincent and the Grenadines

This is basically the Southern Caribbean country where people of India can live without a visa for 30 days. But the validity of their passport should be left.

Senegal

This country is settled on the West Coast of Africa. Here people of India can stay for 90 days without visa, but they must have the validity of their passport.

St. Kitts and Nevis

In this country, Indians have been allowed to stay without a visa for 30 days. They should have a passport. Let us know that it is located between the Caribbean and the Atlantic Ocean.

Micronesia

This is the island country in the West Pacific Ocean. Here, people of India can stay for 30 days without visa, but a passport is necessary to go here too.

Mauritius

Indians are allowed to stay in Mauritius for up to 60 days. Your passport should be valid and it is a very popular place among Indian tourists.

Macao

Macao is also a very famous country for Indians, where they often come to India. People of India can stay for 30 days without visa but their passport must be valid.

Jamaica

In this country of the Caribbean Sea, Indians can live without any visa for 14 days.

Indonesia

People of India can live without visa for 30 days here. Here the visa entry also depends on your passport.

Haiti

Haiti is an African country where people of India can stay for 90 days without visa. Just check your passport's validity time to time.

Grenada

This is basically the Caribbean country where Indians can stay for 90 days without a visa. Just your passport must be valid.

Fiji

Here you will find most Indian people come here to roam around and get a business deal. That's because Indians can stay for 120 days without visa. Just do not have the validity of passport.

Salvador

It is a central American country on the Pacific Ocean coast. Here, Indians can stay for 30 days. But the validity of your passport should be for 6 whole months.

also read Good news for Travellers, this company is offering free world trips

also read A couple slammed on social media for shooting dangerous pics
