UP BJP MLA Yogesh Verma shot at during Holi celebrations in Lakhimpur

UP BJP MLA Yogesh Verma shot at during Holi celebrations in Uttar Pradesh's Lakhimpur district. The incident happened due to some arguments at the party office. According to the reports Verma is out of danger.

UP BJP MLA Yogesh Verma shot at during Holi celebrations in Lakhimpur: Uttar Pradesh BJP MLA Yogesh Verma was shot at on Thursday during the Holi celebrations at his party office in Lakhimpur, which is around 120 kms from state capital Lucknow. The saffron party legislator Yogesh Verma has sustained bullet wounds on his leg, news agency ANI reported. At present, he is being treated at a nearby hospital where his condition is said to be out of danger. A case has been launched, investigations into the firing incident are underway, SP Lakhimpur Kheri Poonam said. Inspector General (Lucknow range) has also rushed to the spot to take stock of the situation.

Speaking on the incident, Lakhimpur District Magistrate Shailendra Kumar Singh said that Verma was meeting some people when an argument broke out following which he was shot at by unidentified assailants. The District Magistrate has suspended the personal security officers of the BJP MLA Yogesh Verma following the incident.

S Singh, DM Lakhimpur Kheri: Lakhimpur Sadar MLA Yogesh Verma was meeting some people when an argument broke out following which he was shot at. He is out of danger. He is in a state of shock and unable to give a statement right now. Investigation underway. pic.twitter.com/xb0nDRrdFg — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 21, 2019

BJP MLA Yogesh Verma is in the state of trauma and unable to give a statement right now, DM Shailendra added. The incident comes less than a month ahead of crucial Lok Sabha elections, which will be held in all seven phases in Uttar Pradesh, which sends 80 members to Lok Sabha.

On March 20, a BJP panchayat president in Assam was shot dead by unidentified assailants in Cachar district of the state. Chief Minister Sarbanda Sonowal had directed the authorities to arrest those responsible for the killing at the earliest.

In 2017 Uttar Pradesh Assembly elections, Verma had defeated Samajwadi Party’s candidate Utkarsh Verma by a margin of 37,748 votes.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
