79-year-old woman strangulated while fighting robbers

Matunga Labour camp

crime

jewellery and cash

CCTV footage

A 79-year-old woman was allegedly strangulated by a gang of robbers in her Matunga home on Tuesday after she tried to fight them.The Shahu Nagar police have registered a robbery and a murder case against unidentified persons.According to the police, the victim Vasanta Lakshminarayanan Iyer lived alone in her ground-floor flat of a fourstoreyed building in. On Tuesday evening, she was found in an unconscious state by her maid. As the part-time help entered the house, she saw the woman lying on the floor with a dupatta wound around her neck, and the house in disarray. Alarmed, she tried to revive the old lady but had to call in a neighbour, who was responsible for taking care of the woman’s daily needs, for help.The police were informed and Iyer was rushed to a nearby hospital where she was declared dead on arrival.The post-mortem report has revealed that the cause of death was strangulation.The police suspect that the victim had tried to fend off the robbers and was killed in the process. The police suspect that more than one person was involved in the. All thewere missing from the house.“The ornaments she was wearing were also stolen. And by looking at the condition of the cupboard, it looks like the robbers also stole the cash and other valuables. We have registered a case and are scrutinising thefrom the area to trace the accused,” said a senior police officer.“She stayed alone in the house ever since her two daughters moved out after marriage. One of them stays in Vasai, the other stays in Navi Mumbai.We were informed by the maid that she was lying unconscious on the floor. We immediately rushed to see her and informed the police and other neighbours,” said a neighbour.A source told Mirror, “The woman often lent money on interest and was also involved in some small businesses to earn her livelihood. We are probing from all angles and are questioning everyone connected to her.”
