University Vice Chancellor Advises Students to Murder Classmates If They Have Conflict

Share Tweet Follow us on Facebook, Youtube, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest stories and updates daily.

The vice chancellor of Purvancal University in Uttar Pradesh, India recently urged his students to “murder” classmates they are in conflict with, instead of complaining to him. According to Reuters, numerous cases of violence have been reported in the state where the university is based.

Speaking at an event in Ghazipur in Uttar Pradesh on Tuesday (29 December), vice chancellor Raja Ram Yadav said,

“If you are a student of Purvanchal University, don’t come to me crying.”

“If you get into a fight with someone, beat up that person. If possible murder him, we will take care of things after that,” he added, as reported by Scroll.in.

#WATCH Purvanchal University Vice-Chancellor Raja Ram Yadav at a seminar in the University in Ghazipur: If you’re a student of this University, never come crying to me. If you ever get into a fight, beat them, if possible murder them, we’ll take care of it later. (29.12.18) pic.twitter.com/omFqXN55z9 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) December 30, 2018

Political leaders condemned Yadav’s statement, including Uttar Pradesh minister Sidharth Nath Singh saying Yadav had no right to make such comments, let alone remain as the vice chancellor, Ani News reported.

“What lesson does he want to give to the students by making such a statement?” asked Congress party leader Shailendra Singh, according to Hindustan Times.

Get in to a fight, commit a murder as a result and this university VC will take care of things. This is what passes for an education in some places these days. Not surprisingly the audience even applauds his assertion. https://t.co/E8tI097uzN — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) December 30, 2018

Days after being criticised, Yadav claimed the media twisted his statement, saying,

“My statement was intended to motivate students and boost their confidence,” Hindustan Times reported.

“I am firm on my stand. I will keep motivating the students to make them braver in order to deal with the odds and work hard to achieve their goals,” he added after stating his speech was presented out of context.

What are your thoughts about his controversial statement? Tell us in the comments section below!

Also read: College Student Complains About Roommate’s Farts and Snores, Gets Stabbed in Sleep

ShareTweet

Follow us on Facebook, Youtube, Twitter, and Instagram for the latest stories and updates daily.
