Elections 2019 Updates: RJD-Congress announce seat shares in Bihar, Sharad Yadav to contest on RJD symbol

Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Manoj Jha. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: A after the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) released its first list of 184 candidates — dropping the name of senior leader LK Advani — the Congress party hit out at the ruling party saying that it 'does not respect elders'. Taking to Twitter, Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala said that how will PM Narendra Modi 'who does not respect elders, honour the trust of the nation'.

Amid some of the most significant events of the day has been former cricketer Gautam Gambhir's decision to join the BJP. Besides, Rahul Gandhi's close confidante Sam Pitroda's comments — wherein he raised doubts over the Balakot airstrikes — raised a political storm. PM Narendra Modi hit out at Pitroda saying that the latter had kick-started Pakistan National Day celebration on behalf of Congress.

Meanwhile, the Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Congress announced that they get into a seat-sharing agreement for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections in the state of Bihar. While the RJD will contest on 20 seats, Congress will fight on 9 constituencies.

Elections 2019 - Key Highlights:

11:15 pm: Former Samajwadi Party Member of Parliament from Mirzapur, Bal Kumar Patel, on Friday joined the Congress party in the presence of Congress president Rahul Gandhi, Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee chief Raj Babbar, Congress general secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East) Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and Congress general secretary for Uttar Pradesh (West) Jyotiraditya Scindia in Delhi.

Former Samajwadi Party MP from Mirzapur joins Congress party in presence of Congress President Rahul Gandhi, Congress General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East) Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Congress Gen Secy for UP (West) Jyotiraditya Scindia & UP party unit chief Raj Babbar in Delhi. pic.twitter.com/IxcTHw6mwB — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 22, 2019

9:45 pm: The chairman of Telangana Pradesh Congress Committee's OBC Cell, J Chittaranjan Dass, on Friday resigned from the Congress party stating that "there is no social equality and respect for the senior members in the Congress party".

8:40 pm: Former Union Minister Agatha Sangma filed her nomination as a candidate for the National People's Party for the Tura parliamentary seat.

Meghalaya: Former Union Minister Agatha Sangma, earlier today, filed her nomination papers as a candidate of National People's Party (NPP) for the Tura parliamentary seat. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/xRxNvkQKju — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

7:30 pm: Telangana Pradesh Congress Committee president Uttam Kumar Reddy filed nomination from the Nalgonda constituency for the Lok Sabha elections. Gutha Sukender Reddy of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi is the sitting Member of Parliament from Nalgonda.

Telangana: TPCC President Uttam Kumar Reddy files nomination as MP candidate from Nalgonda constituency. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/XKvpnCGj4P — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

6:40 pm: OP Ravindranath Kumar, the son of Tamil Nadu Deputy Chief Minister O Panneerselvam, has filed his nomination from the Theni parliamentary constituency for the Lok Sabha polls.

OP Ravindranath Kumar, son of Deputy Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, O Panneerselvam files nomination from Theni parliamentary constituency.#LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/1upjQBU0cj — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

6:30 pm: YSR Congress Party chief YS Jaganmohan Reddy on Friday filed the nomination for Pulivendula Assembly Constituency for the Andhra Pradesh assembly elections.

#AndhraPradeshAssemblyElections: YSRCP Chief YS Jaganmohan Reddy files nomination for Pulivendula Assembly Constituency. pic.twitter.com/tX0GSvtU1y — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

5:40 pm: In a big boost to the NDA in southern India, Deepa Jayakumar, niece of former AIADMK supremo and Tamil Nadu chief minister, late J. Jayalalithaa, today announced that she will extend her support to the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

5 pm: Congress president Rahul Gandhi once again trained his guns at the Bharatiya Janata Party and called all 'chowkidars of BJP' thieves.

BJP ke sare Chowkidar Chor Hai.



NoMo

Arun Jaitley

Rajnath Singh

——-

——-

——- https://t.co/jRmdkYjAhg — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) March 22, 2019

4:45 pm: Uttar Pradesh Congress Committee chief Raj Babbar on Friday rejected a ticket from the Moradabad constituency and has instead asserted to the party leadership that he wants to contest from the Fatehpur Sikri Lok Sabha seat.

4:30 pm: Congress' Jitin Prasada has confirmed that he will not join BJP. "I am not going to join BJP. Talks within the party are on for seat selection. I met Jyotiraditya Scindia earlier today," he said.

4:15 pm: The Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Congress announce that they will join hands for the upcoming Lok Sabha elections. Manoj Jha, Member of Parliament from Rajya Sabha and RJD spokesperson, shared the break-up of the seat-sharing pact for the state of Bihar - RJD to contest on 20 seats, Congress on 9, Hindustani Awam Morcha on 3, Rashtriya Lok Samta Party on 5, Vikasshil Insan Party on 3 and CPI on 1 in RJD quota. He also added that Sharad Yadav will merge his Loktantrik Janata Dal with RJD after the Lok Sabha polls and contest on the RJD symbol.

Manoj Jha, RJD on seat sharing: RJD on 20, Congress on 9, HAM-3, RLSP on 5, VIP on 3 and CPI-1 in RJD quota.#LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/LlLOqxoqB9 — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

3.52 pm: Shiv Sena, on Friday, released the list of 21 candidates for Lok Sabha polls. The party has sealed a deal with BJP to contest on 23 of the 48 seats in Maharashtra.

The list is as follow:

South Mumbai: Arvind Sawant, South Central Mumbai: Rahul Shewale, North West: Gajanan Kirtikar, Thane: Rajan Vijare, Kalyan: Srikant Shinde, Raigad: Anant Gite, Ratnagiri: Vinayak Raut, Kolhapur: Sanjay Mandalik, Hatkanangale: Dhairyasheel Mane, Nashik: Hemant Godse, Shirdi: Sadashiv Lokhande, Shirur: Shivajirao Adhalrao Patil, Buldhana: Prataprao Jadhav, Amravati: Anandrao Adsul, Ramtek: Krupal Tumane, Yavatmal-Washim: Bhavana Gavali, Parbhani: Sanjay Jadhav, Sambhajinagar: Chandrakant Khaire, Mawal: Shrirang Barane, Dharashiv: Omraje Nimbalkar, Hingoli: Hemant Patil



3.51 pm: Congress' Jitin Prasada on being asked if he is going to join BJP: "There should be some basis for such a question. Why should I answer a hypothetical question?"

Congress' Jitin Prasada on being asked if he is going to join BJP: There should be some basis for such a question. Why should I answer a hypothetical question? pic.twitter.com/Dv2D0NhUve — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

3.00 pm: Randeep Surjewala, Congress denies media reports of Jitin Prasada joining BJP. There are strong speculations that Prasada is in talks with BJP leaders.

2.33 pm: Former UPA minister Jitin Prasada is on his way to the BJP HQ. According to Times Now channel, he will be joining the BJP, a move that is likely to come as a shocker for the Congress party.

2.20 pm: Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) release its list of 11 candidates for the Lok Sabha elections 2019.

Bahujan Samaj Party release its list of 11 candidates for the #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/8KcyvCT8hn — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) March 22, 2019

1.45 pm: Congress to hold a press conference at 2 pm. According to Times Now channel, the party will be announcing an 'expose' during the press conference.

1.14 pm: Nara Lokesh, Andhra Pradesh IT Minister and son of CM N Chandrababu Naidu to file nomination shortly. He will contest from Mangalagiri constituency in Amaravati.

1.13 pm: Arun Jaitley- BJP has expanded in the last decade. We were called a cadre-based party and now we are a cadre mass party.

12.50 pm: Delhi: Former Cricketer Gautam Gambhir meets Bharatiya Janata Party President Amit Shah. He joined the party in the presence of Union Ministers Arun Jaitley and Ravi Shankar Prasad today.

Delhi: Former Cricketer Gautam Gambhir meets Bharatiya Janata Party President Amit Shah. He joined the party in the presence of Union Ministers Arun Jaitley and Ravi Shankar Prasad today. pic.twitter.com/jEWTkYrwfw — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

12.40 pm: "I am joining this party(BJP) after getting influenced by PM Narendra Modi's vision. I am honoured to get the opportunity to join this platform," says Gautam Gambhir.

11.53 am: In one of the biggest recoveries before general elections 2019, Ghaziabad police have recovered 120 kg of gold worth Rs 38 crore from a car. IT dept has also been informed. Suspects are being questioned.

11.34 am: Former cricketer Gautam Gambhir is likely to join Bharatiya Janata Party(BJP) today, reports news agency ANI.

10.33 am: "If you say 300 people were killed, we all need to know that, all Indians need to know that. Then comes the global media which says nobody was killed, I look bad as an Indian citizen," Sam Pitroda, Indian Overseas Congress chief.

Sam Pitroda,Indian Overseas Congress Chief on #airstrike: If you say 300 people were killed,we all need to know that ,all Indians need to know that. Then comes the global media which says nobody was killed,I look bad as an Indian citizen. https://t.co/TVUrwR5Q0a — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

10.23 am: As per sources, Congress is likely to release the list of candidates contesting Lok Sabha elections 2019 today. All senior Congress leaders have arrived in Delhi.

10.07 pm: Bihar's opposition grand alliance to announce seat-sharing pact shortly. Sources say RJD to get 20 seats, while Congress will get 9 seats and the RLSP will get 4 seats
