Nagrota terror strike: Accused returned to Kashmir under rehabilitation programme to plot attack

With the release of 'Uri the Surgical Strike' on Friday, movie lovers were reminded of the terror attack that took place in 2016.

The movie about the September 2016 terror attack in which 19 Indian Army soldiers were killed was followed by a surgical strike to avenge the deaths of the brave jawans.

But two months after Uri, three Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) militants launched a dastardly attack in the Nagrota Army Cantonment.

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) managed to crack the case in which seven Indian soldiers were martyred. The three militants were neutralized but it took almost two years for the NIA to crack the case.

Maulana Abdul Rouf Asghar, brother of Jaish-e-Mohammad chief chief Maulana Masood Azhar, was one among the 14 accused.

It was because of two Valley- based men, Syed Munir-Ul-Hassan Qadri and Aashiq baba who made the logistical arrangements, that the attack was possible.

NIA investigations revealed Munir had crossed the Line Of Control (LoC) in the 1990s to become a militant.

He even trained with Al Badr, a proscribed terror organisation, staying mostly in Muzzafrabad, but returned to India via Nepal along with his family in 2011 as part of the chief minister's Rehabilitation Policy - a goodwill gesture initiated by the then chief minister Omar Abdullah.

In 2016, Munir received the three terrorist who caused the attack.

Another accused, Aashiq Baba who was recommended by Hurriyat, crossed over via Wagah to meet top JeM commanders in Muzzafrabad.

In August 2015, he traveled to Pakistan. To plan the Nagrota attack, he traveled to POK in May and July 2016, where he met top JEM commanders Waseem (Operational Commander of JEM), Abu Talha alias Doctor, district commander in Jammu and Qari Zarar, the launching commander of JeM for Jammu.

It was decided that any sort of infiltration would be done via the International Border (IB) in Jammu region.

An advance payment of Rs 20,000 and a Huawei phone were handed over to him.

After return from Pakistan, Ashiq met Munir. The Pakistan handlers put the duo in touch and gave them the green signal to work together.

In November, Ashiq and Munir used the Huawei phone to connect Waseem. They were informed about the three Pakistan fidayeens.

Ashiq received the GPS location from JeM operators in Pakistan. Motta Khad bridge was decided as the location for the pick up.

The arrival was fixed for 26 and 27th November, 2016 but the arrival was delayed by a day. Meanwhile, Munir and Ashiq carried out a detailed recce of Nagrota Army camp.

On 28th, Ashiq reached Motta Khad bridge located along National Highway (NH 44) near Hiranagar and waited till the three JeM fidayeens reached.

According to NIA, the code name for the meeting was discussed. Munir used his i10 car and Ashiq used his Mahindra Verito. The men arrived at 2:30 am.

The terrorists were in combat Indian army uniforms that were soaked in mud but they changed into plain clothes that were arranged for by Ashiq.

Arms, ammunition and explosives that were wrapped up in a blanket and bags of the three terrorists were loaded into the Verito car.

Soon Ashiq and Abu Hissam, alias Khalid who was one of the three JeM terrorists, did a recce of Nagrota army area, this time in Muneer's i10 car.

In the evening, some injections and a disposal syringe along with pain killer medicines were brought from a medical store.

On 28 November at 7pm, the three terrorist moved towards Nagrota camp. Muneer and Ashiq's vehicles were barely 500 metres away from the camp.

Highly trained and equipped with AK-47 rifles and explosives, the three terrorists attacked the Officers' Mess Complex of the Indian Army's 166 Medium Regiment at Nagrota in the wee hours of November 29, 2016.

The Indian Army it is said used a tracker dog named Dino to find out the that the JEM terrorists took. The dog handler found the socks of one of the neutralised terrorists and led the team back near the boundary wall of the camp and further up the main road towards the hillock using the beaten path through the bushes.

The Indian Army found that the three had used the National Highway after midnight. As investigations in Uri and Nagrota reached a near dead end, the breakthrough in Nagrota came with Muneer's arrest in May, followed by Aashiq Baba's in June.
