Can’t we all follow New Zealand PM Ardern?

Sunil Sharan is the author of three books: (i) Lockdown: India Under Siege from Corona (RosettaBooks), (ii) Modi 2.0: Beyond the Ordinary (Bloomsbury), and (iii) How I Came to Christ (Wipf and Stock). LESS ... MORE

India did not have the courage to use the words ‘Muslim’ or ‘mosque’ in its condemnation of the New Zealand terror attacks, foreign minister of Pakistan Qureshi asserts. What hypocrisy! According to reputable Pakistani media, over 20 Hindu girls in rural Sindh in Pakistan alone are abducted, raped, and converted to Islam every month. Does Qureshi or his boss Imran Khan ever decry this atrocity.

New Zealand PM Ardern has gone out of her way to reach out to the global Muslim ummah after the attacks by greeting them in their own language, donning a black dress of mourning and a hijab (so repugnant to so many Westerners), and refusing to even bestow notoriety on the assaulter by taking his name. Strangely enough, the assaulter was an Australian, and not even a New Zealander.

What did we hear after the 9/11 attacks from the world’s Muslim leaders? In these attacks, in which many Muslims perished, there was hardly an Ardern-like outcry by any global Muslim leader, political or religious. Many Muslims in fact even had the gall to denounce 9/11 as a Jewish-inspired plot. Really?! So many Jews died in 9/11, but Jews themselves killed themselves. Such phantasmagoric notions.

What about 26/11? Many Pakistanis refuse to believe, including many of whom in positions of power today, that Pakistanis had anything to do with 26/11. They claim that 26/11 was a false flag RAW operation. What utter tosh! India hasn’t descended to such levels that the Indian government murders its own citizens. The only Pakistani of note to have admitted Pakistan’s role in 26/11, Nawaz Sharif, is rotting in jail today, precisely because he told his military to stop inspiring 26/11-like attacks.

Did Qureshi & Co. decry the fact that mostly Hindus died in 26/11. Muslims must have perished too although the attackers were beleived to have let off some Muslims because of their faith. Today Sindhi Hindus are fleeing Pakistan for India for they do not want their daughters abducted, raped, and converted to Islam.

The US after 9/11 went berserk and razed two Muslim countries- Afghanistan and Iraq- to the ground. But even until today, Islamophobia in the US has not reached the level where many Muslims want to leave the country. In fact, many Muslims from all over the world, especially from Pakistan, want to enter and live in the US. Trump’s Muslim travel ban has been decried by many liberal white, Christian Americans.

Today we see people of the Islamic faith pitted across the globe against people of the Christian faith, the Jewish faith, the Hindu faith, and even the so-called calm Buddhist faith. When Muslims commit atrocities against people of other faiths, one hardly hears Ardern-like outpourings of sympathy from Muslim leaders. Instead, one hears that Islam is a religion of peace, and that the attackers have nothing to do with peaceful Islam.

The Australian attacker in New Zealand has been denounced as a white, Christian supremacist by almost everyone. No excuses have been offered for his actions by white, Christian leaders except maybe Donald Trump, who is hated for this stance of his in much of the western world. The Pakistani military trained and sent in Muslim attackers in 26/11 clearly to avenge the Godhra riots. Recordings of the attackers’ statements during the attacks and overheard by witnesses clearly attest to that.

So in one instance, we have Ardern and other western leaders condemning in the most forceful manner attackers who belong to their own community and promising to bring them to book as soon as possible, and on the other hand we have the Muslim Pakistani military sending its people to polish off Indians who had no role whatsoever in the Godhra riots. Eleven years after 26/11, the trial against the perpetrators of 26/11, which could not have happened without the acquiescence, if not the connivance, of the highest levels of the Pakistani military, remains mired in mud.

Instead we get Pulwama-like attacks from the same military on a recurring basis. And then we are asked for dossier after dossier which are promptly trashed into the bin. And then we are blamed for attacking Pakistan by funding the Pakistani Taliban, which has sworn to finish off India. Imagine the hypocrisy.

Today the world is witnessing terrorism in different shapes and forms- inspired by states, individuals, or both. In the West, white extinction anxiety has gripped its lands. So many browns and blacks and yellows have either entered these lands or want to enter these lands that white people are afraid of being outnumbered by them. In the subcontinent, Hindu extinction anxiety has gripped many Hindus. Hafiz Saeed proposed the reunification of India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh, which notion Narendra Modi promptly dismissed while he was campaigning for the 2014 general elections.

Terrorism and its players will not go away so easily. People of different religions and ethnicities have been in bloody conflict since time immemorial. This conflict is not ending anytime soon. What should end though is the hypocrisy. That people of a singular faith are perpetually the victims, and if one of their own commits a heinous act, then that is not inspired by their faith. Ardern and others like her have set a stellar example on how to behave in moments of crisis. Wouldn’t it be wonderful if their gestures were reciprocated by everyone?

For instance, by bringing the attackers of 26/11 to book.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
