Narendra Modi: 'Natural habitat of terror apologists': PM slams opposition, Congress for insulting armed forces

The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebration… https://t.co/V5LJcgELKZ — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1553232770000

Read |

Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to… https://t.co/hU6CGmsqyz — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1553232825000

Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This reprehensible st… https://t.co/fnwWqxZCig — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1553232910000

Opposition insults our forces time and again. I appeal to my fellow Indians- question Opposition leaders on their… https://t.co/g6a2cFn3QJ — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1553232957000

PM Narendra Modi slams Cong's Sam Pitroda for demeaning armed forces

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday launched a fresh offensive on rival parties over the Pulwama terror attack and the subsequent IAF strike inside Pakistan , terming the Opposition "the natural habitat of terror apologists" and accusing them of "insulting" armed forces.PM said that Congress leaders demean Indian armed forces by indulging in "Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress" but added that "in a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest!"Using the hashtag 'Janta Maaf Nahi Karegi' (people will not forgive) in a tweet, Modi attacked Sam Pitroda , who looks after Congress' overseas affairs, for reportedly saying that post the Mumbai terror attacks, India could have responded with air strikes, but "according to me that's not how you deal with world."Slamming Pitroda, PM Modi said that the "Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty" admitted what people already knew—"Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror."Training his guns at the opposition, PM Modi also shot back at senior Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav for humiliating the families of martyrs and called the opposition "the natural habitat of terror apologists.""Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This reprehensible statement by a senior leader like Ram Gopal Ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir . It humiliates the families of our martyrs."Yadav on Thursday said that the paramilitary forces were angry at the government for poor security provisions on the Jammu-Srinagar highway where the Pulwama attack took place. He had alleged that the February 14 attack was a conspiracy by the government to gain votes at the expense of soldiers' lives.PM Modi warned the opposition that their antics will not be forgotten by the people whom he urged must question the opposition leaders for their statements, meanwhile starting the #JantaMaafNahiKaregi hashtag on Twitter.
