PM Modi lashes out at Congress over Rahul Gandhi aide Sam Pitroda’s tweets ‘demeaning India’s armed forces’

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday lashed out at Congress for what he said ‘kick starting’ the Pakistan National Day celebrations for questioning Balakot anti-terror aerial strike yet again and called it a ‘shame’.

“The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame!,” Prime Minister tweeted taking cognizance of the comments from Sam Pitroda, a known Rahul Gandhi loyalist.

Opposition insults our forces time and again. I appeal to my fellow Indians- question Opposition leaders on their statements. Tell them- 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics. India stands firmly with our forces. #JantaMaafNahiKaregi https://t.co/rwpFKMMeHY — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2019

Sam Pitroda,Indian Overseas Congress Chief, has questioned Indian Air Force actions on February 26 and said just because eight terrorists) come and ‘do something’ — “you don’t jump on entire nation (Pakistan)”.

Modi further said – “Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India – we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest”.

Pitroda had tried to justify the then UPA government’s decision not to undertake any aerial strike against Pakistan after 26/11 Mumbai terror strike in 2008.

Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This reprehensible statement by a senior leader like Ram Gopal Ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir. It humiliates the families of our martyrs. https://t.co/BZyWbIyJjo — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2019

Pakistan observes its National Day on March 23 commemorating the Lahore Resolution passed by Muslim League on March 23, 1940 for formation of a new country.

Prime Minister also has taken exception to remarks by Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav.

“Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This reprehensible statement by a senior leader like Ram Gopal Ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir. It humiliates the families of our martyrs,” Mr Modi wrote in the micro blogging site.

Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest! https://t.co/Mul4LIbKb5 — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2019

Pushing the hashtag ‘#JantaMaafNahiKaregi’, Mr Modi also tweeted: “Opposition insults our forces time and again. I appeal to my fellow Indians- question Opposition leaders on their statements.

Tell them – 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics. India stands firmly with our forces”.

The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress, ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame! https://t.co/puSjTK8Y4x — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2019

Difference between Opposition and BJP is clear. They suspect our army, we are proud of our army. Their heart beats for terrorists, ours beats for the Tiranga. This election, through the power of your vote, do a surgical strike on the Congress culture. #JantaMaafNahiKaregi https://t.co/P2FOuIwupg — Chowkidar Amit Shah (@AmitShah) March 22, 2019
