‘People will not forgive Oppn’: PM after Sam Pitroda raises questions on Balakot strike

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday stepped up attack on the Congress after party leader Sam Pitroda sought more ‘facts’ related to the Indian Air Force strike at a terror camp in Pakistan’s Balakot. In a series of tweets, PM Modi lashed out at the opposition alleging it has been insulting the armed forces.

PM Modi said, “The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress, ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame!”

Pitroda, in an interview to news agency ANI, raised questions over the Balakot strike saying that international media did not agree with the claims made in India about the IAF action against terror camp in Pakistan. He also questioned the policy to launch air strike across the Line of Control. He said “you don’t jump on entire nation” if some terrorists target a place in India.

Watch: ‘Did we really killed 300 people?’: Congress’ Sam Pitroda questions Balakot Strike

Reacting to Pitroda’s comment, PM Modi said, “Opposition insults our forces time and again. I appeal to my fellow Indians- question Opposition leaders on their statements. Tell them- 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics. India stands firmly with our forces.”

“Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest,” read another tweet posted by PM Modi.

Minutes after PM Modi’s attack, Pitroda clarified his remarks stating that he was speaking in personal capacity and not on the behalf of the Congress party.

“I just said as a citizen I am entitled to know what happened. I am not talking on behalf of party, just speaking as a citizen. I have right to know, what is wrong in it,” news agency ANI quoted Pitroda as saying.

The prime minister also hit out at Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav, who on Thursday said that Pulwama terror attack was a “conspiracy” in which “soldiers were killed for votes”.

“Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This reprehensible statement by a senior leader like Ram Gopal Ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir. It humiliates the families of our martyrs,” PM Modi wrote on Twitter.

A CRPF convoy was targeted in a suicide bombing on February 14 in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama killing 40 soldiers. Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed claimed responsibility for the terror attack.

On February 26, the IAF carried a strike at a terror camp, believed to be the biggest training centre of the Jaish-e-Mohammed in Pakistan’s Balakot. The IAF later said that the mission was “successful”, which Pakistan denied.
