Jaitley slams Pitroda for questioning outcome of Balakot air strike

New Delhi [India], March 22 (ANI): Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on Friday lashed out at Congress' Sam Pitroda for questioning the outcome of air strike conducted by the Indian Air Force (IAF) in Pakistan’s Balakot.

While speaking at the press conference in New Delhi, Jaitley said, "He believes what we did was wrong. No country in the world said this, not even the OIC (Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) said this, only Pakistan was of this view. It's unfortunate that such people are ideologues of a political party."

Further slamming Pitroda, who is a Congress party's overseas chief, the Union Minister said, "If the teacher is like that then his students will also be useless."

"We will destroy the terror bases wherever it will perpetuate. Both Surgical strike and Air strike were meant to do that. We were supported by global leaders in our attempts," he added.

This statement from Jaitley came hours after Pitroda questioned the death toll in the Balakot airstrike conducted by the IAF in Pakistan in retaliation to the Pulwama terror attack.

“If they (IAF) killed 300, its ok. All I am saying is can you give me more facts and prove it,” said Pitroda in a wide-ranging interview to ANI.

The Indian Overseas Congress chief said he didn’t know much about the Pulwama terror attack.

“Don’t know much about attacks, it happens all the time. The attack happened in Mumbai also, we could have then reacted and just sent our planes but that is not the right approach. According to me, that’s not how you deal with the world,” Pitroda said.

The Congress leader argued that it was wrong to blame the entire nation (Pakistan) for the action of 10 terrorists who attacked Mumbai in November 2008.

“I don’t know much about (Pulwama) attack, it happens all the time, attack happen in Mumbai Taj hotel and Oberoi hotel. We could have reacted then and sent our planes but that is not the right approach according to me that’s not how you deal with the World. Eight people come (referring to Mumbai 26/11 attacks) and do something, you don’t jump on the entire nation,” said Sam Pitroda in an interview to ANI.

Later Pitroda clarified and told ANI, “I am talking as an individual. I am talking as a scientist. I believe in reason. I believe in logic. I believe in data. I don’t believe in emotions.”

Meanwhile, commenting on Pitroda's remarks, Prime Minister Narendra Modi also tweeted that Congress chief Rahul Gandhi’s close aide has started Pakistan National Day celebrations by “demeaning India’s armed forces”.

“The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress, ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame,” PM Modi wrote on his Twitter wall. (ANI)
