Sajjad Khan, JeM terrorist and Pulwama attack mastermind's a...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Sajjad Khan, JeM terrorist and Pulwama attack mastermind's aide, arrested

22 Mar 2019

Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist Sajjad Khan, believed to be a close aide of Pulwama attack mastermind Mudassir Ahmed Khan, was arrested by special cell of Delhi police on Thursday night.

Khan was arrested near Red Fort and sources claimed he was staying in the National capital as a "shawl trader".

He apparently moved to Delhi before the attack and has been in hiding since February 14.

In worst attack in decades, 40 soldiers were martyred

Pulwama attack

Notorious terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammed orchestrated the Pulwama attack of February 14 in which 40 CRPF soldiers were martyred.

A suicide bomber rammed his explosive-laden vehicle into the CRPF convoy, triggering a massive blast. This was the worst attack to hit the valley in decades and was widely condemned by world leaders.

Subsequently, IAF launched strikes in Pakistan and attacked JeM's camp in Balakot.

Khan knew details of Pulwama attack

Terrorist

It is believed Khan, a resident of J&K, knew about Pulwama attack. Two of his brothers were also part of JeM but were killed in encounters.

One of his brothers reportedly died in an encounter in 2018 along with Usman, the nephew of JeM founder Masood Azhar.

The encounter had taken place in Tral of South Kashmir.

Khan spoke to Mudassir via app

Fact

Khan was constantly in touch with Mudassir and another Pakistani terrorist Yasir. He reportedly contacted them using fake numbers via an app. Mudassir was the one who arranged explosives and vehicle for the heinous attack. He was killed in an encounter on March 11.

Security forces eliminated top leaders of JeM

Details

After Pulwama attack, security forces got into aggressive mode and eliminated top leaders of JeM from the valley in 100 hours.

Announcing it, Kanwal Jeet Singh Dhillon, Corps Commander of Chinar Corps, had said, "Our focus is clear on counter-terrorism operations. We are very clear that anyone who enters Kashmir Valley will not go back alive."

He also claimed recruitment in JeM has dipped.
