Rahul Gandhi's confidante Sam Pitroda insults Pulwama martyrs, says 'don't know much, it happens all the time'

Sam Pitroda raised doubts over the casualty count in IAF's Balakot air strike | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Congress president Rahul Gandhi's close confidante and chairman of Indian Overseas Congress Sam Pitroda, on Friday, questioned the death toll in the Balakot airstrikes. In an interview with news agency ANI, Pitroda sought proof from the Indian Air Force (IAF) to prove that the death toll in the Balakot air strike was 300. Shortly after the interview was made public, PM Narendra Modi took to Twitter and hit out at Pitroda calling him 'loyal courtier of Congress' who admitted that 'Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror'.

"Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest!"PM Modi said in a tweet. Pitroda was later summoned by Gandhi for his controversial remarks.

"If they (IAF) killed 300, it's ok. All I am saying is can you give me more facts and prove it," Pitroda said during the interview. He further said that the international media had a different account of the Balakot air strike and added that the Indian people deserved to know the facts of the IAF operation.

Pitroda later issued a clarification and said, "I just said as a citizen I am entitled to know what happened. I am not talking on behalf of the party, just speaking as a citizen. I have the right to know, what is wrong in it?"

Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror.



This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest! https://t.co/Mul4LIbKb5 — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2019

"I would like to know a little more because I read reports in the New York Times and other newspapers. Did we really attack? We really killed 300 people? I don't know that. As a citizen, I am entitled to know and if I ask it is my duty to ask, that doesn't mean I'm not a nationalist, That doesn't mean I am on this side or that side. We need to know the facts. If you say 300 people were killed, I need to know that. We all need to know that, people of India need to know that and then comes global media which says nobody was killed. I look bad as an Indian citizen," said Pitroda.

Sam Pitroda,Indian Overseas Congress Chief on #airstrike: If you say 300 people were killed,we all need to know that ,all Indians need to know that. Then comes the global media which says nobody was killed,I look bad as an Indian citizen. https://t.co/TVUrwR5Q0a — ANI (@ANI) March 22, 2019

Commenting on the February 14 Pulwama terror attack that resulted in the death of 40 CRPF personnel, Pitroda said that he did not know 'much about the attack'. "I don't know much about (Pulwama) attack, it happens all the time, attack happen in Mumbai Taj hotel and Oberoi hotel. We could have reacted then and sent our planes but that is not the right approach according to me that's not how you deal with the World. Eight people come (referring to Mumbai 26/11 attacks) and do something, you don't jump on the entire nation," he said.

"I am talking as an individual. I am talking as a scientist. I believe in reason. I believe in logic. I believe in data. I don't believe in emotions," he said, adding that he disagreed with the way PM Modi acted post the Pulwama attack.
