‘Shame! Indians will not forgive’: PM Narendra Modi attacks Sam Pitroda after he questions Balakot air strikes

PM Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday launched a scathing attack on Congress leader Sam Pitroda for raising doubts over the Indian air strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot, targeting the biggest terror camp of Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Without naming Pitroda, PM Modi tweeted that Congress chief Rahul Gandhi’s close aide has started Pakistan National Day celebrations by “demeaning India’s armed forces”.

“The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress, ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame,” Modi said in the tweet.

The PM also took on the Congress leader for admitting that the UPA government was not willing to take action against Pakistan post the 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks of 2008.

“Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror.This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest,” the PM tweeted.

Labelling the Opposition as terror apologists, the PM said some of the leaders have been humiliating families of the martyrs.

“Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This reprehensible statement by a senior leader like Ram Gopal Ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir. It humiliates the families of our martyrs.

“Opposition insults our forces time and again.I appeal to my fellow Indians- question Opposition leaders on their statements.Tell them- 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics. India stands firmly with our forces,” the PM stressed.

The PM’s remarks came after Pitroda, the Indian Overseas Congress chief, said he didn’t know much about the Pulwama terror attack.

“Don’t know much about attacks, it happens all the time. Attack happened in Mumbai also, we could have then reacted and just sent our planes but that is not right approach. According to me that’s not how you deal with world,” Pitroda said.

The Congress leader argued that it was wrong to blame the entire nation (Pakistan) for the action of 10 terrorists who attacked Mumbai in November 2008.

“Eight people (26/11 terrorists) come and do something, you don’t jump on entire nation (Pakistan). Naive to assume that just because some people came here and attacked, every citizen of that nation is to be blamed. I don’t believe in that way,” he said.

He further questioned the success of the Indian Air Force strikes in Balakot in view of the Pulwama terror attack, in which 40 CRPF soldiers were martyred.

“I would like to know more as I have read in New York Times &other newspapers, what did we really attack, we really killed 300 people? If you say 300 people were killed, we all need to know that, all Indians need to know that. Then comes the global media which says nobody was killed, I look bad as an Indian citizen,” he stated.

Pitroda also sought to compare PM Modi with German dictator Hitler. Reacting to a question on BJP saying PM Modi symbolises strong government, Pitroda told ANI during an interview: “India will have to decide, strong is not necessarily a good thing for democracy. Hitler was also very strong, all dictators are strong, Chinese leader is very strong, is that what India wants?”

Meanwhile, commenting on Pitroda's remarks, Union Minister Arun Jaitley said, "He believes what we did was wrong. No country in the world said this, not even the OIC (Organisation of Islamic Cooperation) said this, only Pakistan was of this view. It's unfortunate that such people are ideologues of a political party.

"Agar guru aisa ho to shishya kitna nikamma niklega, ye desh ko aaj bhugatna pad raha hai," he added.
