Sam Pitroda statement is shameful: Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi

Terming Sam Pitroda's recent comment on Balakot air strikes as "shameful", Union Minister for Minority Affairs Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi on Friday said that Congress leaders are "dead people" and are not capable of becoming good leaders.

He further said that the Indian Air Force conducted the air strike on the terrorists in Pakistan but the pain was felt across the Congress ranks.

Speaking to ANI, Naqvi said: "Sam Pitroda statement is shameful for the nation. We were shocked to see that when terrorists were attacked in Pakistan Congress leaders were howling here. They are dead people. They do not have a sense what a leader should do for the country's safety and security."

Claiming that "no action" was taken against Pakistan after the 26/11 Mumbai attack by the Congress government, the union minister said: "Now everything is clear, Congress wanted that [Prime Minister Narendra] Modi government to follow their poor international policy, which they had during their rule."

He asserted that Prime Minister Modi's policy is different when it comes to the country's safety. "It is not in his blood. He will give a befitting reply when somebody will attack when it comes to country's safety and pride."

He further opined that people of Kashi, Uttar Pradesh will again vote of Prime Minister Modi. "PM Modi had contested from Varanasi last time and had done a lot of development in Kashi. People of Kashi wanted him back in the constituency this time as well," the minister said.

Sam Pitroda, chairman of Overseas Indian Congress, in an exclusive interview to ANI, questioned the death toll in the Balakot airstrike conducted by the Indian Air Force in retaliation to the Pulwama terror attack. "If they (IAF) killed 300, its ok. All I am saying is can you give me more facts and prove it," he said.

Pitroda was referring to international news outlets reporting a contrary view on the impact of the air strike and asserted that the people of India deserved to know the facts about the operation.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
