While Pitroda questions action on terror, ED responds by action taken on terror funding

New Delhi [India], Mar 22 (ANI): On a day when Congress leader Sam Pitroda questioned Narendra Modi government's action against terror, the Enforcement Directorate (ED) gave out a list of steps taken by it to curb terror-funding.

Sources in ED said properties belonging to several terror financiers have been seized. They added at least 13 persons and their properties have been so far identified by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) in connection with the case and further probe in the matter is underway.

The sources further revealed that the ED has already zeroed in on the proceeds of terror funding and has begun freezing and seizing such assets. Ongoing investigation in the first phase has determined and quantified assets valued at over Rs 7 crores as proceeds of terror funding crimes.

The individuals identified during these investigations have been found to be providing money to all major terrorist groups like Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Hizbul Mujahideen and also to Hurriyat leaders, separatists and stone-pelters in Jammu and Kashmir.

It has been found that funds have been provided to the leaders of Valley-based terrorist groups for providing the means for misguiding, motivating and recruiting local youth to terrorist ranks including from Madrasas and mosques, the ED sources said.

In addition, operational activities of terror groups are also being financed including attacks on the security forces personnel, camps and convoys in the Valley. The money obtained through these channels is also being used by major secessionist formations, particularly All Party Hurriyat Conference (APHC).

These funds are used for maintaining top APHC leadership and also the massive propaganda machinery being used to arouse disaffection among the people of Jammu and Kashmir against the Government of India. Sources added that the funds are also being utilized to sustain the spreading of false information through media contacts, newspapers and social media.

"These are in turn used to instigate and lure misguided youth to resort to anti-India activities, violent street protests, demonstrations and stone pelting on security forces at an encounter," sources added.

Extensive use of such funds is also being made to finance institutions focused on subverting the local population including through selected mosques, madrasas and organization like recently banned Jamat-e-Islami (Jammu and Kashmir). These then form a fertile pool of vulnerable young minds, which can be poisoned and exploited as gun fodder for violent activities aimed at destabilization the State, the sources said.

In the first strike, an action has been initiated to attach a plush bungalow of Kashmiri businessman Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali in Gurugram near Delhi. Watali, who was arrested by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) on August 17 last year for his alleged role in a terror-funding case involving Lashkar-e-Taiba chief Hafiz Saeed, is presently lodged in Delhi's Tihar Jail.

It has been claimed that Watali is a major conduit for funneling terror finances in India. Incriminating documents seized by the ED clearly indicated that he has been receiving money from Hafiz Saeed, Syed Salahuddin, ISI and Pakistan High Commission at New Delhi directly. He is known to have important sources of Hawala financing operating out of Dubai also.

More details are awaited. (ANI)
