‘Did we really attack?,’ asks Sam Pitroda on Balakot air strike; Twitterati have a brutal response

File picture: All India Congress Committee's Overseas Congress Department chairman Sam Pitroda | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: As Sam Pitroda, the close confidant of Congress president Rahul Gandhi, questioned the death toll in the Balakot airstrike conducted by the Indian Air Force in Pakistan, Twitterati on Friday seemed to be in no mood to spare him.

"If they (IAF) killed 300, it's ok. All I am saying is can you give me more facts and prove it," said Pitroda in an interview to news agency ANI.

Speaking about the airstrike against the Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa region, Pitroda said: “I would like to know a little more because I read reports in the New York Times and other newspapers. Did we really attack? We really killed 300 people? I don't know that.”

“As a citizen, I am entitled to know and if I ask it is my duty to ask, that doesn't mean I'm not a nationalist, that doesn't mean I am on this side or that side. We need to know the facts. If you say 300 people were killed, I need to know that. We all need to know that, people of India need to know that and then comes global media which says nobody was killed. I look bad as an Indian citizen," said Pitroda.

Speaking about the Pulwama terror attack on February 14, Pitroda said such incidents "happen all the time" and added that the UPA government also could have deployed planes in Pakistan post-2008 Mumbai terror attack but "that is not the right approach".

The comments made by Pitroda, who is believed to be Congress’ senior ideologue, failed to go down well with most Twitter users. Here’s how they responded:

With advisors like him, why won’t @RahulGandhi become the biggest loser of the history. — Vivek Ranjan Agnihotri (@vivekagnihotri) March 22, 2019

They ruled India for 70yrs, but their disconnect with the people is appalling!! @sampitroda, this may not be the Congress "way of dealing with the world" but the people of the country are very sure about how they want to deal with the enemy nation!! #JantaMaafNahiKaregi pic.twitter.com/N5rlaabiFi — Chowkidar Priti Gandhi (@MrsGandhi) March 22, 2019

We are so grateful ! Mr Sam Pitroda ( @sampitroda ) only read NewYork Times.. had he read the Karachi Times or Lahore Times, he would have said that instead of 300 terrorists killed in #airstrike, 300 indian pilots were killed and 500 Indian fighter jets were gunned down. — Aloke Joshi (@alokejoshi) March 22, 2019

What they say-

Airtrike was an option but it was not a right way. we cant blame Pakistan for 8 people doing 26/11 Attack.



Reality-

We never thought of AirStrike because we wanted to frame RSS for 26/11 Attack. Everything was planned but one got caught alive.#JantaMaafNahiKaregi — Chowkidar Shashank Singh (@pokershash) March 22, 2019

And he's the one mentoring Rahul. Which explains a lot. — Mohan Sinha (@Mohansinha) March 22, 2019

So Sam Pitroda is the new Mani Shankar Aiyar of Congress @bothrapawan53 — Vaibhav Purohit (@purohitvaibhav) March 22, 2019

2014 it was Mani Shankar Aiyar--2019 it may be Sam Pitroda--So many BJP sleeper cells in Cong RT — RVAIDYA2000 (@rvaidya2000) March 22, 2019

Earlier today, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, using the hashtag 'Janta Maaf Nahi Karegi' (people will not forgive) in a tweet, hit out at Pitroda. "Loyal courtier of Congress' royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew -- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest!."

A number of other BJP leaders, including party chief Amit Shah, also lashed out at Pitroda for his remarks.

In response, the technocrat-turned-politician said that he was "baffled" by the Prime Minister's reaction. "All I said is, can we get more facts, that's all. I don't know why this whole confusion... In democracy, you are entitled to ask a question. It is good to have a debate, discussion, dialogue, discourse," Pitroda told news agency PTI.

The Congress leader further underlined that he was neither raising a question mark on the armed forces as being claimed by the BJP and the PM nor the government. He is just asking for more facts, said Pitroda.

Days after a suicide attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district that killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) troopers, the Indian Air Force fighter jets bombed JeM training camp near Pakistan's Balakot on February 26.

The next day, Pakistan retaliated by trying to hit Indian military installations in Jammu and Kashmir. However, the IAF successfully thwarted Pakistan's nefarious plans.
