Model Mansi Dixit Murder: Accused says she demanded money and threatened to file rape case

The accused said that he was "peace-loving" (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A new development has been made in the Mansi Dixit murder case. The accused is now alleging that the deceased had demanded money from him and had even said that she would file a false rape case against him if he did not give the money to her.

The accused has applied for a bail in relation with the case. The accused had allegedly murdered the model with a stool after she resisted his sexual advances. The kin of the accused had earlier said that he had anger management issued and used to fly into a rage very easily.

According to the Hindustan Times' report, the accused said that he was "peace-loving" and even termed the death as an "accident". The accused was identified as Syed Muzammil, a 19-year-old who had invited the deceased for a photoshoot when the alleged incident took place.

In his bail application, the accused allegedly said that the two had established a "friendly relationship" through social media. He alleged that the deceased had approached him for a portfolio shoot. During their conversation, the accused had allegedly denied having a camera and equipment, in response to which, the deceased had allegedly said that she had a fashion photography camera and was ready to come to his house for the shoot.

The accused also claimed that after Dixit came to his house with the camera, there was an argument between the two. Following the spat, the deceased allegedly started asking for money and threatened him saying that she would file a molestation case against him if he did not do the same.

The lawyer of the accused said that a person cannot handle a situation normally if he is being threatened. The accused said that after he was threatened, he pushed the deceased and asked her to "get lost". On being pushed, the deceased allegedly hit a wooden stool and lost consciousness. Scared, the accused allegedly assumed that Dixit was dead and packed her in a bag. The decision on the bail is likely to be announced on April 3.


