Indian PM Modi Capable of Any “Misadventure” to Win Elections - Pakistani PM

Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party has made terrorism one of the strong planks on which it is hoping to win the upcoming general elections, polling for which will start on 11 April and the declaration of results expected by 23 March.

On Friday, opposition leader Sam Pitroda started a controversy by saying "Incidents like Pulwama happen all the time, Pakistani cannot be blamed for that," to which Prime Minister Narendra Modi fired back by describing the opposition Congress party as "terror apologists."

"Loyal courtier of Congress' royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest!" Prime Minister Narendra Modi said while criticising the Congress party for its alleged inaction on terror during its term.

Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror.



This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest! https://t.co/Mul4LIbKb5 — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 22, 2019

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley, another senior BJP leader, also argued that "there is a distinction between the non-state actors and state actors in Pakistan."

"Non-state actors are an extended limb of the state actors in Pakistan," Arun Jaitley was quoted by the Indian media as saying.

Unfortunate such people are ideologues of a political party: @arunjaitley on Sam Pitroda’s remark



For more updates: https://t.co/xpbkMzTmKt pic.twitter.com/JlvSJMz6nd — Hindustan Times (@htTweets) March 22, 2019

The Indian government's policy was to "fight terrorists when they come to the country […] Now, we go and strike at the point of origin of terror," Jaitley said, adding that this approach of the Indian government has received support from the international community.

It's a very unfortunate statement for India: Union Minister @arunjaitley on Indian Overseas Congress Chief Sam Pitroda remarks on Pulwama attack martyrs. | #CongPakCleanChit pic.twitter.com/dy7YywK1d1 — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) March 22, 2019

Tensions between Indian and Pakistan escalated on 14 February when an explosive-laden car rammed into a security convoy on a highway in Pulwama of Jammu and Kashmir, killing 40 soldiers. Subsequently, on 26 February, India launched an airstrike inside Pakistani territory destroying a terror camp in Balakot — a claim which Pakistan ardently denies. Both sides have kept their forces on high alert with aerial exchanges and cross-border firing being reported sporadically.
