Govt bans JKLF for fomenting terror in J&K

The outfit had given up the use of gun in 1994 but continued its separatist activities. (Photo: PTI)

New Delhi: The central government on Friday banned the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF), saying the outfit led by former militant leader Yasin Malik is actively engaged in inciting secessionism and illegal funnelling of funds for fomenting terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir.

The government declared the outfit as “an unlawful association under Section 3(1) of the Unlawful Prevention Act 1967”, Union Home Secretary Rajiv Gauba told reporters here.

The outfit, which had initiated a militant movement in Kashmir in 1988 and was involved in numerous acts of terror, had given up the use of gun in 1994 but continued its separatist activities.

Gauba noted that JKLF was involved in the killing of Kashmiri Pandits, which resulted in their exodus from the valley in 1990.

The outfit also was involved in kidnapping of Rubaiya Sayeed, daughter of then Union Home Minister Mufti Mohammad Sayeed in December 1989, as well as the killing of four IAF personnel besides several other acts of terror, he said.

At least 37 FIRs have been registered by the Jammu and Kashmir Police against JKLF, two cases, including the case of murder of IAF personnel, were registered by CBI. The NIA has also registered a case, which is under investigation, the Home Secretary said.

"Government is committed to relentlessly pursuing the policy of curbing the activities of secessionist organisations which are a threat to the unity and integrity of the country. The NIA and ED are taking strong steps against these organisations," he said.

"The JKLF has many serious cases registered against it,” he said, adding the action has been taken in accordance with “the policy of zero tolerance against terrorism followed by the central government."

Gauba said the JKLF had spearheaded the separatist ideology in the Valley and has been at the forefront of separatist activities and violence since 1988.

He said that the murders of Kashmiri Pandits by the JKLF in 1989 had triggered their exodus from the Valley.

"Yasin Malik was the mastermind behind the purging of Kashmiri Pandits from the Kashmir valley and is responsible for their genocide," he said while reading out the statement.

"This organisation, alongside, is also responsible for illegal funnelling of funds for fomenting terrorism. JKLF is actively involved in raising of funds and its distribution to Hurriyat cadres and stone-pelters to fuel unrest in the Kashmir Valley as well as for subversive activities," he added.

Gauba stated that the JKLF has been "actively and continuously encouraging, feelings of enmity and hatred against the lawfully established government as well as armed rebellion."

"It is evident from these that JKLF continues to be actively engaged in supporting and inciting secessionism and terrorism including terror financing," Gauba said.

He further stated that the government will continue reviewing the process of withdrawing security of separatist leaders.

Malik, who was detained on February 22, was lodged at Kothibagh police station. He was booked under the Public Safety Act (PSA).

In the aftermath of the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district, which claimed lives of 40 CRPF soldiers on February 14, the Jammu and Kashmir government withdrew the security cover of several separatists including Malik, Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Shabir Shah and Saleem Geelani.
