Livelihood issues will determine outcome of election: Sitaram Yechury

Barring the super rich, there is not one section that has not been adversely impacted in the past five years.

After the recent snub by the Congress, the Left Front has been forced to go it alone in West Bengal. Communist Party of India (Marxist) general secretary Sitaram Yechury, who had pitched a “no-contest” proposal, speaks on the Opposition’s political strategy, and the electoral prospects of the Left Front in the upcoming polls.

So close to the elections, the Opposition still seems to be fumbling to build a cohesive narrative against the Narendra Modi-led government. Why is this so?

That is not true. The narrative centres around the peoples’ livelihood issues that cut across all barriers. Barring the super rich, there is not one section that has not been adversely impacted in the past five years. The livelihood level has fallen to dismal levels. That is the major issue and the narrative. There are efforts to try and divert the narrative through jingoistic nationalism by very unfortunate and reckless politicisation of India’s united fight against terror, by sharpening communal polarisation, by creating conflict situations over emotive issues.

All these efforts will continue to be made and may be intensified. The basic narrative that the Opposition has been working [on] is essentially livelihood issues and that is going to determine the outcome of this election.

Will the Pulwama attack, and the Balakot air strikes that followed it, change the course of this election?

They want to use it to change the narrative in their favour. That is why very aggressive politicisation was started by the Prime Minister himself, followed by the BJP president and Union Cabinet Ministers — each giving bizzare figures of casualties [in Balakot], contradicting each other from zero to 450 dead. We have the Union Home Minister talking in terms of cell phones and therefore the number of people [at the site of the air strike].

Nobody in the Opposition has asked for proof. All we said was that we hail the Air Force for choosing the targets and successfully hitting them. Now, what is the consequence of it? Like the Air chief himself said, it is for the government to answer. Instead of answering, there is a counter-attack on the Opposition saying that we are questioning the armed forces. This is utter rubbish.

All we are saying is that you are trying to capitalise on this. The government said the surgical strikes post the Uri incident had put an end to terrorist strikes, that didn’t happen — terrorist attacks continued, leading up to Pulwama incident. Now, after Balakot, it was said that this is the end of terrorist attacks. That is not true. More than a dozen of our security personnel were martyred, you had the bomb blast in Jammu. These are legitimate questions that people are asking. Their [BJP’s] attempt to exploit the situation in their favour is not succeeding the way they expected. Because the Indian voter is clear on one thing: in the fight against terrorism, there is no Opposition or ruling party. Terrorism is the enemy of India as a nation. To try and divide Indian people is exactly what the terrorist wants. And it is precisely this trap that the government and BJP are falling into.

In West Bengal, the Congress has snubbed your efforts to build an alliance. How will this impact the Left Front?

In West Bengal, it was never an alliance. It was an effort to try to achieve our stated objective, to defeat the BJP and Trinamool Congress. For that, we said that we will work for maximisation of pooling of anti-BJP and anti-Trinamool votes. As part of this narrative, that all those who are willing to, achieve a similar objective, we are willing to go along with them in the interest of the people of Bengal.

To clarify our intentions, we had unilaterally offered that [in] sitting seats of non-BJP and non-Trinamool, [the Congress and Left] should not contest each other. Now, they have gone ahead and declared their seats which include our sitting seats. We have refrained from doing so, so far. Because, our appeal to people is that we are sincere here and it is they who are betraying the cause. The seats that the Congress wants to contest are the seats they polled 2-7% votes in the last Lok Sabha election. Anyway, the question was not the quantum of seats, the question was in each seat who is the one who can best achieve this objective of pooling of anti-BJP and anti-Trinamool votes.

How will it impact the electoral outcome?

Let’s see, it is up to them [Congress] to answer. The fact that agreement on pooling of votes to defeat both [BJP and Trinamool], if that had come about then there would have been greater confidence among the voters. There was no question of alliance or front.

Would you blame Congress and its ‘big brother’ attitude for squandering Opposition bonhomie, not only in West Bengal, but across India?

I am not the one to blame anyone. They will have their reasons and their perspective. My concern is only for the general interest of people of our country and Bengal in particular. For that, we set out a road map. Every party has to decide what their priorities are.

We have decided our priorities, one: defeat BJP and its alliance; two: strengthen the Left so that the pressure to change the policy direction in favour of people can be mounted; and three: to ensure that an alternate secular government comes to power. Elections and politics is not arithmetic. People decide on the basis of their own perception, on their experience of the past five years. You can’t merely add the vote share percentages. In politics, two plus two could be 22 or zero.

Are you saying that Congress does not have its priorities right?

It’s up to them to answer, I can’t comment on that.

CPI(M) is staring at a single digit in this election and is looking to stitch alliances wherever possible?

By the time I became the general secretary of the party we already had a single-digit presence in the Lok Sabha. Between 2004 to 2014 was our fall. Now, what we are saying is that [we should] maximise our presence to influence the policy direction.

Today, if every single party is talking about the agrarian crisis or unemployment it is because of struggles led by us. We are influencing the agenda through peoples’ movements but that has to reflect in legislative action and for that our presence has to be strengthened. It’s nowhere in the country that we are desperately looking for someone to latch on to. We will be fighting 70-odd seats on our own; except Tamil Nadu, where we have an alliance.
