Did London tea shop Chaiiwala use Wg Cdr Abhinandan’s photo on its signboard? Here’s the truth

Chaiiwala, London

London: Social media is abuzz with a lot of information and misinformation about Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman who became a household name after shooting down PAF’s F-16 and his subsequent capture and release by Pakistan.

After his return to India Abhinandan received a hero’s welcome. Soon multiple fake accounts bearing his name started appearing on the social media which forced the IAF to issue a clarification saying that the Wing Commander is not on any social media platforms.

Currently, a photo is going viral on social media in which the photo of the IAF pilot can be seen on the signboard of a teashop in London’s Walthamstow called 'Chaiiwala'.

The viral post claims that a fan of PM Narendra Modi named his coffee shop ‘Chaiiwala’ and has placed a picture of Wing Commander Abhinandan on the signboard.

The image became viral on Facebook and Twitter and lots of pro-right-wing accounts shared it on their pages.

Times Now decided to investigate the story and found that the picture was fake and the teashop had never placed the picture of IAF pilot on the signboard.

The popularity of Abhinandan is such that even Pakistanis are cashing in on the IAF’s pilot popularity. A tea seller in Pakistan to attract customers placed a poster of the Wing Commander in front of his stall with a message in Urdu saying “Aisi Chai Jo Dushman Ko Bhi Dost Banaye”.

The way #IAF Wing Commander conducted himself in captivity, he has become a global icon for Indians !



Craze of wing commander #Abhinandan in UK. *‘chaiiwala’,* Walthamstow, London, UK

Photo courtesy Saurav Kumar . pic.twitter.com/x7fCn7R4Um — sanataniamericanhindu (@sanataniameric1) March 6, 2019

The picture on the poster is a screenshot from a video showing the Wing Commander sipping tea while being in Pakistan’s custody. In the video, Abhinandan can be seen holding a cup of tea in his hands and answering questions asked by a Pakistani officer.

During the questioning, the Pakistani captain asks Abhinandan about the tea to which the captured pilot says, “The tea is fantastic.”

Abhinandan’s exemplary courage in the face of the enemy received widespread praise from all quarters.

Abhinandan was captured from Horra'n village in Bhimber district of Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) after his jet was shot down by Pakistani F-16 during a dogfight on February 27. Before that, the IAF pilot who was flying MiG 21 Bison successfully managed to shoot down a PAF jet. As per the media reports, after his landing, Abhinandan tried to swallow documents and maps of strategic importance before being caught and beaten up by an irate mob. He was later handed over to the Pakistani Army who took him to Rawalpindi.

The pictures and videos of his capture were shared on social media platforms. He was later released two days after being held in captivity when PM Imran Khan announced in the parliament that he will be handed over to India as a “peace gesture”. The tension between India and Pakistan escalated after 40 CRPF personnel were killed in suicide bombing in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama. Later, Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohamed claimed responsibility for the attack.

In response to this ghastly attack, the IAF carried out pre-emptive precision airstrikes on JeM terror camps in Pakistan’s Balakot in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa region.
