NUJI, JAA condemn attack on Guwahati journalist

GUWAHATI: National Union of Journalists India,( NUJI ) and Journalists Association of Assam (JAA) vehemently condemned the brutal attack on Guwahati city based TV journalist Chakrapani Parasar and demanded exemplary punishment of the culprits involved in the crime.

In a press release Bhupen Goswami, National vice president NUJI, Dhirendra Nath Chakravarty, President JAA and Dalim Phukan, General Secretary JAA , expressed serious concern over the rise of crime against journalist in the state and demanded the government to introduce the Journalist Protection Act in the state.

The journalist was attacked by sharp weapons by four criminals at Ganeshguri area in the city at around 10 pm on Thursday. Police have arrested all the four accused including the owner of a restaurant in the locality.

The injured scribe was rushed to GNRC Hospital in the city where he is undergoing treatment

It may be mentioned here that JAA has been fighting with the government for introducing the Journalist Protection Act which will ensure the safety and security of the scribes. In this regard, JAA has already submitted memorandum to the Governor of Assam on January 31 last.

The rising attack on scribes is a matter of serious concern where the government remained as a mute spectator added the press release. The journalist organisation demanded the government to bear the medical treatment cost of Chakrapani Parashar who is battling for life in the hospital.

The journalists Association of Assam JAA,has presented a memorandum to Prime Minister of India with Chief Minister of Assam demanding a comprehensive Journalist Protection Act for journalists’ protection. There is need for a comprehensive Act with clear provisions of registering complaints in police stations on intimidation, attack or torture of journalists,” JAA demanded immediate enactment of a Journalist Protection Act.

They also demanded that investigation of the attacks on their fellow colleagues should be carried out by senior police officers equal to the SP or ACP rank and the culprits must sternly be punished. JAA and NUJI has requested all journalists and literary persons to support the respective demands.
