Sam Pitroda's remark reflects true nature of Congress, says Smriti Irani; slams Rahul Gandhi over his silence

Union Textiles Minister Smriti Irani | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Hours after Indian Overseas Congress chief Sam Pitroda questioned the number of the death toll in Balakot airstrikes and said that attacks like 26/11 happen all the time, BJP leader and Cabinet minister Smriti Irani said that Pitroda reflects the true nature of the Congress party.

In an interview to ANI earlier today, Pitroda had said, "If they (IAF) killed 300 (terrorists), it's ok. All I am saying is can you give me more facts and prove it?"

He also said that international news outlets presented an alternate view of the impact of the air strike and that the people of the country deserved to know the facts about the Balakot operation.

Irani also slammed the Congress for not reprimanding Pitroda and said even after his distasteful statement not a single tweet came from the party president Rahul Gandhi.

Irani is up against the Congress president from Amethi in the upcoming Lok Sabha elections.

"I would like to know a little more because I read reports in the New York Times and other newspapers. Did we really attack? We really killed 300 people? I don't know that. As a citizen, I am entitled to know and if I ask it is my duty to ask, that doesn't mean I'm not a nationalist, That doesn't mean I am on this side or that side. We need to know the facts. If you say 300 people were killed, I need to know that. We all need to know that, people of India need to know that and then comes global media which says nobody was killed. I look bad as an Indian citizen," ANI quoted Pitroda as saying.

The Indian Overseas Congress chief had also said that he didn't know much about the Pulwama terror attack.

Reacting to his remarks, Prime Minister Narendra Modi slammed Pitroda and tweeted that he "kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress".

In a string of tweets, the PM said, "Loyal courtier of Congress' royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew- Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India- we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest!"

He also slammed the Congress of insulting the forces and appealed Indians to question opposition leaders’ statements.

“Tell them- 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics. India stands firmly with our forces. #JantaMaafNahiKaregi" PM Modi tweeted.

Calling Pitroda’s comment a political shocker Irani also took a swipe at the Guru-Chela duo and called out Rahul Gandhi for calling Army Chief a “gunda”. She also lashed out at the Congress president for saying Rs 30,000 could be given to IAF pilots if they die in plane crash.

Last month, addressing a press conference in New Delhi on Rafale issue, Gandhi had said that Rs 30,000 given to Anil Ambani's Reliance Defence in Rafale deal could have been given to pilots if they died in a plane crash.
