Pawan Kalyan slams K Chandrasekhar Rao’s ‘proxy politics’

Bhimavaram: Jana Sena chief K. Pawan Kalyan on Friday lashed out at YSR Congress president Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy stating that the latter was not bothered when his own uncle Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy was brutally murdered in Pulivendula.

Mr Kalyan warned TRS president and TS Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao against interfering in AP affairs. He asked that how Mr Rao could play “proxy politics” that when the state was divided and people of both states living happily.

While advising Mr Rao to set up his party in AP, Mr Kalyan dared him to field a candidate against him in Bhimavaram. He was addressing a public meeting after filing his nomination papers from the Bhimavaram constituency, his second after Gajuwaka.

Mr Kalyan asked that when Mr Jagan Mohan Reddy had failed to take care of his own uncle, how would he would take care for the people.

Stating that the murder had taken place in Vivekananda Reddy’s house and there were no blood strains and fingerprints, he questioned Mr Jagan Mohan Reddy for not talking about the murder that took place in his house.

Alleging that the YSRC boss was colluding with the TRS leaders who had hatred for the people of Andhra Pradesh, Mr Kalyan said he was surprised how Mr Jagan Mohan Reddy could join hands with the TRS leaders who had masterminded violence and hurled stones at him in Warangal during the statehood agitation.

Maintaining that he had entered politics not to make money, the Jana Sena boss said his party would form government in AP after the elections and would make efforts to change the political system in the state as desired by the youth.

While criticising AP Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu and Mr Jagan Mohan Reddy for ignoring the people for their selfish political ends, he advised Mr Naidu to take voluntary retirement from politics in a dignified way in view of his age.

He promised the people of Bhimavaram that a water pipeline from Vijjeswaram to the city to supply drinking water from Godavari river would be laid within six months after he elected as MLA.

Urging the people of Bhimavaram to give him a chance so that he would develop the town to international standards, he promised unveiling a 100-foot statue of freedom fighter Alluri Sitharama Raju. Maintaining that the sitting MLA of TD G. Srinivas — Mr Srinivas is the former MLA and YSRC candidate and the sitting MLA is P. Anjaneyulu — did nothing for Bhimavaram, he assured that he would resolve the drinking water problem in the segment.
