Did PM Modi greet Pakistan on its national day? Congress demands PMO's confirmation

New Delhi:

After Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s claim that he received a message from his Indian counterpart on Pakistan National Day, the Congress on Friday asked the prime minister’s office (PMO) to confirm if Narendra Modi has exchanged greetings with his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan on the eve of their National Day.

“I would hope the @PMOIndia clarifies that what Imran Khan has tweeted is the correct version of greetings exchanged or whether if they have been exchanged at all, especially after the function was boycotted in India by the govt. The nation would want to know...,” Congress spokesperson Priyanka Chaturvedi said on Twitter.

Earlier in the day, Imran Khan had tweeted that he received a message from Modi in which the latter extended "greetings & best wishes to the people of Pakistan on the National Day of Pakistan".

"It is time that (the people) of Sub-continent work together for a democratic, peaceful, progressive & prosperous region, in an atmosphere free of terror and violence," PM Modi said in the message, according to a tweet by the Pakistani prime minister.

Khan also said that that it was time to begin "comprehensive dialogue with India" to resolve bilateral issues, including that of Kashmir. "I welcome PM Modi's message to our people. As we celebrate Pakistan Day I believe it is time to begin a comprehensive dialogue with India to address & resolve all issues, esp the central issue of Kashmir, & forge a new relationship based on peace & prosperity for all our people," he said.

The tweet from the Pakistani prime minister came hours after India boycotted a reception at the Pakistan High Commission in Delhi to mark Pakistan's National Day. India was against the Pakistan High Commission's move to invite separatists for the event. Subsequently, the External Affairs Ministry said Indian representative will not attend any events in Islamabad.

This was also the first friendly gesutre by PM Modi since the February 14 Pulwama attack following which the nuclear-armed neighbours came to the brink of war. Over 40 CRPF personnel were killed after a Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists rammed an explosive laden truck into their convoy in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama district.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
