Terror financers: Assets of accused seized, a/cs frozen

The central government cracked its whip on the 13 people booked in connection with terror funding by the National Investigation Agency (NIA) on Friday. The Enforcement Directorate (ED) has decided to freeze the bank accounts and seize the properties of all these terror funders. It has been revealed that these funds were used to execute the Pulwama attack.

"The ED has zeroed in in proceeds of such crime and begun action to freeze and seize such assets. The ongoing investigation, in the first phase, has determined and quantified assets valued at over Rs 7 crore as proceeds of terror funding crimes,"said senior IPS officer.

Individuals identified during these investigation have been found to be providing money to all major terrorist groups such as Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and Hizbul Mujahideen and also Hurriyat leaders, separatists and stone-pelters in Jammu and Kashmir.

"The funds were sent to the Valley-based terrorist groups tp provide them the means for misguiding , motivating and recruiting local youth, including from Madrasas and mosques financed from such funds," the officer said.

Further, operational activities of terror groups are also being financed, including attacks on security forces personnel, camps and convoys.

The money obtained through these channels is also being used by major secessionists formation, particularly All party Hurriyat Conference. These funds are used to maintain the top Hurriyat leadership and also the massive propaganda machinery being used to arouse disaffection among the people of Jammu and Kashmir against the government of India.

It is also being utilised to sustain the spreading of false information through media contact, newspapers and social media. There are in turn used to instigate and lure misguided youth to resort to anti-India activities, violent street protests, demonstrations and stone pelting on security forces at encounter sites for formating further violence.

Extensive use of such funds is also being made to finance institutions focused on subverting the local population including through selected mosques, madrasas and organisation like recently banned Jamat -e Islami. These then form a fertile pool of vulnerable young minds, which can be poisoned and exploited as gun fodder fro violent activities aimed at destabilization of the sates.

In the frist strike, action has been initiated to attach plush bungalow of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali in Gurugram, near Delhi. Watali is presently lodged in Tihar jail. Watali is a major conduit for funneling terror finances in India. Incriminating documents seized by ED clearly indicate that he has been receiving money Hafiz Saeed, Syed Salahuddin, ISI and Pakistan High Commission at New Delhi directly.

"He is known to have sources of Hawala operating out of Dubai also," said the officer adding that more attachments are in process.
