Modi slams Cong as Sam does a Sidhu on Pulwama : The Tribune India

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 22

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today slammed the Congress and Samajwadi Party after their leaders questioned the Indian response to February 14 Pulwama terror attack and said people will never forgive the outfits that heap “insults on the armed forces again and again”.

PM Modi was responding to two statements — one made by Indian Overseas Congress chairperson Sam Pitroda and the other by SP leader Ram Gopal Yadav. Pitroda, like Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu, in an interview today said an entire nation couldn’t be blamed for the action of few terrorists and “sending planes to attack in another country is not the right approach”. Sidhu had earlier said Pakistan as a country could not be blamed for the actions of few terrorists.

Recalling the Mumbai attacks, Pitroda said: “Eight people come and do something, you don’t jump on entire nation (read Pakistan). It’s naive to assume that just because some people came here and attacked, every citizen of that nation is to be blamed. I don’t believe in that way.”

While the Congress distanced itself from the remarks, with party spokesperson Randeep Surjewala saying: “The Congress has nothing to do with the personal opinion of one individual. The fact is when the watchman is caught stealing, he uses anything he gets to divert national attention.

The PM earlier attacked Pitroda on Twitter, saying: “Loyal courtier of Congress’ royal dynasty admits what the nation already knew — Congress was unwilling to respond to forces of terror. This is a New India — we will answer terrorists in a language they understand and with interest!

“Opposition insults our forces time and again. I appeal to my fellow Indians to question Opposition leaders on their statements. Tell them — 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics. India stands firmly with our Forces. #JantaMaafNahiKaregi.” Reacting to Yadav’s comment that Pulwama attack was “stage-managed”, PM said: “The Opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. This statement by a senior leader like Ram Gopal-ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir.”

‘Attacks happen all the time’

These (attacks) happen all the time. Attack happened in Mumbai also and we could have then reacted and just sent our planes but that is not right approach. That’s not how you deal with world.” — Sam Pitroda, Cong leader

‘Demeaning armed forces’

The most trusted adviser and guide of the Congress president has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress, ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame!” — Narendra Modi, PM
