A part of success of Amitabh Bachchan and Govinda’s careers should go to Kader Khan, says Pahlaj Nihalani

Pahlaj Nihalani on Kader Khan's death | Photo Credit: Instagram

The actor, who was known for his flawless acting prowess and comic timing, Kader Khan, passed away on Tuesday. He was 81 and breathed his last at a hospital in Toronto, Canada after prolonged illness. His ardent fans from across the world and B-town celebs alike, are shocked and saddened with the demise.

Producer Pahlaj Nihalani, who worked closely with Kader in films such as Aankhen (1993) and Andaz (1994), expressed his regret of losing the veteran actor and acknowledged his contribution to Hindi films.

Nihalani told news agency IANS, “Meeting him was always like running into an embodiment of the Hindi film industry. He could do anything, and he did everything. It's a pity his health began to fail in the last 10 years. Kader bhai had so much more to give.”

“I don’t know of any talent in Bollywood who was as in-demand as Kader Saab. He used to be writing and acting in five to six films at the same time in the 1970s, 80s, and 90s. He was so busy that he would dole out dates in hours,” said the filmmaker.

Nihalani was deeply inspired by the veteran actor and said that if given an opportunity, he would have worked with Kader in several other films.

“For Aankhen, I wanted him in a double role. He pleaded off. But I insisted. I told him to just give me four hours for one day and then I’d manage. My trick was to get him on board. Once he was signed he’d have no choice, but to give me more dates. And that’s what happened.”

“A part of the success of Amitabh Bachchan and Govinda must go to Kader bhai for his writing. He used to drop in at my restaurant, Nagina, on Grant Road (Mumbai) before his shooting in that locality,” Nihalani said further.

Govinda, who worked with Kader in films such as Coolie No. 1 (1995), Hero No. 1 (1997), Aunty No. 1 (1998), Aankhen (1993), Dulhe Raja (1998), Joru Ka Ghulam (2000), Ankhiyon Se Goli Maare (2002) and Waah Tera Kya Kehna (2002), also reacted to the sad demise of the legend. The actor posted a photo with Kader from his film Dulhe Raja on Instagram and wrote, “RIP Kader Khan Saab. He was not just my "ustaad" but a father figure to me, his midas touch and his aura made every actor he worked with a superstar. The entire film industry and my family deeply mourns this loss and we cannot express the sorrow in words. I pray to God that may his soul rest in peace.”

Several other Bollywood celebrities put out posts on social media mourning the loss of the legendary actor. Take a look...

#KaderKhan Saab was one of the finest actors of our country. It was a joy and a learning experience to be on the sets with him. His improvisational skills were phenomenal. His humour was eternal and original. He was a wonderful writer. We will miss him & his brilliance. pic.twitter.com/m9z1yix9HB — Anupam Kher (@AnupamPKher) January 1, 2019

T 3045 - Kadar Khan passes away .. sad depressing news .. my prayers and condolences .. a brilliant stage artist a most compassionate and accomplished talent on film .. a writer of eminence ; in most of my very successful films .. a delightful company .. and a mathematician !! pic.twitter.com/l7pdv0Wdu1 — Amitabh Bachchan (@SrBachchan) January 1, 2019

Sad to hear the demise of the Versatile Writer,Actor,Comedian Kader Khan.He made us laugh and cry at the same time.He entertained us with his punchful dialogues.God bless his https://t.co/HSrp7MqQMh Sir pic.twitter.com/N8a6HVSlZc — Madhur Bhandarkar (@imbhandarkar) January 1, 2019

An actor and a writer who defined a generation.. You’ve left a void in the industry that cannot be filled..RIP #KaderKhan.. My heartfelt prayers to his family — Arjun Kapoor (@arjunk26) January 1, 2019

Kader had developed Progressive Supra-nuclear Palsy, a degenerative disease that causes dementia and difficulty in walking. Following breathing issues, he was transferred from a regular ventilator to a BiPAP ventilator.

Among Kader’s most loved films were Coolie No. 1, Aunty No. 1, Haseena Maan Jayegi and Aankhen.
