Should BBC be a Biased Broadcasting Corporation when reporting on India?

In its daily roundup on the election scene in the world’s most populous democracy called India, the 97-year-old British Broadcasting Corporation has shown not just its age but its bias. Just click online on the anonymous BBC.com article, headlined “The Congress and RJD announce alliance” and carried on the evening of March 22, 2019. Here is a sample of the reportage, if it can be called that:

“Prime Minister Narendra Modi has launched a Twitter offensive against opposition leaders and those associated with their parties, accusing them of “insulting” the armed forces. He appears to have picked up several videos and some speeches made by various leaders, including Sam Pitroda, who is very close to the Congress Party. Mr Pitroda, who is credited with being the father of the Indian telecom revolution, had objected to “vilifying all Pakistanis” over the Kashmir suicide attempt that saw a fresh heightening of tensions between India and Pakistan.”

Perhaps the BBC was reporting all this for a non-Indian readership. Any one in India who switched on the TV and tuned in to any Indian news-channel on the morning of Friday, March 22, would have realized the ludicrousness of the BBC comment that “Mr Modi appears to have picked up several videos and some speeches made by various leaders, including Sam Pitroda”.

There was no need for Mr Modi to pick up any video of Mr Pitroda’s speech. Every Indian news-channel worth the name was highlighting the gratuitous comments made by Mr Pitroda in his interview to ANI.

Every Indian government (including the Congress-led UPA coalition which was ruling India when the cross-border 26/11 terrorist strike on Mumbai took place in the last week of November 2008) has, over the last decade, submitted meticulous dossiers linking Pakistan’s Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) agency with the attack by nine AK-47-armed Pakistanis who killed 166 Mumbaikars and maimed 300.

Mr Pitroda revealed both his age and lack on interest in national security by not mentioning in his interview to ANI the support given to anti-India Lashkar-e-Toiba terrorists by the Pakistani deep state (ISI) even though he was serving as Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s Adviser on the National Information Infrastructure and Innovations at the time 26/11 occurred. Apart from these dossiers submitted by the Manmohan Singh government and of which Mr Pitroda seems blisfully unaware, the ISI involvement in 26/11 is also detailed in the video-recorded confession the double agent David Headley gave to the CIA about how he had carried out the reconnaissance weeks before November 26, 2008.

All of which was blissfully ignored by Mr Pitroda when he said, “Eight people (26/11 terrorists) come and do something, you don’t jump on entire nation (Pakistan). Naive to assume that just because some people came and attacked, every citizen of that nation (Pakistan) is to be blamed. I don’t believe in that way.”

How come the naive Pitroda did not realize that it would have been impossible for eight LeT terrorists to carry out such an attack without the planning and involvement of sections in the ISI in a country where the army calls the shots and where the politicians look the other way.

Ignorance is bliss but only when the likes of Sam Pitroda do not hold forth on national security while giving interviews on 26/11 and the latest February 14, 2019, terrorist attack at Pulwama

However, the same latitude for blissful ignorance cannot be extended to the anonymous BBC correspondent(s) who reported on the Congress-RJD alliance and the Pitroda comments. The BBC downplayed the fact that Pitroda is currently the chief of the Indian Overseas Congress, in which capacity he had organized Rahul Gandhi’s interactions with students in Berkely (California) and in England and elsewhere. Mr Pitroda has been a part of the Congress establishment right from the mid-1980s when Rahul Gandhi’s father was the Prime Minister of India. That was the era when Rajiv Gandhi entrusted Pitroda with launching technology missions in India.

Mr Modi did not, therefore, have to pick up Mr Pitroda’s comments. The reason why the comments were highlighted on the Indian news-channels was because the 76-year-old Pitroda is regarded as a mentor (but hopefully not on national security!) to the 49-year-old Congress president Rahul Gandhi

The BBC’s inherent bias can be seen by the fact that terrorist strikes on people in India are described as “suicide attacks”. Maybe suicide attacks become terrorist strikes for the BBC only when the targets are British or are living in the United Kingdom.

Again, the BBC correspondent(s) who reported on the Pitroda comments seem to be carried away by their anti-Modi bias. Take comments like “Mr Modi and his party have ensured it is anti-Pakistan feeling, and not other issues, which are firing up voters.”

Or the BBC correspondent(s) comments like “In essence, he (Mr Modi) is saying that to question the official version of what happened in Pakistan (the airstrikes on the JeM terrorist camp in Balakot)–which have been queried by several leading media organisations–is an “affront” to the army itself. He (Mr Modi ) is also saying that to express anything less than severe reprobation against Pakistan is a slight to the army and makes the opposition a supporter of nothing less than terrorism. This is another clear attempt to refocus the debate around the polls on anti-Pakistan statement (sic sentiment), which has served the party well ever since a suicide attempt in India-administered Kashmir killed 40 troops.”

What makes the BBC so sure that, in the coming Indian elections, the opposition parties are more sinned against than sinning? The BBC itself has boxed the Hindi comments made by the Samajwadi Party (SP) leader Ram Gopal Yadav, the uncle of former UP chief minister Akhilesh Yadav who has entered into an alliance with Mayawati’s BSP and Ajit Singh’s RLD to check the BJP in India’s most populous state which elects 80 MPs, almost one-seventh of the total of 543.

Over to Ram Gopal Yadav’s comments in Hindi: “Jawaan maar gaye vote ke liye, checking nahin thi Jammu-Srinagar ki beech mein. Jawaano ko simple buses mein bhej diya, ye saazish thi, abhi nahin kehna chahta, sarkar badlega, iski jaanch hogi, tab bade bade log phasenge,” meaning “The troops were killed (at Pulwama in the bomb-blast) for the sake of votes; no checking was done between Jammu and Srinagar, the troops were sent in simple buses, it was a conspiracy, we can’t say any thing now, when the government changes (after the elections) there will be a probe and then big, big people will be caught.”

In effect, the SP leader Ram Gopal Yadav was insinuating that the 40 Indian troops blown up on February 14 in the bomb-blast at Pulwama had been killed as part of a conspiracy to generate votes so as to get the Modi government re-elected.

So can one blame Mr Modi for tweeting that the “opposition is the natural habitat of terror apologists and questioners of our armed forces. The reprehensible statement by senior leaders like Ram Gopal Ji insults all those who have given their lives in protecting Kashmir. It humiliates the families of our martyrs.”

The BBC article not only shows up sections of the Indian polity but also reflects poorly on the BBC itself which was set up in London in the heart of the British Empire in 1922, some two decades before the imperialist-made Bengal famine in which millions of people died of starvation during World War Two even while hundreds of their freedom-fighter compatriots participating in the Quit India Movement were ruthlessly machine-gunned from the air. All of which is detailed not (repeat not) in contemporary BBC reports but in the book “Calcutta Under Fire”, penned by the British sociologist David Lockwood.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
