This week that year: Pachasi jhatkes with Rekha and a home for Khosla

Sawan Bhadon

Doordarshan

Mera Naam Joker

Khosla Ka Ghosla

Navin Nischol

Navin Nischol, the name today could well prompt the response, “Naam to suna hai, but what films did he do?” I knew him from, Victoria No. 203, Haste Zakhm, Dhund and Parwana which I had watched ongrowing up and which were replaying on my mind when I landed up at a Juhu bungalow where he was shooting for a TV serial. The actor seemed disconnected from the hustle bustle around him and refused to start our interview till pack-up was announced close to noon. Then, he whisked me off to a resto-bar where, over a platter of kebabs, which went largely untouched, he reeled back to a cigarette commercial in the late sixties which had made him the campus heartthrob.Soon after it came out, his father called filmmaker Mohan Segal who was an old school friend from their Lahore days, to grouse over the fact that his young son had suddenly lost interest in academics and wanted to become an actor. Navin, who was in Kolkata then, had got a Bengali photographer to shoot him and mailed those pictures with his application for the United Producers Talent Contest. He made the cut and after clearing the preliminary rounds in Delhi, arrived in Mumbai for the finals. He bumped into Segal who was favourably impressed and told Navin to forget about the contest and instead sent him to the Film and Television Institute of India for two years to train as an actor at his expense.His protégé graduated first class, with a gold medal. “Many of the other examiners were rooting for Asha Chandra (who later went on to start her acting school) but Raj ji (Raj Kapoor) insisted I deserved it. Following the internal tussle, the results were delayed by two months, but eventually, Raj ji’s decision prevailed,” he informed me that afternoon in the restaurant.Interestingly, Navin’s debut film opened in 1970, the same year as Raj Kapoor’s dream project,, and while the latter bombed, Segal’s Sawan Bhadon celebrated a jubilee run in over 30 theaters across the country. The film is still remembered for Navin and Rekha’s evergreen hit, “ Kaan mein jhumka, chaal mein thumka”and its pachasi jhatkes, but over time, RK’s golden boy was lost in a galaxy of stars.Inone saw glimpses of the talent that he was as he played Bapu/Sethi, the face of the con, to perfection. Savita Raj Hiremath who produced the film with Ronnie Screwvala, recalls that when they were looking for an actor for the role, her mind was stuck on Navin. Director Dibakar Banerjee and writer Jaideep Sahni agreed with her choice. “Since we were not from the film industry, we were looking for actors who fit the characters. He was a perfect match. Later, given his experience, we asked him to supervise rehearsals with the younger talent and he’d wonder why we were giving him so much izzat,” she recounts.He never threw any starry tantrums and put up with family rather than at a five-star during the Delhi schedule which went of smoothly. “But after six-eight months, when we flew to Mumbai for the last leg of the shoot, I found that he had got increasingly dependent on alcohol and he admitted to me he couldn’t live without a drink,” she sighs. The last few years following his wife Geetanjali’s suicide had been traumatic for him. I recalled how he’d downed one drink too many during our interview but both of us agreed that Navin had been a gentleman and a brilliant actor.He went away too soon, suffering a heart attack on his way to Pune on March 19, 2011. Savita reveals a few months before his untimely end, she’d told him that she wanted him in the Khosla Ka Ghosla sequel. “What role will you give me?” he laughed, but, she remembers, he was pleased to know that he’d continue to be a part of the Khosla family. That’s not likely to happen now, butwill always remain in our memories.
