Pawan Kalyan accuses KCR of intimidating leaders of rival parties to join YSR Congress Party

Amaravati

Telugu Desam Party

N Chandrababu Naidu

Pawan Kalyan

Telangana

K Chandrashekar Rao

Andhra Pradesh

YSR Congress Party

Narendra Modi

: Joining chorus withpresident, Jana Sena Party presidentalleged thatChief Minister and TRS Party presidentis intimidating leaders of rival parties into join theHe said KCR is threatening to create troubles for those having properties in Hyderabad, if they fail to fall in line."Hyderabad is not Pakistan for us to be afraid of security of our assets there", he thundered while addressing an election rally in Bhimavaram, where from he is contesting for Andhra Pradesh Assembly. Pawan told the TRS leadership to set up its party in Andhra Pradesh and directly participate in elections."But, the TRS is trying to take control over Andhra Pradesh through indirect means. It is supporting the YSR Congress. KCR works for the YSRCP behind the curtains. His minister Talasani Srinivas Yadav comes to Andhra Pradesh on mission to bring in caste division among us," Pawan charged.He revealed to the audience that a group of people had approached him a month ago seeking to join Jana Sena. But, a few days later, they joined the YSRCP.He said that the enquiries revealed that they were threatened that their properties will be damaged if they don't give up the idea of joining JSP instead join the YSRCP.It may be mentioned that Chandrababu has been accusing KCR of trying for control over Andhra Pradesh through YSR Congress. According to him, KCR wants to ruin Andhra Pradesh by making Jaganmohan Reddy the chief minister of AP." Jagan is a puppet for KCR and. They think if they make him the CM here, they can blackmail him and take away all the industries from AP to Telangana and Gujarat ", Naidu has been saying in his campaign for the April 11 Assembly and general elections.KCR, who did not like TDP contesting the Telangana Assembly elections, vowed to give a return gift to Naidu (by working for TDP's defeat).Pawan faulted the YSRCP leaders for not objecting to Jagan's surrender to KCR. "KCR abused us during the separate state movement. He is now threatening us to damage our properties in Hyderabad. Were you all not born in Andhra Pradesh? Why do you lack the courage to oppose such undemocratic politics?", he questioned the YSR Congress leaders.Pawan's attack on KCR and Jaganmohan Reddy have heated up the election environment in the state.
