Over 15 animals poisoned to death by villagers in Telanagana, Ghatsekar police launch investigation

Local police officials at the Koremulla village | Photo Credit: Times Now

Hyderabad: A mind-numbing case of animal cruelty has come to light from Koremulla village of Ghatkesar in Telangana's Medchal district where as many as fifteen animals were allegedly poisoned to death by a local. A case in this regard was registered at the Ghatkesar police station on Friday based on a complaint by volunteers of an animal-welfare collective, Compassionate Society for Animals (CSA).

In their complaint, volunteers claimed that a local by the name of Bijili Bikshapathi noticed the carcasses of the animals on Thursday and alerted CSA. Bikshapathi told media outlets that nine pigs and six dogs were poisoned by someone in the village. He added that he saw the culprits after "they had dumped about eight pigs in a nearby water body". The culprits tied the legs of the dogs after killing them in order to be able to carry their carcasses easily to the water body to be dumped, said Bikshapathi.

Founder and chairperson of CSA, N Pravalika claims that this is not the first time locals in Koremulla village have resorted to murdering animals. People who care for these animals also feel threatened by those who attack them, she adds. The CSA chairperson also shed a light on what might have caused the death of as many as 15 animals. She says that a rabid dog has been attacking villagers these past few days and the act of poisoning dogs and pigs may have been an attempt by locals to kill the rabid dog. They will, however, end up killing several innocent animals in the process if not stopped, she adds.

Meanwhile, CSA chairperson N Pravalika told Mirror Now that civic affairs of the Koremulla village are handled by a Gram Panchayat with ward members under the leadership of a Sarpanch. She further adds that little or no measures have been taken by the concerned officials to deal with the situation which will only lead to locals attacking more animals in the near future. "The state government of Telangana has completely failed in administering anti-rabies vaccines to stray dogs or in controlling their population," adds the chairperson.

An official with the Ghatsekar police confirmed that an official complaint in this regard was filed on Friday. He further added that police suspect a particular local behind the killings, however, no arrests have been made as of yet. The unidentified accused have been booked under section 11 (1) of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (PCAA) along sections 429 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
