Can #Boycott be good for business and brands?

Last year, Nike’s sales soared northward after people barbecued their old kicks and pledged to boycott the sportswear brand for life. Months later, they called for a boycott of Gillette and flushed their turbo razors down the toilet. According to P&G the backlash against Gillette didn’t impact sales. In both cases the “outrage”, and ensuing boycott, was triggered by ads – Nike’s Colin Kaepernick campaign and Gillette’s ‘We believe: The best men can be’ that jumped on the #MeToo trampoline. In the latter’s case, sales remained "in-line with pre-campaign levels" in the days after its release, according to reports. But P&G officials count the campaign as a big success.More recently, FMCG-majorcame under hashtag-fire after two of its ads - Brooke Bond Red Label ’s Kumbh film and Surf Excel ’s Holi ad - rubbed off people the wrong way. With the charged political climate in mind, experts and amateurs endlessly dissected and examined both ads since the outrage machine switched to full throttle. So, we’ll skip the ads inquest and go straight to impact. HUL didn’t clearly respond to Brand Equity’s specific query about the brand impact of this selective online outrage on the ground. But, it seems, for every virtual call to boycott HUL brands, there were plenty of people who promised to purchase a few extra kilos of washing powder. An HUL company spokesperson tells BE, “We have had positive and organic responses coming in large numbers from our consumers, and that is the best response that we could hope for.”So, can #Boycott be good for business and brands? Sometimes, if you play it right. Says Vijay Koshy, head - brand partnerships, The Viral Fever, “With the right premeditation, brands can wield backlash as a powerful tool to gain both exposure and support.” In the age of outrage that gets disproportionately amplified, brands would do well to ride these online waves of rage instead of retreating to the relative safety of the shore.FORE School of Management’s Freda Swaminathan believes most consumers would “brush these rather extreme conversations aside…” Using the HUL case as an example, she adds, “#BoycottHUL may result in #NoticeHUL , where the stimulus, ‘boycott’ gets transformed to ‘notice’.” Brand strategist Ambi Parameswaran echoes her sentiments, “In the final analysis, FMCG brands are low involvement. Consumers don’t psychoanalyze advertising before buying any brand. And any discussion around your brand is a good outcome.” Although he suspects this latest episode of outrage might send FMCG brands back into their shell and the safety of old tropes like “smiling mother, smiling kid”, he believes marketers must keep creating “interesting stories”, just not at the cost of brand-promise.According to the experts the key to unlock the potential of polarization is in the management of outcomes. Rudratej Singh, who is an ex-Unilever board-member and the global president of Royal Enfield, says, “The brand custodians and their authority and their responsibility have to be very clearly defined. If that is done the core team will know when to respond and how to respond to brand crisis.” Debraj Tripathy, ex-MD Mediacom South Asia, says "Disproportionate reactions on social media cannot be avoided. That is the nature of the beast. Social media ensures extreme reactions and quick polarization. That can't be wished away and needs to be managed.” Depending on the nature of these ‘transgressions’, brands can choose to state their stand (agree or disagree) clearly and unambiguously and take visible action like showing contrition, or just lie low. Marketers have a choice when their brands become the focus of social media outrage: Play dead and wait for the beast to pass or take it on the chin.Fake or genuine, right or wrong, social media is able to build a momentum and frenzy which in the real market place may not exist. Of course, sometimes it influences the real world and causes debate escalated through mass-media that is difficult to control, especially when it is laced with religious sentiment.Advertisers and their ad agencies now need to have a measure of the cultural dimensions of consumer segments in the nation before they allow for controversies that take away from the overall strategic positioning of the brand. HUL is well known for regular consumer research. May be India’s largest advertiser has actually anticipated the pulse of this segment and as part of their strategy wishes to revive established brand communications by raising social issues and waking up the consumers to look out for their advertising and build a conversation.Freda Swaminathan, professor of marketing, FORE School of ManagementIndia’s aggressive traditionalists need little reason to fly off the handle. Anything not aligned to their prescription of how we must live - and what we must think and say - is a reason to load the social media cannons. Ads are relatively easy game, and a convenient outlet for an anger that might not even originate from this specific “offense”. But boycott? Let them be – they’re only ads. Their shelf life is a few months – unless we make it longer.Bharat Bambawale, founder, Bharat Bambawale & Associates, a brand strategy consultancy
