Lok Sabha elections 2019: Amit Shah says Rahul Gandhi must apologise for Sam Pitroda’s remarks on IAF strike

BJP president Amit Shah attacked Congress on Saturday over Sam Pitroda’s remarks on the Indian Air Force strike at a terror camp in Balakot. He said Congress chief Rahul Gandhi must apologise for Pitroda’s remarks.

Amit Shah said Pitroda’s comment that attacks like the one in Pulwama happen all the time is unacceptable. He said Rahul Gandhi must make it clear who he supports. “Who do you (Rahul Gandhi) support? Doubting the Indian Air Force is not right for the national president of any party,” Amit Shah said.

Sam Pitroda, who is part of the Congress’ manifesto committee for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections and is considered a senior ideologue of the party had raised questions over the Balakot strike saying that international media did not agree with the claims made in India about the IAF action.

He also questioned the policy to launch air strike across the Line of Control and said “you don’t jump on entire nation” if some terrorists target a place in India. Pitroda later clarified his remarks stating that he was speaking in personal capacity and not on the behalf of the Congress party.

Also read : On Sam Pitroda’s remark, Arun Jaitley’s swipe at ‘student’ Rahul Gandhi

On Saturday, Amit Shah asked the Congress if the Pakistan government and military has a connection with terror attacks in India. “If there is a connection, who is the culprit, Congress party should answer,” he said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also targeted Congress over Pitroda’s comments and alleged that the party has been insulting the armed forces.

Modi said 130 crore Indians will not forgive or forget the Opposition for their antics and the country stands firmly behind the forces. “The most trusted advisor and guide of the Congress President has kick-started the Pakistan National Day celebrations on behalf of the Congress, ironically by demeaning India’s armed forces. Shame!” he had tweeted.
