Mumbai: Mother arrested for killing 16-day-old daughter in Sion, motive still unknown

The PTI report mentioned, during the preliminary investigation, the police grew suspicious about Ansari and began interrogating her | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Mumbai: In an appalling case reported from Mumbai, a 25-year-old woman was arrested on Friday evening for allegedly killing her 16-day-old daughter. The incident took place on Tuesday in the Sundar Kamla Nagar area of Sion.

According to a report in PTI police said, the 16-day-old girl first went missing from the house when her mother went downstairs for some work. Meanwhile, the baby's father immediately lodged a complaint at the Sion police station following which a case of kidnapping under the Indian Penal Code, section 363 was registered. The baby's mother was identified as 25-year-old, Sama Ansari.

Shockingly, on Wednesday midnight the baby's body was found on the rear side of her residence and the police registered a case of murder after kidnapping was registered. The PTI report mentioned, during the preliminary investigation, the police grew suspicious about Ansari and began interrogating her and she was later arrested by them. However, the motive behind the murder was not yet known. Further investigation in the case is underway.

In a similar case reported from Chennai, an 18-day-old child was allegedly killed by her mother. The accused was arrested by the police after evidence against her emerged. Initially, she had claimed that her child had died out of breathlessness while she was feeding her milk but the police claimed that the child did not die an accidental death, it was the mother who murdered the girl by banging her head on the floor.

The mother confessed to police, 'My husband was already married and he had a three-year-old girl. He never told about his first marriage to me, recently I got to know the truth. Already we have a girl baby and I suffered a lot because of my husband. And he also fought with me because the second child also was a girl. So I was very upset and I decided to kill my own baby. I banged the baby's head on the floor. After she died, I called my mother and told she is suffering."
