Things were taken out of context: Sam Pitroda continues to stick to his guns on insensitive remarks about Pulwama

Things were taken out of context: Sam Pitroda continues to stick to his guns on insensitive remarks about Pulwama

A day after Sam Pitroda attracted national outrage owing to his insensitive remarks about 2008 Mumbai attacks and Pulwama attack, the Congress leader has continued to stick to his gun. Infact, he has done the easiest thing possible, shooting the messenger. Rather than owning up to the fact that he trivialised death of CRPF soldiers in Pulwama saying it 'happens all the time' , Pitroda put the blame on the media.

In a tweet storm on Saturday morning, Pitroda said: I am surprised and literally shocked at the nationwide response and associated discussion, debate and dialogue on my ANI interview of 22nd March 2019. believe Indian media went to town in taking things out of context to misquote and misrepresent facts, message and meaning. I was not surprised at some of the modern Indian Media and their intent and approach."

He further said, "When I came home after a morning meeting,I had over 20 television reporters waiting to get my comments on the interview & ask more questions. At the same time,I had 100s of compliments and good wishes from people all over the world for the courage to ask what needed to be asked."

Pitroda said, "In the process, I learned that even the @PMOIndia Prime Minister of India felt compelled to tweet along with some of his senior ministers on my TV interview. What they have said are twisted lies.I was born in 1942 and was raised by a poor Gujarati parents who strongly believed in Gandhian Values related to #TRUTH, TRUST, LOVE, SIMPLICITY, SACRIFICE, NON-VIOLENCE, etc. I speak #TRUTH and nothing but #TRUTH."

He ended with saying, "#TRUTH will always prevail. You can fool some of the people sometime, but you cannot fool all the people all the time."

Pitroda's clarification comes even as PM Modi, Amit Shah and other BJP leaders have used it to corner Congress over issue of national security. In a a press conference on Saturday, Amit Shah questioned Rahul Gandhi's silence over Sam Pitroda's remarks.

With agency inputs
