Is Uday Chopra battling depression? His cryptic tweet before deactivating account sparks speculations!

Follow us on Is Uday Chopra battling depression? His cryptic tweet before deactivating account sparks speculations!

Uday Chopra, who is often in news for his tweets, has made headlines again. He shared a cryptic tweet in which he’s talking about putting a gun on his head. This sparked speculations that the Dhoom actor is battling depression. The actor, who has been able to prove his mettle in Bollywood despite a strong surname, later added that he is ‘not okay’ but he’s trying to. Later, he deleted the tweets and went back to tweeting about god and atheism.

He wrote: Here’s a thought: you can hold a gun to my head a force me to believe in your god. I’ll even say yes I do...cause let’s face it I want to live, but how do you know what I really believe in my head? I don’t think even your god knows, most likely cause it’s imaginary.

Uday Chopra deactivated his Twitter account after tweeting about suicide. He wrote: For a few hours, I De-activated my twitter account. It felt as close to death as I could get. Was phenomenal! I think this is a good option for suicide. I might be doing it permanently soon.

Worried fans on social media started asking him about his whereabouts. There were hundred of concerned tweets on his Twitter thread.

Uday Chopra, who is the scion of Yashraj Films, lives in a luxurious villa in the US. He was previously living in with his actress girlfriend Nargis Fakhri. However, last year they parted ways due to unknown reasons. Currently, his ex-girlfriend Nargis was in a relationship with American filmmaker Matt Alonzo. But she has parted ways with him as well.

Uday Chopra found it hard cementing his position in Bollywood. Talking about his failures, he said, “Everyone who enters Bollywood has dreams. I won t lie I wanted to be number one too, but things did not work out. I faced rejection from the audience and I just couldn t accept it. I went into denial, refusing to believe that this could be happening but then reality hit me hard. In these two years, all the froth and rubbish has come out of me. I now know who I am and what my limitations are. It s been a cathartic process."

Well, it seems like his breakup with ex-girlfriend Nargis Fakhri and his Bollywood career has taken a toll on his mental health.
