Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act Current Affairs, GK & News

Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act Current Affairs, GK & News

The central government is considering to ban both factions of the Hurriyat Conference under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) for funding terror. Highlights This decision was taken after National Investigation Agency (NIA) found that outfits linked with the Hurriyat raised money to fund terror in Jammu and Kashmir. According to the officials, NIA was ..

Month: Current Affairs - August, 2021

Category: Defence Current Affairs • India Nation & States Current Affairs

Topics: counter terrorism task force • Hurriyat Groups • National Investigation Agency (NIA) • Terrorism in India • UAPA act • Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act

The US Senate recently passed a bill to help combat the rise of hate crimes against the Pacific Islanders and Asian Americans. The bill will support the local law enforcements in controlling the hate crimes. Need for the Bill The COVID-19 increased the hate crimes against the Asian Americans in the US. According to the ..

Month: Current Affairs - April, 2021

Category: International Current Affairs • Legal & Constitution Current Affairs

Topics: Asian Americans in government and politics • California • Crime Data • Hate crime • Indian Penal Code (IPC) • Representation of People Act 1951 • Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act • US Senate

On July 1, 2020, the Union Home Ministry declared 9 individuals associated with Khalistan Movement as Terrorists. They were declared terrorists under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. Highlights The Government of India had amended the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 in August, 2019. According to the amendment, individuals shall be designated as terrorists. Prior to the ..

Month: Current Affairs - July, 2020

Category: India Nation & States Current Affairs

Topics: Assassination of Indira Gandhi • Indira Gandhi • Khalistan • Khalistan movement • National Investigation Agency • UAPA act • Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act

The Home Ministry, last week in Rajya Sabha provided the National Crime Record Data (NCRB) of cases under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act in 2017. According to the data provided Manipur with 352 people arrested in 330 cases, have more than 35% cases of the total cases registered under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act in the country, ..

Category: Reports & Indexes Current Affairs

Topics: Assam • Bihar • Home Ministry • Jharkhand • Manipur • NCRB • Rajya Sabha • Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act • Uttar Pradesh

The Centre has extended a ban on Assam-based Bodo insurgent group National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) citing that the terrorist outfit has continued to indulge its involvement in violent activities which includes killings, extortion and joining hands with anti-India forces. The NDFB was declared an outlawed outfit in 1990s, the ban has been extended ..

Month: Current Affairs - November, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Assam • Boroland • Ministry of Home Affairs • National Democratic Front of Bodoland • NDBF • UAPA • Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
