Happy Guru Gobind Singh Jayanti 2019: Gurpurab Images, Cards, Greetings, Quotes, Pictures and Wallpapers

Read Also

Guru Gobind Singh Jayanti is a revered Sikh festival celebrated in India and around the world wherever there is Sikh population. The festival commemorates the birthday of the tenth Guru of the Sikhs, Guru Gobind Singh. It is a very pious and religious celebration in which prayers are offered for a happier life and prosperous times.A public holiday, Guru Govind Singh Jayanti is not only celebrated by the Sikhs alone. In India, many people from other religious communities observe this day as a holiday as a mark of respect for the tenth Sikh Guru. Schools and colleges get the day off and most businesses are closed.The birth anniversary celebrations of the tenth Sikh guru are marked by processions and prayers, and many Sikh households indulge in great feasts. Gurudwaras, the holy place of worship for the Sikhs serve delicious langar on this day and they prepare the sacred karah prasad or kadha prasad which can also be made at home.Famed as a warrior, poet and philosopher, Guru Gobind Singh initiated the Khalsa order, the highest order that can be reached by Sikhs, on Vaisakhi in 1699. The Khalsa must abide by four restrictions: Not to cut natural hair, not to eating meat slaughtered in halal manner, not cohabiting with a person other than one's spouse, and not using tobacco. Guru Gobind Singh's contributions to Sikhism were many including the tradition of covering one's hair with a turban. Following the death of his father Guru Tegh Bahadur, Gobind Singh became the leader of the Sikhs when he was only nine years old!The revered Guru Gobind Singh died on 7 October 1708 from wounds inflicted by an assassin. His death is a sad and painful history in Sikh community. Guru Gobind Singh was the last of the living Sikh Gurus. This is because while still on his deathbed, he passed the Guruship of the Sikhs to the Guru Granth Sahib, the sacred Book of the Sikhs. After Guru Gobind Singh, the Granth Sahib then became the Eleventh and the Eternal Sikh Guru."If you are determined, the victory shall be yours"- Guru Gobind Singh.Heartiest Gurpurab greetings to you and your family!May Waheguru be your guiding star through your life and may he shower blessings on you this Gurupurab. Praise our Sikh guru!May our lord Guru Gobind Singh give us the courage and strength to fight the evil, persevere tough circumstances and always stand by the side of truth. Wishing you a very happy Gurpurab!May Waheguru bless your soul with kindness, bravery and success!Prasie the lord!Happy Gurupurab to you and your family!Celebrate Gurpurab with your loved ones, friends and family.May you be showered with Guru Gobind Singh Ji’s divine love and blessings.
