Karnataka-Born IS Terrorist Killed, Ola Licence Suspended In Bengaluru And Other Top News

The Islamic State in a statement has said that Shafi Armar, a resident of Bhatkal in Karnataka whom the Indian and the US intelligence designated as the main recruiter for IS in India has been killed in fighting in IS’ last stronghold in Syria.

The statement said that Shafi Armar alias Yusuf al-Hindi was one of the founding members of Ansar-ul-Tawhid and on March 19, he died fighting the Syrian coalition forces. Read more

People Won't Be Able To Use Ola Cabs In Bengaluru As The State Suspends It For 6 Months

As far as traffic is concerned, Bengaluru is one of the worst in the country. And it could worsen further in the coming days as the Karnataka government has suspended the licence of cab aggregator Ola for six months.

Karnataka transport department suspended the licence of Ola Cabs on March 18 after the company was found violating rules. According to reports, the bike taxis operated by Ola in Bengaluru was in violation of license conditions and rules prescribed by the government. Read more

After 4 Attacks On Vande Bharat Express In 2 Months, Special Team Formed To Curb Stone Pelting On Trains

Railways on Wednesday set up special teams comprising GRP and RPF personnel to track the miscreants pelting stones at India’s first premium class semi-high speed train Vande Bharat. Plain-clothes team members would mingle with folks of villages where attacks have occurred in past, railway officials said on Friday.

“We have decided to keep a close watch in areas on the route from Kanpur to Varanasi,” said SP Railways Himanshu Kumar. Read more

There's Now A Petition In HC To Ban 'Alibaug Se Aaya Hai Kya'? Because It's Disrespectful

The complainant, Rajendra Thakur, a resident of Satirje village of Mapgaon in Alibaug argued that the phrase is “unfair” and “humiliating” as it projects the people of Alibaug as “illiterates”.

'Alibaug se aaya hai kya?' is often used in conversations in the tune of 'Are you a fool?'. Read more

He Didn't Pay His Wife Alimony For 2 Years, Fed Up Court Sent Him To Jail But Pays After Spending 5 Days Behind Bars

What the orders from the courts couldn’t do, the order to send the person in question to jail from Apex court did in a matter of days. A man who despite several orders from the court hadn’t given the alimony to his estranged wife since January 2017, was quick to sign cheques after the Supreme Court sent him to jail for not abiding by court’s orders.

A Man from Uttar Pradesh was first directed in January 2017 to pay his wife Rs 4.75 lakh of outstanding alimony, but he didn’t pay which forced his wife to move to court in contempt of court plea in September 2017 and the man was issued a show-cause notice. Read more
