Kashmir Valley Current Affairs, GK & News

Kashmir Valley Current Affairs, GK & News

Hybrid terrorists are those people brought in by the terrorist groups only to carry out one or two missions. They basically assist the terrorist groups. For instance, shopkeepers allowing terrorists to store their arms, passing information, etc are hybrid terrorists. They are like temporary or contract labours. They are not a part of the terrorist ..

Month: Current Affairs - January, 2022

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: hybrid terrorist • Jammu and Kashmir • Kashmir Valley • narco terrorism • Narcotic • Terrorism

On January 9, 2020, Indian Railways announced that it will source 1000 MW of solar power and 200 MW of wind power to zonal railways by 2021-22. Also, Kashmir is to be linked with the rest of India through railway network by December 2021. Highlights: Solar Power In order to implement the solar and wind ..

Month: Current Affairs - January, 2020

Topics: highest bridge • infrastructure • Kashmir • Kashmir Valley • Railway Modernisation • Railways • Rooftop Solar Power Plant • Solar power

The traditional 40-day period of harshest winter in Kashmir known in the local parlance as ‘Chillai-Kalan’ began on 21 December 2019, with the upper reaches of valley receiving snowfall. Chillai-Kalan period which is known for sub-zero temperatures, frozen lakes and river, will end on 31 January 2020. About ‘Chillai-Kalan’ These 40 days are when the ..

Month: Current Affairs - December, 2019

Category: Environment Current Affairs

Topics: Chillai-Kalan • Jammu and Kashmir • Kashmir • Kashmir Valley

The Kashmir is under the vicious cycle of peace and violence for a long period of time. This perpetual cycle is also posing serious internal security challenges for India. The government has taken a drastic step towards ending this perpetual cycle by taking steps to abrogate Article 370 and Article 35A. Approaches towards Enduring Peace ..

Topics: Insurgency • internal security • Jammu and Kashmir • Kashmir Valley • scheduled areas

The Central Government has banned the Yasin Malik-led Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) as an unlawful association under the provisions of Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA). Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) is spearheading the separatist ideology in the Kashmir valley and has been at the forefront of the separatist activities and ..

Month: Current Affairs - March, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Kashmir Liberation Front • Kashmir Valley • Kashmiri Pandits • UAPA • Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
