Army pays tributes to Major Nair

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Jammu/Pune, January 12

The Army today bid a tearful adieu to Major Shashi Dharan V Nair, who was killed along the Line of Control (LoC), in the Nowshera sector on Friday.

Major Nair was killed when an improvised explosive device (IED) exploded. The IED was planted by the Border Action Team of the Pakistan army with the help of militants on the LoC.

The Army paid tributes to the valiant officer and remembered his sacrifice for the nation.

At Rajouri, General Officer Commanding, Ace of Space Division, Major General H Dharmarajan paid homage to the officer. At Technical Airport, Jammu, Inspector General of Police, Jammu, MK Sinha; Station Commander, Jammu; Chief Security Officer, 16 Corps; Station Commander, Air Force Station, Jammu, and others paid tributes to the Army officer.

Major Nair hailed from Khadagwasla, Pune, and is survived by his wife Trupti Shashidharan Nair. Born on July 30, 1985, Major Nair had joined the Army 11 years ago.

The Army officer’s mortal remains were transported in a service aircraft from Jammu to Pune on Saturday.

In Pune, Harish Kasarkhod, his childhood friend, said having graduated from the famous Fergusson College, Nair could have got a comfortable job elsewhere, but his passion was the armed forces.

A pall of gloom descended on the area after the news came. Friends and relatives thronged the family's house.

Meanwhile, another soldier Rifleman Jivan Gurung was killed in an IED attack along the LoC in the Nowshera sector of Rajouri. He was from Lamahatta village, Darjeeling, West Bengal.

He is survived by his mother Poonam Gurung. The soldier’s mortal remains are expected to be taken to his native village on Sunday. He was born on April 11, 1994.

Soldier commits suicide in south Kashmir

Anantnag: A soldier committed suicide by shooting himself with his service rifle on Friday night in Kulgam district of south Kashmir. The deceased soldier has been identified as Abishekh Roy Kumar. He worked as a wireless operator in the Army’s 34 Rashtriya Rifles camp at the Behibagh area of Kulgam district. Confirming the incident, an Army officer said, “Abishekh died on the spot after shooting himself.” He, however, said the reasons behind the suicide were not known. oc
