HC dismissal of Yasin Malik’s plea paved way for ban on JKLF

NEW DELHI: A ban on Yasin Malik ’s Jammu & Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) became imminent on March 13 when the J&K high court dismissed his plea for transfer of a case relating to killing of four unarmed Indian Air Force personnel in January 1990, in which he is a prime accused, to Srinagar . With the hurdle now cleared, the trial against Malik and six other accused is expected to resume soon in Jammu.Malik, now in custody under Public Safety Act (PSA), was recently moved to Jammu’s Kot Balwal jail from a Srinagar prison facility.On Friday, the Centre stepped forward to complete its crackdown on Malik by banning JKLF, which sources in the home ministry said was responsible for a litany of terrorist attacks in J&K since the early 1980s. “JKLF continues to abet stone pelting in J&K, indulge in laundering of money, provide financial and logistic support to Kashmiri separatist groups and glorify terror activities. A crackdown on JKLF is a sign that Centre will not tolerate separatist activities in J&K,” said a senior central government functionary.The list of cases against JKLF involving subversion and sedition is quite long. Raising the slogan of ‘azadi’ the secessionist outfit has perpetrated heinous crimes like targeting Kashmiri pandits, government employees and ordinary Kashmiri people, and kidnapping Dr Rubiya Sayeed, daughter of the then Union home minister Mufti Mohammad Sayeed , among others.The terror story of JKLF began on August 1, 1988 when it used explosives to blast three government buildings, including the telegraph office in Srinagar. JKLF activists killed Mohammad Yousuf Halwai, a local leader of National Conference in Srinagar on August 17, 1989. Then came the targeted attacks on Kashmiri pandits, which home ministry Rajiv Gauba on Friday said were responsible for the exodus of members of the community from the Valley.JKLF targeted a Kashmiri Hindu for the first time on September 14,1989 by killing Pandit Tika Lal Taploo, the state BJP vice-president. On October 4, 1989 members of the outfit shot dead retired sessions judge N K Ganjoo for having conducted the trial against JKLF leader Maqbool Bhat , and awarding him death sentence.The case that grabbed the most media limelight was the kidnapping of Rubiya Saeed, elder daughter of Mufti Mohammad Sayeed who was then home minister. She was released five days later in exchange for five JKLF terrorists.On Republic Day eve on January 25, 1990, JKLF terrorists gunned down four IAF personnel in Natipora, Srinagar. A chargesheet in this case was filed in Jammu TADA court against Yasin Malik and six others.Malik has since tried all possible ways to escape trial. He moved a petition in 2008 for transfer of the case to Srinagar which was rejected. Against this order, he approached the HC of J&K. For one reason or the other, hearing on this writ petition could not be completed till now.
