Political swing song: Rahul turns on Mamata di, Shiv Sena's love-hate alliance with BJP

Analysing any leader's election speech will tell you how they feel about an issue, a person or an ideology.

Indian elections or the grand festival of democracy as they are called are finally here. While elections are the backbone of any democratic society, they often involve drama and plot twists seen on Ekta Kapoor shows.

The biggest highlight of the election season has to be what leaders say. As parliamentarians wax eloquent (not always in the most parliamentary of words) on issues, they seek to woo not only voters but also potential allies.

Analysing any leader's election speech will tell you how they feel about an issue, a person or an ideology. Or well what they feel on the face of it.

Because during elections, turn arounds happen faster than you can blink your eye. Friends become foes and vice versa. We at Indiatoday.in feel it is important to to keep track of these political swing songs to fully capture the edge-of-the-seat thriller the Lok Sabha elections 2019 is.

Here is a breakdown of the u-turns in the election season so far:

Didi to Demagogue

Taking a cue from Indian cultural values, several opposition leaders have been displaying the unity in their diversity by talking of a grand alliance or mahagathbandhan.

The goal of this coming together of political heavyweights from across India? To save India from a constitutional crisis by ousting the Modi government.

Two key players in this stage sharing exercise are Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee.

Rahul Gandhi has been all praise for how the Bengal tigress who took "fascist forces" head on when she prevented CBI officers from probing the Kolkata Police Commissioner for his alleged role in multiple chit-fund scams.

"I spoke with Mamata-di tonight and told her we stand shoulder-to-shoulder with her. The happenings in Bengal are a part of the unrelenting attack on India's institutions by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP. The entire opposition will stand together and defeat these fascist forces," tweeted Rahul Gandhi on February 3, 2019.

Looks like the brotherly love faded within a month as Rahul Gandhi equated 'Mamata di' with the very fascist force he promised her they would defeat together.

Congress decided to drop Mamata after Mamata dropped the Congress from Trinamool.

Speaking at a rally in West Bengal's Malda on March 23, Rahul Gandhi compared Mamata Banerjee to PM Modi saying, "Did the youth get employment, did the farmers receive any help? Like Modi, Mamata Banerjee makes only fake promises and lies to the people."

Not stopping there, Rahul Gandhi went on to say that both Mamata Banerjee and Narendra Modi run their governments without "consulting anyone".

Launching another attack on Mamata Banerjee, he said "Bengal today is run by only one person."

Ouch.

The curious case of Shiv Sena

If politics was like a racing game, the Shiv Sena would go viral for how swiftly they make u-turns.

The party, which has been a long time ally of the BJP, recently started showing its displeasure with the Modi government.

With each passing day, the jibes grew sharper. What started as a campaign to remind the BJP to stay true to its promise of building the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya reached a fevered pitch when Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray threw the infamous "chowkidar chor hai" accusation on PM Modi.

Speaking at a rally in Maharashtra's Solapur in December 2018, Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray said "Halli paharekarich chorya karaylaa laagale aahet. (Today, security persons have themselves become thieves)"

He didn't stop there. While the nation was reeling from the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 CRPF jawans, the Shiv Sena warned the government to not use the martyrdom for electoral gains. It also questioned the merits of international condemnation of Pakistan post Pulwama -- a move that has been considered a feat of PM Modi's diplomacy.

"We are busy patting our backs over what Donald Trump, France and Iran had to say over the attacks...However, we are patting our backs even after doing nothing. It is different for countries like the US and France to condemn the terror attack in Pulwama and another thing to openly say Kashmir is a part of India," Uddhav Thackeray wrote in party mouthpiece Saamna.

The criticism however did not stop the Shiv Sena from reuniting with the BJP. The two parties announced an alliance for both the Lok Sabha as well as assembly elections.

The Shiv Sena even obliged to contest two seats less than the BJP in the general elections.

Uddhav Thackeray evoked Maratha pride when he commented on allying with the BJP.

He said, 'We have joined hands to safeguard Hindutva and this won't be possible just by merely joining hands, or just taking the saffron flag in hand or by shouting slogans. We all need to forget the past differences and work together so that we win the 2019 general election. If Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj was present today, he would have severely punished us by pushing all of us from a mountain cliff if we betrayed the alliance."

From pointing fingers at the 'chowkidars' to extending them a hand of friendship, the Shiv Sena has surely come a long way in a few months.

However, old habits die hard. Poking the BJP over its decision to field Amit Shah from Gandhinagar in place of stalwart Lal Krishna Advani, the Sena wrote in its mouthpiece Shah contesting in place of Advani is politically translated as the 'Bhishmacharya' of Indian politics being "forced" to retire.

Is this how they will get the BJP to sach ka 'Saamana'?
