Kalyan tree hanging victim was murdered say police

Post-mortem

Rukmini Bai Hospital

The victim’s SIM card led the police to family; brothers killed her to avoid disrepute.The Kolsewadi police in Kalyan have used a woman’s SIM card to solve the mystery surrounding her death. Manisha Yadav, 23, was found hanging from a tree at the Kalyan Railway Yard on December 31. What first seemed like a case of suicide turned out to be murder when the police found a SIM card in the sweater worn by the victim.atrevealed marks on her neck, apart from the marks from hanging.The cops then inserted the SIM into a mobile phone and got contact numbers of her family members, including her husband Sandeep. A resident of Molanpur in Azamgarh, Uttar Pradesh, Sandeep told the police that he and his family had asked Manisha to leave the house as they suspected her of having an affair. The police also contacted the victim’s family in Vikhroli. On questioning, her father and brothers revealed that they didn’t want Manisha to come back home as they thought that her reputation would trail her and spoil the chances of marriage for her two younger sisters.Assistant police inspector Ajit Gavit from Kolsewadi police said, “The victim’s brothers Tirthraj and Manoj Yadav went to Azamgarh to bring her home. In the early hours of December 31, after getting off at Kalyan station, they spoke to their father Latku Yadav and another brother Ramakant Yadav, who had come to the station to pick them up. After some time, they took her to an isolated spot and strangulated her. They hung her from a tree to disguise the act as suicide.”Gavit added that in the CCTV footage from Kalyan station, the victim can be seen on the platform with her brothers. However, the three men are seen leaving the station without her. According to the police, only Tirthraj has been arrested under section 302 (murder) of the IPC as the other two are residents of Uttar Pradesh and are yet to be apprehended. Latku Yadav, who is also a resident of Uttar Pradesh, has been booked for murder but has not been arrested.
