Missing for 12 days, man found murdered

Ludhiana: A man, who had been missing since March 11, was found murdered at Bagha Kalan village in Ladhowal on Saturday.

Police said the man, whose hands and legs were tied, had died a few days back as the body had started decomposing. The officials said initially, the man’s identity could not be ascertained due to the damage to the face. They suspected either the body had decomposed, or the murderer had burnt the face to hide the man’s identity.

But later the police found out that the victim was Zari Lal, 36, who lived in the labour quarters in Model Town area. Zari had gone missing from the house on March 11 without informing anyone following which his cousin also lodged a missing complaint with Model Town police station on March 14.

In his statement, Zari’s cousin Kundan Kumar said he along with his cousin and another man lived at a rented accommodation in Model Town. On March 11, Zari left the house around 4.30pm without informing anyone. When he did not return till evening, Kundan dialed his number, but Zari did not respond to calls.

Around 9.30pm, Zari Lal answered the call and asked Kundan to prepare dinner, saying that he is returning. But, Zari Lal did not come back. The Next morning when his roommates tried to contact him over the phone, it was found to be switched off. On March 14, Kundan lodged a missing complaint with the police.

On Saturday morning, when farmer Gurmeet Singh of Bagha Kalan went to his field with labourers, he detected the body, which was covered in mud and its hands and legs were tied with a rope.

Ladhowal police have started investigations.

Inspector Manmohan Singh, SHO, Ladhowal police station, said during preliminary investigation, it has been found that the man was murdered somewhere else and his body was dumped here later. The face of man could not be recognised initially and it is suspected that the face was burnt to hide his identity. The case has been referred to Model Town police station.

Inspector Satnam Singh, SHO, Model Town police station, said the police have registered a case under Section 302 (murder) of IPC. The police are questioning the roommates of the deceased to get clues. So far, the police have not come across any person who had personal rivalry with the deceased.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
