Directors can make actors comfortable during bold scenes: Flora Saini

Is this your first visit to Patna?

What prompted you to become an actress?

Are you comfortable doing bold scenes?

What is your view regarding obscenity in certain films?

Recently, you opened up about your troubled life in a two-year relationship with Gaurang Doshi by joining the #MeToo movement. Why didn’t you speak about it earlier?

Model-actress Flora Saini , who shot to fame as the ghost in Shraddha Kapoor and Rajkummar Rao-starrer Stree , made her acting debut in the year 1999 with a Telugu film titled Prema Kosam as the lead. Recipient of The Great Daughter of Soil Award in Mauritius for her social work, the actress also made it to the Limca Book Of Records for the most number of films releasing on the same day, down south. Flora has worked in several Kannada, Tamil and Hindi films. Recently, the actress was in Patna for an event, when PT caught up with her for a chat. Read on...Yes, this is my first visit to Patna. But sadly, I did not get enough time to roam around the city or meet the common people on the streets. But I have realised that Patnaites make for a great audience and I saw them cheering throughout the event. I wish to come back here again.Since my dad, JS Saini, was an army officer, we used to travel a lot. I was born in Chandigarh but did my schooling from Udhampur and Jammu and Kashmir. Further, I continued my education from The Army Public School, Delhi. We kept shifting places because of my father’s postings. When my family moved to Kolkata, I decided to pursue modelling. That time, I had put on a lot of weight. People used to laugh at me when I walked the ramp at fashion shows organised in the army cantonment. Thereafter, I started losing weight and participated in many other ramp shows. Gradually, people started liking my performance. I participated in many beauty pageants in Kolkata. Gradually, I developed an interest in acting. I told my father about it and he encouraged me. I made my acting debut in a Telugu film, Prema Kosam.Earlier, I was not. But now, I am comfortable doing bold scenes. It all depends on the cast, crew and the director to make his actors comfortable while shooting bold scenes. The environment provided to actors on the set should be condusive. Also, actors must perform such roles with conviction, so that they don’t have to do it again and again.Filmmakers make such films because people watch them. Though such movies are not publicised much, yet they keep trending. This proves that the demand of such movies is high.I didn’t speak about it earlier because I was under threat of losing work. He was abusive and tortured me physically, mentally and emotionally. It was because of him I couldn’t give any interviews and was out of limelight since 2006. It took me a lot to cope with depression. That was a very difficult phase of my life. Thankfully, I am out of it now.
