BJP's Ram Madhav takes jibe at Congress, says if their leaders contest from Pakistan, they will win

BJP general secretary Ram Madhav | Photo Credit: PTI

Guwahati: Amid the backlash over Sam Pitroda's comment on the Pulwama terror attack and the Balakot air strikes, BJP national general secretary Ram Madhav on Sunday targeted Congress saying that if their leaders fight from Pakistan, they'll win. Asserting that the 'Modi-wave' was still there in the country, Madhav said that BJP will gain more seats in the coming elections as compared to 2014 Lok Sabha elections.

"Their statements are retweeted more by the people of the neighbouring country than the people in our own country. If they go there and contest elections someday, they will probably win there. This is the condition of our principal opposition party," Ram Madhav was quoted by ANI as saying.

Several Congress leaders have raised questioned over Balakot air strikes, that India carried out in response to the February 14 Pulwama attack. Latest in the series of Congress leaders is Sam Pitroda, a close confidante of Gandhi family, who termed the terror attack as a 'routine incident' carried out by a few people in Pakistan and raised questions over the authenticity of the strikes.

"The opposition leaders doubt our own forces. They not only question the achievements of our government but also use undignified language for our Army," Madhav said.

Earlier, BJP president Amit Shah had also condemned Pitroda's comments and had asked the Congress president to clear his party's stand over the remarks. Prime Minister Narendra Modi had also cited Mr Pitroda's comments to launch an all-out attack against the Congress over national security.

BJP general secretary for (in-charge of North East) Ram Madhav also took a jibe at the campaign of the grand old party. Madhav said that wherever Rahul Gandhi visits people start sloganeering "Modi-Modi". "These days Priyanka Gandhi is visiting temples and there also she has to listen to "Modi-Modi'," Madhav added.

On the upcoming elections, Madhav said that BJP is confident of winning 10 seats of protests-hit Assam, where the Citizenship Amendment Bill moved by the saffron party stirred massive protests. Praising PM Modi, Madhav said that conventionally there has never been a wave in favour of the incumbents, but "Narendra Modi is the one person who has broken the conventions several times in the past."




