Bringing back IAF pilot in 2 days from Pak was major success: Sushma Swaraj

Bringing back captured Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Abhinandan Varthaman from Pakistan in just two days was a major diplomatic success for India, said External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj addressing 'Vijay Sankalp Sabha' on Sunday. (Photo: ANI)

Noida: Bringing back captured Indian Air Force (IAF) pilot Abhinandan Varthaman from Pakistan in just two days was a major diplomatic success for India, said External Affairs Minister (EAM) Sushma Swaraj here on Sunday.

"A day after the airstrike, Pakistan retaliated and shot down one of our planes. We also shot down their plane. They captured our soldier. Bringing back captured IAF pilot in just two days is a major diplomatic success for India," Swaraj said while addressing 'Vijay Sankalp Sabha' here.

She said that accountability is a major principle of democracy. "If you seek votes after making promises, the next time you go back to seek votes, give an account of your promises and then seek votes," she said.

"As far as the national security is concerned, you have seen when the Uri attack happened, we retaliated with the surgical strike. When the Pulwama attack happened, we took revenge with the airstrike," Swaraj said.

"When the UPA government was in power, a major terror attack happened in the country in 2008 (Mumbai attacks) in which 166 people were killed including foreigners. Hence, it was an international level attack."

"If the then government would have wanted to create an atmosphere to confront Pakistan, it could have done that. But, the government only told Pakistan to investigate," the External Affairs Minister said.

"We gave the reason to the international world that we only destroyed the terror outfits and did not harm any civilian or military targets. After this, even the international community came to support us."

On February 26, the IAF carried out an airstrike at a Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror training camp in Balakot.

The strikes were in response to the terror attack in Pulwama in which 40 CRPF personnel lost their lives. JeM had claimed the responsibility of the attack.
