Cong blocked Rs 90 crore funds meant for victims of anti-Sikh riots: Rajnath Singh

3/4

"It took 34 valuable years of legal battle and courage shown by fearless witnesses/victims, which has resulted in his conviction and no leniency, therefore, on the ground of age should be granted," it said.



The probe agency further said Kumar is a "political leader with a large political clout" and he has a "following in and around Delhi and is capable of influencing/terrorising witnesses".

The matter came up for hearing on Friday before a bench of Justices S A Bobde and S A Nazeer. It has fixed the case for further hearing on March 25.

CBI said that at the time of the incident, Kumar was a Member of Parliament of the then ruling party in India and killings in this case had taken place in pursuance to the provocative speeches made by him against the Sikh community.

Considering the influence of the applicant/convict (Kumar) in the society, the fact that he belongs to one of the older political parties having substantial following, the gravity of the offence for which the trial is going on, the prosecution seriously apprehends that a fair trial in the aforementioned pending case would not be possible if the applicant/convict is enlarged on bail," the CBI said.



It said due to Kumar's powerful position and influence, several persons who had mustered courage to be witness against him have resiled from their earlier statements out of fear.

The CBI further said that in January this year, they have received a letter from three prime witnesses in the case who have apprehended that they "may be harmed" by Kumar.

"It is, therefore, most humbly prayed that in view of the above submissions (in the reply), the application filed by the applicant/convict seeking bail/suspension of sentence may kindly be dismissed in the interest of justice," it said.

Kumar, through his counsel Ajay Marwah, has approached the apex court against the high court's verdict convicting him in the case.

Anti-Sikh riots had broken out after the assassination of then prime minister Indira Gandhi on October 31, 1984 by her two Sikh bodyguards.


