Sailors recall ordeal: ‘Cleaned floors, battled depression in Greek jail’

MUMBAI: We lost 13 precious months of our lives for no fault of ours, lamented the five Indian crew members of the Tanzania-flagged merchant cargo vessel, M V Andromeda, who were sent to jail after their ship was detained in Greece in January 2018 for carrying ‘explosive material’. Narrating their ordeal on reaching Mumbai on Sunday, they said the Greek shipping firm neither paid them salary nor helped them get out of prison.Deck cadets Bhupinder Singh (21) from Punjab and Kumar Gagandeep (22) from Bengaluru, first engineer Jaideep Thakur (32) from Punjab, technician Satish Patil (28) from Belgaum and third engineer Rohtash Kumar (24) from Mathura revealed how they battled depression in jail. They said they cleaned floors, got one meal a day and shared barracks with criminals. While Singh had texted his father saying he would commit suicide, Thakur sorely missed his daughter who was only four months old when he set sail in 2017. The five Indians found support from an unlikely ally: Pakistani inmates. “I missed so much time with my daughter. Now, she is two years old,” said Thakur. “It was the Pakistani inmates who helped boost our morale in jail.”The International Maritime Federation Maritime Union of India (MUI), and Greece-based Indian NGO Indian Group Team pursued the release of the five Indians. MUI general secretary Amar Singh Thakur said they regularly visited Greece, and along with the NGO, hired a lawyer. “It took 13 months and several euros to pay lawyers to get them back home. The first trial was held only after eight months,” Captain Sanjay Prashar, chairman of International Maritime Federation, told TOI. “We will sue the Greek court authorities and the shipping firm. We will also ask the Greek government not to release the ship until the crew is paid their dues.” Director general of shipping Amitabh Kumar said he will meet the five sailors on Monday. MV Andromeda had set sail from Cyprus to Libya in December 2017. On January 6, 2018, when it reached Greece, the ship was detained for carrying ‘explosive material’.Singh’s father Balkar, a retired sub-inspector of the Border Security Force, said: “I was shocked when my son texted me from jail that he is going to end his life. My son missed all family events—his sister’s marriage and even my retirement in December 2018. I had taken a Rs 10-lakh loan for his shipping studies and even for his job placement. This was his first job.”M V Andromeda was also Patil’s first job. “My farmer parents were worried about my return. I had paid a huge sum to the placement agency to land the job, but the company hasn’t even paid my salary.” Similar was the case for Gagandeep. “My parents were eagerly waiting for my return,” he said. Kumar was upset that he could not return home when his father died two years as he was on the ship. And then he got jailed. “My brother took loan to get me out of jail,” he said.Despite the ordeal, the five sailors said they will return to the sea after taking a break.
