The Shillong Times

Soldier killed in J&K

Jammu: A soldier was killed Sunday when Pakistani troops violated the ceasefire by targeting forward posts and villages with heavy caliber weapons and rockets along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir’s Poonch and Rajouri districts, a defence spokesperson said. The Indian Army retaliated in strong measure, inflicting adequate damage and casualties to Pakistani troops, Jammu-based Public Relations Officer (defence) Lt Col Devender Anand said. He said grenadier Hari Bhakar, a resident of Rajasthan’s Nagaur district, was seriously injured and admitted to the nearest field hospital, but succumbed later, taking the number of Army personnel killed since last week to three. On March 18, rifleman Karamjeet Singh was killed in Pakistani firing in Rajouri district, while rifleman Yash Paul lost his life in unprovoked firing by Pakistan troops in the same sector on March 21. Col Anand said heavy caliber weapons and rockets were also fired from across the border in unprovoked firing by Pakistan troops in Poonch sector Saturday evening. (PTI)

26 lakh bottles of ink for LS polls

New Delhi: Ahead of the Lok Sabha polls, the Election Commission has ordered 26 lakh indelible ink bottles worth Rs 33 crore. The seven-phase election will begin on April 11 and conclude on May 19. In the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, the poll panel had bought 21.5 lakh phials, 4.5 lakh less than this year. Mysore Paints and Varnish Ltd, a government of Karnataka undertaking, is the only authorised manufacturer of indelible ink for the EC. Managing Director, Mysore Paints, Chandrashekhar Doddamani told PTI that the company has received an order for 26 lakh phials of 10cc each from the EC. “The expected turnover is approximately Rs 33 crore,” he said. The order, Doddamani said, is higher than the last general elections by 4.5 lakh phials. In this election, nearly 90 crore people are eligible to case their votes for which the EC will set up nearly 10 lakh polling stations across the country. In 1962, the Election Commission, in collaboration with the Law Ministry, National Physical Laboratory and National Research Development Corporation, had made an agreement with Mysore Paints for supply of indelible ink for Lok Sabha and assembly elections. (PTI)

CBSE to introduce new subjects

New Delhi: The CBSE will introduce artificial intelligence (AI), early childhood care education and yoga as new subjects in school curriculum from the upcoming academic session, an official said. A decision to introduce the three subjects was taken at a recent meeting of the board’s governing body, he said. “The CBSE is introducing artificial intelligence as an optional 6th subject at Class IX from the session 2019-2020 onwards. To enhance the multidisciplinary approach in teaching learning and also to sensitise the new generation, it was decided that schools may start AI “inspire module” of 12 hours at Class VIII itself,” the senior board official said. He said the board has also decided to introduce yoga and early childhood education as elective subjects at senior secondary level. “The decision was taken considering the demand of schools supplemented by various reports that projected the huge requirement of yoga professionals and early childhood educators,” the official said. (PTI)

BJP leader shot at in Rajasthan

Jaipur: Four persons including a BJP leader were injured when three-four persons opened fire at them after a social function in Rajasthan’s Jhalawar district, police said Sunday. The incident occurred on Saturday night in Bhawanimandhi area where former chairman of Nagarpalika and BJP leader Ramlal Gurjar (58) was returning after attending a function, they said. The accused opened fire and targeted him, police said. “Gurjar and three others received bullet injuries. They were admitted to the district hospital where their condition is stable. Different teams have been formed to locate and arrest the accused,” they added. (PTI)
