Indian soldier killed in ceasefire violation along LoC

For the third time in a week, Pakistan army provoked India when they killed an Indian soldier guarding the Line of Control (LoC) in the Poonch sector of the Jammu division.

Grenadier Hari Bhakar received grave injuries during ceasefire violation on Saturday in Poonch Sector. He was rushed to nearest field hospital for immediate medical treatment. However, he succumbed to his injuries on Sunday.

"Unprovoked firing by Pakistan Army commenced in the evening of March 23 in which heavy caliber weapons and rockets were also fired. Own troops retaliated in strong measure inflicting adequate damage and casualties to Pakistan Army," said Lieutenant Colonel Devender Anand, defence spokesman at Jammu.

Hailing from Joosari village of Nagaur district in Rajasthan, martyr Hari Bhakar is survived by his mother Kamla Devi. "Grenadier Hari Bhakar was a brave soldier and the nation will always remain indebted to him for the supreme sacrifice," he said.

Greande Hari Bhakar is the third soldier to have been killed by the Pakistan army on the Line of Controls since last Monday. Rifleman Karamjeet Singh was killed when Pakistan army resorted to unprovoked mortar shelling and small arms fire on the Indian forward positions along the LoC in Sunderbani Sector on March 18. On the occasion of Holi, Pakistan army killed rifleman Yash Paulwas along the LoC in the Sunderbani sector on March 21.

Later Pakistan extended their shelling to Nowhsera sector targeting the Indian forward positions with mortars and small arms fire. "Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along LoC in Nowshera Sector", he said

Figures reveal that Pakistan has carried out more than 118 ceasefire violations on the Line of Control since Indian Air Force (IAF) jets bombed Jaish-e-Mohammad terror camps in Balakot area of Manshera in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan on February 26. Pakistan army even used artillery on March 6 to pound the Indian positions and civilian areas in the Rajouri and Pooch districts of Jammu division.

Five civilians including two women were killed and several others injured in the cross border shelling by Pakistan army on Indian positions and civilian areas since the tension gripped the LoC after the air strikes.

Official figures reveal that Pakistan carried out 1,599 ceasefire violations (CFV) along the Line of Control (LoC) in which 20 security force personnel were killed in 2018.

More than 109 people including 35 army soldiers and 21 BSF personnel were killed while 565 people were injured including 302 civilians and 263 security force personnel in the cross border firing since January 2016 to July 2018.
