Mumbai shocker! Denied snacks and tea, man murders wife; surrenders

The wife took her luggage and started going to her parents' house (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A shocking incident recently surfaced in Mumbai when a man allegedly killed his wife after she denied cooking snacks for him. The incident took place on Sunday in Kolhapur which is situated in Maharashtra. The accused had allegedly asked his wife to prepare tea and snacks for him.

The accused allegedly strangled his wife to death. The accused has been identified as Ramesh Gaikwad. After committing the crime, the accused surrendered to the police. According to the Press Trust of India's report, the incident took place in the Kurundwad village in the Shirol tehsil. The deceased, Mangal and the accused used to fight with each other on small issues. However, this time, the fight crossed all limits and took an ugly turn.

As he was observing a fast, the accused asked his wife to prepare some tea and snacks for him in the evening. Denying the same, the deceased started arguing with her husband. The accused alleged that his wife took her luggage and started going to her parents' house.

The deceased was standing at a bus stop when the accused approached her and asked her to go back to their house. When she abused the accused, he strangled her with nylon rope, killing her. Following this, the accused informed his family about the incident. The accused went to the police anad surrendered. The police booked the accused under Section 302 (punishment for murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Though marriage is an institution based on love, there are constant cases of crime in marriage which take place all across the country. A similar incident took place in Mumbai when a woman poisoned and then strangled his husband.

The accused first murdered her husband and then went to the police stating that somebody had killed him. It was alleged that the accused was not happy with her marriage as she had been married to her husband against her will. The accused did not gel with her in-laws and used to fight with her husband on petty issues. The autopsy of the dead body revealed that the accused had been strangled and poisoned. On being probed, the accused eventually confessed to her crime.
