Chhapaak: Deepika Padukone transforms into acid attack survivor in first look from Meghna Gulzar film. See it here

Actor Deepika Padukone has shared her first look from her upcoming film, Chhapaak. The actor plays acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal in the film, currently being shot under the direction of Raazi’s Meghna Gulzar.

Deepika appears to be in full prosthetic makeup in the image, which shows her in an artistic pose that highlights the scars and burns on her character’s face. In addition to revealing the first look, Deepika announced that filming on the project will commence today. Chhapaak will be released on January 10, 2020.

Meghna had previously teased that fans can expect to see a completely new Deepika in the film. “You won’t be seeing Deepika, you know. You will be seeing a disfigured Deepika,” the filmmaker said at a Chennai event. “There is an uncanny similarity between the survivor and Deepika.”

Laxmi has expressed her approval of Deepika being cast in the role. Speaking with Hindustan Times, she had said, “I am so happy that Deepika is playing the role. I have no right to judge her. How can I judge someone for something which I can’t do. She has played wonderful characters on screen and I believe she will give her best.”

The actor had recently shared a behind-the-scenes image from a table read session from the film, which also showed her co-actor, Vikrant Massey, in a bearded look. “All things are ready, if our mind be so,” Deepika quoted William Shakespeare in the caption.

Also read: Chhapaak actors Deepika Padukone, Vikrant Massey seen together for time in new pic from film’s sets. See here

Calling Chhapaak an ‘important film’, the actor had said at the recent Zee Cine Awards, “It’s so ironic that on the day of Holi, I am off to Delhi for the shooting of Chapaak. We will start shooting it on Monday. It’s a very important film and I feel that the story which we are showcasing in our film needs to be told.”

Chhapaak is Deepika’s first film since the massive Padmaavat. Vikrant recently appeared in Amazon Prime Video’s gangster drama Mirzapur, and delivered an acclaimed performance in Konkona Sen Sharma’s A Death in the Gunj.

Follow @htshowbiz for more
