Indian Air Force adds muscle to its firepower with induction of first four heavy-lift Chinook helicopters

Boeing CH-47F (I) Chinook I Photo credit: Boeing | Photo Credit: Twitter

Chandigarh: The Indian Air Force (IAF) inducted the first four of its 15 Chinook heavy-lift helicopters on Monday in Chandigarh. The new multi-role helicopters will add significant muscle to IAF’s capabilities along the borders with China and Pakistan.

The first four helicopters, to be deployed at Chandigarh's Air Force Station 12 Wing, were formally inducted in IAF by Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa here on March 25 (Monday). IAF took the delivery of the four choppers from Boeing on Sunday.

Dhanoa at the induction ceremony said the country faces multiple security challenges and IAF required vertical lift capabilities across a diversified terrain. "Chinook has been procured with India specific enhancements; it's a national asset"

Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa at induction ceremony of Chinook helicopters in Chandigarh:Country faces a multiple security challenges; we require vertical lift capability across a diversified terrain. Chinook has been procured with India specific enhancements; it's a national asset pic.twitter.com/UWwXvcz9Fc — ANI (@ANI) March 25, 2019

"Chinook helicopter can carry out military operations, not only during the day but in the night too; another unit will be created for the East in Dinjan (Assam). Induction of Chinook will be a game changer the way Rafale is going to be in the fighter fleet," he added.

CH-47F (I) Chinook is an advanced multi-role helicopter that will provide IAF with strategic airlift capability across a spectrum of combat and humanitarian missions.

“Chinook can deliver heavy payloads to high altitudes and is eminently suited for operations in the high Himalayas. It will greatly enhance India’s capabilities across a range of military and HADR (Human Assistance and Disaster Relief) missions,” IAF said in a statement on Twitter.

Visuals of Chinook heavy-lift helicopters at Air Force Station 12 Wing, in Chandigarh. Indian Air Force to induct the first unit of four Chinook helicopters today. pic.twitter.com/o6xoiOCrOa — ANI (@ANI) March 25, 2019

Explaining the capabilities of the heavy-lift helicopter, IAF said, Chinook is a tandem rotor helicopter which serves armed forces of 19 countries. It is a multi-role platform and is used for the transport of troops and material among other roles. It will greatly enhance IAF’s HADR capability.

Boeing on its website describes the CH-47F as "an advanced multi-mission helicopter for the US Army and international defence forces. It contains a fully integrated, digital cockpit management system, Common Aviation Architecture Cockpit and advanced cargo-handling capabilities that complement the aircraft's mission performance and handling characteristics."

India will induct a total of 15 such helicopters, worth $1.5 billion, which will be used to deploy men and machinery at high-altitude locations and for humanitarian missions.

The delivery of Boeing-made AH-64E Apaches multi-role combat helicopters will commence by July.

India signed a deal worth $3 billion with Boeing and US government on July 14 to procure 22 Apache and 15 Chinook helicopters.

Boeing signed a JV with Tata Advanced Systems Limited to form Tata Boeing Aerospace Limited which manufactures the fuselages for AH-64 Apache choppers. Tata Boeing Aerospace Limited is the sole producer of fuselages globally, as per Boeing.
