Fearing another strike by India, Pakistan deploys Chinese-made air defence system at LoC

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Islamabad: Fearing possible new strikes by the Indian Air Force (IAF), Pakistan has installed the Chinese-made medium-range air defence missiles in different parts of its country and military bases.

There has been a diplomatic tension between India and Pakistan following the Pulwama terror attack, in which 40 CRPF jawans lost their lives. India, in a retaliatory action, conducted the air strike on terrorist training camps in Pakistan’s Balakot on February 26.

On Saturday, Pakistani President Arif Alvi cornered India for having what he described as an “irresponsible” attitude amid ongoing bilateral tensions that worsened after IAF intrusion inside Pakistan last month.

“After the Pulwama attack, India blamed Pakistan without any evidence. India did not adhere to international laws and violated Pakistan’s airspace,” Alvi said, referring to the 14 February attack.

As per reports, air defence missiles, deployed near the Indian border, include five LY-80 (HQ-16) surface-to-air missile units and IBIS-150 surveillance radar batteries that can track and destroy a variety of aerial targets at longer ranges flying at low and medium altitude.

Chinese-made Rainbow CH-4 and CH-5 drones to conduct surveillance and potential strikes along the Line of Control (LoC) have also been deployed by the Pakistani military.

Pakistan came under fire after the Pulwama terror attack with several countries across the world condemning it for harbouring terrorist organisations on its soil.

Following the attack, India had withdrawn the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status accorded to Pakistan. The Indian government also asked Pakistan to take stern action against terrorists and terrorist groups operating on its soil.

Earlier this month, considering the escalated tension with its neighbouring country, India deployed the aircraft carrier INS Vikramaditya and nuclear submarine INS Chakra in the Northern Arabian sea off Pakistan coast.
