IAF inducts first Chinook helicopters, BS Dhanoa says big boost for national security

The Indian Air Force (IAF) on Monday formally inducted the first unit of four heavy-lift Chinook helicopters in Chandigarh. Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa announced the induction at a ceremony and said the helicopters are national assets.

In his address, BS Dhanoa said, "India faces multiple security challenges and that a vertical lift capability across a diversified terrain is required."

Dhanoa added that Chinook has been procured with India specific enhancements and can carry out military operations even at night.

BS Dhanoa also said that the induction of Chinook will be a game changer, the same way Rafale is going to be in the fighter fleet and informed that another unit of heavy-lift choppers will be created for the East in Dinjan (Assam).

CH-47F (I) #Chinook : Quick Facts

Chinook is a heavy lift, tandem rotor helicopter which serves armed forces of 19 countries. It is a multi-role platform and is used for the transport of troops and material among other roles. It will greatly enhance IAF’s HADR capability. pic.twitter.com/15kRLyC4aP Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) March 24, 2019

hinook helicopters will be deployed at Chandigarh's Air Force Station 12 Wing.

IAF received the delivery of the four choppers from Boeing on Sunday (March 24).

IAF received its first CH-47F (I) Chinook heavy-lift helicopter on February 10, 2019 at the Mundra port in Gujarat.

CH-47F (I) Chinook is said to provide Indian Air Force with unmatched strategic airlift capability, with an advanced multi-mission characteristic.

The aircraft have been inducted after being tested in diverse and extreme conditions.

The Boeing aircraft is said to have a fully integrated, digital cockpit management system, Common Aviation Architecture Cockpit and advanced cargo-handling capabilities that complement the aircraft's mission performance and handling characteristics.IAF, in a tweet had said, "Chinook is a heavy lift, tandem rotor helicopter which serves armed forces of 19 countries. It is a multi-role platform and is used for the transport of troops and material among other roles. It will greatly enhance IAF’s HADR capability."
