Shamshera: Vaani Kapoor reveals why she is learning Kathak for the Ranbir Kapoor-starrer

Why Vaani Kapoor is learning Kathak for Shamshera

After wrapping up her untitled big-ticket Yash Raj Films project, starring Hrithik Roshan and Tiger Shroff as the male leads, Vaani Kapoor will soon begin shooting for the film studio’s next, Shamshera, wherein she has been cast opposite Ranbir Kapoor. In this larger-than-life entertainer, the actress will be seen playing the character of the most desirable performer from the heartland of India.

Vaani is among the best dancers we have in Bollywood; a glimpse of her dancing prowess was seen in her last film Befikre (2016). However, for her role in Shamshera – which will be directed by Agneepath director Karan Malhotra – the actress is all set to push the envelope. She has been training in Kathak for the last few months so that she can pull off the intricate choreography being set for her with ease. The lady has been spending hours every single day to perfect her dance and body postures.

Talking about the preparation, Vaani said, “Since Shamshera is set in a particular time, the dance sequences require me to have a very Indian, very classical body language, which is why I started taking Kathak classes to learn the nuances and the grace. Karan specifically wanted me to adapt to a more traditional Indian dance form and break from the western style to do justice to the choreography that is being set for me.”

The mega project will have jaw-dropping action sequences and will feature Ranbir in the role of a dacoit. “Karam se dacait, dharam se azaad,” says the tagline of the film.

Shamshera was announced in May last year with a 52-second teaser that showed Ranbir in a never-seen-before avatar. Below, watch it:

Shamshera, produced by Aditya Chopra under the film production banner of Yash Raj Films, will star Sanjay Dutt as the antagonist. The film is scheduled to release on July 30 next year. It will clash with SS Rajamouli’s Telugu biggie RRR that stars Ram Charan, Jr NTR, Alia Bhatt and Ajay Devgn in the lead roles.
