UAE swaps a British arms consultant at the centre of bribery scandal for Dubai princess

The UAE has swapped a British arms consultant suspected of being at the centre of a helicopter corruption scam in India for a runaway Dubai princess in a bizarre extradition.

'Smooth' business dealer Christian Michel, 57, is one of three middlemen being investigated by the Central Bureau of Intelligence (CBI) over claims they accepted bribes to buy luxury aircraft for politicians in 2013.

He was extradited from the United Arab Emirates last month to face police over the deal and given to India in exchange for Princess Latifa bint Mohammed Al Maktoum, The Sunday Telegraph reports.

'Smooth' business dealer Christian Michel, 57, who's accused of being involved in a multi-million pound bribery scandal was given over to India by Dubai

He was swapped in exchange for runaway princess Latifa bint Mohammed Al Maktoum, who tried to escape her father's regime in Dubai but was captured by Indian officials

The Princess had tried to flee Dubai in a yacht last year but was intercepted by the Indian Navy. She was last seen on March 5 being dragged into a rubber boat by Indian and Emirati forces.

The 33-year-old royal was trying to escape the regime amid claims that her and her sisters were frequently heavily medicated and described as mentally ill.

European and Asian diplomatic sources in New Delhi told the Telegraph India struck swapped the princess for Mr Michel, who owns a home and business in Dubai.

Asked about the alleged extradition swap, a member of Mr Michel’s legal team, speaking on condition of anonymity, told The Sunday Telegraph: 'That there was a swap deal is my understanding too.'

The Princess (left) escaped with Ms Jauhiainen (right) and planned to start a new life in America but three weeks into her escape bid, their yacht was surrounded by Indian forces

The arms consultant was wanted in India for his part in the £400million purchase of 12 helicopters for Indian politicians during the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance government.

His personal books showed he paid £5.4m to Indian Air Force officers, £7.5m to bureaucrats and £12.5 - £14m to an unidentified political family, according to CBI investigators.

But Mr Michel claims the CBI had coerced him into signing a confession.

Princess Latifa's identity card (pictured above) which states her full name as Sheikha Latifa Mohd Rashed Almaktoum

This photo, released by the UAE in December, show Princess Latifa posing with the former UN high commissioner for human rights Mary Robinson. The emirate released the image to help find the 'missing' royal

Radha Stirling of Detained in Dubai, a criminal justice NGO in the UAE, said India and Dubai had shown blatant disregard for 'standard norms of diplomatic relations'.

Princess Latifa's father, Sheikh Mohammad Al Maktoum, is the ruler of Dubai and the Maktoum family.

According to campaigners, Latifa was snatched from a yacht after trying to flee with the help of French former spy Hervé Jaubert and long-time friend Tiina Jauhiainen.

Rights groups had called on the UAE to disclose the whereabouts and condition of Latifa, following reports in the international media that she was forcibly returned after fleeing the Gulf Arab state

She changed her clothes and sunglasses, and along with Ms. Jauhiainen crossed into Oman.

They then headed out into international waters by inflatable boat and jet ski to meet Mr Jaubert in a yacht flying the US flag.

They set sail for India, where Latifa hoped to claim political asylum in the US, but were stopped by armed men just 30 miles from the coast.

Her plight was the subject of a December 6 BBC documentary, Escape From Dubai: The Mystery Of The Missing Princess.
