Gujarat: Murder accused mugs biker on gunpoint

On Saturday afternoon a 35-year-old man from Punjab looted a bike from Shaherkotada near on gunpoint. The accused was later nabbed by police from Naroda Patiya and a country-made pistol was recovered from him with two rounds.

The accused was identified as Major Singh Santramsingh Shashi, 35, a resident of Hoshiarpur in Punjab. As per police, the incident took place on Saturday near Vijay Mill located on Memco road. The accused was travelling in auto from Kalupur railway station when he suddenly jumped out of the auto and threatened the youth with his gun. The accused then looted his bike and fled towards Naroda side.

Regarding the matter, Ahmedabad police control room was informed, who immediately alerted Naroda police station staff and the accused was nabbed from Naroda Patiya area by Naroda police team. While searching cops recovered a country-made pistol and two live rounds of bullet from him.

During the investigation of police, it was revealed on March 20, Shashi had shot his wife Rajni and 16-year-old daughter Priya in Punjab after there was a complaint of harassment lodged against him by his daughter and wife. In the incident, his daughter died, while his wife's condition is serious and right now he is wanted in the murder case.

Nirajkumar Badgujar, DCP Zone-4 said " We have come to know that Shashi is a drug addict. After shooting his family he came to Gujarat by train on Saturday morning. Later in the afternoon, he took an auto from Kalupur railway station to Memco.

While travelling, he doubted the auto driver was taking him to the police station, in fear, he jumped from the moving auto and threatened a passerby biker with his and looted him."

As per police source, they have also recovered Shashi a bag from the near Memco area. While searching bag officials recovered a drug, cash, mobile and some clothes. Regarding the matter, Gujarat police have informed the Punjab police and further investigation is on.
