Fact Check: Did Yogi Adityanath celebrate Holi wearing a raincoat?

This Holi, Yogi Adityanath had put up photos on Twitter celebrating the festival, where he is indeed not wearing any raincoat. (Photo: Twitter)

The social media played a rough Holi with Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath this time. A picture of the UP chief minister is doing the rounds on Facebook, with the claim that Adityanath was India's first chief minister to have celebrated Holi wearing a raincoat.

The post was shared on Monday by Facebook page 'Feku Express' which has more than six lakh followers.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the post to be misleading as the photo collage is two-year old.

The archived version of the Facebook post can be seen here.

The message with the photo reads: "India's first specimen chief minister to celebrate Holi wearing a raincoat."

The picture shows Adityanath wearing a raincoat covered in bright colours of Holi.

The post was shared by more than 1,700 Facebook users and had received over 3,600 reactions.

It is true that Yogi wore a raincoat while playing Holi but that was in 2017.

By using Google reverse image search, AFWA found a video where Yogi was seen wearing the raincoat and speaking to the media. The original video was posted on news channel India TV's official account. The viral photo collage is from the same video.

The Holi function is from Gorakhpur where the BJP had recorded a landslide victory in the state legislative Assembly polls. Yogi Adityanath can be heard speaking to the media at 01:05 minutes of the video.

The claim that he was the chief minister at that time also doesn't stand technically correct. The results of the Uttar Pradesh Assembly polls were announced on March 11. Yogi was announced the chief minister of UP on March 19, and the video was shot on March 13.

This Holi, Yogi Adityanath had put up photos on Twitter celebrating the festival, where he is indeed not wearing any raincoat. The Uttar Pradesh chief minister went to Gorakhpur to celebrate Holi this year.





INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Yogi Adityanath is India's first chief minister to celebrate Holi wearing a raincoat. Conclusion The photo is two years old from the time when Yogi wasn’t announced as the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
