Arkan Army camps on Myanmar, Bangladesh borders, worry India

India has found Arkan Rohingiya Salvation Army (ARSA) has set up new bases at Myanmar and Bangladesh where cadre are being trained to launch massive attacks on security forces and big infrastructural projects. As per the intelligence report, some camps are situated very close to Rohingya refugee camps in Cox Bazar in Bangladesh. Their target are infrastructural projects between India and Myanmar.

As per the report, ARSA is recruiting people from Rohingya refugees camps in Bangladesh and are brainwashing and radicalising them and then giving them weapons to fight against security forces. Myanmar government too has alleged that ARSA has three training camps inside Bangladesh and many Rohingiya are joining them.

Contrary to it, Bangladesh denied existence of any such camps on their soil and demanded support from international community to help them to rehabilitate them.

Recently Indian Army carried out a mega operation to eliminate threats posed by insurgents along the Indo-Myanmar border.

Joint operations between the Indian and Myanmar armies were carried out from February 17 and March 2 to thwart a threat to a mega infrastructure project vital for the Northeast.

The Indian Army carried out a major operation on the eastern front targeting the Arakan Army, which is designated as a terrorist group by Myanmar. According to assessments, the mega Kaladan Project was under threat from the Arakan Army. The Kaladan Project is a transit project will connect Kolkata to Sitwe port in Myanmar.

The project will finally end up linking Mizoram and is a new gateway to the landlocked Northeast. The project will reduce the distance from Kolkata to Mizoram by nearly a thousand kilometres and bring down the travel time by at least four days.

With intelligence assessments point to threats to the Kaladan Project, the Indian Army planned a mission to flush out insurgent groups that had set up bases south of Mizoram in Myanmar.

It was found that the Arakan Army is also well trained in setting up Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) making the threat to the project and it workers even greater. "This was a serious concern both for India and Myanmar," a source said.

The source also said that in January this year, six Myanmar border guards were injured when 10 ARSA ambushed a border guard post near Wet Kyein village in Maungdaw township in the north of the state.

KALADAN PROJECT
