Wife killer to be deported after serving 25-year jail sentence

A man who stabbed his new Melbourne wife to death after Australia Day drinks will be deported after spending at least 20 years behind bars.

Supreme Court Justice Lesley Ann Taylor today sentenced Douglas Derick Eustace, 44, to 25 years’ jail for actions she described as "brutal and utterly senseless".

Eustace has pleaded guilty to his wife's murder in January this year. (9NEWS)

“You committed the ultimate act of family violence,” Justice Taylor told the court.

Eustace met Mary Freeman while on holiday and proposed to her within weeks so he could return from India to live in Australia.

Ms Freeman, 41, soon became unhappy in her new marriage and the pair slept in single beds as tensions rose, the Supreme Court had been told.

Less than four months after their wedding, Eustace fatally stabbed Ms Freeman 12 times at her Hallam home, shortly after midnight on January 27, 2017.

The court heard Eustace retrieved a long knife from the kitchen before a loud argument ensued.

Eustace told police he then found Freeman in the bathroom flicking a small green knife.

"Oh so that's the way you want to play? Let's play," Eustace then said before launching his attack.

He had already stabbed his wife ten times when he fought off housemates trying to stop him.

But Eustace broke free, returned to the room and stabbed Ms Freeman twice more saying, ‘Let me go, I want to kill this bitch’,” the court heard.

Ms Freeman died crouching and crying.

Mary Freeman was murdered in 2017. (Nine/Supplied)

Eustace handed himself into police, casually smoking a cigarette while telling people outside the station that he'd stabbed his wife.

He pleaded guilty in September to her murder.

Eustace will be deported to India at the conclusion of his sentence.

Ms Freeman's daughter, 16-year-old Joanna Selvam, wept as she read a statement to court at an earlier plea hearing.

"The person my mother was supposed to trust was just a facade," she said.
