Running a school won’t keep murderer out of jail

jail

High Court

Court says just because man, who killed ex-classmate’s colleague due to jealousy, runs a school, his sentence cannot be suspendedA man from Uttar Pradesh, who is infor killing the colleague of a former classmate due to jealousy, approached thefor suspension of his sentence. As reason, he said he was running a school in UP. The HC refused to suspend his 10-year imprisonment sentence saying, “Merely because the accused is running a school and is from a respectable family, that itself is not a ground for suspending the sentence.”Ravi Rana Singh of Allahabad in UP, was a student of the National Institute of Fashion Technology, HSR Layout. He was in love with Aparna Venkatesh, a classmate, who had not reciprocated. Aparna started working in a private company after completing the course. On October 16, 2011, when Singh visited Aparna’s house in HSR Layout, he was upset to find Kaushik, a colleague of Aparna’s, there. A quarrel ensued. Singh stabbed Kaushik thrice and the latter succumbed to injuries later. Aparna was also grievously stabbed. While trying to jump out of the first-floor house, Singh sustained fractures and was nabbed by the patrol police.Singh was charged with murder and voluntarily causing grevious hurt. However, he was sentenced by the trial court in December 2018 for ‘Causing death by negligence’ and ‘voluntarily causing grievous hurt.’ The sentence for the former was 10 years imprisonment while it was five years imprisonment for the latter. This sentence was challenged by Singh in the HC. An application was also filed in the petition for suspension of sentence and releasing him on bail.Rejecting the application in the case, the HC said that there was “no material placed on record to show that this appeal could not be heard or the matter could not be disposed of early by this Court. The case has come up before the Court for the first time and the judgement was delivered only in December 2018. Such being the case, there cannot be any apprehension that the matter could not be heard and disposed of early as submitted by the counsel for the accused.”
