Court extends Robert Vadra's interim protection from arrest

The interim protection from arrest of Robert Vadra and Manoj Arora accused in a money laundering case has been extended till March 27. Vadra's counsel argued that he himself flew down from abroad and joined the investigation when he learnt that his office was raided. The probing agency Enforcement Directorate, will submit its arguments on the next date of hearing.

KTS Tulsi counsel for Vadra argued that he has been co-operating with the investigation. "Interrogators want a specific answer and this can not be counted as non-cooperation," said Tulsi. He also added that Vadra has no property outside India and the probing agency has relevant documents with them as well.

The Enforcement Directorate had earlier sought his custodial interrogation. The agency had accused Vadra of not cooperating into the probe, however, the court has asked granted relief to him till March 25 with a direction that he has to cooperate with the agency.

The special public prosecutors representing the agency told the court of Special Judge Arvind Kumar that Vadra is not cooperating despite several opportunities and his custodial interrogation is required and he is a high profile identity would tamper with the evidence and hamper the investigation.

Following the arguments, the matter was given the next date to March 25 while extending till then Vadra's interim protection.

During the proceedings, the ED alleged that Vadra's conduct during the course of investigation raises even more apprehensions that he is a key to unearthing the modus operandi and black money. While they also accused co-accused Manoj Arora of evading the process of law.

The agency also revealed the investigation was at a crucial stage and various incriminating documents have come on record.

"There are ample evidences in the form of e-mails retrieved from seized electronic devices as well as material information gathered from electronic surveillance showing involvement of Vadra, along with his associates in undisclosed overseas assets which he, during course of investigation has denied blatantly taking advantage of interim protection," said a source.

AGENCY’S TAKE

The Enforcement Directorate on Monday opposed Robert Vadra’s plea seeking quashing of a money laundering case in which he was questioned by the probe agency, saying it was not maintainable as he “wilfully suppressed” material facts from the court.
