Congress leader Manish Tewari calls Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa’s Rafale remark ‘politically loaded’

Congress leader Manish Tewari. | File image

New Delhi: Senior Congress leader and party spokesperson Manish Tewari on Tuesday courted fresh controversy by picking on the Indian Air Force and its chief Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa for the latter’s comments that “Pakistan won’t come near the Line of Control” once Rafale jets join the fleet.

Taking to micro-blogging platform Twitter, Tewari said Dhanoa’s statement is “politically loaded”. “I usually refrain from joining issues publicly with our people in uniform. Regrettably, this statement by Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa is both politically loaded in election time and has implications on India’s current deterrence capabilities. Very, Very avoidable,” the Congress leader said.

I usually refrain from joining issues publicly with our people in uniform. Regrettably this statement by Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa is both politically loaded in election time & has implications on India’s current deterrence capabilities.Very Very avoidable. https://t.co/uL4OSMmiLU — Manish Tewari (@ManishTewari) March 26, 2019

On Monday, speaking to news agency ANI, Dhanoa said that with the inclusion of the French-made Rafale jets, forces across the border won’t dare to loiter anywhere near the International Border.

“When Rafale comes in, it will ensure that the deterrence of our air defence will increase manifold and they (Pakistan) will not come anywhere near our Line of Control or border. That kind of capability we will possess, for which, presently they (Pakistan) don’t have an answer,” the Air Chief Marshal said.

Tewari’s comments come in the wake of the controversy surrounding the Rafale deal between the Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance government and the French government after the deal remained in limbo since the previous UPA-II government, led by the Congress party.

Dhanoa’s statement, however, referred to the recent escalation of tension between India and Pakistan last month following the horrific Pulwama terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir carried out by terror groups based out of Pakistan.

Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot that falls in the Khyber- Pakhtunkhwa region, along with Muzaffarabad and Chakothi in PoK. The terror group is responsible for the dastardly terror attack in Pulwama on February 14 in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The Indian attack was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Sukhoi jets that provided back-up throughout the operation. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.

The very next morning, Pakistan Air Force jets entered Indian airspace from Nowshera sector but were immediately sent back by IAF jets on February 27.
