Trinamool vs BJP in Didi’s West Bengal

It is increasingly becoming clear that the electoral battle of 2019 will vary significantly in the intensity of competition and the range of competitors from one state to another. While many are arguing that Lucknow is the gateway to Delhi, it is also being conceded that a critical battleground state is West Bengal. This state in eastern India is important for several reasons. It has a strong state-based party in power -- the Trinamool Congress, that is hoping to emerge as a key player in national politics.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) too has focussed on this state hoping to emerge as the direct challenger to the Trinamool Congress, in the process pushing the Left parties (and the Congress) to the sidelines. This is also one state where the BJP hopes to make up for some of the losses it could suffer in North India.

What are the emerging patterns of political competition in the state?

Current trends indicate that the Trinamool Congress appears to be holding its ground though the BJP could well emerge as its key opponent. This implies that in the Lok Sabha polls the Trinamool could well retain the bulk of its seats and the BJP could emerge in second place with a reasonable increase in its seats share.

Several factors seem to indicate this trend. With the Congress failing to arrive at an alliance with the Left parties, the opportunity for the BJP to emerge as the principal opposition to the Trinamool is patently evident. In the last Mood of the Nation poll conducted a year ago, by Lokniti-CSDS, it was clearly evident that while the Trinamool Congress was ahead of the pack, the BJP appeared to be the favourite of close to one-fourth of the voters and in the absence of an alliance the Left parties and the Congress were in a distant third and fourth position.

Moreover, the BJP vote appeared concentrated in a few pockets while the Left and Congress votes seemed to me more evenly spread out. There is limited proof of any effort of the Left and the Congress to expand their presence in the past few months. As the ruling party in the state, the Trinamool has been visible and active and the BJP has clearly made the state an important focus of its attention with both the party president and the prime minister spending time in addressing public rallies and galvanizing party cadres.

If one were to notice the trends since the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, the vote share of the Trinamool Congress has remained more or less unchanged. It has hovered around 45 per cent across the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, the 2016 assembly polls and the Mood of the Nation poll. In the case of the BJP, its vote share saw a significant dip in the 2016 assembly poll as compared to the 2014 Lok Sabha polls but has staged an impressive recovery ever since. There is not much of a variation in the Congress vote share though in the case of the Left, the Mood of the Nation poll indicates a sharp decline in its vote share as compared to the 2016 assembly polls.

If this trend continues in the next two months one is likely to see the Trinamool Congress see its seat share be more or less remain in the early thirties (it won 34 seats in 2014) with the BJP inching towards double digits (it won two seats in 2014) with the Left and the Congress conceding political space (they won two and four seats respectively in 2014).

A few more trends need to be budgeted into this analysis. If one were to notice the preferred prime ministerial choice among the people of West Bengal, the support for both Narendra Modi and Mamata Banerjee has seen a rise. Till the January 2018 LoknitiCSDS Polls, Modi was a few percentage points ahead of Mamata. It peaked in May 2017, when across the country too, the support for the prime minister had risen. The last Mood of the Nation poll done by Lokniti-CSDS indicates that in the prime ministerial sweep stakes in the state, Mamata has overtaken Modi by eight percentage points. This seems to be in consonance with the trends one notices in terms of vote share of parties.

A few other data points to buttress the above arguments. If one were to measure the net satisfaction levels (satisfaction with government minus dissatisfaction with the government) with the central and state government as evidenced from the Mood of the Nation poll in May 2018, it is noticed that the Mamata Banerjee government enjoyed a net satisfaction of 22 percentage points while the Narendra Modi led government at the Centre had a 1 percentage point net satisfaction.

It is also noticed that on two other factors the support for the BJP was close to its vote share as projected by the Mood of the Nation survey of May 2017. Firstly, three of every 10 respondents in the state felt that `acche din` had been realised while more than six of every 10 felt that the good days were not yet on the horizon.

Similarly, a little over half the respondents in West Bengal said that the Modi government should not get a second chance while three of every 10 said that it should get a second chance.

The above trends indicate that there is an element of consistency in the support that both the Trinamool Congress and the BJP appear to enjoy and the electoral battle in West Bengal is geared to be a fight between these two parties who were, interestingly allies two decades.

Also read: BJP's Arjun Singh disrupts train services over TMC workers molesting woman supporter

ALSO WATCH| Trinamool removes Congress from its logo
