CPI(M) puts its best forward for LS battle

CPI(M) puts its best forward for LS battle

Five sitting MPs, four MLAs figure in list

The Communist Party of India(Marxist) is pulling out all the stops to win the Lok Sabha elections from Kerala. The candidates list released by the party amply reflects its determination to send a decent complement of MPs to the Lok Sabha from the state.

The CPI(M) will contest in 16 seats and the CPI in four seats. The LJD and the JD(S), the CPI(M) allies in the LDF, had voiced their resentment on being denied tickets But both, especially the LJD led by MP Veerendra Kumar, have been pacified with assurances of greater representation in the upcoming local bodies elections.

That the CPI(M) has decided to put its best foot forward is evident from its decision to retain five sitting MPs: A Sampath(Attingal), PK Sreemathy(Kannur), Innocent(Chalakudy) , MB Rajesh(Palakkad) and PK Biju(Alathur).

A measure of the CPI(M)'s resolve to field the maximum number of winning candidates is clear from the decision to field for the Lok Sabha four sitting MLAs: A Pradeep Kumar, who represents Kozhikode North in the Assembly(Kozhikode), Aranmula MLA, Veena George(Pathanamthitta), Nilambur MLA PV Anwar(Ponnani) and Arur MLA AM Arif (Alappuzha.

Likewise, two district secretaries - both political heavyweights - have been drafted for Kottayam and Vadakara. While Kannur district secretary P. Jayarajan will try his luck from Vadakara, Kottyayam district chief V N Vasavan, has entered the Kottayam fray.

Other candidates the party has decided to field are also political heavyweights. They are: former Rajya Sabha members P Rajeev( Ernakulam), KN Balagopal(Kollam), SFI president VP Sanu(Malappuram), former district secretary KP Satish Chandran(Kasaragod) and left-backed Independent Joyce George from Idukky.

Of course, the opposition has found fault with the candidature of P. Jayarajan against whom a chargesheet has been filed in the Shukooor murder case. But the CPI(M) has ignored the protests and has fielded Jayarajan whose organizational skill and hold on the party machinery are formidable. There is also a perception that Jayarajan is more sinned against than sinning. The FIR which has been filed against him has nothing new and that the case against him is weak. Jayarajan is the living symbol of the brutality of the RSS. RSS criminals had brutally attacked him by entering his house.

Another CPI(M) candidate who is under a cloud is PV Anwar who is allegedly involved in a financial fraud case. Besides, his water theme park in Kakkadampoyil in Kozhikode district has been set up by violating revenue and environmental rules, allege opposition. But Anwar has secured the ticket mainly because of his political influence cutting across parties. Besides, he has the solid backing of Kanthapuram AP Abubacker Musaliyar, who is the chief of the AP faction of Sunnis, which is quite influential in Ponnani from where Anwar will fight the LS polls.

And Ponnani is poised for a change this time around, feel the CPI(M) as IUML candidate and sitting MP ET Mohammed Basheer won by a slim majority of only 20,000 votes in 2014. Basheer had won in 2009 with a thumping majority of over 80,000 votes. A nervous Basheer had even explored the possibility of shifting to Malappuram. But he failed with the IUML candidate from Malappuram P K Kunhalkikkutty refusing to fall into the trap.

—(IPA Service)
