Indian Man kills Wife for Refusing to make Snacks and Tea

Mangal said something to her husband which enraged him

An Indian man by the name of Ramesh Gaikwad, aged 49, from Kolhapur, Maharashtra, allegedly killed his wife after she refused to prepare snacks and tea for him.

Gaikwad strangled Mangal, aged 38, with a nylon rope in a fit of anger. After coming to terms with what he had done, he handed himself to police on Saturday, March 23, 2019.

The incident took place approximately 55 kilometres away from Kolhapur in Kurundwad town.

A police officer said that Gaikwad and Mangal used to argue all the time, even the smallest of issues.

The quarrelling took a turn for the worst on Saturday, March 23, 2019, when he asked her to make some snacks for him as he had been fasting, and tea in the evening.

However, Mangal refused to do what her husband had asked and an argument broke out. This resulted in the woman packing her things and leaving to go to her parent’s house.

Mangal was waiting at a bus stop when Gaikwad saw her and asked her to come back home. She obliged and they returned to their home.

However, once they got home, Mangal said something to her husband which enraged him and led to him strangling her to death with a nylon rope.

The police official said:

Once he calmed down and realised what he did, Gaikwad informed his family about the incident and went to Kurundwad police station to confess.

Gaikwad was arrested and booked under section 302 (Punishment for murder) of the Indian Penal Code.

There have been a number of incidents in India in which a man has murdered his wife following an argument.

In another case which took place in Delhi, Prem Singh was arrested for strangling his wife.

Singh would often come home drunk and this would lead to frequent arguments between him and his wife.

On Tuesday, March 5, 2019, Singh came home drunk and the couple had another argument. This led to an altercation which resulted in Singh strangling his wife to death.

He then slept next to her body for the night before fleeing the scene the next morning.

Police raided a number of locations before Singh was arrested in Rajasthan. Singh admitted killing his wife and sleeping next to her lifeless body.

He was booked under the charges of murder and produced before the court. Singh was later jailed for his crime.
