CBI findings in Sardha Chit Fund case 'very, very serious': SC

CBI findings in Sardha Chit Fund case 'very, very serious': SC

The Supreme Court today said the fresh status report presented by the Central Bureau of Investigations (CBI) in the Sardha Chit Fund scam has made some “very, very serious” revelations relating to the recent interrogation of the then Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar.

A bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi said it cannot “close its eyes” if some “very, very serious facts” are disclosed to it and directed the CBI to file an application seeking appropriate relief against Kumar, who had earlier headed the state SIT on the chit fund case.

The bench, which also comprised Justices Deepak Gupta and Sanjiv Khanna, granted 10 days to the probe agency for filing the application.

Kumar and others can respond to the plea seven days thence.

Supreme Court said that as the CBI’s status report was filed in a sealed cover and that it cannot pass any order without hearing the other side.

The apex court was hearing the CBI’s contempt petition against various senior officials of the West Bengal government, including state’s DGP and then Kolkata police chief on the ground of non-cooperation in its probe and alleged destruction of evidence.

The Kolkata police stopped a team of CBI officers from entering the residence of Kumar, the then Kolkata Police Commissioner, on 3 February when they had gone to question him in connection with chit fund scam cases.

The move had prompted chief minister Mamata Banerjee to launch a sit-in-protest in the heart of the city to protest against "the attack on constitutional norms".

On 5 February, the apex court had directed Kumar to appear before the central investigative agency in connection with the matter. It had also said that no coercive step should be taken against Kumar.

Acting on the apex court's order, the CBI had questioned Kumar for five days in Shillong.

On 19 February, Kumar was appointed additional director general of police and inspector general of police in the CID.

And, on 2 March, the West Bengal government gave additional charge of the state directorate of economic offences and the special task force (STF) of Kolkata Police to Kumar

Kumar, who took over as the state CID chief after completing his tenure as the city police commissioner, would hold additional charge of the two departments until further orders, a home department official said Saturday.

The order was issued by the state home department late evening on 1 March. Kumar, a 1989-batch IPS officer, had been embroiled in a controversy for being at loggerheads with the CBI over its investigations into the Saradha chit fund and Rose Valley scams.
