Pregnant Gold Coast nurse who was kidnapped in India is found dead in a canal

A pregnant Australian nurse who was kidnapped outside her parents' home in India has been found dead in a canal.

Ravneet Kaur, who lives on the Gold Coast, went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March.

Her body was found on Monday night in a canal 200km away in Lehragaga.

Police believe Ms Kaur, 29, was sedated, driven away and killed before her body was dumped.

When she was abducted at 11.30am, Ms Kaur was on a video call with her husband Jaspreet Singh who was back in Australia, police said.

Officers have arrested a woman in connection with the crime.

Tragic: A pregnant Australian nurse (pictured) who was kidnapped outside her parents' home in India has been found dead in a canal

Ravneet Kaur (pictured with her husband and their daughter), who lives on the Gold Coast, went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March

Ms Kaur arrived in India on February 27 to visit her friends and family with her four-year-old daughter.

The Indian-born woman was meant to return on March 22.

Ms Kaur's devastated father Harvinder Singh told the Hindustan Times that his daughter was strangled - but this has not been confirmed.

Indian Inspector Mohit Dhawan told the Gold Coast Bulletin: 'She was murdered on the day she was kidnapped and her body was disposed of in a canal.'

Indian authorities are now working with the Australian High Commission in New Dehli, police said.

Ravneet Kaur went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March. Her body was found on Monday night in a canal 200km away in Lehragaga

Ms Kaur (pictured with her husband) arrived in India, where she was born, on February 27 to visit her friends and family with her four-year-old daughter

Jaspreet Singh last week held back tears outside his Gold Coast home as he told 9News: 'I just want my wife back.'

He said he did not trust Indian authorities to solve the case.

Ms Kaur, a mother-of-one, had been employed at Tricare in the Gold Coast and was described as a devoted worker and mother and was reportedly expecting a son.

Ms Kaur's colleague of six years, Kerrie Hawker, said she was devastated to hear the news.

'She had a heart of gold, she wouldn't hurt anyone. She was so loving and her smile would light up a room. It was the most beautiful smile,' she said.

A spokesman for the Australian Federal Police told Daily Mail Australia that it is aware of the death of an Australian citizen in India.

Daily Mail Australia has contacted the Australian High Commission in New Dehli for comment.
