Only we have seen pellet guns in last 5 years says Omar Abdullah – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR, MAR 26 (PTK): Former chief minister of Jammu and Kashmir Omar Abdullah has lambasted the Centre for attempting to create the conflicted state into a ‘war-zone’ by maintaining the ‘enmity’ between India and Pakistan.

Omar Abdullah criticism on the Modi government for stopping invitees from entering the Pakistan High Commission to mark Pakistan’s National Day as several separatists leaders from Jammu and Kashmir were invited to the event.

He said, “In this election, there are talks of enmity between India and Pakistan, there are talks of maintaining tensions. For the first time I saw, in Pakistan High Commission”.

Omar further added “I have seen that people were stopped from entering the Pakistan High Commission on Pakistan Day, saying don’t go inside. There were efforts made to keep the situation between both countries tensed, instead of making them better. If the situation will get tensed, who will be responsible? They want to create a war zone in Jammu and Kashmir”.

He further accused the government of failing to acknowledge the issues of the state and moreover pushing it to a grim by using pellet guns and tightening of Armed Forces.

He said, “Do we want a government for five years that does not respect our emotions or does not acknowledge the issues of Jammu and Kashmir. When people told us that the Army should not stand with a stick as it seems that they are different forces. We took the stick from them during our tenure. But today, in the hands of the Forces there are only guns. This is the situation in Jammu and Kashmir.”

“Only we have seen pellet guns in the last five years. We have seen a lot in the last 5 years, we have seen a lot of conspiracy,” he added.

He accentuated on the educated, youths of Kashmir who turned to militancy requisitely and pinned the blame of the same on Centre. He further pointed out how kids from Kashmir studying in parts of the country were attacked, following the Pulwama attack

He said, “So many youths were killed, so many youths turned into militants. Educated youths became helpless and picked up guns. So many of our youths we wanted to shine, but they were put in graves.”

“Do we want that for the next five years, Kashmiris are being the target. Our kids studying in Dehradun, Jaipur, Mumbai, Kolkata, Punjab, they were chased away from there because of BJP and RSS. We waited for 10 days for the Prime Minister to speak of our rights. But the Centre did not save our Kashmiri kids, but in Punjab, Delhi and Haryana our Sikh brothers saved our kids. The job that Modi sahaab was supposed to do, our Sardar brothers did it,” he added. (PTK)

Omar welcomes Pakistan’s announcement to open Sharda Peeth Corridor

SRINAGAR, MAR 26 (PTK): Welcoming announcement to open the Sharda Peeth Corridor, former chief minister Omar Abdullah expressed hope that Government of Pakistan (GoP) will also open other routes to facilitate greater people to people contact.

Reacting to media reports, the GoP on Monday approved a proposal to establish a corridor that will allow Hindu pilgrims from India to visit Sharda Peeth, vice-president of the National Conference (NC) Omar Abdullah said the government in Pakistan will also announce the reopening of Kargil-Skardu road in Ladakh region.

Abdullah also praised Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan for opening-up Sharda Peeth that has been held up for years and hoped the dialogue between the two nations would resume soon.

The Sharda Peeth corridor, when opened, will be the second religious tract after Kartarpur corridor in PaK that will connect the two neighbouring nations.

Taking to micro blogging site twitter, Abdullah said, “Sharda Peeth is an ancient Hindu temple and cultural site in Pakistan-administered Kashmir. It’s good to see @ImranKhanPTI take decisions that have been held up for years. Allowing greater people to people contact & opening routes to religious pilgrims are always welcome developments that help to ease tensions.

“One can only hope that in a post May 23rd (when results of Lok Sabha polls are announced), these steps will be reciprocated by the central government & we can move towards resuming the comprehensive dialogue between India & Pakistan (sic),” Abdullah said in another tweet.

About 5,000 year-old Sharda Peeth, is also one of the three famous holy sites for Kashmiri Pandits, the other two being the Martand Sun Temple in Anantnag and the Amarnath temple in south Kashmir Himalayas. (PTK)
