Kullfi Kumarr Bajewala March 26, 2019 Written Update: Kulfi’s great escape

In the previous episode, we see how Kulfi and her friends struggle to make the hot air balloon. Elsewhere, Amyra's health deteriorates while Loveleen shocks Sikander with an unexpected offer. Loveleen offers Sikander to disclose Kulfi’s location while Amyra remains unknown. Sikander tells Loveleen that he doesn’t make false promises and that he will keep his promise made to Amyra. Loveleen trying to lessen Sikander’s sufferings inform him about Kulfi being safe, wherever she was. Sikander and Amyra’s training continues where he motivates Amyra for every step, she had to take to reach her goal.

Amyra shares her future plans of being able to sing with him and finds him daydream about Kulfi and get sad. Sikander was adamant to fulfil Amyra’s wish to sing in the competition and assures her that winning or losing did not matter to him, as much as Amyra performing for the first time. Here, Kulfi and her friends continue to make their hot air balloon. Ammaji warns Rajan about having a premonition of something uneventful to happen. Ammaji instructs Kulfi and one of her friends, to come to her office. Student no 220 makes an excuse of his sickness and Kulfi suggests Ammaji that she take him to the room to rest. Ammaji finds something fishy in the way Kulfi and her friends were behaving recently and tries to look for them in the kitchen. Not finding them in the kitchen, Ammaji calls Rajan and instructs him to find the children.

Rajan finds Kulfi and his friends near the self-made hot air balloon and learns about their plan to escape on the hot air balloon. Rajan comes and joins them in the plan and offers to pedal the cycle for the balloon to fly. Ammaji finds a door locked and struggles to open it while Kulfi’s friends manages to keep it closed. In the meantime, Rajan fills the hot air balloon for them and Kulfi calls for the rest. They manage to board the balloon and escape in front of Ammaji. Infuriated Ammaji helplessly witness the kids escape while Rajan, being their guiding angel helped them flee.

(ALSO READ: Kulfi Kumarr Bajewala actor Mohit Malik continues to shoot despite getting 6 stitches due to injury)
