Intelligence warns of Lashkar-e-Tayyeba, JeM strikes during elections in Valley

The purpose of the terrorist organisation is to create fear psychosis among the political parties so that they do not participate in the electoral process and connect with the masses. (Photo: Representational/PTI)

New Delhi: In their bid to derail the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections in Jammu and Kashmir (J&K), terrorist organisations like Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), Lashkar-e-Tayyeba (LeT) and Al-Badr are planning to target workers of the political parties in the Valley, according to intelligence agencies input.

Intelligence agencies are expecting the terror organisations to increase violence in run-up to the polls. The purpose of the terrorist organisation is to create fear psychosis among the political parties so that they do not participate in the electoral process and connect with the masses.

"The terrorist organisations don't want normalisation in the Kashmir Valley and they will use any tactic to prevent people from taking part in Lok Sabha elections," said sources in the intelligence agencies.

As per latest inputs terrorist organisations may target workers of the political parties especially in Sopore, Bandipore and Ganderbal among other areas of the Kashmir Valley.

Due to threat perception, Election Commission in an unprecedented move will be holding election in single Parliamentary constituency of Anantnag in southern Kashmir in three phases.

The polling in Anantnag will be held on April 23, under the third phase, Kulgam during the 4th phase on April 29. The elections in Pulwama and Shopian will be held under 5th phase, on May 6. In two other Parliamentary seats in Valley, Baramulla will go for polls on 11th April and on Srinagar on 18th April.

The political party workers have always been on the target of the militants in the Kashmir Valley as they are seen a threat by the terrorist organisations.

Earlier panchayat members in Kashmir Valley were targeted by the terror organisations.

During peak of militancy in Kashmir in early 90's terrorist were specifically killing cadre of National

Conference and Congress. Even cadre of these parties at block levels and in villages were targeted by the terrorists. To save themselves, many workers were forced to give advertisements in local Urdu newspapers disassociating themselves from their parties.

Many former MLAs and MPs in 90s migrated from the Valley to Jammu and were accommodated in the MLA hostel under high security.
