Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan starrer Imtiaz Ali’s Love Aaj Kal sequel gets a title, read details

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan starrer Imtiaz Ali’s Love Aaj Kal sequel gets a title

Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan have been ruling the headlines for their fiery chemistry on the sets of their upcoming Bollywood film, Imtiaz Ali’s Love Aaj Kal sequel. While the film was announced much later, the actors had already begun shooting for the film days before in the capital city New Delhi. Until Now, the film was being touted as 2009 hit film Love Aaj Kal’s sequel and now it has even got a title. According to the latest reports, Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan starrer will be called Aaj Kal.

The latest development from the film suggests that the makers have registered the film under the name ‘Aaj Kal’ which clearly indicates that the film is going to be connected with Saif Ali Khan and Deepika Padukone’s hit film. Almost a week ago, the young actors took to their social media to announce that the film is actually happening but didn’t spill the beans about the title. Sharing a picture together with Kartik Aaryan, Sara announced the film saying, “Honoured, grateful and uncontrollably excited to be a part of Imtiaz Ali ‘s next! “Check out their posts here-

Sara Ali Khan has already wrapped up the Delhi schedule of the film and she had a blast on the last day. She took to her Instagram to share her special moments with Kartik Aaryan on her Instagram. In the video, the actress is seen addressing the camera and introducing herself as well as Kartik just before they greet their fans from a balcony. The actors even celebrated their big win at Filmfare and Zee Cine Awards by cutting a cake on the last day of shoot.

Love Aaj Kal is a 2009 hit film which had Sara’s father Saif Ali Khan and Deepika Padukone in the lead role. The film is getting a sequel after 10 years with Saif’s daughter in the lead role. Earlier it was reported that Saif will also be the part of the film however, he refuted the reports sayind, “I’m happy to sell my stake and not be a part of the film. It’s a business deal."

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
