China DESTROYS 30,000 world maps to ERASE ‘problematic’ rivals India and Taiwan borders

China destroyed 30,000 world maps over 'problematic' depiction of borders

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The borders on the maps are not recognised by Beijing who currently maintain the portrayal of international boundaries within the country, Newsweek reported. Chinese Ministry of Natural Resources, customs officials said at a press conference last week 803 boxes containing the maps had been confiscated and later destroyed. The ministry stated the reason for disposal was due to "problems such as border marking errors”.

The documents have been described as the largest cache to be disposed of in recent history, according to the ministry's Geographic Information Management division. China is currently involved in many international disputes about its overlapping borders. The most prominent of these are India and Taiwan which China claims as its own. While Beijing had fought with New Delhi over the Aksai Chin region near India-administrated Kashmir. READ MORE: China plotting to DESTROY EU warns French MEP - 'I'm terribly worried'

A Chinese and Indian guard at the Chinese side of the ancient Nathu La border crossing

The Chinese government has also claimed the South China Sea as its own despite accusations of enforcing their claim through military force. There have been encounters between US and Chinese ships in the region. The US has escalated tensions further with China by implementing the Taiwan Travel Act which restricts travel to the US for Chinese officials. However, China has criticised the legislation.

There have been encounters between US and Chinese ships in the South China Sea region
