Cops seek CBRI aid to gauge bridge condition

Neeraj Kumar Desai

BMC

The analysis by Central Building Research Institute, Roorkee, will act as expert opinion: Police.The Mumbai Police has sought the help of the Central Building Research Institute (CBRI), Roorkee, to analyse samples collected from the site of the foot overbridge collapse at CSMT on March 14, in which six people were killed.The police said CBRI’s report would act as an expert opinion, and would help them strengthen their case regarding the procedure to be followed while conducting audits and repairs of bridges. They said along with soil testing, the CBRI report would help them ascertain the condition of the structure before it collapsed.Till date, the Azad Maidan police is investigating the collapse case have arrested, who carried out the structural audit on the bridge. The police said Desai has been claiming he was only assigned to carry out an inventory of the bridge, and that the tender notice did not state that he was to carry out a structural audit.In the two reports he had submitted earlier, he said there was a need to carry out repairs on the bridge. But in his third report on the same bridge, he had said the bridge was in good condition. He has since claimedofficials did not carry out any repairs on the bridge as suggested by him, and had only made cosmetic changes. Desai is currently in police custody.“We will soon record the statement of either a Public Works Department (PWD) official, or a railway official to strengthen our case as to the correct procedure regarding tenders for structural audits, and before releasing payments. We are also studying the BMC manual to ascertain the role of BMC officials while awarding tenders and later supervising the work. They claim their work is just of an associate,” said a police official.“If their work is just that of an associate, we won’t be able to arrest them, so we are gathering evidence before arresting anyone to prove the duties of a civic body official prior to releasing payments to the auditor. We are checking if the work was supervised, and if someone bothered to check if the actual structural audit was carried out on the bridge,” he said.The police are also seeking guidance from Special Public Prosecutor Shishir Hiray, who has prosecuted cases like the Lucky Compound building collapse, in which 76 people had died, and the Dockyard Road building collapse, in which 61people had perished.“We are trying and will send a request for Shishir Hiray’s appointenr as the special public prosecutor in the case,” said a police official from Azad Maidan police station.“We know that getting a conviction under section 304 (II), i.e. culpable homicide not amounting to murder, is tough; Alister Anthony Pareira was convicted for mowing down seven people on Carter Road in 2006 under this section,” the official said.
