Pakistan Air Force attempted to do Balakot-type strike on India on February 27, failed to hit targets: Report

PAF Mirage-III (above) and H-4 missile. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: In an explosive development, Indian government sources have on Wednesday revealed that Pakistani fighter jets had attempted to attempted to carry out an aerial attack against Indian military targets on February 27, however, they had failed in their mission. The move by Pakistan had come a day after the Indian Air Force had carried out aerial strikes on the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) camps in Balakot in Pakistan.

Pakistan fighter jets entered Indian territory along the Line of Control on February 27 and fired a payload of 1000 kgs of H-4 bombs from ranges of around 50 kilometres inside Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir using more than 20 aircraft, led by American F-16s with support from French Mirage-III jets and Chinese JF-17 fighter planes, government sources told news agency ANI.

The source added, "The H-4s are not very accurate and missed their targets. In one of the attacks on an army camp in Jammu and Kashmir, the building was protected by a tall and thick tree which suffered extensive damage but deflected the Pakistani bomb,"

The report stated that the senior officers were reportedly present inside the campus when the attacks occurred. The bombs fell in Poonch and the adjoining sectors, ANI reported.

Meanwhile, government sources while speaking on the condition of anonymity to the news agency, said that the reason the Pakistani jets missed their targets could perhaps be because of the quick response of the Indian jets which were flying at high speeds to counter the attack. In a hurry, the Pakistani jets could have dropped the H-4 bombs, thus missing their targets.

Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot that falls in the Khyber- Pakhtunkhwa region, along with Muzaffarabad and Chakothi in PoK. The terror group is responsible for the dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14 where 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The attack was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.

The very next morning, Pakistan Air Force jets entered Indian airspace from Nowshera sector but were immediately sent back by IAF jets on February 27.
