Gangster who threatened to kill MLA held in Ludhiana

LUDHIANA: Amid Model code ahead of elections, crossing firing was exchanged between infamous gangster Amarbir Singh alias Lalli Cheema and a team of Organised Crime Control Unit (OCCU) in Dehlon area of Ludhiana after which the team has apprehended the gangster and his accomplice on Tuesday late evening. The gangster Cheema has also threatened to kill Navtej Singh Cheema , MLA, Sultanpur LodhiThe team of OCCU was lead by Sub inspector Kirpal singh and Sub inspector Hardeep singh. Importantly the firing was exchanged at Main Dehlon chowk merely 200 meters away from Dehlon Police station.Speaking to TOI the IGP intelligence (OCCU) Kunwar Vijay Pratap Singh said, “ Lalli cheema along with two others was travelling in a cars and had stopped in Delhon Ludhiana. As soon as they got out of the car the police party which was following them tried to stop them. On seeing the police party Lalli cheema fired at the police party.”“He opened three fire at Police Team and in defence both cops cross fired at them. During this, Lalli Cheema sustained a bullet injury on his leg. The team manage to nab his one accomplice who is identified as Kuldeep Singh of village Talwandi, Kapurthala . Besides, two weapons of .30 bore has been recovered from them” added IGP.According to a fruit seller, who was on the spot, three men came out of a car and were standing outside a Mobile store when some cops, in Civil dress came and tried to nab three men. Then they exchanged fire.”Where as according to eye witnesses a cop has also sustained bullet injury, the IGP Singh has denied it.The official further informed that the gangster Lalli Cheema hails from village Busowal Teh, of Kapurthala, but presently is a resident of Basti Bawa khel Jalandhar .He is brother of gangster Harry Cheema, who died in Chandigarh recently when he jumped from hotel window. He is wanted in more than 10 henious crime cases registered against him in Punjab and neighboring states.
