Gone Kesh Movie Review {3.5

Story: Diagnosed with alopecia at 15, Siliguri girl Enakshi Dasgupta’s (Shweta Tripathi) biggest fear is losing her hair. Her self esteem and confidence takes a beating as her visible bald patches start drawing unnecessary attention at school. Her hair loss becomes a subject of concern for her parents and mockery for classmates. Enakshi’s rare condition not only hampers her peace of mind but also supposedly sabotages her marriage prospects.

Review: Most girls often grow up on Disney fairytales, romantic movies and Barbies — all of which define women’s beauty in a certain way. Fair and flawless skin, slender waist, long legs, petite frame and gorgeous hair. Even actresses who don’t meet this checklist, aren’t really in the ‘mainstream’. Those who do, are worshipped and desired.

Our race to fit in begins right from our childhood. The society sets unrealistic standards of beauty and women must live upto those expectations. If you don’t, you are considered unworthy of success, love or marriage. Enakshi’s hair-loss sucks the happiness out of her life. She stares at every other woman with envy, covers her head with a scarf and struggles to put up a brave front. Her simple parents are willing to do anything for her hair regrowth treatment and a guy quietly nurses feelings for her. But can Enakshi free herself from wallowing in self pity? Rapunzel used her gorgeous hair to escape the tower but what happens when your thoughts are your tower of prison?

Qasim Khallow’s film is a heartwarming tale of conquering fear, crushing societal standards of beauty and exploring the parent-child bond. The film is most relatable for women, who are conditioned to believe that they ought to be perfect if they wish to ‘bag a good husband’.

Other than presenting a story that’s deeply personal yet relatable, Gone Kesh primarily works owing to its great casting. Shweta Tripathi portrays the trauma of her condition in the most real, understated manner.

Vipin Sharma and Deepika Amin are every bit the loving and supportive parents who sacrifice their own needs and wishes for their child. They believe in their daughter when she herself gives up. Jitendra Kumar is perfect as the shy love interest, who loves Enakshi just the way she is. A scene where he happens ho see her without her wig plays out brilliantly.

Khallow captures the minutiae of the small town life in a heartfelt, authentic manner. The thought of flying in an aeroplane for the first time, taking a vacation after 25 years of marriage and being told that you are ‘good enough’. Despite the film’s languid pace, this one’s a winner — hair or no hair. It also reminds you that good people end up with good people, always.
