Demonetisation again? PM Modi's surprise address takes Twitter by storm

Just the prelude to PM Modi's address has elicited hilarious reactions from Twitterati.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi this morning sent Twitter to a frenzy when he announced that he will address the nation "with an important message".

"I would be addressing the nation at around 11:45 AM - 12.00 noon with an important message. Do watch the address on television, radio or social media," Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote from his personal Twitter handle.

,



11.45 - 12.00



I would be addressing the nation at around 11:45 AM - 12.00 noon with an important message.



Do watch the address on television, radio or social media. Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019

Just the prelude to PM Modi's address has elicited hilarious reactions from Twitterati.

The announcement from the prime minister comes a month after the Balakot airstrikes in Pakistan by the Indian Air Force and days before polling for the upcoming general elections begins.

Many expected a demonetisation-like announcement that PM Modi made on November 8, 2016.

One Twitter user, said, "Another #Demonetisation? Did they catch Masood Azhar or Dawood? Are we taking over Pakistan? OMG I am #anxious now."

Another #Demonetisation? Did they catch Masood Azhar or Dawood? Are we taking over Pakistan? OMG I am #anxious now. https://t.co/KyxK5XQDUW Gaurish Salunke (@gaurishsalunke) March 27, 2019

Another Twitter handle responded with a meme that said "Pal bhar theher jaao, dil ye sambhal jaaye"

Yet another one said, "I was going to the ATM... Just turned back. Now buying stuff I don't need with any remaining cash I have. Cheers ??"

I was going to the ATM... Just turned back.

Now buying stuff I don't need with any remaining cash I have

Cheers #modi #ModiHaiToMumkinHai #Demonetisation wala feeling #politics pic.twitter.com/pkNQhcS1Ln Shahenshah (@Shhahenshah) March 27, 2019

Former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah also added his two cents to the ongoing frenzy. He wondered if Modi is going to declare results of the general elections.

He’s declaring the results of the Lok Sabha elections. #JustSaying Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 27, 2019

What announcement will fit within the code of conduct guidelines of the election commission of India? Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) March 27, 2019

Taking a dig at the PM, one user said, ''Now some are saying that PM is about to tell the ending of Avengers End Game."

Now some are saying that PM is about to tell the ending of Avengers End Game. Rubu (@rubu19) March 27, 2019

PM Modi, however, managed to really surprise his skeptics when he announced about India registering itself as a space power and the resounding success of Mission Shakti.

PM Modi said that India has shot down a low orbit satellite, demonstrating its space warfare capability.

"With this, India has registered itself as a space power," he said.

He said that India is the fourth nation to register itself as a space power after US, Russia and China.

An anti-satellite weapon A-SAT, successfully targeted a live satellite on a low earth orbit.

In the journey of every nation there are moments that bring utmost pride and have a historic impact on generations to come.



One such moment is today.



India has successfully tested the Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Missile. Congratulations to everyone on the success of #MissionShakti. Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019

#MissionShakti was a highly complex one, conducted at extremely high speed with remarkable precision. It shows the remarkable dexterity of India’s outstanding scientists and the success of our space programme. Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019

#MissionShakti is special for 2 reasons:

(1) India is only the 4th country to acquire such a specialised & modern capability.

(2) Entire effort is indigenous.

India stands tall as a space power!

It will make India stronger, even more secure and will further peace and harmony. March 27, 2019

Follow | Narendra Modi address to nation Live Updates: India becomes space superpower, says PM

Also read | PM Modi keeps India waiting for surprise address, misses own announcement time

Also watch | India shot down low-Earth orbit satellite: PM Narendra Modi
