Briefing

MUMBAI

Bollywood continues to date with Kashmir. A romantic movie titled Notebook is scheduled for a release on March 29. Exclusively shot in Kashmir, the film by Salman Khan’s production has Kashmiri children playing the lead characters. The Bajrangi Bhaijaan actor, Khan believes ‘right education’ can go a long way in combating ‘terrorism’. His remarks were in response to the Lethpora suicide car attack. The film, which is the story of love between a teacher and his students also shows how ‘kids who are being misled finally drop the gun’. Notebook marks the debut of Pranutan Bahl and Zaheer Iqbal.

NISHAT

First PhD scholar of Islamic University of Science and Technology (IUST), Awantipora became first researcher from J&K to get prestigious research project from the union government. Meet the man, Professor Gowhar Rasool, a Nishat resident works at Central University of Jammu (CUJ) from last six years. Rasool brought laurels to the state by getting a prestigious research project titled ‘Field Mapping and Capacity Building of Stakeholders for Consumer Welfare & Protection’ from the Ministry of Consumer Affairs. The project is worth over 31 lacs and would cover all the three regions of J&K.

UDHAMPUR

As if fighting counter-insurgency was not enough, CRPF is face to face with the internal crisis as well. The latest was the fratricidal firing incident. Reportedly, Constable Ajit Kumar, shot at his three colleagues from his service rifle, leaving them seriously injured. He shot at himself as well. The incident occurred at the 187th battalion camp in the Battal Ballian area in Udhampur. An argument became the reason. Kumar continues to be critical.

NEW DELHI

Two years after he fought his father’s killers, Irfan Ramzan Sheikh was awarded prestigious Shaurya Chakra, third highest peacetime gallantry award. Irfan, now 16, was awarded by the President of India Ram Nath Kovind for fighting militants, who had come to kill his father. Then 14, Irfan gave them a tough fight. His father Muhammad Ramzan Sheikh, a PDP worker, got killed. Injured in the scuffle, one militant succumbed, later. A 10th class student, Irfan got the award usually conferred upon to armed forces and paramilitary personnel for courage in the face of the enemy.

RAMBAN

Hopeful to have a peaceful life, when families in Pakistan administered Kashmir (PaK) returned back, they never got the moments of peace. From existential threat to an identity crisis, the families faced everything. Last week, a Pakistani woman, Faiza Begum, 27, a mother of three minor children was sentenced to five years imprisonment and fined Rs 20,000 by Principal Sessions Judge, Jammu, Vinod Chatterji Koul. Married in 2005 to Sheraz Ahmad, the couple travelled back in 2012 via Nepal route. While Faiza was booked under provisions of Foreigners Act and Passport Act, Sheraz was arrested under provisions of Unlawful Activities Act, Enemy Agents Ordinance, Conspiracy, and Egress and Internal Movement Control Ordinance (E&IMCO), the report said.
