‘Don’t need alliances, will take everybody along’

editorial@tribune.com

THE contest on all 10 seats in Haryana is essentially going to be between the two national parties, the BJP and Congress, feels former Speaker and Congress MLA Kuldeep Sharma. Batting for younger candidates, Sharma, in an interview with The Tribune reporter Geetanjali Gayatri, says that he thinks alliance politics will not impact the poll results and the INLD and its breakaway group, the JJP, will become irrelevant after the Lok Sabha elections. Excerpts:

Is the Congress fighting a losing battle?

The Congress will contest to win all 10 seats in the state as we have done in the past. All that the Congress has to do is to change the narrative and ask the BJP about its unfulfilled promises and the five years of misrule during which they tore apart the brotherhood of Haryana and stand fully exposed.

What is the Congress USP?

All-round development and inclusive growth is our USP. Development in India wasn’t brought about in the past five years only. In fact, the Congress made India an economic and military power. We alone have the capacity to take everybody along. We were handed over a country of “have-nots” while we handed over to the BJP a strong and self-reliant India.

The Congress has only one MP from Haryana. How many seats you expect to win this time?

No doubt, we only won Rohtak last time. But now, it is going to be different as people will judge the BJP on its performance. The Congress is getting ready for the poll battle and we will surprise opponents as we have done in the past. The BJP is trying to cultivate war psychology which is dangerous. India needs a statesman and not a salesman.

Will Congress rely on old war horses or field fresh faces?

The Congress will have a mix of both. There are leaders of stature in the party with their own areas of influence but a new crop of leaders is also coming up and is raring to go. They are industrious and have entirely different outlook and understanding of political affairs. I am all for younger people as they are sensitively attuned to the mass sentiments.

Where do you see the JJP, AAP and INLD post-poll?

Haryana has its own political dynamics. The AAP never had any noticeable presence. The JJP is only a breakaway faction of the INLD. After the split, both will become irrelevant. The real fight on 10 seats in Haryana is going to be between the Congress and BJP.

Will alliances with regional parties work for the national parties in Haryana?

People of Haryana have suffered alliance politics in the past. The BJP played second fiddle to the INLD and the Haryana Vikas Party was reduced to a two-member party in the House. The Congress does not need an alliance in Haryana. However, we have mutually beneficial alliances at the Centre.
