Mission Shakti: India registers as elite space power, carries out anti-satellite missile test, says PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi has addressed the nation to say that India has registered itself as an elite space power. PM Modi said that India carried out an anti-satellite test on Wednesday.

PM said that till now US, Russia and China had this achievement. Now India is the fourth nation that has achieved it. PM Modi said, "Our scientist has shot down a live satellite in LEO: Low Earth Orbit. 'We shot down the Live Satellite through ASAT: Anti Satellite We completed this operation in 3 mins only."

PM Modi said, "MISSION SHAKTI" was an extremely difficult mission. It required high skills of technical achievement in this. Our scientists have completed every objective of the mission. The mission was completed using an ASAT MADE IN INDIA".

PM Modi also said, "I congratulate DRDO and scientists who achieved this feat. They have again brought pride to the nation. We are proud of them."

#MissionShakti was a highly complex one, conducted at extremely high speed with remarkable precision. It shows the remarkable dexterity of India’s outstanding scientists and the success of our space programme. — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019

#MissionShakti is special for 2 reasons:

(1) India is only the 4th country to acquire such a specialised & modern capability.

(2) Entire effort is indigenous.

India stands tall as a space power!

It will make India stronger, even more secure and will further peace and harmony. — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019

PM Modi also said that this test is not against anyone. PM said, "I would like to reassure the world that our new technique is not against anyone. India has not been against arms race in space and this move has not brought any change to that stand". PM Modi said that the mission Shakti does not violate any international law. PM Modi said that India's mission is to maintain peace and not to incite any violence.

PM Modi said that "Our mission is just for the development and security of India. Mission Shakti is an important mission for India's security". PM said that aim is to make every Indian feel safe.

An important message to the nation. Watch. https://t.co/0LEOATgOOQ — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019

Earlier PM Modi said on Twitter that he will be giving an important message around 11.45 AM. He said, "I would be addressing the nation at around 11:45 AM - 12.00 noon with an important message. Do watch the address on television, radio or social media" he tweeted on Wednesday."
