Is Cardi B Drugging & Robbing Men Excusable Because She Had "Limited Options?"

The Kardashians, Cardi B, and Donald Trump have all made a huge case for the trainwreck celebrity, who entertains everyone by being a hot mess. They are always embroiled in controversies, they are always saying stupid things, and we are all watching them with a bowl of popcorn, expecting them to spontaneously combust at any point. So, when we saw an old video of Cardi B bragging about drugging men who wanted to have sex with her while she was a stripper and taking their money while they were drugged, we were not surprised. Disappointed and exasperated, but not surprised.

Cardi B is a complicated and VERY polarising personality, so we saw this coming

Cardi is known for honestly acknowledging the unconventional manner in which she rose to fame. A stripper with a large Instagram following, Cardi B danced in clubs to put herself through college. In that time, she put up with abusive boyfriends and a dismal living situation. When you watch the video in question, she talks about how she would be approached for sex by men who came to the club to watch her strip. She would then drug them and take their money. That, in fact, was also her excuse as to why she did what she did. Citing “limited options,” she said that many women like her make poor choices because they are forced into such situations.

All I can do now is be a better me for myself my family and my future. pic.twitter.com/VlPJW20thN — iamcardib (@iamcardib) March 26, 2019

Our audiences love exploiting a problematic personality’s missteps for personal enjoyment

We love watching people who are clearly terrible examples do messed-up things in public view for our kicks. We laugh at them but also criticise them for creating the drama we made them famous for creating. Isn’t it time we chose whether this kind of behaviour flies? To quote Jeffree Star’s reaction to Khloe Kardashian publicly ranting about the Jordyn Woods-Tristan Thompson drama: “Shut the f*ck up.”

The problem is glorifying ‘gangsta’ culture

Kanye West recently made an entire album about sleeping with his wife’s sisters (how macho and virile). Future, Dr. Dre, Young Thug, Gucci Mane, Lil Wayne, and Meek Mill routinely rap about drugs, guns, and murder to assert how “hard” they are. If hip hop is characterised by talk of violence and toxic masculinity, isn’t Cardi giving her audience exactly what they want? All rappers talk about drugs and money. Why is Cardi B suddenly the crazy one in a room full of Tupacs, T.I.s and Lil Kims, who have actual criminal records? In the words of a Reddit comment on the subject: “I'd rather get drugged and robbed than be held up at gun point and shot.”

Before we start going off on the internet about how wrong Cardi B is or how messed up rappers are, we need to sit down and talk about where this originated and why it continues. Why are the majority of rappers talking about money and “cribs?” Because most African-Americans were ghettoised to a poor part of town and grew up in terrible conditions, and rap originated in the ghetto to talk about their stories. Why are they talking about guns and robbery? Because the poor neighbourhoods, black or white, see more crime.

This rags to-questionably-earned-riches story is not all there is to hip hop culture, but it’s the only one that audiences seem to like. Look at this person thrust into fame and money from nothing- it’s the American dream (and going by the success of the Once Upon A Time In Mumbai franchise, the Indian one, too). This backlash towards hip-hop culture needs to be questioned because it is, after all, the result of someone’s painful background, one which we listen to in clubs and dance to.

Cardi B is being compared to R. Kelly or Bill Cosby

Cardi B’s actions were by no means defensible. There are poorer people in the world who survive every day without stealing from others, so her excuses make little sense.

So, #SurvivingCardiB has been trending on the internet, in a play to equate her drugging and robbing men with rapper R. Kelly’s scandal of sexually abusing and raping a bunch of minor girls over a long period of time. The fact that she drugged men to take their money is also been compared to disgraced rapist Bill Cosby, who raped women after drugging them.

Now that an alleged survivor of Cardi's has come out and talked about how she drugged him, took his money, and disappeared--it remains to be seen whether Cardi also faces a trial.
