'Mission Shakti', India's homegrown anti-satellite missile: A quick guide

Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced on Wednesday that India had successfully demonstrated an anti-satellite missile. While the test does indeed put India in an elite club of nations with the strategic capability, what it actually means is shrouded in the mystery of space.

Here is a quick guide to 'Mission Shakti':

What was 'Mission Shakti'?

'Mission Shakti' was an Indian missile test that was successfully carried out in the morning of March 27. India demonstrated that it had developed an anti-satellite missile. It successfully destroyed a satellite that was circling the Earth in Low Earth Orbit (LEO) at an altitude of 300 km. The whole operation took three minutes, the PM said. The name 'Mission Shakti' seems to be an allusion to the strategic breakthrough India achieved with 'Operation Shakti' nuclear tests of 1998, which are also referred to as 'Pokhran-2'.

What is it, in simpler terms?

India now has a missile that can hit satellites in space.

Is it aimed at Pakistan? Or China?

Neither, according to Prime Minister Narendra Modi. He said the test was not aimed at any nation in particular. "We want to assure the world that our new capability is not against any country but is the defensive initiative of a fast-moving India. India has always been against an arms race in space, and this operation has not changed that. This is not a violation of any treaty or law.

Why is this a big deal?

India is only the fourth country to demonstrate that it has an anti-satellite weapon. It means India now has the option of shooting down the satellites of any country in the event of conflict. That could have vast military implications, especially for the use of spy satellites or even navigation satellites of a particular country.

What did PM Modi say?

He said India should feel proud of its growing power and clout. He congratulated the Defence Research and Development (DRDO) and the scientists who carried out the operation. He spoke of the growing role that space assets play in daily life and in the economic development of nations, and said the strategic capability would further cement India's place in the world as a space power. He further said it would aid in securing peace and harmony.

Which are the other countries that have anti-satellite weapons?

A number of countries could potentially carry out a strike against a satellite. However, only the US, Russia and China have demonstrated such an ability so far. The US and USSR had developed the capability during the Cold War. China carried out its first test in 2007.

How real is the threat to satellites?

No country in the world has so far used anti-satellite weapons against satellites belonging to another country. The US, Russia and China - and now, India - all blew up their own satellites. The US and Russia have also shot down their own defunct satellites on multiple occasions.

What exactly has India demonstrated?

Reaching an altitude of 300 km is something that India has been doing regularly through its space programme. A number of countries can do that as well. India has also demonstrated its ballistic missiles like Agni or Prithvi. Most ballistic missile enter space before turning back down towards their target.

What is significant in India's demonstration is that it has shown its ability to hit a relatively small target in the vastness of space that is travelling at a speed of at least 24,000 kmph. LEO is also that zone in space where a majority of man-made objects are.

So, what would an anti-satellite missile look like?

It could, well, look like a missile - think of those images of Agni or Prithivi from the Republic Day Parade. Those would be the types that would be launched from the surface of the Earth. The other option would be for a smaller missile that could be carried by a fighter jet to a high altitude and then launched. PM Modi offered no details.

How long has India had this capability?

Indian officials have many times before said India has all the building blocks and technologies needed for an anti-satellite missile. It is only now that it has actually announced that it has tied together all these aspects to come up with a missile that works as intended.
