Jagranjosh.com announces MBA, Engineering College Ranking 2019

New Delhi, March 27: Jagranjosh.com has announced Rank One – Institute Ranking 2019 recognizing India’s top MBA and Engineering colleges. The Rank One – Institute Ranking 2019 was unveiled at an education forum held in Delhi at the Taj Palace Hotel on 27th March 2019. The Vice President of India Mr. M. Venkaiah Naidu graced Jagranjosh.com’s education forum as the chief guest. He also delivered the keynote address that highlighted the key opportunities and challenges faced by Indian education system today.

Being India’s leading education and career website, Jagranjosh.com’s Institute Ranking 2019 is trusted by students and faculty alike for being India’s 1st Holistic College Ranking for MBA and Engineering institutes. In addition to releasing the Institute Ranking 2019, Jagranjosh.com also honoured upcoming and promising engineering and MBA colleges of the country.

Jagranjosh.com’s MBA Ranking 2019

The MBA Ranking 2019 of Jagranjosh.com was dominated by the IIMs with IIM Ahmedabad, Bangalore and Calcutta securing the first three spot. Among the non-IIM B-schools, XLRI Jamshedpur secured the 6th position while FMS Delhi was ranked 7th in the list of top MBA colleges in India.

Jagranjosh.com Engineering Ranking 2019

On the engineering ranking side, IITs dominated the top 9 spots with BITS Pilani securing 10th position on the list. Among the various IITs, IIT Madras secured the 1st Rank while IIT Bombay and IIT Delhi secured 2nd and 3rd Ranks, respectively.

Panel Discussions at Jagranjosh.com’s Education Forum

As part of the education forum, Jagranjosh.com also held two high-powered panel discussions that saw participation of eminent educationists and corporate leaders. The first panel discussion focused on the Skill Gap among the fresh engineering and MBA graduates walking out of colleges. The panel discussion was led by experienced industry leaders who shared their expectations in terms of skills that they look for in fresh recruits. The second panel discussion was focused on the future of jobs in today’s digital world. Eminent educationists from across the country participated in the panel discussion. The panel highlighted new and emerging career opportunities and their scope for youngsters.

For more details about Jagranjosh.com’s Institute Ranking 2019, please visit ranking.jagranjosh.com.
