Uttar Pradesh Navnirman Sena fielding Shambu Lal Regar, men accused in Akhlaq, Junaid lynchings

A Rama Navami procession in Jodhpur which recreated Regar's crime with pride in March of 2018 (File Photo) | Photo Credit: ANI

Meerut: The Lok Sabha 2019 general elections are around the corner and it is essential for citizens to be aware of the leaders who are contesting for their vote. One such candidate who is all set to contest elections from Rampur in Uttar Pradesh on a ticket from Uttar Pradesh Navnirman Sena is Shambhu Lal Regar.

Currently lodged at the Jodhpur Central Jail as an undertrial, Regar is the same man who in December of 2017 hacked a labourer to death and filmed the incident. Claiming to "save a girl from love jihad", Regar first brutally murdered Mohd Afrazul and then set his body ablaze while recording the inhumane act on camera in Rajsamand area of Rajasthan. The victim was identified as a Bengali migrant worker.

After the cannibalistic video went viral on social media, Rajasthan police arrested Regar and booked hum under nine sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Information Technology (IT) Act. He was charged under section 302 (murder), 153 (promoting enmity), 120-B (criminal conspiracy) among other offenses.

Regar was initially supposed to contest from Agra but will now contest against Samajwadi Party (SP) national general secretary Azam Khan and Bharatiya Janata Party's new (BJP) recruit and yesteryears actress Jaya Prada. Founder and chief of the Uttar Pradesh Navnirman Sena Amit Jani told Times of India that the party has filed a parole application for Regar.

In fact, Jani also told the national daily that his party is also fielding Hari Om Sisodia who is one of the 19 men accused of lynching Mohammad Akhlaq in Uttar Pradesh's Dadri in September of 2015 from the Noida constituency. In addition, the Uttar Pradesh Navnirman Sena is also fielding Naresh Kumar Sehrawat, one of the men accused of stabbing 16-year-old Junaid Khan in Mahendargarh of Haryana in June of 2017.
