At least 11 civilians wounded in Indian army gunfire in Kashmir

At least 11 civilians were wounded on Sunday when Indian armed forces opened fire on mourners and protesters gathered to offer funeral prayers for two slain militants in the south of Kashmir.

Six of the injured were taken to the district hospital in Pulwama.

Medical Superintendent Dr. Rashid Parra said one of the wounded had a fire arm injury, another had either a shell or fire arm injury on his head, and others had pellet injuries. Parra told Anadolu Agency that all of them were referred to a hospital in the capital city Srinagar because of the serious nature of the injuries.

At least four other civilians are reported to have been hit by pellets, while a young Kashmiri girl was hit by a speeding Indian forces’ vehicle amid the protests.

According to local media, one of the wounded Bilal Ahmad is in critical condition with an injury in the head.

The two militants, belonging to the Al Badr militant outfit, were killed after Indian forces ambushed the house they were hiding in on Saturday night.

UN alarmed by alleged police killings in Indian state The UN human rights body's experts expressed “alarm” over alleged 59 extra-judicial killings by police in northern Indian state, where many victims belong to Muslim community.The UN Human Rights Office of the High Commissioner (OHCHR) said in a statement on Friday that its experts have written a letter to the government of India on 15 of the cases in Uttar Pradesh since March 2017."We are extremely concerned about the pattern of events: individuals allegedly being abducted or arrested before their killing, and their bodies bearing injuries indicative of torture," the UN experts said in the statement.In 2017, according to the Wire, an Indian media outlet, at least 420 encounters were conducted that left 15 people dead in the six months of Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s government.By 2018, the police had conducted 1,038 encounters in which 32 were killed, the media outlet added.The Indian Supreme Court is slated to hear several of such fake encounter cases on Monday.The OHCHR noted that they have also received reports that family members of victims and human rights defenders working on the cases have been harassed from police and had false criminal cases brought against them.“Family members of victims and human rights defenders must also be protected from reprisals, and threats and harassment against them investigated,” it said.Calling for an “urgent review” of the use of force by the state police, the OHCHR said they are yet to receive a response to their letter from the Indian government.The UN experts also said the local police did not follow its Supreme Court’s guidelines on investigations."We have also received allegations of corruption including the police demanding money to release the victim prior to the killing," the experts said in the statement.

One of the two militants, Zeenat ul Islam, was the top commander of the Al Badr outfit.

Thousands of people marched toward his village, Sugan in Shopian district, to offer funeral prayers despite the barricades and deployment of troops along the way.

According to eyewitnesses, multiple funeral prayers were held for the slain militants as more and more people kept arriving.

As the reports of action by Indian forces spread, more people took to the streets.

The train service was suspended in south Kashmir and the internet blocked by the Indian administration.

Jammu and Kashmir, a Muslim-majority Himalayan region, is held by India and Pakistan in parts and claimed by both in full. A small sliver of Kashmir is also held by China.

Blast kills Indian army officer, soldier in Kashmir An explosion in Jammu and Kashmir killed two Indian soldiers, including a major-rank officer, and injured two others on Friday.“An officer and a soldier were martyred and two other soldiers were injured in an IED [Improvised Explosive Device] blast on the Line of Control in Nowshera sector of Rajouri district,” Defence spokesman Lt. Col. Devender Anand told media.The Line of Control is a de facto border that divides the disputed Kashmir valley between Pakistan and India.In a separate incident, Anand said, an army porter was killed in an alleged sniper fire from across the border in the Sunderbani sector of the same district.Jammu and Kashmir, a Muslim-majority Himalayan region, is held by India and Pakistan in parts and claimed by both in full. A small sliver of Kashmir is also held by China.Since they were partitioned in 1947, the two countries have fought three wars -- in 1948, 1965 and 1971 -- two of them over Kashmir.Also, in Siachen glacier in northern Kashmir, Indian and Pakistani troops have fought intermittently since 1984. A cease-fire came into effect in 2003.Some Kashmiri groups in Jammu and Kashmir have been fighting against Indian rule for independence, or for unification with neighboring Pakistan.According to several human rights organizations, thousands of people have reportedly been killed in the conflict in the region since 1989.

Since they were partitioned in 1947, the two countries have fought three wars -- in 1948, 1965 and 1971 -- two of them over Kashmir.

Also, in Siachen glacier in northern Kashmir, Indian and Pakistani troops have fought intermittently since 1984. A cease-fire came into effect in 2003.

Some Kashmiri groups in Jammu and Kashmir have been fighting against Indian rule for independence, or for unification with neighboring Pakistan.

According to several human rights organizations, thousands of people have reportedly been killed in the conflict in the region since 1989.
