Editorial: Some in politics and law strain the chain of accountability

The Editorial Board

A recent court ruling in New England, questions from the House Democrats' most recognizable fresh face and the legal musings of a handful of Senate Democrats should send shivers down the spines of corporate executives.

Earlier this month the Connecticut Supreme Court ruled that families of the victims of the horrific December 2012 Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre could sue the Remington Arms Co. for marketing practices for its Bushmaster AR-15 rifle. At Sandy Hook, the murderer, Adam Lanza, used a Bushmaster he had stolen from his mother, whom he also killed, to slaughter 20 students and six faculty members.

A lower court had backed Remington's claim that it could not be sued under a 2005 federal law that precludes lawsuits against gunmakers when their weapons are used in crimes. But the justices, by a 4-3 vote, decided that a jury should sort out whether, as the victims' families argue, the advertising for the Bushmaster violated state unfair-trade-practices laws. Connecticut law, the majority noted, "does not permit advertisements that promote or encourage violent, criminal behavior." As for the federal statute, Congress, the majority added, "did not intend to immunize firearms suppliers who engage in truly unethical and irresponsible marketing practices promoting criminal conduct."

Meanwhile, during a hearing on Capitol Hill that almost coincided with the ruling in Connecticut, freshman Democratic Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez raised a different issue about corporate responsibility.

Ocasio-Cortez asked Wells Fargo CEO Tim Sloan why his bank should be excused from responsibility for a clean-up operation if the Dakota Access pipeline in the upper Midwest springs a leak, since the pipeline owner borrowed from Wells Fargo for the project.

Then out west last week, a handful of Democratic lawmakers, led by California Sens. Dianne Feinstein and Kamala Harris, filed paperwork supporting appeals filed by the cities of San Francisco and Oakland against five major oil companies. The cities maintain Big Oil is responsible for climate change, hid its culpability from the public and then lobbied elected leaders not to impose changes that would affect their profits. The cities argued in a lawsuit that the firms should spend big to rectify adverse effects facing them. A judge dismissed the case, saying it was a political, and not a legal, matter. Hence, the appeal.

The ideas expressed by the Connecticut Supreme Court, Ocasio-Cortez and the California cities present two problems.

First, on a moral plane they divorce individual responsibility from negative outcomes. Companies should not be held liable for a crime, mishap, or situation if they bear no direct responsibility.

In Connecticut, the justices' ruling strains belief by suggesting that Remington marketed firearms so they could be used to shoot up a school, or murder children. It's also ridiculous to think that Remington could possibly know who might buy its weapons and what they might use them for — especially since Lanza actually stole the Bushmaster from his mother.

Wells Fargo's Sloan offered a perfectly rational response to Ocasio-Cortez: "Because we don't operate the pipeline." Yet he, like many of us would be, appeared genuinely perplexed by Ocasio-Cortez's suggested linkage of financing to operational control.

As for Big Oil, some of us remember when climate change was called global warming, and that environmental activists argued the problem was caused by human activity across the entire planet, and not just attributable to oil companies. How is Big Oil in the U.S. accountable for polluters in China, India and elsewhere?

All of which leads to the second issue: Where does it end?

For example, if you accept the reasoning of those who support the aforementioned arguments, the families of the 30,000-plus people killed on our highways every year could sue car manufacturers who made the instruments of death, the banks that lent the money to buy the cars and oil companies for providing the fuel that powered them. In a highly interconnected capitalist economy, the use of everyday products carries us way beyond six degrees of separation.

The execs who run major companies, and us, as their customers, better hope our society can re-root itself in logic before any of this progressive thinking about corporate responsibility progresses much further.
