India shoots down live space satellite in just THREE minutes

Narendra Modi, India's Prime Minister, said Mission Shakti has caused the country has become the fourth in the world to use an anti-satellite missile

India shoots down live space satellite in just THREE minutes

India "registered its name as a space power" by shooting down a live satellite in space today.

The country's Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, hailed the ground-breaking mission a success after the missile wiped out the satellite 186 miles away.

Only Russia, China and the US have ever completed such a feat.

The anti-satellite device can blind enemies, disrupt communications and providing a technology base for intercepting ballistic missiles.

Mr Modi stressed the test wasn't a bid to antagonise historic rivals, such as Pakistan, but the leader of an opposition said she'll lodge a complaint against the move.

Speaking on live television, Mr Modi said: "Some time ago, our scientists, shot down a live satellite 300 kilometers (186 miles) away in space, in low-earth orbit.

"India has made an unprecedented achievement today.

"India registered its name as a space power."

Image: www.isro.gov.in) www.isro.gov.in)

The missile showed remarkable precision and technical capacity, the politician, who faces a general election in April, added.

But he stressed the destruction was not directed against any country, but instead was designed to strengthen India's overall security and technical advancement.

Mr Modi, 68, added: "This is a big moment for India. Something that all of us should be proud of.

"We are not just capable to defend on land, water and air, but now also in space.

"I congratulate all scientists who have made this possible and made India a much stronger nation."

But Mamata Banerjee, the chief minister of West Bengal state and a potential prime ministerial candidate, said it was a gross violation of an electoral code of conduct.

India has had a space programme for years, making earth imaging satellites and launch capabilities as a cheaper alternative to Western programmes.

Brahma Chellaney, a security expert at New Delhi's Centre of Policy Research, said the United States Russia and China were

pursuing anti-satellite (A-SAT) weapons.

Image: AFP/Getty Images) AFP/Getty Images)

"Space is being turned into a battlefront, making counter-space capabilities critical. In this light, India's successful "kill" with an A-SAT weapon is significant."

No comment was immediately available from old rival Pakistan.

There was also no immediate reaction from China's foreign or defence ministries.
