CCOG in Manipur, India

Dear Bob,

As soon as I arrived, I met with 8 members of Church of God. I told them the purpose of my visit and why I came. I also told them that I could see with corresponding with Sani Mao that they are well established in the doctrines of the Bible, so that I will endeavor to give them messages that will corroborate their faith. That was met with thrill. If there is one word to describe that group of people, the first thought that comes to my mind is – ZEAL! And no wonder that they wanted to associate with us for the zeal is one of the characteristics of the Philadelphia church. As far as I could assess, their mutual relations are on the same level. It brings a great joy to my heart that those people fast twice a month and they get together on those occasions. They all confirmed to me that Sani Mao has been serving them faithfully for years and that they are all here due to what God has done through that man. On the other hand, they are responsive and helpful and they have been keeping the Feast in a very organized manner, so I would add that the government of God, such as should be administered in the proper way, has been present in this group all along.

The whole structure is there, but this group has been waiting, with a great discipline, to have an a ministerial approval. They were very worried that I might not come as they are expecting that help from me. Sani Mao talked to me on Friday evening about my ordination and his correspondence on that matter. Now we talked about it alive, so that I could better understand motives and reasonings on his part. As I have already established, he is man of one wife and he has never been divorced. His wife and him are both employed by the government, which speaks loudly of their reputation.

I feel that these people have been yearning for my visit to be approved as full-fledged part of the true community of the Philadelphia remnant. I live far away and so do you. But, they already have everything in place to operate as the Church of God and for that they do not seek, nor do they expect any financial support. I am, for example, deeply impressed at how faithfully and in an organized manner they kept the Feast for years, being cut off by their former Church organization, and enduring and waiting for my visit. At certain moments I even feel uncomfortable with the level of trust and respect they show me (I surely am not worthy of that). However, while I am here, I want to do my part and leave this community at peace and see it thrive with God’s merciful help here in the second populous nation in the world.

Now, I remembered that there was that accusation about them having Pentecostal spirit, or Pentecostal behavior. You can rest assured that I would not have hesitated to correct that and put things in order had that be true. Now that I have had a Sabbath services with them, I understand better the things. There is nothing Pentecostal in terms of “speaking in the tongues”, or a disorder at services. On the contrary, there is peace and order. Perhaps there is some intensity of emotions in the air, with which a Westerner might not be comfortable with. But, as for me, I am perfectly comfortable with that.

I want to assure you that I am well taken care of. To all my questions I get very detailed answers. I haven’t noticed any half truths. I am only afraid of mosquitoes. The weather is beautiful, so my windows were open, and then in the evening the room was full of them. Sani Mao and I killed most of them. One remained hidden. I managed to kill it later at night when I talked to the congregation in Serbia on Friday evening (Serbian time).

A few more things I need to bring to your attention.

1. Sani Mao related to me how they had become spiritual orphans when they were abandoned by LCG. Other than the unfounded accusation about Pentecostalism, a LCG minister made derogatory comments about women. That their place is to wash the cups. He would not accept that a woman might have a dream coming from God, such as we know that has happened in our CCOG history. And so, when LCG announced that there was no LCG in India, that came out of the blue and has devastated these people. 2. Coercive hierarchical control. They were told not to get together for Bible studies, or when they fast with no Scriptural explanation whatsoever and contrary to what we are told in the Book of Hebrews. 3. I had another baptism counseling session after the Sabbath. A young man was present as an interpreter. After counseling, he told me that LCG always had short counseling and would dismiss people. I just don’t understand such an approach. When I counsel people, I try to bring up the important points for their salvation. I also asked questions. I let them talk to me. I need to see if they are repentant to be baptized. Sani Mao’s daughter, for example, asked me several questions from the Scriptures seeking help to defend her belief against here Protestant peers who mock her beliefs. I also read some scriptures related to baptism. I never limit counseling time. I let it continue until all relevant points have been exhausted. That is new to this group as well. But I would find it highly disrespectful to just have short counseling and then dismiss them.

Now, having said all this, I need to tell you that I prayed and thought about ordinations. After getting your approval, which I read on the Sabbath morning, I realized there is no more reason to wait and delay. The intensity of prayer and faith that these people had about me coming – and I came against all the odds – and them hanging in and enduring all that they have, made me convinced finally that I couldn’t leave them orphans in spiritual terms. Plus, on Friday, during a counseling session, one of the members here said he had a dream before my coming. A hand on which an oil was poured was there to anoint Sani Mao. And that member told others not to worry, that I would come against all odds. Also, after his dream, his Bible was opened to Romans 5:4. When I read that verse, I realized it aptly describes Sani Mao. Therefore, when he came to pick me up for the Sabbath, I asked him if he had any objections to being ordained on this Sabbath. He didn’t have any, even though he was surprised that I would do it during this visit. He said he thought it would take some time. I didn’t see any reason to take any more time.

And so, after the Sabbath services and refreshments, I have ordained Sani Mao a deacon. I also called all baptized men to join me on the stage and follow me in laying hands on Sani Mao as a symbolic consent of the entire congregation to having now finally the government of God restored in India. After that act, Sani Mao addressed the congregation briefly and, as he admitted, for the first time he broke in tears in front of that group. I also announced that I want to bless the children after ordination ceremony, so that the ladies would be prepared for that. And I was about to that, but realizing what a great emotional thing Sani Mao’s ordination has been for both the congregation and me, I stepped in to make another announcement.

I said that we better prepare emotionally for something else and that I made a decision based on what I feel God led me to. And I said that I have decided to anoint Mary, Sani Mao’s wife as a deaconess next Sabbath. That announcement came a bolt from heaven. Sani Mao’s wife was shocked and then she broke into tears. Almost all the ladies in the congregation wept silently as I explained the reasons. I see that a strong presence of the ladies in the congregation. I could feel that their involvement has kept that congregation together and that such thing had to be recognized by God somehow. I asked God to show me what to do about it, and then Mary came to mind. I considered some other ladies as well, those that I met, however I felt that Mary was a strong example of the faith and that she should be ordained. That I didn’t make a mistake in that judgement it was confirmed when the anointing for illnesses came later and Mary related her health problems, but she also enumerated the cases when she was supernaturally healed without medical intervention. Besides her other illnesses, she was cured of a womb cancer.

So, after giving this message of preparation for the next Sabbath, all the children, small ones and even some bigger ones, encouraged by their mothers and aunts, came forward and knelt. I pronounced a blessing on them and asked the Eternal to protect them and be with them in this spiritually evil and dangerous society. Following that, I announced that those who may have ailments should ask to be anointed. A good portion of the congregation came forward. They all knelt spontaneously and so did I with them. First I anointed males so that they could be watching over children and do other needed things. Then I anointed all the ladies that came forward. With short breaks between prayers and anointing, I think it probably took about 45 minutes to one hour to complete all that.

We have videoed my sermon with translation to Manipuri language, so part of that can be used for Behind the Works Feast video.

January 12, 2019, goes down into history as an important date in the history of (Continuing) Church of God and in the history of God’s people in India.

With my best regards,

Sasha
