You want to be a chowkidar? Really?

Pritish Nandy writes, paints, makes movies and occasionally, when he wins an election, sits in Parliament. He has been writing for The Times of India for over 26 years. In "Extraordinary Issue", he talks to all those who find his views controversial, challenging, charming or even utterly despicable. Just one small caveat. Nandy is always on the move, travelling for a film, writing a book, working on an exhibition of his paintings. Or simply eating lotus. So there could be occasional gaps, the odd delay. But Nandy is Nandy. He never ignores a barb, never lets a compliment go by without swatting it hard. LESS ... MORE

To understand politics, one needs to occasionally refer to etymology. Today’s sudden nationwide obsession with chowkidars begs the question is: Who is a chowkidar? The OED, the world’s most respected authority on language, describes a chowkidar as a gatekeeper or watchman. It is one of those old colonial words that derives its meaning from Urdu. But, as always happens, politics vulgarizes language and social media murders it. This humble word has thus curiously mutated.

The prime minister started it all by declaring himself a chowkidar. (What I guess he meant was that he wouldn’t allow anyone to loot the nation.) In the wake of Rafale, Rahul retorted that the chowkidar himself is compromised. So Modi came back with a full on campaign where he and all his party leaders are calling themselves chowkidars and, to drive home the point, inviting all others to become chowkidars as well. A magazine edited by a friend has the prime minister posing in front of India Gate dressed as a chowkidar for its latest cover story written by a former minister, also a friend. Really? Is that what we all want to be? A chowkidar?

In Calcutta, where I grew up, only the homes of the rich had chowkidars. They were there to ensure that the right kind of people were allowed in. Just as you have tall, strapping, uniformed gatekeepers in five-star hotels today to stop people who look like unworthy guests. In those days, chowkidars were thin, scraggly, ordinary looking guys, usually immigrants from the backyards of our neighboring states. They would sit on stools outside the gate and, if you wanted to enter, they asked you a few perfunctory questions before letting you in. They were friendly, respectful and polite, a bit like a neighborhood Google map. Passersby would ask them for directions to addresses they were searching. That’s about all they did. They certainly did not guard anything or anyone. A chowkidar meant you had a house with a big iron gate that needed to be occasionally opened and shut for visitors to come in or the family to step out.

In the sixties, Naxalbari happened. A few rich people got extortion threats and we suddenly saw the emergence of security guards. In those days, business families were nowhere as flashy as they are today. There were no gaudy weddings. No flamboyant homes that doubled up as city landmarks. Calcutta was never about showing off. Everyone was easily accessible. As a student, I made friends with Jyoti Basu and Satyajit Ray in the coffee house. There were no celebrities. Only serious talent. And you never knew who was how rich because no one talked money. Not even the media. There was the occasional, very occasional story on some boxwallah who appeared richer than he was because he lived and dressed well, chose his single malts with care and wore his ties with a single knot. The quality of the knot revealed a man’s class in those days. Only reprobates wore the double knot.

The new security guards were different, very different from the friendly chowkidars. They did not hang outside the gates of homes and office buildings. They wore smart uniforms, spoke with authority and actually strode inside homes and offices to reach their protectees. They were a privileged class. The poor chowkidar remained sitting outside the gate, underpaid, unnoticed while the security guards became new symbols of status. Some even got licenses to carry guns though I doubt if they knew how to use them. The idea was to look dangerous. So they began going to gyms to build their bodies, look tough. You could call a chowkidar a security guard. But if you ever called a security guard a chowkidar you would get a glare.

Why am I explaining this? In the age of social media, spinmeisters have started changing the meaning of words. In the process, the romance of language is frequently defiled. Every troll thinks he’s Shakespeare because he can weaponise a cunning line. Now, one of the humblest words in the lexicon has now been given a new spin. The chowkidar does not guard your house. He is there only to open and shut the gates. Unlike the security guard, he is not an accessory for the rich and famous to flaunt. The chowkidar’s job is actually unenviable. He works for the haves but belongs to the have-nots and his real task is to maintain a barrier between the haves inside and the have-nots out there. That he himself is lowly paid and goes back at night to live with the have-nots makes his task even more difficult. He knows he is pretending to protect the well being of people who don’t even trust him to come inside. He is only symbolic. Like the guard outside Marie Antoinette’s palace at Versailles. When the ransacking mobs came inside, they didn’t even notice him there.

He is in that sense is a tragic figure. He lives out a lie for a meager wage. However loyal he may be, he is always dispensable, a hired hand who can be removed at will. He sits outside the rich man’s house but is never called in.

Would you like a job like that? I guess not. Then why pretend to be a chowkidar? Go, get a life instead.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
