If elected to power NC will set up 'TRC': Farooq

If elected to power NC will set up 'TRC': Farooq

ANANTNAG, Jan 12: National Conference president, Dr Farooq Abdullah today said his party, if elected to power, will set up a Truth and Re-conciliation Commission (TRC) to probe the killings that happened in 2016 and before.

"If we come to power with full strength and do not have to walk on crutches we will set up a Truth and Reconciliation Commission about which Omar Sahab has already talked about. This (probe) will be a great thing for us to do and we will constitute this commission on the very first day of taking over, " Farooq told reporters on the sidelines of party workers meet in Anantnag.

He was replying to a question whether the NC government will probe the killings that took place in 2016 and before during NC's tenure.

During 2010, mass-uprising triggered by the killing of a student, Tufail Mattoo, over hundred people were killed by the forces during the NC rule.

He said his party will not allow any oppression including 'operation all out' against militants.

"How can we support where there is oppression. This is not a question of 'all out'. We do not want our people to suffer that they will be beaten in their homes. This has never been the policy of National Conference," Farooq said when asked ‘if NC is voted to power will it stop operation all out against militants’.

He added that central government should talk to stakeholders including Hurriyat leadership and Pakistan for the resolution of Kashmir issue.

"Central government must talk to Hurriyat to find a solution to Kashmir issue. It must also talk to Pakistan. Center should ask Pakistan to stop sponsoring terrorism and we will talk. Dialogue is the only way to find a solution," NC president said.

He further said the regional parties will form grand alliance to defeat those spreading communal hatred.

"Some parties are spreading communal hatred. They do politics on religion. Not only Muslims in India are feeling insecure but other minorities are feeling same way. It is important that the regional parties unite to defeat such communal forces," Farooq said.
