Modi diverting people’s attention from real issues, says Opposition

Trying its best to position the election debates on “people’s issues”, the Opposition on Wednesday warned the voters to not fall into the “political agenda” of the BJP of “politicising” the success of Indian scientists in developing anti-satellite missile capability. The Opposition leaders said Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the BJP are incapable of going to the electorate with the “performance” of their government in the last five years and are depending on the achievements of the Armed forces and scientists.

Addressing a convention of his party’s workers here on Wednesday, Congress President Rahul Gandhi said the BJP camp was jittery over the Congress’ promise of a basic minimum income to the poor people. “He (Modi) made the country wait for 45 minutes for his announcement, did you look at his face? He has realised that the Congress will now give justice... Modi is now afraid that his time to go has come,” he said. “Well done DRDO, extremely proud of your work. I would also like to wish the PM a very happy World Theatre Day,” he earlier said on Twitter.

Former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav said Modi got himself an hour of free TV and diverted the nation’s attention away from issues on the ground. “Today, Modi got himself an hour of free TV and diverted nation’s attention away from issues on ground such as unemployment, rural crisis, women’s security by pointing at the sky,” he tweeted. He said the success belongs to DRDO and ISRO. “Thank you for making India safer,” he added.

BSP supremo Mayawati urged the Election Commission to take cognisance of Modi’s action. “Congratulations to the Indian defence scientists for the successful experiment of shooting down a satellite in the space. But the Prime Minister playing politics under its garb for electoral gains is most condemnable,” she said in Twitter.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said the Prime Minister’s address was yet another limitless drama to reap political benefits. “India’s Mission Programme is world-class for many many years. We are always proud of our scientists, DRDO, other research and space organisations,” she said in Twitter. “There is no great urgency in conducting and announcing the mission now by a government past its expiry date. It seems a desperate oxygen to save the imminent sinking of the BJP boat. We are lodging a complaint with the Election Commission,” she added.

Violation of Model Code

CPI(M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury said in a letter to Chief Election Commissioner that Modi’s announcement comes in the midst of the ongoing election campaign where the Prime Minister himself is a candidate. “This is clearly a violation of the Model Code of Conduct. I would like to know if the Election Commission was informed of such an address to the nation by the Prime Minister and did the Election Commission consider and permit such an address to the nation by the Prime Minister?” Yechury asked.
