Pulwama attack: Pakistan shares its preliminary findings with India

The Pakistani government has shared the preliminary findings of the report on the Pulwama incident with the Indian government, the Foreign Office said Wednesday.

According to the FO’s statement, the findings were shared with the Indian High Commissioner by the foreign secretary at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

The Indian government had sent a dossier to Pakistan on February 27, claiming that it had all the details of the Pulwama attack and the militants involved in it.

Related: Masood Azhar’s brother, son detained in crackdown against banned outfits

On February 14, 40 Indian soldiers were killed after a local Kashmiri boy rammed an explosive laden van into the convoy of Indian soldiers. The attack was reportedly claimed by outlawed Jaish-e-Muhammad.

It brought Pakistan and India on the brink of war. Tensions between the two countries escalated further after Indian planes violated Pakistani airspace and released their payload inside Pakistan’s territory on February 26.

In response, Pakistan shot down two Indian planes in Kashmir on the very next day. One plane crashed in the Kohi Rata sector of Azad Kashmir while another in Indian-Administered Kashmir’s Budgam area. A pilot of the Indian Air Force, identified as Abhinandan, was also taken into custody. However, he was handed over to Indian authorities as a gesture of peace.

The Pakistani government has detained hundreds of members of the JeM, including a brother and relatives of Masood Azhar, in the first week of March and taken administrative control of the group’s seminaries and mosques.

Related: Masood Azhar is in Pakistan but is very unwell, says Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi

PM Imran Khan had promised India that Pakistan will cooperate with India if the Modi government provides credible evidence. The foreign office said that Pakistan has acted with a high sense of responsibility and extended its full cooperation in the interest of regional peace and security.

“We have sought further information/evidence from India to take the process forward,” the FO statement said.

Follow SAMAA English on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
