Pakistan shares preliminary findings on Pulwama attack dossier with India

ISLAMABAD - The Government of Pakistan Wednesday shared the preliminary findings with the Indian government after examining Indian report on the Pulwama attack that took place last month.

The Ministry of Foreign Affairs said in a statement that the Indian High Commissioner

in Islamabad was called at the Ministry by the Foreign Secretary and findings

on the Pulwama incident were shared with him.

Earlier, Prime Minister Imran Khan had offered cooperation in investigation provided credible evidence is provided by India instead of allegations.

In response, India kept on hurling allegations against Pakistan for allegedly playing a role in the incident that took over 40 lives but also handed over a paper to Pakistan on February 27.

"Pakistan has acted with a high sense of responsibility and extended full cooperation. We do so in the interest of regional peace and security," the Foreign Office said in its statement.

44 Indian soldiers killed in IHK car bomb attack 09:18 PM | 14 Feb, 2019 SRINAGAR – At least 44 Indian paramilitary police personnel were killed and many others injured when their convoy ...

Tension between Pakistan and India escalated in the aftermath of the attack as India pinned blame on Pakistan but Pakistan denied the charges.

Pakistan and India came to the brink of a full-blown war after Indian Air Force first violated the Line of Control in the last week of February and afterwards lost its two fighter jets which were downed by Pakistan Air Force.

Pakistan also captured Indian pilot Abhinandan alive which was handed over to India as a gesture of peace by Prime Minister Imran Khan - a step widely hailed on the global scale.

Analysts claim that tension between the South Asian countries can be escalated again as India is set to hold general elections for which ultra-nationalistic sentiments are whipped up as a policy by the political forces to garner support.

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan also echoed the same concerns that security threats still existed till the elections in India are over for which Bharatiya Janata Party and Indian National Congress are main contenders.
