Paedophile moves court in Mumbai to transfer all 20 rape, murder cases against him

A dreaded serial rapist and murderer who targeted kids across four districts of Maharashtra in and around Mumbai for nearly a decade has filed a petition before the Bombay High Court seeking to transfer all 20 cases registered against him before a Mumbai sessions Judge.

The petition has been filed by peadophile Rehan Qureshi who was involved in the rape and murder of two minors in Kurla in 2010.

He also sexually assaulted minors in Thane, Palghar, Mia Road, Navi Mumbai and other nearby areas.

Rehan Qureshi was finally caught in October last year by Navi Mumbai crime branch when they were on the lookout for a suspect involved in the sexual assault of a minor in Kharghar.

His arrest led to him confessingto about eight other cases in Navi Mumbai and several other areas including the two in Nehru Nagar, Kurla.

The evidence against him in the two cases was a DNA sample recovered from victims that matched with his eight years later.

In his petition filed through advocate Adil Khatri on Wednesday Rehan Qureshi stated he was innocent and there was no strong evidence against him in the cases that he had been charged against.

It also mentioned he was wrongly framed by police in several cases that were unsolved for a long time by the Maharashtra police.

Further grounds mentioned for the transfer was that the continuance of criminal proceedings against the petitioner in various sessions courts across Mumbai, Navi Mumbai, Palghar, Thane Rural and Thane city districts would not serve any purpose other than to cause unnecessary hardship to the petitioner as the dates would clash for various courts. In this situation the petitioner would not be able to properly defend his case and may cause unnecessary adjournments in all the cases.

The petitioner will not be able to remain present for his trial if the police took remand of him while the trial was underway. It also stated the petitioner will not get a chance to get a free and fair trial in such situation.

Qureshi is presently lodged inside the Taloja prison. Charges in few cases have been framed against him and trial is yet to commence.
