Former AAP leader H S Phoolka rules out joining BJP

Former Aam Aadmi Party leader and senior lawyer H S Phoolka was felicitated by Bhartiya Janata Party on Sunday for his legal battle for anti-Sikh riot victims. The event was hosted by Union minister Vijay Goel.

Speaking on the event Goel mentioned that the Bhartiya Janta Party is open for Phoolka, however Phoolka appreciated various senior leaders of BJP but denied any joining the party.

"BJP has always supported us in our fight for anti-Sikh riots victims. I met Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad and Home Minister Rajnath Singh and they supported my stand on it," Phoolka said while appreciating BJP'stand on anti-sikh riots of 1984.

However he was quick to mention the fact that working in BJP is still not an option for the senior lawyer. "I am not joining any political party," he added.

Goel, although regarded Phoolka as a "good man" and his friend who fought to provide justice to the victims of the 1984 anti-Sikh riots."It does not matter that he was associated with AAP. He is a good person who did a good thing. That is why we are felicitating him. People ask me, if he will join my party. BJP wants all good people should join it," said Goel.

Phoolka who has been working for the victims of the anti sikh riots of 1984 had resigned earlier this month from the Aam Aadmi Party. Although the reason for the move was not clear, but speculation were ripe that a probable AAP-Congress collation in Delhi was the reason behind the move.

Vijay Goel however was quick to react upon the decision and regarded it as good move. Commenting on Phoolka's resignation from AAP, Goel had said, "He quit AAP recently, better late than never."

Since resigning, Phoolka has avoided giving any reason for quitting the AAP and expressed his desire to float a non-political outfit in Punjab to fight the drug menace and the perceived politicisation of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC).

According to sources, Phoolka was also annoyed over the AAP's stand on the demand to strip former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi of the Bharat Ratna for "justifying" the anti-Sikh riots.
