India joins ‘satellite killer’ club after missile test success

India has successfully tested a ‘satellite killer’ missile that has far-reaching strategic implications.

In a televised address, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced the success of ‘Mission Shakti’ after the anti-satellite (A-Sat) missile intercepted and destroyed the spacecraft at an altitude of 300kms.

It propels India into an exclusive club of Russia, China and the US that possess such a weapon, reports the Times of India.

READ MORE: US shoots down missile with interceptor weapon

READ MORE: Drone weapons the future of underwater warfare

The 18-tonne missile, fitted with two solid rocket boosters, blasted into space to hit the 740-kgs satellite dead centre just three minutes after its launch over the Bay of Bengal.

Satheesh Reddy, head of India’s Defence Research and Development Organisation, told local media the missile’s successful test came only two years after it was approved by the government.

“We got into mission mode only six months ago,” he said.

Reddy also said the A-Sat achieved accuracy to within a few centimetres and the weapon is capable of reaching much higher altitudes.

Yesterday’s trial of the ‘satellite killer’ missile has important strategic implications for India.

India can now match China’s ability to intercept and shoot down ‘enemy’ satellites – destroying an adversary’s eyes and ears in space.

Indian defence chiefs have been concerned about China’s advances in military space projects, which tested its own ‘satellite killer’ in 2007. Beijing is also developing futuristic laser weapons.

Modi said India had attained “global space power” status after the A-Sat test.

Indians watch Prime Minister Narendra Modi announce the successful test of the A-Sat weapon. (AAP)

The announcement is Modi’s latest bid to flex India’s military muscle as his party seeks to retain power in polls beginning April 11.

After 40 Indian soldiers were killed in a February suicide bombing in disputed Kashmir, India said it retaliated with a “surgical strike” on a terrorist camp in Pakistan.

Afterward in an air skirmish, Pakistan shot down one of India’s Soviet-era fighter jets, prompting scrutiny of India’s aging military hardware.

Modi said the new capability is “not against anyone,” and that India’s policy remains against the use of weapons in space.
