Satellite shot down, PM hails India’s arrival as ‘space power’

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Vibha Sharma

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, March 27

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today announced India’s accession to the global space club after the DRDO successfully showcased its anti-satellite busting capability. “India has shot down a live satellite,” the PM said, terming it “a rare achievement”.

India is the fourth country to acquire such a specialised and modern capability after the US, Russia and China.

“Our scientists struck down a live satellite in space 300 km away in low earth orbit. We have been able to do it with anti-satellite weapons (ASAT). I congratulate the scientists associated with the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO),” he said in a broadcast to the nation.

The Opposition attacked the PM for “trying to take credit” for scientists’ efforts and using it as a “political opportunity”, even wishing him on World Theatre Day.

The timing of the test is being questioned as the programme had been in the making for almost a decade. It remains to be seen if it adds to the BJP’s narrative of providing a strong and secure government after the Balakot airstrikes post-Pulwama.

“Today, we have enough satellites that are contributing in various segments such as agriculture, disaster management, communication, weather, navigation. etc. The space satellites’ importance is going to increase. Today’s ASAT missile will make India stronger,” the PM said.

Assuring that India would not use the strength to harm anyone, he said: “Our aim is to establish peace and not create an atmosphere of war. Mission Shakti is a step in taking forward our vision of a ‘surakshit, smriddh and shantipriya rashtra’ (a safe, prosperous and peaceful nation). I dream of a country that can think ahead in time and is also able to achieve that.”

The address followed Modi’s message on Twitter: “I would be addressing the nation around 11.45 am to noon with an important message. Do watch the address on television, radio or social media.”

As the country awaited the “important announcement”, the social media went rife with speculation. The last time the PM addressed the nation suddenly was on November 8, 2016, when he had announced demonetisation.

Read: Twitter goes into panic mode before PM Modi addresses the nation

Cong says UPA rolled ASAT; hails scientists, Manmohan Singh

National security issues don't fall under poll code ambit: EC sources

BJP leaders hail Modi for demonstration of anti-missile technology

Limitless drama to reap political benefits: Mamata after Mission Shakti op announcement

Jaitley targets Cong, Oppn over anti-satellite missile launch

With anti-satellite test, India can render enemy ‘deaf and blind’

350 km in 3 minutes to hit live satellite

An anti-satellite (ASAT) missile hit a live satellite flying in a low earth orbit after it traversed a distance of almost 350 km from Earth within 3 minutes of launch

Experts and scientists said India had the capability by 2012 to carry out a similar test, but no political clearance came at the time

Significance of anti-satellite weapon system test

An anti-satellite weapon system (ASAT) can severely cripple the enemy’s communications and reconnaissance systems during war, and “blind” the entire military of an enemy force

Destroying an enemy’s satellites is considered an advanced capability

With the successful test, India theoretically holds other countries’ satellites at risk

Pakistan has several satellites in orbit, launched with Chinese, Russian rockets

But China, which put dozens of satellites in orbit in 2018 alone, could see India’s fledgling capability as more of a threat

India said its test was done in the lower atmosphere to ensure there was no debris in space and whatever was left would “decay and fall back onto Earth”

EC to examine announcement

Taking cognisance of complaints from the Opposition leaders about PM Narendra Modi’s televised address, the Election Commission has decided to examine the matter. The committee set up by the EC will be chaired by Deputy Election Commissioner Dr Sandeep Saxena. TNS

‘Unprecedented feat’

Our scientists shot down a live satellite 300 km away in space, in low-earth orbit... India has made an unprecedented achievement —Narendra Modi, Prime Minister
