MM Kalburgi shooter may have been in custody all this while

Amit Baddi

Kannada

Kalburgi

Gauri Lankesh

Karnataka

Kalburgi shooter

Confession statements of co-accused lead police to believe that, who was picked up last year, may have been the killerKeep chanting your god’s name in your mind and then aim and pull the trigger. I am saying this from my personal experience.” These were Amit Baddi’s motivational words, to the new recruits, while attending a firearm and bomb making session at Dakshinadistrict near Moodbidri in the first week of October 2015.The 27-year-old goldsmith from Hubbali has emerged as the possible shooter in the murder of Kannada literary giant, Prof MM, at his Dharwad residence on August 30, 2015.These words have been attributed to Baddi by his co-accused Vasudev Suryavanshi, a 29-year-old mechanic from Jalgaon in Maharashtra, who reportedly stole two motorcycles that were used in the murder of Kalburgi and. Suryavanshi was one of the recruits at the training session.Vasudev Suryavanshi has told the investigators that Baddi. along with his childhood friend Ganesh Miskin, an incense seller, were present at the Dakshina Kannada training camp. The duo, because of their involvement in previous events (code for murder) was deputed as the instructors in this training camp, for the module using airguns. As of now Baddi, Miskin and Suryavanshi are the three suspects formally arrested by the CID in the Kalburgi case before it was handed over to the Special Investigation Team (SIT) that probed the Gauri Lankesh murder case. The trio is also among the 18 men arrested for murdering Gauri Lankesh outside her residence on September 5, 2017.“ I came to know about the murder of Kalburgi through TV. The manner in which the killers operated and how he (Kalburgi) was killed, was very similar to the way Narendra Dabholkar and Govind Pansare were killed. I realised it was done by our group,” states Suryavanshi in his statement to the SIT which is part of the 9235-page charge sheet submitted to the court in the Gauri Lankesh murder case.The investigators strongly suspect that Amit Baddi and Ganesh Miskin rode upto Kalburgi’s residence in Dharwad on a Bajaj Dscover bike stolen by Vasudev Suryavanshi on August 30, 2015. Baddi is suspected to be the shooter who knocked on his front door and opened fire at Kalburgi on his forehead. Amol Kale, Sharad Kalaskar, Amit Degwekar and Rajesh Bangera were arrested for their alleged involvement in Gauri Lankesh murder are also expected to be formally arrested for the murder of Kalburgi in the coming days Vasudev Suryavanshi’s statement also elaborates how Sachin Andure in September 2015, just days after Kalburgi’s murder and handed him a heavy bag. The CBI has accused Andure and Sharad Kalaskar of shooting rationalist Narendra Dabholkar in 2013. Suryavanshi was instructed to hand over the bag to Amol Kale in Belagavi for ‘safe keeping’. It is suspected that Andure was given the responsibility of transporting the firearm safely back to Amol Kale, to be then shifted to Maharashtra.“Sachin Andure handed me a black bag in September 2015, which contained something heavy. I was asked to hand over the bag to Amol Kale in Belagavi,” reads Suryavanshi’s statement. Sharad Kalaskar, another key member of the group, along with Amol Kale, had made Belagavi their operational base insince 2013.Amol Kale, the alleged mastermind of this radical assassin group was yet to take over the reins of the group back in 2015 as it was still under the guidance of Dr Virendra Tawde till his arrest in June 2016 in connection with murder of Govind Pansare. Suryavanshi’s statement also speaks about Tawde conducting seminars and lectures for the recruits of this fringe radical outfit. He also states that both Baddi and Miskin were well acquainted with Tawde and used to attend his ‘seminars’ on spirituality and life lessons. The group also conducted training sessions at various places including Belagavi, Dakshina Kannada, Pune and Ahmedabad between 2015 and 2017.“We assembled and exploded country made explosives at the Moodbidri camp and then in November 2015, we had another three-day camp in Ahmedabad where we were taught to assemble circuit-enabled explosive devices,” Suryavanshi has said in his statement. Suryavanshi also talks about his meeting with Parashuram Waghmare in one of these camps. Waghmare was later arrested as the alleged shooter of Gauri Lankesh.Though SIT is keeping mum on the identity of the, sources have confirmed that all main operatives involved in the Kalburgi murder are the same ones arrested in the Gauri Lankesh case. The SIT had initially picked up Baddi and Miskin for their alleged involvement in Gauri Lankesh murder case as the probe revealed that Miskin was the motorcycle rider for her shooter, Parashuram Waghmare and Baddi was in charge of collecting the murder weapon, jackets and helmets used in the ‘event’ and ensuring its safe disposal. The SIT stumbled upon some details about Kalburgi’s murder while interrogating the Gauri murder suspects and it was passed onto the CID in August 2018. Within a month, both Baddi and Miskin were arrested by the CID in connection with Kalburgi’s murder. Vasudev Suryavanshi was also formally taken into custody for providing the motorcycle used in Kalburgi’s murder. Interestingly Ganesh Miskin is suspected to have been the bike rider in this case and had also brought the shooter to the slain professor’s doorsteps.The Bajaj Discover bike stolen from Dharwad by Suryavanshi to be used for Kalburgi’s murder was later kept at Belagavi and then transferred to Vaibhav Raut in Nalasopara. It was also used to conduct a recce of movie halls where Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Padmavat was being screened. The group was planning to hurl petrol bombs at these cinemas. Maharashtra ATS had recovered this bike from Nalasopara in August 2018 along with explosives. Suryavanshi has also told the SIT that he had stolen a Passion pro bike from Davangere which was used by Waghmare and Miskin in Gauri Lankesh murder.
