Husband of pregnant Australian nurse, 29, who was found dead in a canal is charged with murder

The husband of a pregnant nurse who was kidnapped and killed in India has been charged with her murder.

Ravneet Kaur went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on March 14.

Her body was found 200km away in a canal in Lehragaga.

Her husband Gold Coast businessman Jaspreet Singh was in Australia at the time but local police allege he was having an affair and arranged the murder with his mistress.

Ravneet Kaur (pictured with her husband and their daughter), who lives on the Gold Coast, went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March

Police believe Kaur, 29, was sedated, driven away and killed before her body was dumped

Indian police have confirmed Mr Singh and four others have been charged with conspiracy and murder, ABC reported.

Mr Singh, who is understood to still be in the Gold Coast, will face extradition to India.

Ms Kaur, 29, who was pregnant, arrived in India on February 27 to visit her friends and family with her four-year-old daughter.

The Indian-born woman was meant to return on March 22.

Ms Kaur had been employed at Tricare in the Gold Coast and was described as a devoted worker and mother and was reportedly expecting a son.

Ms Kaur (pictured with her husband) arrived in India, where she was born, on February 27 to visit her friends and family with her four-year-old daughter

Ravneet Kaur went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March. Her body was found on Monday night in a canal 200km away in Lehragaga

Police allege Mr Singh was wanting to move to Canada with his mistress, who is also an Australian citizen.

Mr Singh denied the allegations in an interview with SBS Punjabi.

'I don't know what the basis of all these allegations is,' he said.

'I can't say anything. I will have to go to India and find out what happened. I have no role in this whatsoever.'

Indian authorities have been working with the Australian High Commission in New Dehli, police said.
