Soladevanahalli cops shoot two

habitual offenders

knife point

Solad evanahalli police on Wednesday morning opened fire at twowho were targeting college students and robbing them at. The police had taken the two to recover lethal weapons which were hidden in an isolated place near Acharya College and when they reached the spot, the two overpowered the cops and attacked them. The accused have been identified as Devraj, (25), Chandrashekhar, (23) and Manjegowda, (26), all three are labourers. Police said that the three used to target college students who would come out for evening walks near the forest area and would threaten them at knife point.They were involved in eight such robbery and extortion cases since 2014. Based on a tip off, the police caught Devraj and Chandrashekhar near a bar on Tuesday night and after detailed questioning, the accused confessed to the crime and agreed to take the police to the spot where they had hidden their weapons. When the cops took them to recover the weapons, they overpowered the police escort team and attacked PSI Vasanth Kumar and head Constable Shivaji Rao in an attempt to escape. Inspector Venkata Gowda in self defense, opened fire and shot them on their legs to neutralize them.Two people were injured after the driver of a car lost control and rammed into the divider of a Metro pillar near Basaveshwara bus stand on Tuesday night in Peenya traffic police station limits. The injured have been identified as Roshan, 30 and his brother Rehman, 12, residents of Doddaballapur. Police said that Roshan works with a private company in the city and on Tuesday, he had taken his brother along with him for some official work and the incident took place while the two were on their way back home.Cyanide Mohan convicted for two fresh casesThe 6th Additional District Sessions Court in Mangaluru convicted Serial killer Cyanide Mohan in two other fresh cases, Mohan who was already convicted death sentence by the court in three separate cases. Totally 20 cases were registered against Cyanide Mohan, who poisoned more than 20 women from 2003 – 2009.Cyanide Mohan alias Mohan Kumar who hails from Bantwal district in Dakshina Kannada was a teacher by profession. Mohan used to friend unmarried girls and promise to marry them. Later he would call that girl to a hotel or resort along with jewels and other valuables, rape them and the give a cyanide tablet saying it’s a contraceptive pill. The women’s bodies were found in the washrooms at bus stands.
