Bollywood: Alia Bhatt heads to Delhi to shoot for SS Rajamouli's RRR starring Ram Charan, Jr NTR and Ajay Devgn

Ram Charan

Komaram Bheem

Alia Bhatt

I wanted to paint the canvas with a new brush so that the universe I create has valour, energy, and grit. SS Rajamouli

Mirror had earlier reported (March 16) that SS Rajamouli’s period drama RRR will see Ram Charan and Jr NTR stepping into the shoes of two legendary freedom fighters from the 1900s—Alluri Seetharama andrespectively—whilehas been brought on board to play Charan’s love interest, Sita.While reports suggested that it would be yet another patriotic film, we have learnt that the film is a larger-than-life action-drama with a fictional touch to the real-life protagonists. Asserting that he wanted to put a fresh spin on a patriotic story, Rajamouli told Mirror, “I wanted to paint the canvas with a new brush so that the universe I create has valour, energy, and grit.”The Baahubali filmmaker wrapped up the film’s first schedule in Hyderabad last year and will kick off the second one in Delhi next week. According to a source close to the development, Alia joins Ram Charan and Jr NTR for the month-long schedule, which will also head to other parts of North India, along with British actress Daisy Edgar, who is romantically paired with Jr NTR. “The team will shoot at real locations in this schedule which also includes confrontation and action sequences,” the source revealed.Ajay Devgn, who has an extended cameo in the film which is set in the pre-Independence era, joins the team after wrapping up work on his home production, Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior. According to the source, the actor appears in the flashback portions.After the second schedule, the team flies to Hyderabad. Rajamouli has taken over an abandoned aluminum factory in the city and recreated a 1920s jail setup in it. A lot of the film is set inside its premises. “In the first schedule, a larger-than-life action scene was shot there with Ram Charan. A part of the third schedule will be based in and around the same set,” the source informed. The makers plan to wrap up by the year-end and release it during the Bakri-Eid 2020 weekend in Hindi, Tamil, Telugu and Malayalam.
