Ludhiana cop suspended for threatening murder witness

LUDHIANA: An assistant sub-inspector deployed at Daba police station was suspended on Wednesday after he was booked for allegedly threatening an eyewitness in a murder case and pressuring him to give a false statement.It was alleged that ASI Mewa Ram, along with relatives of the murder accused, trespassed the house of the eyewitness, Bhupinder Punj, on the evening of January 17 and threatened him. Bhupinder, a resident of Daba, then approached the Punjab and Haryana high court, which ordered a police inquiry. After deputy commissioner of police (investigation) Gaganajit Singh probed the allegations, the ASI and three others were booked on Tuesday. The other three accused are Gagandeep Singh and Gurpeet Singh, both of Giaspura village, and Ritneshwar Singh of Shaheed Ajeet Singh Colony. Gurpreet and Gagandeep were arrested on Wednesday.The police have registered a case under sections 120-B (criminal conspiracy), 195-A (threatening any person to give false evidence) 448 (punishment for house trespass), 506 (criminal intimidation), 166 (public servant disobeying law with intent to cause injury to any person) of the IPC.Bhupinder, 45, a transporter from Daba, said his cousin Manoj Kumar, 30, was killed by nine accused on December 16, 2016. The accused kidnapped him from near a liquor vend in Daba, took him to another place in a car and set him ablaze. His body was found a day later in Panjeta village. “I am an eyewitness as I was crossing the area when the accused kidnapped Manoj. Manoj and an accused, Amandeep Singh Amna, had an argument in a Ludhiana court the same day, which is why the latter and his accomplices killed him.”Bhupinder said the police had arrested Amna, Harkirat Singh, Manjit Singh, Jagjit Singh, Love Grewal, Gagandeep Singh, while other accused, Ravi, Lovely and Rajvir, were on the run.“On January 17, ASI Mewa Ram, the investigating officer, along with the three men, who are relatives of the murder accused, came to my house and threatened me. I approached the police to lodge a complaint, but to no avail. I then approached the HC, which on March 12 asked the police to conduct an inquiry as the ASI and three others were captured on CCTV cameras installed at my house,” Bhupinder, the complainant, added.Commissioner of police Sukhchain Singh Gill confirmed the police have suspended ASI Mewa Ram after lodging an FIR.
