These pics of Mira Rajput receiving Shahid Kapoor at the airport scream couple goals

Check out these adorable pics here

Shahid Kapoor did break a lot of hearts when news of his wedding first came out. But since then, the hottie has been winning hearts and constantly setting husband goals for everyone. From the way he looks at his wife, Mira Rajput to the adorable social media PDA, the lovebirds are too cute for words. From red-carpets to Bollywood events, the duo only arrive in style and reinstill our faith in love.

Adding happiness to the Lohri celebrations, Shahid returned to the bay from New Delhi where he was shooting for next release, Kabir Singh. The actor made a dapper entry to the airport in a white hoodie and a black tee. Some old school love, Mira was right there to receive her hubby and the smile on their faces made our hearts race too. Check out the super cute pics here.

Aren't they adorable? (Also Read: Shahid Kapoor has not had a social life ever since he got married to Mira Rajput. Read on to know)

While we can't get enough of the cuties, Shahid arrived on Koffee With Karan along with his brother, Ishaan Khatter. During the show, he goes on to reveal that he has no social life since his wedding. When quizzed about his relationship with Ranveer Singh, Deepika Padukone and Sanjay Leela Bhansali post-Padmaavat, he revealed, "my relationship status with most of the industry is zilch. Ever since I got married, I have literally not had a social life. I don’t know if that’s a good thing I probably think that’s a really bad thing because I was a bit of recluse anyways and now I’m so into my kids that every time I finish shooting I’m only with them. I’m not in touch with most people.”

Stay tuned for all the updates.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month. Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
