US calls out China's hypocrisy of protecting Masood Azhar and detaining country's Muslims

US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has hit out at China for its "shameful hypocrisy" over its treatment of Muslims.

Mike Pompeo said China, on one hand, abuses over a million Muslims at home and then protects Islamic terrorist groups from United Nations sanctions.

"The world cannot afford China's shameful hypocrisy toward Muslims. On one hand, China abuses more than a million Muslims at home, but on the other it protects violent Islamic terrorist groups from sanctions at the UN,"Mike Pompeo said.

Mike Pompeo was referring to China's move to block India's proposal at the United Nations to designate Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist.

The US along with Britain and France had moved a resolution in the UNSC to designate Azhar a "global terrorist" following the February 14 Pulwama attack, but China blocked it.

China put a hold on the resolution arguing that it needs more time to study it. Every member of the UNSC, except China, had supported the US move.

Masood Azhar's Jaish-e-Mohammed had claimed responsibility for the February 14 attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama that killed over 40 CRPF personnel.

On detention of Uighur minority in China, US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said China has detained more than one million Uighurs, ethnic Kazakhs, and other Muslim minorities in internment camps in Xinjiang since April 2017.

"China must release all those arbitrarily detained and end its repression," Mike Pompeo added.

The US stands with them and their family members. China must release all those arbitrarily detained and end its repression, he said.

On Wednesday, Pompeo met with survivors and family members of China's campaign of repression and mass detention against the minority groups in Xinjiang.

I call on China to end these counterproductive policies and release all arbitrarily detained, he said.

(With PTI inputs)

ALSO READ | Need more time: China after blocking move against Masood Azhar once again

ALSO READ | US sets up UN clash with China over bid to blacklist JeM leader Masood Azhar
