Seattle shooting spree leaves 2 dead

Police say two people were killed and two were injured after a man opened fire on vehicles including a metro bus in Seattle.

Seattle Deputy Police Chief Marc Garth Green says just after 4 p.m. Wednesday, a man approached a motorist near the Lake City neighborhood and shot her before firing on a southbound Metro bus.

Green says the bus driver turned around and drove to a safe place before hitting his alarm button and reporting he was shot. Green says the suspect then approached another motorist and fired, killing that driver.

Green says when police arrived, the suspect fled in the dead driver's vehicle and struck another vehicle nearby, killing that driver. Police took him into custody after a brief standoff.

Texas retailer turns over bump stocks

A Texas retailer of now-banned bump stocks has transferred about 60,000 of the gun-related items to the federal government to be destroyed.

RW Arms of Fort Worth turned over the bump stocks to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. The products will be shredded and recycled.

Bump stocks make semi-automatic guns rapidly fire. The government also isn't allowing existing owners to keep bump stocks. The items must be destroyed or surrendered.

Hiker lands chopper in 'super bloom'

Park officials in California's Antelope Valley, about 70 miles north of Los Angeles, said Tuesday that in recent days someone landed a helicopter in a field of poppies – part of the massive “super bloom” unfolding across the state – and then began a hike.

“We never thought it would be explicitly necessary to state that it is illegal to land a helicopter in the middle of the fields and begin hiking off trail,” the Antelope Valley California Poppy Reserve said in a Facebook post along with the hashtag #Don'tDoomTheBloom, according to the Los Angeles Times. “We were wrong.”

Indian anti-satellite weapon tested

India successfully test-fired an anti-satellite weapon Wednesday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in an unexpected announcement of military advancement that was broadcast live just weeks before a general election.

He said the destruction of a satellite in low-earth orbit by missile demonstrated India's capacity as a “space power” alongside the U.S., Russia and China.

The announcement is Modi's latest bid to flex India's military muscle as his party seeks to retain power.
