This All-Woman Kolkata Company Will Take Your Old Clothes & Turn Them Into Something Brand-New

A lot of us suffer from 'I have lots of clothes but nothing to wear' syndrome. The symptoms include being an avid clothes shopper, to the point where we have no more room in our wardrobes.

Welcome to the vortex of retail boom which lures us into buying more. Like us, Sujata Chatterjee from Kolkata was also caught in this web of abundance. But, she decided to break the rut and came up with a more sustainable way to declutter - just in case you are going berserk over the Marie Kondo method.

Speaking to Indiatimes, Chatterjee said, "The way we consume things isn't just limited to it being 'need-based'. There was a time when we'd only go on a shopping spree during a festival. But that culture has faded out."

"This constant lure led to my wardrobe being filled to the brim. My friends and family faced the same problem."

This is exactly what inspired Chatterjee to do something about clothes that keep piling up, and she decided to set up a sustainable way to upcycle them.

For a generation that's addicted to e-commerce, Chatterjee was well aware that minimalism was not going to happen overnight. So, she looked for a middle ground and came up with 'Twirl'.

Sujatha Chatterjee's unique online portal called Twirl.Store is aimed at making fashion more sustainable and environment-friendly, while empowering women in the process. The name 'Twirl' signifies spinning the wheel of sustainability, where everyone from the makers to consumers feel rewarded.

She set out on her entrepreneurial journey in 2017 and has single-handedly set up the all-woman organisation. At present, there are 60 women who are working with Twirl from all over Kolkata.

Chatterjee went out of her way to look for women who were willing to join her mission, "There was no ready-made place, each every unit and person has been handpicked."

The women who work with Twirl are more than happy that their skill is being used for something meaningful and is part of a bigger movement. Chatterjee says that most of these women come from the outskirts of Kolkata and her manufacturing units are spread across the city.

According to the online portal, Twirl.store believes in minimizing wastage. "The clothes you send to us are either provided to those in need through our donation drives, or upcycled. Our aim is that all fashion should benefit society and the environment." The women are also encouraged to work in self-help groups.

Speaking about how Twirl functions she said, "People who send unwanted clothes are not merely sending them as charity, they get points that can be redeemed to buy new gifts, accessories, and they are all upcycled products on the online store."

She also added that Twirl offers free home pickup across the country.

The organisation has been able to create more than 10,000 upcycled products out of 3500 clothes, and has donated around 1500 garments to people across slums and villages of Shantiniketan, Sundarbans.

The 37-year-old who started her career with an IT company with a degree in engineering battled the odds to establish Twirl. Eyebrows were raised when she conveyed her idea of an all-woman team and the concept of Twirl.

"People were doubtful about how, as a woman entrepreneur, was I going to start this offbeat company and that too Kolkata," said Chatterjee.

But she has come a long way. Her initiative has been felicitated by IIM Calcutta and DST, Govt of India, Tata Social Enterprise Challenge, India Future Leadership Award At Infocomm 2018 and Swayam Siddha Eastern Chamber of Commerce and Rotary Club of Calcutta.

Sujatha Chatterjee's story is proof that change always starts small, but if you really believe in your goal, it will one day become a monument to marvel at.
