Airaa Movie Review: Nayanthara kisses goodbye to logic in latest horror flick

Of late, Nayanthara, who is hailed as Lady Superstar, prefers to work with newcomers because she believes they bring in 'fresh' stories. For her film Airaa, she teamed up with one-film-old director KM Sarjun, who is well known in the short film circuit for his intense films like Lakshmi and Maa.

Airaa is a horror flick; one of the most exploited genres in the history of Tamil cinema. Being a horror film, it follows a certain template - an act of revenge, proper backstory, jump scares and a pulsating background score. Airaa has plenty of it, but it is bogged down by a ridiculous pre-climax that will leave you puzzled.

Airaa begins with the introduction of Yamuna (Nayanthara), who is a journalist at a publication called Makkal Mail. She is keen on starting a YouTube channel, but her boss shoots down the idea. However, situations force her to start a YouTube channel that uploads fabricated ghost videos to earn money. As expected (duh), Yamuna's channel becomes a huge hit.

But, Yamuna has to pay a price for her sudden rise to fame. Her grandmother's house in Pollachi, from where she operates her channel, becomes haunted. Meanwhile, in Chennai, Amudhan (Kalaiyarasan) is clueless about the deaths that are happening around him. Yamuna and Amudhan are searching for the cause (separately) and whether they crack it or not forms the story.

Airaa's strength lies in its second half, which showcases the story of Bhavani, who yearns for happiness in life. As grief-stricken Bhavani, Nayanthara is excellent and makes us empathise with her. Director Sarjun KM has dealt with a lot of social issues such as bullying, abuse, rape and many more in the second half. The messages are not on your face; they are subtle yet strong. Also, Sarjun's use of the Butterfly Effect is clever.

The first half of Airaa aims to induce fear in the audience's mind. But, having watched over 100 horror films in the last few years, the audience has, by now, turned immune to them and it takes a great deal to pull off jump scares today. For any horror film, the backstory plays a major role and Sarjun has crafted a relatable story in Airaa.

Airaa's main drawback is that the director has tried to address several things but he doesn't delve deep into any of them. Yamuna's introduction scene, where she puts a sexist man in place, looks like it is there just to establish her as a strong woman.

The events in Bhavani's life are showcased beautifully, but the pre-climax is a huge letdown and almost spoils the entire feel of the movie. In fact, the big reveal is one of the most ridiculous reasonings a director can resort to.

Nayanthara in two roles (as Bhavani and Yamuna) looks ethereal and delivers an arresting performance. In retrospect, however, it also feels like she is getting repetitive with her expressions. As the dark-complexioned Bhavani, she brings about a change in her body language, which is much needed for the character.

Kalaiyarasan, Maathevan and Gabriella Sellus have all delivered convincing performances but it is Nayanthara who shoulders the movie from the start. Yogi Babu's one-liners don't work and fall flat.

Airaa's backbone is composer KS Sundaramurthy's music and background score. His compositions Kaariga and Megathoodham are brilliant to listen to. Cinematographer Sudarshan Srinivasan's work needs special mention: he has played with colours in Airaa.

Airaa could have been a horror film with a moving backstory, but it falls short by miles.

Director Sarjun KM's Airaa starring Nayanthara in two roles aims to be a thrilling horror flick laden with many hidden messages. But, logic takes a beating and makes it an underwhelming film. Watch it only for Nayanthara, and only if you really want to.

2 out 5 stars for Airaa.

ALSO SEE | Airaa producers vow not to cast Radha Ravi in films after his distasteful remarks on Nayanthara

ALSO SEE | Aaranya Kaandam gave me confidence to become actor: Fahadh Faasil
