Chennai dogs battle perils of heat strokes, 3 dead in a week

Pugs, bulldogs and St Bernards usually get affected by the heat and they need extra care.(Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chennai: During summers our pets need extra care. From heat strokes to tick infections to skin irritation, pets are prone to many ailments during these few months, most of which can be avoided if the pet owners put minimal efforts towards their pets as they have special needs.

Reportedly, Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCA) claimed that in the past week, heat stroke has killed three dogs in Chennai. As per the reports in the Times of India, All the three dogs were exotic breeds, viz. Pugs, Bulldogs and St Bernards - all three of these breeds usually cannot handle a rise in temperature as they belong to colder areas.

R Sokkalingam, a veterinarian specialist, warned dog owners to be mindful of their pets in the hot temperatures. He further suggested some immediate help like putting a wet towel around the head and between the legs of dogs or to give it ice-cold water. These measures help to bring down the heat in the animal’s body and save them from heat stroke.

Apart from this, the expert also advised that the dogs must be regularly fed with fruits like watermelons and bananas. Feeding the dogs with grapes should be avoided as it can lead to kidney failure and can be fatal.

Meanwhile, T Ganesan, a techie, told TOI that last year he had lost one of his two German Shepherds because he used to leave them out in the sunny verandah. Eventually, the two dogs looked very dehydrated and would not touch food and water. Suddenly one day one of them died.

He further mentioned that now he has been taking extra care for his other dog which is four years old.

Dawn William, general manager of an animal rescue NGO, Blue Cross, told the media that Dogs belonging to Indian breeds are capable of surviving in summers, but not exotic species as not everyone can provide them with the required attention.
