Sriram Raghavan: From Johnny Gaddar to AndhaDhun

Sriram Raghavan

Ayushmann Khurrana

spy film

Johnny Gaddaar

Barry Norman

David Sassoon

Karan Singh

When we started the film, we had two choices for the end—One was a rather sad one where the diabolical Simi has blinded Akash forever and the other was a simplistic one whereby he gets his eyes back. Sanjay (Routray) and I eventually opted to keep it ambiguous. Our studio partner was understandably worried about whether it would work from the box-office point out view. AndhaDhun was an experimental for an Indian film but not too expensive, so I was left alone. I admit the move could have backfired and am super thrilled people talked about and debated it, came back to watch the film and embraced it.By now everyone knowswas not my first choice. I had narrated to a couple of actors and even tried a few newcomers when he texted me and I met him out of courtesy. I was narrating the story to him, looking for a viewer feedback when slowly, his palpable excitement made me see him in the role. He offered to audition, and I gave him two scenes: One when he’s actually blind and one where he is play-acting. They were easy to write and hard to play. He brought in his natural style and given the kind of roles he’s played, the darkness was implied which made it better. Ayushmann and Tabu are both the killers of the film.Tabu I’d invited to a trial screening of Badlapur even though I didn’t know her. She came and liked the film which encouraged me to narrate AndhaDhun to her. It made her laugh—I don’t know whether she was laughing at the story or with it, but I enjoyed her laughter and given that she can carry off both comedy and intensity with effortless ease, she was the perfect Simi.Her husband, Pramod Sinha, could have easily been a jeweller or a businessman but I thought why not an actor, who, like Amol Palekar, had perhaps moved to Pune after retirement but still enjoyed watching his old films. I thought of Anil Dhawan because he’s Varun’s uncle and from the institute. Also, I remember my mom telling me I couldn’t watch his Chetna, a really bold adult movie in the ’70s. Getting Anil Dhawan gave us a chance to experiment with the music, give it a yesteryear feel. I had initially planned not to have songs but I was told that was crazy, and since I like piano songs like Dev Anand’s “Khwab Ho Tum” I gave in despite my inhibitions since I had a legitimate reason to use them tantalisingly, as inserts between songs. It wasn’t your usual commercial stuff but Amit Trivedi’s music does grow on most people.Thanks to AndhaDhun I ended the year on a high, and now while scripting a biggie with Dinesh Vijan, a biopic on second lieutenant Arun Khetarpal, who died at 21 in the 1971 Indo-Pak war and was awarded the Param Vir Chakra posthumously, I’m also looking at two-three other stories. I don’t want to wait three years for a release, I wish to come out with one next year, it’s one way of avoiding jury duty for film awards.After Agent Vinod while reading a lot of books, I came across this story whose basic synopsis was one-third of what you see in Badlapur. Expecting a revenge drama like Ghayal, I stopped reading mid-way, and tried to invent my own scenario of what happened 15 years later. I came up with some rather trite answers and then went back to reading it and it left me deeply affected despite being a much darker story.A lot of people told me not to experiment with it, even Sanjay (Routray) found it too dark. Fortunately, Dino (Dinesh Vijan) loved it and was ready to produce it if I promised not to dilute it. Badlapur was my first box-office hit, but some people didn’t get the point and found it misogynist while some well-known critics were sceptical. I’m glad the film provoked some thought.For me the high was the casting. Nawazuddin Siddiqui got a role with a hero’s arc because as the film progresses, you start liking Liak Tungekar because, in his own way, he’s a pure soul. Varun’s Raghav was the big dare. I had thought he’d want to play Nawaz’s role but he took on the challenge of Raghav and since people saw him as a hero, his presence added to the shock value of this antirevenge movie.This was perhaps my most ambitious film and since I love spy thrillers, I tried a mix of everything but fell between two streams. In retrospect I think I should have put my foot down on occasions. After Agent Vinod I understood what Billy Wilder meant when he said, “Trust your instinct. Your mistakes might as well be your own, instead of someone else’s.”Saif was the best thing about the film and I feel doubly bad for having let him down. I guess going by the first trailer, people expected a desi Bond—haraami, lots of fun and definitely not celibate. Our film got a little too serious after a point and as a critic pointed out, was too intelligent for dumb audiences and too dumb for the intelligent. I’ve to make anotherto get it right.I used to watch theShow on BBC and in one episode saw a clip of Quentin Tarantino’s Reservoir Dogs. Instantly hooked, I traced a VHS in a Colaba video library, saw it a few times and decided I wanted to make a film like this. The basic plot of Johnny Gaddaar, was drawn from different sources, including James Hadley Chase novels and French noir, but the treatment was mine.For the character of Seshu (Sheshadri) I wanted Dharamendra. He’d quit films and was an MP from Bikaner, still I visited him with my producer Pooja Shetty, sure he’d say “No.” But mid-way through, he got very excited and I wondered how to tell him he’d get killed in the next scene. Working with him was my biggest take-away from the film which also introduced Neil Nitin Mukesh whom I met by chance at Jhamu Sughand’s office. Jhamu told me he’d screen-tested for Anurag. I narrated him the story and he was fascinated. I warned him it wasn’t a traditional hero launch, but he still wanted to do it. It was great for me because Neil came with no set image and that added to the intrigue.After I passed out of FTII, my first professional assignment was a docu-drama on Raman Raghav for a video magazine showcasing interesting cases of cops. We had a budget lesser than that for TV but with Raghuvir Yadav leading the gang, we went out and shot it like a film in actual locations, including one in Jogeshwari where the serial killer of the ’60s had actually made his weapons. The magazine shut down soon after and the docu-drama was never released but became a show reel for me.Anurag (Kashyap) showed it to Ramu (Ram Gopal Varma) who wondered why I wasn’t making movies. When I told him that apart from his films, I didn’t like too many, he asked me to write a script for him. We’d work on an idea for a few weeks, then, Ramu would move to something else.During this time, he offered me Shool. I had issues with the second half while he was convinced with what he had. So that didn’t work out. Then, we started collaborating on Daya, an ironic title given that it was on encounter cops. I’d been working on that script for a few months when Ramu started Company and decided to put this on hold given the sensitive subject. My face fell and to appease me, he gave me another script. It was written like a novella, but I liked that it was a romance, crime saga and a jail drama all rolled in one.We shot Ek Hasina Thi atSchool, Thane jail and even created our own jail at Natraj Studio. The climax with all those rats is still talked about. We had two-three huge junglee rats which were secured, the rest were white mice dyed black with toothpowder. Urmila (Matondkar), a fantastic actress and very sporting, even swatted one of the mice at the interval point. There’s also a shot of a rat running up Saif’s (Ali Khan) trouser leg but that was a wound-up mechanical toy!Saif was our first choice forRathod but he was in the Dil Chahta Hai happy space and wary, convinced his fans would hate him as this charmingly diabolical Charles Sobhraj-kind of character. But once he came on board, he was brilliant and gave us a taste of the Saif who nailed it as Omkara’s Langda Tyagi.
