India had anti-satellite missile capability in 2007, but no political will: Ex-ISRO Chairman

India had anti-satellite missile capability in 2007, but no political will: Ex-ISRO Chairman

NEW DELHI, Mar 27 (Agencies): Former ISRO chairman G Madhavan Nair on Wednesday said that India had the anti-satellite missile capability more than a decade ago but there was no political will at the time to demonstrate it.

He said when China shot down an ageing weather satellite by launching a missile in 2007, India had the technology to undertake a similar mission.

"...now (Prime Minister Narendra) Modiji has taken the initiative and he had the political will and courage to say that we will do this. We have now demonstrated this to whole world," Nair told agencies.

He had headed the ISRO (Indian Space Research Organisation), Space Commission and was Secretary in the Department of Space from 2003 to 2009.

Asked if India could have demonstrated the anti-satellite missile capability in 2007 itself, Nair said "certainly", but it could not be done due to absence of "political decision" to go ahead with it at that time.

"Now, Modiji has courageously taken the decision," he said.

The prime minister on Wednesday announced India had demonstrated the capability by shooting down a live satellite, describing it as a rare achievement that puts the country in an exclusive club of space superpowers.

India is only the fourth country to have such a specialised capability after the US, Russia and China.

Pakistan urges no militarisation of outer space after India tests anti-Satellite MissileISLAMABAD, Mar 27 (Agencies): Hours after India's announcement of shooting down a live satellite with a missile - a rare achievement that puts the country in an exclusive club of space superpowers, Pakistan on Wednesday that it was against the militarisation of outer space.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi earlier announced that India successfully test-fired an anti-satellite missile by shooting down a live satellite.

The test makes India the fourth country in the world after the US, Russia and China to acquire the strategic capability to shoot down enemy satellites. "Space is the common heritage of mankind and every nation has the responsibility to avoid actions which can lead to the militarisation of this arena," Foreign Office spokesperson Mohammad Faisal said in a statement.

He said Pakistan was a "strong proponent of the United Nations resolution on Prevention of Arms Race in Outer Space".

"Boasting of such capabilities (to destroy satellite) is reminiscent of Don Quixote's tilting against windmills," he said, referring to India's test.

"We hope that countries which have in the past strongly condemned demonstration of similar capabilities by others will be prepared to work towards developing international instruments to prevent military threats relating to outer space," Faisal said, without naming any country.

In New Delhi, the Ministry of External Affairs said in a statement that India has no intention of entering into an arms race in outer space.
