‘BJP govt showed courage for surgical strikes in all spheres,’ says Modi in UP

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed his first rally in Uttar Pradesh’s Meerut and said the people have made up their mind for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

Addressing the rally, PM Modi said, “5 years ago, when I sought your blessings, you gave me a lot of love. I had said that I will return the blessings and the love with interest, and I had also said that I will give account of the work that I have done.”

PM Modi paid tribute to Choudhary Charan Singh and said ‘chowkidar’ does no injustice.

“Apna hisab doonga, saath-saath doosra ka hisab bhi lunga. Ye dono kaam saath-saath chalne waale hain.Tabhi to hoga hisab barabar.Aur aap to jaante hain main chowkidaar hu. Aur chowkidaar kabhi Na-Insaafi nahi karta hai. Hisab hoga,sabka hoga, aur baari-baari se hoga (You know that I am a Chowkidar and Chowkidar doesn’t let there be injustice. Everyone will be held accountable, one by one. In next few days, I will keep detail of what I did. But I will also ask that when people entrusted you with responsibility, why did you betray them.),” Modi added.

Praising BJP-led NDA government’s achievement, Modi said be it land, air or space his government has shown its mettle. “We showed the courage to carry out surgical strikes,” he said.

“The opposition is trying to be popular in Pakistan. Does the public want India’s hero or Pakistan’s,” Modi added referring to the row over the impact of India's Balakot strike on February 26.

Talking about India’s achievement of ‘Mission Shakti’, PM said that for him, India is before anything else.

Taking a jibe at Opposition, he added that they ignored the achievement of missile test.

“Our scientists were demanding for testing of shooting down of satellite in space, their government (UPA) postponed this decision also. To make the India of 21st century strong and for its security, this decision should have been taken long ago. But it kept getting delayed,” he added.

“I spoke about ASAT (anti-satellite missile), some intelligent people thought I was talking about a theatre set," he said, referring to Rahul Gandhi's tweet sarcastically wishing him "Happy World Theatre Day."

Attacking Congress, Modi said on one side there is a strong ‘chowkidar’ and on the other is a line of tainted people.

“The upcoming Lok Sabha elections will be fight between decisive government and indecisive past,” he added.

Modi will hold rallies in Uttarakhand’s Rudrapur and J&K’s Akhnoor later on Thursday.

All three states are scheduled to go for polls in phase-1 on April 11, 2019.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses et all. Happy reading.
