Rinse, repeat: Pakistan claims no terror camps at 22 spots named by India

Denying the existence of terror camps at 22 locations on its soil as pointed out by India after Pulwama terror attack, Pakistan has expressed its willingness to allow the visit of international community and India as well, on request, to these places.

Pakistan has claimed no terror camps exist at the 22 mentioned places in a report it shared with the Indian government on Wednesday about how they carried out a probe soon after receipt of the Indian dossier of evidence on Pulwama attack.

Pakistan has shared the investigation report with the Ministry of External Affairs, and also with UN Security Council's five permanent members - China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

On February 14, Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammad carried out terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama wherein 40 Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed. The attack was planned by Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar.

The report Islamabad shared with New Delhi claimed, "Pakistan had constituted an investigation team, detained a number of persons for investigations and initiated work on the technical aspects of social media content."

Pakistan said it is focusing on those parts which relate to Pulwama incident.

"During the course of investigations, all aspects of the information provided by India have been thoroughly examined, including the confessional video of Adil Dar, "claim" of responsibility for the attack, WhatsApp and Telegram numbers used to share videos and messages in support of Pulwama attack, list of 90 individuals suspected of belonging to a proscribed organization and 22 pin locations of alleged training camps," the report stated.

The Pakistan report further pointed that that service providers have been requested for data, including relevant details of activities and contacts of the GSM number provided by India authorities.

"A request for assistance from WhatsApp has also been made to the US government," stated the report adding that while 54 detained individuals are being investigated, no details linking them to Pulwama have been found so far.

The report stated that the 22 pin locations shared by India have been examined and no such camps exist. "Pakistan is willing to allow visits, on request, to these locations," the report also stated.

"Additional information and documents from India would be essential to continue the process of investigations," added the report.

India had shared with Pakistan a list of 90 suspected terrorists, belonging to a proscribed organization Jaish-e-Mohammad, and 22 pin locations of alleged training camps on it soils after terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama.

India shared its dossier with Pakistan on February 27. The dossier, seen by DNA, contains 91 pages and is divided into six segments, out of which second and third segments pertain to Pulwama terror attack. Other parts are details of terror organisations operating in Pakistan, mostly general information about terror groups on soil in Pakistan.

India has also shared "confessional" video of the terrorist Adil Dar, who carried out the suicide blast that killed CRPF soldiers in Pulwama, and also details of how he was in constant touch with his Jaish-e-Mohammad handler in Pakistan.

India has also shared WhatsApp and Telegram numbers used to share videos and messages in support of Pulwama attack.
