YS Vivekananda Reddy murder: Family questions SIT investigation of the case

YS Vivekananda Reddy murder: Family questions SIT investigation of the case

Dr Suneetha Narreddy, the daughter of YS Vivekananda Reddy suspects a nexus between two men, Adinarayana Reddy and K Parameshwar Reddy.

news Controversy

Dr Suneetha Narreddy, the daughter of slain former minister YS Vivekananda Reddy, has raised suspicions on the role of Adinarayana Reddy and K Parameshwar Reddy in the alleged murder of her father. She has also questioned the credibility of the Special Investigation Team (SIT) of Andhra Pradesh Police for investigating the family and not questioning whom the family suspects are behind the murder.

Suneetha has questioned the role of Kasunur Parameshwar Reddy who got himself admitted in a hospital in Kadapa on March 14, two days before the former MP YS Vivekananda Reddy was found dead at his home at Pulivendula village. Parameshwar Reddy is presently in police custody. The daughter suspects a nexus between Adinarayana Reddy and Parameshwar. Parameshwar was an aide to her later father, while Adinarayana is a TDP defector from YSRCP who was inducted into the cabinet.

“Parameshwar complained of chest pain and got himself admitted in a hospital in Kadapa on March 14. However, all his test results were normal and the man was on the phone most of the day. Later, around 5.30 pm, he got himself discharged against medical advice and met TDP workers at Haritha hotel. Parameshwar Reddy then insisted on readmission in the same hospital on the same day. Additionally, those who visited him showed him something displayed on their phones. He then argued with the staff and left the hospital on March 14. The Regional Circle Inspector has known about the case, but these facts have been kept hidden.” Suneetha told reporters on Wednesday.

Suneetha said the family has been informing the SIT about whatever information they have and whomever they suspect. However, “The police are taking into custody and questioning those who were close to my father, including the family members. But they are not going after those whom we suspect. Why are some people not being investigating despite my complaint? We are going through a lot of pain and we are being targeted?” she added.

YS Sowbhagya, the wife of the deceased YSRCP leader, has also filed a petition with the Andhra Pradesh High court expressing concern over the way the SIT of the Andhra Police is conducting their investigation. She has sought the court to declare the actions of the SIT as arbitrary and unconstitutional.

This petition is notwithstanding the two pleas already filed in the courts, one by YS Jagan Mohan Reddy and the other by his nephew Vivekananda Reddy. The family is accusing the investigating agency of concluding that family members were involved in the murder, even before conducting a far investigation. The SIT investigating the case is being accused of bending the investigation to suit the political will of the ruling TDP. The matter has been adjourned for March 28.

Suneetha has also reached out to the Election Commission of India, seeking an NIA or CBI probe into the death of her father. Jagan also approached Governor ESL Narasimhan with a memorandum with similar requests.
