Who stops Congress from chanting Bharat Mata Ki Jai: Prakash Javadekar at Chunav Manch

Follow us on Image Source : PTI HRD Minister Prakash Javadekar

HRD Minister Prakash Javadekar on IndiaTV’s Chunav Manch on Thursday said that the public is with them and in the Lok Sabha elections 2019 BJP will come out with flying colors.

Talking about Prime Minister Modi’s leadership Javadekar said a leader is one who leads from the front, who is not afraid to take tough decisions, who stands up for the Country in times of need.

“Narendra Modi has always led from the front. He has always shown faith in the abilities of own people. After 2008 Mumbai attack Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of the Congress party did not give the forces a go-ahead when the world was devastated by the terror attack which originated from Pakistani soil. After Pulwama Modi ji gave a free hand to the forces to take the best possible approach to deal with this threat of terrorism originating from Pakistan. That’s how a leader should be,” said HRD Minister.

Taking a jibe at Congress, he said, “All the operational details were provided in the all-party meeting regarding Balakot attack. But Congress has a habit of nodding their heads in the closed-door meetings and making noise as they come out. They did the same thing at the time of GST, the bill was made with a consensus from all parties. The Congress party agreed to all the norms of the bill in the parliament but when they came out they criticised the bill.”

When asked about Rahul Gandhi as the next Prime Minister he said: “Even the Congress deep down doesn’t believe in Rahul Gandhi, how can you expect me to accept him as my next Prime Minister.”

Talking about Prime Minister’s Space Mission announcement, “We have always been a strong nation on land, sea and air. Only space was left. Now we are a superpower in space too. Modi Ji had the political will to give a go-ahead to our scientists.”

When asked if Modi ji is taking the credit for scientists he said “This is not a matter of taking credit as an individual. This is a matter of national pride. In 2012 the Chief scientist of DRDO asked Dr Manmohan Singh for the permission to carry out this test. Manmohan Singh denied permission. Credit needs to be given where due. Modi Ji had the political will to carry out the test and we should all be proud of our country today.”

Talking about the Chowkidar Campaign Javdekar said, “Chowkidar Campaign was initiated by the people and it is theirs as much as us. The Congress party has always insulted poor people.”

Javdekar referred to the times when the Congress party has insulted Prime Minister Modi by calling him a ‘Chai-Wala’

He ended by saying People will again choose the BJP and with even greater numbers.

Watch Video:
