'Hardly surprised': India slams Pakistan over response to Pulwama terror attack dossier

Pulwama terror attack | February 14, 2019 | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: After Pakistan’s response on the dossier shared by India on Pulwama terror attack, New Delhi said it is disappointed at the response and added that Islamabad continues to remain in denial and even refuses to acknowledge Pulwama as a terror attack.

A statement released by the Ministry of External Affairs called out Pakistan for not sharing “details of credible action, if any, taken by it against terrorists or terrorist organizations based in territories under its control.”

India is hardly surprised at Pakistan’s response as it deploys a set script whenever any terror attacks take place in the neighbourhood be it Mumbai 2008 or Pathankot attack in 2016, the statement read.

The MEA further said that it is a well-known fact that the UN-designated terrorist organization Jaish-e-Mohammed and its leader Masood Azhar are based in Pakistan which was even acknowledged recently to international media by Pakistan’s Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi but the Imran Khan-led PTI government has not shown any intention or sincerity to take action against terror outfits.

"Pakistan should abide by the commitment it gave in 2004, and which its current leadership has recently repeated, vowing not to allow any territory under its control to be used for terrorism against India in any manner. Pakistan should take immediate, credible, irreversible and verifiable actions against terrorists and terror organizations operating from territories under its control," the statement further read.

Yesterday, Pakistan had referred to Pulwama attack as "incident" and sought more evidence from India and said that the Indian dossier failed to prove link of JeM chief Masood Azhar with the Pulwama incident.

Islamabad also said that it examined the 22 "pin locations" shared by India but no evidence of terror camps was found at the site.

Yesterday, Pakistan called Indian envoy Ajay Bisaria and handed over the response.

The press release shared by Pakistan stated: “Pakistan has acted with a high sense of responsibility and extended full cooperation. We do so in the interest of regional peace and security. We have sought further information/evidence from India to take the process forward.”

40 CRPF jawans were killed when JeM suicide bomber rammed his SUV into the convoy in which the jawans were travelling.

In response, India carried out pre-emptive high-precision airstrikes in Balakot and destroyed JeM terror camps in the area. The attack was carried out after Indian intelligence agencies received credible inputs that JeM was planning another Pulwama-like attack in the country.

While the Centre claimed that over 200-300 terrorists were killed in the strikes the IAF said that it had succeeded in fulfilling its objective. Imran Khan had ordered a crackdown on terror outfits and their leaders after facing intense international pressure and over 120 members of banned militant outfits in the country were taken in preventive custody.

Khan had recently said that tension between both the countries will only de-escalate after the 2019 Lok Sabha elections get over. Khan was also criticised for his statement on India's response to Pulwama terror attack when he said that the attack was planned as Lok Sabha elections were approaching.
