Our war against errorism

By Neeraj Kaushal

The Ides of March witnessed a self-described ‘ethno-nationalist eco-fascist’ killing 50 innocent Muslims in two mosques in New Zealand. Six months prior to that, on the other side of the globe in Pittsburgh, US, another white supremacist opened fire in a synagogue killing 11 Jews.

In 2017, yet another terrorist attack resulted in the killing of six Muslims and injuring another 19 worshipping in a mosque. In 2015, a series of coordinated terrorist attacks by the Islamic State (IS) in Paris killed 130.

Terrorists do not have to belong to asingle religion, ethnicity, race, skin colour, nationality or ideology. Terrorists have one single goal: to kill, create anarchy and spread terror.

Yet, a terrorist stereotype has taken root in the minds of many around the world. Terrorists are, according to this view, young Muslim men who migrate from Islamic to Western countries to carry out jihad against Western civilisation. ‘Not all Muslims are terrorists, but all terrorists are Muslims,’ is a widely used catchphrase for those who believe in and propagate this image. This factually incorrect phrase is repeatedly expressed in the media despite evidence to the contrary.

Terrorists involved in acts of terrorism over the past decades have been Buddhists, Christians, Jews, Hindus and Muslims. They were communists, Maoists, Marxists and extreme right-wing anarchists. Here are a few examples. After World War 1, in British-controlled Palestine, the terrorists were often Jews. Terrorism in various forms has continued in Israel since its creation, by groups belonging to both the Jewish and Muslim faiths. The Irish Republican Army (IRA), which used bombs and other terrorist tactics to oppose British rule in Ireland, had roots in Catholic nationalism.

The Aum Shinrikyo death cult in Japan, which used sarin gas on the Tokyo subway in 1995 killing 12 and injuring more than 5,000, claimed to follow Hinduism and Buddhism. The Ku Klux Klan (KKK) in the US espouses Christian Protestantism and has targeted mostly African-Americans but occasionally Jews, Catholics and other minorities.

Greatly Exaggerated

In the Sri Lankan civil war that lasted three decades and killed close to 100,000 people, the terrorists were Hindu Tamils on the northern side of the island state and Buddhists on its southern side. Both groups received funding from the prosperous Sri Lankan Tamil and Sinhalese diaspora. Terrorists in the Sikh nationalist movement in India’s northern state of Punjab, which killed over 10,000 people including Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, were Sikhs. They, too, were often instigated and funded by the rich Sikh diaspora in Canada, the US and Britain.

In several Central and South American countries, including Colombia, Guatemala and Honduras, terrorists are warlords dealing in drugs and arms. The Marxist-Leninist Túpac Amaru Revolutionary Movement and the Maoist Shining Path have been responsible for terrorism in Peru. In the tribal areas of central India, the terrorists are Maoist revolutionaries. In India’s eastern state of Assam, they are left-wing Hindu anarchists. In much of Africa, the terrorists are warlords and their objective is to create and profit from terror.

Even the belief that Islamic terrorists have been responsible for most of the recent terrorist attacks in the Western world has no foundation if we go by the official data. Europol, EU’s law enforcement agency, reports that the vast majority of terror attacks in Europe are not religiously motivated by Islamic groups but are, in fact, perpetrated by separatist groups.

An FBI study on terrorism committed in the US between 1980 and 2005 found that 94% of the acts of terrorism were by non-Muslims. Another study by the Australia-based Institute for Economics and Peace found that between 2006 and 2016, 98% of all deaths from terrorism in the US resulted from attacks carried out by lone actors.

Some believe that the primary targets of terrorism are Western people. Statements by terrorist organisations such as al-Qaeda, the Taliban and IS articulate that their goal is to destroy Western civilisation, and perhaps this is the source of these beliefs. However, it is not the West but countries in the East and South that bear the brunt of the violence from international terrorism.

Global Scourge

According to the Global Terrorism Index, during 2004-15, the top 15 countries for terrorism-related fatalities were in North Africa, West Asia and South Asia. Between 2000 and 2014, there were 3,659 terrorist-related deaths in all Western countries combined. Alarming though these numbers are, they are dwarfed by the 13,076 terrorism-related fatalities in Iraqi cities in 2014, a single year.

Terrorists win when we allow our beliefs on terrorism and terrorists to be guided by alternate facts. Terrorists achieve their goals when we allow our unsubstantiated fears to overwrite facts. There should be only one response to terrorists, ‘You have chosen us, but we utterly condemn you and reject you,’ to repeat the words of New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern.

(The writer is professor, social policy, Columbia University, US)

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
