WE Hub moves into its own facility on BRAOU campus

Kiran Mazumdar Shaw asks women to be more confident

WE Hub, a one-of-its-kind initiative of the Telangana government for women entrepreneurs, moved into its own premises on Thursday with Kiran Mazumdar Shaw, one of the prominent women business leaders, highlighting the need for women to push themselves and also the role of micro-entrepreneurship in job-creation in the country.

Ms. Shaw, chairperson and managing director of Biocon, said she wanted women to fight for what is rightfully theirs. “I want women to push themselves and be more confident,” she said, urging women to move from being a job-shunner to a job-creator.

Addressing the gathering at Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Open University in the city where the 50-seater facility has been set up, she said We Hub ought to be replicated across the country as more women foraying into entrepreneurship could mean more than double the GDP.

A state-run platform, WE Hub provides a range of support services for women, including access to seed funding, mentoring, virtual programmes for those who are unable to travel, business guidance, and government liaison to help women establish their own enterprise.

Important role

Calling upon WE Hub to work towards changing the mindset that comes in the way of women setting up their own businesses, Ms. Shaw, who also went down memory lane on how it was not easy for women entrepreneurs to work when she started 40 years ago, said women have a an important role to play in India’s growing economy. “Entrepreneurs have a sizable role to play in the new economy and in that women must have an equitable share…”

Entrepreneurship is also about creating jobs. “Micro entrepreneurship is the way to go forward,” she said, adding not all enterprises are about tech ideas as they can be created out of simple ideas too. Failure is inherent to entrepreneurship and that should not stop women from taking risks, she added.

R&D facility

Telangana Industries Secretary Jayesh Ranjan said unlike other incubators, WE Hub does not insist on only accommodating a start-up with an idea. “The facility is also for those who do not have an idea, but have a desire to create something enriching and meaningful. It is also sector agnostic, tech agnostic,” he said.

Mr. Ranjan also announced that Biocon, which has a manufacturing facility in the city, is setting up an R&D facility in Genome Valley.

WE Hub CEO Deepthi Ravula said incubation, access to the government and eco-system building are the three pillars on which WE Hub is based. On the occasion, a number of MoUs with partner organisations were signed.
