Kullfi Kumarr Bajewala March 28, 2019 Written Update: Kulfi meets Sikander

In the previous episode, we see how Sikander and his family are overwhelmed, seeing Amyra's recovery. Meanwhile, Kulfi and her friends try to figure out a way to land their hot air balloon. Kulfi had managed to escape from Ammaji’s captivity and reaches the Gill house. She gets excited to see people playing holi while Sikander gets a feeling of Kulfi being around and runs outside. He gets a pleasant shock to see Kulfi standing outside and takes her to be his imagination. While they both had million plans on what they will do for each other once they get back together, seeing each other after ages just made them gaze. Breaking the spell, Kulfi runs into Sikander’s arms while he holds her tight, getting filled with emotions to see his daughter.

Kulfi asks about everyone’s wellbeing and just then Sikander remembers about his promise to Amyra about not bringing Kulfi back. Seeing Sikander get unsettled hearing Amyra’s name, Kulfi demands to know the reason from him. Mohendra comes out and finds Sikander with Kulfi and rushed to meet her. Sikander becomes paranoid as he wondered what would he explain to Amyra. He tells Mohendra and Kulfi to wait outside and while they think, Sikander was planning a surprise, Sikander rushed to explain the situations to Sikander. Amyra had requested Loveleen to take her in the compound as she wanted to see the holi party and just when they come down, they find Sikander in a panic state. Sikander tells Amyra to let him speak and listen to what he was about to tell her, but before he could present the facts, Amyra sees Kulfi with Mohendra.

Seeing Kulfi there, Amyra feels cheated by Sikander and blames him for breaking her promise. Amyra gets hyper and continuously blabbers about not being able to live longer as Kulfi had returned. To put an end to Amyra’s sufferings, Sikander announced that Kulfi will not stay with them and tells Loveleen to take Amyra upstairs. Sikander, with heavy heart comes to break the news to Kulfi, who waits for him to celebrate her first holi with him.

(ALSO READ: Kulfi Kumarr Bajewala actor Mohit Malik continues to shoot despite getting 6 stitches due to injury)
