Modi ensured befitting retaliatory action against Pakistan: Dr Jitendra - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Excelsior Correspondent

KATHUA / HIRANAGAR, Mar 28: Union Minister and BJP Lok Sabha candidate from Udhampur-Kathua-Doda Parliamentary constituency Dr Jitendra Singh said here today that Prime Minister Narendra Modi had ensured befitting and decisive retaliatory action across border against Pakistan, which is testified even by the people living along the border.

Addressing a series of public meetings in the border villages close to International Border (IB) of Kathua and Hiranagar sector here today, Dr Jitendra Singh said, none other than the people living in the border areas are India’s first line of defence against the enemy for 24 hours and 365 days. Therefore,none other than them, he said, can appreciate and realize the sensitivity and concern with which the Modi Government has ensured a befitting retaliatory action against enemy for the first time in several decades.

Click here to Watch Video

Quite in contrast to the earlier Governments, it was under the Modi Government that orders were issued to allow free hand to Defence Forces to decide the nature and extent of military action depending upon their professional wisdom and discretion. Since there was no political intimidation, the Defence Forces had been able to perform their best, whether it was in the form of surgical strike or air strike after the Pulwama attack, he said.

Taking a dig at Congress, National Conference (NC) and PDP who have joined together to oppose BJP in this constituency, Dr Jitendra Singh said, it is a strange paradox that the air strike resulted in the killing of hundreds of terrorists on the other side of the border, but the wound and pain is being felt by the leaders of Congress, National Conference and PDP. It is now for the people to decide, whether they would like to have a dispensation which is pledged to “Bharat Mata Ki Jai” or such political parties which blatantly raise slogans of “Pakistan Zindabad”, he added.

Referring to a number of decisions taken for the welfare of the people living along the border areas, Dr Jitendra Singh said, it is during these five years of Parliamentary term that bunkers and Seema Bhawans are being constructed in these areas. It was also during this period that hundreds of Sulabh Toilets along the International Border (IB) and more such toilets are under construction. It is also during this period, he said, that a gross injustice done to the youth was undone by ordering 3% reservation for the youth living along the IB on the same lines as those living along the Line of Control (LoC). On the last working day before imposition of the Model Code of Conduct, he said, orders were issued for setting up eight mobile towers along the IB, which would immensely benefit the students and youth who depend heavily on connectivity for their professional work.

During his whirlwind tour of border villages, Dr Jitendra Singh was accompanied by veteran BJP leader Thakur Ranjit Singh, MLA Kuldeep Raj, former MLA Durgadas, Party District President Prem Nath Dogra, former Chairman Backward Class Board Yashpal Verma, various Mandal Presidents, Surpanches and Panches of the area, prominent social activists and a large number of youth.
