Indian police charge four people over murder of pregnant nurse - including her 'cheating' husband

Four people have been charged over the death of a pregnant Gold Coast nurse who was allegedly kidnapped and murdered in India.

Ravneet Kaur, 29, went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border while on holiday with her four-year-old daughter on March 14. Her body was found 200km away in a canal in Lehragaga.

Her husband, businessman Jaspreet Singh, was in Australia at the time but local police allege he was having an affair and arranged the murder with his mistress.

Indian police have claimed she was speaking with her husband on the phone when she went missing.

Punjab police inspector Mohit Dhawan said four people have been charged in relation to Ms Kaur's death and there were discussions with the Australian High Commission about extraditing Singh to India, the Gold Coast Bulletin reported.

Scroll down for video

Ravneet Kaur (pictured with her husband and their daughter), who lives on the Gold Coast, went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on March 14

Indian police have claimed Ms Kaur (pictured) was speaking with her husband on the phone when she went missing

Inspector Dhawan said an alleged 'murder conspiracy' resulted in the kidnap of Ms Kaur (pictured)

Inspector Dhawan said an alleged 'murder conspiracy' resulted in the kidnap of Ms Kaur.

'The maximum punishment for this offence is the death penalty, that's on the prosecutor and the judge,' he said.

Capital punishment is a legal penalty in India but has only been carried out five times since 1995. It is done by hanging by the neck until death.

Australia has a long-standing policy of not allowing people who are facing the death penalty to be extradited.

One of the people charged in relation to Ms Kaur's death has denied being involved.

Australian Federal Police officers are expected to travel to Punjab to meet with Indian authorities.

Gold Coast police sources said they have not communicated with Indian police or Interpol in relation to the case.

One of the people being investigated by police reportedly went to the Surfers Paradise police station on Wednesday before leaving.

Ravneet Kaur went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March. Her body was found on Monday night in a canal 200km away in Lehragaga

Police believe Ms Kaur, 29, was sedated, driven away and killed before her body was dumped

THE DISAPPEARANCE AND DEATH OF RAVNEET KAUR February 27, 2018 - Ravneet Kaur travelled to Punjab with her four-year-old daughter to visit family in Punjab, India. March 14 - Ms Kaur goes missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border. March 15 - A woman who was allegedly having an affair with Ms Kaur's husband returns to Australia from India. March 25 - Ms Kaur's body is found in a canal in Lehragaga, 200km away from where she was last seen. Advertisement

An Attorney-General's Department spokesman said they would not comment on the case.

'As a matter of longstanding practice the Australian Government does not comment publicly on extradition matters, including whether it has received an extradition request, until the person is arrested or brought before a court pursuant to a request,' the spokesman said.

Ms Kaur, 29, who was pregnant, arrived in India on February 27 to visit her friends and family with her four-year-old daughter.

The Indian-born woman was meant to return on March 22.

Ms Kaur had been employed at Tricare in the Gold Coast and was described as a devoted worker and mother and was reportedly expecting a son.

Police have alleged Mr Singh was wanting to move to Canada with his mistress, who is also an Australian citizen.

Mr Singh denied the allegations in an interview with SBS Punjabi.

'I don't know what the basis of all these allegations is,' he said.

'I can't say anything. I will have to go to India and find out what happened. I have no role in this whatsoever.'

Indian authorities have been working with the Australian High Commission in New Dehli, police said.
