TS cine workers' stand vindicated

The Medchal Senior Civil Court on Wednesday sentenced Andhra-born choreographer Sheik Jhani (Jhani master) and five other members to six months imprisonment along with fine for disrupting the shooting of a song for a TV serial, three years ago, since Telangana Cine Workers were hired by the production house and AP cine workers created ruckus on the sets in 2015.

"TS-born choreographers and dancers are hailing this judgement. AP choreographers hooliganism has to stop from now, at least after this verdict, because the livelihood of 2,000 Telangana cine workers is at stake," says Prem Raj, president of Telangana Cinema Industry Employees Federation and adds "We wanted to work with Andhra and Chennai-born cine workers in good harmony and friendly atmosphere but members of AP union always transgressed their limits and hit us in our stomach," laments Raj. The writer-turned-director, admits that there was a delay in the court verdict.

"Atlast justice has come in favour of Telangana workers, we are happy with it, albeit bit late. The verdict vindicated our stand that Telangana-born workers reserve their right to work in TS, without fear and earn their living," he adds.

He agreed that it it took more than two years to get the union into shape. "We had to bring members of 24 unions under one federation and there were lots of pulls and pressures, but we managed to form the workers union for our welfare. We will be more active to safeguard the interests of workers which includes thousands of aspiring dancers, stuntmen, junior artistes, carpenters, make-up artistes and production managers and spotboys who arrive in hordes from 30-odd districts to showcase their talent and eke out a living. There are lot of talented artistes and technicians who are looking around for opportunities and we will help them to realise their dreams by getting them some work, sooner than later," he adds.

After being humiliated by Telugu Pradesh Film Employees Workers Federation for decades, 2,000-odd Telangana cinema industry employees also took a rally demanding 40 per cent quota in films being shot in TS some time ago.

"We still stand by our demand and urge Telugu filmmakers to employ 40% local talent and 60% from other states, to give a filip to our work force," he informs. There were many instances of TS workers suffering in the hands of Telugu Film Employees Federation, despite the new state came into being in 2014.

"It is true that our members suffered a lot. Its high time we can get our quantum of work and allow us to prove our talent. Despite all the issues, we are ready to work with workers from other states. We seek the support of other trade bodies and State government for our cause." he concludes.
