Congress leader Rashid Alvi spews venom, calls Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath a 'poisonous snake'

Congress leader Rashid Alvi. | Photo Credit: IANS

Lucknow: While Congress chief Rahul Gandhi has often said that the party is all about love and compassion, it seems that his party leaders don’t subscribe to his school of thought. Stoking fresh controversy Congress leader Rashid Alvi compared Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath to the most 'venomous snake'. Addressing the party workers in Amroha, the veteran Congress leader said Yogi Adityanath is a man who doesn’t utter words but only spews venom.

“A wild animal who is full of venom from head to tail also subverts in front of Yogi whilst thinking how a man can be more poisonous than me. You are fighting venomous people like him,” Alvi said.

Alvi also raked up the fact that BJP's poster boy Yogi had at least 13 criminal cases lodged against him including an attempt to murder and inciting communal riots.

Last year in July, after hugging Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha, Congress president Rahul Gandhi had said that love and compassion in the hearts of all Indians is the only way to build a nation.

During no-confidence motion debate in the Parliament, the Congress president said that PM Modi was using “hate, fear and anger” in the hearts of some people to build his narrative but Congress will always counter it through love and compassion.

Before joining the Congress, Alvi was with the Bahujan Samaj Party but was expelled from the party in 2004 after he accused party president Mayawati of taking bribes for giving party tickets and working under pressure from the BJP.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
