Indian test shoots down space satellite

By MANOJ CHAURASIA | China Daily | Updated: 2019-03-29 07:52

Students raise flags to celebrate after India shot down one of its satellites in space with a missile in a test, in Ahmedabad, India, on Wednesday. [AMIT DAVE/REUTERS]

India on Wednesday succeeded in an anti-satellite missile test by shooting down one of its satellites in space. The feat enabled the country to join the United States, Russia and China for achieving this distinction.

What has drawn everyone's attention, however, is Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi's TV address to the nation about this test, even though while the model code of conduct bars political activity by the prime minister in the run-up to parliamentary elections.

"Our scientists shot down a live satellite 300 kilometers away in space in low-earth orbit. India has made an unprecedented achievement today," Modi said in a televised address on Wednesday. He didn't stop at that and even turned to Twitter to widely advertise his address, describing it as an "important message" and advising the public to "do watch the address on television, radio and social media".

This was only the second time in his five-year tenure that Modi had addressed the nation. The last time was in November 2016 when he had enforced demonetization of highvalue currency notes.

Acting US Defense Secretary Patrick Shanahan warned any nations contemplating anti-satellite weapons tests like the one India carried out that they risk making a "mess" in space because of debris fields they can leave behind, Reuters reported.

Speaking to reporters in Florida during a visit to the US military's Southern Command, Shanahan said the United States was still studying the outcome of a missile India said it launched at one of its own satellites.

Experts say that anti-satellite weapons that shatter their targets pose a space hazard by creating a cloud of fragments that can collide with other objects, potentially setting off a chain reaction of projectiles through Earth orbit.

Modi's move assumes much political significance in the light of ongoing general elections where the Modi-led ruling Bhartiya Janata Party is caught in a tough contest with the opposition. Although the Congress party has failed to stitch an alliance with major parties in states, some local regional parties have formed an alliance against the ruling coalition and are giving the BJP a tough challenge.
