Latest Bollywood News Jan 14: Inside Lohri celebrations of Sara Ali Khan, Munnabhai 3 put on hold

Follow us on Inside Lohri celebrations of Sara Ali Khan, Munnabhai 3 put on hold

Latest Bollywood News and Updates January 14: It was celebration time for all the Bollywood celebrities on the occasion of Lohri. From Sara Ali Khan to Mira Rajput, everyone celebrated Lohri with their friends and family and their pictures are worth staring at. On the other hand, Bachchan siblings are all set to appear on the next episode of Koffee With Karan 6 and the promos have already left us excited. In the video shared, Abhishek Bachchan is asked who is he more scared of- mom or wife? His answer will shock you! While many celebs were in their happy zone, Rajkumar Hirani has found himself trapped under the #MeToo Movement after an assistant director accused him of sexual misconduct. Will this mean that Munnabhai 3 will take a back seat until he gets a clean chit? A lot is happening in the world of Bollywood, check out this space to get updates about all the latest Bollywood news and updates.

Munnabhai 3 put on hold until Rajkumar Hirani gets clean chit from sexual misconduct allegations. Read details

In another shocking twist in the #MeToo campaign, popular filmmaker of Bollywood, Rajkumar Hirani has been accused of sexual misconduct by an assistant director while working on his 2018’s blockbuster film Sanju. The woman said that the filmmaker first made a sexually suggestive remark on April 9, 2018, and then assaulted her. However, Hirani has denied all such allegations and said, “I was completely shocked when these allegations were brought to my notice about two months back. I had suggested immediately that it is essential to take this matter to any committee or legal body. The complainant has chosen to go to the media instead. I want to very strongly state that this is a false malicious and mischievous story being spread with the sole intention of destroying my reputation.”

With Rajkumar Hirani’s name coming in the forefront in the list of #MeToo accused, the buzz has it that his next project Munnabhai 3 has been put on hold. Going by the reports in Mid-Day, a source from Star India revealed, “In a meeting in late December, it was decided that Fox would pull the plug on Munna Bhai 3 if Hirani was found guilty. The studio stands in solidarity with the survivor. VVC Films too has taken the matter seriously, and dropped Hirani's name from the promotional material of Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga."

A few days ago, Rajkumar Hirani’s name was removed from the posters of Sonam Kapoor and Anil Kapoor starrer Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga and left everyone puzzled. The source also added, "An ICC set up by VVC Films will investigate the matter. Munna Bhai 3, however, by default, is on hold till Hirani gets a clean chit.”

Koffee With Karan 6: Abhishek Bachchan is more scared of wife or mom? Shweta Bachchan gives the answer

Abhishek Bachchan and Shweta Bachchan are all set to raise the temperature on Karan Johar’s most entertaining chat show Koffee With Karan season 6 in the upcoming episode. While the sizzling Bachchan siblings know all the secrets of each other and never shy away from telling them in public to tease each other, here are the most candid with their childhood friend Karan Johar. To raise the level of excitement among the fans, the channel has already released a promo of the episode and we can’t help but say it helluva interesting.

In the video shared by Star World on their social media, fans get a glimpse of the spicy rapid fire round Karan Johar is famous for and being the King of wit and Sarcasm, Abhishek Bachchan hits a six on every question he throws at him. Interestingly, it is sister Shweta Bachchan who makes it all the more difficult for him on the Koffee Kouch. In the video when host Karan Johar asks Junior Bachchan who is he more afraid of, his mother Jaya Bachchan or wife Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, without a blink he replies his mother. However, sister Shweta Bachchan differed in the opinion and revealed it’s the wife. To this AB had the sarcastic response as he said, ‘It’s my rapid fire round, you are not supposed to answer.’ Check out their video here-

Arjun Kapoor’s picture with sister Sonam and Rhea Kapoor is everything cuteness is made up of

Arjun Kapoor is most definitely the best brother anyone would ask for. From taking care of his sisters to standing up for them as a shield against the trolls, Arjun Kapoor is always there when his sisters need him. Regardless to say that he loves his little sister Anshula Kapoor the most, he has also showered half-sisters Janhvi and Khushi Kapoor will all his love after their mother Sridevi passed away. On the other hand, whenever asked who her favorite brother is, Sonam Kapoor without blinking name Arjun Kapoor. The bonding between Sonam and Arjun has always been a thing of jealousy and now the actor has shared yet another click from their treasure box of pictures and it is adorable to next level.

On Sunday, Arjun Kapoor took to his social media and shared a picture of himself with his sisters Sonam and Rhea who are seen sharing a laugh with him. The picture appears to be from Anil Kapoor’s 62nd birthday last year in December. Arjun Kapoor captioned the image as, "Haaso, jiyo, muskurao because it's Sunday (and your sister is laughing with you)." Well ofcourse, that is reason enough to spread joy and laugh. Check out the post here-

PICS: Sara Ali Khan enjoys Lohri with family, Mira Rajput celebrates with daughter Misha

Talk of the town, Sara Ali Khan shared a number of clicks on her social media in which she is seen enjoying the festival of Lohri. In one of the first clicks she shared, the beautiful actress is seen with ace designer Sandeep Khosla. In another click, Sara shared the frame with her gorgeous mother Amrita Singh as they both posed for the camera. The actress is also seen twinning with her best friend Sara Vaisoha as the two get clicked. For the lohri celebrations, Sara Ali Khan chose to wear a pink salwar suit and she looked every bit of elegant and gorgeous in it. Check out the pictures here-

On the other hand, Shahid Kapoor’s wife Mira Rajput Kapoor enjoyed the festival of Lohri with her family including daughter Misha, parents-in-law Pankaj Kapoor and Supriya Pathak and sister-in-law Sanah Kapoor. She shared heartwarming pictures from the celebrations, and they all looked adorable. Actor Shahid Kapoor could not join the celebrations as he is currently shooting for his next Bollywood film Kabir Singh. The actor keeps sharing pictures and videos from the sets and leaves the fans excited.

PICS: Bhumi Pednekar wraps up Alankrita Srivastava's Dolly Kitty Aur Woh Chamakte Sitare shoot

Bollywood actress Bhumi Pednekar has completed shooting for the upcoming film "Dolly Kitty Aur Woh Chamakte Sitare". Bhumi, who will be seen playing the role of Kitty in the film, took to social media on Sunday and penned a heartfelt note saying she will miss her onscreen character a lot.

"She is a crazy dreamer full of love and hope. She is weird...very weird, her faith in love and her ambition to do better is infectious. She is a character I've had such fun playing. No inhibitions and Fears. I will miss you kitty," Bhumi wrote.

Directed by Alankrita Shrivastava, the film also stars actress Konkana Sen Sharma in a pivotal role. She is essaying the character of Dolly.

Bhumi also thanked the film's cast and crew for making her journey "unforgettable". "Thank you Alankrita for making me your kitty. My journey with her is unforgettable. Your characters have made me more confident as a person. Lanki you're just amazing and of course this couldn't have happened without my dolly Konkana. I love you..."

Aamir Khan and son Azad Rao Khan are lost in deep thoughts in this latest pic

Aamir Khan is undeniably the cutest father one could ask for. After hosting a Asterix themed party for his friends and having dressed up as Obelix and Getafix for it, Aamir Khan shared another adorable click with his little bundle of joy Azad Rao Khan. The actor is a complete family man. From being by his daughter’s side to witness her great achievements to having fun with his little munchkin Azad Rao Khan, the actor makes sure he is a part of every important part of his kids’ life. The latest picture shared by Aamir is proof that he loves spending time with his kid.

Taking to Instagram. Aamir Khan shared am adorable picture with son Azad Rao Khan in which the two are at their candid best. The picture shows Aamir and Azad lost deep on thoughts as Azad rests calmly on Aamir's shoulders. Aamir is seen wearing a red shirt and jeans with red-framed spectacles while Azad looks cute in a black T-Shirt and white pants with a pair of spectacles. Aamir captioned the picture as, "Gehri soch :-)"

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
