What is the CM doing, fumes HC

rationalists Narendra Dabholkar

Govind Pansare

Court criticises CM for not having time to take stock of murder cases of rationalists Dabholkar and Pansare.The Bombay High Court has come down heavily on the chief minister for not taking enough interest in the murder cases ofandNoting that an elected leader belonged to the state and not just any party, a division bench of Justices SC Dharmadhikari and BP Colabawalla said, “It is a sovereign function and cannot be outsourced.”“What is the CM doing? He holds 11 portfolios, including Home, but does not find the time to take stock of the case. His deputies do not have the time to remove obstacles in the probe?” the bench remarked.The bench added that it was shameful that almost every investigation required the court’s intervention. The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is investigating the Dabholkar murder case, while the State Crime Investigation Department (CID) is probing the Pansare case. Dabholkar was shot dead on August 20, 2013, in Pune while out on a morning walk and Pansare was shot at on February 16, 2015, in Kolhapur and succumbed to injuries on February 20.The observation were made after State CID’s lawyer, Senior Advocate Ashok Mundargi, submitted that the agency had doubled the number of officers in the Special Investigation Team (SIT) investigating the Pansare murder case to 35.“Top officers have reviewed the case thoroughly. Five meetings have been conducted in the past few months, and the reward announced for any information on the absconding accused has been increased from Rs 10 lakh to Rs 50 lakh,” Mundargi told the court.The bench, however, termed these measures as knee-jerk reactions, introduced only after the court made some adverse remarks during the previous hearing. It said the authorities could not just rely on vigilant citizens for help.“It is shameful but if that unfortunate incident in Karnataka (killing of activist-journalist Gauri Lankesh) had not happened and you (authorities in Maharashtra) had not coordinated with Karnataka police, you would have remained clueless,” the court said.“Those who are perpetrators of a crime today can become the victims of such crime tomorrow,” the bench said. Additional Solicitor General Anil Singh, representing the CBI, told the court that the agency had already identified shooters in the Dabholkar case and filed charge sheets. He said the agency required some time to work on additional information received from Karnataka police. The court has now granted time to both the agencies till April 26 for further probe.
