8 Dead, 30 Injured As Bus Rams Truck On Expressway Near Delhi

8 dead, 30 injured As Bus Rams Truck On Expressway Near Delhi.

Highlights The bus was on its way to Noida from Agra when its brake failed

It rammed into a truck on the Yamuna Expressway in Greater Noida

The bus's front part caved in, shattered and mangled into a steel mesh

Eight people were killed and 30 sustained injuries when a double-decker bus rammed into a truck on the Yamuna Expressway in Greater Noida today morning.

The bus was on its way to Noida from Agra when its brake failed and it rammed into a truck going in the same direction at around 5 am.The accident occurred in the area that falls in Rabupra Police Station jurisdiction.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has expressed grief over the accident. He has directed the district administration and the police to provide all assistance. The district magistrate and the senior superintendent of police are reaching the accident site, the official said.

Expressing his condolences, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav tweeted saying, "May God give the souls of the deceased peace and family in this hour of grief. Appeal for full sensitivity and proper compensation from the government. All possible help to the injured."

The bus driver is among those killed. All the injured have been admitted to Kailash Hospital in Jewar for treatment and bodies have been sent for post-mortem, police said.

The impact of the collision was such that the front part of the bus caved in, shattered and mangled into a steel mesh.

Villagers from nearby informed the police and also helped in the rescue.

The deceased have been identified as bus driver Mahesh Kumar (48), helper Bandu (25), passengers Vineeta (32), Arun (42), Asad (12), Suman (35) and Vishwanath Tiwari (75).

The passengers were from Jalaun, while the driver and helper hailed from Dhaulpur in Rajasthan, a police spokesperson said.

"The identity of one deceased was yet to be established," the official added.

The police is trying to establish the sequence of events and trying to record eyewitness accounts.
