8 killed, 30 injured in road accident in UP's Greater Noida

Eight passengers, including a minor and two women, were killed and 30 injured when a privately-operated bus rammed into a tanker on the Yamuna Expressway in Greater Noida on Friday morning, officials said.

The bus was en route Delhi from Uttar Pradesh's Jalaun district when the incident occurred at 5 am under Rabupura police station limits, they said.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath condoled the deaths, while top officials of Gautam Buddh Nagar, including District Magistrate B N Singh and police chief Vaibhav Krishna, rushed to meet the victims in hospital.

"I am saddened by the demise of eight people in a bus accident in Greater Noida today. Praying for the peace of the departed souls and strength to their families. Also wishing speedy recovery to the passengers injured in the accident," Adityanth tweeted.

Police Circle Officer, Jewar, Sharat Chandra Sharma said, "Eight people were killed and 30 injured in the incident. The victims were rushed to the nearby Kailash Hospital in Jewar. The speeding bus rammed into a tanker which was moving relatively slowly."



"The exact cause of the incident is yet to be confirmed, but prima facie it appears the driver was drowsy. The tanker was moving at a slower pace and the speeding bus could have comfortably overtaken it, but instead rammed into it," Sharma told PTI.

The deceased have been identified as bus driver Mahesh Kumar (48), helper Bandu (25), passengers Vineeta (32), Arun (42), Asad (12), Suman (35) and Vishwanath Tiwari (75).

The passengers were from Jalaun, while the driver and helper hailed from Dhaulpur in Rajasthan, a police spokesperson said, adding Three women and three children were among the 30 injured who hail from Auraiya, Jalaun, Phaphund and Noida.

"The identity of one deceased was yet to be established," the official added.

Earlier, an official spokesperson in Lucknow said the chief minister had taken prompt cognizance of the incident and issued directions for immediate relief for the victims.

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav also condoled the death of the bus passengers and appealed for a compensation for injured and the kin of the deceased from the state government.

"Tragic death of eight people in a bus accident on Yamuna Expressway! Prayers for peace to the souls of the dead ad strength to their families. My condolences and appeal for monetary compensation to victims from government. The injured should be given all possible help," he tweeted.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
