Pulwama, Balakot and more: 7 big takeaways from Modi's inter...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Pulwama, Balakot and more: 7 big takeaways from Modi's interview

29 Mar 2019

After kicking off the poll campaign on Thursday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave an interview to Republic TV on Friday where he spoke about a range of issues.

From Balakot airstrikes to Pulwama attack, from the allegations leveled by the Opposition to loan defaulters and BJP's confidence in 2019, PM Modi touched many issues.

Here are 7 of his biggest statements.

Addressed rally after Pulwama, restrained from mentioning incident: PM Modi

Pulwama attack

When Pulwama attack happened, PM Modi was on a visit to Uttarakhand. He said he learned about the heinous attack, in which 40 CRPF soldiers were martyred, soon.

"I decided to address the rally over the phone but restrained myself from immediately mentioning about the incident of such magnitude," PM Modi said.

Notably, Opposition leaders slammed him for continuing his business despite the attack.

PM Modi said he didn't sleep when Balakot strikes happened

Balakot strikes

After Pulwama attack, IAF jets breached Pakistani airspace on the intervening night of February 25 and 26, to demolish Jaish-e-Mohammed's biggest camp in Balakot.

PM Modi said he was kept in the loop.

"It is my behavior, where there is a risk to the jawans of India, I'm constantly involved. There is no expectation from their end but I could not sleep," he said.

PM Modi explained why he informed nation about "Mission Shakti"

Mission Shakti

On Wednesday, in a nationwide address, PM Modi informed the country about Mission Shakti.

But when he, and not the DRDO scientists who contributed to the success, spoke about it, Opposition leaders saw red and claimed PM Modi was hoping to lure voters.

When asked about this, PM Modi said, "It was not a pre-planned move, we announced it when the test was successful."

When Abhinandan was detained, Opposition questioned Balakot strikes: PM Modi

Opposition

PM Modi said it was unfortunate that Opposition leaders strayed away from core issues. He said there should be debates on gas connections given and houses built.

"It is unfortunate that when Abhinandan Varthaman was detained in Pakistan, the Opposition started questioning the Balakot air strike and regarding his return," he added.

He even claimed his government worked for 24 hours.

Pakistan only gives assurances, doesn't do anything: PM Modi

Pakistan

On Pakistan, PM Modi said he has stopped responding to their assurances because they don't do anything except talking.

"Pakistan has constantly tried to assure that they will take action, but we hardly see anything happening from their end. Regarding the 26/11 attacks, we had given them a detailed dossier, but there was no response again," said PM Modi.

Fugitives fled because of our actions, said PM Modi

Fugitives

PM Modi said Opposition attacked his government over the issue of fugitive businessmen, like Nirav Modi and Vijay Mallya. But they fled the nation because of his actions, PM Modi added.

"We have come down severely on their assets, and they have had to run because of our actions. During Opposition rule, you wouldn't have even known the names of such fugitives," he said.

PM Modi is confident BJP would win again

Confidence

PM Modi also appeared confident for the upcoming polls. He said he was sure of getting a full majority this time.

"As a responsible citizen, and as a prime minister for the past 5 years, I would say I want to work with whoever becomes victorious," he said.

He added people have suffered for 30 years but enjoyed themselves in the last five years.
