Hotel Mumbai

WHAT IT'S ABOUT:

A gripping true story of humanity and heroism that recounts the 2008 siege of the famed Taj Hotel by a group of terrorists in Mumbai. Among the dedicated hotel staff is renowned chef Hemant Oberoi, and a waiter, who risk their lives to protect the guests. As the world watches on, a desperate couple is forced to make unthinkable sacrifices to protect their newborn child.

WATCH THE TRAILER HERE:

In November 2008, a group of 10 terrorists launched an attack on 12 locations in the city of Mumbai, India that lasted four days. The city's police force was not equipped to handle an attack of this magnitude, and the siege lasted over days.

One-hundred-seventy-four people died in these senseless attacks, and around 300 were injured. A Pakistani man identified as the ringleader behind the attacks still walks free today.

The film, Hotel Mumbai, focuses on one of the targets of the attack – the prestigious Taj Hotel. Starring Dev Patel (Arjun), Armie Hammer (David), and Homeland's Nazanin Boniadi (Zahra) the film openly and unapologetically takes on the shocking subject matter without any filters or fading away.

Shocking, because firstly, most people are unaware of the scale of the attack that happened in our recent past. Also, shockingly because it was so senseless and brutal and very little is ever said about it in Western media.

The film is not a bloodthirsty blockbuster type of look into a horrific tragedy. Not at all. Instead, it's a harrowing retelling that remembers the victims and never glamorises the killers. It's also not a film with a "white saviour" complex – it's the story of people fighting for their lives and those of others when a horrible act turns an ordinary day into a never-ending nightmare.

Viewers will be left breathless as they see the courage and teamwork it took to overcome evil to restore order finally. Hate never wins – and it didn't in Mumbai. In a 2018 article in The Telegraph about the hotel, it explains why it was a target: "To have pictures of burning Taj Hotel broadcast around the world will have a deeper impact than even perhaps the terrorists intended, striking a blow against a symbol of Indian wealth and progress and sending shivers down the spine of some of the richest and most powerful people on the planet."

At least 31 people died at the hotel - most of which were brave staff who stayed to protect their guests. "Guest is god," is a slogan repeated several times in the film. Less than a month after the attack parts of the luxury establishment re-opened its doors. Almost two years later in 2010 American President Barack Obama became the first foreign head of state to stay at the hotel after the attack.

The film tells the story of India's resilience and their strength as the world hardly took a proper glance at what had happened. With the recent Christchurch mosque terror attacks the film is a poignant reminder that terrorism can strike anywhere at any time – but those affected will rebuild and come back stronger than ever before.

Hotel Mumbai is a heartbreaking and harsh look at a true story that can't ever be forgotten.
