Alia Bhatt, Varun Dhawan's crackling chemistry on magazine cover is unmissable!

New Delhi (India), Mar 29 (ANI): Everyone’s favourite Bollywood pair Alia Bhatt and Varun Dhawan’s chemistry is undeniable and their latest photo shoot for a magazine cover is proof of the same.

The duo, who manage to sweep the audiences off their feet every time they star in a film together, are breaking the internet with their sizzling appearance on the cover of Filmfare magazine.

Alia posted photos on her Instagram account from the latest shoot featuring the duo. The cover of the magazine reads, “Feeling Hot! Hot! Hot! Golden Couple Alia-Varun Is Back To Slay,” and we couldn’t agree more!

The pair, who has previously starred in films-- 'Student of the Year', 'Humpty Sharma Ki Dulhania' and 'Badrinath Ki Dulhania’, are coming back to woo the audiences with ‘Kalank’.

Alia ditched her girl-next-door look and appeared in a completely hot avatar. The actor looks stunning in wet grungy hair, black nail paint, and gorgeous make-up. She sported denim and leather outfit for the magazine cover.

Meanwhile, Varun looks dapper with a stubble, wet grungy hair, wearing just a black leather jacket flaunting his abs.



In a second picture shared by Alia, the two can be seen striking another intimate pose.



This isn’t the first time that Alia and Varun have turned heads with their sizzling chemistry. The two have featured in a lot of other magazines covers together.

On the work front, Varun and Alia will be seen together in the upcoming film ‘Kalank’. It also features Aditya Roy Kapur, Sonakshi Sinha, Sanjay Dutt and Madhuri Dixit in lead roles.

Varun's latest dance number from the film, 'First Class' as well as Alia's classical moves in the song 'Ghar More Pardesiya' have already received an overwhelming response from the viewers. The title track of the upcoming drama is scheduled to release later today.

Apart from 'Kalank', Alia will also be seen in Ayan Mukerji’s ‘Brahmastra’ opposite rumoured beau Ranbir Kapoor. On the other hand, Varun is working with Shraddha Kapoor for the next installment of ‘ABCD’, titled ‘Street Dancer’ that is being helmed by Remo D'Souza. (ANI)
