#PrimetimeWatch: PM's Words Fascinate Media More Than His Actions in Karnataka

New Delhi: With just two weeks for the Lok Sabha elections to begin, Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed three rallies on Thursday. He called the Samajwadi Party, Rashtriya Lok Dal, Bahujan Samaj Party alliance in Uttar Pradesh “sarab” (liquor) and urged people to stay away from it.

This evoked a strong response from the SP, the Rashtriya Janata Dal and the Congress, who accused Modi of “lowering the standard of political discourse”.

The PM also asked the people to choose between those who are asking for ‘saboot‘ (proof – apparently of the Balakot airstrike’s success) and ‘sapoot‘ (good son).

Former Union minister Shatrughan Sinha’s speculated entry into the Congress did not happen on the day.

China accused the US of “forcefully moving” a resolution in the UN Security Council to list the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist.

The Janata Dal (Secular) leaders protested raids by Income Tax and Central Reserve Police Force personnel at homes of their kin in Karnataka.

How did the media report these stories?

Hindi channels

Aaj Tak

At his rally in Meerut, the channel said Modi attacked the Congress saying: “Ab desh ka garib bhi keh raha hai, Congress hatao garibi apnay aap hat jayegi.” (Even the country’s poor is saying, remove Congress, poverty will go away.)

He also took a dig at Rahul Gandhi for wishing him “Happy World Theatre Day” after he announced the successful ASAT test. He said: “Some people got confused when I spoke of ASAT. They thought I was talking about a theatre’s set. They do not have knowledge about the anti-satellite mission I was referring to.”

Also Read: Former NSA Shivshankar Menon Says DRDO Head Never Sought Permission for ASAT Test

Modi claimed that opposition leaders were racing to say things which make them more popular in Pakistan. He then asked, “Does the country need India’s heroes or Pakistan’s?”

Finally, the channel said, Modi ended his speech with the question, “I ask 130 crore Indians, do we need ‘saboot’ or ‘sapoot’?”

ABP News

It also showed PM’s address at different rallies under the headline: “6 ghantay 3 rajya aur Modi ki 3 rally ka maha-episode” (mega episode of Modi’s three rallies in three states within six hours).

At his Jammu rally, Modi told people to trust their ‘chowkidar’, saying, “Those running factories of terror across the border are today living in fear – this has happened for the first time.”

ABP News said Shatrughan Sinha’s entry into Congress has been delayed. It said the ‘Bihari Babu’ had declared: “Situation koi bhi ho, location woh hi rahegi – Patna Sahib” (No matter what the situation, I will contest from Patna Sahib).

The channel reported that Sinha could officially join the Congress at 11 am on Thursday, but though he met Rahul Gandhi during the day, he did not join the party. The rebel-BJP leader later said, “When such a big thing is happening then it should happen during the auspicious time of navratri”.

Having grown distant to the Modi-Shah duo, the report said, Sinha was often seen with “every person opposed to Modi” – be it Yashwant Sinha, Mamata Banerji, Chandrababu Naidu or Arvind Kejriwal. It showed him saying: “I never spoke against the Nehru-Gandhi family, always praised them.” He also lauded Rahul Gandhi for exposing the “one man show and two-man army”.

NDTV India

Anchor Ravish Kumar highlighted the PM’s “sarab” comment and showed him telling people that “for good health, future of UP and a prosperous ‘Bharat’, they should avoid ‘sarab’.”

Kumar said the PM’s verbal attack was retorted by the Congress, SP and RJD leaders. Former UP CM Akhilesh Yadav said “Sharab aur sarab ka antar who log nahin jantay jo nafrat kay nashay ko badhawa dete hain.” (Those who promote intoxication through hatred do not know the difference between liquor and ‘sarab’ (alliance).)

The RJD hit back saying “sharab” (liquor) was rather an acronym for “Shah, Rajnath and BJP”. The channel also showed Congress spokesperson Surjewala accusing Modi of “only spinning acronyms like a flop actor of a flop film”.

Coining such acronyms is not new, the channel said, as in the past, Amit Shah used the word Kasab – the 26/11 terrorist who was captured – to refer to the Congress, SP and BSP.

The channel wondered, “Kya jumlon main atak gayee hai hamari rajniti?” (Will the country’s politics remain entangled in such frivolous talk alone?)

It also insisted that “Chunavi bhashan shuru hogaye hain aur mudday hawa hogaye hain.” (Real issues have got lost in these electoral speeches.)

Zee News

In a special programme, “Abki baar – Masood azhar par antim vaar” (This time – last assault on Masood Azhar), the channel discussed the resolution being moved by the US in the United Nations Security Council to get the Jaish-e-Mohammad leader declared as a ‘global terrorist’.

Anchor Sudhir Chaudhary said China has opposed the move. “The resolution brought by the US will have public voting,” he noted, wondering, “will China expose itself by vetoing the move.”

If the resolution is passed, bank accounts of Azhar and the JeM would be seized. Countries would also be barred from providing them weapons or funding and the imposition of a travel ban. It termed the US initiative “a major diplomatic victory for India”.

English channels

Times Now

Through an “Inside scoop from Cong camp”, the channel tried to project that there was a wedge between Rahul and Priyanka over the issue of the latter contesting against Modi from Varanasi.

“Cadre wants Rae Bareli for Priyanka” but “Rahul campers uneasy with demand” read two competitive headlines.

Anchor Navika Kumar then asked, “If Priyanka is going to campaign from Varanasi then where does it leave Rahul? Is she the prime ministerial aspirant or Rahul?

The channel also claimed that Sonia Gandhi was unwell. “Sonia’s unavailability causes flutter,” it declared, adding, “sources say her health is not permitting her to campaign”.

NDTV 24X7

The channel looked at how “Modi’s 2019 campaign is different from 2014?”

“PM campaign – focus on national security?” a headline read, as the channel reported that during his three rallies during on Thursday, Modi mentioned jobs three times and Pakistan ten times.

Anchor Nidhi Razdan said, “PM did not speak about farmer distress at all – focus was entirely on chowkidar discourse.” She wondered, “Won’t people ask Modi about delivery on his promises?”

Also Read: Ahead of Polls, Grassroots Muslim Women Activists Release Manifesto, Charter of Demands

Samajwadi Party spokesperson Ghanshyam Tiwari also charged that the Modi government has no achievements to talk about. “Modi only has Pakistan to put on table, he has nothing else to show.”

Priyanka Chaturvedi of the Congress accused the PM of “all round failure” and of “hiding details”. “Why NSSO is not in public domain, why is data on farmer suicides not there, and GDP series issue not sorted out,” she asked.

Republic TV

With a hashtag “TheModiCampaign”, it too spoke about how PM has made “nationalism the focus” and undertaken the “saboot vs sapoot strike in the open”. The channel also noted that the “dumdaar (brave) vs daagdaar (tainted)” dagger has been drawn.

India Today TV

The channel had a big story on “Income tax raids rock Karnataka”. It said raids were launched against multiple people associated with the JD(S) and the Congress.

Karnataka minor irrigation minister C.S. Puttaraju claimed that IT officials carried out raids at his and his nephew’s homes early on Thursday.

There were reports of searches also being carried at the homes of associates of PWD minister H.D. Revanna, chief minister H.D. Kumaraswamy’s brother.

The headline said: “24 contractors, babus raided” and “Babus under Revanna raided”.

The events sparked protests and a headline said: “HD Kumaraswamy: PM using agencies”. It also showed the CM asking why CRPF and not the local police was used during the raids.

Senior Congress leader Brijesh Kalappa said, “They are only raiding non-BJP leaders just the way they have been all over the country”.

The IT department clarified that the raids were conducted on “specific intelligence” on people from different professions and businesses. But, it said, “No MP, MLA or minister has so far been covered in the searches.”
