Opposition was more concerned about Abhinandan's return than IAF's valour: PM Narendra Modi

PM Narendra Modi said that the political parties were more concerned about IAF pilot Abhinandan's return than the valour of India's armed forces. (Photo: PTI)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday said that opposition parties turned Indian Air Force Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's release from Pakistan and the IAF's Balakot airstrike into a political issue by doubting their country's prime minister.

In an interview with a news channel, PM Narendra Modi said that the parties were more concerned about Abhinandan's return than the valour of India's armed forces.

"When the Abhinandan incident took place, every Indian political party should've said that they were proud of the Indian Air Force for crashing Pakistan's F-16 aircraft. Instead, they were more concerned with Abhinandan's release and return. The entire attention was diverted," PM Narendra Modi said.

PM Narendra Modi also said that even if Abhinandan Varthaman was caught across the border, the government would've done what it could on the diplomatic level.

Had Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan not announced Abhinandan's release, the political parties were planning to take out a candle march that night, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said.

"Abhinandan was caught. The government would've done what it could on the diplomatic level, but that night, the opposition parties were planning to take out a candle march and divert the attention from Balakot airstrike and the Pulwama attack," PM Narendra Modi said.

On February 27, Abhinandan Varthaman was captured by the Pakistani Army after his MiG-21 Bison jet was shot down in a dogfight with Pakistani jets during an aerial combat. He downed an F-16 fighter of Pakistan before his plane was hit.

After he was captured, Varthaman showed courage and grace in handling the most difficult circumstances for which he was praised by politicians, strategic affairs experts, ex-servicemen, celebrities and people in general.

Abhinandan Varthaman was released on the night of March 1 by Pakistan.
