Real-Life Incidents That Took Place On Horror Movie Sets That Will Leave You Spooked

Most of us love horror movies because of the adrenaline rush they give us and the out-of-box story lines that take us away from the real world only to transport us to a paranormal world. A well-made horror movie can actually give viewers goosebumps and also, a heavy dose of nightmares. A good horror story is just like a piece of art that stays with you even after you’re done watching the movie. However, over the years, there have been enough creepy events that take place on movie sets of horror films. These incidents are actually more spooky than the films themselves because they’re real-life incidents.

We looked into the spooky things that have happened during the filming of some our favourite horror movies and these incidents are enough to give you just as many chills as the movies did:

1. The Conjuring

The movie, apparently based on true events experienced by a family at their house of residence, went on to become a big hit. However, shooting it was also a creepy experience in itself. For instance, when members of the family affected were visiting the set, a strong wind seemed to surround them. However, the crew couldn’t see any trees moving as you’d expect. The mother of the family believed that the spirit wasn’t done with her family just yet.

wikipedia

2. The Exorcist

A favourite for many horror movie lovers, the instances that took place during the shooting of it are just about as famous as the movie. During the shooting, the whole set caught fire and burnt down. No one was able to figure out the reason for this fire. Moreover, actor Jack MacGowran passed away quite unexpectedly. After his death a security guard and FX worker also passed away. If all this wasn’t enough, many viewers died of heart attacks while watching the film.

pinterest

3. The Possession

A movie about a cursed ancient box, this film saw light bulbs exploding randomly while the filming was going on. The place where all the props were kept also caught fire and got destroyed. The box which was shown to contain the spirit was also destroyed.

pinterest

4. The Exorcism of Emily Rose

A film about ghostly possessions, shooting this one was quite an experience for the cast. Initially, Jennifer Carpenter, the lead actress, noticed that her radio alarm clock would switch on and go off on its own whenever she’d be shooting. If this wasn’t enough, the alarm clock only played one song which was Alive by Pearl Jam. Other cast members complained about the same thing happening and the same song played for all of them as well.

youtube

5. Poltergeist

Most horror movie fans love this movie but the events surrounding the people who worked on the movie are pretty spooky. The protagonist, Heather O’Rourke died aged just twelve due to a sudden, unexpected cardiac arrest. The actress playing her older sister was murdered by an ex-boyfriend only a day after the movie released. Eventually, the producer of the film also passed away during a surgical operation.

snopes

6. Annabelle

Annabelle, as a movie, got mixed reviews from the audience. However, that isn’t to say that what the cast went through was any less horrific. The director, John Leonetti, revealed that he saw a three-fingered claw mark on a dusty window when he was on the set. The demon in the script also had a three-fingered claw. In the movie, the demon kills the handyman in a hallway. When they were shooting, in the same hallway, the actor who played the handyman actually died in a freak accident when a light fixture fell on his head.

pinterest

7. Rosemary's Baby

Directed by Roman Polanski, this 1968 movie got the approval of many horror genre fans for managing the spook out the audience, a task that it isn’t easy when one is making a horror film. Interestingly, the producer of the movie William Castle is reported to have gotten an anonymous letter "slowly rot during a long and painful illness”. He actually did fall pretty sick and even went through surgery for treatment. However, nothing really worked and his illness would always return. Another producer who was driving home after getting done with filming, he had a stroke and died.

pinterest

8. Insidious

From the makers of horror movies like Paranormal Activity and Annabelle 2, this movie was received pretty well and its because it is a pretty creepy movie. However, one of the production designers Jennifer Spence gave some rather horrid details of what happened on the set. She said, "When we were set dressing in the basement for Insidious, there was this room full of crazy old patient records from the 1940s and 1950s. We were moving them around to do our set dressing, and everybody in the room started feeling sick and weird and heavy. We had to take a break because everyone felt overwhelmingly unwell. On the second or third floor, the buzzer to one of the rooms would go off all the time when nobody was up there. There were no patients, but the buzzer at the end of this hallway would go off all the time and freak us all out. We’d go in groups, like nobody’s going down there by ourselves." Sounds like a pretty spooky workplace.

pinterest

9. The Innkeepers

The film is based on two employees of a hotel which was flourishing once but is now closing operations. Obviously, a whole lot could go wrong and it does, making it a movie which gives you the chills. However, enough creepy things happened during the filming and Director Ti West revealed that a whole lot of instances happened that spooked out the whole cast. "I’ve definitely seen doors close by themselves, I’ve seen a TV turn off and on by itself, lights would always burn out in my room. Sara Paxton, who played one of the main characters, would wake up in the middle of the night thinking someone was in the room with her.” Sounds like a horrible experience.

pinterest

10. The Omen

Released in 1976, the film was loved by the audience and also went on to win a lot of awards. However, it seems like the spookiness they showed on camera was nothing in comparison to what happened behind the scenes. There’s a scene where a character loses his head during a car accident. On Friday the 13th, the same happened to the wife of special effects artist who set up the scene and almost in an identical manner. And to creep you out a little more, it is reported that all this happened next to a road sign that showed this special effects artist to be "66.6" kilometers from the Netherlands city of "Ommen."

pinterest

11. Twilight Zone

The story is full of supernatural twists and was quite loved by the audience. However, Vic Morrow who was one of the lead actors was killed during the filming. Strangely, Morrow had revealed that he felt something bad was going to happen to him during the shooting of one of his films. Before joining the film, he got himself a $5 million of life insurance. His fears turned out to be true when, during the filming, a helicopter crashed and Morrow was killed.

pinterest

The filming of these movies is just as spooky as the movies!
