By fielding Shahabuddins wife, RJD has shown its intentions:

BJP president Amit Shah on Friday lambasted Lalu Prasads RJD for giving a ticket to the wife of mafia don-turned-politician Mohd Shahabuddin, claiming that it showed the partys intention to bring back the era of jungle raj to Bihar.

Shah's hard-hitting comment against the RJD came while addressing an election rally here.

Sitting BJP MP Sushil Kumar Singh is pitted against Mahagathbandhan candidate from Hindustani Awam Morcha party Upendra Prasad at Aurangabad seat popularly called "Chittorgarh of Bihar" due to overwhelming population of the Rajputs.

"What did Lalu give to Bihar during his long political career. He gives a ticket to the wife of Shahabuddin, who has oppressed so many people before finally going behind bars.

"The development has made clear the RJDs intentionwhich is to bring back the era of jungle raj. In the event of the Mahagathbandhan coming to power", Shah said at his maiden rally in the state upon announcement of the Lok Sabha polls.

The 15 year rule of RJD from 1990 to 2005 in Bihar had drawn the moniker "jungle raj" on account of large-scale incidents of crime.

A several-term MP from Siwan from where the candidature of his wife Heena Shahab was announced earlier in the day, Mohd Shahabuddin has been accused of involvement in several criminal cases including the killing of former JNU students union president Chandrashekhar and journalist Rajdeo Ranjan.

He is at present serving life sentence awarded for the murder of two Siwan residents both of them brothers who were killed by being doused with acid. Another brother of the duo, who was an eyewitness in the case, was bumped off later.

Notably, the BJP candidate Om Prakash Yadav had defeated Heena Shahab in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, which her husband could not contest since he had been disqualified on account of conviction in the murder case.

The seat has gone to Chief Minister Nitish Kumars JD(U) this time and his party has fielded MLA Kavita Singh, wife of Ajay Singh, a local muscleman.

In an apparent bid to woo both upper and lower castes of Bihar, where polity has been riven along caste lines since Mandal days, Shah also spoke of measures like 10 per cent quotas to the economically weaker sections among the upper castes and constitutional status to the OBC Commission.

Shah also mocked Rahul Gandhi for having alleged at a rally in Purnea last week that the Narendra Modi government did not do anything for Bihar.

The UPA had spent only 1.98 lakh crore on the states development in 10 years. The NDA has spent close to six lakh crores. There is simply no comparison. Rahul baba, four generations of Bihar are seeking an answer from your party for the misrule the state had suffered while your party was in power, on its own or in alliance with RJD, the BJP president said.

Shah also said the ongoing Lok Sabha elections are not just about a new government. These are about helping India achieve the international standing it deserves, towards which Modi is working.

Modi presided over the strong response to the dastardly Pulwama terror attack which also claimed the lives of two CRPF jawans from Bihar. It left the opposition baffled and their sympathizers like Sam Pitroda have been crying that airstrikes should not have taken place, Shah said evoking jeers from the crowd.

But Modi has demonstrated Indias resolve to reply with goli ke badle gola (mortar shell in retaliation of gunshot). India now stands in the same league as the US and Israel which take no prisoners when it comes to clamping down on terror. Our defence capabilities have scaled new heights with Mission Shakti which has left our opponents in disarray, he added.

In addition to Modis performance, which also includes distribution of free LPG cylinders and complete electrification of villages ably assisted by leaders like Nitish Kumar in Bihar, the opposition finds its problems compounded by its own inability to project a leader.

"Rahul Gandhi had once remarked that he was not averse to becoming the Prime Minister which met with a rebuff from leaders like Mamata Banerjee in West Bengal, Arvind Kejriwal in Delhi and Tejashwi Yadav in Bihar", Shah claimed.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
