Weekly Digest (Mar 25 - 29, 2019): Top Weather, Environment and Science Stories of the Week

File photo of a cyclist in Ahmedabad struggling to move as tar melts on a road due to summer heat. (Yogesh Chawda/ BCCL, Ahmedabad)

Here's a quick recap of the top weather, environment and science stories of the week.

Gujarat and Maharashtra Worst-Hit as Summer Heat Escalates

Saurashtra and Kutch regions of Gujarat—namely Porbandar, Veraval and Bhuj—experienced yet another heat wave on Thursday. This year, the onset of summer was delayed, especially in the northern states, due to recurring western disturbances. What factors are causing such intense summer heat in India? Read more.

Can Meatless Meat Become the Next Big Thing in India?

Plant-based meats may sound like an alien concept now, but in a few years, they may become legitimate competitors to regular meat products. Experts say plant-based meats can also be beneficial to health. Indeed, many startups are already working to invest in plant-based meat that mimics meat on a molecular level, Michelin-starred chefs like Gordon Ramsay and David Myers are also embracing the new trend. Read more.

India Shoots Down Satellite in Space, Joins Elite Club: PM Modi

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi kept the nation on tenterhooks for an hour on Wednesday, before finally revealing that the DRDO had shooting down a satellite in space with an indigenously-developed ASAT missile. Modi added that until now, only the US, Russia and China have conducted similar tests. The missile shot down a Low Earth Orbiting satellite, 300 km in the sky as part of an operation titled ‘Mission Shakti’. Read more.

In Scorching Mumbai, Air Quality Falls to ‘Very Poor’ Levels

Mumbai’s temperatures repeatedly flirted with the 40°C mark this week, but it was not just the heat that bothered Mumbaikars. According to air pollution monitoring authority SAFAR, the air quality in Mumbai also deteriorated to ‘very poor’ levels, pushing the AQI as high as 320 in some parts of the city. Experts attributed the spike in temperatures to hot and dry easterly winds from inland regions, coupled with the delayed onset of sea breeze. Read more.

How Climate-Friendly Buildings Can Help Keep You Stay Cool in Scorching Summer

Soaring temperatures might not be in your control, but, with smart architectural ideas, you can beat the heat inside your house. Who wouldn't want to live in a 'naturally cool' building that doesn't depend on energy-guzzling air conditioners? Read more.

Stopping Human-Caused Air Pollution Would Prevent 5.6 Million Air Pollution Deaths Per Year: Study

A study released this week revealed that air pollution in India is one of the leading causes of premature deaths, and that curbing it can prevent 5.6 million mortality cases. The study also found that droughts and other related climatic conditions can stem from increased air pollution. Another alarming finding was that an estimated 3.6 million people die every year due to indoor air pollution. Read more.

Summer Heat: Three Die of Suspected Sunstroke in Kerala

Summers have crept into our cities, and have started to affect daily life across India. Three residents of Kerala succumbed to sun stokes this week. According to the Met department, 11 out of 14 districts in Kerala are only about to get hotter, with temperatures rising 2-3°C above normal. Read more.

Rocks in Meghalayan Caves Can Predict Monsoon, Droughts, and Floods

Advertisement Meghalaya, one of the rainiest places on earth, also harbours stalagmites which are a type of rock formation that rises from the floor of a cave. Studying these rocks, deposited on the floor from ceiling drippings, can unlock secrets about climate change and could help better predict monsoon patterns, droughts and floods in India, scientists say. Read more.

March-End Scorcher in Maharashtra, Mercury Over 40°C in 17 Spots

The mercury soared to 40°C or beyond on Thursday in 17 locations out of 32 monitored for temperatures in Maharashtra. Temperatures at most places are currently significantly above normal, by 3.1 to 5 degrees. The maximum temperature in six out of 10 locations in Vidarbha was 40°C or more on Thursday. Read more.

Mars Had Big Rivers for Billions of Years: Study

A study by scientists at the University of Chicago has found that the runoff in Mars was not a short-lived or localised phenomenon. Martian rivers may have persisted as recently as one billion years ago and they may have been wider than those on Earth today. Read more.

Melting Everest Glaciers Throw up Climbers' Bodies

The melting of glaciers on Mt. Everest has started exposing the bodies of hundreds of climbers. According to CNN, more than 200 climbers have died since 1922 trying to reach the top of world’s highest mountain. Now, global warming's effects on glaciers are throwing up bodies that were buried under snow for years. Read more.

Submit Clean Air Action Plans in a Month or Pay Rs 1 Cr: NGT Tells Six States

The National Green Tribunal has issued a directive to six states, Maharashtra, Punjab, Assam, Jharkhand, Uttarakhand and Nagaland, to submit their clean air action plans by next month. The NGT has also made it clear that if these six states fail to comply, they will be liable for a penalty of rupees 1 crore each. Read more.

India, China, US See 70% Rise in Energy Demand: IEA

According to a new report by the International Energy Agency (IEA), India, China and the United States together accounted for nearly 70% of the rise in energy demand. The IEA attributed the exceptional rise in energy demand to a robust global economy and stronger heating and cooling needs in parts of the world. Read more.

Study Finds Gaps in Conservation Efforts in the Western Ghats

A recent study discovered that extensive efforts undertaken for the expansion of protected areas in Western Ghats have not benefited Dhole, commonly known as Asiatic wild dogs. Although conservation projects have helped increase the number of tigers, the wild dogs—crucial for the health of this ecosystem—face local extinction at many sites. Read more.

Delhi: Mercury May Rise to 36 Degrees Celsius this Weekend

With summer tightening its grip on most parts of the country, Delhi is not left behind. The Met department predicts temperatures in New Delhi will touch 36°C, the highest of the season so far. However, the forecasts also suggest rain and thundery activities over the weekend, which may help in alleviating the heat. Read more.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel app (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
