2 people killed in gas cylinder blast during the shooting of Kannada film Ranam in Bengaluru

Bengaluru

Tragic scenes at the blast spot. https://t.co/kAOWh6waqp — Bangalore Mirror (@BangaloreMirror) 1553867783000

A woman and child were killed when a cylinder exploded during the shoot of the movie, Ranam (Kannada and Telugu) in's Bagalur on Friday afternoon. Another child, who was seriously injured, was taken to a local hospital.The deceased have been identified as Sumana Banu, 28, and her daughter Ayesha Banu, 5, residents of Kattigenahalli in Yelahanka. There are allegations that the road where the incident had happened was blocked for the shooting. Sumana along with her husband Tabrez Khan, a driver by profession and two daughters were going in a car towards Sulibele and parked the car to the side due to the road block and stepped down to see the shooting.Sumana's brother-in-law Javed Khan told media that his brother had a lucky escape as he was standing by the side. Sumana was with her two daughters who were standing close to the film shooting set and the cylinder exploded right next to them. Due to the severity of the explosion, his sister-in-law and niece have died on the spot."Case against those responsible for the deaths by not following the procedure will be booked for culpable homicide not amounting to murder under section 304 of the Indian Penal Code. After the incident the entire film have escaped from the spot," Seemanth Kumar Singh, Additional Commissioner of Police (East) told Mirror.The movie – which features Chetan, Chiranjeevi Sarja and Varalakshmi Sarathkumar – was being shot on the outskirts of Bengaluru. An action sequence was being filmed when the blast occurred. The film was directed by V Samudra.While the team was unavailable for comment, further details are awaited from the scene. It is said that none of the lead actors were hurt during the incident.The Bagaluru police of the Bengaluru North East division has registered a case and are further investigating.
