Friends and colleagues gather at Surfers Paradise to remember murdered Gold Coast nurse

Friends and colleagues have gathered at the Gold Coast to commemorate the Indian-born nurse whose body was found dumped in a canal earlier this week.

Ravneet Kaur, 29, went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border while on holiday with her four-year-old daughter on March 14.

She was found dead 200km away in the Bhakra Canal on Monday.

It has since been revealed her husband, businessman Jaspreet Singh, was in Australia at the time, but was believed to have been having an affair and allegedly arranged his wife's murder with his mistress.

Australian Federal Police confirmed in a statement they conducted searches on the Gold Coast on Friday and are working with Indian counterparts in investigating Ms Kaur's death.

Gold Coast nurse Ravneet Kaur, 29, was found dead in an Indian canal on Monday after she went missing on March 14

Friends and colleagues of the TriCare nurse gathered at Surfers Paradise to pay tribute to the mum-of-one in an emotional memorial service

On Friday, family and close friends met at Surfers Paradise to pay tribute to the beloved TriCare nurse, who was four months pregnant when she was killed.

Ms Kaur was remembered as 'beautiful' and a 'saint' as well as pleasure to work with, the Gold Coast Bulletin reported.

'You have no idea how beautiful this lady was, you'd never meet anyone like her.

'She was a saint. Honest to God, you talk to anyone, they'll say the exact same thing. Never a bad word, never,' former colleague Kerrie Hawker told the publication.

The group of mourners gathered at the shore to observe a moment of silence for the slain mum-of-one.

Loved ones were seen weeping while holding colourful flowers which were later thrown into the ocean.

A second memorial service for Ms Kaur has been planned for Sunday.

Earlier that day, Indian authorities confirmed four people have been charged in relation to Ms Kaur's death so far, and there are discussions with the Australian High Commission about extraditing Singh to India.

Ravneet Kaur (pictured with her husband Jaspeet Singh and their daughter), was on holiday visiting her family when she went missing from the the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border. It is alleged Singh was having an affair and arranged his wife's murder

Indian police have claimed Ms Kaur (pictured) was speaking with her husband on the phone when she went missing

Ravneet Kaur went missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border on 14 March. Her body was found on Monday night in a canal 200km away in Lehragaga

Inspector Dhawan said an alleged 'murder conspiracy' resulted in the kidnap of Ms Kaur.

'The maximum punishment for this offence is the death penalty, that's on the prosecutor and the judge,' he said.

Capital punishment is a legal penalty in India but has only been carried out five times since 1995. It is done by hanging by the neck until death.

Australia has a long-standing policy of not allowing people who are facing the death penalty to be extradited.

One of the people charged in relation to Ms Kaur's death has denied being involved.

Australian Federal Police officers are expected to travel to Punjab to meet with Indian authorities.

Police believe Ms Kaur, 29, was sedated, driven away and killed before her body was dumped

THE DISAPPEARANCE AND DEATH OF RAVNEET KAUR February 27, 2018 - Ravneet Kaur travelled to Punjab with her four-year-old daughter to visit family in Punjab, India. March 14 - Ms Kaur goes missing from the village of Bagge Ke Pipal on the Pakistan-India border. March 15 - A woman who was allegedly having an affair with Ms Kaur's husband returns to Australia from India. March 25 - Ms Kaur's body is found in a canal in Lehragaga, 200km away from where she was last seen. Advertisement

An Attorney-General's Department spokesman said they would not comment on the case.

'As a matter of longstanding practice the Australian Government does not comment publicly on extradition matters, including whether it has received an extradition request, until the person is arrested or brought before a court pursuant to a request,' the spokesman said.

Ms Kaur, 29, who was pregnant, arrived in India on February 27 to visit her friends and family with her four-year-old daughter.

The Indian-born woman was meant to return on March 22.

Ms Kaur had been employed at Tricare in the Gold Coast and was described as a devoted worker and mother and was reportedly expecting a son.

Police have alleged Mr Singh was wanting to move to Canada with his mistress, who is also an Australian citizen.

Mr Singh denied the allegations in an interview with SBS Punjabi.

'I don't know what the basis of all these allegations is,' he said.

'I can't say anything. I will have to go to India and find out what happened. I have no role in this whatsoever.'

Indian authorities have been working with the Australian High Commission in New Dehli, police said.
