UP: Dreaded gangster treats police to liquor party, then esc...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





UP: Dreaded gangster treats police to liquor party, then escapes

29 Mar 2019

In a major embarrassment for Uttar Pradesh police, a dreaded gangster Badan Singh alias Baddo escaped from custody on Thursday after he allegedly threw a liquor party for policemen in a hotel in Meerut.

While the policemen enjoyed themselves, Baddo, who was serving a life sentence for murdering lawyer Ravinder Singh in 1996, fled.

Seven police personnel have been detained.

Here's what went down.

On way from court to jail, policemen attended party

What happened

The policemen were tasked with taking Baddo from Fatehgarh Central Jail to a court in Ghaziabad, for hearing.

On their way back, the policemen made a stopover at a hotel in Meerut where Baddo's accomplices had thrown a party.

The officials were apparently served with sedative-laced drinks after which they passed out. An official said the policemen weren't in their senses.

Inspector and six others have been detained

Fact

"Those detained are constables Omveer, Santosh, Sunil, Rajkumar, Bhupinder, Ihetashamam, and police inspector of Farrukhabad, Deshraj Tyagi. We hope to arrest Baddo soon," said Nitin Tiwari, Senior Superintendent of Police, Meerut.

Guilty cops informed local police hours after Baddo escaped

Details

According to reports, the cops informed local police about the incident, three hours after Baddo escaped.

"The big question is why did they bring him here? There is a clear instruction that hearings involving high-profile criminals will take place through video-conferencing. Investigations are on," said Additional director general (Meerut zone) Prashant Kumar.

Notably, Meerut police had arrested Baddo last year.

Three people came to meet Baddo on March 20

Criminal

After being kept in Meerut jail for a month, Baddo was shifted to Fatehgarh jail in Farrukhabad district. Prison authorities claimed there was a threat to his life. He was sentenced to life imprisonment on October 31.

Fatehgarh jail superintendent BK Singh said three people came to meet Baddo on March 30.

He is wanted in 34 cases of murder, extortion, kidnapping, etc.

Baddo adores Al Pacino, his family stays in Australia

Lifestyle

50-year-old Baddo is known for his suave lifestyle. He is an Al Pacino fan, wears designer tuxedos, and Swiss watches.

Baddo's family is settled in Australia. While his son completed his post-graduation, his wife runs a hotel business.

Despite being behind bars, Baddo's influence in crime circles continued. He is also wanted in connection to a bank robbery case in Andhra Pradesh.

Baddo had links with hotel from where he escaped

Details

Baddo reportedly owns stakes in the Mukut Mahal Hotel, where the party was hosted.

"We can't call him a Robin Hood, but he was no less than that. He was an influential person. He used to mingle with elite businessmen and even did business with some of them," a senior officer said.

Police said Baddo can't flee the country as his passport is canceled.
