Let 2019 be a mandate for a strong, decisive government: Narendra Modi

BHUBANESWAR: The Prime Minister Narendra Modi , addressing a rally in Jeypore in Odisha , asked for 2019 to be a mandate for a strong, decisive government.Raising the post-Balakot attacks on terrorists camps in Pakistan, Modi accused opposition parties of questioning the armed forces. “When India takes action against terrorist, enters their home and kills them, even then these people ask for proof. Do you have faith in the armed forces or not? You do, our opposition doesn’t,” said the Prime Minister.Addressing his first rally in the run-up to the simultaneous polls in the state, Modi added, “It has been a month and Pakistan is still busy counting bodies and these people (the opposition) ask for proof. On voting day when you head to polls, you have to decide whether you want a government that enters terrorists homes kills them or a government that bows its head in fear and scoots.”The PM said his government had installed a “chowkkidar" in space referring to his recent announcement of Defence Research and Development Organisation successful testing of an anti-satellite (ASAT) missile. The missile was launched from the Abdul Kalam island off Odisha’s coast.The PM who began his eastern India campaign from Jeypore in Koraput will be back in Odisha to address a rally in Bhawanipatna in Kalahandi district on 2nd April. Party president Amit Shah similarly is scheduled to visit on 1 April for public meetings in Parlakhemundi and Umarkote. Polls for Odisha’s 21 parliament seats and 147 assembly seats will be held in four phases from 11 April – 29 April.The BJP, at 10 seats in an assembly of 147, no longer makes a claim of 120 (seats) for 2019. Its leaders do stress on the development potential of “twin-engine” governments, or a BJP government at the centre and one in the state. And for Odisha, which contributed only one MP seat to the party in 2014, to play a bigger part in Modi’s return as PM.Before arriving Modi, tweeting in Odia, expressed his excitement over the visit. “The BJD had failed to meet the expectations of the people of Odisha, and play its role as an anti-Congress party. The people of Odisha deserved a good government, which the BJP would deliver,” said the tweet.He hit out at Naveen Patnaik’s government in the state for blocking his pet free healthcare programme, Ayushman bharat, and farmers’ intervention scheme. Patnaik has rolled out his own free healthcare scheme, refusing to join the central programme, and also his own farm intervention scheme, Kalia."Those who have governed here for the last seventy years have given the state nothing except poverty and starvation. Schemes are run in the name of the poor but dalals (middlemen) take advantage of it while the intended beneficiary sits his head in his hands,” said Modi calling for the voter to punish the Congress and BJD.
