We can be now chowkidars in space, says Narendra Modi

India is now capable of performing chowkidari in space, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said here on Friday, while launching the BJP campaign in Odisha.

Mr. Modi was referring to the successful test of the anti-satellite missile under the ‘Mission Shakti’ programme.

“Two days ago, the country witnessed an achievement which made the world acknowledge India’s capability. It is the power of India’s new self-confidence the whole country is now proud of,” Mr. Modi told a public meeting.

“When India takes action against terrorists attacking them by entering their homes, the Opposition still seeks proof. Please tell me if you have confidence in our security forces or not, and if India has forced Pakistan to fall flat on its face or not. Our Opposition parties do not have any trust in us. It has been a month since Pakistan has been counting bodies. And they seek proof,” Mr. Modi said.

In response to the Pulwama terrorist attack in which over 40 CRPF men were killed, India had carried out an airstrike on February 26 and claimed to have hit a terrorist training camp deep inside Pakistan.

Although different death figures were cited by ruling BJP leaders, Opposition leaders wanted a report on the airstrike to be shared with them.

Appeal to voters

The Prime Minister pitched for a strong government, while questioning the intentions of the Opposition parties on the issue of national security. “Those for whom the achievement appears small, India is watching them closely. Those who have been betraying the poor for seven decades are so baffled that they have started insulting the capability of our forces and youth day in and day out. The insults are not acceptable and they need to be taught a lesson.”

Mr. Modi urged voters to elect a government which can act decisively. “Do you want a government which can strike by entering enemy territory or a government which sits down with head bowed in fear? You have to decide — a government which can take a decision or a government which is busy shouting slogans. It is up to voters to choose a strong government or a helpless government,” he said.
