Maharashtra’s trade unions to back Urmila Matondkar

Humbled by the gesture, says the Congress candidate from Mumbai North.

Actor Urmila Matondkar, Congress candidate from Mumbai North, has found support from an unlikely quarter: the trade unions.

Trade Union Joint Action Committee (Maharashtra) extended support to Ms. Matondkar on Friday, recalling her father Shrikant Matondkar's contribution to the trade unions and especially to the All-India Bank Employees Association (AIBEA) of which he was a member.

“Urmila Matondkar’s father was a leader of the AIBEA while working with Grindlays Bank. He has been a staunch follower of socialist ideology and was associated with Rashtra Seva Dal,” said Vishwas Utagi, convener, TUJAC. “He helped the movement not only in terms of his physical participation, but also financially. Urmila herself has been active in various initiatives. We feel that it is important for us to extend support to her to defeat the BJP candidate who is a representative of the anti-worker policies of this government.”

Mr. Utagi recalled that the actor was present during the first conference of all-India women bank employees’ federation as a special guest. “We are requesting all our members to remain active to defeat the BJP,” he said.

On April 1, trade unions across Maharashtra will hold a joint press conference to call for the defeat of the BJP-led government for its “anti-worker’ policies.” The press conference will see participation from Indian National Trade Union Congress (INTUC), Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU), All-India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), Shramik Mahasangh and Trade Union Centre of India (TUCI), among many others.

“As representatives of the workers, we feel that this BJP-led government has launched an attack on workers, farmers and the poor. This government is working against the Constitution and therefore we are coming together to announce that we will support a candidate in each constituency who can defeat the BJP or Sena,” said Mr. Utagi.

Touched, says Urmila

Reacting to the unions’ support, Ms. Matondkar said she was humbled and touched by the gesture shown by the trade unions.

“Yes, my father was an active member in the bank employees’ union and I too represent the aspirations of the workers. It is a happy moment for me that I am getting support from all quarters,” she said.

Ms. Matondkar said she would be meeting the trade union leaders in the coming days to personally thank them. “As I have said earlier too, the ultimate star in this election is the voter. I am here to work for the voters,” she said.
