Congress fields journalist Supriya Shrinate from UP's Maharajganj

Journalist Supriya Shrinate has taken the plunge into politics, daughter of late Harsh Vardhan the two-time Congress MP from Maharajganj and a member of the Consulative Committee, Ministry of Defence, will be contesting from Maharajganj seat in Uttar Pradesh.

Amid a lot of speculation, the Congress on Friday replaced politician Amarmani Tripathi's daughter Tanushree Tripathi with Supriya Shrinate. The Congress was left grasping at straws after Tanushree was also fielded by Shivpal Yadav's Pragatisheel Samajwadi Party-Lohia (PSP-L) from Maharajganj.

PSP-L's candidature meant that Tanushree was fielded from two parties. Tripathi's name was also becoming a matter of controversy as people were pointing out that her father, former UP minister Amarmani Tripathi, is in jail for poet Madhumita Shukla's murder.

However, Supriya's father started his political career as the president of Samajwadi Yuvjan Sabha in 1974 and was associated with the Congress party for more than two decades.

Soon after the announcement of her candidature, Supriya Shrinate, who formerly worked with business news channel ET Now, tweeted, "I will be taking an active plunge in politics, am grateful to @INCIndia @RahulGandhi @priyankagandhi @JM_Scindhia for trusting me with Maharajganj. It will be an honour to keep my later father's legacy alive. I look forward to making a meaningful contribution."

Speaking to India Today, Supriya said that she is ready to fight it out in the battleground. She in fact is ready with her poll plank, "I will highlight the plight of sugarcane farmers in Maharajganj. I will also highlight the high level of unemployment that plagues the region."

She further said that her father had worked for his constituency and she is looking forward to carry his legacy. Thanking the Congress and party president Rahul Gandhi for giving her a ticket she said she knows what the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has being saying and what it has been doing and she will use his journalist acumen to find solutions for the problems that her constituency faces at the moment.

Surpiya Shrinate has done her schooling from Loreto Convent in Lucknow, after which she went on to do her graduation from Lucknow University in political science, history and economics.

Also see: YOUR COMPLETE GUIDE FOR 2019 ELECTIONS
