Samson ton in vain as SRH hunt down 198

IPL 2019

Samson ton in vain as SRH hunt down 198

by Cricbuzz Staff • Published on

David Warner blitzed a 37-ball 69 in SRH's successful chase. © BCCI

A David Warner assault trumped Sanju Samson's sublime hundred as Sunrisers Hyderabad defeated Rajasthan Royals by five wickets in Hyderabad on Friday.

Riding on Samson's second IPL ton, Rajasthan Royals amassed 198/2. Samson operated on a different plane, putting on show his class and timing as he brought up a hundred off just 54 balls. RR plundered runs at the end to get to 198, but Warner made that total look small thanks to a blitzy knock in the PowerPlay.

The left-hander went after the bowlers from the get-go, smashing 69 off just 37 balls to give his side a great platform. There was a slight wobble as SRH neared the target, but Rashid Khan was able to seal SRH's highest successful chase with a four and a six off Jofra Archer in the penultimate over.

The Samson assault

It takes something for someone to smash a hundred off just 54 balls, and yet look all class and elegance. But that is what Sanju Samson brought to the table for Rajasthan Royals. The right-hander walked into the middle after Jos Buttler was castled by Rashid Khan early, and straightaway looked in great touch.

While Ajinkya Rahane played the anchor role, content on rotating the strike, Samson put the onus on himself to go big. And this wasn't the swing-wildly-and-hope-the-bat-meets-ball go big. This was more the-trust-your-skill-and-pick-the-right-shot-for-the-right-ball go big.

But his best was reserved for the end. If until then Samson had sparkled, he just beamed himself as RR's lodestar. He took on Bhuvneshwar Kumar and smashed the India bowler for 24 runs in the over. But it wasn't brute force that outdid Bhuvneshwar in that over. The first six was a superb cover drive that was hit on the up and with minimal footwork. Then two near-yorkers were carved for four through the off side before he picked the gap between point and short third man to perfection. He went on to get his hundred in the final over, with RR amassing 63 runs off the final four overs to help them finish with 198/2.

The Warner assault

If Samson was all grace and poise, Warner, who arrived not long after, was all brutality and muscle. And unlike Samson, Warner did not wait to get going. He was gifted with one down leg, which he tickled down fine for four, before he whacked a length ball out of the ground in the very first over. If ever there needed to be a signal of his intentions, Warner had just walked out with the boldest colour in his palate and painted it obvious.

For the next few overs, Warner put on a clinic in clean hitting. Boundaries rained off his bat, as Sunrisers Hyderabad rattled along at more than 12 an over. By the time the powerplay was done, SRH had raced to 69. Warner brought up his fifty off just 26 balls, and even allowed Jonny Bairstow to play himself in. The Englishman too got himself in the mood, hitting an aggressive 45, as the openers put on 110 in less than 10 overs.

The RR fightback

RR had no business fighting back after the onslaught from Warner and Bairstow. When Warner fell, SRH needed a comfortable 89 in 62 balls. A stand of 47 between Vijay Shankar, with the allrounder tonking the ball around, and Kane Williamson made the equation much more gettable for the home team. Then, SRH lost the plot.

The captain hit an innocuous looking wide ball straight to point, while Vijay Shankar needlessly went big against Shreyas Gopal and holed out for 35 off 15. When Manish Pandey was trapped in front next ball, SRH had slipped to a precarious 167/5. Thankfully for SRH, Yusuf Pathan and Rashid Khan were at hand to finish the job.

Hindsight is always 20-20, but perhaps RR could have been better served with a more aggressive Ajinkya Rahane (70 off 49) at the crease. But both him and Sanju Samson mentioned that the pitch was on the slower side at the start, and that may have played its part in Rahane's relatively slow start.

Where next for the teams?

Both teams head further south for their next games, to take on teams at the opposite sides of the table. RR take on the high-flying defending champions CSK, while SRH take on the low-lying RCB.

© Cricbuzz

TAGS

RELATED STORIES
