Saif Ali Khan roped in along with Amitabh Bachchan & Jacqueline Fernandez for Aankhen 2?

If there was one thriller movie that managed to make the audiences bite their nails till the end, then one name comes to mind and it is Akshay Kumar, Amitabh Bachchan, Arjun Rampal and Paresh Rawal starrer Aankhen. Helmed by Anees Bazmee, the movie about 3 blind men robbing a bank on the insistence of an ex-employee won many hearts. Now, the film is all set to get a sequel and as per reports, Saif Ali Khan has been approached besides Jacqueline Fernandez for the film. Anees Bazmee is busy shooting for his film Pagalpanti in London. Amidst that, Aankhen’s second part was announced.

As per a report in DNA, Amitabh Bachchan and Paresh Rawal are already on board the cast of the film and Anees plans on telling a story this time with 5 characters. Thus, for two characters, Saif Ali Khan and Jacqueline Fernandez were approached by Anees Bazmee. As per the reports, Anees wanted to work with Saif who has experience of working in thriller films and thus, he asked the actor who immediately hopped on board.

As per DNA, “Both (Saif and Anees) of them had been planning to collaborate for a few years. The filmmaker was looking to cast someone for the second male lead and approached Saif with the script. The Nawab of Pataudi will essay a role similar to what Akshay Kumar had portrayed in the first part. Saif has been a part of successful thrillers such as the Race franchise. So, he jumped at this offer.”

Meanwhile, Saif Ali Khan will be seen in the second part of the viral web series, Sacred Games in which he plays a cop named Sartaj Singh. Also, he is shooting for Ajay Devgn’s period film Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior. The film is based on the Tanaji Malusare and will reunite Kajol with Ajay on screen. In the film, Saif will be playing the character of the antagonist and will be seen as Uday Bhan. Tanhaji: The Unsung Warrior is slated to release on January 10, 2020.

Also Read: Diljit Dosanjh calls Taimur Ali Khan a superstar while Kareena Kapoor and Saif Ali Khan are the coolest couple
