Hyderabad: Six electrocute leopard for skin and nails; arrested

The accused were trying to find prospective buyers for the skin and nails of the leopard (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: Cases of animal apathy have witnessed a sharp increase in the country. From smuggling of animals to using them for high-end products, the cruelty meted out to animals seems to be worsening everyday. One such case recently surfaces in Mancheria, Hyderabad.

The Ramagindam CCS police arrested six people who allegedly killed a leopard and attempted to sell its skin and nails. The six accused were arrested by the police on Friday.

The police stated that twelve people had a probable role to play in killing the leopard. While the police arrested six, six were still absconding. The leopard was allegedly killed using a live electric wire. The accused were trying to find prospective buyers for the skin and nails of the leopard.

While talking to the Deccan Chronicle, the Ramagundam police commissioner, V Satyanarayana said that the accused killed the victim in the Bondra village of Sironcha which is situated in Maharashtra.

The skin, twelve nails and three teeth were seized by the police. The police also confiscated building wire and sharp knives from the accused. It was also alleged that the accused were bringing the animal to Alam Raju who lives in Chennur by crossing the river Pranitha. The accused were identified as Pendam Vasanth, Pendem Ramesh, Porthati Nagesh, Porthati Anil, Porthati Suresh, Allam Vignesh and Allam Dilip.

This is not the first time that the police has caught hold of people involved in targeting animals to earn money. A similar case surfaced in Odisha on March 16 when the Special Task Force (STF) arrested seven people with four leopard skins.

Acting on a tip-off, the STF arrested the seven accused who were allegedly involved in smuggling banned items. The seven accused were arrested under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 and relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).


