After Karnataka, I-T raids in TN: Income Tax officials search residence of DMK treasurer Durai Murugun in Vellore

Income-Tax sleuths, who raided the premises of JDS leader and Karnataka government Minor Irrigation Minister CS Puttaraju in Mandya Thursday, carried out searches at DMK treasurer Durai Murugan, at Katpadi in Vellore, Tamil Nadu. I-T department raids have been continuing since Friday night at Murugan's residence in Vellore. Not only Murugun's residence, Kingston Engineering College and Durai's B.Ed. college in Katpadi are also being raided.

I-T officials in a pre-dawn swoop Thursday had raided the premises of Karnataka government Minor Irrigation Minister CS Puttaraju in Mandya. The department had carried out coordinated raids at many locations across Bengaluru, Ramanagara, Kanakapura, Mandya, Mysuru, Hassan and Shivamogga.

Tamil Nadu: Officials of IT dept have been conducting a raid since last night at the residence of DMK treasurer Durai Murugan, at Katpadi in Vellore. Kingston Engineering College & Durai Murugan B.Ed. college in Katpadi are also being raided. pic.twitter.com/m2XyOdzlYa — ANI (@ANI) March 30, 2019

I-T officials informed that they had seized Rs 1.66 crore cash in raids across Karnataka. The department though also informed that no MP, MLA or minister has so far been covered in the searches, which are underway.

Meanwhile, slamming the Centre over I-T raids being carried out at various locations in Karnataka, Congress state unit president Dinesh Gundu Rao wrote to President Ramnath Kovind alleging that the raids were conducted to create a fear psychosis among the voters.

In the letter, a copy of which was released to the media, he said the I-T department was carrying out raids on the relatives of Congress and JD(S) leaders to mar the election prospects and create a fear psychosis among voters, supporters, leaders and candidates of the alliance partners. Rao requested the President to direct the income tax department to desist from conducting raids in the interest of free and fair elections.

Dinesh Gundu Rao also wrote to Election Commission, Central Board of Direct Taxes over in regards to the recent raids being conducted across the state. He said, "The ruling party in power at the centre is misusing the office of the Commissioner of Income Tax of Karnataka & Goa circle, whose integrity is doubtful & who is inimically disposed towards Congress & JD(S). The said officer acts as BJP agent by his candid actions."

"We request you to direct the Income Tax department desist from conducting raids in the interest of free & fair elections," he added.

He writes, 'The ruling party in power at the centre is misusing the office of the Commissioner of Income Tax of Karnataka & Goa circle, whose integrity is doubtful & who is inimically disposed towards Congress & JD(S). The said officer acts as BJP agent by his candid actions.' https://t.co/Cp0pjxzZP9 — ANI (@ANI) March 30, 2019

Moreover, the ruling Congress-JDS alliance in Karnataka alleged that the I-T raids were carried out on JD(S) leaders overseeing the elections of Kumaraswamy's son, Nikhil, in Mandya and nephew Prajwal Revanna in Hassan.

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy said, "I was watching the television, (where it was claimed that) crores of rupees were found. Did your income tax officers get even Rs 10? Why did they go for it (raids)? It was intentional." He sought to know why the BJP leaders were spared from the raid and only Congress and JD(S) leaders were targeted.

(With inputs from agencies)
