Karnataka Congress chief asks EC to desist Income Tax dept from conducting raids for ‘free & fair elections’

Karnataka Congress leader Dinesh Gundu Rao. | Photo Credit: ANI

Bengaluru: Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee chief Dinesh Gundu Rao on Friday wrote to the Election Commission of India, the Central Board of Direct Taxes and President Ram Nath Kovind complaining against the Income Tax raids conducted at the residences of leaders, supporters and candidates of Congress and Janata Dal (Secular) in the state in the run-up to the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

“The ruling party in power at the centre is misusing the office of the Commissioner of Income Tax of Karnataka and Goa circle, whose integrity is doubtful and who is inimically disposed towards Congress and JD(S). The said officer acts as a BJP agent by his candid actions,” Rao wrote in his complaint.

On Thursday, Income Tax officials, along with Central Reserve Police Force personnel carried out raids at the residences of Karnataka Minor Irrigation Minister CS Puttaraju and his nephew.

He writes, 'The ruling party in power at the centre is misusing the office of the Commissioner of Income Tax of Karnataka & Goa circle, whose integrity is doubtful & who is inimically disposed towards Congress & JD(S). The said officer acts as BJP agent by his candid actions.' https://t.co/Cp0pjxzZP9 — ANI (@ANI) March 30, 2019

“We request you to direct the Income Tax department to desist from conducting raids in the interest of free and fair elections,” he said in his letter, news agency ANI reported.

Earlier, Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy said that he and his party leaders are protesting as the raids distract and prevent his leaders from campaigning during election time.

“Income Tax officer Balakrishna is a puppet in the hands of the Modi government. He should be sacked immediately for misusing his post for BJP’s political benefits… All the raids conducted are politically motivated to target BJP’s opponents and their sympathisers… We are protesting as the raids distract and prevent our leaders from campaigning during election time,” Kumaraswamy tweeted.

We are protesting as the raids distract and prevent our leaders from campaigning during election time. — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) March 28, 2019

In response, the Income Tax department dismissed Kumaraswamy’s witchhunt charge and said that the raids were conducted based on credible information and should not be politicised and trivialised after Kumaraswamy slammed PM Modi and termed the raids as ‘revenge politics’ against him.
