India killed enemies in their home, but Congress is stressed: PM Modi

Dibrugarh (Assam): Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said that the Congress was stressed about the fact that India for the first time killed its enemies in their territory.

In what was an apparent reference to India’s air strike at Jaish-e-Mohammad’s (JeM) training camp in Pakistan’s Balakot in February in retaliation to Pulwama terror attack, he said: “For the first time, India killed its enemies inside their territory but the Congress is still stressed about it.”

“The whole world got united and stood by India but the Congress has lost its sleep over it. You are all happy about these developments, but there is an atmosphere of unhappiness in two places. One of the places is the Congress family and the other is terrorists’ homes,” said he while addressing an election rally here.

“Congress party created an image of India as a nation which is suffering,” he said. “It is for you the people to decide if you want a strong government or a tainted government. They hate chowkidaar; they have a problem with ‘chaiwalas’ too.”

“I used to think there is only one ‘chaiwala on their target. But when I visited all corners of the country, I realised be it West Bengal or Assam, they do not even like to look at someone associated with tea,” he said.

Questioning the Congress for the plight of tea farmers in Assam, he said: “What else is the reason for tea farmers to face problems for seven decades? They did not even get basic facilities. Only a ‘chaiwala’ can understand the pain of ‘chaiwalas.”

Talking about Mission Shakti, the Prime Minister said: “We have extended our abilities in the space. Recently India became the fourth nation in the world to have destroyed a live satellite. You, the people are happy about it. Meanwhile, Congress is crying.”

Referring to himself as ‘Chowkidar,’ the Prime Minister said: “It is your faith in me that I have been trying to change the lives of the poor, deprived, afflicted tribal people of the country.”

He further said that even after 70 years of independence, only 40 per cent of Assam’s households had electricity but in the last five years, electricity has reached almost every household today.

“Around 27 lakh families in Assam will receive a free medical treatment of up to Rs 5 lakh every year. Under Mudra Yojana, a loan of Rs 50 lakh was allotted to lakhs of youth who are now self-employed,” he said.

“The provision of regular pension of Rs 3,000 after the age of 60 for those who work as guards, drivers, housekeepers, tea farmers,” said Prime Minister Modi.

He further said that the projects including Gas Cracker Project, Dhola-Sadiya Bridge or Bogibeel Bridge, that were neglected for years, were completed by the BJP government.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
