Rana Daggubati brings a new version of Amar Chitra Katha, Karan Johar says he grew up on this 'treasure trove'

Rana Daggubati | Photo Credit: Instagram

Telugu star Rana Daggubati, who made his debut in Hindi cinema with Dum Maaro Dum, might have a bevvy of professional commitments lined up but the actor has made sure to take out time for something special. And for the generation, who's lived on Amar Chitra Katha books, his latest venture is sure to get them excited.

The comic book company, that has given kids from different generations a world to live and ponder over, has now transformed into a new form. Headlined by Rana Daggubati along with Kishore Biyani, Amar Chitra Katha has transformed into ACK Alive, a learning centre that is set to open on Sunday. Rana took to social media and gave his fans a walkthrough of the place and the video is sure to evoke a gamut of emotions – nostalgia of the era gone by and curiosity for what's to come.

Soon after Rana shared the photo, Bollywood filmmaker-producer Karan Johar took to social media to express support for his new venture. “I grew up on #AmarChitraKatha ! The treasure trove of stories! Here it is #ackalive @RanaDaggubati.”

In the video, Rana shares that the centre will cater to people of different age groups, offering them learning lessons on art, life skills, performing arts, calligraphy and storytelling among other topics. The actor, in an official statement, revealed that he discovered the world of Amar Chitra Katha in his childhood. He shared how the comics went on to become his worldview of different cultures existing in India adding that this institution aims to carry forward the Indian legacy.

His statement reads as, “I discovered Amar Chitra Katha like the rest of India. These comics were my favorite story-tellers in childhood. Soon enough, I realised that these weren’t just stories or comic books, these were carriers of our ethos and values. They were also a route for me to discover a lot more about the multidimensional culture this land has nurtured over the decades. Call it an extension of Uncle Pai’s vision, ACK Alive promises to become a tool in carrying forward the Indian legacy - not just through stories, but with art, sciences and life skills entrenched in our roots.”

On the film front, Rana is currently shooting SS Rajamouli's RRR alongside Jr NTR. The film, set in the 1920s, also stars Alia Bhatt and Ajay Devgn in lead roles. The actor will also star in Housefull 4, co-starring Akshay Kumar, Riteish Deshmukh, Bobby Deol, Kriti Sanon, Kriti Kharbanda and Pooja Hegde.
