Farooq accuses PM of ‘using’ Pulwama attack to divert attention

Srinagar, Mar 30: National Conference president Farooq Abdullah Saturday claimed that Prime Minister Narendra Modi was spreading “lies” about Balakote attack to “divert” attention from real issues.

Addressing office bearers’ convention at party headquarters here, Farooq said that Narendra Modi has “failed” to fulfill the promise with the people.

“He made fake promises with the people prior to elections. He promised that 2 crore people will be given employment every year. As he has failed to fulfill promises, Narendra Modi has been spreading lies that Indian Air Force carried out an attack in Pakistan’s Balakot to divert the attention. People were told that 200 people were killed and then 500 people were killed in Pakistan,” the National Conference president said.

“These all lies are being spread with the sole purpose of winning the elections. Now Pakistan has been seeking compensation for the damaged trees. Even crash of a helicopter at Budgam too happened because of pressing of a wrong button,” he said.

Farooq was referring to a national daily report which reported that investigators have found that an Indian air defence missile was fired shortly before the crash of a Mi17 V5 helicopter at Budgam, near Srinagar on February 27, which resulted in the deaths of six air force personnel and a citizen on ground.

The National Conference senior leader also claimed that Ghulam Mohammed Sadiq, Bakshi Ghulam Mohammad, and Syed Mir Qasim were also responsible for miseries of Kashmir and helped New Delhi to weaken special position of the state.

“They listened to New Delhi unlike Sher-e-Kashmir, who spent 20 years in jail,” the former chief minister said.

His son Omar Abdullah who is National Conference’s vice president, party’s General Secretary Ali Mohammad Sagar and senior party leaders were present on the occasion.

Reacting to Union Finance Minister Arun Jaitley who claimed that Article 35A, which restricts non-permanent residents to buy property in Jammu and Kashmir, was “constitutionally vulnerable and also hampering economic development of the state”, Farooq said: “Maharaja Hari Singh has signed an instrument of accession on the condition that New Delhi will control defence, foreign affairs, and communication. Article 370 can be abrogated only if people of Kashmir are allowed to hold plebiscite. We have to protect our special position from the RSS and BJP. BJP can do anything to win elections.”

Farooq also slammed PDP for forming alliance with the BJP. “Mufti Sahab sought votes that his party will stop BJP and RSS from entering into Kashmir but later formed government with the BJP despite National Conference and Congress offered unconditional support.”

He asked people to save India from communal parties. “We shall not fight on religious lines. People shall vote for NC and don’t get afraid,” he said.

He also questioned emerging of new political parties in Kashmir.

On the occasion, Sagar said efforts were being made to weaken special status of the state. “We have to eliminate Narendra Modi and BJP politics,” Sagar added.

ADVERTISEMENT
