Congress has always stood with farmers and will continue to do so: Ghulam Nabi Azad

Party woos farmers at public meeting as six-day-long ‘Parivartan Yatra’ organised by its Haryana coordination committee reaches Sonipat

All-India Congress Committee general secretary Ghulam Nabi Azad on Saturday said that the Congress and the farmers of the country share a relationship which is more than a century old.

From bringing water to fields of the farmers to providing them with the Minimum Support Price, the Congress has always stood with the farmers and would continue to do so as farmers are at the top of the Congress’ political agenda.

Mr. Azad was speaking at a public meeting as six-day-long “Parivartan Yatra” organised by the State coordination committee reached Gohana Sabzi Mandi in Sonipat on Saturday.

The yatra started from Karnal on its fifth day and travelled through Panipat, Israna, Gohana, Lakhan Majra, Meham, Kalanaur, Beri before reaching Jhajjar in the evening. Mr. Azad, former Chief Minister and coordination committee chairperson Bhupinder Singh Hooda, Pradesh Congress Committee president Ashok Tanwar, Rohtak MP Deepender Singh Hooda and other leaders of the party made an appeal to the people to vote for the Congress in the ensuing Lok Sabha election.

Speaking at the public meeting, Mr. Azad said farmers from across the country had seen the Congress as a party which had worked tirelessly for them. He said the focus during the days of Pandit Nehru as the Prime Minister was to ensure that water for irrigation reached every village of the country while during former PM Indira Gandhi’s time, the focus was on ensuring greater productivity and she brought the green revolution.

Talking to Congress supporters and workers, he said that the entire top leadership of the party in Haryana was not just travelling together, they were also seeking support for each other.

Hooda attacks BJP

Mr. Hooda launched an all-out attack on the BJP government. He said the anti-farmer policies of the BJP government had reduced the farmers to a pitiable condition as they had not only been denied a fair price for their produce, but the government’s policies had also pushed up their input prices by bringing them under GST, hitting them from both ends.

“Every farmer in the state is struggling as they are not getting a fair price for their crops,” Mr. Hooda said.

The former Chief Minister said the Congress government in the State had made Haryana number one in per capita income and investment, but the BJP government had brought the growth of the State to a grinding halt. “The State which was number one in development has become number one in crime against women,” Mr. Hooda said.
