SALUTE! Army Major, killed in Pak attack, had married fiancé despite her suffering paralysis attack

Major Shashi Dharan V Nair was bid an emotional adieu | Photo Credit: PTI

Pune: Major Shashi Dharan V Nair, who got martyred in an IED explosion in Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir last week, was bid an emotional adieu on Sunday at Khadakwasla area on the outskirts of Pune in Maharashtra. His last rites were held with full military honours.

As per details available, Major Nair was a native of Khadakwasla and did his studies at the famous Fergusson College in the city. He lost his life along with another Indian Army soldier in the IED explosion suspected to have been triggered by Pakistan’s Border Action Team (BAT).

It has come to light that the Army officer was a hero not just on duty but also in personal life. Major Nair is survived by his wife Trupti, who is suffering from multiple arteriosclerosis and is paralyzed below waist.

In what was a display of his commitment to honour his word, Major Nair married Trupti even after she was diagnosed with the disease. It may be noted that Major Nair’s fiancé was absolutely fine at the time of engagement, but had got paralyzed below waist by the time of the marriage.

The Major decided to marry her despite being dissuaded by most against doing so. It has been learnt that he would carry her wife everywhere he went, like parties or restaurants.

Also, as per a report in PTI, the martyred Major was "passionate" about joining the armed forces since his childhood days.

A friend of his said that Nair, who was in National Cadet Corps (NCC), used to travel to his college riding a cycle covering 15 kms each day.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
