India happy with surgical strike, not Congress: Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday said that the whole country was happy with India's bombing of the terrorist camp in Pakistan but not the Congress and also the terrorists.

"The Indian armed forces for the first time killed the terrorists in their own territory. While the whole world stood by India, the Congress family have lost their sleep," Modi told an election rally here in Assam's Dibrugarh district.



"Recently our scientists made significant achievements in space technology and we became the fourth nation to have such technology," he went on.



"But the Congress leaders were in tears. Today India is walking together with the superpowers of the world and the Congress is worried," he said.





"Now you have to decide whether you want a strong government or a government run by people stained (by allegations of corruption)," he said.



Showering appreciation for the Moran community, the Prime Minister said that India cannot strengthen itself unless Assam was strengthened.



Modi also slammed the earlier Congress government for what he said was its apathy towards the tribals in the tea community.



"They do not like this chowkidar but they also don't like the chaiwala. They don't even like to look into the eyes of the chaiwala. Only this chaiwala can understand the pain of the chaiwala," he said.



He was clearly referring to some of the flagship schemes launched by the BJP government in Assam for the benefit of the tea tribes.



The Prime Minister alleged that various development projects got delayed when the Congress ruled Assam. "It is our government that has completed many of the long delayed projects."



The Prime Minister slammed the Congress for the Assam Accord and said that his government was working to ensure its implementation.



"Our government is also seriously considering a proposal to grant ST status to six communities of Assam. However, in doing so we will ensure that none of the existing tribals are affected," he added.
