A twisted love triangle

RTI activist Shehla Masood

Anna Hazare

Shivraj Singh Chouhan

journalist Hemender Sharma

Zahida

(L) Zahida is one of the two women convicted for Masood’s murder; (R) RTI activist Shehla Masood

ByA new book re-examines’s murder, and brings to light incriminating details about the involvement of a powerful politician from Madhya Pradesh and his alleged dalliances.Rights activist Shehla Masood was murdered in broad daylight outside her residence in Bhopal on August 16, 2011, just as she was leaving home to participate in the India Against Corruption (IAC) campaign launched byat the time.Masood, 38, was a multifaceted and popular personality in Bhopal. She was an environmentalist-turned-RTI activist, and took a deep interest in Anna Hazare’s campaign. Days before her death, Masood had started RTI Anonymous, a portal through which whistle-blowers could file RTI applications without having to reveal their identity. She had reportedly filed over 200 RTI appeals highlighting various acts of alleged corruption in the BJP-rungovernment in Madhya Pradesh.In his soon-to-release book Shehla Masood: The Murder That Shook India [Harper Collins],— who works with India Today TV — talks about a politician (who goes by the pseudonym ‘Darbar’), who got away despite being charged with Masood’s murder, thanks to the shoddy investigation and ‘assistance’ from a former Madhya Pradesh chief minister who was in Darbar’s rival political party.Names of a BJP MLA, an MP and a RSS functionary had figured as suspects in the Shehla murder case, but when the judicial verdict was delivered in January 2017, two little-known women were awarded life imprisonment. The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) that probed the case, said the murder was the result of a ‘love triangle’, and claimed that both Masood and— one of the women convicted for the former’s murder — were in a relationship with a BJP MLA at the time which resulted in a jealous Zahida hiring Kanpur-based professional killers to bump Masood off.Subsequently, the CBI gave a clean chit to the MLA. The CBI first attributed the murder to an affair between Shehla and Zahida’s husband, but later alleged it was a love triangle involving Darbar, Shehla and Zahida, that the latter had cooked up in her head. Zahida’s presumptions, the investigating agency said, were based on moves made by ‘Darbar’ that were aimed at getting rid of Shehla.The book reveals a lot about the convicted Zahida, who reportedly preserved condoms used by Darbar in her office. “The CBI’s reluctance to arrest Darbar was attributed to his caste and [political] allegiances,” writes Sharma in his book, adding: “Darbar had managed the whole thing with the help of a former chief minister of Madhya Pradesh.Almost everyone — from police officers to politicians to anyone associated with the Shehla Masood murder case — was certain about the role of this politician who had ruled the state for more than five years. Many even went to the extent of speculating about the amount of money Darbar had spent, a staggering Rs 25 crore to Rs 30 crore.”Interestingly, both Zahida and Saba, who have been convicted for Masood’s murder, kept telling the media about the alleged involvement of a politician, but did not repeat the allegation even once in court, or while deposing before the magistrate under Section 164. According to CBI sleuths, Zahida, married and a mother of two, meticulously maintained a diary, keeping note of her sexual encounters with Darbar. The diary entries start in 2009, two years before the Masood murder, and some of these entries find mention in Sharma’s book.For instance, the entry dated January 1, 2009, begins with a quote from Mother Teresa, ‘If you judge people, you have no time to love them.’ On March 16, Zahida notes: “I met with Darbar. It was regarding work in the tourism department. He was impressed with me. We spoke for hardly five minutes and that too through ifs and buts. I think he really felt something for me. But I didn’t feel anything.”By May 3, 2009, she had started feeling “something” for him and recorded it: “Darbar came to my office for the first time. For the first time [ever] since I met him, I felt something for him.” On May 13, she wrote a text message to him, “You talk so cheap Darbar but still aap jaise bhi hain, yes I’ve started loving you”. The June 4 entry reads: “Darbar has felt me everywhere. First time I did intercourse with someone other than Parvez [Zahida’s husband]”.The entry from January 20, 2010, is more graphic: “As usual he called me in the afternoon. Asked me [for a] meeting, I said OK. He arrived in office at 7 pm. I was sitting on a chair with my hair open. He saw me and I saw him, we smiled at each other. Immediately [after that] he gave me a tight lip-touching kiss. I cried a lot and he cajoled me. Then he showed interest in sex. He took [off] my clothes. We had sex and then he got off.”Zahida’s February 3, 2010, entry mentions ‘Shehla M’ and expresses suspicions about Darbar’s relations with her and another woman referred to as ‘S’. the diary entry ends with a remark, “This thing is killing me”. A February 19 post reads: “‘Why do you have sex without a condom. Are you not afraid, what if you get pregnant?’ [He asked me, and I replied] ‘It does not make any difference to me.’ I will give birth to a baby, I replied. He said, ‘No’. Then he said, ‘Partner you were not in the mood today. You just wanted to oblige me’. I said, why would I do that? ‘Because you love me’, he said. I have compromised with Darbar. He goes to a lot of places. He is physically related with so many other women but I cannot help it.”The May 30, 2011, entry reads, “Today’s going to be a blast. Darbar is excited since morning. He called and started, ‘I love you Jaaan. Ok tell me what time should I come’. I said, ‘7.30, but only if you keep your worries and tension outside. Also you don’t have to look towards the phone’.”Shehla figured in Zahida’s diary on August 15, 2011, a day before the RTI activist was murdered. The entry reads: “I did not speak to Darbar at all. But he spoke with Shehla twice, and that too for over half an hour each time. Poor fellow Darbar, he is finished”.On August 16, 2011, she writes: “She [was] shot dead in front of her house. I was very depressed since morning when all of a sudden Ali called up around 11.15am. ‘Mubarak ho sahib, we did it in front of her house’, he said. I was in my office. I had come early due to Ramadan. I sent Rohit to check her car. He confirmed that the car was not parked. I returned home to offer my prayers. I was so relaxed. I went to the mosque and offered prayers. I had many missed calls registered on my phone...Sanjay also called around 12.30 pm but I missed the call. I called him back and he said, ‘This is too much. This is [the] height of hatred’.”According to Sharma, Zahida’s diaries were not just about Darbar, sleaze and passion. “It was clear that Zahida would do anything for Darbar. She also had a good memory. On several occasions, her recorded entries coincided with later events as they took place,” he says. But somehow, the CBI failed to consider this. A day after the judgement, Masood’s relatives, friends and many people in Madhya Pradesh were stunned about the manner in which the police and the investigative agency had conducted the murder probe. Masood’s father, Sultan, a retired librarian, broke down after hearing the verdict. “I am at the loss for words. Perhaps the real culprits will never be caught,” he said, refusing to elaborate further.
