BSF to keep border gates open for polling

SILCHAR: Indian families living on the other side of the fence along the border with Bangladesh , are set to get a breather this election as the Border Security Force will keep open the gates to facilitate voting in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls in Cachar.The barbed wired fencing that limits the two neighbours has separated many families and Indians on the other side of the fence have been deprived of many privileges. The Cachar district administration asked the BSF to help the Indian voters across the border to exercise their franchise. “The Cachar district administration and police, along with the BSF, are taking steps to facilitate the voters who reside outside the fencing along the 36.8-km India-Bangladesh international border,” said an official communiqué.The Cachar district election office sources on Friday said, there are 97 voters (80 in Nathanpur and 17 in Pirnagar village) on the other side of the fence. The locality under Katigorah block in Cachar, constituting the Silchar Lok Sabha constituency, does not have any school or anganwadi centre or any government office which can be converted into a polling station.Superintendent of police (Cachar) Mugdhajyoti Dev Mahanta said unlike regular days when the fence gates are opened and closed at specified times, people in Nathanpur and Pirnagar can come into the barricaded area to cast their vote on April 18. The SP said Cachar deputy commissioner Laya Madduri and he discussed the matter with the BSF and they have ensured that voters can come into the Indian territory with necessary documents to cast their votes. Dev Mahanta, however, added that they would keep a vigil on any attempt by Bangladeshi nationals to cross into India during polling. Sources said villagers on the other side of the fence find it very difficult to come to this side of the border and then return home because of the paper work they have to do at the border manned by the BSF. They have to return home before sun set. Taking all difficulties into consideration, the administration decided to keep the gates open for maximum participation of voters.A total of 2,625 people belonging to 343 Indian families from 17 villages along the international border in the Barak Valley (Cachar and Karimganj districts) were barricaded during fencing in the past few years. Barbed wire fencing work is still on along the border.
