Why can’t Modi be hailed for air strikes, asks Rajnath : The Tribune India

editorial@tribune.com

Gandhinagar, March 30

Facing criticism for indulging in a credit war for the air strikes in Balakot, Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Saturday said if former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi can be credited for creation of Bangladesh, Prime Minister Narendra Modi should also be congratulated for the action against terrorists.

Addressing a public meeting here on the occasion of filing of nomination by BJP president Amit Shah, Singh also hit out at Congress president Rahul Gandhi for calling him a "thief" and urged the people to "punish" him democratically.

"Those who are saying that Balakot air strikes are being politicised and the PM is being credited have forgotten that the Army divided Pakistan in 1971 war and created Bangladesh. Our leader Vajpayeeji had hailed Indira Gandhi in Parliament. The entire country was doing so," he said. After 40 CRPF troopers were killed in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir, the PM showed strong determination to take the revenge, he said.

"Our Air Force did air strikes in Balakot. Then why the PM should not be given credit (PM ka jaykara kyo nahi hona chahiye)? Whenever our forces have shown their valour, strong political will was there. The Congress government didn't do anything after 26/11 Mumbai terror attack," he said.

The senior BJP leader said when there is coordination between political will and Army's valour, "no world power can challenge us".

Referring to Rahul's "chowkidar chor hai" jibe at the PM, Singh said: "Under Modiji's leadership, the country has become world's sixth-largest economy but irony is that the Congress president is using abusive language against our PM. I would appeal to the people that those using such abusive language against the PM should be dealt with democratically."

The Home Minister said the Congress leader was calling the PM a thief but the reality was that he was "pure" and had not even a single allegation of corruption.

"The 'chowkidar' is pure, he is becoming PM for sure and for every problem he has a cure," he said. Hailing the BJP chief, Singh said Shah was a charismatic organiser under whose leadership the BJP became world's largest party. He sought people's support for Shah's victory with a record margin.

On the occasion, Union Minister and Lok Janshakti Party chief Ram Vilas Paswan said Shah has strengthened the BJP by making elaborate booth-level visits across the country. He also slammed the Opposition, saying their "gathbandhan" had turned into "latthbandhan".

Listing the government's achievements, he said the Modi government had been working day and night for empowerment of every section of the country.

Paswan said Shah had extraordinary organisational skills and was a great leader. He said he used to hold the record for biggest victory margin in parliamentary polls but wished he breaks all records to win Gandhinagar. — IANS
