Guns not pens

The pattern of the struggle in Indian-held Kashmir has taken a new turn, a result of oppression that since the 1990s has claimed hundreds of lives and forced families to re-examine the way they think and act. More and more highly educated Kashmiris, including university professors, are putting aside the pens they had used for so long to try and voice opinions, and instead taking up guns. In this, they are following the lead from their students, their sons, their daughters and other young people who have for decades led the uprising in the valley.

Some of these academics have been killed in confrontations with Indian security forces. Others continue to fight on while people with degrees that would give them well-paid jobs in most parts of the world and cushy lives have chosen to join a fight that is led by the people and intended to benefit the people of Kashmir. The decisions they have taken and the factors that led them to do so should make Indian authorities sit up and take notice. It is clear that the fight for freedom in Kashmir is now not just a skirmish between bands of young militants and Indian security forces but a movement which runs deep through all of Kashmiri society. In some cases, fathers have decided to adopt the strategies already taken up by sons and, for the first time in their lives, picked up automatic weapons to make their voices heard.

The world, and New Delhi, needs to act. The situation in Kashmir must be recognised as one of the most grave crises of our time. It has continued for far too long with too few attempts made to initiate the dialogue that could allow people to put down their guns and bring a semblance of peace to a region torn apart by war and strife. It is essential that this happen as quickly as possible. We hope that in the run up to elections in India, Kashmir will remain not just a slogan to be raised as politicians insist it will forever be kept as a part of India, but a more rational approach adopted towards solving the very real concerns of its people. Entire households have now become entangled in the freedom struggle. So have entire university campuses and the groups present on them. A negotiated settlement involving all stakeholders cannot be delayed any further. To do so would only bring more tragedy to households in Kashmir which have seen far too much death. The voices of Kashmiri people need to be heard at international forums so that people can once again move towards the core issue of permitting the people of Kashmir to determine their own destiny. This should happen through the use of discussion and words rather than guns.
