India’s satellite-destroying missile sends Pakistan CHILLING warning amid fresh violence

India’s satellite missile sends message to world says reporter

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Scientists in New Delhi made the breakthrough and demonstrated its power by flying the machine 300km into the air to destroy a satellite orbiting the Earth. The move comes one month after an Indian Air Force jet was shot down during the bitter row between India and Pakistan. Officials believe the new weapons capability has been aimed at showing their might to countries such as China.

Retired Indian Air Force group captain Ajey Lele argues the missile shows India’s strength. According to the Times of India, he said: “Essentially, India is saying that we are a strong and capable military power - it’s specific to any one country, but it is a message to all of India’s adversaries. “If somebody wants to do something to our satellites, we have the capability do this to your satellites.” India’s prime minister Narendra Modi said in a national address the country had “established itself as a space power”. READ MORE: India V Pakistan: Tensions rise over Modi missile launch

India's prime minister alongside a stock picture of an explosion during the dispute with Pakistan

The two warring leaders of Pakistan and India

Pakistan and India have long been in dispute with one another. A ceasefire between the two had been reached but on Saturday, reports suggested Pakistan had broken it. Locals state that Pakistan had committed the violation in the Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir, along the border which separates the countries. The Zee TV website reported the “unprovoked violation” took place in the Mankot area of the district, which saw Pakistani troops attack Indian soldiers with heavy fire and mortar shelling.

Imran Khan of Pakistan
