Congress will simplify GST if voted back to power, says Rahul Gandhi

14 Jan 2019, 6:38 PM

Digital platform helps Maharashtra save Rs 12,000 crore in farm loan waiver: CM Fadnavis

Maharashtra has managed to save Rs 12,000 crore in farm loan waiver alone by adopting a digital platform that helped eliminate bogus claimants, Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis said . "From sowing to harvesting, everything will be managed through a digital platform and that will give advantage to farmers to make this sector more sustainable, predictable," he said, adding it will be launched today.

Congress will simplify GST and take "rational economic decisions" if voted back to power, says Rahul Gandhi

India's main opposition Congress party will simplify the goods and services tax (GST) and take "rational economic decisions" to attract foreign investment if voted back to power in a general election due by May, its leader Rahul Gandhi said. Gandhi said that foreign investment was at a multi-year low in India due to the "ill-advised and badly thought out economic moves" such as the currency ban and a "poorly designed GST".

India's largest startup ecosystem inaugurated in Kerala; to provide 2.5 IT jobs

India got its largest startup ecosystem Sunday when Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan inaugurated here a 1.8-lakh-square-feet facility housing incubation set-ups across a string of segments in modern technology. The Integrated Startup Complex under the Kerala Startup Mission (KSUM) includes the ultra-modern facilities of Maker Village that promote hardware startups, the BioNest that promotes medical technologies etc.

Samsung to launch three phones designed around Indian millennials

Samsung plans to launch a budget smartphone series in India ahead of a global release, aiming to regain ground ceded to Chinese rivals such as Xiaomi in the world's second-biggest mobile phone market. The three new M-series phones, which Samsung plans to sell only through its website and Amazon.com's Indian operation, will help the company double online sales, the head of Samsung's Indian mobile business told Reuters.

India invites China's participation in plans to expand EV market at home

India plans to achieve electric mobility by 2030 and welcomes Chinese industries participation and investment in the expansion of Indian Electric Vehicles (EV) market, NITI Aayog Principal Advisor Anil Srivatsava has said. He has invited China's participation in India's ambitious plans to go for full electric mobility.

Air India's passenger revenue grows by 20 pc in Q3 of 2018-19

While Air India's passenger count rose by only 4 per cent in the December 2018 quarter, its revenue from passengers increased by 20 per cent on the back of better aircraft utilisation, said a senior official. The number of passengers has increased to 55.27 lakh during the quarter from 53.28 lakh in the year-ago period, showing an increase of 4%.

Bangladesh garment workers clash with police as strikes roll on

Thousands of Bangladeshi garment workers churning out clothes for top global brands walked off the job Sunday and clashed with police as protests over low wages entered a second week. Bangladesh is dependant on garments stitched by millions of low-paid tailors on factory floors across the emerging South Asia economy of 165 million people. Roughly 80 per cent of its export earnings come from clothing sales abroad.

Budget 2019: Cut corporate tax rate to spur economic growth, says FICCI

Industry chamber FICCI on Sunday recommended the government to cut corporate tax rate across the board to 25 per cent irrespective of turnover in the forthcoming Budget to spur economic growth and increase overall tax collections. The chamber has also suggested revision in the tax slabs for the individual taxpayers with the top 30 per cent rate to be applied beyond Rs 20 lakh annual income.
