Morning digest: Modi says Congress resents everything Indians are proud of, Rahul Gandhi promises green jobs, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

Prime Minister Narendra Modi came down heavily on the Congress, saying the “dynastic party” resents everything that Indians, in general, are proud of.

Amid a punishing campaign schedule, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N. Chandrababu Naidu squeezed in time, first aboard an aircraft and then in his SUV, to talk about Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s rule, unity of non-BJP parties, the impact of the Balakot air strike on the election and the TDP’s prospects in his State.

At a tea kadai in Sanarpatti village, some 13 km from Sivakasi town, a group of men are huddled in animated discussion. It appears to be fairly cheerful chatter until I get close enough to hear the conversation. Each one of them is talking of how uncertain he is about the future. Ever since the firecracker factories shut down five months ago, survival has been precarious, they say.

Malayalam writer Benyamin’s Jasmine Days won the 2018 JCB Prize for Literature. That’s not the only reason the novel has proven to be extraordinary for him. It’s the book that made him decide to quit his day job as an engineer in Bahrain, where he’d lived for 21 years, to preserve his integrity as a writer. In this conversation, he explains what writing means to him, how a migrant mind adapts to the lack of freedom in a dictatorship, and the acute sense of homelessness a migrant worker feels.

Hitting back at Finance Minister Arun Jaitley for advocating repeal of special status for Jammu and Kashmir, PDP president Mehbooba Mufti said the relationship between the Union and the State would be over if Article 370 of the Constitution is revoked.

The anti-BJP alliance in Uttar Pradesh led by the Samajwadi Party and the Bahujan Samaj Party received a setback after a key OBC partner, the Nishad Party, ditched them allegedly for not following “alliance dharma” and within hours moved towards stitching a deal with the BJP.

Once Prithvi Shaw stood tall, by comparison, even Andre Russell’s mighty contribution was dwarfed. But all that was pushed into the background once Delhi Capitals faltered in the final over of its chase of Kolkata Knight Riders’ 185 and left the match tied.

After the social media and political buzz created by Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s announcement of India’s anti-satellite (ASAT) missile capabilities, Congress president Rahul Gandhi sought to steer the discourse back to basic issues by promising to employ “lakhs of youth” through a new scheme to help the environment.

In his first interview to any media organisation after the announcement of the Lok Sabha poll schedule, Deputy Chief Minister O. Panneerselvam explains why the people of the State should support Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the AIADMK-led front; why the AIADMK is contesting fewer number of seats this time; and distribution of party ticket to women and minorities.

Respected Madam/Sir,

Two three days back Mrs. Mathrubootham came and said, “Old man, shall we go somewhere for trip?” I looked at her carefully because sometimes she will say things like, “Do you want to go on trip,” and I will say, “Yes of course, I very much enjoy tourism.” Then she will say, “Very good, take this plastic bag and go on trip to supermarket and bring seppankizhangu?”

Yours in exasperation,

J. Mathrubootham
