Immigrant attacks Karnataka couple in Germany, husband dies

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Immigrant attacks Karnataka couple in Germany, husband dies

31 Mar 2019

A couple from Karnataka, living and working in Germany, was attacked by an immigrant near Munich on Friday which resulted in the death of the husband.

49-year-old Prashant Basarur and his 43-year-old wife Smita were attacked with a kitchen knife by a Guinean, claimed reports. Smita is undergoing treatment.

External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj confirmed the tragic news on Twitter on Saturday.

Here's more.

Accused stabbed couple after an argument

What happened

According to reports, the accused was a neighbor of the Basarurs and lived in the same apartment complex.

The couple and the accused had an argument which spiraled out of control. Prashant suffered several injuries in his head and body. The topic for the argument is unknown.

Indian authorities didn't hint that the incident was a case of hate crime.

Couple moved to Germany years ago, have two kids

Couple

While Prashant studied at NMAMIT in Udupi, Smita has a graduation degree from Bhandarkars Arts and Science College in Kundapur. She did her Masters course from Mangalore University.

The couple stayed in Hyderabad, Bangalore and then shifted to Germany almost a decade ago. They reportedly obtained citizenship last year.

Prashant and Smita have two kids- 15-year-old Sakhishya and 10-year-old Shloka.

Smita's brother will fly to Germany

Family

Smita, who hails from Siddapur, has two brothers. Sujay, who is a civil engineer, is likely to fly to Germany. Her other brother, Ajay, stays in Dubai and is awaiting a visa.

Her father Dr. Chandramouli is a well-known ayurvedic daughter and the family owns a couple of businesses in town.

Smita was a simple college going girl, people in the town said.

Relative said government is helping the family

Fact

"We are told that the government will help with arrangements to bring back Prashant's body at the earliest. Smita is said to be recovering," a relative of Dr. Chandramouli told NIE. Notably, the couple had visited Siddapur last year with their kids.
