Pakistan violates ceasefire along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch

Pakistan violates ceasefire along LoC in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch The mortar shelling and small arms firing from across the border started in Mankote and Krishna Ghati sectors around 8.00 pm. By: PTI | 31 Mar 2019 08:13 AM (IST) FOLLOW US: Pakistani troops on saturday violated the ceasefire by targeting forward posts and villages along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district, a defence spokesperson said. (PTI)

Jammu: Pakistani troops on saturday violated the ceasefire by targeting forward posts and villages along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir's Poonch district, a defence spokesperson said. The mortar shelling and small arms firing from across the border started in Mankote and Krishna Ghati sectors around 8.00 pm, he said. The spokesperson said the Pakistani troops initiated the unprovoked ceasefire violation, prompting befitting retaliation by the Indian Army. The cross-border firing between the two sides was continuing when last reports were received, he said, adding that there was no report of any casualty on the Indian side. Earlier on Tuesday, the Pakistani army resorted to shelling and small arms fire on forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir, a defence spokesperson said. "At about 1750 hours, Pakistan initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by shelling with mortars and firing of small arms along the LoC in Nowshera sector," he said, adding that the Army opened fire in retaliation. The official said cross-border firing was underway when last reports came in and there was no report of any casualty on the Indian side. Seven people, including three soldiers, were killed in the twin districts of Rajouri and Poonch since India's air strike on a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot on February 26 in response to the February 14 Pulwama attack that killed 40 CRPF personnel.

Follow Breaking News on abp LIVE for more latest stories and trending topics. Watch breaking news and top headlines online on abp News LIVE TV
