Cop kills woman, her friend for changing phone number, rejecting marriage proposal

After coming to know of Annu and Preeti's relationship, Dinesh planned to kill them, police said. (Image for representation)

A Delhi policeman allegedly shot dead a couple at a temple here, apparently because the woman had ended her relationship with him, police said on Saturday.

Dinesh Kumar, assistant sub-inspector with the Delhi Traffic Police, and his accomplice Pintoo were arrested, days after the bodies of Preeti, 32, and her fiancé Annu Chauhan, 26, were found in a temple in 'Sai Upwan' near the Hindan river, police said.

An FIR was lodged by the girl's father Pramod Kumar, DIG Upendra Agarwal said.

Dinesh reportedly told police that he was in a relationship with the woman, Preeti, for the past 12 years.

When he proposed marriage to her, she declined, and instead told him of her wish to get engaged to Annu Chauhan, who owned a glass shop in Ghaziabad.

On March 25, Dinesh shot Annu and Preeti with his service revolver as they were coming out of a temple. The duo died on the spot.

Police said Dinesh was all the more angry with Preeti because she had changed her phone number a week before the murder and had severed all contact with him.

"The accused has told us during questioning that he killed the woman and her friend because she had been ignoring him for some time and had even changed her phone number so that the traffic inspector could not contact her. What angered him all the more was that the woman was going to get engaged to another man," said Upender Kumar, the Ghaziabad SSP.

After coming to know of Annu and Preeti's relationship, Dinesh planned to kill them, police said.

On March 25, Dinesh and his friend Pintoo followed the couple's scootie when they were on their way to the Sai temple in 'Sai Upvan', officials said.

When the couple came out of the temple, Dinesh had a heated argument with them and in a fit of anger shot them.

Police have recovered a 9 mm service pistol, three live cartridges and the car which was used in committing the crime.

Annu, who lived in Sarvodaya Nagar, and Preeti, who was from Pratap Vihar, had been in a relationship for the past three years and were going to get engaged in a few days when they were shot dead.

Annu, originally from Uttarakhand, had been running a glass shop in Ghaziabad for the past few years, while Preeti worked at a private school in Indirapuram.

According to sources, Dinesh had joined Delhi Police as a constable in 1994 and was promoted as head constable in 2008.

He again got a promotion in 2016 and became a sub-inspector. Currently, he is posted in Seemapuri area of North-East Delhi as a traffic inspector.
