Mission Shakti: Where did the mysterious Big Brother vanish?

A nomad interested in twisting the kaleidoscope of science and looking for new patterns

While intellectuals in India are busy debating legal appropriateness of announcement of Mission Shakti’s success made by PM, few are realising how enormous a step it is in terms of securing India’s future safety.

As there is not an iota of doubt that future wars are going to be fought by unmanned war-machines guided by satellites, there nothing more important than having an eye in the sky to operate them. And, as a corollary, having the ability to blind enemy’s eye is a huge advantage for the nation, especially because we are passing through a phase where rapid technological advancements are now taking the world closer to a meltdown that will be building a new world order soon.

As only three other nations (USA, Russia, and China) have this ability, it is clear that we have joined an extremely elite league by force, so it should really bother all the proverbial Big Brothers who are always watching us, and yet, interestingly, we see a very mild response from all three superpowers.

While the USA is almost neutral in acknowledging us shooting down a satellite in space from the ground, both Russia and China have made almost polite noises about the danger of militarisation of space and nothing more.

For me, a middle-aged Indian who has seen how petrified his nation has always been about the “anger of international community” for anything it does, more surprising than the technological advancement is the mysterious vanishing of a Big Brother we had till recently.

If we remember Pokhran, the last time we asserted that we will consider the safety of our nation more important than what the Big Brother thinks of us, it was a seesaw that lasted for a long time till we can summon up the courage to conduct nuclear tests.

If we go by the claims floating on social media, theatrical ability to shoot down a satellite in space also seems to have existed with us since a long time, but we were reluctant to experiment with it because of the fear of annoying the same mysterious Big Brother.

As we have gone there and done that now, with nothing much adverse happening to us, it is time to think about this Big Brother who has been scaring us for decades.

Looking at the response of the international community to Mission Shakti, there are two possibilities.

The first possibility is that India has now grown big and powerful and hence Big Brother is no longer big enough to scare us. It makes sense, but not too much, as the world is full of smaller nations who regularly defy the Big Brother and nothing much happens to them, so there is a need of thinking of the second possibility, i.e. there was no Big Brother other than the one we had constructed in our minds.

There is a strong possibility that our cynical and fatalist mindset as a nation had imagined a Big Brother. Our fear was just a product of a collective mind that was full of a sense of inferiority.

So, the change needed to make him vanish was required from within, by becoming confident and assertive. The minute we dared to do it, the bluff of the Big Brother was called.

As we have now moved to a new state of mind where India seems to rise out of a prolonged bout of Stockholm Syndrome, I really hope that we don’t destroy it by linking it with politics.

It is sad to see that aggressive stance of the nation is now linked to a political party instead of looking at the new mind-state of the nation. I feel that new India is rising, on its own and will remain so if we don’t ruin it by linking it with politics.

Just as no party should claim ownership of aggression, no party should start taking an anti-aggression stance as a political statement only because it thinks its gains by opposing the party in power.

Aggression needs to be a party-agnostic national policy for the future for it to work effectively.

We like it or not, the world is going to find a new balance very soon, and we must rapidly work on strengthening our position by assertion, instead of making the same historical mistake that submissive postures reduce the possibility of conflict. Avoiding conflicts have never paid for long, as they lead to a weakening of the national fabric and public morale.

Let us remember that, love works only in fairy tales, romantic novels, self-help books, and UNO speeches. The real world has only dogs, that too not cuddly pups that plant soft kisses on your face but those that eat each other.

As a nation, we need to be ready to be one shows that it is a dog that bites, and bites hard if need be.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
