Mumbai: Man burns daughter's body over friendship with boy; police suspect "honour-killing"

The incident took place in the Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Another life in the country was lost to the orthodox school of thought as a man killed his daughter for befriending a boy. A college student, the 17-year-old was murdered by her father. The incident took place in the Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra.

The accused was identified as Pandurang Shreerang Saygunde. The 51-year-old did not approve of her daughter's equation with a boy from her college. According to police inspector Pandurang Pawar, the deceased used to talk to the boy on the phone frequently. The two allegedly used to go to the college on the boy's two-wheeler. The accused had asked the deceased to end her friendship with the boy but the former did not stop.

The news agency, PTI reported that the accused strangled the victim to death on March 23. The accused killed the victim at their residence in the Chondi village which is situated 60 kilometres away from the Ahmednagar district. After murdering his daughter, the accused allegedly tried to burn her body. The accused was assisted by two of the victim's maternal uncles. Following this, the accused lodged a complaint at the Jamkhed police station stating that his daughter had gone missing. The accused had filed the missing complaint on March 24.

On March 15, the sister of the deceased found her half-burnt body near her residence. The police were informed about the incident and they sent the body for an autopsy. The police interrogated around 35 people to connect the dots of the incident.

After thorough investigation, the police arrested the father of the deceased, her uncles, Rajendra Jagannath Shinde and Dnyandev Jagannat Shinde on Saturday evening. The police are suspecting it to be a case of "honour-killing". The police booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
