Adityanath accuses Congress of hurting Hindu sentiments

Bisahara (Uttar Pradesh) [India], Mar 31 (ANI): Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday in a veiled dig at erstwhile Akhilesh Yadav led Samajwadi Party government for “suppressing sentiments” of Hindus and letting “illegal slaughterhouses” operate freely in the state.

“This is western Uttar Pradesh. Earlier, when people used to go somewhere with bullock cart, their cattle used to end up in illegal slaughterhouses. Who doesn't know what happened in Visara? How SP government suppressed sentiments (of Hindus) here?” the UP Chief Minister said while claiming that his government shut all illegal slaughterhouses after coming to power.

The Chief minister was campaigning for Union Minister Mahesh Sharma here.

“Congress government had said that Ram and Krishna don't exist. I would like to ask Congress leaders what do they want to see by going from one temple to the other? Why this hypocrisy?” the Chief Minister questioned.

Attacking Congress East UP general secretary Priyanka Gandhi for not visiting Ram Lalla at the disputed site in Ayodhya during her recent visit to the temple town, he said, “She (Priyanka) was asked why you did not visit the Ram Temple, she (Priyanka) said that I don’t want to visit the disputed site. She hurt Hindus.”

“They (Congress) are playing with the emotions of this country through policies of appeasement,” Yogi said.

Urging people to vote for BJP, the Chief Minister said, “We need a Prime Minister who can ensure the safety and prosperity of this country. This can happen only under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.”

Earlier in the day, while addressing a rally in Ghaziabad, he accused the Congress party of “feeding Biryani” to the terrorists.

“Congress leaders used to feed Biryani to the terrorists. Modi’s Army gives bullets and shells to terrorists. Congress leaders encourage terrorists by referring to terrorists such as Masood Azhar by using “ji” with them. This is the difference (between us and them),” the Chief Minister said while campaigning for BJP candidate Gen (retd.) VK Singh. (ANI)
