PM Modi led the most corrupt govt since Independence, ruined India in 5 years, says Arvind Kejriwal

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal | Photo Credit: ANI

Visakhapatnam: Delhi Chief Minister and Aam Aadmi Party chief Arvind Kejriwal on Sunday launched a blistering attack on PM Modi-led BJP government terming it as the most corrupt government since Independence. Kejriwal alleged that PM Modi along with BJP chief Amit Shah "ruined" the country in the last five years.

Speaking at an election rally of Andhra Pradesh chief minister Chandrababu Naidu, Kejriwal also claimed that the Modi-Shah duo divided the country on religious lines. "What Pakistan could not do in the last 70 years, Modi-Shah did in 5 years. They divided the country on religious lines," said Kejriwal.

Pitching for votes for Chandrababu Naidu, Kejriwal heaped praises on the Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister. "We have come here to appeal to you to vote for Chandrababu Naidu again. He has laid the foundations of a modern Andhra Pradesh. If he gets five years more, he will expedite the process," Kejriwal said.

Hitting out at PM Modi for the alleged emergency-like situation in the country, Kejriwal said that BJP government has destroyed the country's prestigious institutions. On the I-T raids in Karnataka and the CBI raid at Kolkata police commissioner Rajeev Kumar's house, Delhi CM said that Modi has unleased central agencies over Opposition parties.

Reiterating his 'Hiter' jibe for PM Modi, Kejriwal said that as Hitler changed the constitution of Germany and ruled till his death, Modi and Shah would do the same if elected again.

With folded hands, Kejriwal then made an appeal to the people to "remove Modi from power." Listing out a number of issues, Kejriwal trained his guns on the saffron party. He called demonetisation as the "biggest scam" since Independence. "Modi never listens to anyone, only takes advice from Shah. He announced note ban and ruined the economy," he said.

Pushing the full statehood issue of Delhi at Visakhapatnam, Kejriwal said that the national capital is not even a state even after 70 years of Independence and then again made an appeal to the people of Andhra to remove Modi from power.
