‘The work and food combination for me has been deadly here in Lucknow’ Manoj Pahwa

The versatile actor Manoj Pahwa of 'Mulk', 'Veere Di Wedding', 'Judwaa 2' and 'Being Cyrus' fame is in Lucknow these days shooting for the Ayushmann Khurrana starrer Anubhav Sinha ’s 'Article 15'. The Office Office actor, who is shooting his fifth movie in the city after 'Mulk', 'Abhi Toh Party Shuru Hui Hai', 'Family of Thakurganj' and 'Pinddaan', is all praise for the city. “A lot of films now are being shot in Lucknow. It feels good shooting here and I enjoy it a lot because it is a very shooting-friendly place. Lucknow toh waise bhi khatirdaari aur mehmaan nawazi ke liye jaana jaata raha hai, bade pyaare log hai yahan. Shooting in congested places like Akbari Gate in Nakkhas was real fun,” says Pahwa.Manoj adds, "People really were very welcoming there. And then comes the local cuisine, be it Raheem’s nihari or Idrees ki biryani, the food here is to be relished. The work and food combination for me has been deadly here, bahut mazaa aata hai yahan,” says Manoj. Sharing his memory of the city which has left an indelible mark on him, he says, “Visiting the mazaars of ghazal queen Begum Akhtar and poet Asrar ul Haq Majaz, recently was a memorable experience for me.”Ask him how has been the journey from Hum Log to Article 15 and does he feel contented with what he has achieved, the 'T for Taj Mahal' actor replies, “I think we should not talk about achievement. It’s all about the journey. Travelling is the fun part and destination doesn’t matter to me at all. I started my journey from Ramlila where I played Lakshman, from there I reached Mandi House chauraha in Delhi and then my theatre journey began. Then I came to Mumbai and it’s been a good 25 years in cinema. So meri journey badi mazedaar rahi and when your hobby or passion becomes your profession, you never feel that you are working.”Manoj, who started his journey from Sambhav theatre group in Delhi, later started a theatre group in his daughter’s name, Kopal. He, along with his wife Seema Pahwa, a well-known actress, have been simultaneously busy in theatre too. Talking about theatre, he says both his children Manukriti and Mayank, who are graduates from a drama school, have been involved in this theatre group. He adds, “My children have been writing and directing plays. My wife recently directed a play where we all acted and we also did a lot of shows in Dubai and Kuwait. So, we have been doing theatre also along with films.” Ask him how he is able to manage both the fronts (films and theatre) efficiently and he replies, “Hum miya-biwi aaj jo kuchh bhi hain theatre ki wajah se hi hain, toh uske bina toh kaam chalta hi nahi hamaara. Woh toh khuraak hai hamaari. It’s just like people go to gym to stay fit and healthy, for us our gym is theatre. We do work in films and television but our real training comes from theatre.”But ask him whether theatre artists get their due as it does not pay well and he is quick to respond, “There are certain limitations of every media. Theatre has its selected audience and so the outcome is that much only. On the contrary, television has a much wider reach and in fact, if you compare television and films, TV has much more money than cinema. So every medium has its own economic bracket. But humko hameshaa se theatre mein mazaa aata raha hai aur isliye hum karte rehte hain.”Manoj Pahwa in Lucknow (BCCL/ Aditya Yadav)The Total Dhamaal actor, who has mostly played comic characters, broke the mould in 'Mulk' with his poignant portrayal of the character Bilaal Ali Mohammed and since then has also received a lot of appreciation for it. So does he intend to do more such serious roles? “As an actor, you always want a variety of roles instead of doing the same kind of roles. Yeh toh mera saubhagya hai ki Anubhav Sinha sahab ne mujhe yeh role offer kiya jisne mujhe typecast se bahar kar diya. Nobody wants to get typecast but because no one in the film industry wants to take risks, they choose the perfect match who has done similar roles. So whenever a funny and happy-go-lucky type character is required, they call me ki bhai yeh readymade hai kyun kisi aur se yeh role kyun karwayen. So, whatever roles I will get, even if they are comic characters, as an actor I will try to find variety and do them differently. But yeh toh bahut accha hua ki Anubhav Sinha jo hamaare director hain aur mere dost bhi hain, jinhone mujhe bilkul hi muktalif role mein cast kiya jo ki bahut emotional tha. Lot of people were surprised to see me in this role and I got a lot of appreciation for it.”Quiz him about his dream role and he responds with a pause, “There is no definition for it actually but yes human brain is a very complex thing to understand and to perform as well. Acting is a very difficult craft, jitna complex character hota hai and jitney layer hote hain uss character ke utna hi difficult hota hai to enact it. So, I would like to do such complexed and layered character roles in future,” says Manoj signing off.— Abhishek.Shukla2@timesgroup.com
