Space jam – of junk: Why visiting alien’s first words may be: “I want to see the manager here”

The best proof that there is intelligent life in Outer Space is the fact it hasn’t ventured anywhere near Planet Earth, sci-fi legend Arthur Clarke once conjectured. India’s joining the ranks of nations (US, Russia and China) who have achieved the rather dubious capability of shooting down a moving satellite, while militarily impressive, is cosmically disheartening. In the celestial scale and scheme of things, where our planet is but a galactically insignificant “pale blue dot”, it means little. At least nuclear tests resulted from humankind’s mastery of the fission process which, viewed constructively, could also release vast amounts of energy. Shooting to smithereens a satellite is but a projection of scrawny space muscle by puny earthlings carrying their petty terrestrial wars to outer space. We’ll see how that works out when a 10-15 km wide comet or asteroid of the kind that wiped out dinosaurs homes in on us at 72,000 km an hour.

The charitable explanation for India’s exercise is that it wants to be a part of any upcoming space protocols, a yearning that comes from being kept out of the nuclear club that sailed before New Delhi first tested in 1974. Fair enough. If anything, it is the SS3 (Satellite Smashers Three), well ahead in the “space domination” sweepstakes, who should cop the blame for making a mess out there. And a mess it is, with space debris ranging from 1,800 satellites to 18,000 other trackable objects, not to speak of 34,000 pieces 10 cm and above and 9,00,000 pieces in the 1-10 cm range. We’ve just gotten started.

All these developments come at a time when space travel and inter-planetary aficionados like Elon Musk, who feels Mars is a “fixer-upper planet” that could be settled on, are looking beyond the realms of Earth. Bio-tech businessman Craig Venter is absolutely certain that life can exist in outer space, move around, find a new aqueous environment. Brave words from a human race that can barely keep its own planet clean and in order. As someone said, the moment anyone from outer space visits Planet Earth, their first words will be “I want to see the manager here”.

Asato Maa Sad-Gamaya/ Tamaso Maa Jyotir-Gamaya / Mrtyor-Maa Amrtam Gamaya, intones the Pavamana Mantra in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, seeking a path from falsehood to truth, darkness to light, death to immortality. Nothing in the mastery of the destructive Asat – Anti-Satellite – technology shows the way to truth, light, or immortality, much less to peace. Home Shanti Shanti Shanti is what we need.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer This article is intended to bring a smile to your face. Any connection to events and characters in real life is coincidental.
