Need to come out of Pulwama-Balakot rut

editorial@tribune.com

Arun Joshi

The February 14 terror attack that left 40 CRPF men dead was a momentous tragedy, but the influence of tears and words of revenge deflected our attention from the tough question: Why did it happen?

When Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammad owned the responsibility for the attack, we thought our job was done. The culprit identified itself, and that was all. The group and its mentors roaming free in Pakistan had their reasons to commit this macabre act — to terrify the nation. India reacted in the manner in which the nation’s leadership promised.

A red line was breached by India by mounting aerial strike against nuclear-powered Pakistan. The spectre of nuclear clash was played up in the international media and Pakistan was the beneficiary of this narrative. International forces stepped in to de-escalate the situation.

The whole aerial strike was converted into a national referendum. Those who joined the euphoria of triumphalism were out with the badge of honour of nationalists and those who asked questions automatically became anti-nationals.

And Pakistan did, what it does best. It denied there was any trace of terrorists in the 22 locations listed in the Indian dossier. Sure enough, there were none, because Pakistan doesn’t view terrorists as terrorists — they are its strategic tools.

For that matter, the Al-Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden was not in Pakistan until American forces discovered him there.

This denial cannot be separated from the long-term plans of Pakistan to cause and promote terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir. This poses a serious security threat to India’s integrity. Pakistan is using various tools — military, terrorism, diplomacy, social media campaign and hired authors to write the human rights abuses in Kashmir and above all, the religion to incite more troubles in Kashmir.

At the same time, the Pulwama-Balakot cycle cannot move on forever for it will not rid India of terrorism exported and incited by Pakistan. Military retaliation is just one part of the national security and its politicisation compounds the matters. It takes off eyes from the real security issues.

Other dimensions cannot be ignored. Our own backyard in Kashmir is full of troubles.

Pakistan could not have succeeded had there been a sense of confidence among our people in the government’s steps to fight terrorism to their benefit. Unfortunately, Delhi, whether ruled by the BJP or Congress, has limited the geography and demography of the state with a particular mindset. The aspirations of other regions and religious identities have been sacrificed at the altar of the “national interest”. This strategy will harm India more if the other regions and religions are not given their due.

Fragmented views will fragment the state further. There is a need to work out a strategy. Address the internal issues first.
