Rubin: It'll be tough getting answers from Canada's new security and intelligence committee

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Rubin: It'll be tough getting answers from Canada's new security and intelligence committee Photo by Chris Young / THE CANADIAN PRESS

Article content Last month, I sent more than a dozen queries to Rennie Marcoux, executive director of the Secretariat of the National Security and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians, asking about this little-known committee’s operations, and specifically about one of its former members, one-time Conservative MP Tony Clement.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content I did not expect much in way of response, knowing that this parliamentary committee, basically controlled by the prime minister, is shrouded in secrecy. Most documentation about it could be excluded under Section 16.6 of the federal Access to Information Act. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Rubin: It'll be tough getting answers from Canada's new security and intelligence committee Back to video And indeed, excluded from Marcoux’s Dec. 28 response were the briefing notes I requested, memos to committee members and to Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, as well as records about committee and secretariat procedures. So were summary notes on Trudeau’s review of the committee’s report on his controversial 2018 India trip . Photo by Sean Kilpatrick / THE CANADIAN PRESS However, a little information was provided about Clement’s Nov. 7, 2018 resignation from the committee of MPs and senators, which is chaired by Ottawa South Liberal MP David McGuinty. Marcoux noted that the records Clement reviewed were not in his possession because ”All Committee records are kept within the Secretariat’s secure offices.” She also stated that Clement’s extra payments as a committee member until his resignation were not recovered but that his payments were “stopped as of the day he resigned from the Committee.”

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content This parliamentary committee, basically controlled by the prime minister, is shrouded in secrecy. Not provided is anything about how much the prime minister (who controls appointments to the committee) knew, or when, about Clement’s social media and contact indiscretions that could have national security undertones. (Clement resigned from the committee and the Conservative caucus over a sexting scandal in which he said he also faced extortion threats.) Marcoux referred these questions to the Prime Minister’s Office though she indicated that the committee security clearance vetting for its parliamentary members, including Clement, is the responsibility of the Privy Council Office. Under Bill C-22 creating the committee, no records or responses are subject to review by the Information Commissioner of Canada. The prime minister and departments submitting information to the committee as “national security” matters (which are not defined), get to unilaterally decide what is made public or not.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Back in November, 2016, then-information commissioner Suzanne Legault warned the House of Commons Public Safety and National Security Committee that the new proposed parliamentary committee was severely handicapped on what information it got from security agencies, on how timely such reviews in private would be, and hampered because all information the committee reviewed was mandatorily legally excluded from the public or her review. The committee’s largely redacted report on the prime minister’s India trip, held recently for some months in the prime minister’s hands, is a case in point. Secretariat head Marcoux replied that “there is no provision in our Act (Bill C-22) for the PM to issue instructions to the Committee” (and here is the kicker) “other than to redact the classified portions of our reports when they are delivered to him.”

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content PST That’s quite the power the prime minister holds in deciding what security-related data is documented for the committee and for public release. It makes his control of the security committee unprecedented and nearly absolute. It is also quite the power security agencies have been granted to decide on what data they put before the committee. And under the national security bill, Bill C-59, their powers to collect, share and withhold information are expanded, though this may be somewhat checked with the proposed creation of a new National Security and Intelligence Review Agency. Civil society groups have been battling the sweeping and largely undefined powers Bill C-59 grants to security agencies. Senate National Security and Defence Committee hearings on Bill C-59 are set to begin in February. Marcoux indicated that some further information may be posted shortly about the committee’s work on its website “where possible.” It’s a start that Marcoux responded. But the committee’s review role is so limited and secret that it needs to be seriously reexamined in this election year. Ken Rubin regularly monitors transparency issues and is reachable at kenrubin.ca. ALSO IN THE NEWS Code Orange: The Ottawa Hospital’s response to the OC Transpo bus crash Ontarians have a retirement savings goal of $872,000: RBC survey China: Detained Canadian does not have diplomatic immunity

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Ottawa Citizen Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from Ottawa Citizen, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Ottawa Citizen Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
