No discrimination or appeasement, Yogi says in Akhlaq village

Greater Noida: “We neither discriminate against people nor appease them,” chief minister Yogi Adityanath said on Sunday during his first visit to Bisada, the village where Mohammad Akhlaq, a Muslim man, was lynched in his house in September 2015 on the suspicion that he had slaughtered a cow and eaten beef.

Yogi did not directly refer to the lynching but said everybody knows “what had happened in Bisada” and the BJP government had shut all illegal slaughterhouses after coming to power in 2017.

“The country has seen the emotions of Bisada residents and connected with them. Who does not know what had happened in Bisada? The then SP government had disrespected the people’s sentiments. We formed the government and shut all illegal slaughterhouses in one stroke,” the chief minister said in his 30-minute speech.

Among those in the rally crowd were a few accused in the Akhlaq lynching case, including Vishal Rana, who had seated themselves in the front row. All the accused are now out on bail. The trial into the lynching has not begun even after three and a half years.

The villages of Bisada and neighbouring Satha-Chaurasi hold much importance in BJP’s scheme of things ahead of the polls. The party, which has fielded a Brahmin in Gautam Budh Nagar (Mahesh Sharma), is aiming to consolidate the 1.5 lakh Thakur votes in the rural region. The votes are all the more important to counter the Congress, whose candidate is a Thakur (Arvind Singh).

In his speech, Yogi repeatedly attacked the SP-BSP combine, saying they had ruled UP for the longest period. “The SP formed the UP government four times and the BSP thrice. They adopted an appeasement policy and destroyed the social fabric. The BJP government does not work on the basis of caste, creed, religion, etc. We work for the welfare of people. This is why no other incident like Bisada took place in UP,” he told the 10,000-strong crowd.

The chief minister lashed out at Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi, saying she had insulted Hindus with her Ayodhya “disputed site” remark. “She had said she did not visit Ayodhya since it is a disputed site. There could not have been a worse insult to Hindus. Ram Janmabhoomi is a symbol of Hindu faith. People in India and the world over consider this as the birth place of Lord Ram,” he said. Yogi then went on to attack the erstwhile Congress governments at the Centre. “Narendra Modi’s 55-month government has performed better than the Congress’s 55-year rule,” he said, and listed various schemes of the government such as Ayushman Bharat, Ujjwala Yojana, etc.

Referring to local development projects like the Aqua Line metro, Jewar airport and the rapid rail projects, Yogi said things that appeared impossible in the SP-BSP regime in UP are now being implemented. “Modi hai to mumkin hai (things are possible if Modi is there),” he said. “People in hawai chappals can now travel in hawai jahaz (aircraft).”

Encounters in the region also figured in Yogi’s speech. “When the BJP took over, there was crime and anarchy across the state. Ab apradhi ya to jail mein ha ya unka ram naam satya hai ki yatra nikal chuki hai (Either criminals are behind bars or they are dead),” he said.

Yogi said he was the only chief minister to visit Noida seven times during his tenure, and touched upon the homebuyers’ issue. According to him, the BJP government has delivered 1 lakh houses to buyers in Noida and Greater Noida in the past few months. “Others will also get houses, we have a plan,” he said.

In the end, Yogi urged people to vote decisively. “Do you want a government that supports terrorists or a government that eliminates them? You have to decide that,” he said, adding that his message from Bisada should reach all the eight Lok Sabha seats in Western UP going to polls in the first phase.

In neighbouring Ghaziabad, too, Yogi launched a scathing attack on the Opposition and called on people to decide if they wanted a “strong government” led by Narendra Modi or one which spreads “anarchy and corruption”. Yogi, who spoke for well over 25 minutes, also referred to topics such as the Pulawama attack and the subsequent airstrike to drive home the point that the Centre would not go soft on terrorism.

(With inputs from Aditya Dev)



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
