It’s a cruel, cruel summer: Bengaluru meters its water, consumption down 40%

mobile phones

water tankers

Bangalore

BWSSB

Here, they have saved water up to 50%

By Reya MehrotraResidents install private water meters for each flat, get updates on theirWith borewells going dry andcharging skyrocketing, residents are gearing up to fight the water battle themselves. Numbers of apartment complexes in the city are installing water meters to keep a check and cut down the water consumption. They say that after the installation, the residents have become more conscious of the usage as they are being charge for each litre.WhileWater Supply & Sewerage Board () provides its water meter along with Cauvery connection, residents are going for private meters to help analyse water consumption per house. Broadly, there are two types of water meters - digital and the analogue one. Most residents have installed a digital meters, with updates sent to their mobile phones. Once installed, the residents have to install an app attached to the meter and create a log in id. The app tells the consumption of the particular apartment and also helps them keep a tab on the bill being generated. The generated bill is then paid to the apartment association by each apartment, every month.Hemanth Apte, resident of Viceroy Sagar apartments in Kasavanahalli says, “Ever since we have installed the water meter, we have been saving 25,000 litres of water every month. Earlier we used to consume 90,000 litres of water from tankers per month, now it’s down to 65,000 litres. Residents have become more conscious and minimalized wastage. The digital water meter notifies every 10-15 minutes. The total installation cost us Rs 20,000 and has saved us both in terms of money and water consumption as tankers are now charging as high as Rs 1,200-1,300 per tanker.”Pradeep S, resident of SVR Samruddhi Apartments with 30 flats, in Electronic City says, “We installed the water meter in December last year as we are completely dependent on tanker water. Those who work, don’t use so much water as those who stay at home. Earlier everybody used to pay equally but this was not fair as some couples only came to their apartments at night after work hours and their usage was naturally lower than the rest. With the installation of meters, we pay as per usage. This has also helped in cutting down consumption. The water meter also detects any leakage by generating alerts. Earlier we paid Rs 45,000 per month for using water tankers, now the cost has come down to Rs 30,000.”In some places, the consumption has come down by 40-50% after the water meter installation. Kanakaraj, resident of Vinayaka Residency on Sarjapur Road, says, “We are saving 40-50% water now after the meter installation. We have 30 flats in our building and pay Rs 45,000 per month to water tankers. Before the meter installation, we paid Rs 60,000-70,000 per month.”Pratiush Raj, resident of Oceanus Vista, an apartment complex with 247 flats that is in the process of installing water meters, says, “We are expecting that the cost and consumption of water will come down. Currently we require 10-12 tankers every day.”A senior BWSSB official says, “Since the city is dealing with water scarcity, We are encouraging residential complexes to install water meters to check on their consumption.”Kanakaraj, resident of Vinayaka Residency on Sarjapur Road, says, “We are saving 40-50% water now after the meter installation. We have 30 flats in our building and pay Rs 45,000 per month for tankers. Before the meter, we paid Rs 60,000-70,000 per month.”
