Ludhiana: Man opens fire at girlfriend after relationship goes sour, says gun was ‘only to scare her’

The accused had been in a relationship with his girlfriend since the past two years (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ludhiana: After his love was left unrequited, a man resorted to extreme measures in Ludhiana. The accused allegedly shot at his girlfriend while chasing her down the street. The incident took place at the Main Chowk market in Mullanpur Dakha.

When the police tried to look into the matter, the accused allegedly opened fire at them as well. The accused even threatened to shoot himself when the police team asked him to surrender.

According to the Indian Express' report, since the relationship of the accused had turned sour, he borrowed a revolver from his friend to scare his girlfriend. The accused was identified as Paramvir Singh. The accused had been in a relationship with his girlfriend since the past two years.

On Sunday, the two met with a friend to resolve their differences but soon after the discussion started, it took the face of a nasty spat. Following the spat, the woman left the place and the accused followed her. The accused allegedly shot a bullet in the air and then started taking shots at her.

Seeing the accused run on the streets with a gun in his hand, two traffic police officers informed the police station. Though the police team tried to catch hold of him, the accused managed to lock himself up inside a washroom at the LIT market. The police then tried to convince him to surrender but the accused stayed resolute. The accused opened the door of the washroom and started firing at the police. Around 12 in number, the police officers eventually caught hold of the accused.

The Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Varindar Singh Brar said that when the grocery store owner tried to take the revolver away from the accused, he started firing. After he missed his first shot, the accused started targeting the woman. The woman was admitted to a hospital. The police are yet to record the statement of the woman
