ISIS bred Islamophobia : Introspection is the way

By NDT Special Bureau

Just a couple of years back when ISIS terrorists were killing people by hundreds, nay thousands, there was not a single murmur of protest from the human rights lobby.

The fundamentalist elements among the Islamic community were infact rejoicing in silent satisfaction that world was getting Islamised much faster than they had ever imagined or worked for.

The uncultured followers of the path rampaged the non-believers derogatorily calling them Kafirs, i.e. non-believers. ISIS became the scourge of humanity, dragging Yezidi women and children from hill-tops and unleashing untold sufferings—slavery, rape and murder – on them.

Such dastardly, inhuman acts must have moved God up there but not the leaders of Islamic leaders who maintained convenient silence. The carnage continued across the vast expanse of Syria and Iraq while the world looked aghast at the apathy of Muslim ummah.

The current single-wolf terror attack in two mosques in New Zealand that killed around 50 unsuspecting worshippers was ghastly and has been rightly condemned by all and sundry.

New Zealand Prime Minister expressed solidarity with the victims and their family. Can you recall any leader of an extremist state like Pakistan expressing such a show of solidarity with the marginalised communities such as the minority Hindu, Sikh and Christian community or with the Baluchs or the Ahmadis, who bear the brunt of violation of human rights perpetrated by the extremist elements.

During the recent visit of Malaysian Prime Minister to Pakistan, both the leaders discussed the Christchurch episode branding the act as increasing Islamophobia in the west and of issues affecting the Muslim world. Projecting itself as the leader of Islamic world Pakistan fakes concerns over Palestine, Myanmar and Kashmir but keeps strategic silence over torture of Uighur Muslims.

The plight of minorities in Pakistan is akin to hell. Pakistan’s such double standards at international forums like the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) deflates its credibility.

Pakistan commits grave human rights violations in Baluchistan but keeps harping on Kashmir to divert attention. This epicentre of world terror shamelessly poses itself as a peace-loving Islamic nation at the international forums. Without the active support of the government in Islamabad, it is doubtful whether the Taliban could ever have come to power in Afghanistan. Pakistani authorities helped fund the militia and equip it with military hardware during the mid-1990s when the Taliban was merely one of several competing factions in Afghanistan’s civil war. Pakistan openly supports terrorist individuals-Hafeez Sayeed of Masood Azhar-or terror groups Al-Qaeda, Taliban, ISIS, LeT or Hizbul Mujahedeen. The fundamentalist elements in Pakistan do not recognise the existence of other religions other than Sunni Islam.

Al-Qaeda and ISIS have already threatened to carry out terror strikes against Jewish centres in India. Muslim Ummah must intervene now rather than crying over spilt milk on counter-actions.

Moreover, there are fears that Christchurch attack would be used by radical Islamic elements as a pretext to further the calls for Jihad against the west. In nations like Pakistan, such possibilities cannot be

ruled out.

Religious conversions are the scourge of humanity but in case of proselytising religions religious conversions constitute their bread and butter for getting new adherents into the faith.

On the contrary self-assured religions—Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism – don’t need scouting, confident as they are of the inner strength of their faith. They detest imposing their religion on others either by force or allurement.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Like this: Like Loading...
