What Amit Shah had to say about Mission Shakti, job creation and Priyanka Gandhi’s political foray

BJP President Amit Shah on March 31 spoke about a range of issues like the saffron party’s performance in West Bengal, Odisha and the northeast, the Balakot airstrikes, Mission Shakti and Priyanka Gandhi’s foray into active politics at the News18 Agenda India Summit. Here’s a look at some of his key comments:

PM Modi only No. 1 in BJP | Asked who was the ‘number 2’ in the party, Shah said: “There is only number one in our party and that is Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Were you to look for a number two after him, you would not find any. As far as the leadership of the party is concerned, I am very happy to be leading the world’s largest party and often seek suggestions from my seniors whenever the occasion arises.”

On Priyanka Gandhi Vadra’s political foray | Shah said: “This is not her first entry into polls. She has been campaigning for her party for the last 12 years and has proved to be a failure each time. This is her 13th time. Let us see what she is able to do.” (Image: Twitter/@CNNnews18)

On timing of Mission Shakti | Responding to allegations that PM Modi’s Mission Shakti announcement had violated the model code of conduct, Shah said such announcements have been made since the time of former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. He also rubbished claims that the announcement was made keeping polls in mind. (Image: Twitter/@CNNnews18)

On Balakot airstrikes | Shah said the world has acknowledged India’s right to self-defence and Pakistan has now been isolated diplomatically. He added that if airstrikes like Balakot operation “had been carried out 10 years ago, terror attacks like Pulwama would not have happened”. (Image: Twitter/@CNNnews18)

On jobs creation | The BJP chief said: “We have to stop looking at the data from a Western perspective. NSSO data is correct. But we need to have a re-look at the system.” A recent National Sample Survey Office report quoted by several media organisations had pointed out that job creation was at a historic low in the current period

On Congress’ NYAY scheme | Shah said a 'concerned' Congress could have implemented such a programme to alleviate poverty during its 10 years of the UPA regime
