India ka DNA: Unhappy with govt's economic policy, but PM Modi will be re-elected: Subramanian Swamy

BJP MP Subramanian Swamy in India ka DNA programme hosted by Zee News gave his candid views about government's economic policy, regarding Rahul and Sonia Gandhi, and also about by when Robert Vadra and others may go to jail.

Swamy said that there are some grievances with government but Narendra Modi will be back as PM again. Swamy said that there is no challenge to PM Modi as of now. When questioned whether it will be a win for Brand Modi, Swamy said that it is more to do with BJP's organisation and nationalistic policies. Swamy said that at a time when the country is facing external threats, voters will opt for a strong government. Swamy said Brand Modi is a media creation.

Giving an honest appraisal of government's policies, Swamy said that he is not happy with the economic policies. Swamy said that taxes have gone up. He also said that demonetization was a good plan but faced faulty implementation.

Swamy was scathing about Arun Jaitley saying that he doesn't know economics. He also said that ex- FM Chidambaram also doesn't know economics. Swamy said that Manmohan Singh as a Finance Minister knew economics. Swamy reiterated that as a Brahmin he can't be chowkidar.

When asked about the delay in putting Robert Vadra, Rahul Gandhi and others in jail, Swamy put the onus the legal system and said that there is very little that can be done to expedite the cases if the accused look to exhaust all legal options.

Continuing his usual attack on Congress first family, Subramanian Swamy said Rahul Gandhi has four passports and one of them has the name Raul Vinci. Swamy said that he had produced the documents in front of a Parliamentary committee but no action was taken. Subramanian Swamy refused to attach much importance to Priyanka Gandhi's introduction to electoral politics. When asked about Congress' Minimum Income Guarantee scheme NYAY, Swamy said that it is not a concrete idea and is like Arun Jaitley's proposal!

When asked if it is possible for mediation in Ram Mandir issue, Swamy replied in the negative. He said that negotiation can happen when both sides have something they can let go off. But for Hindus, it is a matter of faith and hence there can't be any compromise, said Swamy.

Swamy was also quizzed about the fact that BJP is yet to build Ram Temple, scrap Article 370 and implement Uniform Civil Code- three fundamental pillars of 2014 manifesto. Swamy said that if those are ever implemented, it will be done by BJP and not Congress. Hence the public should take a lenient view on it and elect a BJP government to power again.
