Seeking resolution of Kashmir dispute not a crime: Mirwaiz

Srinagar, March 30, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of Hurriyat forum, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, has said that seeking resolution of the Kashmir dispute is neither terror nor crime. Mirwaiz Umar Farooq addressing a gathering in Srinagar said that India should not criminalize the Kashmiris’ political aspirations which were rooted in history and principle of justice.

He said that the Hurriyat leadership had always taken a realistic and principled stance and advocated dialogue among stakeholders to find an acceptable solution for all parties involved in the dispute and for friendship between Pakistan and India. He said that the Hurriyat leaders had always advocated and would continue to push for dialogue as it was the way forward.

The Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front in a statement issued in Srinagar said that New Delhi should read writing on the wall that Kashmiris would not compromise on their fundamental rights including the right to self-determination.

Meanwhile, the Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party in a statement in Srinagar termed the attaching of the house of its illegally detained Chairman, Shabbir Ahmed Shah, by India’s infamous investigating agency Enforcement Directorate as a glaring example of political vendetta. Shabbir Shah’s wife, Dr Bilquees Shah in her statement said that the property, which as per media reports had been attached, belonged to her and not her husband.

The Chairman of Carvan-e-Islami, Maulana Ghulam Rasool Hami, talking to newsmen in Pulwama demanded settlement of the Kashmir dispute in its historical perspective. A large number of people including Hurriyat leaders and activists participated in a condolence meeting held at Mazar-e-Shuhada at Eidgah in Srinagar, today, to pay tributes to prominent martyred Kashmiri freedom leaders, Ashfaq Majeed Wani, Shabbir Siddiqi, Dr Abdul Ahad Guru and Advocate Jaleel Andrabi on their martyrdom anniversaries.

The members of High Court Bar Association abstained from work, today, to commemorate the martyrdom anniversary of noted Kashmiri human rights lawyer, Advocate Jaleel Andrabi. On the other hand, in order to suppress the Kashmiris’ ongoing freedom movement, the Indian government has constituted a special group comprising top officers from police, intelligence, investigative and tax agencies to victimize and harass the pro-freedom people including Hurriyat leaders and activists in occupied Kashmir.

A Sub-Inspector of Indo-Tibetan Border Police committed suicide by shooting himself with his service rifle at a camp in Kunzar area of Baramulla district, today. This incident raised the number of such deaths amongst the Indian troops and police personnel to 424 in occupied Kashmir since January 2007 till date. A soldier of Indian Central Reserve Police Force was injured in a grenade attack in Pulwama. A shopkeeper was killed after he was fired upon by unknown gunmen in Baramulla town, today.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
