Pluralism ethos of India;PM attempting communal divide:Owaisi

AIMIM president Asaduddin Owaisi Monday accused Narendra Modi of "dividing" Hindus and Muslims on the religious line to win elections for the BJP, which he said did not behove the Prime Minister's position.

Addressing a public rally in Indora in Nagpur in support of Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi (VBA) nominee, Owaisi said "pluralism is ethos of Hindustan".

His remarks came hours after Modi in a rally in Wardha in east Maharashtra accused the Congress of branding "peace-loving Hindus" as terrorists and insulting those who follow the religion.

The VBA is headed by Owaisi and Dalit leader Prakash Ambedkar. The front has said that it would contest all the 48 Lok Sabha seats in Maharashtra.

Calling Modi for a debate, Owaisi asked whether Mahatma Gandhi's assassin Nathuram Godse was a terrorist or not.

"Today, we can see what kind of language Modi is using despite being the prime minister of the country. The so-called 'chowkidar' (watchman) is spreading hatred between Hindus and Muslims to save his 'chowkidari' and job," the Hyderabad MP alleged.

Owaisi said Modi still thinks himself as the chief minister of Gujarat though he has been the PM since the last five years.

In an apparent reference to the 2002 communal riots in Gujarat, Owaisi said, "People were killed under the nose of this CM who had failed to discharge his Constitutional duties".

He said the BJP's efforts to "weaken" Constitution since it came to power in 2014 are unprecedented.

"By using such language, Modi is strengthening the wall of divide between Hindus and Muslims," he alleged.

The All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) leader also questionned "silence" of the prime minister on suicide "committed by three thousand farmers in Maharashtra in the last three years under Devendra Fadnavis government of BJP".

He said Modi had failed to see plight of farmers as well as rising unemployment.

"Modi is claiming that he has ended terrorism. I want to ask him whether Nathuram Godse was a terrorist or not? The one who killed Mahatma Gandhi was a terrorist or not?" he asked.

Owaisi claimed that the Kapoor Commission of Inquiry had stated that Hindutva ideologue (V D) Savarkar was a "conspirator in murder of Mahatma Gandhi (in 1948)".

"Modiji you are talking about Hindu and Muslim terror..I want you to debate with me on this issue. You will not stand even five minutes before me. Such hatred is being spread only to win elections," the AIMIM chief alleged.

Taking a dig at the Congress and the NCP, especially Sharad Pawar, Owaisi said these parties lacked strength to win elections.

"(NCP chief Sharad) Pawar has strength only to save his nephew Ajit Pawar," he said.

Union minister and BJP stalwart Nitin Gadkari is in the fray from Nagpur seat against Nana Patole of Congress. The VBA has given ticket to Sagar Dabrase.

Earlier, addressing a rally in Amravati in Vidarbha region, Owaisi alleged that the prime minister was trying to "save" the Sangh Parivar in the Samjhauta train blast case.

A special court recently acquitted Swami Aseemanand and three others in the 2007 Samjhauta train bomb blast case. A total of 68 people, mostly Pakistanis, were killed in the bombing.

Owaisi further said there was no difference among parties like the BJP, the Shiv Sena, the Congress and the NCP.

"PM Modi had said a (VBA) candidate is in the fray from Amravati because it has less number of Hindu votes. He is creating a religious divide between Hindus and Muslims. Where is democracy, where is the Election Commission, where is the model code of conduct?" Owaisi asked.

Taking a dig, he said the parties like the BJP, the Sena, the Congress and the NCP are "siblings".

"They are all siblings who are united again after getting separated in childhood. Don't fall prey to them. Form our own club and fight for justice," he said.

The AIMIM leader also targetted the Modi government over its "failure" to keep promises.

Referring to recent acquittals in the Samjhauta train bomb blast case, Owaisi said, "Modi was trying to save 'Sangh parivar' in the train blast case".

In his speech, Bharipa Bahujan Mahasangh leader Ambedkar criticised the government for "ignoring" irrigation development and over "backlog" of development-related issues in the Vidarbha region.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
