How South India’s Somnath Temple Languishes On Neglect, Lack Of Income

In 1947, a businessman, A Pethaperumal Chettiyar, travelled from Devakottai in Tamil Nadu’s Sivaganga district to various pilgrim centres of Lord Shiva.



A businessman, who had lots of cash in hand and was accompanied by a 12-year-old assistant, Pethaperumal Chettiyar happened to visit the Sri Arul Somanathaswami (Lord Shiva) temple at Needur, five km from Mayiladuthurai in Tamil Nadu’s Nagapattinam district.

Finding the temple dilapidated, Pethaperumal Chettiyar took the initiative to reconstruct the main part of the temple. The Needur Shiva temple is considered to be South India’s Somnath temple.

Legend has it that when Lord Indra came to earth, he looked for a Shiva lingam to offer his morning prayers. Failing to sight one, he collected clay from the Cauvery river and made a Shivalingam to worship.

Indra also sang a melodious song invoking Lord Shiva then and prayed for darshan of a dancing Lord Shiva. Pleased with Indra’s efforts, Lord Shiva gave darshan to him in a dancing form, thus earning the name Sri Gana Nardhana Sankara (Lord Shiva who danced to a devotional song).

The Shiva lingam made of clay is the main deity at the Sri Arul Somanathaswami temple. The finger marks of Indra are still believed to be visible on the side of the lingam.

There is another legend attached to this temple . A demon, Thanmasudhan was born as a crab owing to a curse in his previous birth. Worried, Thanmasudan sought Sage Narada’s advice, who asked him to visit Needur and worship Lord Shiva there.

Thanmasudan came to Needur, bathed in river Cauvery and worshipped Lord Shiva, who blessed the crab and gave him salvation. Further, Lord Shiva absorbed the crab inside the lingam by making a hole. Today, the crab’s footprint and the hole at the rear of the Shiva lingam can be seen. In view of this, Lord Shiva is also known as “Sri Karkadeswarar” here.

The Needur Shiva temple is one of the 276 that figure in the hymns sung in praise of Lord Shiva in the Tamil Saivite Devotional poetry, Thevaram. The site also figures in ancient Tamil Sangam literature Agananooru with two of the 63 Nayanars ( staunch saintly devotees of Lord Shiva) - Thirunavukkarasar and Sundarar - mentioning the prosperity and wealth of this place.

Needur is also the birthplace of Munaiyaduvar, another Nayanar. Munaiyaduvar was a soldier who commanded an army and assisted many kings in their battles.

With the money that he earned by helping the kings, he carried out the maintenance of the Somanathaswami temple. Pleased with his act, Lord Shiva placed him among the 63 Nayanars.

Having coming to know all of this, Pethaperumal Chettiyar chose to retrieve and renovate the Sri Arul Somanathaswami temple, all those years ago.



Things seem to have come to a standstill, though, after this renovation.

The story of South India’s Somnath Temple today is one of total negligence.
