Major killed in Rajouri given emotional adieu in Pune

Major killed in Rajouri given emotional adieu in Pune

Homage paid to jawan in Udhampur

PUNE, Jan 13 (Agencies): Major Shashi Dharan V Nair, who was killed in an IED explosion in Rajouri district of Jammu, was cremated with full military honours here in Maharashtra on Sunday.

In the meanwhile, a wreath-laying ceremony was held on Sunday in Northern Command in Udhampur to pay tributes to an army jawan killed along with Major Nair in IED blast in Rajouri district on Friday.

Major Nair’s body was brought to the National War Memorial in Pune on Saturday evening where wreaths were laid.

The mortal remains were taken for the last rites on Sunday morning in a massive procession from his residence in Khadakwasla area on the outskirts of Pune.

Major Nair’s well-wishers raised slogans in his praise throughout the procession.

The last rites were performed at the city-based Vaikunth crematorium where his wife, mother, sister and other friends and relatives bid him an emotional adieu.

Officials from the Southern Command and police department were also present.

District Guardian Minister Girish Bapat, BJP Lok Sabha member from Pune Anil Shirole and leaders from various other political parties also attended the funeral.

Major Nair, who grew up in Khadakwasla and studied at the famous Fergusson College in the city, was killed along with another soldier in an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) explosion in Jammu and Kashmir’s Rajouri district on Friday.

He was “passionate” about joining the armed forces, one of his childhood friends had said on Saturday.

Another friend had recalled that Nair, who was in National Cadet Corps (NCC), used to cycle 15 km to reach his college everyday.

In the meanwhile, a wreath-laying ceremony was held on Sunday to pay tributes to an army jawan killed along with Major Nair.

The ceremony was held at northern command headquarters at Udhampur.

Rifleman Jiwan Gurung, 24, along with Major Shashi Dharan V Nair, 33, was killed on Friday in an IED explosion in Nowshera sector of Rajouri district.

After the wreath-laying ceremony, Gurung’s mortal remains were Sunday transported from Udhampur to Delhi by a service aircraft, a defence spokesman said.

The body will be taken to Bagdogra in West Bengal from Delhi through a civil flight and then by road to his home town Darjeeling, the spokesman said.

The mortal remains of Nair were flown to his home town in Pune for last rites Saturday after tributes were paid to him at Rajouri garrison and technical airport here.
