BJP vs Congress battle intensifies in Amethi

As the BJP is set to give a tough fight to the Congress in its bastion by fielding Union minister Smriti Irani once again, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi also decided to contest the Lok Sabha elections from his second seat in Kerala's Wayanad, besides his Amethi seat, to intensify the competition.

Congress MLC and Rahul Gandhi's aide in Amethi, Deepak Singh told India Today TV, "This decision was taken by our party chief keeping the sentiments of people in mind. He will continue serving Amethi and will win by a bigger margin this time. The next PM of India will be sent by the people from Amethi."

Meanwhile, the local BJP unit said that Irani is expected to visit Amethi soon. Sources in the UP BJP said that rallies by top leaders, including PM Modi, is being planned to give a strong challenge to the Congress.

"The decision taken by the Congress chief of contesting from two seats clearly indicates that he wants to run away from Amethi. His party's think tank has decided to go for a plan B to save Rahul Gandhi from embarrassment. Our leaders will be using this narrative to attack him during the election campaign," said UP BJP spokesperson, Manish Shukla.

The locals in Amethi, however, gave India Today TV mixed reaction about the Congress president's decision of contesting from two seats.

UP Congress spokesperson, Zeeshan Haider, said, "If PM Modi contests from two seats, the BJP welcomes it; but if Rahul Gandhi decides the same, then it is seen as a negative move. Our party chief has said this repeatedly that Amethi is his first home and people in the constituency are his family members. We are confident that he will be setting the biggest victory in the polls."

Amethi BJP spokesperson, Govind Singh, said, "The Congress president wants to run away from here because he is afraid of losing. Even after losing the 2014 polls, Smiti Irani has visited Amethi often to spread the message of development. She also has a strong connection with the party workers. Rahul Gandhi neither meets people nor knows 10 people in his organisation here."

READ | Lok Sabha Election 2019: Your one-stop poll guide is here

READ | Rahul's NYAY high on voter radar, Modi's airstrikes not an election factor in Congress states

WATCH | Is Rahul Gandhi not sure of winning Amethi?
