Bombs, pistols seized from BJP leader’s house in MP

BARWANI: Police seized a veritable arsenal — 17 crude bombs, 10 pistols and 111 bullets — from BJP strongman Sanjay Yadav ’s house in Sendhwa town late Sunday night.This is significant ahead of Lok Sabha elections as the Yadav family wields considerable clout in Sendhwa, a segment of Khargone Parliamentary constituency that goes to the polls in the final phase on May 19.Sanjay Yadav — known as a bahubali in these parts — had joined BJP two years ago with his younger brother Jitu and mother Basanti Bai Yadav . Basanti was elected unopposed as president of Sendhwa municipality in January last year after all candidates withdrew their nomination. The Congress had faced a lot of embarrassment over this.Late Sunday night, a police team raided Yadav’s house in Daru Godam area of Sendhwa town and recovered the cache of arms and ammunition, Barwani SP Yang Chen Dolkar Bhutia said in a press conference on Monday. The weapons were found in a big box kept in an almirah on the roof of the house, she said, adding Sanjay and Jitu are absconding.“We are not sure why the weapons were stored. We are investigating it,” the SP said.Town inspector of Sendhwa city police station, Raju Singh Baghel, told TOI that specialists are examining the weapons. “Only then can we say if these pistols are countrymade or imported,” he said, adding that bomb disposal experts have been called to check the cache.A case has been registered against Sanjay Yadav, Sagar Chaudhary, Deepak and Hrithik under Sections 25(1), 27 of Arms Act and 4/5 Explosive Substance Act 1908.Sanjay Yadav and his aides were booked for the sensational firing at a rival, Gopal Joshi, in a court room of Sendhwa last year. Joshi is the main accused in the murder of Sanjay Zawar, the then state secretary general of Bhartiya Janshakti Party, and was recently released on bail.The Sanjay-Gopal feud is two decades old. The gangs are accused of extortion, threats, ransom, assault and murder. Sanjay has around 47 criminal cases registered against him, while Gopal Joshi faces charges in over 30 crimes.SP Bhutia said that on March 30, there was a dispute between the two groups over molestation of a girl, which led to stone pelting that injured a few people. Two FIRs were lodged against 30 people from both sides. Additional police forces had to be deployed in Sendhwa to keep tension in check.On Sunday night, police carried out simultaneous raids at the houses of three other accused and seized three pistols and ammunition. Three suspects were arrested, Bhutia said. Police have recommended action under National Security Act against Sanjay Yadav and Gopal Joshi.
