‘Have we ever asked for anything? Why ignore us then?’

laxmi@tribune.com

In the run-up to the centenary of the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, The Tribune launches a special series to revisit the epochal tragedy that shaped the course of the freedom struggle

Vishav Bharti

Tribune News Service

Amritsar, April 1

Tek Chand’s grandfather took a bullet in the chest a century ago when Gen Reginald Dyer’s troops fired at peaceful protesters on April 13, 1919. He and his father went unrecognised as “kin of freedom fighter” for 90 years, but he took it all in his stride. What upsets him today is the admission by the Amritsar district administration and the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Trust that they don’t have a list of the martyrs’ descendants.

“Eh ki drama hai?” Tek Chand asks. He is the grandson of Khushi Ram, whose name appears at serial number 32 on the original list of martyrs. He leads a life of penury in one of the many serpentine lanes of Chowk Pasia.

“Have we ever asked them for anything? Why do they treat us like beggars?” he asks and starts flipping through an old file. He then brings out a laminated paper, and says: “Read this!”

It’s a certificate issued by the Department of General Administration of the Punjab Government in 2010. It reads: “Tek Chand is the grandson of Khushi Ram, who got martyred at Jallianwala Bagh. This certificate is issued to him as kin of the martyr.”

He is one among those who have valid certificates to prove they are genuine descendants of the martyrs. However, it seems no effort has been made to contact them ahead of the centenary of the massacre. “What further proof do they want?” he wonders.

Last week, the local authorities had claimed that they didn’t have any list of the descendants of the martyrs, so it was difficult to honour them.

However, The Tribune team came across three such cases in which both certificates as well as identity cards were issued by the Department of General Administration. In 2007, the state government had recognised the martyrs of 1919 as freedom fighters.

Sunil Kapur, grandson of martyr Wasoo Mal, has a long list of names and addresses of the martyrs’ descendants. “The government must tell us what efforts it has made to contact us or others,” he asks.

Former chairman of the National Commission for Minorities Tarlochan Singh, recently inducted as a member of the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial Trust, accepts that had the efforts started well in time, the situation could have been avoided.

The apathy has left Tek Chand and others bitter about the centenary commemoration. Satpal Sharma and Mahesh Behal, grandsons of Amin Chand (No. 310) and Hari Ram (No. 19), respectively, have similar certificates, but none of them has been contacted by the government.

“They need not worry. I am 82 and won’t ask for a government job,” Sharma mocks.

Mahesh Behal, president of the Shaheed Parivar Samiti, says his grandfather Hari Ram’s picture hangs in the Trust secretary’s office. “He just needs to turn around.”

Government’s List of 501

The Punjab Government and Amritsar administration have furnished the list of martyrs on various occasions, including before High Court, where they claimed having a list of 501 who were killed, injured or went missing on April 13, 1919. Titled ‘Kacha File Register No. 117’, it was prepared on November 12, 1919. TNS
