Drug control officers in shock, seek security

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Sandeep Rana

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, April 1

The shocking murder of a young drug inspector inside her office at Kharar has sent shock waves among professionals in this field, who have stressed the need for adequate security.

Calling drug inspectors vulnerable to threats, experts and a “demoralised” drug control fraternity have called for measures such as the wireless system, vehicles, security and a barbed fence around the office for them.

Officials often conduct raids to keep a check on spurious drugs and illegal transit and sale of habit-forming drugs and intoxicants in the pharmaceutical business, which is on the rise. Thus, they face a big threat from those dealing in illegal activities, particularly from the drug mafia.

A former colleague of the victim and Ropar District Drug Control Officer Balram Luthra said, “When Dr Neha Shoree was posted in Ropar, she had conducted raids on assailant Balwinder Singh’s shop, whose licence was later cancelled. After the murder, the department is in shock. Officials are in fear and demoralised. The mafia is strong and we have nothing in the name of security.”

Haryana State Drug Controller Narender Ahuja said, “We met teams of the department dealing in drugs in Punjab and found there was fear among them. Officials are in shock and have decided to meet the Health Minister to demand security. Even in Haryana, no security is provided.”

Dr Girdhari Lal Singhal, former Haryana State Drug Controller, said, “Besides raids, drug inspectors also depose as witnesses in courts and there are many important samples stored in drug offices. So, they should be equipped with vehicles, wireless system and security. The mafia is active. Even I used to get threats. Those who compromise go easy and those who do not have to walk the tightrope. Drug officials are shattered and are feeling low. The brave girl was killed in the headquarters, imagine the plight of inspectors posted in a jungle area with a peon only. Government officers should hold regular meetings with them.”

Experts and those in the profession demanded that the police should join them during raids. Expressing shock over the murder, Ravi Uday Bhaskar, secretary general, All India Drug Control Officers Confederation, said, “The situation in many drug control offices across the country is similar where we lack security while discharging official duties. The nature of work also involves raids and investigations against the drug mafia and criminals, but many states do not have enough manpower and machinery to tackle such unscrupulous elements.”

“It is a challenging task for the department to monitor illegal activities. Most drug control departments have increased the strength of women officials. Over 30 per cent of total staff now comprise women and the government should initiate steps to provide a safe working environment to all officers,” said a member of the confederation.

Dr Neeraj, victim Neha’s teacher at NIPER, said, “It is tough to stay honest in today’s time and it is disgraceful that in our country such brilliant and honest officers have to go through this.”
