The blood you see is my own: Varun Dhawan talks about shooting the bull fight action sequence in Kalank

Varun Dhawan as Zafar in Kalank

Varun Dhawan, who is currently gearing up for the release of his next movie Kalank, has opened up about playing the character of Zafar in the epic period drama. The 31-year-old actor recently got candid while narrating his experience of shooting one of the toughest action sequences of his career so far, the bullfight scene - a glimpse of which was shown in the teaser and poster of the multi-starrer.

Revealing that Sanjay Dutt was one among many who reacted to his character poster for Karan Johar's next ambitious production venture, Varun told Mumbai Mirror, “When the poster came out, Sanjay sir called me up to say that these are the kind of characters I should play. He also said he’s happy to see me all grown up.”

The actor also shared that he is particularly excited about the excruciating bullfight action sequence which was reportedly filmed over 8 days on a scorchingly hot set in Mumbai.

“I moved into a hotel in Goregaon to save time and since I had suffered a knee injury and hamstring tear at the time, I had physios visiting me daily. But I still managed to continue with my twice-a-day training session at the hotel and in the make-shift gym on the set with my trainer Prashant Sawant,” he was quoted as saying.

He revealed that he had asked Abhishek Varman, the director, for a body double as he didn't want to get hurt which would've held up his other shoots but got no response. “Later, I learnt that he had told Sham Kaushal ji (action director) that he wanted me to do every stunt myself and instructed him to put me through the wringer, banging me against the wall and throwing me off a height,” he further said.

For the bullfight scene, a Colosseum was built and a part was also shot in Kargil where the actor had to bare his body despite the biting cold. “The blood you see is my own because Zafar is the kind of guy who will come out of a crisis with a smirk,” he said, confessing that playing Zafar made him a tougher guy.

Meanwhile, after the release of the grand teaser last month, the trailer of Kalank is all set to drop online tomorrow. Three songs from the movie - Ghar More Pardesiya, First Class and the title track are already out and the movie is set to hit the theatres on April 17, 2019.

Set in the 1940s, Kalank would see Alia Bhatt paired opposite Varun for the fourth time and would also feature Madhuri Dixit, Sanjay Dutt, Sonakshi Sinha and Aditya Roy Kapur.
