India’s Church urges faithful to pray and vote “judiciously” in general election

India’s Church urges faithful to pray and vote “judiciously” in general election

Cardinal Oswald Gracias, the president of India’s Catholic bishops, has issued a Pastoral Letter on behalf of India’s Catholic bishops, in view of the imminent general election.

Apr 02, 2019

By Robin Gomes

India’s Catholic Bishops are urging their faithful to exercise their sacred duty and right to vote in the upcoming general election “judiciously” for the good of the country by choosing leaders who listen to the people and respond effectively to their anxieties and needs.



“As Pastors of our people, we Bishops consider it is our duty to address you …. so that joining hands with all people of good will, our community can effectively contribute to shaping the future of our nation,” writes Cardinal Oswald Gracias, the Archbishop of Bombay, in a Pastoral Letter issued on behalf of India’s Catholic bishops on March 14.



Stressing that “all of us are truly proud of our country”, Card. Gracias, the president of the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of India (CBCI) urges “every community to pray and to discern in prayer what is best” for the nation.

With about 900 million Indian voters above 18 years of age, the April 11 to May 19 general election is being bitterly fought, with the ruling National Democratic Alliance (NDA) coalition led by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) seeking another term.

The BJP came to power in the last general election in 2014 with Narendra Modi as Prime Minister. The Indian National Congress, that has ruled the country for most of its history, was thoroughly voted out of power largely because of alleged corruption. The party is seeking a comeback.



In an interview, Card. Gracias explains to Vatican News that in the Pastoral Letter, India’s Catholic bishops are reminding Catholics of their duty to vote for the good of the country and for future generations. The bishops are also urging the faithful to pray in order to be able to vote “judiciously”.--Vatican News
