'She Shines' aims to inspire 2 lakh women with its 2019 edition

New Delhi (India), April 2 (ANI/NewsVoir): Women all over the country have battled stigma, broken boundaries and paved the path for future generations of women to enter the professional world. With respect to this, She Shines announced that its newest edition will provide a platform for such exceptional females to share their experiences and transform the journeys of younger women as they pursue their ambitions.

She Shines provides both an opportunity to the leading women in India to spread the word about their vision, work and industry, while aspiring women get the opportunity to learn from and network with leading females from all industries.

“She Shines 2019” is a conference for 200 select women to celebrate their womanhood, achievements, drive, challenges and sacrifices in life. It will be held on April 13th, 2019 at Shangri-La Hotel, in New Delhi. The conference will feature inspiring stories of speakers, panel discussions and exclusive workshops from industries like fashion, finance, fitness, food and entrepreneurship for a female audience. Participants will be able to have meaningful conversations with female entrepreneurs, CEOs, mid-senior executives, bloggers and influencers through this platform.

The highlight of the event will be veteran Bollywood actress, Kamlesh Gill, who shall be inaugurating the session along with other key women. Key speakers from various industries, such as RJ Sayema, Sakshi Tulsian, Gurleen Kaur Tikku, Anupriya Kapur, Nikita Burman and Harnidh Kaur shall be a part of the event.

“The idea behind She Shines was born five years ago when Gurleen and I were discussing some issues that women still face on a daily basis, even though the gender equality movement has made significant progress in India. We found our discussion around this topic so stimulating and productive than we thought, well why not include more women in these discussions? Thus, She Shines began as a place where women can get together and discuss relevant issues, and how women can create a better world for them through new career opportunities. Our pilot edition was loved by all and we have decided to revive it into a regular event that will take place in different cities in days to come. We aim to reach more than two lakh women through the online and offline promotion of this event,” said Gurpreet Singh Tikku, Co-founder, She Shines.

“The many ‘She’ in our lives shine in whichever roles they play – be it as a daughter, sister, wife, mother, homemaker, entrepreneur or professional. She Shines aims to be an ode to celebrate womanhood. It is a platform for women to take inspiration from one another and to empower their passions, dreams and ambitions in each step of their lives,” said Gurleen Kaur Tikku, Co-founder, She Shines.

This story is provided by NewsVoir. ANI will not be responsible in any way for the content of this article. (ANI/NewsVoir)


