Winning Hearts Through Barrel of Gun

(MENAFN- Kashmir Observer) With the elections in India round the corner, the BJP regime and the hard-line approach towards Kashmir have been very brutal. We had grown up seeing the violent face of India, but last five years of Modi rule at centre and his collation at state with the PDP had only intensified violent and aggressive approach mostly towards Muslims and Kashmiris in particular. Killings, maiming, arrests, harassments and much more have been the order of the day ever since this government came into being.

The ban on JeI is the most disappointing decision, after arresting all their top leaders, including Dr. Fayaz Hameed and then slapping them with the draconian PSA is more disappointing.

HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH in a report says 'As of December 2018, at least 44 people had been killed in cow-related violence since May 2015, 36 of them Muslims. According to Indiaspend, a data-based journalism website, there were over 100 incidents of such violence since 2014. Fifty percent of the victims in these incidents were Muslim, 10 percent Dalit, 9 percent Hindu, and 3 percent members of tribal groups'.

Banning Jamaat or any other group who believe in non-violence and peace will never solve the issue, neither will this arrest spree, stop seeing Kashmir dispute through the armed paradigm for a while. Come on meet the people on the ground, discuss the issues and find the real solution. JeI served two-time ban in past now this third one will push the moral and raise them to new heights. Modi who failed to win hearts in Kashmir is trying some muscular policy now. One fails to understand how will this win him hearts here. The irony is that recently JKLF led by Yasin Malik which abandoned violent path and began following Gandhi's way of struggle too has been banned. The political space seems to have been totally choked. Centre's hard-line and muscular policy will never bring peace to Valley. The change in approach and the sincerity must be there to hold on a peaceful and fruitful dialogue. Turning valley into prison has never been the solution nor will it be in the future.

Gazi Muzamil (Student of Law, KU)

Younus Rashid (Student B.A English, GDC Boys Anantnag)
