Britannia enters snacking category, appoints Lowe Lintas as creative agency for Timepass

Food products major Britannia has decided to enter the snacking category and has awarded the creative mandate to Lowe Lintas following a multi-agency pitch. Britannia plans to enter the category with Timepass -- a range of baked snacks in exciting formats and flavours.

The account will be handled from Lowe Lintas Bangalore, and the scope entails building online and offline brand campaigns for Britannia's Timepass.

Advertisement

Speaking about the appointment of Lowe Lintas, Jayant Kapre, Business Head, Adjacent and New Business, Britannia Industries Limited, said, "In line with Britannia’s vision of being a Total Foods Company, it was a natural move for Britannia to make an entry into this category. We looked at the tremendous growth of the snacking category over the past half-decade. Our approach will be not just to create an innovative portfolio of products, but one that is represented by a memorable brand persona. We look forward to working with Lowe Lintas in gaining a meaningful entry into this competitive category."

Lowe Lintas currently handles the creative duties for a large share of Britannia's portfolio.

Advertisement

Hari Krishnan

Hari Krishnan, President, Lowe Lintas, said, "We are Britannia’s lead creative partner and to be chosen for a new category is a vindication of our strengths in consumer understanding, strategy and our creative firepower. Snacking is a category where consumer demand is triggered by two types of hunger – Mouth Hunger and Stomach Hunger. Most of the packaged snacks fall into the Mouth Hunger category and is generally an addictive and/or mindless activity. Based on this insight, we have worked with the Britannia team on the strategy, brand name and communication and that’s how the brand name Timepass was frozen. We look forward to developing some exciting and Timepass work."

Snacking is one of the fastest growing sub-categories within the food category in India. The category, worth Rs 24,000 crore, is witnessing a lot of new players entering the market. The snacking market is projected to grow annually at a CAGR of 7.5% till 2023.

Advertisement

Info@BestMediaInfo.com
