We might just know the plotline of Salman Khan’s Dabangg 3 - read on to know more

Dabangg 3 will hit theatres in December 2019 | Photo Credit: Instagram

The first schedule of shooting for third instalment of the Dabangg franchise has begun. Bollywood superstar Salman Khan, who will reprise his iconic role of Chulbul Pandey in Dabangg 3, is in Maheshwar, Madhya Pradesh shooting for the film. A report in Mumbai Mirror has revealed that the schedule is being shot at Ahilya Fort, in which, the team is shooting for the title song for Dabangg 3 and it is a 13-day schedule. According to a source, a total of 500 dancers will be seen in the background with Salman, as usual, in a larger-than-life image.

"This will be followed by an action sequence on bikes involving Chulbul and his brother, Makkhi (played by producer Arbaaz Khan). It will end with a week-long shoot in Mandeshwar," – a source told the tabloid.

Unlike the previous Dabangg films, Dabangg 3 will reportedly be depicting Salman Khan’s character in two different eras. Being directed by Prabhudeva, Dabangg 3 will serve as both a prequel and a sequel to the previous films. According to the report, Chulbul Pandey will be shown as a goon with a heart of gold from before the events of the first Dabangg film. In fact, the lengthy flashback will also show his transition from being a goon turning into Robin Hood Pandey.

"In his back story, which is kind of a prequel, Chulbul will be shown as a local goon with a heart of gold and a lengthy flashback will cover his metamorphosis into a Robin Hood cop. The conflict in the present with Sudeep is connected to his past beforChulbul got into uniform. Everything that the brand is synonymous with has been retained and adapted keeping modern-day sensibilities in mind," the source added.

The report also claimed that while Sonakshi Sinha will reprise her role of the female lead, Rajjo, there will be another actress, who’ll play a pivotal role from Chulbul’s past. The source also revealed that after concluding the shooting schedule in Madhya Pradesh, the team will head to Wai in Maharashtra.

Dabangg 3 is set for a December release, as has been confirmed by Salman Khan on multiple occasions. However, there is still no confirmation on a specific date.
