Bike-borne assailants open fire at man, his five-year-old son in Delhi for sheltering eloped lovers

Delhi police is currently investigating the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: An appalling case of mindless violence has come to light from north-east Delhi where a bus driver was shot dead by bike-borne assailants while he was holding his infant son. The incident took place on Sunday night in Usmanpur area when the 40-year-old bus driver was taking his 5-year-old son to buy him candy or snack from a nearby store.

In her statement to the police, victim Hakimuddin's wife claimed that his murder is a case of honour killing. Recalling the sequence of events on the day of the crime, Shahana told The Hindu that the couple along with their two children had gone to their family home in Seelampur for dinner. Once they returned home, their son Umar asked his father to buy him a snack from a nearby store to which Hakimuddin obliged.

However, when he was walking into the store with Umar, four armed bike-borne assailants arrived at the spot and started shooting at Hakimuddin. The suspects fired as many as eight rounds at the victim and he fell to the ground. Miraculously, none of the bullets hit Umar who ran back to their home and informed his mother that his father had been shot dead.

Neighbours and passerby rushed Hakimuddin to the Jag Pravesh Chandra hospital where he was declared dead upon arrival. Speaking to the national daily, the victim's wife alleged that the attack on Hakimmuding could have been orchestrated by family members of one Uzma, who is married to her brother-in-law.

Shahana further clarifies that her brother-in-law Shahzad fell in love with a neighbour, Uzma. However, Uzma's parents did not approve of love marriages which is why Shehzad and Uzma decided to get married in court and started living with the victim Hakimuddin and his wife Shahana at their home in Usmanpur. This is why a personal enmity had developed between our family and theirs.
