UAE can activate Human Fraternity Document: Intellectuals, scholars

ABU DHABI, 2nd April, 2019 (WAM) -- Several intellectuals and scholars said that the UAE has the capacity, through its efforts to promote and reinforce tolerance and coexistence, can activate the "Human Fraternity Document," which was signed in February.

The UAE hosted the "Global Conference on Human Fraternity" in February, and the document, which aims to achieve world peace and coexistence, was signed by Dr. Ahmed Al Tayyeb, Grand Imam of Al Azhar, and Pope Francis, Head of the Catholic Church.

The document aims to promote the culture of tolerance, acceptance and coexistence and stresses the importance of combatting terrorism, protecting places of worship, and reinforcing the concept of citizenship.

Dr. Moustafa Othman Ismail, Former Sudanese Minister of Foreign Affairs and Representative of Sudan to the United Nations, UN, said that the UAE, due to the legacy of the "wise man of the Arabs," the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, is a model of a giving country, which is the leading donor country in the world.

In his statements to the Emirates News Agency, WAM, he added, "The Declaration of the Human Fraternity Document in Abu Dhabi came at the right time when violence, conflicts and terrorism are accelerating in the East and the West, and we are in need of this initiative."

Sheikh Ahmed Tamim, Grand Mufti of Ukraine, said, "The UAE aims to reinforce the values to tolerance, coexistence and openness, through annual activities that aim to encourage dialogue and protect the social values promoted by the Prophet Muhammad."

In his interview with WAM, Sheikh Ahmed Tamim stressed that promoting the values of fraternity, coexistence and citizenship, as well as combatting corruption, should be the top priorities of Muslim communities.

Sheikh Mohamed Al Mukhtar Ould Hambala, President of the Supreme Council of Fatwa and Ombudsman and Advisor to the President of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, stated that the document is a good initiative, which aims to prevent wars, conflicts and social issues.

Sheikh Abu Bakr Ahmed, Secretary-General of the Ahl Al Sunna Wal Jamaa Society in India, said that the UAE is a bridge between cultures and an icon of tolerance and coexistence.

He urged religious and academic institutions to play a key role in changing the incorrect perceptions that led to extremism in Muslim communities.
