Fact Check: Did Rahul Gandhi attribute Mahatma Gandhi's non-violence mantra to Islam?

Did Congress president Rahul Gandhi in his Dubai speech say Mahatma Gandhi picked up the idea of non-violence from Islam? This claim is being widely circulated by Facebook pages such as Nation with NaMo, PMO India: Report Card and Shankh Naad. Rahul Gandhi recently concluded his two-day maiden visit to the UAE.

India Today Fact Check found this claim to be misleading. During his interaction with the Indian diaspora in Dubai, Rahul Gandhi did not credit Mahatma Gandhi’s idea of non-violence just to Islam but other religions such as Christianity and Judaism too. These posts have been shared more than 11,000 times at the time of the last count.

In the nine-second video, Rahul can be heard saying, Mahatma Gandhi picked up the idea of non-violence from ancient Indian philosophy, from Islam." The remaining part of the speech was mischievously cropped in the viral video.

Rahul Gandhi's full speech is available on the Congress' Facebook page. In the original video, which is 27 minutes and 37 seconds long, Rahul Gandhi can be heard saying, Non-violence is embedded inside our DNA and it has been embedded not for 50 years. Mahatma Gandhi was a great exponent of non-violence. But Mahatma Gandhi ji picked up the idea of non-violence from our great religions, from ancient Indian philosophy from Islam, from Christianity, from Judaism, from every great religion where it is clearly written that violence will not help anyone achieve anything."

The same has also been tweeted by the Congress.

Mahatma Gandhi picked up the idea of non-violence from every great religion where it is clearly written that violence will not help you achieve anything: Congress President @RahulGandhi #RahulGandhiInDubai pic.twitter.com/OAFt8QHgVC — Congress (@INCIndia) January 11, 2019

Hence, we can conclude that Rahul Gandhi’s video was mischievously edited just to mislead users and give them an incomplete perspective.

In the past too, Rahul was targeted in a similar manner. In November 2018, a video of Rahul Gandhi went viral where he was attacking Prime Minister Narendra Modi. However, the viral video misled netizens by not presenting the complete story as it was cropped too. India Today had successfully debunked the claim.

Also Read | Fact Check: No, Rahul Gandhi didn’t say he will make Sun rise from the West

Also Read | Fact Check: Did Rahul Gandhi go blank on a question about Kailash Mansarovar?

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Congress president Rahul Gandhi in his Dubai speech said Mahatma Gandhi picked up the idea of non-violence from Islam. Conclusion While talking about Mahatma Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi did not just credit his idea of non-violence to Islam but other religions such as Christianity and Judaism too. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
