Global Defence Technology: Issue 53

Global Defence Technology is now free for the iPad. Download our app from the App Store to read the latest issue and browse our back issues for free.

With the next Strategic Defence and Security Review expected by the end of the year and the global security situation remaining unpredictable, the new UK government faces a formidable challenge in setting an achievable defence strategy for the country. We investigate how key issues such as budget cuts and the Trident controversy will shape the UK’s defence decisions.

We also take a look at the contenders for Australia’s Land 400 programme, review new research into the link between sleep and PTSD, and investigate the politics behind the development of Israel’s David’s Sling missile defence system. Moreover, we check in on the progress of the troubled Gerald R. Ford carrier project, and find out how the US Navy is tackling today’s littoral threats with a new ‘trinity’ of technology.

Read the issue for free on your iPad through our app, or if you’re on a desktop computer you can also read it in our web viewer.

Related

In this issue

What’s the Strategy?

With global instability at its highest level in decades and the UK’s defence budget declining steadily, the newly elected government faces the challenge of setting an effective and achievable national security strategy. Chris Lo finds out what we can expect.

Read the article.

Data, insights and analysis delivered to you View all newsletters By the Naval Technology team Sign up to our newsletters Sign up here

Necessity Turned Luxury

A new study has found that a lack of healthy sleep among troops is linked to an increased risk of health conditions, including post-traumatic stress disorder. Gary Peters looks into the extent of the problem and possible solutions

Read the article.

The Race is On

As the Australian Government zeroes in on a new fleet of armoured fighting vehicles under its biggest ever land acquisition programme, industry teams are aligning themselves to get a part of the action. Claire Apthorp investigates

Read the article.

Arming David’s Sling

The latest system in Israel’s multi-layered defences against rocket and missile attacks may come equipped with caveats symbolic of a changing relationship with the US and Russia. Dr Gareth Evans reports on the technology and the politics behind David’s Sling

Read the article.

Paris Air Show 2015: The Tech and the Deals

Sales were markedly dominated by Airbus and Boeing on the commercial side, with military sales -and even the big defence players – few and far between. Claire Apthorp reports from the event

Read the article.

Ford’s Bumpy Ride

The USS Gerald R. Ford is on track for delivery to the US Navy in March 2016, but with it comes an overstretched budget and technological glitches. Dr Gareth Evans reports on the patchy Ford Class aircraft carrier programme

Read the article.

The Three Musketeers

The US Navy is tackling today’s littoral threats with a ‘trinity’ of complementary systems. Carol Jenkins investigates why the Littoral Combat Ship, the MH-60R Seahawk helicopter and the MQ-8 Fire Scout UAS could be the perfect partners for littoral supremacy

Read the article.

Next issue preview

The US and India have announced plans to strengthen their defence relationship by cooperating on a number of projects ranging from jet engines to aircraft carrier designs. We find out how this could support India’s efforts to become a defence manufacturing hub and what each country stands to gain.

We also take a look at Airbus Defence and Spaces’ new Multirole Jammer system designed to protect military vehicles against radio-controlled improvised explosive devices, ask what the certification of SpaceX’s Falcon 9 launch system for national security space missions and the US Air Force’s request for rocket propulsion system prototypes to replace the RD-180 engine will mean for the future of the US space launch market, and find out how the EU plans to target trafficking in the Mediterranean with a new naval force mission.

Digital magazine FAQ

You can read Global Defence Technology for free on the iPad. Download our app from the App Store to read the latest issue and browse the back issues in our archive. Sign up for a free subscription in the app and never miss a new issue.

You can also continue to read the desktop version for free on our web viewer. (Browser compatibility: The web viewer works in the latest two version of Chrome, Firefox and Safari, as well as in Internet Explorer 9 and 10. Some features may not be compatible with older browser versions.)
