Pakistan at WAR: India promises to FIGHT BACK as Pakistan ceasefire deal VIOLATED

India Pakistan: Crossfire breaks out in Poonch district

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Pakistan’s ceasefire violations on Sunday saw cross border shell-fire resume this week in the Poonch district of Jammu and Kashmir. The Pakistani attack on Indian soldiers saw troops attack with heavy fire and mortar shelling. The Line of Control, the border that separates the two warring nations’ controlled parts of the state of Jammu and Kashmir area, has been identified by military experts as a potential trigger point for World War 3.

A Twitter post from the India's Zee TV website reporting on the attacks read: "Ceasefire violation #PakistanArmy. #India retaliates with heavy fire! “1 enemy post destroyed 4-7 killed and several injured #Pakistan aslo reporting about loss of 2 armored Vehicles hit by #IndianArmy shells in retaliation." The recent attacks have led to increased tensions between the already strained nations. Rajni Kant Mishra, the Director-General of Border Security Force (BSF) in India responded to the attack on Tuesday, saying his force would be fully prepared to meet any challenge posed by Pakistan.

Pakistan at WAR: India has promised to fight back after Pakistan violated ceasefire deal

Mr Mishra said Indian forces are giving befitting response to the “unprovoked” firing by the Pakistani army. He said: ”We have accepted the challenge and are prepared for it.” The BSF DG added all 365 days of the year pose a challenge for the border guards. On the casualties suffered by Pakistan in the retaliatory action, he said: "We are waiting for the feedback to ascertain the casualties suffered by them.”

Pakistan at WAR: Pakistan violated its ceasefire deal with India on Sunday

Pakistani military on their end has said at least three Pakistani soldiers have been killed when the countries exchanged fire across the Line of Control in the latest round of hostilities between the nuclear-armed neighbours. Tensions have been high in South Asia since India and Pakistan conducted air raids on each other's territory and Pakistan shot down an Indian fighter jet in February. The military escalation followed a suicide attack in the Indian-administered Kashmir town of Pulwama and more than 40 Indian troops were killed in the attack on February 14 by Pakistani rebel group Jaish-E-Mohammad. India responded to the attack and launched air strikes against militants on Pakistani territory.

India has said they will fight back in the conflict against Pakistan
