Supreme Court order on RBI circular will not impact Jet Airways case, say experts

The legal fraternity and aviation industry experts are of the view that the apex court ruling on the RBI circular is unlikely to have any impact on the Jet Airways case, as it is being resolved outside the insolvency proceedings through a bank-led mechanism.

The Supreme Court on Tuesday struck down the February 12 order by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) and called it unconstitutional. The RBI circular mandates that a borrower missing repayment even for a single day would be treated as a defaulter. Further, the banks need to finalise a resolution plan for defaults in excess of Rs 2,000 crore within the next 180 days, failing which the insolvency process would be initiated.

According to Santosh Hiredesai, an analyst with SBI Cap Securities, there will be no change as far as Jet Airways is concerned, as the apex court ruling today states that banks have the right to proceed the way they want. When asked whether the bankers still have the option to convert their loans into equity by payment of Rs 1, Hiredesai said, "It will in no way get impacted."

Jet Airways lenders have decided to convert their debt into equity and take a controlling stake in the carrier by paying a token sum of Re1 for 11.4 crore equity shares. The mandate by RBI is applicable to the companies with negative net worth and requires approval by all the lenders and stakeholders.

Further, in Jet Airways case the debt has been converted into equity, therefore technically there is no Jet Airways anymore. Mark Martin, founder and CEO of Dubai based Martin Consulting said, "So technically, the SC ruling does not apply (in Jet Airways case)"

Jet Airways interim management committee is being set up by the lenders led by State Bank of India (SBI) to manage the daily operations of the crisis-ridden airline until the lenders are able to sell/issue shares to new investors, with the entire process to get completed by June.

The SBI executives involved in the deal said that the lenders are likely to issue an expression of interest (EOI) by April 9 with the deadline being month-end and bid to be awarded by May 31. The airline's founder Naresh Goyal has stepped down from the Board as well as the chairmanship, paving the way for the lenders to look for suitable investors.

Insiders claim that Goyal's insistence on not leaving the control of the airline was the main reason why prospective investors were hesitant in infusing funds. However, the promoter along with his family eventually had to bring down their ownership to less than half from 51% earlier. The development thus paved the way for the lenders to infuse Rs 1,500 crore, which is expected to bring some normalcy to the airline's troubled situation.

However, some experts chose to differ in their views. Amit Kapur, joint managing partner, J Sagar Associates, said though he is unaware about the proceedings of the Jet Airways case, the RBI still has the power to initiate an action if it wants, subject to government authorisation as is prescribed under the law.

Ahmed Abdi, the Mumbai-based lawyer, said that though he has not seen the entire order, what he can say is that SC order will definitely impact the defaulting companies, including Jet Airways.

Meanwhile, the pilots union has written to civil aviation minister Suresh Prabhu requesting him to help release their last three months salaries, inclusive of interest. The pilots have set a deadline of April 15 for the same.

SMOOTH RUNWAY
