OYO loses 82 hotels from India portfolio every year

OYO, South Asia's largest chain of branded hotels and homes, is losing 82 hotel assets from its network every year. According to a top company executive, the SoftBank and Airbnb-backed budget hotel chain with 8,200 properties at present, has a hotel attrition level of 1% in its India portfolio.

OYO claims to be the sixth largest hotel chain with over 8,700 hotels and homes in India and South Asia and 18,000 across the globe.

Responding to a DNA Money query, Aditya Ghosh, chief executive officer – South Asia, OYO Hotels & Homes, said the 1% attrition happens for various reasons. "We have very stringent checks and balances in terms of quality and service delivery across our lease-operated and franchised hotels portfolio. And hotels not conforming to our standards get discontinued," he said. Ghosh was in Mumbai on Tuesday to relaunch its two brands - Collection O and SilverKey that will specifically cater to the millennials and full-serviced executive stays, respectively.

Industry experts, however, have a completely different observation on Ghosh's claims of 1% attrition of hotel assets. "That's an incorrect number. It is way higher than OYO management's claims of 1%," said one of the experts requesting not to be identified.

The reason for higher attrition levels, experts said is because OYO typically enters into a one-year contract with hotel asset owners. In fact, some of the hoteliers DNA Money spoke to said that OYO starts defaulting on payments the moment they realise there isn't enough money to be made with the hotel asset.

"That's one reason leading to litigation between OYO and hotel asset owners. A lot of small asset owners get taken on a ride by the OYO legal team because these hoteliers don't have the ability/capacity to devote time and money in fighting the litigation. And having burnt their fingers associating with OYO, they are left with no option but to exit the network once the contract expires. However, by then, the exiting hotel asset owners would have also lost their business and loyal clientele," said one of the hoteliers.

This conflict of business interest has led to a major battle between hotel asset owners/hotel associations from across India and the OYO management. The hotel chain, however, maintains that there are a lot of disgruntled hotel owners who do not appreciate OYO's way of looking at this business.

"Single hotel asset owners who would earlier charge customers as per their whims and fancies are obviously not happy because OYO hotels offer quality rooms at affordable rates. We have almost 8,500 asset owners and the so-called hotel associations don't even have 100 members. However, we are also addressing their grievances. We discuss the issues at regular intervals with our asset owners and consider their suggestions for the business to create a win-win scenario for both," said Ghosh.

On illegal properties in the OYO network, Ghosh said the company has a standardised format in terms of all the documents and permissions that the asset needs to have. "Without all those documents in place, we will not sign up. Additionally, our quality assurance team visits every hotel room in the network of hotels almost thrice a week to ensure these are running as per prescribed standards. We also have a technology platform that allows us to shut down not just the hotel room but the entire hotel in case of discrepancy of experience/service," said Ghosh.

The OYO management claims that 93% of their customers are repeat customers. However, Ghosh declined to share details of the profile of these customers i.e, whether they are millennials, entry and mid-level working executives, corporate clientele, leisure or business travellers. "Almost 1.4 lakh customers use OYO daily across the globe. Over the last 90 days, we have had a 3% increase in the number of happy/delighted customers because we further increased our focus on safety, quality, experience etc," said Ghosh.

While OYO is yet to achieve profitability, the management is aggressively working on cutting losses. According to Ghosh, losses were reduced by 50% last year and there are plans to further reduce it by 50% this year. "This year's guidance is to bring it down to about 10% by the end of December 2019," he

COLD RECEPTION
