NASA attacks India for ‘endangering’ astronauts lives after destroying its OWN satellite

NASA: India missile launch has increased risk to ISS by 40%

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Last week, India’s prime minister Narendra Modi hailed the country’s achievements as a “historic feat”. He said it had turned India into a “space power” following the mission to shoot its own low-orbit satellite with a ground-to-space missile. But now, NASA has claimed astronauts aboard the International Space Station (ISS) could have been endangered.

According to the MirrorOnline, NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine claimed the risk of debris colliding with the centre had now gone up by around 44 percent in 10 days. He said: “That is a terrible, terrible thing to create an event that sends debris at an apogee that goes above the International Space Station. "That kind of activity is not compatible with the future of human spaceflight." Mr Bridenstine added: “The International Space Station is still safe. READ MORE: NASA asteroid tracker: 60,500MPH asteroid will skim Earth TONIGHT

Mr Bridenstine made the comments after India shot its own satellite out of the sky

He said it could endanger the lives of astronauts on the space centre

“If we need to manoeuvre it we will." In a statement, India argued that the test was done in a low-earth orbit, which would ensure debris wouldn’t get close to the station. It added: “Whatever debris that is generated will decay and fall back onto the earth within weeks.” The move comes one month after an Indian Air Force jet was shot down during the bitter row between India and Pakistan.

India: ISRO successfully launch the PSLV-C45 EMISAT satellite

India's prime minister
