Ask TN CM EPS to resign: DMK tells Governor Banwarilal on Kodanad murder case

Ask TN CM EPS to resign: DMK tells Governor Banwarilal on Kodanad murder case

Stalin reiterated the demand for a Special Investigation Team probe into the case and called for the resignation of Chief Minister Palaniswami.

news Politics

Days after a controversial documentary by Delhi-based journalist Samuel Mathew rocked Tamil Nadu, accusing current Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi Palaniswami of contracting a robbery at the Kodanad estate belonging to late Chief Minister J Jayalalithaa, Leader of the Opposition and DMK President MK Stalin met with the Tamil Nadu Governor Banwarilal Purohit, demanding the President of India be made aware of the situation.

Speaking to media persons after his meeting at the Raj Bhavan, Stalin said, “We have given a petition to the Governor regarding the release of a video by journalist Mathews. The Chief Minister has been named and accused of murder. We have asked that the Governor immediately inform this to the President of India.” The DMK has demanded that the Governor should ask the Chief Minister to step down to make way for fair trial, and wants a Special Investigation team set up under an 'honest Inspector General of Police'.

“The Kodanad bungalow was not just a private property. It was used an office by late Chief Minister J Jayalalithaa. Government documents were there. This needs to be probed an honest IG-rank officer without bias and independently,” Stalin said.

The investigative report on the sensational attempted burglary and murder of watchman Om Bahadur in April 2017 was aired to the press at the Delhi Press Club on Friday. Two men, Sayan and 'Walayar' Manoj, part of the gang that attempted to break in to the 200-acre estate, appeared in the video and claimed that the hit job was ordered by Chief Minister Edappadi Palaniswami. The duo was arrested in New Delhi on Sunday.

Stalin, accompanied by senior DMK members Kanimozhi, A Raja, TR Baalu, TKS Elangovan and RS Bharathi, alleged that the Chief Minister pressured former Nilgiris Superintendent of Police Murali Rambha into giving an interview to the press on Monday.

“The case was earlier investigated by SP Murali Rambha and declared that Kanakaraj's death was an accident. The Chief Minister has pressurised him to give an interview related to this. The Chief Minister is involved in an effort to destroy the evidences remaining in this murder case. He is using the police department for this,” he said.

While he said that Governor Purohit had assured appropriate action on the DMK’s petition, Stalin also added that the party’s Rajya Sabha MPs would meet President Kovind in New Delhi if no action was taken.
