Man hit by air-gun pellet in Feb loses vision in one eye

Aditya Jyot Eye Hospital

Azad Maidan Gymkhana

Nirmala Niketan College

Indian Military Training Centre

St George Hospital

Police registered a case against Pune-based academy that taught shooting to students.A twenty-six-year-old man has lost vision in his left eye after he was hit by an air-gun pellet near Azad Maidan in February. The police have registered a case against the training academy that taught shooting to students of Nirmala Niketan, Marine Lines.“His retina has been permanently damaged and he may not regain vision in the eye,” authorities at, where the man underwent surgery on February 17, told Mirror.According to the police, the incident happened on February 16, near. The police said nine students ofwere being given training by the, Pune — a private organisation — in shooting at the maidan.The centre had installed a curtain as a target, which the students were supposed to hit. One of the pellets tore out the curtain and hit the man, who works with a shipping company in Navi Mumbai, and had come to the area on work.The injured man was initially rushed to, from where he took discharge and got himself admitted to Aditya Jyot Eye Hospital, Wadala.Sources at St George Hospital said the injured victim was brought to the casualty ward on February 16, and was referred to the Ophthalmology department. However, he took discharge against medical advice (DAMA) the same day, as he wanted to be operated on the same day.“The X-ray done on him showed a piece of the pellet lodged in one eye. A CT scan was required to be done, and his operation was scheduled the next day, on February 17. However, he wanted to undergo surgery the same day and got himself discharged,” an official at the hospital said.The police said they are yet to make any arrests in the matter, but have registered a case against the organisation that conducted the shooting camp and brought students to the spot for shooting practice, under section 336 of IPC, for an act endangering the life or personal safety of others, and section 338, for causing grievous hurt by an act endangering the life or personal safety of others.“The Pune organisation approached us and we put them in touch with the parents directly during parents’ orientation day. They interacted with the parents and independently registered interested students. The college was not involved anywhere. We had nothing to do with encouraging students, or registrations, or collecting fees. The understanding was between the students, the parents and the organisation. What activities the students are involved in after college hours is their lookout. Many organisations come to us to conduct various programmes for students to give them exposure to a variety of skills. We always connect them to the parents, who then take it forward independently,” Nirmala Niketan Principal, Dr Geeta Ibrahim told Mirror.She said the incident was unfortunate, and the organisation had taken responsibility for it.“Students told me the person emerged from the crowd, out of nowhere. They did not run away and immediately rushed the injured person to the hospital. There were barricades in place, and all due permissions were taken,” Ibrahim said.
