RSS seeks Re 1 compensation from Rahul Gandhi, Sitaram Yechury for dragging name in Gauri Lankesh murder

Days before the first phase of Lok Sabha elections, a Thane civil court has summoned Congress president Rahul Gandhi and CPI(M) leader Sitaram Yechury over a defamation suit filed by the RSS.

The civil defamation suit was filed by Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS) member Vivek Champanerkar who hails from Thane. According to Champanerkar, RSS was defamed by both the two Opposition leaders in the days after the Gauri Lankesh murder of 2017 in Bengaluru.

Immediately after the journalist's murder, Gandhi had tweeted, "Anybody who speaks against the RSS/BJP is attacked & even killed. They want to impose only one ideology which is against the nature of India".

Yechury too had addressed the media and made similar comments linking RSS to the murder while the investigating agencies are yet to establish any such connection.

Anybody who speaks against the RSS/BJP is attacked &even killed. They want to impose only one ideology which is against the nature of India Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) September 6, 2017





Advocate Aditya Mishra who argued before the court said that the suit seeks two prayers, "One, we are asking for an injunction that these people and their party workers should be barred from speaking against the RSS whenever Gauri Lankesh case is mentioned. Secondly we are seeking Re 1 as compensation for this defamation," said Mishra.

The advocate added, "RSS is a social organisation and it is being defamed by these comments. That is why we are only seeking nominal compensation just to make these people understand that no one should defame RSS."

Mishra also pressed upon the fact that no judicial inquiry or investigation has connected RSS to Gauri Lankesh's murder so these people have only defamed the organisation by making such statements.

After listening to the arguments, the Thane third joint senior division civil judge S M Bhatia issued summons to Rahul Gandhi and Sitaram Yechury. Both have been asked to be present before the court on April 30.

This is not the first time that Rahul Gandhi and Sitaram Yechury have been dragged to court for their 2017 statements. Earlier, a Mumbai court, too, had issued summons. However, the summons in that case had not reached Gandhi or Yechury so hearing in the case was adjourned to April 5.
