24 rescued from de-addiction centre

Ludhiana: In a joint raid by Dehlon police and Sahnewal health department, 24 people were rescued from an unauthorised de-addiction centre in Alamgir village, here, on Tuesday afternoon. One-and-a-half-month ago, too, the health department had raided the same centre and rescued 17 people. However, the centre kept running after that.

On Monday, staff of Baba Budha Ji Gurmit Vidyala thrashed a Doraha man, who had been admitted there for the past two months. The next afternoon, the man tried to flee. The staff members gave him a chase and thrashed him. Some commuters intervened to rescue him and sounded the police. Dehlon police reached there and found 23 more people admitted to the unauthorised centre.

A team of Sahnewal health department also reached the spot and the 24 addicts were rescued. The inmates told the police that they were given only boiled rice to eat and hot water to drink. And in the name of treatment, they were given only painkillers. There were no beds and they slept on mattresses on the floor. They said they were thrashed with sticks when they asked for food or medicines.

Father of one of the victims said, “The centre charges Rs 10,000 per month. Whenever I came to see my son, the staff showed CCTV camera footage, saying he was sleeping. They never allowed me to meet him. I did not know that they tortured him.”

Dehlon police station assistant sub-inspector Gupreet Singh said, “Our checks found that there was no doctor, no psychiatrist and no medical aid was given to the addicts. Instead, they were beaten up and tortured. The police have arrested the accused father-son duo who ran the centre. They have been identified as Bhupinder Singh, 34, and Bikar Singh, 67.”

A case under sections 420 (cheating), 342 (punishment for wrongful confinement), 506 (criminal intimidation), 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC has been registered against the accused.

Senior medical officer (SMO), Sahnewal, JP Singh said, “Around one-and-a-half-month ago, our team had conducted a raid at the centre and rescued 17 addicts. Those rescued were admitted to the civil hospital.”

When asked about the action taken then, the SMO said, “Police should have had taken action and sealed the centre. Even today I have suggested senior police officers to increase patrolling, as when raid is conducted at one place, other unauthorised centres become cautious. I was shocked to know that the raid was conducted at the same centre.”

ASI Gurpreet Singh, however, said, “I am not aware of the earlier raid. Entire staff at the police station is new.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
