Blackbuck poaching case: Salman Khan’s appeal to be heard today in court

Salman Khan's appeal in the 1998 Blackbuck poaching case to be heard today in court

After a delay, Salman Khan will finally have his hearing in the 1998 Blackbuck poaching case today in Jodhpur, Rajasthan. Earlier this year, in the month of February, Salman Khan had filed an appeal against the verdict of the court, which had sentenced him to 5 years of imprisonment. However, his hearing date was postponed to April 3. In his appeal, Salman had challenged the prison sentence inflicted upon him.

The Bollywood superstar was sentenced to five years imprisonment in the 1998 Blackbuck poaching case. The actor was accused to killing blackbucks, an endangered species as the time, in Kankani near Jodhpur. It was during the time, when Salman Khan, along with Saif Ali Khan, Neelam, Tabu, Sonali Bendre and Monish Bahl were shooting for the Sooraj Batjatiya film Hum Saath Saath Hain.

Last year, while Saif, Tabu, Neelam and Sonali Bendre were acquitted of all charges by the court, Salman Khan, however, was charged under Section 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act and others under Section 51 read with Section 149 (unlawful assembly) of the Indian Penal Code. As a result he was sentenced to five years in prison.

The sessions court had found him guilty of killing two blackbucks. The actor had to spend two nights in prison following which he was released on bail. In an offcial statement, Salman Khan’s advocate, Anand Desai, had said: "ln the present case, the Hon'ble Court has acquitted all the 5 co-accused which would imply that Salman was out hunting alone in the middle of the night in a remote area outside Jodhpur. We have preferred an appeal to the Hon'ble Sessions Court and applied for an urgent hearing today ."

Salman Khan and his team of lawyers must be hoping for a favourable result in today’s hearing as just like last year, there is a lot of investment riding on the Bollywood superstar’s shoulders. In addition to the impending promotions of his upcoming film Bharat, Salman Khan is currently shooting for Dabangg. He is also set to star in Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s upcoming film Inshallah with Alia Bhatt, and 4 other films in the pipeline.
