Pakistan 'deeply concerned' over India shooting down satellite

Pakistan expressed "deep concern" Tuesday over India's test of an anti-satellite weapon (ASAT) last week, calling on the international community to take the move seriously.

"Pakistan has noted with deep concern the assessment of relevant organizations and international experts on the threats resulting from space debris generated by the recently conducted ASAT test by India," Pakistan’s Foreign Ministry said in a statement.

It said the test should be a matter of grave concern for the international community, not only in terms of space debris, but also because of its ramifications for the long-term sustainability of peaceful space activities.

"It would also be amiss to ignore the military dimension of such actions and its implications on global and regional peace, stability and security," it added.

"Pakistan remains a strong proponent of non-militarization of outer space. We will continue to work with like-minded countries to address gaps in the international legal regime governing the exploration and use of outer space with a view to ensuring that no one threatens peaceful activities and applications of space technologies for socio-economic development.

"In the absence of strong legal instruments, other states could also follow suit by demonstrating such capabilities," it concluded.

The remarks echoed a statement by a U.S. space program administrator earlier today.

"That is a terrible, terrible thing to create an event that sends debris at an apogee that goes above the International Space Station. That kind of activity is not compatible with the future of human spaceflight that we need to see have happen," NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine told a town hall meeting at the space agency’s headquarters in Washington.

Last Wednesday, India said it had launched a missile that shot down one of its satellites in low-earth orbit, joining the ranks of Russia, the U.S. and China -- the only other nations that are capable of such a move.
