Conservation victory! Thousands of Olive Ridley Turtle eggs hatched on Konkan beach

Babies hatched from eggs of Olive Ridley Turtles (Photo: Dr Rajeev Suryavanshi/FB Page) | Photo Credit: Facebook

Mumbai: The eggs of the Olive Ridley Turtles that the beach of Velas, a coastal village in the Ratnagiri district of Maharashtra is now famous for, have once again hatched in batches of thousands.

Apart from the Bankot Fort and the Harihareshwar Temple that village of Velas houses, its pristine beaches have now become the hatching home for the thousands of Olive Ridley Turtles that come ashore here every year to breed and lay hundreds of eggs.

The place also holds the Velas Turtle Festival that began in 2006 and is since held every year from February to May. It witnesses thousands of tourists who come to visit not just the miracle of the hatching of the eggs of this rare species, but also ingrain the value of why we need to keep the beaches clean, safe and why we need to preserve this precious species.

Taken from the Facebook page Dr Rajeev Suryavanshi (MD) - a nature lover doctor from Ahmednagar, here are beautiful pictures that the good doctor shot last week.

What took the self-confessed 'wanderer' doctor to Velas and its Olive Ridley Turtles? "I wanted to see the life of newly-born Olive Ridley turtles and really wanted to appreciate the work that the local volunteers doing there," Dr. Suryavanshi said.

"I was amazed by the struggle of life and also by the amazing thing called Nature. The ORT females travel thousands of miles to lay eggs on the same beach where they were born. Also, I was amazed by the fact that those tiny babies waddled in that beach sand only in one direction that took them all towards the ocean's water."

"It puzzles me as to how they must have sensed where to head. There was a weakling amongst them which also reached to the goal late but eventually achieved the destination. This all stunned me," Dr. Suryavanshi said.

He says he heard about the feast for the eyes and soul of the hatchlings of the ORT on Velas beach from his friend Abhijit Palande, an IT engineer with Tech Mahindra, who is also an avid photographer.

"I had read about this but thought it's happening in Odisha which seemed so far away.

But when I heard about Velas in Ratnagiri, I thought that it's near my place in the beautiful Konkan, so we bundled our families along in the cars and drove there immediately."

This year the hatchlings seemed to have wrapped up the process before April dawned. The rare and endangered species came still faces the danger of extinction owing to fishing, trawling and poaching, reports the Times of India, quoting Bhau Katdare who heads the Chiplun-based animal protection organisation Sahyadri Nisarga Mitra (SNM).

"Olive Ridleys have nested along Maharashtra's coast for years. But locals were stealing them for sale and consumption. We realised that conservation would be possible only of we involved the locals in the process," Bhau told TOI.

The efforts paid off and now the locals are involved in every step of the process, that include:

1. Surveying the beach for eggs

2. Collecting them

3. Transferring them to the artificial hatcheries

4. Monitoring the process till the eggs hatch

5. Release the hatchlings on the beach and then see them slide away into the sea

"In Velas, Mohan Upadhye has been working tirelessly for the conservation of the Konkan Kinarpatti (coastal strip), the extremely precious but otherwise neglected mangroves of Konkan and also volunteers in the conservation of the Olive Ridley turtles. He has learnt it from Bhau Katdare, and treasures and carries forward this legacy," said Dr Rajeev Suryavanshi.

Apart from Mohan Upadhye, the conservation work that has brought about a boom in the number of ORTs, has been managed by the synergy of SNM, Kasav Mitra Mandal (Velas), the gram panchayat and the forest department.
