Man runs with slit throat for help, accused arrested

Upset over an accusation of theft at the workplace, a 22-year-old man was arrested after he killed his friend Gurfan Khan by slitting his throat in Mumbai's Vikhroli.

Police said that the murder took place after the 22-year old was accused by his friend of theft at the workplace, the Mumbai Mirror reported.

Police have booked the accused under relevant sections of Indian Penal Code for murder and arms act for carrying knife.

The victim managed to call his employer and tell him that he was attacked by the accused Salman before he fell unconscious, which helped the police nab the accused within hours.

The police said that the incident took place on the intervening night of Monday and Tuesday on Jogeshwari - Vikhroli Link Road (JVLR).

Following the attack, the victim was running down a road holding his bleeding throat and asking for help. A Metro official came to his help and informed the police.



"I work with Metro and was going to the site when suddenly someone came from behind. He was profusely bleeding. He was murmuring 'please save me', 'someone has attacked me'. He asked me to inform the police, so I called up 100 and narrated the incident. Meanwhile, I saw him calling someone from his mobile and within a minute after talking over the phone, he fell unconscious,'' said BP Singh, the Metro official told police, as quoted by the Mumbai Mirror.

"He was giving someone information about the attack and the location of the spot," Singh added.

A police officer told media, "Gurfan had called his employer, a woman. She told us that he had informed her that one Raja alias Salman had attacked him. Based on this information, we registered an FIR and started the probe. We managed to trace the accused to Dharavi where he was hiding at his relative's place."

According to reports, Salman and Gurfan used to work together in a garment shop in Mumbai's Goregaon, where a theft had taken place, following which Gurfan suspected Salman and allegedly held him responsible for the same.

Reports also said that the two has been fighting over the matter since a few days, as Salman feared that he would be replaced by Gurfan.

"On Monday night, after the work, Salman had taken Gurfan to JVLR and he suddenly slashed his neck with a sharp object. We have arrested him and are probing if any other accused is involved in the crime," said another police officer told media.

READ MORE: Upset over wife's affair, man hangs daughters, sends picture to her

WATCH MORE: Decoding chilling conspiracy behind Shailza Dwivedi murder
