In A Gracious Note To Fans For Supporting Him During His Illness, Irrfan Khan Says He's Back In Business

This universe isn't a wish-granting factory and sometimes when you are not even prepared, it throws a curve ball. For Irrfan Khan, whose career was at an all-time high, the diagnosis of cancer came as a speed breaker.

Irrfan Khan, who is considered as one of the finest actors in the film industry has been battling cancer since a year. A few months ago, he shared the news and wrote,

"The unexpected makes us grow, which is what the past few days have been about. Learning that I have been diagnosed with the neuroendocrine tumor as of now has admittedly been difficult, but the love and strength of those around me and that I found within me has brought me to a place of hope."

He was in London for several months, where he was undergoing medical treatment for neuroendocrine tumor. While he battled cancer in London, all his fans and well-wishers in India were praying with a hopeful heart to see their favorite actor back in India.

Our faith in miracles and prayers got reinstated when he returned to India in March. Reports claimed that he is all set to begin shooting for the sequel of his hit film Hindi Medium. After several months, yesterday, he was spotted at the airport and he looked evidently comfortable with the paparazzi clicking him without his mask.

Today, Irrfan is again winning hearts and the reason is a note that he penned down for his fans. Thanking all his fans and close ones for sending across love and best wishes, Irrfan Khan penned down a note full of gratitude and love. He wrote,

He wrote:

"Maybe somewhere in the pursuit of winning we forget how much it means to be loved... In our vulnerability we are reminded. As I leave my footprints onto these steps of my life, I want to pause to be grateful for receiving your immense love and support. It soothed me in my process of healing. So, I travel back to you, thanking you from the bottom of my heart."

Irrfan's message is proof that even when life has not been fair to him, he has his heart in the right place and he is immensely grateful for all the love he has received ever since he broke this heartbreaking news to his fans.
