Irrfan Khan shares heartfelt note as he returns to Bollywood after cancer treatment, check out

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER/IRRFAN KHAN Irrfan Khan shares heartfelt note as he returns to Bollywood after cancer treatment

Irrfan Khan’s fans were eagerly waiting for the actor to return to the country and bounce back on the big screen and looks like the day has finally arrived. One of the most phenomenal actors Bollywood has ever seen, Irrfan Khan returned to India last month and on Wednesday, he took to his social media to announce that he is ready to get back to work and even thanks his fans and supporters for pouring in endless love that helped him in his recovery journey.

Taking to Twitter, Irrfan Khan shared a heartfelt note that can make anyone’s eyes filled with tears. He shared a picture of himself and wrote, “Maybe somewhere in the pursuit of winning, we forget how much it means to be loved. In our vulnerability, we are reminded. As I leave my footprints onto these steps of my life, I want to pause to be grateful for receiving your immense love and support, it soothed me in my process of healing. So I travel back to you, thanking you from the bottom of my heart.” Irrfan’s infectious smile in the picture will definitely warm the hearts of his fans. Check out the post here-

As soon as Irrfan’s post hit the internet, fans started pouring in their wishes and also expressed how happy this announcement made them. While one Twitter user commented, “Welcome back to one of my favorite person ever! You have no idea how much your comeback means to me. Thank you”, another one said, “Sooooo Happy to see you back sir. You are one of the finest actor of indian cinema and as a movie buff I missed you like anything” We are sure the actor must be thrilled to see how much he was missed on the big screen.

Rumours about Irrfan Khan’s next project haven’t left the headlines ever since he returned to India. It is said that the actor will soon start shooting for Dinesh Vijan’s Hindi Medium sequel as he was spotted outside his office a while back. While Irrfan’s presence in the film is quite confirmed, many names have been doing the rounds about the leading lady of the film. One report suggested that Radhika Madan and Radhika Apte will be seen as Irrfan’s daughters in the sequel. Another report stated that Kareena Kapoor Khan has been roped in opposite Irrfan in the film.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
