Lok Sabha elections 2019 Highlights| People have not forgotten Balakot air strike: PM Modi

Congress poll manifesto insults India’s soldiers: PM Modi

Congress poll manifesto insults India’s soldiers, says Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Cong destabilising India, creating confusion in country: PM Modi

Cong destabilising India, creating confusion in country: PM Narendra Modi.

Will you give chance to those who seek to scrap sedition law: PM Modi targets Congress

Will you give chance to those who seek to scrap sedition law: PM Narendra Modi targets Congress

If by mistake these ‘Mahamilavti’ people get power then naxals will get a big boost: PM Modi

PM Modi in Gondia,Maharashtra: If by mistake these ‘Mahamilavti’ people get power then naxals will get a big boost. Congress has already promised in manifesto that sedition case will not be imposed on any urban naxal, they have promised to do away with sedition law, reports news agency ANI.

Last five years spent in rectifying mistakes of UPA regime: PM Modi

Last five years spent in rectifying mistakes of UPA regime: PM Narendra Modi.

People have not forgotten Balakot air strike: PM Modi

People have not forgotten Balakot air strike: Modi at rally in Maharashtra

We have still not forgotten 1962 war,how will we forget Balakot?: PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi in Gondia,Maharashtra: Some sitting in AC rooms in Delhi are saying ‘its been long, people are now forgetting Balakot strike’. You tell me, have you forgotten? We have still not forgotten 1962 war,how will we forget Balakot?

PM Modi addresses public meeting in Gondia, Maharashtra

PM Modi addresses public meeting in Gondia, Maharashtra.

I need to pull out the country from 72 years of despair and bring prosperity in the country: PM Modi

I need to pull out the country from 72 years of despair and bring prosperity in the country: PM Modi.

Leaders opposing Modi have become those opposing the interests of the nation : PM Modi

Leaders opposing Modi have become those opposing the interests of the nation : PM Modi.

Today some people in their hate for Modi have started speaking against India: PM Modi

PM Narendra Modi in Kolkata: Today some people in their hate for Modi have started speaking against India. Who raised doubts on airstrike? Who demoralized armed forces? Who had asked for count of bodies of terrorists? reports news agency ANI.

55 years of dynasty ruined this country. It’s about time to get rid of this one-family rule: PM Modi

55 years of dynasty ruined this country. It’s about time to get rid of this one-family rule: PM Narendra Modi.

Situation in Tripura was the same as West Bengal. But it was possible to make BJP govt in it and now it’s on path of development: PM Modi

The situation in communist ruled Tripura was the same as West Bengal. But it was possible to make BJP govt in it and now it’s on path of development: PM Narendra Modi .

The world is looking at India with pride, whether in matters of security or space exploration: PM Modi

The world is looking at India with pride, whether in matters of security or space exploration, says PM Narendra Modi.

If providing home and toilets to poor is a crime, then I have committed this crime: PM Modi

If providing home and toilets to poor is a crime, then I have committed this crime: PM Narendra Modi

Congress wants to weaken the forces, they want to compromise the national security: PM Modi

Congress wants to weaken the forces, they want to compromise the national security, Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Congress is determined to bring instability in the country: PM Modi

In their manifesto, the Congress has stated that they will dilute AFSPA.

This move will help Pakistan sponsored terrorist.

The Congress is determined to bring instability in the country: PM Modi

The only thing the country lacked was a resolute government: PM Modi

Our forces had the courage to carry out air and surgical strikes. The only thing the country lacked was a resolute government, says Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

Whether it’s a surgical strike or strike in the space, the world is looking at India with pride: PM Modi

Whether it’s a surgical strike or strike in the space, the world is looking at India with pride, says Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

If the country’s political pundits have to guess the 23rd of May, they can guess from the wave that is coming from Bangland: PM Modi

If the country’s political pundits have to guess the 23rd of May, they can guess from the wave that is coming from Bangland. How big is the crowd at Brigade Parade? Can we compare with Mamata’s rally in January? Prime Minister Narendra Modi

I haven’t seen a wave of masses like this before in Bengal. I bow to your this love and affection: PM Modi

I haven’t seen a wave of masses like this before in Bengal. I bow to your this love and affection: PM Modi in Kolkata.

India will soon be a super power: PM Modi

India will soon be a super power, says PM Modi.

PM Modi addresses public meeting in Kolkata

Prime Minister Narendra Modi addresses public meeting in Kolkata

Congress fields MLA Chavda against Amit Shah on Gandhinagar seat

The Congress has fielded its MLA C J Chavda against BJP president Amit Shah from Gandhinagar Lok Sabha seat in Gujarat, reports PTI.

The opposition party released a list of names late Tuesday night in which it mentioned four more candidates from the state, including Chavda.

With this, the Congress has so far declared 18 candidates in Gujarat, where the last date of filing of nomination papers is April 4.

Cong won’t allow Citizenship Amendment Bill: Rahul Gandhi

Rahul Gandhi said: “If voted to power, Congress will not allow Citizenship Amendment Bill. Congress will restore special status of northeastern states”. It will restore special status of northeastern states, bring in industrial policy to make region a manufacturing hub.”

We do what we say, we don’t lie: Rahul Gandhi

We do what we say, we don’t lie...they always lie. We have committed to pay minimum wages in tea estates, we will fulfil it. This is a fight of ideologies. The RSS, BJP break the country but the Congress unites the nation. RSS and Nagpur are attacking Assam, its history, thinking and culture.”

No permission would be needed for 3 yrs to start small businesses: Rahul Gandhi

We will change the GST and give you a simpler tax once we come to power. (Modi govt) has given Rs 30,000 crore to one person. Country’s youth want to start small businesses. But you need permission and give bribe to start business in Modi’s India. But we have promised that no permission will be needed for the first three years if you want to start small business.

Funds for NYAY will come from pockets of chor businessmen: Rahul Gandhi

Congress president Rahul Gandhi says, “Funds for NYAY scheme will come from pockets of ‘chor’ businessmen favoured by ‘chowkidar’ Narendra Modi.”

Cong will put Rs 3,60,000 in five years in bank accounts of India’s poorest

Rahul Gandhi said: Modi ji made people unemployed in five years, we want to create a new line. 20% of people earn less than Rs 12,000 per month. The moment our govt is formed, we will make a list of all these people and the govt will put Rs 72,000 every year in the bank accounts of these people. Money will go into women’s accounts. We will give Rs 3,60,000 in five years in the accounts of 20% of India’s poorest. This is our guarantee.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi addresses rally in Golaghat, Assam

Congress president Rahul Gandhi is addressing election rally in Golaghat, Assam. Says, “Chowkidar is always speaking lies. I decided to put the truth in front of the people. I asked Cong think tank to tell me how much money can the Congress govt put in people’s accounts? We worked for six months, spoke to world’s top economists, and planned. We came to the conclusion Rs 72, 000 every year in everyone’s account.”

People on TMC payroll indulging in vandalism: Modi

People on TMC payroll are indulging in vandalism, I want to warn them to stop it, else the moment BJP comes to power, they will be taken to task: PM Modi

Didi’s ministers looted the poor: Modi on Bengal chit fund scam

PM Modi: In the Bengal chit fund scam, Didi’s ministers and MLAs fled with the money of the poor. They looted the poor.

Waiting for speed-breaker to go: Modi

I am waiting for this speed-breaker to go so development can gather speed: Modi tells BJP rally in Siliguri.

AFSPA is a protective shield for armed forces: Modi

AFSPA is a protective shield of country’s armed forces which enables them to take steps. But Congress wants to take it away from them: Modi on Congress manifesto

‘She demanded proof of Balakot strike’: Modi on Mamata Banerjee

PM Modi: When our soldiers came back after exacting revenge in Balakot, those in Islamabad and Rawalpindi should have been shedding tears but Didi in Kolkata was pained. She demanded proof and questioned the IAF strike.

If poverty is eradicated, her politics will also finish: Modi on Mamata Banerjee

In a rally in Bengal’s Siliguri, PM Narendra Modi said that Mamata Banerjee doesn’t worry about the poor. “How can she work, after all she has to do politics over the poor. If poverty is eradicated, her politics will also finish.”

Your chaiwala dedicated to tea estate workers: Modi

“On the one hand is your chowkidar, on the other hand are ‘daagdaar, says Modi.Your chaiwala is completely dedicated to the workers of tea estates.”

Didi a speed-breaker in path of WB development: Modi

PM Modi addressing election rally in West Bengal’s Siliguri. Says, “ NDA govt started the Ayushman Bharat scheme for the poor in the country. But, “‘Didi’ (Mamata Banerjee) is a speed-breaker in the path of West Bengal’s development.”. Says Didi has put a break on the development of over 70 lakh farmer families of the state.

Arunachal CM Khandu rubbishes Cong allegation on cash-for-vote

Arunachal Pradesh CM Pema Khandu has refuted Congress allegations of cash for vote in the state. Speaking to news agency ANI, Khandu said, “ It’s absolutely wrong. ‘Cash for Vote’ is rather practised by Congress party. Investigation under Election Commission will reveal all the details. We have got the information that it has been recovered from a BJP candidate’s car.”

Don’t play with nation’s security for vote-bank politics: Shah to Congress

Amit Shah says, “Yesterday, in its manifesto, the Congress said it would remove the sedition law from CrPC. I want to tell Rahul Gandhi not to play with the nation’s security for vote-bank politics.” On Congress promise on AFSPA, Shah says the party doesn’t have the nerve to go against the security forces, adds the BJP is standing with the armed forces like a rock.

Only Modi can keep India safe, make it a world power: Amit Shah

Only Narendra Modi can keep India united, keep it safe, make it a world power, a global power and one of the top five economies in the world: Amit Shah in Uttarkashi

Modi govt launched airstrikes on terror camps after Pulwama: Amit Shah

After Pulwama attack, your Modi government launched air strikes on the locations of the terrorists and destroyed them, says Amit Shah.

All-weather road will encourage tourism in state, says Amit Shah

The all-weather road in Uttarakhand will encourage tourism and provide employment to people here: Amit Shah. Adds, it is not just a brick-and-mortar road but connected with the faith of the people.

Modi govt decided to construct all-weather road: Amit Shah

Right after coming to power in 2014, the Modi government decided to construct an all-weather road in the state. Earlier, families of those visiting Uttarakhand used to be worried about landslides: Amit Sha

BJP president Amit Shah addresses rally in Uttarakhand

BJP president Amit Shah addressing election rally in Uttarkashi. Says, earlier there used to be discussions in Uttarakhand about scams, today the discussion is about development.

Congress manifesto will be interpreted as anti-national: Defence Minister

If you want to remove AFSPA, there is a system. Our govt has been removed in Assam, we have shown it can be removed. Congress manifesto on removing AFSPA will have a negative effect. Congress manifesto will be interpreted as being in favour of anti-nationals and separatists, even if indirectly; they are demoralising our forces: Nirmala Sitharaman

Congress is trying to remove sedition law: Def Min

Congress wants to dilute the AFSPA and demoralize the Armed forces, limit powers of a District Magistrate. Congress wants to remove sedition law: Nirmala Sitharaman

Defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman criticises Congress on AFSPA

Defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman addresses media at BJP HQs . Says Congress manifesto is anti-forces. Says, Congress demand for amending AFSPA will be ‘terrorist-friendly’....asks Congress if it is right to amend it and who are they trying to help? Says, this is very insidious. Congress approach doesn’t inspire confidence. Why it is assumed that power of central forces is opposed to human rights. This is an attempt to weaken the armed forces. Cong’s promise insidious. Says Congress is trying to weaken the armed forces.

PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti files nomination from Anantnag LS seat

PDP president and former J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti has filed her nomination from Anantnag parliamentary constituency for 2019 Lok Sabha Elections: ANI

Anantnag: PDP president and former J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti has filed her nomination from Anantnag parliamentary constituency for #LokSabhaElections2019. pic.twitter.com/Kavsqff68z — ANI (@ANI) April 3, 2019

Ex-Karnataka CS Rathna Prabha joining BJP

Retired IAS officer and former Karnataka Chief Secretary Rathna Prabha says she has decided to join BJP as the PM has been striving to develop the country in a unique manner.; Talking to ANI, she said, “ I wanted to do serve the nation and I felt this was one party apt for me to fulfil my desires to work for the people.”

Waiting for report on recovery of cash: Arunachal poll chief

Reacting to Congress allegation of ‘cash-for-vote’ against BJP in Arunachal, the chief electoral officer of the state Kaling Tayeng said, “It is true that a cash amount of Rs 1.8 crore were recovered on Tuesday night from some vehicles. But we don’t have the exact details yet. Since the Deputy Commissioner and police superintendent of East Siang district are busy with the Prime Minister’s rally in Pasighat they have not sent a report yet about the recovery. We would be able to get a clearer picture once the report is available by late afternoon.”

He refuted reports appearing in social media about recovery of Rs 9 crore from some buses in Arunachal Pradesh as false.

BJP candidate Jaya Prada visits religious places before filing nomination

Actor-politician Jayaprada, BJP’s Rampur candidate, visited a temple and a mosque before filing her nomination papers from Rampur. She is up against SP’s Azam Khan, who is supported by the BSP and RLD. “I feel blessed. Being fielded on BJP ticket and getting to file nomination today is a special gift on my birthday,” she said.

BJP’s Rampur candidate at a religious place before filing her nomination in Rampur ( HT Photo )

Issue hushed up before PM’s Arunachal rally: Surjewala

What is Election Commission of India and ED doing regarding this case? Why are they not taking any action? The issue is hushed up right before Narendramodi’s rally in Pasighat, Arunachal: Randeep Surjewala

Was Rs 180 lakh being used to lure Arunachal voters: Surjewala

Was the Rs 180 lakh being ferried in a BJP car convoy for PM’s rally and for voters, asks Surjewala. If this cash was being used for BJP trying to lure voters, then is it not true that ‘chowkidar is thief’? Is it not a violation of Representation of People’s Act? Shouldn’t their be a case filed against the PM, CM and Arunachal BJP chief? : Surjewala

Congress addresses media in New Delhi

Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala addresses media in New Delhi. Shows two videos. Says, ‘cash-for-vote’ is Modi’s slogan. Is this the way Modi wants to win the election, says Surjewala.

Congress only remembers you for votes : PM Modi

Congress never gave the north east space in its heart or in Delhi. Only BJP did this. Atal Bihari Vajpayee made a separate ministry for the north east which this chowkidar has carried forward. Many of our ministers have made innumerable trips to north east in the past five years. Congress only remembers you for votes . Compare Congress’ 60 years with Modi’s 60 months and decide, says PM.

Is the Cong with India or anti-nationals: Modi

In Arunachal, PM pushes for ‘lotus engine’ in both Itanagar and Delhi. “Is the Congress with the nation or with anti-nationals? Will you ensure that Congress candidates lose their deposit? To save Arunachal, for its progress, it is necessary to strengthen the hands of Pema Khandu, and the BJP. Till the time this ‘chowkidar’ is around, people who try to break-up the country will have to think a hundred times. : PM Modi

Their manifesto should be called ‘dhakosla patra’: Modi

In a dig at the Congress, PM says their manifesto an eyewash, full of lies. “Their manifesto should be called ‘dhakosala patra’, says PM without naming any party. “Like these people, their manifesto is corrupt, they are dishonest, their manifesto is a sham”, says PM.

Launched world’s biggest health mission: Modi

We launched world’s biggest health scheme, Ayushman Bharat’, which is benefitting a lot of people in Arunachal. Cleanliness was never discussed in our country. But we launched Swacch Bharat mission and with people’s cooperation, the reality is in front of the world.

We don’t promise just one thing for decades: Modi

This servant of yours is always in your service. I am trying to improve things here. We don’t promise just one thing and stretch it for decades. We are people who work sincerely to make your lives easy. We have provided free LPG connections, have worked for the farmers without making false promises. Be it roads in villages, national highways, railways or airways. We have done a lot of work to increase the connectivity: PM Modi

Aim to make Arunachal gateway for East Asia, says Modi

We aim to make northeast and Arunachal the gateway for East Asia, says PM Modi. My colleagues and I are here for that purpose today. This election is between promises and intentions.

Am always ready to take up all the challenges: PM

One family ruled India for 55 years but cannot claim they have done all that needs to be done. I’ve been here only for five years, cannot claim the same. But I am ready to take up all the challenges, and am always ready to fulfil all the challenges. I believe in challenging all challenges : PM

All villages in Arunachal now have power: Modi

PM says his rally venue has become a grand stadium in a few years since he last came here. Earlier, it was a field. Says all villages in the state has power after 70 years.

PM begins election rally in Pasighat

PM begins addressing the poll rally in Pasighat. Says its with people’s cooperation, the government has been able to achieve a lot, complete a lot of projects in the state.

PM Modi to shortly address election rally in Arunachal

PM Modi is in Arunachal Pradesh today. He will shortly address an election rally in Pasighat. This is his first election rally of the day. He will be in West Bengal and Maharashtra.

Arunachal Pradesh: Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address a public rally at Pasighat shortly. pic.twitter.com/kBRuPa6iLU — ANI (@ANI) April 3, 2019

EC notice to I&B ministry on NAMO TV: ANI

The Election Commission of India has sought response from the I&B ministry on the 24-hour channel ‘NAMO TV’, based on complaint filed by the Congress and Aam Aadmi Party : ANI

EC seizes Rs 2.10 crore in cash near Perambalur in Tamil Nadu

Election Commission Flying Squad officials have seized Rs 2.10 crore in cash near Perambalur from a former VCK party district secretary during vehicle checks. The cash was concealed inside the car doors.
