China hits back at US over Masood Azhar listing, says resolution at UNSC not conducive to peace in South Asia

Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi/ Bejing: A day after the United States asserted that it will use "all available resources" to ensure that Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar is designated as a global terrorist, China has hit back at the US terming Washington's move as "not conducive to peace and stability in South Asia."

This has come after US, France and the United Kingdom moved a draft resolution at the United Nation Security Council (UNSC) last week to blacklist Azhar and subject him to a travel ban, an assets freeze and an arms embargo.

Listing at the UNSC will be preceded by an open debate where China will be forced to either give approval to the resolution or defend a known terrorist.

The has escalated after China put a technical hold for the 4th time on the listing at the UN 1267 Sanctions Committee. China insists that the sanctions committee should be the sole forum where Azhar's listing should be discussed not the UNSC.

Earlier, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Geng Shuang had told a media briefing in Bejing that China is adopting a constructive and reasonable stand on the issue to resolve it properly while adding that there has been positive progress on the issue.

However, Shuang had pointed out that the US's push is setting a bad example at the International level.

"Also China has been working hard with relevant sides and is making positive results. The US knows that very well. Under such circumstances the US still insists on pushing the draft resolution, doesn't make any sense," Shuang had reiterated.

On the question of Pulwama attack and JeM claiming responsibility of it, Chinese spokesperson reiterated its statement that China hopes South Asia could maintain peace and stability and the two nuclear powers will engage in dialogue and through consultations would resolve the issue.

Meanwhile, India has handed over a dossier to the Acting High Commissioner of Pakistan detailing the JeM's complicity in the Pulwama attack that killed 40 CRPF personnel on February 14. In response to the terror attack, India had carried out air strikes across the Line of Control (LoC) targeting JeM camps.

The next day Pakistan made an unsuccessful attempt to intrude the Indian airspace. An F-16 of Pakistan and a MiG-21 Bison of IAF had crashed in the dogfight that ensued during the PAF's intrusion.
