I am trying to break stereotypes in portrayal of women, says Nimisha Sajayan

The young actor, who bagged State Film award for best actress, says she can’t wait for more good roles

Acting has always been a passion for Nimisha Sajayan and winning the Kerala State Film award for the best actress this year perhaps underlines the efforts she has put in. Not bothered about her ‘screen image’, the actor approaches her characters with exemplar sincerity.

She made her début in Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum, where her character is in for a rude shock when a thief snatches her gold chain while travelling with her husband on a bus. Later, it was her role as an inexperienced lawyer who defends a youth accused of murder in Oru Kuprasidha Payyan and as a school student in Chola going through a traumatic experience that fetched her the award.

Nimisha, who is set to join Rajeev Ravi’s Thuramukham after wrapping up Lal Jose’ Nalpathiyonnu, talks to FridayReview about how she realises her dreams. Edited excerpts:

You made your entry into films at the age of 19. Were you sceptical about accepting the offer?

Such thoughts never came into my mind when I received the offer. I was ecstatic to work with such a wonderful team and I considered it as one of the biggest opportunities one could ever get.

When did you realise that you wanted to be an actor?

I am not really sure about the inspiration, but acting has always been my ‘plan’. Even when I was in primary school, I used to go for auditions. I was born and brought up in Mumbai and we were living in Andheri then. Once I finished schooling, I started going for auditions more seriously.

How was your experience in Thondimuthalum Driksakshiyum?

I was selected after attending three rounds of auditions. But even then, Dileesh ettan [director Dileesh Pothan] was doubtful because I was not fluent in Malayalam. Actually, I didn’t know a thing about the making of a film when the shooting started. They all helped me so much and it was an exceptional experience.

Did the State award change your mindset as an actor?

It is the greatest appreciation I have received so far in my career and it perhaps comes with a certain responsibility as well. At the same time, I make it a point not to think too much about awards or the box-office stature of my films. Instead, I prefer to concentrate on my acting.

Were you upset that Eeda and Mangalyam Thanthunanena didn’t do well?

I am proud about Eeda. I have always been looking forward to be part of good movies but such attempts may not always be commercially successful. As an actor, honestly, I am not happy with Mangalyam Thanthunanena. I was happy with the script but not with the outcome on screen. But I am not blaming anyone for it.

What were your preparations for the role in Oru Kuprasidha Payyan?

I did visit some courts to see what really happens there and to observe the mannerisms of lawyers. I am so grateful to director Madhupal and actors Nedumudi Venu and Siddique who helped me out on the sets throughout.

What’s Sanal Kumar Sasidharan’s Chola about?

The storyline is basically about a certain situation happening in the lives of three people. My character is a school kid named Janu who goes through a trauma.

Does the pain your characters face have an impact on you?

It does. There was a scene in Chola after which I couldn’t control my tears. Some situations tend to make you weak. I am consciously trying not to let such feelings affect me.

And what is your role in Nalpathiyonnu?

I am playing a bubbly girl named Bhagyasooyam who is not scared of anyone. Nalpathiyonnu deals with certain socially relevant issues that we discuss so often.

What do you look forward to in a script?

I think the characters I have done until now have been real. I am waiting for more of such roles that revolve around genuine themes, the kind of roles that make viewers think, even after they leave the cinemas.

But aren’t you part of a star system that entails heroines to cater to certain prerequisites?

I am happy that you asked this. I am trying to break that mindset and such stereotypes in portrayal of women. I believe that it is about making a change. I am trying to create my space and feel proud about what I am doing.

In less than three years, you have made your mark...

I am happy about the kind of offers that have come my way and the trust some fine filmmakers have reposed in me. But I would like to believe that I have a long way to go. Maybe, I have taken the first step but there is a lot more to learn.
