Chris ‘Thor’ Hemsworth Loves India. We Can All Finally Sleep In Peace Now

Chris ‘Thor’ Hemsworth, has always been that kinda lad you want to take home to your mother. He's got the looks, the talent and definitely the height. While our obsession with him has always been something we guiltily boast of, we came across a crucial piece of information that made us fall in love, just a bit harder. As part of his upcoming project, Avengers: End Game, a short clip of the hottie was played for fans at an event and well, let’s just say, he loves India just as much Indians love him.



"What's up everybody in the beautiful country of India? The countdown has begun. 'Avengers: Endgame' will be in cinemas soon," Hemsworth started out by saying. By this point, we were already neck-deep in sachcha pyaar. "Our director Joe Russo has come to the beautiful country. I have come myself. It is one of the best places on the planet. Sorry, couldn't be there this time. Joe thinks he can handle some spicy food and I have told him to try some rogan josh and some butter chicken... see if he can handle the heat. Lot of love guys and hope to see you soon (sic)," he added. Typical firang zest of taking on some desi tadka--it’s cute.

To give you some context, last year, as part of his Netflix project, Dhaka, Chris shot extensively in Ahmedabad and Mumbai. He loved it and put up multiple pictures from behind the scenes--which we all collectively double-tapped while wishing we could get in touch with him. *Sigh* "Beyond thankful for the kindness and generosity that the people of India have extended to us while making our little film here," he had captioned a post from India. Clearly, he really loves this place--probably the ‘exotic’ land he wishes Thanos could get lost in.



While Avengers: End Game hits theatres on 26th of April, there is another connection the 35-year-old has with our part of the world. His seven-year-old daughter is also named ‘India’. Another point to add to the adorable chart. Let's just the say the whole experience has been like finally realizing your crush likes you back. Okay, maybe not specifically you but the entire country you come from. So, it’s a win-win, nonetheless!
