Deepika Padukone gets clicked in her Chhapaak look as she starts shooting for the film- photo inside

Deepika Padukone gets clicked in her Chhapaak look | Photo Credit: Instagram

Deepika Padukone who was last seen in Padmaavat with her now husband Ranveer Singh. The actress is away from the silver screen since a long time now and fans are waiting for the actress to grace the big screen once again with her upcoming film Chhapaak. It was last month when the actress took it to her social media handle and shared the first look of her from the film. The intriguing poster and Deepika's look received a lot of compliments.

Now, the new photos of the actress have surfaced on the social media where she was snapped shooting for the film in the Janpath area of Delhi. The videos and photos started making rounds on social media. In the videos, the huge crowd can be seen waiting to get a glimpse of Deepika.

The actress herself waved at her fans before getting inside her car. The actress was snapped in the same look with her disfigured face. Take a look at the photo and videos right here:



While you are at it also check out the look the first look and photos shared by DP on her social media handle here:

Apart from Deepika, actor Vikrant Massey will be seen playing the lead role in the film. Talking about working with DP, he said, "Working with an actress of her calibre is not just an opportunity but also a huge responsibility. I’m both nervous and excited." According to reports, Vikrant gained 8 kg for the role that demanded him to put on some weight and has also grown a heavy beard.

In the film, Deepika can be seen playing Malti and the film is based on the life of acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal. Deepika is also making her debut as a producer with Chhapaak which again comes with an added responsibility. As per a statement, Deepika bankrolled her debut production venture in order to put across a brave and independent female character for she believes that her story needs to be told. It's a story of undying human spirit, courage and self-love.
