Promise of Minimum Income for Poor Boosts the Opposition’s Chances – Analyst

During the 2014 anti-Congress wave, the "Grand Old Party" of India managed to win just 44 seats to the Lower House — an all-time low since country's independence. On the other hand, Narendra Modi's BJP surpassed the majority mark of 273 seats in the House — the first party to do so in three decades.

Several analysts and opinion surveys have predicted missing the majority mark for the governing party, something which has created a flutter in its camp. As the NYAY electoral promise permeates down into rural areas on the minimum income guarantee scheme, it may make the governing party more nervous.

"Over the last week, we have been tracking voters' perception about the much-touted Congress NYAY scheme. It has slowly begun to catch on in terms of awareness among the masses, but has not yet made a deep impact", Praveen Patil, psephologist and founder of 5Forty3 Datalabs says.

READ MORE: Indian Opposition Leader Promises $1,000 Guaranteed Annual Income for the Poor

Narendra Modi has been trying his best to counter this poll promise from Congress by raising national security issues, including the air strike in Balakot inside Pakistan and the anti-satellite missile test on 27 March. Just a week before polling begins he has been trying to arouse Hindu nationalist pride and accused the Congress of committing a "grievous sin" by linking the Hindu majority community with terrorism. Substantiating his charges, he mocked Rahul Gandhi for "taking shelter" in a constituency where the majority community (Hindus) is in the minority. Rahul Gandhi had earlier opted to fight elections from a second constituency — Wayanad, in south India.

"The charges coming from Narendra Modi is an indication that he possibly is not very sure of the election campaign going completely his way", Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay, a political analyst and author of Modi's biography, told Sputnik.

READ MORE: Facebook Removes 687 Pages & Accounts Linked to Indian Party Ahead of Election

Nevertheless, the Narendra Modi government has claimed that it has distributed much more in the last five years than what Congress has been promising to do under the income guarantee scheme. It claims that besides subsidies for food, fertilizer, kerosene, 55 Ministries handed over subsidies to the poor through the direct benefit transfer into bank accounts. This comes out around INR 106,800 annually (around $ 1,557) as compared with the INR 72,000 (around $ 1,050) which Congress is promising through the direct benefit transfer mechanism. The government also claims that minimum wages for labourers under the rural guarantee scheme have been raised by 42% under the Modi tenure.

The views and opinions expressed by speakers in this article are those of the speakers and do not necessarily reflect the position of Sputnik.
