Official agencies continue prosecution of official agencies

Official agencies continue prosecution of official agencies

Strategy has been prepared by BJP President Amit Shah and National Security Advisor Ajit Doval apart from the Prime Minister. While RSS has been kept in the loop. According to plan, while the Prime Minister would take on the opposition particularly the Congress in his speeches, tweets and statement calling them names, the government agencies like the CBI, Income Tax (IT), and Enforcement Directorate (ED) would target opposition leaders through probes, questioning and raids.



Income tax officials in company of the CRPF raided offices and residences of ruling JDS-Congress alliance minister and his associates in Karnataka in midst of elections. Developmentis not a routine exercise because such steps have not been a norm in the past.

Karnataka Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy was not off the target when he accused the BJP-led NDA government of following "revenge politics". There is a lot of truth in the Chief Minister's accusation if one takes a close look at some of recent events across the country.

In the wake of the numerous failures of his government and any worth mentioning achievement, Prime Minister Narendra Modi became acutely conscious that the BJP is not going to win this time on any positive agenda. An alternate plan in in place according to which the opposition is going to be presented before the country's electorate as corrupt, inefficient, anti-national and bunch of criminals.

Strategy has been prepared by BJP President Amit Shah and National Security Advisor Ajit Doval apart from the Prime Minister. While RSS has been kept in the loop. According to plan, while the Prime Minister would take on the opposition particularly the Congress in his speeches, tweets and statement calling them names, the government agencies like the CBI, Income Tax (IT), and Enforcement Directorate (ED) would target opposition leaders through probes, questioning and raids.

Twin objectives of such a strategy were first to defame these leaders in public eyes and secondly was to prevent opposition unity that was emerging. A united opposition would have ensured the BJP's electoral defeat and it had to be prevented at any cost.

The BJP's biggest worry was big states in the Hindi heartland from where it had won its majority of Lok Sabha seats in 2014. In Uttar Pradesh from where it alone had won 71 out of total 80 Lok Sabha seats, an alliance between the SP, BSP, RLD and the Congress would have ensured the BJP's political decimation.

Mayawati was identified through whom the strategy was operationalised. She among all the leaders is the most vulnerable because the BSP supremo has all her political life has been having cash dealing. The BSP's political funding has largely been through cash. It is no secret that she collects money from her supporters and followers.

On March 12, residence and offices of retired IAS officer Netram were raided by the Income Tax. A Dalit by caste, Netram had held several important positons including that of the principal secretary to the Chief Minister during Mayawati's tenure from 2007 to 2012. He has been accused of being guilty of tax evasion of Rs 100 cores.

Raids and questioning of former UP chief ministers Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav after the two had announced their party's electoral alliance was not a coincidence but was a part of the intelligently- crafted plan to defame and discredit them in public eyes. Reopening of the case of misuse of public funds in installation of hundreds of elephant statues in Lucknow and Noida against the BSP supremo in the apex court cannot be dismissed as routine.

In the same sequence come targeting of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee through Kolkata Police Commissioner Rajeev Kumar through the CBI and calling of Congress chief Rahul Gandhi's brother-in-law Robert Vadra, who is also the husband of newly appointed general secretary Priyanka Gandhi-Vadra, by the Enforcement Directorate (ED). The ED called Robert Vadra only after Priyanka Gandhi decided to join active politics.

The ED is already expediting the questioning of former Finance Minister P Chidambaram and his son Kiriti Chidambaram in the INX media case so that a chargesheet can be filed in the court that can pave the way for his arrest.

Strategy to target the Congress and opposition parties to paint them corrupt has been readied only after the Congress began to succeed in denting the Teflon image of the Prime Minister who has been claiming to be incorruptible and invincible. Main component of the strategy is to aggressively present the opposition as pack of anti-nationalist parties who are in politics to loot the nation.RJD leader Lalu Prasad is already in jail and his son Tejaswi Yadav may get summons from CBI or EDanytime soon.

While entire government machinery is busy targeting the opposition, not a single BJP, RSS or any of the alliance leader has even been investigated so far by any of the agency and this fact alone creates misgivings in popular mind about such a selective approach.

Along with it the Prime Minister or for that matter other BJP leaders like party chief Amit Shah are no sparing any effort to present opposition as pro-Pakistan accusing them for appeasing Muslims. At the same time, they are even claiming that national security can only be saved by the BJP under Modi.

If this strategy is going to ensure an electoral victory insuring return to power or not will only be known on May 23 when results are announced. In the process the BJP, once known as a party with difference claiming itself standing for probity and commitment to constitutional norms, stands is going to lose its credibility.

The BJP today stands transformed. In less than five years under the unchallenged leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the 39- year old party is merely an electoral machine trying to win at any cost caring two hoots for norms or moral values.

Dr. Satish Misra is a Veteran Journalist & Research Associate with Observer Research Foundation.

—[IFS]
