Fact Check: China never shot down an Indian satellite as being claimed

On March 27, India shot down a low-orbiting satellite in a missile test and became one of the handful countries to have advanced space powers.

But, soon after Prime Minister Narendra Modi's announcement about India's A-SAT (anti-satellite) capabilities, social media has been abuzz with various posts, one of which claimed that China shot down an Indian satellite in 2012.

A Facebook page named 'Amit Shah Fans' claimed that after Mission Shakti, China, which shot down an Indian weather satellite in 2012, is now appealing for peace.

Screenshot of Facebook post making the claim

India Today's Anti-Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the claim to be false.

The Facebook page, Amit Shah Fans, wrote in a post in Hindi, "2012 mein China ne Bharat ka ek mausam satellite maar giraya tha. Kal space super power bante hi China ne shanti ki appeal ki. Modi hai toh mumkin hua.

ENGLISH TRANSLATION: In 2012, China shot down an Indian weather satellite. As soon as India became a space superpower, China is now appealing for peace. It is possible only because of Modi.

The post, uploaded on April 1, has been shared by more than 1,700 Facebook users till the filing of this story. Over 130 users commented on the post, in which everyone hailed Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The page is being followed by 6.14 lakh people.

AFWA searched the internet with keywords and found that China did shoot down a weather satellite but it was not Indian and it was not in 2012.

In fact, China had shot down its own defunct weather satellite called Fengyun-1C.

This was done in 2007 when China was testing its anti-satellite missile. The news report regarding the same can be read here and details of the satellite can be found here.

We also searched for official reactions from India and found nothing to conclude that an Indian satellite was shot down.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim China shot down Indian weather satellite in 2012. Conclusion China shot down a weather satellite in 2007 but it was not Indian. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
