Aga Mohsin Srinagar’s only contestant with clean reputation: PDP

Srinagar

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) on Wednesday reiterated its pledge to defeat the communal and divisive elements during coming elections, stating that the forthcoming polls will be crucial for the future discourse of the state.

Addressing party convention at Srinagar’s Batamaloo and Khanyar, PDP General Secretary Ghulam Nabi Hanjura said that the repressive measures and iron fist approach are being rigorously implemented and people are threatened, intimated and harassed by the government in every possible manner.

The PDP General Secretary added that PDP party will remain in the forefront keep sternly opposing any move aimed at harassing, suppressing and targeting the people of the state and that the policies being adopted by the central leadership towards the state are turning the already crises ridden region into a veritable inferno.

He said that the ban on Jamat-e- Islami will further shrink the space for politics and dialogue and it seems that the government of India is implementing every measure which is aimed to subjugate the people of the state. Hanjura said that due to a ruthless smear campaign launched against the people of Kashmir, Kashmiri students outside JK are targeted, traders harassed all across and inside Kashmir religious outfits are banned with clerics bundled in jails like criminals.

Hanjura reiterated PDP’s stand vis-a-vis banning the socio-political and religious organisation- Jamaat-e- Islami, and JKLF which believes non- violence as a method of residence in Jammu and Kashmir. He termed banning such organisations as undemocratic, unconstitutional and an attempt to hurt the religious sentiments of Muslims all across.

He said that Government of India is pushing the people of Jammu and Kashmir into a corner while their constitutional rights are being trampled which is being guaranteed by the constitution of India. Hanjura said that need of the hour is that the Government of India stop this muscular policy and understand that dialogue is the only way forward.

Addressing the conventions, PDP Srinagar District President and MLC Mohammad Khurshid Alam stated the people must remain cautious in electing their vote for the parliament this time as on one side are those elements who have been plundering people since 1947 and on the other side is PDP’s candidate for has dedicated his life to uphold moral and Islamic values in the society.

Both the leaders urged people to vote for PDP’s Srinagar Lok Sabha candidate Aga Syed Mohsin, termed him the politician of a clean reputation

Senior PDP leaders who were present on the occasion include Aga Syed Mohsin, Noor Mohammad, Dr Ali Mohammad, Abdul Hameed Kosheen, Aijaz Ahmad Rather, Arif Laigoroo, Mohammad Shafi Kundangar, zone President Khaniyar, Zone President Batamaloo Bashir Ahmad Bhat, Zone President Eid Gah Ghulam Nabi Bhat several others.
