Pakistan lodges strong protest over ceasefire violations along LoC

The ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Director General (SA & SAARC), Dr Mohammad Faisal, summoned Indian Deputy High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia and condemned the unprovoked ceasefire violations by the Indian occupation forces along the Line of Control on April 1 and 2.

According to the statement issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Director General (SA & SAARC) urged the Indian side to respect the 2003 Ceasefire arrangement; investigate these and other incidents of ceasefire violations; instruct the Indian forces to respect the ceasefire, in letter and spirit and maintain peace on the LoC and the Working Boundary.

Dr Faisal urged that the Indian side should permit UNMOGIP to play its mandated role as per the UN Security Council resolutions. He said that India is violating international laws.

The foreign office spokesperson said that the deliberate targeting of civilian populated areas is indeed deplorable and contrary to human dignity, international human rights and humanitarian laws.

“The ceasefire violations by India are a threat to regional peace and security and may lead to a strategic miscalculation” he added.

On April 1, four innocent civilians namely Muhammad Yousaf, Muhammad Shahzad, Mrs Akbar Jaan and Mrs Kousar Parveen were injured in Nezapir, Rakhchikri, Hotspring and Jandrot, Sectors along the Line of Control.

On April 2, 1 innocent civilian Muhammad Attique, an 18-years-old boy and resident of Jugal Pal, was martyred and 3 women namely Fareeda Begum, Azmat Begum and Rehmat Bibi residents of Jigot Bahadur sustained injuries in Kotkottera and Khuiratta Sectors along LoC.

On the same day, Indian troops intentionally targeted innocent civilians travelling in a civil bus in Bagsar Sector. This is not only in clear violation of existing arrangement but also unethical and immoral.

The Indian forces along the Line of Control (LoC) and the working boundary are continuously targeting civilian populated areas with heavy weapons. This unprecedented escalation in ceasefire violations by India is continuing from the year 2017 when the Indian forces committed 1970 ceasefire violations.

Earlier today, seven Indian troops had been killed and nineteen others injured in exchange of fire with Pakistan Army along the Line of Control.

The Indian soldiers were killed in retaliation of the martyrdom of three Pakistani soldiers at Rakhchakri and Rawalakot sectors along the Line of Control yesterday.

Pakistan Army responded to the Indian aggression befittingly, causing heavy damage on the Indian side.

Indian forces have increased ceasefire violations along the Line of Control during the last couple of days.
