Have a look at the culturally wealthy Ajmer and Pushkar

Travel Destinations

Skymet Weather Team

Ajmer lies in a valley encircled by the ancient Aravalli Range in the state of Rajasthan. It is a heritage city receiving aid from the Indian government’s Yojana Scheme. It lies to the west of Jaipur. Ajmer Sharif and Adhai Din ka Jhonpra are two popular tourism places Ajmer is known for. The mausoleum of Khwaja Moinuddin Chisti is an important place of worship for Hindus and Muslims alike. Other sightseeing places in Ajmer are the Adhai-din-ka-Jhonpara, Taragarh fort, Akbari Fort and Museum, Maqbara Shaikh Husain and Anasagar Lake.

Fairs and Festivals are on Ajmer’s calendar what with a great ethnic mix of people who celebrate an Urs and Diwali with equal fervour. The town of Pushkar has grown curling around the Pushkar Lake which is a holy site said to have legendarily appeared when a lotus was dropped by Lord Brahma upon the site.

The Pushkar mela or fair is a major crowd puller. Let’s get to know the weather in these tourist places.

November- January: Pushkar fair takes place every year in the month of November. During this time, days become comfortable with almost clear sky. While, morning and night temperatures start to drop. The month of November is much warmer as temperatures settle in the mid 20s. As we enter December, both day and night temperatures start falling with nights becoming much colder. During the later part of December and first half of January, the average night temperature drops to hover around 6°C. The day temperature settles between 17°C-21°C. . The first half of January witness cool and comfortable weather conditions with pleasant sunshine. Occasional light rainfall can also be a sight during this time.

According to experts, the day and night remains cool and comfortable and is considered as one of the best months to visit Ajmer and Pushkar. During this time, it is neither too cold nor not too warm.

March-May: As we move into March, the pre-monsoon season begins for Rajasthan. By the end of March, day becomes warm but significant rise in temperatures is seen in April and May. Day becomes hot and uneasy. Dust storm and thunderstorm activity become a common phenomenon during this time.

June- August: It gets really hot and uneasy by the end of June. Humidity levels during this time, starts to rise thus leading to discomfort. Also, by end of June, monsoon reaches parts of Ajmer and Pushkar. Months of July and August are the rainiest months. Since, the intensity of rain is not high, sultry weather prevails.

September-October: By mid September, monsoon starts retreating from Ajmer and temperatures start rising. October is considered to be a transition phase, wherein initially the temperatures remain warm. By the end of October, gradual fall in both day and night temperatures begin.

Vacationing in Ajmer and Pushkar would most definitely be a rejuvenating, refreshing and enriching affair. Brace yourself for heart-warming hospitality; luxurious stays and unforgettable experiences.

Image Credit: Pushkar Camel Safari

Please Note: Any information picked from here must be attributed to skymetweather.com
