Anyone asking for dilution of AFSPA is supporting terror, says minister RK Singh

RK Singh said that "Kashmir has not yet gotten rid of terrorism. A lot depends on reviewing the status of AFSPA" (Photo: PTI)

Questioning the motives of PDP leader Mehbooba Mufti demand to revoke AFSPA, BJP minister RK Singh said anyone wishing to dilute the Act is "supporting the cause of terrorists".

"This is a serious issue. AFSPA gives powers to soldiers to act and operate. It is necessary. Anyone asking to dilute it is helping terrorists' cause," said minister RK Singh.

Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) has been applied to Jammu and Kashmir due to 'disturbed areas' status with ongoing terror activity in the region. Ahead of Lok Sabha elections, it has become a political flashpoint between BJP, Congress and especially regional parties -- PDP and NC.

Responding to why can the government not experiment with removing the AFSPA in J&K if it can be pulled back from Arunachal Pradesh and Tripura, RK Singh said that "Kashmir has not yet gotten rid of terrorism. A lot depends on reviewing the status of AFSPA."

RK Singh directly targeted Kashmir-based leaders stating such a position is "against the country". "How can AFSPA be removed if terrorism is still present in Kashmir? Should we tie the hands and legs of soldiers? Security forces have to fight terrorists, attack hideouts. They need powers to operate for that."

Meanwhile, former union home secretary also reacted to Congress jibe against him on the "saffron terror" remark. Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari had accused him of having coined this term as a bureaucrat.

"I was in Odisha campaigning for the party when I was informed of this comment. Either he was not properly briefed or did not have access to facts. Or, he deliberately made a false statement" he said.

He said that the phrase was coined by Sushil Kumar Shinde, "The term was mentioned by the then home minister Sushil Kumar Shinde at a conclave in Jaipur. He used the word 'saffron terror'. Due to hue and cry, a few correspondents later asked me about the Samjhauta case. As per facts from the National Investigation Agency (NIA) probe, I said that some accused have had a link with RSS at some time in the past. I only stated facts available to me as a bureaucrat from agencies. However, I never used the term as was mentioned by the Congress leader."
