Taranaki man returns to his first Royal New Zealand Navy ship as commander

When Taranaki man Mike Peebles left high school he joined the Royal New Zealand Navy aboard the HMNZS Te Mana, 18 years on and he's the ship's commanding officer.

Commander Mike Peebles returned to the Te Mana, part of the Anzac frigate, earlier this month becoming of the youngest frigate commanding officers in the RNZN's history.

Born and raised in Taranaki, Peebles joined the RNZN immediately after gaining a University Bursary in his final year at New Plymouth Boys' High School.

"All my mates went to university, but I had a love of the sea and wanted to do something different and exciting," he said.

After he graduated from Junior Officer Common Training as a Midshipman, he was posted to HMNZS Te Mana in 2001 for three months at sea, during which the ship took part in a large international exercise off Darwin.

"I vividly remember standing on the bridge with fighter jets passing low overhead, buzzing the ship in simulated attacks," he said. "That made a big impression on me as a fresh-faced 19-year-old and it cemented the feeling that this was where I should be."

He followed that first posting with training as a warfare officer on inshore patrol and support ships and gained service medals for maritime operations in the Persian Gulf and Arabian Sea.

"I served as a bridge watch keeper and boarding officer during two operations post the 9/11 terror attacks, looking for narcotics and illegal weapons in the fight against terrorism," he said.

In 2005 he became Commanding Officer of the inshore patrol craft HMNZS Moa, conducting fishery and customs patrols around the New Zealand coast, and in 2009 he spent a year in the United Kingdom completing the Royal NavyPrincipal Warfare Officer Course at HMS Collingwood.

After roles at sea and on land after his return to New Zealand, in 2015 he assisted with the successful interception and confiscation of almost 260 kilograms of narcotics as part of a combined Task Force for Maritime Security Operations off the Coast of Africa.

"One of the highlights of that posting was being on the Gallipoli peninsula for the 100-year Anzac Day commemoration," he said.

In recent years he has completed a staff and command course, graduating with a masters degree in International Security from Massey University, and served as Operations Planner at Joint Forces Headquarters in Wellington.

His command of HMNZS Te Mana begins with the ship based in Canada, undergoing a systems upgrade.

"The regeneration package for the ship will result in new capabilities that will put us on par or above any navy in the world," he said.
