Lok Sabha polls 2019: PM Modi, Mamata Banerjee clash in West Bengal

Political temperature in West Bengal soared on Wednesday with Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressing two back-to-back high-pitched election rallies in the state, targeting the Trinamool Congress; and state chief minister Mamata Banerjee coming up with an equally strong rebuttal. Addressing rallies in Siliguri in North Bengal, and at the Brigade Parade Ground in Kolkata, PM Modi accused the Congress and the TMC of being 'sympathisers of Pakistan' who wanted to 'break the morale' of India's security forces and make them 'helpless' in the fight against terrorism.

While he targeted the Congress over its promise to review the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA), he accused the TMC leadership over the remarks on the Balakot airstrikes. "The airstrikes were carried there and the pain was felt here. Neither Didi (Mamata Banerjee) nor her friends from the mahamilawat (adulteration alliance) liked it," he said.

PM Modi dubbed the TMC supremo as a 'speed breaker' in the path of the development in the state who wanted poverty to stay so her 'politics of poverty' can flourish.

"I have not been able to ensure the development of Bengal with the same speed as the rest of the country. The reason for this is that in Bengal there is a speed breaker, and this speed breaker is known as Didi," the PM said.

He also accused the TMC of indulging in dynastic politics, an allegation the PM has been levelling against the Congress. "The people of the state are reeling under the dynastic rule. The aunt and her nephew are looting the resources of the state," he said, in an obvious reference to Banerjee and her nephew and TMC MP Abhishek Banerjee.

During the rallies with large crowds, Modi also targeted the Congress manifesto calling it a dhakolsa patra (document of falsehood). Referring to the promise of reviewing the AFSPA, Modi alleged that the Congress has affected the 'moral' of security forces and made them 'helpless' in the fight against terror.

Later in the day, Banerjee was also 'not kind' in choosing words against her 'primary political adversary'. Describing PM Modi as 'expiry babu', Didi dared him to participate in a debate with her. "I don't tell lies like Modi babu. Will call him 'Expiry Babu' from now on," said the Bengal CM.

Starting her election campaign from Dinhata in West Bengal's Cooch Behar district, Banerjee accused the PM of 'indulging in politics over armed forces'.

"The EC has said no party can refer to our military while campaigning. Despite that BJP leaders are doing this. How did the PM do it? Isn't he ashamed?" she said.
