bhu Student murder case: First woman chief proctor of BHU has three FIRs against her

VARANASI: Royana Singh smashed the glass ceiling by being the first woman chief proctor in the 100-year history of Banaras Hindu University (BHU), but her celeb status has more to do with infamy. After a student’s murder on the campus late Tuesday, a third FIR has been lodged against her in less than a year.Rakesh Prasad Singh, father of the student shot on campus, has alleged that Royana hatched the conspiracy to kill his son. SSP Anand Kulkarni confirmed that the woman proctor has been booked under Section 120B in the murder case and her role will be probed.The first FIR against Royana was lodged with Lanka police on May 1, 2018, after the CJM court took note of an application given by Ashish Kumar Singh of Naria under Section 156(3) CrPC. In his application, Ashish alleged that on March 7, 2018, the chief proctor along with 25 others had raided his father’s shop in Naria and looted timber after assaulting him. On court’s order, Lanka police lodged an FIR against Royana.The second FIR against was lodged by a nursing student in December 2018. On November 29, 2018, when nursing students were protesting on the campus for recognition of their college with Indian Nursing Council, Rayana along with other proctorial board members reached the spot and tried to disperse them. Later, a video of the episode went viral on social media after which a student, Manju, alleged she was slapped by the chief proctor.Manju gave a complaint to Lanka police, but cops did not take cognizance. On December 3, 2018, the nursing student alleged her family was being coerced to withdraw police complaint against the chief proctor. When other nursing students carried out a procession, police lodged FIR against Royana.About the status of previous FIRs, Inspector Lanka Bharat Bhushan said Royana Singh had been served notices in both cases to appear before court and seek bail.Royana, a professor of anatomy at Institute of Medical Science, BHU, was given the responsibility of chief proctor when the varsity was embroiled in controversy after lathicharge on girl students following violent protest on campus in September 23, 2017. Taking moral responsibility, the then chief proctor ON Singh had resigned after which then vice-chancellor Prof GC Tripathi appointed her as first chief proctor.BHU spokesperson Rajesh Singh said, the chief proctor is on leave and out of town. Royana could not be contacted over phone as her mobile was switched off.
