A giggle fest it is! Sara Ali Khan can't contain her excitement with mom Amrita Singh in latest photos

Sara Ali Khan and Amrita Singh head to meet Abu Jani Sandeep Khosla



Sara Ali Khan, daughter of Amrita Singh and Saif Ali Khan, might be just two films old in the industry, but her charisma, confidence and candidness has impressed one and all. She made her debut with Abhishek Kapoor's Kedarnath alongside Sushant Singh Rajput and went on to star in Rohit Shetty's Simmba, co-starring Ranveer Singh and while both films have earned critical acclaim and commercial success, the projects have established Sara's name as a talent to reckon with.

The actor, who is busy shooting for her next film, took out time from her hectic schedule. Last night, she was photographed with her mom and actor Amrita Singh. The mother-daughter duo was heading to meet their family friends, the ace designer duo Abu Jani Sandeep Khosla, to celebrate Abu's birthday. In the photographs that have now surfaced on social media, Sara and Amrita have been snapped in a car. Both Sara and Amrita can't contain their excitement as they giggle about something leaving us to wonder what it could be.

Sara paints a pretty picture in an ivory suit, which she's teamed up with traditional jhumkis and a stylish maroon clutch while her mom Amrita looks as graceful as ever, dressed in a silk beige attire. While Sara sported a no make-up look, her mom Amrita finished off her simple look with a small black bindi.

Check out the photographs of Sara Ali Khan and Amrita Singh right here:

Sara Ali Khan, Amrita Singh

On the film front, Amrita last graced the big screen in Sujoy Ghosh's Badla, co-starring Amitabh Bachchan and Taapsee Pannu while Sara is occupied with the shoot of Imtiaz Ali's next. Co-starring Kartik Aaryan, the film is a sequel to Saif Ali Khan and Deepika Padukone's much-loved film, Love Aaj Kal. The entire cast and crew of the film were recently shooting in Delhi and several photographs and videos from their shooting had gone viral on the internet, thereby piquing the curiosity of fans. Besides this, Sara has come on board for the remake of Coolie No. 1 alongside Varun Dhawan.
