Asaduddin Owaisi: Prakash Ambedkar-Asaduddin Owaisi alliance fights elections and a tag

Dalits and Muslims constitute a big electoral segment in Vidarbha , as in other parts of Maharashtra . The entry of Prakash Ambedkar-Asaduddin Owaisi-led Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi has, hence, given a new twist to the electoral battle. More so, with the Modi government perceivably battling Dalit-Muslim anger and support of the two communities remaining crucial for Congress-NCP. In the last two years, there has been several Dalit mobilisation over the Bhima Koregaon incident and SC order on the anti atrocities Act.Ex-RPI leader, Prakash Ambedkar enjoys a larger stature as grandson of BR Ambedkar. His pact with Owaisi’s AIMIM and fielding of candidates in almost all Lok Sabha seats in the state has, however, left political pundits debating on VBA’s potential to divide the Dalit-Muslim vote to BJP-Sena’s advantage. Talking to ET, Ambedkar denied the charge. “We have decided to launch VBA because all mainstream parties are Manuwadi parties who systematically neglect Dalits, Muslims and other deprived sections…When we tried to have an alliance with Congress-NCP, they rejected it. After realising VBA is a force, they are trying to malign us by alleging a link between us and BJP. I don’t care about the false allegation,” he said. Among other things, Ambedkar promises loans up to Rs 5 crore for landless Dalits-Muslims without surety.In the 2014, the BJP-Sena won all 10 seats in Vidarbha and victory margins in many were around 50,000 votes. “The more the Congress-NCP alliance tried to accommodate Prakashji, the more he rejected us. It is clear VBA is BJP’s B team. His move is unfortunate as BR Ambedkar had always urged Dalits and Muslims to never compromise with right-wing forces,” said Nitin Raut, a senior Congress leader of the Dalit community.A number of Dalit activists and NGOs have come out against VBA. “We personally respect Prakash Ambedkar. But when deprived sections are at the receiving end of BJP governments, why has he launched a ‘third force’ only in Maharashtra? It makes people like me fear VBA is trying to provide a safety valve for BJP. And why has he chosen not to contest in Nagpur, the centre of RSSBJP in Vidarbha, instead of fighting Shinde, another Dalit,” asked Sushma Andhare, a Dalit activist who alleged most prominent VBA candidates were in Congres-NCP strongholds.Ambedkar, contesting the Akola and Sholapur seats, has lost 6 Lok Sabha contests. Twice when he won, he had tied up with Congress. Yet, the VBA venture keeps BJP-Sena and Congress-NCP guessing.
