Bangladesh wants to solve Rohingya crisis thru’ discussion, PM reaffirms

DHAKA, April 4, 2019 (BSS)-Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina today reiterated

Bangladesh’s stance on solving the Rohingya crisis with Myanmar through

discussion, urging all concerned to perform properly their responsibilities

to this end.

“Our aim is to solve the Rohingya crisis through talks and we’re working

to this end,” she said in her introductory speech during her visit to the

Defence Ministry at Sher-e-Bangla Nagar in the capital this morning.

Sheikh Hasina, who is also in-charge of the Ministry of Defence, paid her

maiden visit to the ministry after assuming office as the prime minister for

the fourth time after her party’s landslide victory in the December 30

elections.

Pointing out Bangladesh’s foreign policy — friendship to all malice to

none, the premier said Bangladesh will never go for any conflict with

Myanmar.

“Rather our efforts will have to continue so that Myanmar takes back their

forcibly displaced nationals through discussion and I will like to request

all concerned to discharge their duties in this way,” she said.

Sheikh Hasina said Bangladesh has set a unique example in the world by

giving shelter to over 10 lakh Rohingyas. “We did it on humanitarian grounds

as we had an experience in this regard,” she said mentioning one crore

Bangladeshi refugees who took shelter in India during the liberation war.

The prime minister said she and her younger sister had to stay abroad as

refugees after the assassination of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh

Mujibur Rahman in 1975.

“We’ve given shelter to the Rohingyas on humanitarian grounds. We didn’t

engage in any conflict (with Myanmar) … we held talks and signed agreement

with Myanmar for their repatriation,” she said.

Acting Army Chief Lieutenant General Md Shamsul Haque, Chief of Naval Staff

Admiral Aurangzeb Chowdhury, Chief of Air Staff Air Chief Marshal

Masihuzzaman Serniabat and Principal Coordinator on the SDG Affairs at the

Prime Minister’s Office Md Abul Kalam Azad were present.

Besides, PMO Secretary Sajjadul Hassan, Defence Secretary Akhtar Hossain

Bhuiyan, PM’s Military Secretary Major General Mian Mohammad Zainul Abedin,

Press Secretary Ihsanul Karim and senior military officials were present.

The prime minister said Bangladesh has proved that it is capable of

tackling any situation whether it is created by nature or manmade.

“Bangladesh keeps strength to combat any disaster,” she said.

Sheikh Hasina said as an independent country, Bangladesh wants to maintain

peace with all countries. “We want peace, not war … we want to maintain

peaceful relations with all and we are moving with the foreign policy adopted

by Bangabandhu,” she said.

The premier, however, said the country will have preparation to give

befitting reply if anybody attacks. “We will have preparation so that we can

safeguard our independence and sovereignty … we should also have

preparation for peace,” she said.

“If any problem exists with any country, we can solve it through

discussion,” she said referring to the peaceful solution of the maritime

boundary disputes with India and Myanmar as well as the decades-long land

boundary problem with New Delhi.

About winning in the maritime boundary cases, the prime minister said that

it was possible only because of all concerned in Bangladesh worked with

sincerity, responsibility and dutifulness.

Sheikh Hasina said as an independent country, Bangladesh should have an

arrangement so that it can move keeping pace with the world in every field.

The prime minister put emphasis on imparting proper training and procuring

modern equipment for the Bangladeshi peacekeepers so that they become experts

in all sides.

“The members of our armed forces and police are going to different UN

missions to maintain peace in the trouble-torn countries. So I want that they

become expert in all sides and for this proper training and equipment are

necessary for them,” she said.

Terming the defence ministry as a symbol of the country’s independence and

sovereignty, Sheikh Hasina said the ministry deals with how to protect the

country from the attacks of the external forces.

The premier also mentioned various institutions under the Ministry of

Defence including the Armed Forces and SPARSO saying these are very important

organizations of the country.

Describing the armed forces as a symbol of country’s independence and

sovereignty, Sheikh Hasina said the members of the armed forces are playing a

very important role in safeguarding the country.

Alongside this, she said, they are also working with honesty, integrity and

sincerity in the international arena particularly at the UN Peacekeeping

Missions.

In this regard, the prime minister said various posts of the armed forces

and the defence ministry have been reorganised keeping consistency with the

developed countries.

Besides, the armed forces have been developed with latest tools and

technologies like other countries of the world through imparting necessary

training and providing other support, she added.

Sheikh Hasina said Bangladesh has already graduated to a developing country

and all will have to work with integrity and sincerity to maintain the trend

of advancement.

Referring to the long term plans of the government including 20-year

perspective plan and Delta Plan-2100 to further advance the country, the

prime minister said the new generations will be able to celebrate country’s

the 100th year of independence in 2071 as the most developed and prosperous

country in South Asia.

The premier later visited Bangabandhu Memorial Museum set up at the Defence

Ministry in memory of the Father of the Nation.

While visiting the museum, she became emotional. She also signed the

visitors’ book there.

Bangabandhu used the current office of the Defence Ministry as his office

when he was the prime minister and president of the country.
