To tackle China in Indian Ocean Region, Navy to acquire 6 advanced submarines worth over Rs 50,000 crore

Indian Navy submarine

New Delhi: The Indian Navy has initiated the process to acquire six submarines under Project-75 and the project is likely to cost over Rs 50,000 crore. The tender process has been initiated by the Navy and the initial Expression of Interest has been issued to foreign vendors who wish to take part in this programme.

Under Project 75-India, the Navy plans to build six conventional diesel-electric submarines which would be almost 50 per cent bigger than the Scorpene class submarines currently being built at the Mazagon Dockyards Limited in Mumbai.

"The draft EOI has been issued to the foreign vendors who would be taking part in the competition along with the probable Indian partners who have also been invited to give suggestions on the strategic partnership policy under which the boats would be built," Sources in the Navy told ANI.

As per the requirements of the Indian Navy, the submarine has to be equipped with heavy-duty firepower with least 12 Land Attack Cruise Missiles (LACM) along with Anti-Ship cruise missiles (ASCM).

Sources in the Navy have further said that submarines should also be able to carry and launch 18 heavyweight torpedoes in the sea.

Compared to the Scorpene submarine, the new vessel is set to have more firepower.

Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman after clearing the procurement of these submarines in the Defence Acquisition Council meeting has appointed a Navy officer as in-charge of the project

The Indian Navy plans to operate a mix of nuclear as well as conventional submarines in the fleet to patrol the area stretching between the Malacca Straits and the Indian Ocean Region.

While the Indian Navy runs more than 100 submarines and surface warships, the Pakistani Navy has around 20 of these.

Submarines form an integral part of the blue-water navy and are important for nations that want to project their power by operating in the deep waters of open oceans.

The project is seen as a drive to tackle China which operates in the Indian Ocean Region.

Pakistan operates 5 submarines but currently, only one submarine is partially operational while the remaining are undergoing major repairs.
