Rahul Gandhi files nomination papers in Kerala

Rahul Gandhi, President of India's main opposition Congress party, looks up before releasing his party's election manifesto for the April/May general election in New Delhi, India, April 2, 2019. Photo: REUTERS/Adnan Abidi

India's Congress party President Rahul Gandhi today filed his nomination papers from Wayanad Lok Sabha constituency in Kerala for the coming national elections.

Accompanied by his sister and party General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, Rahul, the 48-year-old scion of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, filed the nomination for Wayanad, marking his contesting from a second constituency for the first time, apart from his traditional constituency of Amethi in his home state of Uttar Pradesh, reports our New Delhi correspondent.

Senior Congress leaders submitted the papers before the District Collector A R Ajayakumar amidst heavy security in and around the Collectorate.

A helicopter carrying Rahul, Priyanka and other leaders landed in school playground near the District Collector's office, reports the correspondent.

On their way to the Collectorate, Rahul and Priyanka were greeted by thousands of party flag-waving Congress workers, including women and youth, who turned up braving scorching heat.

In Wayanad, a constituency dominated by Muslims, Christians and indigenous community members, Rahul's opponent in the poll battle will be Tushar Vellappally, chief of regional party Bharat Dharma Jana Sena (BDJS) which is an ally of BJP in Kerala and is contesting Lok Sabha polls in Kerala for the first time.

Rahul and Priyanka were greeted by a large crowd carrying party flags during the road show when he stopped his car and stepped out to greet party workers. Rahul also shook hands with some party workers before he moved on.

Last week, the Congress announced Rahul's candidature from Wayanad in addition to the Amethi constituency in Uttar Pradesh that has voted him to parliament since 2004 when he had contested his first Lok Sabha election.

Rahul had at that time said that people in South India "feel hostility" from Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his contesting from Wayanad was a way to send out a message that "Congress stands with you. I stand with you."

Rahul's contesting from a second seat prompted the BJP to charge that he is "running away" because he is unsure of his electoral prospects in Amethi where he has been challenged by federal minister Smriti Irani for the second time.

At an election rally in Maharashtra a few days ago, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had reacted sharply to Rahul's decision to contest from Wayanad saying the Congress chief was "afraid" because the party had "insulted" Hindus by using the term "Hindu terror" and knew it would be punished by the community and that Wayanad is a place where "the majority is in a minority".
