cashify agents: Cashify nabs fraudsters posing as its agents to steal iPhones, Apple Watches, Retail News, ET Retail

BENGALURU: Cashify founder Nakul Kumar on Wednesday tweeted his dissatisfaction at police inaction in a case that was hurting his company's brand image. Fraudsters allegedly posed as Cashify agents on websites like OLX India to pick up iPhones and Apple Watches with the promise that money would be transferred online after the items were picked up. When such cases of fraud came to their attention in early March, Nakul tried to get Pulikeshi Nagar police to take action. However, even after 14 attempts, no FIR was registered.The Cashify team then decided to play detective, set a trap for fraudsters and caught them. But Nakul alleged no arrests were made and the culprits got a free pass after being taken to the police station by the Cashify team.The fraud unravelled on March 7 when a customer complained that Cashify had not paid him for an Apple Watch he had sold. The online platform is for reselling old mobiles , laptops and electronic gadgets for instant cash but it does not buy or resell Apple Watches. The fraudsters sourced their victims on OLX India and other such sites, posed as Cashify agents, picked up their items, gave them receipts with the Cashify logo and told them money would be transferred online. And escape.On March 11, Cashify received another complaint from a customer who sold an iWatch to fraudsters posing as Cashify agents. The customer tried to file a complaint at the Pulikeshi Nagar police station, but cops did not entertain his complaint, alleged Nakul.On March 12, Cashify tried to file a complaint but was fobbed off by cops at Pulikeshi Nagar police station. Every day, there were fresh excuses like elections or writer being unavailable, Nakul claimed. On March 14, the Cashify team approached city police commissioner with their complaint, but were turned away.For 14 days, Nakul said they tried to get police to register an FIR but failed. On March 27, Cashify realised there was another attempt being made online by fraudsters to lure a customer. Since police refused to come to the spot, Cashify team hid near the victim's house at 4pm and managed to nab the culprits.Despite turning them over to cops, Nakul alleged no action was taken and an NCR was filed despite repeated requests for an FIR. The culprits were also let off after police secured a written apology from them on April 2.Nakul tweeted: "We had the proof,s we had the victims. What we didn't have was the support of the custodians of law who're supposed to use those to favour justice. Shame!"Stern actionCity police commissioner T Suneel Kumar said he’ll look into the matter. “We’ll take stern legal action against the miscreants. I’ve directed DCP (East) Rahul Kumar to check why Pulakeshi Nagar cops refused to accept the complaint,” he said.
