‘Queen’ Kannada remake ‘Butterfly’ certified UA

‘Queen’ Kannada remake ‘Butterfly’ certified UA

The film is a comedy drama directed by Ramesh Aravind and has Parul Yadav reprising the role done by Kangana Ranaut in the original.

Flix Sandalwood

The Kannada version of the hit Bollywood flick Queen, titled Butterfly, went in for certification recently and has been certified UA. With this, Butterfly is gearing up to hit the theatres shortly and an official announcement about its release date is expected to be made soon.

The story is a comedy-drama on how a small-town girl goes on to find her feet in a foreign land, shattering stereotypes and taking control of her decisions in life.

Butterfly is directed by Ramesh Aravind and has Parul Yadav reprising the role done by Kangna Ranaut in the original. Ramesh Aravind has also penned the dialogues for the film in association with Mamta Sagar. The film is produced by Manu Kumaran under the banners Mediente International Films Ltd and Liger Commercial Brokers.

The Kannada version also stars Elli AvrRam, Varun Shashi Rao, Sudha Belawadi and Bhargavi Narayan. The shooting for the film began in India and later shifted to Paris, Barcelona and London, where major portions were shot.

Queen is being remade in all the four south Indian languages and the first look poster of all the four versions was released on October 19 last year to coincide with the Vijayadasami festival. With the teasers releasing on the same day, the buzz was that the four remakes will have a simultaneous release as well, but there is no official word about it yet.

In Tamil, the film is titled Paris Paris with Kajal Agarwal in the lead role while in Telugu it is titled Queen with Tammannah Bhatia playing the lead and in Malayalam the film will be released as Zam Zam with Manjima Mohan reprising Kangana’s role.

Queen was both a critically acclaimed film and a commercial success. A comedy drama, it was directed by Vikas Bahl and produced by Anurag Kashyap, Vikramaditya Motwane, and Madhu Mantena. The film released in 2014 and won the National Awards under the Best Hindi Film and Best Actress categories.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
