Four Corners: Migrant ship stranded with more than 60 on board

A HUMANITARIAN ship off the Libyan coast with 64 rescued migrants aboard is stuck at sea as Italy and Malta refuse it safe harbour.

Their refusal sets the stage for another Mediterranean stand-off that can only be resolved if European governments agree to accept the asylum seekers.

Carlotta Weibl, spokeswoman for the German humanitarian organisation Sea-Eye, said yesterday that the ship was near the Italian island of Lampedusa, adding: “Malta says we can’t enter their waters and we are unlikely to get permission from Italy.”

A TALIBAN attack on an Afghanistan government compound in western Badghis province has killed at least 20 troops and policemen.

Mohammad Nasir Nazari, a provincial councillor, said the “massive attack” took place before dawn yesterday, and that it targeted the government headquarters in the district of Balal Murgab.

He said the Taliban stormed all the security posts around the compound under the cover of darkness.

He said that the lives of some 600 members of the security forces deployed there are under threat.

Jamshid Shahabhi, spokesman for the Badghis’ governor, said intense fighting in the district was still under way.

He added that he fears more casualties are likely due to the violence.

Taliban spokesman Qari Yousf Ahmadi claimed responsibility for the attack in a statement to the media.

IN the US, prisons will no longer allow clergy in the death chamber after the US Supreme Court blocked the scheduled execution of a man who argued his religious freedom would be violated if his Buddhist spiritual adviser could not accompany him.

Effective immediately, the Texas Department of Criminal Justice will only permit prison security staff into the execution chamber, a spokesman said.

The policy change comes in response to the high court’s

ruling staying the execution of Patrick Murphy, a member of the Texas Seven gang of escaped prisoners.

And finally, the Dalai Lama has praised New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern for her compassionate handling of a recent attack on two mosques by a gunman that left 50 Muslim worshippers dead in Christchurch.

The Tibetan spiritual leader said others could learn from her.

“I really admire the New Zealand Prime Minister,” he told reporters in the Indian capital, New Delhi, where he addressed a conference of educators and students.

“She really tried to tackle this problem through non-violence, through compassion and through mutual respect.”
