Top news of the day: RBI cuts repo rate to 6%, 4 BSF jawans killed in Chhattisgarh encounter, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

The Reserve Bank of India on Thursday once again reduced the benchmark lending rate by 0.25 percentage points to 6 per cent. Four members of the monetary policy committee (MPC) voted in favour of the rate cut, while Deputy Governor Viral Acharya and Chetan Ghate voted for maintaining the status quo.

The Supreme Court on Thursday agreed to hear a plea challenging the release of a biopic on Prime Minister Narendra Modi as a violation of the Model Code of Conduct (MCC). A Bench led by Justice S.A. Bobde listed the case for hearing on April 8.

Good people opt out of becoming judges for fear that negative things, right or wrong, about them will come out into the public domain, Chief Justice of India (CJI) Ranjan Gogoi observed on Thursday.

Four Border Security Force (BSF) jawans were killed and two others injured in an encounter with Naxalites in Chhattisgarh on Thursday, police said. The encounter took place in Kanker district, police said.

Twice in succession, Delhi Capitals showed it doesn’t quite know how to win from a winning position. As a result, its self-belief has taken an obvious beating. On Thursday, an upbeat Sunrisers Hyderabad could well compound the worries of an already-shaken host.

The United Arab Emirates (UAE) on Thursday honoured Prime Minister Narendra Modi with the prestigious Zayed Medal for giving a “big boost’ to bilateral strategic ties between the two countries.

The Australian, who is accused of killing 50 worshippers in gun attacks on two mosques in Christchurch will face 50 murder charges and 39 attempted murder charges when he appears in court on Friday, police said.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi filed his nomination for the Wayanad constituency. He is also contesting in his traditional seat, Amethi. He was accompanied by his sister and party general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra.

In what is likely to become a protracted battle with U.S. President Donald Trump, a committee of the U.S House of Representatives has demanded six years of Mr. Trump’s personal and business tax returns from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).

The House of Commons of the British Parliament on Wednesday approved a legislation that will force Prime Minister Theresa May to seek a Brexit delay to prevent a potentially disorderly departure on April 12 without a deal.

The interval block has become a crucial element in Tamil cinema. In most cases, it's written to set the stage for a hero versus villain clash. In Natpe Thunai, itannounces the hero.
