Woman on a scooter pulls out in front of another rider sending them both flying in scary crash

A scooter rider had a lucky escape after pulling out in front of another rider.

The female biker was crossing a road in Nagercoil, part of Tamil Nadu state in southern India, when the other rider slammed straight into her.

Miraculously both only needed two days in hospital before being discharged despite the crash, according to a local source.

A female scooter rider was thrown from her bike in Nagercoil, part of Tamil Nadu state in southern India, after she was hit by another rider

The biker was hit in the middle of the road, flinging her from her scooter

Shocking video shows the scooter rider look in both directions twice before pulling out onto the road.

As she gets to the middle another driver, who is zipping down the road, slams straight into her side hurling her from the scooter and into the hard tarmac ground.

The other rider's bike is lifted completely off the ground before smashing down a short distance away.

Shopping bags are also exploded by the force, and fling their contents across the highway.

The woman lies on the ground motionless, her scooter lying on top of her, while the other rider gets up and stumbles to the side of the road clutching their head.

Passersby, who have seen the crash, immediately rush forward to help the pair.

As she was flung off the scooter her shopping bags exploded and spilled their contents across the road. The scooter then fell on top of her

She had looked both ways before deciding to pull out into the road in Tamil Nadu state

Amazingly, despite the shocking crash, she was discharged from hospital after two days according to a local source.

A local source said: 'As soon as the bystanders saw the mishap unfold right in front of their eyes, they ran to their rescue.

'They ran towards the bikers as both of them lay injured on the street.

'Both were rushed to the nearby hospital and were admitted immediately by the doctors.

'They were then discharged after two days.'
