India shot down a satellite, joining only four other countries in the space club

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

India shot down a satellite, joining only four other countries in the space club 'We are not just capable to defend on land, water and air, but now also in space' Photo by TOLGA AKMEN/AFP/Getty Images

Article content NEW DELHI — Joining the select space club of United States, Russia and China, India became the fourth country in the world to shoot down a low-orbit satellite with a missile, announced Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday. The Shakti (power) mission lasted just three minutes and the target was blown up in its low earth orbit 186 miles up, he said, describing it as a “proud moment” for the India and purely for defensive purposes. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or India shot down a satellite, joining only four other countries in the space club Back to video “We are not just capable to defend on land, water and air, but now also in space,” said Modi, noting that the technology was developed indigenously. The successful test comes amid broader concerns about the readiness of India’s armed forces for today’s battles. It recently engaged Pakistan in its first aerial dogfight in decades, fielding much older aircraft than its rival.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content In the journey of every nation there are moments that bring utmost pride and have a historic impact on generations to come.



One such moment is today.



India has successfully tested the Anti-Satellite (ASAT) Missile. Congratulations to everyone on the success of #MissionShakti. — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) March 27, 2019 Parliament a issued report in March 2018 bemoaning the state of the armed forces, noting that normally only a third of military equipment should fall into to the older, “vintage” category. “As far as we are concerned, the state today is 68 per cent of our equipment is in the vintage category, with just about 24 per cent in the current, and 8 per cent in the state-of-the-art-category,” the parliamentary committee was told by top military officials, according to the report. The United States first tested antisatellite missiles in 1958 while China did it as recently as 2007. The latest feat demonstrates India’s growing ambitions and footprint in space, where its neighbour China is seen as dominant. Last year, the government set aside a budget of US$1.43 billion for the country’s first manned mission to space by 2022. The space research organization aims to send a three member team to space for a week.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Earlier in 2014, India had become the fourth country to send a satellite to Mars. It cost US$74 million, less than the budget of the space movie “Gravity.” More On This Topic India bombs insurgents in disputed region of Kashmir. Will Pakistan respond? Meet the fighter jet pilot whose conduct may have averted an India-Pakistan war Modi tweeted about the upcoming “important message,” an hour before his televised address leading to intense speculation in the media. The last time Modi had suddenly addressed the nation was in November 2016 when he announced the ban on 500 and 1000 rupee notes called demonetization, plunging the country’s monetary system into chaos for months. India goes to polls on April 11 in elections that will last a month across this vast nation before the results are declared on May 23.

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Calgary Herald Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Calgary Herald, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Calgary Herald Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
