Opponents are adversaries, not “anti-nationals or enemies”: L K Advani

New Delhi: BJP veteran LK Advani, benched by the ruling BJP ahead of the April-May national election, broke his silence Thursday in a blog titled “Nation First, Party Next, Self Last”. In the piece, he urged his party to “look back, look ahead and look within” and stressed on “democracy and democratic traditions” within the party.

“Defense of democracy and democratic traditions, both within the Party and in the larger national setting, has been the proud hallmark of the BJP,” Advani wrote.

“The essence of Indian democracy is respect for diversity and freedom of expression. Right from its inception, the BJP has never regarded those who disagree with us politically as our ‘enemies’, but only as our adversaries.”

He said similarly, “in our conception of Indian nationalism, we have never regarded those who disagree with us politically as anti-national. The party has been committed to freedom of choice of every citizen at personal as well as political level.”

The BJP had always been in the forefront of demanding protection of independence, integrity, fairness and robustness of all democratic institutions, including the media, Advani reminded, referring to the Emergency.

Referring more than once to internal democracy, Advani said, “The triad of Satya (truth), Rashtra Nishtha (dedication to the Nation) and Loktantra (democracy, both within and outside the party) guided the struggle-filled evolution of my party. The sum total of all these values constitutes Sanskritik Rashtravad (Cultural Nationalism) and Su-Raj (good governance), to which my party has always remained wedded.”

Advani, who was Deputy Prime Minister in the BJP government that Atal Bihari Vajpayee led nearly two decades ago, was hurt at the way he was pink-slipped.

Sources said more than the idea that he would not be in parliament for the first time in decades, Advani was hurt that the emissary of the news was not BJP president Amit Shah but a lower functionary.

Advani said in his blog that elections are “also an occasion for honest introspection by all the stakeholders in Indian democracy – political parties, mass media, authorities conducting the election process and, above all, the electorate.” He is one of the BJP founders and its longest-serving president.

PTI
