The Friday 5 — April 5-7

C&G Newspapers | Published April 3, 2019

1. Royal Oak Market: Spring Art Fair

April 4-5 • Royal Oak Farmers Market, Royal Oak

The third annual Royal Oak Market: Spring Art Fair will roll into the Royal Oak Farmers Market Thursday, April 4, and Friday, April 5.

The juried event will kick off the art fair season with 55 artists featuring a wide range of mediums, including ceramics, painting, photography, glass, jewelry, sculpture, mixed media, drawing, printmaking and more.

The art fair will be open from noon to 10 p.m. both days, and admission and parking will both be free.

The Royal Oak Farmers Market is located at 316 E. 11 Mile Road, east of Troy Street. For more information, visit www.royaloakartfair.com.

Related story: Art fair to spring back to Royal Oak Farmers Market

2. Macomb County Senior Wellness and Retirement Expo

Friday, April 5 • Macomb Intermediate School District, Clinton Township

The annual Macomb County Senior Wellness and Retirement Expo returns for its 16th year from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. Friday, April 5, at the Macomb Intermediate School District building, 44001 Garfield Road in Clinton Township.

The free event will feature gifts to the first 200 attendees, free door prizes, raffles, giveaways, free health and wellness screenings, free safe prescription drug disposal, and a new Make Macomb Your Home photo booth with Macomb County Executive Mark Hackel. Local seniors can also visit with more than 60 vendors — including event partner Henry Ford Macomb Hospital — providing services such as health screenings, eyeglass adjustments, blood pressure and stroke education, diabetes prevention tips, weight management information and more.

For more information, call (586) 286-9333.

Related story: Senior wellness expo returns to Macomb County

3. Celebrate India at the DIA

April 5-6 • Detroit Institute of Arts, Detroit

The Detroit Institute of Arts’ yearlong “Arts of Asia” celebration will honor the arts and culture of India this weekend with a full lineup of special programs.

The two-day event, which focuses on both traditional and contemporary Indian culture, will take place Saturday, April 5, and Sunday, April 6. Festivities include art demonstrations, such as henna, miniature painting and Rangoli; beginner and intermediate yoga workshops; classical and folk dance performances; children’s activities; carom games; and classic Bollywood films.

The celebration will also feature special guest Harsh Vardhan Shringla, India’s ambassador to the United States, who will deliver a keynote speech titled “India: Land of a Billion Dreams” at 1:30 p.m. Saturday in the Detroit Film Theatre, located inside the DIA.

The DIA is located at 5200 Woodward Ave. in Detroit. All activities are included with museum admission, which is free for residents of Wayne, Oakland and Macomb counties. For a full list of events, visit www.dia.org/events/celebrate-india.

4. Baumgartner House Museum open house and tours

Sunday, April 7 • Baumgartner House Museum, Fraser

Fraser’s historical Baumgartner House Museum, 18577 Masonic Blvd., will hold its April open house from 1 to 4 p.m. Sunday, April 7.

The Baumgartner House was built in 1875 and is one of the city’s first and oldest homes. During the open house, visitors can take a tour of the museum or browse a variety of Easter items and glassware that will be for sale.

For more information on the Baumgartner House Museum, visit the Fraser Historical Commission’s website at www.ci.fraser.mi.us/index.aspx?nid=196 or email baumgartnerhousemuseum@yahoo.com

5. Rochester College presents ‘Opal’

April 4-7 • Rochester College’s RAC Theatre, Rochester Hills

Rochester College’s theater department will present "Opal," an award-winning Broadway hit by Robert Nassif Lindsey, April 4-7 at the college’s RAC Theatre, 800 W. Avon Road in Rochester Hills.

The musical tells the story of a young girl who is placed in an early-1900s lumber camp after being orphaned in a shipwreck. She dreams of returning to her former life and family, and she creates her own fantasy world to survive in her new surroundings.

Performance times are 7:30 p.m. April 4-6, and 2 p.m. April 7. Tickets cost $5 for students, and $12 in advance or $15 at the door for adults. To purchase tickets online, visit www.rc.edu/rctheatre.

For group sales or more information, call (248) 218-2149 or email theatre@rc.edu.

Staff Writers Sarah Wojcik and Nick Mordowanec contributed to this report.
