Back Again From Rules to Deals

By Manish Sabharwal

One reason India remains poor is because of its regulatory policy of ‘Show me the person and I will show you the rule’. This has led to the notion that rules in this country are made, tweaked and enforced according to the wealth/power/connection of individual under investigation. Before the 1991 reforms, entrepreneurs spent half their time in Delhi because a licence meant ‘hostages’, not ‘customers’.

And since a licence meant a loan, it also meant financing targeted returns-before-equity. Since 1991, the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Sebi) has done a fine job of creating leverage for the voice of capital. The missing link was bankruptcy. This needed the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (IBC) — and RBI’s February 12, 2018, circular, ‘Resolution of Stressed Assets: Revised Framework’, which the Supreme Court struck down on Tuesday.

In J K Rowling’s Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets, Dumbledore tells Harry, ‘It is our choices more than our abilities that reveal who we really are.’ India’s policy choices around bankruptcy over the last three years represent a rupture with the past. IBC went live in 12 months and was subsequently amended to make RBI’s role explicit (Sec 35A) and banned promoters from re-bidding (Sec 29A).

RBI evolved transparent criteria for bank IBC referral of two defaulter batches (12 and 28 accounts). The 2018 RBI circular atoned for 20 years of RBI sins in bad loan recognition. A new Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018, diluted the attractive economics of emigration. And the courts upheld IBC’s constitutionality. None of these were enough individually.

But collectively, they created a regime where what happened before IBC because of equity infusion, strategic sale, higher collateral, board reconstitution, etc, became more important than what happens in bank haircuts or liquidation. This has improved recovery rates and resolution time for past defaults. India desperately needs a shift from deals to rules. It’s toxic for an entrepreneur to believe that if she follows a rule, she probably will miss the deal.

This is why only one million of India’s 63 million enterprises pay social security. Society allows banks up to 20 times leverage because it expects them to act as trustees. But this is inconsistent with evergreening bad loans. Banks are not perfect. But they are safer with a rules-based regime for recognition and resolution of their mistakes.

Many changes will make our banks healthier. In public sector banks (PSBs), the shareholder is so powerful that the board and management are weak. In private banks, the management is so powerful that the board and shareholders are weak. But problems will recur without a rules-based regime for NPA resolution. The new bankruptcy regime is working in three ways: by de-stigmatising, de-leveraging and dediversifying. De-stigmatisation recognises IBC as an important tool —we all make mistakes, stupidity is not illegal, and everybody is better off with a quick resolution. De-leveraging entails higher equity raising and lower borrowing against shares by promoters. And de-diversifying — borrower troubles often don’t come from core businesses but from too many businesses in too many areas. Nobody expected Ravi Shankar to play the guitar or Eric Clapton to play the flute.

Similarly, there was little logic other than debt availability for a great consumer company to make cement, an amazing media company to own a highway, and a talented airport operating group to generate power. Post-mortems have a certainty that prescriptions don’t. Many of these remarkable entrepreneurs will bounce back with resolutions that will enable them to do more by doing less. Indian entrepreneurs are redefining boldness as generating prosperity far into the future over quick returns, generating positive economic externalities and not extracting economic rent, and recognising some values as more important than business. India has often been a hostile habitat for first-generation entrepreneurs.

One reason was a banking system unable to recover its loans. Counter-intuitively, effective bankruptcy laws lead to more meritocratic lending. Former bank regulator William K Black, in his 2005 book, The Best Way to Rob a Bank is to Own One, wrote about the 1980s bad loans crisis in the US that cost taxpayers $200 billion. That figure — about Rs 14 lakh crore — is eerily close to the amount India’s NPAs recently peaked at. RBI’s ‘Resolution of Stressed Assets: Revised Framework’ created rules for handling bad loans. It is little solace for us today that if these rules had existed from 2008, India’s NPAs would have stopped at Rs 4 lakh crore, instead of the . Rs 14 lakh crore today. More worryingly, since this week, these rules no longer exist.

The writer is co-founder, TeamLease Services

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
