NHW was not closed even during Kargil war: Farooq

NHW was not closed even during Kargil war: Farooq

SRINAGAR, Apr 4: The Jammu-Kashmir highway was not closed even during the Kargil war when intelligence reports suggested suicide attackers were at large, former chief minister Dr Farooq Abdullah said today, a day after the government decided to block the road lifeline for two days a week.

"What is happening for God’s sake? Are you trying to make Kashmir a colony of the British?" an anguished Abdullah asked and termed the governor Satya Pal Malik led administration's decision interference with a citizen's fundamental rights.

According to the order issued on Wednesday by state home secretary Shaleen Kabra, no civilian traffic will be allowed to move from Baramulla in north Kashmir to Udhampur in Jammu region on Sundays and Wednesdays till May 31.

The restrictions on civilian traffic on the 271-km highway will remain in force from 4 AM to 5 PM, said the order, which follows the suicide attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama. The highway passes through important towns such as Anantnag, Awantipora, Pampore, Srinagar, Pattan and Baramulla.

"The fundamental rights of people are being tampered with," Abdullah said.

Such a decision flies in the face of the BJP-led central government's assertion that the security situation in the state had improved, he said.

"We brought the state from the 1989 turmoil to 2014 when tourism was booming the state and separatists had become redundant. Look where we are now?" asked the National Conference president, who is contesting the Lok Sabha elections from Srinagar.

"We have never seen such a situation. Even during Kargil war when intelligence reports suggested suicide attackers were roaming, such a decision was never taken," he added.

Those who had passed such orders were acting as a rubber stamp for Delhi and only worsening the life of the people in the state, Abdullah said.

"The national highway is the lifeline of people. Patients pass (through the highway), marriages take place, tourists come... Those passing such orders must have surrendered their ability to think before acting," he said.
