CHRISTIANITY CRACKDOWN: Prayer group attacked - Bibles TORN APART

A Christian fellowship was attacked by a mob of Hindu radicals

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

A Christian fellowship was attacked by a mob of Hindu radicals in Chapar village, located in India’s Uttar Pradesh state, religion watchdog International Christian Concern (ICC) reports. The incident happened on February 7, but has only come to light recently, with the perpetrators threatening to kill the victims if they reported the incident to police. Ranjeet Kumar Gautam, a Christian from Chapar, told Morning Star News he had invited 39 Christians to a meeting, which was interrupted at 2pm by a gang of 20 Hindus belonging to a group called Bajrang Dal broke inside and beat them with wooden sticks. He said: “They seized each worshipper, men and women, and beat us with wooden sticks, with their legs and fists,” Gautam told Morning Star News. “They spared nobody except children.”

Christians are perceived as 'second class citizens' in India says expert

The radicals forced them to lick their feet in a humiliating attack while praising the Hindu gods. Musical instruments were destroyed along with furniture and 45 bibles which were torn up. Pastor Om Prakash said: “They snatched our bags, cell phones, and collected all the Bibles, about 45 in number, and tore them apart.”

Pastor Prakash added: “The assailants chased us away from the hospital. “We somehow reached the local police station to report the matter and a group of radicals were standing outside the police station. They threatened to kill us if we filed a complaint.” The ICC reports police are yet to register the complaint despite several visits to the police station by the victims.
