Two candidates have close links to post-Godhra riots

VADODARA: Politicians with some links to the 2002 post-Godhra riots are contesting the Lok Sabha polls from both the Congress and BJP.While the BJP gave Anand constituency ticket to Mitesh Patel alias Bakabhai, who was named as an accused in a rioting case in Vasad, Congress Dahod candidate Babu Katara’s son Bhavesh was named in a 2002 riot case in which four people were murdered.Katara, who was also a Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) activist before joining politics, and his son Bhavesh had joined the Congress ahead of the 2017 assembly polls. In his election affidavit, Bhavesh, who is the sitting MLA from Jhalod, had declared that he was named as an offence in a 2002 loot with murder case registered by the Jhalod police station. He and others were booked for the murder of four persons on Banswada Road in Jhalod. The accused were allegedly involved in arson and loot too. Police had later filed a summary report in the case. It was one of the post-Godhra riot cases that the Supreme Court had ordered to be reopened.Bhavesh and other accused were arrested and, according to the affidavit, the case was pending in 2002. Bhavesh was also involved in a couple of other offences after the rioting case lodged on March 1, 2002.Babu himself was named as an accused in a case of cheating and impersonation after he tried to take a mother-son duo abroad on the passports of his wife and son. The affidavit filed by Babu states that charges are yet to be framed in the offence that was registered in 2007. He was suspended from the party subsequently.Bhavesh was keen on getting a ticket from Jhalod assembly seat in 2017 and had worked hard for the BJP, but was dropped at the last moment. Bhavesh rebelled against the BJP along with his father and contested successfully on a Congress ticket.Babu along with former Congress MP Dr Prabha Taviyad was the frontrunner for the ticket for the Dahod parliamentary constituency. The Congress formally announced his name as its candidate on Thursday, the last day of filing nominations.Babu had helped BJP make inroads into the constituency otherwise dominated by the Congress. He won on a BJP ticket in 1999 by 12,361 votes against Congress veteran Somji Damor and then by a wafer-thin margin of 361 votes against Taviyad in 2004.On the other hand, Patel, the chairman and managing director of Laxmi Protein Products Pvt Ltd that sells pulses under the Laxmi brand, was named as an accused in a arson and rioting case registered by the Vasad police station in 2002. He was acquitted in the case in 2010 by the Anand district court. An appeal against the acquittal has been filed in the Gujarat high court.Patel was also named as an accused in another rioting case in the Vasad police station in 2002, but the affidavit states that an ‘A Summary’ was filed regarding the offence and was approved by the court.
