BJP, Cong workers come to blows outside collector’s office

SURAT: Ugly scenes were witnessed outside the Surat collector office as supporters of BJP candidate Darshana Jardosh and Congress’s Ashok Adhevada clashed with each other on Thursday.At least five from BJP and two women Congress workers were injured in the violence. They were rushed to the New Civil Hospital for treatment.The trouble started after BJP supporters who had carried out a procession with vehicles were stopped from entering the collector’s building campus on Athwawlines. They were asked to leave their vehicles near Chowpaty police chowky and only handful number of workers were allowed inside during filing of nomination by Jardosh.However, one vehicle of vehicle in Congress procession went straight inside the collector’s building, which sparked argument among workers of both parties. In the meelee, some someone tried to pull the sari of a BJP woman worker that had Modi print on it. This triggered a free for all and the supporters started hurling abuses at each other and attacked each other.Eyewitnesses said worn by Congress councillor Kapila Patel of Anjana ward was torn by some BJP workers whereas a BJP woman worker’s hair were pulled by some Congress women.“ We were in collector’s office to file nomination when I got the message that trouble has started down . I rushed down to placate them. With help of police, situation was brought under control,” said Nitin Bhajiyawala, city BJP president.He alleged that Congress workers were using highly objectionable language. The BJP workers who were injured were Smita Bhatt, Sangita Patel, Meena Ambaliya, Pravin Moradia and Abhilash Thakar.However, Babu Rayka, city Congress chief said, “I was accompanying our candidate upstairs to file his nomination when I was informed about the violence. Such things are regrettable and must be avoided at any cost. Two of our workers Kapila Patel and Meghna Patel are under treatment.”However, a BJP activist said, "When Jardosh was heading to the collector's office to file her papers, the police stopped her cavalcade, but allowed the Congress candidate to go inside with vehicles. When we confronted them, the Congress goons attacked us. We also gave them a befitting reply."
