Bengaluru Crime News: Cops stopped conspirators in Belagavi before Kalburgi murder, fell for sweet talk

Karnataka

Narendra Dabholkar

MM Kalburgi

Gauri Lankesh

Govind Pansare

police goofed up and lost a golden opportunity to bust the group of right-wing extremists allegedly responsible for the murder of rationalists and activists -, Govind Pansare, Profand-- about a month before they eliminated Professor MM Kalburgi in 2015. According to the statement of Sharad Kalaskar, a key operative of the group, his co-accused Bharat Kurne and another youth Sagar Lakhe were intercepted by a police patrol in Belagavi when they were transporting a bag carrying the firearm that was used to killin Mumbai. According to Kalaskar, they managed to hoodwink the cops with their smart talk that they did not bother to check the bag. The SIT’s 9,235-page charge-sheet in Gauri murder case has confirmed that the same gun was used to kill Govind Pansare, MM Kalburgi and Gauri Lankesh.“They were shifting the gun out of Bharat Kurne’s residence when police intercepted them,” Kalaskar told the SIT.The SIT had summoned Sagar Lakhe to their office in August 2018 and questioned him in detail in connection with his involvement in the Gauri Lankesh murder case.Kalaskar also states that Veerendra Tawde, Amol Kale, Bharat Kurne, Ganesh Miskin and Amit Baddi used to frequently convene meetings at his rented room in Mahadwara Raste area in Belagavi in July 2015. Professor MM Kalburgi was shot dead at his Dharwad residence by one of the two unidentified men who arrived in the guise of his student on August 30, 2015.Kalaskar in his statement has also stated that the Bajaj Discover bike that was used in the Kalburgi event (code for murder) was kept at Belagavi till April 2016. He said that the bike was in the custody of Naamdev, a cotton vest businessman in Belagavi, and was shifted to Pune on the orders of Amol Kale.“We changed the registration plate to a fake one starting with MH-12 so that it looked like a Pune-registered bike. Govinda (Baddi) and Mithun (Miskin) rode it from Belagavi to Pune when they went to attend a firearm training session there in the same month,” Kalaskar told the police.The Bajaj Discover bike was then kept in Pune and was later used by Vaibhav Raut, another member of the group to conduct a recce of movie halls in Mumbai that were scheduled to play Bollywood movie Padmavat which according to them was a historical distortion on the lines of Love Jihad. The group had decided to hurl petrol bombs and create panic at movie halls screening Padmavat in Mumbai, Pune and Belagavi.Sharad Kalaskar (25) claims that he was academically weak and wanted to earn his livelihood as a farmer growing crops on his seven acre land in his village Keshavpura in Aurangabad, Maharashtra. But all that changed in 2010-11 when he attended a satsang at his village and soon came in touch with Veerendra Tawde, the former commander of the extremist group.In 2011-12, aides of Tawde used to tour villages in Maharashtra especially near Kolhapur, Aurangabad and often conduct seminars in marriage halls with movie projectors in which they used to show visuals of cow slaughter, love jihad and various incidents of religious conversions that were being carried out in the country. In 2013, Kalaskar’s mobile number was passed on to Tawde and they had a meeting after which Kalaskar got recruited and was initially asked to start firing practice with air pistols.Soon Kalaskar was asked to shift base to Belagavi and he also managed to work as an apprentice at a fabrication unit in Udhyam Bhag area as the group wanted to use his skills to weld and fabricate pipes to be used for manufacturing pipe bombs and also other components of firearms. The group initially used to procure country-made guns from Madhya Pradesh but Kale and Kalaskar wanted to start making guns in Belagavi itself. In February 2018, on Amol Kale’s instructions, Kalaskar went to Kolhapur and started working at a local road roller and stone crusher service unit which had a foundry where he learnt to make pistol parts including barrel, trigger and its locking mechanism. Kalaskar’s rented room on Mahadwara Road became the den of the group and almost all conspiracy meetings were held here with Kale and even Tawde in attendance before CBI arrested him in 2016. The group also used to meet at another rented facility of Bharat Kurne ( code name Uncle and Tamaatar) who worked as a wholesale commission agent for vegetables and fruits at Belagavi main market. Kalaskar also told the SIT that he was also always entrusted with the responsibility of picking up and dropping those who came for these meetings and firearm training session in Belagavi.After Naveen Kumar’s arrest in early 2018, Kale sent an emergency message to Kalaskar asking him to immediately shift the weapons he had at his Belagavi room to a safe spot outside Karnataka in Satara. But Kalaskar was at his village working on his fields and decided to disobey Kale which led to considerable friction between the two for a long time. Kale and Sudhanva Gondhalekar had to later shift the weapons because Kalaskar refused to do so.“I was working on drip irrigation facility on my field when Kale wanted me to go to Belagavi and shift the weapons. I did not go and when I met Kale after a few weeks he blamed me for being unreliable and was upset with me,” Kalaskar added.Kalaskar was also a participant at multiple training camps held near Moodabidri in October 2015 where he states that they were planning to test a projectile explosive that they called rocket bombs. But he also added that it was postponed because of increased police vigil in the area following the murder of Prashant Poojary, a Bajrang Dal worker, in Moodabidri in October 2015. Kalaskar also states in his statement that Kale and his group always made him to serve tea and coffee during their meetings and also to pick up and drop other operatives at the bus stand.
