Only Modi deserves to be PM: Aaditya Thackeray

Shiv Sena youth leader Aaditya Thackeray at an election rally

Nagpur: Enmity between BJP and Shiv Sena has vanished after the pre-poll alliance. Aaditya, son of Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray, on Thursday said only Narendra Modi was fit to be prime minister of the country. “You must vote for BJP and Shiv Sena so that NDA crosses 350 seats,” he told the gathering at a playground in Wadi. He was campaigning for Ramtek Sena MP Krupal Tumane.

Thackeray asked the gathering whether they wanted Rahul Gandhi to the PM. “I will give you even worse scenario. Omar Abdullah becomes the PM. He wants a separate PM for Kashmir. If you want Kashmir and North-East to remain a part of the country then you must vote for a strong PM. Do you want a man with 56-inch chest or a weak coalition of 56 parties,” he said.

The youth leader said there were some differences between Sena and BJP in the past but now they were over. “Now, our alliance is stronger than before. It is just like old days when Pramod Mahajan, Gopinath Munde and Nitin Gadkari used to come to our house to meet Balasaheb Thackeray and we used to go to theirs,” he said.

“I have been touring the state since past few weeks. Everywhere, I see a wave in favour of BJP and Shiv Sena. Congress and NCP were thinking that there would be no alliance between us but their leaders are running scared,” said Thackeray.

Earlier, Tumane heaped praises on PM Modi, chief minister Devendra Fadnavis and Union transport minister Nitin Gadkari. “Modi has shown that nobody can take India for granted. He twice taught a lesson to Pakistan when our brave soldiers were killed,” he said.

“Uddhav Thackeray decided to go for an alliance with BJP because the country needs a strong leader like Modi. Uddhav and Fadnavis have implemented the biggest farm loan waiver scheme in the country. Energy minister Chandrashekhar Bawankule has made the state load shedding free. Gadkari is executing works worth Rs2,300 crore in my constituency,” said Tumane.

Sena minister Deepak Sawant, Hingna BJP MLA Sameer Meghe, district BJP president Rajiv Poddar and others also addressed the gathering.


