National security, terror take poll position this time

The attack on CRPF convoy in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir on Feb 14 has brought national security and terrorism on the centre stage on eve of 2019 general election. Unlike in 2014 -- when development and corruption were topmost on minds of people -- Pulwama attack and IAF raids at Balakot in Pakistan are being talked about fiercely by the voters this time around.

The political parties, this time, are selling protection from terror on voters' platter. 'Pakistan Murdabad' slogans echo across the country during rallies and roadshows of most of the political parties.

The two biggies -- BJP and Congress -- are claiming and reclaiming patriotism and their leaders talk about security and terror while addressing rallies. At BJP rallies, there are slogans of Bande Vich Dum Hai (Narendra Modi has the strength) while in Congress rallies, it's 'Pakistan murdabad, Indira Gandhi zindabad, Rahul Gandhi zindabad' etc.

Since Pulwama attack and India's retaliatory air strikes in Balakot, the BJP has made national security the core of its political discourse. Congress manifesto, too, seeks to address this issue.

HRD Minister and BJP leader Prakash Javadekar said although all issues are important for this Lok Sabha elections, "national security and country" come first. Javadekar said peace and stability had achieved importance in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack.

"We talk about development in our speeches. We talk about crackdown on corruption and we talk about the good work BJP has done. But why does speaking on the issue of national security prick anyone?" he asks.

Congress manifesto promises "increase in defence spending to meet requirements of the Armed Forces; suitable policies to address data security, cyber security, financial security, communication security; rapidly expand domestic capacity to manufacture defence and security equipment."

However, party leader Manish Tewari questions politicisation of the air strikes targeting a terrorist camp in Pakistan's Balakot in response to Pulwama attack. Tewari has stated, "PM Modi had said that the result (of the India-Pakistan standoff) could have been different if India had procured Rafale fighter jets on time. Neither he nor his office clarified the comment later," Tewari said.

Countering him, Javadekar states air strikes were not "rajneeti" (politics), but "rashtraneeti" (tactics).

Terror and national security issues have become talk in every nook and cornere across the country and parties are trying to make a connect with the wind.
