Jalandhar priest’s firms have Delhi link to Bishop Franco

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Deepkamal Kaur

Tribune News Service

Jalandhar, April 4

There seems to be a curious link between the businesses of Father Anthony Madasserry and Bishop of Jalandhar Diocese Franco Mulakkal. Of the five companies being run by the Jalandhar priest, two were registered in New Delhi at the time when Mulakkal was Auxiliary Bishop in the Catholic Archdiocese of Delhi.

The website of Registrar of Companies (ROC) suggests that Ashok Vihar-based company Words Worth Educational Aid Pvt Ltd, with Father Anthony as one of its two directors, was registered on November 10, 2009. Another company, Eduzone Multimedia Pvt Ltd, based at Suraj Nagar in Azadpur was started on April 6, 2011.

Franco took over as Auxiliary Bishop in Delhi in January 2009 and joined the Jalandhar Diocese in June 2013. Father Anthony is an aide of Bishop Franco, who is facing allegations in a nun rape case. After Bishop Franco moved to Jalandhar, Father Anthony started spreading his business empire, starting Sahodhaya Partnership Firm in 2014.

This firm, being run by three other priests — Father Paul, Father Jose and Father Shine — is engaged in selling books and stationery besides providing construction and securities services and has a Rs 40-crore turnover. This was revealed after the Khanna police raid and subsequent Income Tax investigations in Jalandhar last Friday.

Father Anthony, Father Paul and Nakodar-based priest Father Jose, who claim to be doing charity out of the profits earned from book selling, are all directors of a finance company too.

This Jalandhar-based company is registered with the ROC since May 2016 as Navjeevan Nidhi Ltd. Father Paul is registered in this company as Babu Kizhakkinedath Joseph, Father Jose as Father Jose Kuzha Pala and Father Anthony as Anthony FR Madasser.

Though mandated by the government, the income tax returns of this company have never been posted on the ROC website. Father Anthony’s NGO Navjeevan Charitable Society for Integral Development is located next to his finance company office in Karol Bagh.

Wary pastors get armour for cars

Jalandhar: With polls round the corner, Christian pastors in the region have been getting their vehicles armoured fearing a security threat. Sanchit Sobti, Director of Laggar Industries, a firm engaged in the business, says many pastors have approached them for bullet-proofing. Pastors of churches in Khambra, Tajpur, Khojewal, Nakodar and Kartarpur are among those who have got their vehicles retrofitted. It costs around Rs 7 lakh to armour a vehicle like Fortuner, Endeavour or Scorpio, which are reinforced with cast iron plates and 42 mm-thick glass.

Vicar, transporter, financier...

Father Anthony Madasserry, under I-T Dept scanner, has fit himself into many roles. Besides being a priest, he is a school director, a vicar and secretary of charitable trust, a financier, a transporter, a book-seller and director of a securities firm and a construction company
