Sonakshi Sinha joins Salman Khan in Maheshwar for Dabangg 3

Salman Khan

Maheshwar

Sonakshi Sinha

Arbaaz Khan

Sudeep

Prabhudheva

Mirror had reported (April 2) thatkicked off the third installment of the Dabangg franchise inwith the title song and 500 back-up dancers on Monday. After the three-day shoot, the team is now gearing up to start with an action sequence for whichjoined the team on Thursday.According to a source close to the development, the actress will be in Maheshwar for five days after which she returns to Mumbai for the promotions of her upcoming film, Kalank. “The sequence is centered around Rajjo’s abduction. Chulbul, and his brother Makkhi (), who is also a cop in part three, come to her rescue,” the source informed, adding that the high-octane chase sequence will feature bikes and cars. “It’s stylish and something different from other action pieces in the earlier two films.”While South actor, who plays the antagonist, will join in during the next schedule, Nawab Shah, who also has a villainous role in thedirectorial, is a part of the ongoing shoot. “Salman was impressed by Nawab’s performance in Tiger Zinda Hai and got him on board for a pivotal role in Dabangg 3,” the source revealed.The Madhya Pradesh leg of the shoot wraps up by April 20, after which the film proceeds to Wai for an 80-day schedule. “The team will film songs, as well as romantic scenes between Rajjo and Chulbul there. It’s an old-school romance with the couple shown as parents to a young kid in the new film,” the source shared.The story, written by Dilip Shukla, follows a non-linear narrative between the present and past, wherein flashback scenes show the metamorphosis of Chulbul from a local goon with a heart of gold to Robin hood cop. The music is composed by Sajid-Wajid, who are reuniting with Salman after five years. Five tracks have already been recorded.In Maheshwar, the Khan brothers have been pedaling around happily to beat the traffic, with Arbaaz opting for a kid’s bicycle.
