Honour killing? Man kills brother-in-law 6 years after marriage

LUDHIANA: Six years after a couple from Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh went ahead with their marriage against the wishes of the woman’s family, the man was allegedly murdered by his brother-in-law at Jaspal Bangar village in Sahnewal on Wednesday night.The couple — Raj Kumar, 30, and Deepa — have had a love marriage in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, six years ago. The accused, Ankit, along with his friend took Raj for a ride where they first slit his throat and then stabbed him several times before fleeing.Seeking a better future, Raj Kumar, a mason, had shifted to Ludhiana six months ago with his family. He was staying in a rented accommodation in Jaspal Bangar. The couple had two children — a five-year-old son and a 2-year-old daughter.Raj’s father Hari Ram said, “Deepa’s family was against the inter-caste marriage. There was huge drama between the families when Deepa and Raj married. But, things turned normal with time. Deepa often talked to her family members over the phone. We thought they had forgotten everything. Meanwhile to get better work, we shifted to Ludhiana six months ago.”He said, “On Tuesday, Deepa’s brother Ankit called her saying that he along with his friend Bhupinder has come to Delhi and will visit Ludhiana too. Ankit and Bhupinder came home on Tuesday evening. On Wednesday, they along with Raj went for some shopping and returned home by evening. Around 8.30pm, Ankit asked Raj to take them for a ride. Raj agreed only after Deepa insisted him to do so.”Ankit, Bhupinder and Raj left the house on Raj’s bike. When they reached Sidhwana Canal near Jaspal Bangar village, the duo slit his throat and stabbed him with a knife. Meanwhile, Raj’s sister Rakhi along with Deepa, who was walking by the area, saw the accused stabbing Raj.Rakhi said, “When Raj, Ankit and Bhupinder left the house after dinner, I along with Deepa went for a walk. We were walking towards the canal where we saw how Bhupinder was holding Raj from behind and Ankit was stabbing him. On raising an alarm, the accused fled the spot. Onlookers helped family to rush Raj to hospital where he was declared brought dead.Inspector Iqbal Singh, SHO, Sahnewal police station, said, “The family was completely unaware of the plans of Ankit, as he was quite friendly and acted normal. In fact, Deepa was also in touch with her family and never realized that his brother had kept a grudge against them.”He said, “The accused had stabbed Raj with a knife and escaped. The police are checking CCTV cameras installed at the bus stand and railway station as they suspect that the accused might have left the city,”Meanwhile, a case under Sections 302 (murder) and 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intension) of the IPC has been registered against Ankit and Bhupinder.“Bhupinder also hails from a village near Jabalpur and was known to the family,” added the inspector.Post-mortemThe autopsy report revealed that slitting of throat caused his death. Besides, he was stabbed by knife once in stomach and four times in the back.Excited to meet brotherAccording to neighbours, Deepa was quite happy that his brother had come to meet her. For the entire day, she was cooking different items and snacks for him, ignorant of his ultimate plan.
