Kill, don’t talk

Brexit

European Union

political issues

Maoist violence

Central India

Illustration: Ashish

As a keen watcher of the world of politics and diplomacy I thought I should report to you my observations about. This is the series of contortions the United Kingdom is going through to leave the. I did not know that United Kingdom was made up of four nations: England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Or that there were differences of language, culture and religion between the four.These differences have become amplified because England and Wales voted in favour of Brexit and Scotland and Ireland voted against. I did not know either that the UK internally had similarto India’s. Scotland is full of separatists who want an independent country. The UK responded to this separatism by allowing the Scottish government to hold a referendum in 2017. The question was: ‘Should Scotland be a separate country?’ The ‘Yes’ votes were 44% and the ‘No’ votes were 55% and so Scotland chose to remain.Northern Ireland is made up of two communities who have historically disliked each other because of differences of religion. One community wanted to secede and join the country to the west, which shared their religion. The other community wanted to remain in the United Kingdom.This dislike became violence and for decades, it caused bloodshed of the sort rarely seen in Europe. There was bombing and shooting and rioting and killing on a disturbing scale. This was ended by an agreement which opened up the border between the two countries so that the communities could move around freely. It also gave Northern Ireland to right to hold a plebiscite in future and decide where they wanted to go, though there seems to be no great danger of that. The British seem to believe that being open and accommodating will ensure that the UK stays together.My thoughts on learning this were the same as yours: how dumb. We of course have a firm policy since Nehru of not talking to separatists. What is there to talk about?Since 2014, a total of 1,572 people has been killed in Kashmir (including 323 people from our armed forces). A further 1,845 have been killed inin(including 364 from the security forces) and 1,096 have been killed in the Northeast (including 119 people from the armed forces).We lose more soldiers in peacetime from this than we have done in war. But I think it is a very small price to pay for us to say BMKJ.
