Dawood Ibrahim: Dawood aide killed in Pakistan for 'plot' against boss?

Dawood aide killed in Pakistan for 'plot' against boss?

MUMBAI: Farooq Devdiwala, a close aide of Dawood Ibrahim whose deportation was sought unsuccessfully by the Indian government after his arrest in Dubai last year, is believed to have been killed in Karachi, Pakistan, on the orders of Chhota Shakeel on the suspicion that he was plotting against the D-gang boss.Though India wanted Devdiwala for various offences and for recruiting youngsters for the terror group Indian Mujahideen (IM), Pakistan in July 2018 succeeded in getting him extradited to its own soil by submitting bogus identification documents, including a passport showing him to be a Pakistani national.Sources said that Shakeel, who is among Dawood's closest operatives, got to know through his informants that Devdiwala had had a meeting with Indian agency officials in Dubai and was conspiring against Dawood. According to sources, Devdiwala, on being confronted by Shakeel, acknowledged the truth of the claim, after which Dawood and his aides felt he could no longer be trusted.Though senior officials of the Mumbai police's crime branch refused to comment on the matter, well-placed sources tracking developments said that the Interpol was trying to confirm Devdiwala's death in Karachi.If the death is confirmed, it would make Devdiwala the second Dawood aide to be killed in Pakistan. Earlier, in late 2000, gangster Feroz Kokani was killed allegedly after he was overheard showing disrespect to Dawood.Originally a resident of Jogeshwari, Devdiwala had been on the radar of various anti-terrorism squads (ATS) in India. His name had cropped up in the murder of Gujarat home minister Haren Pandya and some others in the aftermath of the post-Godhra riots.A member of the Arjun gang from Musafirkhana, Devdiwala worked closely with gangster Salim Kutta.In later years, sources said, he had almost become a fundamentalist and had been aiding IM in recruiting and training youngsters to launch attacks on Indian soil. His links with the IM came to light after the Ahmedabad ATS arrested two suspects, including one Faizal Mirza, in Gandhinagar . Both the suspects had undergone training in terror camps in Pakistan and had returned to India reportedly to launch terror attacks. Some of their targets included political leaders and establishments.While Pakistan's success in getting Devdiwala extradited was a setback for Indian authorities, sources said Pakistan is attempting to do the same in the case of Shakeel aide Munna Jhingada, who had attempted to kill Chhota Rajan in Bangkok in the year 2000. Pakistan, along with India, has claimed that he is their national. The case is pending in a Thailand court despite the Mumbai police providing fingerprints and an entire dossier on Jhingada to the Thai court.
