Lok Sabha elections 2019 LIVE updates| ‘Has PM hugged anyone from Varanasi’: Priyanka Gandhi

They complain about Nehru, but what has Modiji done?: Priyanka Gandhi

They complain about Nehru, But what has Modiji done?asks Priyanka Gandhi

‘Has PM hugged anyone from Varanasi’: Priyanka Gandhi

‘Has PM hugged anyone from Varanasi’, asks Priyanka Gandhi Vadra.

A Congress delegation comprising Ahmed Patel, Randeep Surjewala, Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Jairam Ramesh reaches ECI

Delhi: A Congress delegation comprising Ahmed Patel, Randeep Surjewala, Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Jairam Ramesh reaches Election Commission of India.

BJP releases list of star campaigners in Gujarat for Lok Sabha Elections 2019

BJP releases list of star campaigners in Gujarat for Lok Sabha Elections 2019 and by-election in the state. Actor Vivek Oberoi is also included in the list. The 26 Parliamentary constituencies of the state will undergo polling in the third phase of elections on 23rd April.

BJP releases list of star campaigners in Gujarat for #LokSabhaElections2019 and by-election in the state. Actor Vivek Oberoi is also included in the list. The 26 Parliamentary constituencies of the state will undergo polling in the third phase of elections on 23rd April. pic.twitter.com/PC5lKcD3mp — ANI (@ANI) April 5, 2019

Would like to ask Rahul Gandhi, you speak loudly from stage, why don’t you give an account for your 10 years of governance: Amit Shah

BJP President Amit Shah in Morigaon, Assam: ‘Mauni baba’ Manmohan Singh was the Prime Minister for 10 years. He went to the Rajya Sabha via Assam. I would like to ask Rahul Gandhi, you speak loudly from stage, why don’t you give an account for your 10 years of governance, says Amit Shah.

Bricks will be answered by rocks: Amit Shah

I want to tell Rahul Gandhi that talk with terrorists may be your policy, but Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s principle is if we are attacked by bullet, we will reply with cannon balls.

Bricks will be answered by rocks: Amit Shah

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party’s candidate from the Parliamentary constituency Dolly Sharma hold a road show in Ghaziabad

Ghaziabad: Congress General Secretary for UP east Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party’s candidate from the Parliamentary constituency Dolly Sharma hold a road show.

Ghaziabad: Congress General Secretary for UP east Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party's candidate from the Parliamentary constituency Dolly Sharma hold a road show. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/VrkS0ambLC — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 5, 2019

Entire country celebrated after Prime Minister Narendra Modi sent Air Force inside the neighbouring country to bust terrorist camps: Amit Shah

Atmosphere of mourning prevailed in Pakistan and Congress camp, but the entire country celebrated after Prime Minister Narendra Modi sent Air Force inside the neighbouring country to bust the terrorist camps: Amit Shah

Rahul Gandhi must clarify whether he supports Omar Abdullah’s statement that Jammu and Kashmir should have a separate Prime Minister: Amit Shah

Rahul Gandhi must clarify whether he supports Omar Abdullah’s statement that Jammu and Kashmir should have a separate Prime Minister: Amit Shah

NRC is a major step taken by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to drive out illegal migrants from Assam: Amit Shah

NRC is a major step taken by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to drive out illegal migrants from Assam: BJP president Amit Shah

Diary is not considered an evidence if there is no other proof: Arun Jaitley

The documents now recovered after the deportation of those 2 people match the ones in the documents recovered earlier. Diary is not considered an evidence if there is no other proof, says Arun Jaitley.

The investigation proceeded further when the current government took steps: Arun Jaitley

The investigation proceeded further when the current government took steps. And Christian Michael was deported on December 4, 2018 and Rajiv Saxena was brought back in January 2019.

What kind of coincident is this that the documents recovered in Switzerland in 2013, in which there are those initials.says Arun Jaitley

Documents recovered had names such as AP, RG, Fam: Arun Jaitley

The documents recovered had names such as AP, RG, Fam. The CBI registered its preliminary investigation in 2013. The CBI can’t be blamed. It’s a matter that started in 2013.

If it is part of a conspiracy, then it is considered an evidence: Arun Jaitley

If it is part of a conspiracy, then it is considered an evidence. The right to remain quiet can’t be turned into right to remain silent, says Arun Jaitley

The case was registered in 2013. It gathered pace after 2018 and 2019 deportations of Michel and Saxena: Arun Jaitley

The case was registered in 2013. It gathered pace after 2018 and 2019 deportations of Michel and Saxena, says Arun Jaitley.

Did they plan a conspiracy for 18-20 years later?: Arun Jaitley

Did they plan a conspiracy for 18-20 years later? The evidence is overwhelming. The needle of suspicion is clear.If they don’t answer, then they don’t have an answer to give, says Arun Jaitley.

The more you suppress it the more it spreads. That is why they need to answer as to who were these people?: Arun Jaitley

The more you suppress it the more it spreads. That is why they need to answer as to who were these people?: Arun Jaitley.

Documents recovered in two different times match and the names are the same: Arun Jaitley

Documents recovered in two different times match and the names are the same. Can’t escape this even if they want to. The truth is very inconvenient, says Arun Jaitley.

When no reply is given to such serious allegations then the country is entitled to presume that no reply can be given: Arun Jaitley

When no reply is given to such serious allegations then the country is entitled to presume that no reply can be given, says Arun Jaitley.

Arun Jaitley attacks Congress over chargesheet against Christian Michel

Arun Jaitley attacks Congress over chargesheet against Christian Michel.

I love Modi; genuinely have no hatred or anger towards the man: Rahul Gandhi

I love Modi; genuinely have no hatred or anger towards the man, says Congress president Rahul Gandhi.

Around 27,000 jobs being lost per 24 hours in India: Rahul Gandhi

Around 27,000 jobs being lost per 24 hours in India, says Rahul Gandhi.

Farmers won’t be put behind the bars for debts: Rahul Gandhi

Farmers won’t be put behind the bars for debts, says Rahul Gandhi.

Chowkidar is watching out for rich, Rahul Gandhi attacks PM Modi

Chowkidar is watching out for rich: Rahul Gandhi attacks PM Modi.

Have you got any benefit from the farm loan waiver: Rahul Gandhi

Have you got any benefit from the farm loan waiver? asks Rahul Gandhi.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi is in Chandrapur, Maharashtra

Congress president Rahul Gandhi is to begin addressing an election rally in Chandrapur in Maharashtra. This is second election event of the day after interacting with students in Pune in the morning.

Told the party I won’t contest election: Sumitra Mahajan

Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan tells media, “I have freed the party from the dilemma and told it that I will not contest the elections.”

Rahul Gandhi to file nomination papers for Amethi LS on April 10

Rahul Gandhi will file nomination papers for Amethi Lok Sabha seat on April 10, Sonia Gandhi for Rae Bareli LS seat on April 11, says Congress : PTI

‘Hatred is cowardice’, tweets Rahul Gandhi

Congress president Rahul Gandhi tweets, saying he is not a coward and won’t hide behind hate and anger.

Hatred is cowardice.



I don’t care if the entire world is full of hatred. I am not a coward.



I will not hide behind hate and anger.



I love all living beings, including those temporarily blinded by hatred. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) April 5, 2019

SP-BSP shut factories, we are reopening them: Modi

Modi said: SP and BSP shut down mills and plants, we are reopening them. They did the same with sugarcane mills and wood industry in Saharanpur. Factories are being set up throughout India to produce ethanol from sugarcane. Once these plants begin production, there won’t be any problems for sugarcane growers: Modi

‘Behanji criticised me for washing the feet of cleanliness workers at Kumbh’

When I washed the feet of those associated with cleanliness at Kumbh and gave them respect in my own way, Behanji criticised me immediately. But she never said a word when the Congress insulted the cleanliness workers.: Modi

Opposition will never allow law against triple talaq

Modi said: They (opposition) give threat of ‘boti-boti’ (cut into pieces) and we talk of honour of “beti-beti” (daughter). Muslim sisters are free from the triple talaq. I want to tell my Muslim sisters, they will continue to be exploited under Congress, SP-BSP rule, the opposition will never allow law against triple talaq and will ensure that is never passed when we bring it in the parliament. We are the ones who respect our daughters: Modi.

‘After BJP came to power in UP, atmosphere of fear is over’

After the BJP govt came to power in UP, the atmosphere of migration and fear is over. That is why the (opposition) is playing the politics of vote bank. For your chowkidar, be it farmer, armed forces personnel or anyone else, we are working for everyone’s prosperity.

PM Modi addresses election rally in UP’s Saharanpur

PM Modi addresses election rally in UP’s Saharanpur. This is his second rally in the state after Amroha earlier in the day.

Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee addresses rally in Dhubri, Assam

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee, while addressing an election rally in Dhubri in Assam, said, “In the Citizenship Amendment Bill, you will be a foreigner for 6 years, then you will be given citizenship, why? What will you do in the 6 years? What about your job, school & every essential thing. This is nothing but a conspiracy.”: ANI

‘NDA govt bringing first national sports university in Manipur’

Amit Shah said: This is a land of players and Mary Kom brought laurels to the country. NDA govt is building India’s first National sports university in Manipur

BJP president Amit Shah addresses rally in Thoubal, Manipur

BJP president Amit Shah addressing rally in Thoubal in Manipur. Says, “During Congress rule, there were frequent bandhs and one lasted for 160 days. It led to escalation in the price of essential commodities. However, in the tenure of Biren ji in Manipur has become blockade free.”

LS Speaker Sumitra Mahajan says she won’t contest these polls

Outgoing Lok Sabha Speaker and eight-time MP from Indore, Sumitra Mahajan has said she would not contest the ensuing general elections and has freed her party from making its choice: PTI

Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan's letter announcing that she doesn't want to contest the 2019 elections. She also asks why a candidate has not been declared yet from Indore, appeals to BJP to name a candidate pic.twitter.com/zruHJVCBXF — ANI (@ANI) April 5, 2019

Samajwadi Party is in favour of an absolute farm loan waiver.

Releasing the party’s manifesto for the Lok Sabha elections, Akhilesh Yadav said Samajwadi Party is in favour of an absolute farm loan waiver.

The current government claims development: Akhilesh

The current government claims development; had there been development then there wouldn’t have been so much unemployment, he said.

Without social justice progress can’t be achieved: Akhilesh

Samajwadi party chief Akhilesh Yadav said without social justice progress can’t be achieved. “Development is confined to only handful of people. Data about social indices should be made public,” he said.

‘Want a new vision’: Akhilesh Yadav releases SP manifesto

Akhilesh Yadav says, “We want a new vision’ while releasing the manifesto

Akhilesh: Huge gap between rich and poor, we want to make India prosper

There is a huge gap between rich and poor, we want to make India prosper says Akhilesh Yadav

Akhilesh Yadav releases manifesto of Samajwadi Party

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav released manifesto for his party.

Chowkidar’s govt has protected the interests of everyone: Modi

Chowkidar’s govt has protected the interests of everyone, be it farmers or anyone else. Yogi govt is working towards it. More than two crore farmers families of UP are getting direct benefit every year. I have never claimed that I have fulfilled every promise but I am working day-night to make your life easy .: Modi

BJP govt has reined in criminals in UP: Modi

Modi says, “ Votebank politics has hurt the country. In SP rule, criminals were roaming freely in western UP. But today the BJP govt has put a stop to this. We have warned them to mend their ways or they’ll be jailed.”

‘We have to move forward together for the development ’

We have to move forward together for the development of the country, Some people are trying to create a divide on the basis of caste, you need to be aware of them.: Modi

‘SP-BSP was soft on terror’

Modi says, “It was because of the soft attitude of Congress, SP and BSP that the terrorists became bold.” Adds, “Attacks have stopped in past five years because you have appointed a chowkidar in Delhi. Terrorists know Modi will go after them even in hell.”

‘Taking action against terrorists wasn’t liked by some people’

Should we talk to militants? Should we not send them to jail? Retaliating to terrorists is not liked by some people in our country, when Pak is getting exposed in the world, these people are siding with Pak. The soft attitude towards terrorism has emboldened terrorists: Modi

UAE civilian award for India, not me: Modi

PM Modi: Your pradhan sevak was awarded the top civilian award by UAE. I thank the government of UAE. This is an achievement for India, not me. Says a strong government is must to take India ahead in the world.

PM Modi addresses rally in Amroha

PM Narendra Modi addressing election rally in Amroha, UP.

Have no anger towards Narendra Modi: Rahul

Rahul Gandhi: I love Mr Narendra Modi, I have no anger or hatred towards him.

I am wedded to my work: Rahul Gandhi

Asked who should be the heroine in his biopic, Rahul Gandhi says, “ I am wedded to my work”. Asked about celebrating Raksha Bandhan, says he keeps till it breaks. My sister is my closest friend, says Rahul Gandhi,

(Congress) will create 100 million jobs: Sam Pitroda

Sam Pitroda also present at the event. Says, the real challenge today is jobs. We will create 100 million jobs when we come to power

‘Politicians need to be asked questions’

We don’t appreciate questions in our system. I have the guts to answer your questions even if some questions might make me uncomfortable. Why is the PM not standing here? We have to move from memorisation-centric system to a question-centric system. My message is ask questions, I am a politician, so I need to be asked questions, made uncomfortable. Our politicians need to be asked questions: Rahul Gandhi

Against politicisation of airstrikes: Rahul Gandhi

IAF should get credit for the recent air strikes. But I am against politicisation of the air strikes, I feel uncomfortable when the PM politicises these issues: Rahul Gandhi

‘Planning Commission was a strategic institution’

Asked about doing away with NITI Aayog, Rahul Gandhi says, ‘Planning Commission was a strategic institution. we want an institution that allows us to solve problems at a large scale, that is why we want Planning Commission, for strategic thinking. NITI Aayog is a tactical institution.

Demonetisation a disastrous idea, says Rahul Gandhi

Rahul Gandhi: Demonetisation was a disastrous idea, had terrible effect on economy, millions of jobs lost, economy was jammed shut. Not much can be done now about notebandi. But we want to give access to young entrepreneurs to the banking system and loans. We will do away with permissions for three years for businesses, part of our manifesto. 22 lakh govt jobs are vacant. We will increase expenditure on education and health. Once NYAY scheme is implemented, jobs will be created and economy will revive.

Will ensure 33% reservation in parliament, assemblies: Rahul Gandhi

Ensure one-third of parliament and Vidhan Sabha is guaranteed for women when we come to power in 2019, and 33% of jobs are reserved for women: Rahul Gandhi. Come and talk to me, we’ll ensure you become interested in politics, says Rahul Gandhi to the student who asked the question.

Plenty of money in the system: Rahul on being asked about income scheme

Asked about how funds for Rs 72,000 scheme being raised, Rahul Gandhi said, how many jobs have Anil Ambani or Mehul Choksi given to the country? How many people have had their loans written off? There is plenty of money in the system, the money will come who have dominated the banking system and not given anything back, says Rahul Gandhi. Indian economy is jammed shut, the moment money is put in people’s hands, they will start buying and the economy will revive.

Link between university education and businesses needed: Rahul Gandhi

The Rs 72,000 promise will happen. says Rahul Gandhi when asked about Congress manifesto. Asked about educated youth being underemployed and underpaid, Rahul Gandhi says, 27,000 jobs are being lost every 24 hours in India. Because we do not respect skill, a person’s capability. No link between university and businesses, such a link is needed.

I am persistent, will do what I have to do: Rahul

Rahul says he got courage to be what he is today from accepting the truth and works on the basis of truth. From truth comes humility, from humility comes courage. I don’t like to make excuses and am persistent. I stand up for people who are weak like farmers.

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi interacts with students in Pune

Congress president Rahul Gandhi is in Pune and interacting with a group of students. Asked how he should be addressed, he says ‘Rahul is fine’.

Modi govt has started reining in militants: Amit Shah

Amit Shah said: Narendra Modi government has started reining in militants; after Pulwama attack, Modi government launched air strike on terror camp. We were given respect after that. Sam Pitroda questioned air strikes. BJP’s policy is clear that whoever crosses India’s boundaries, attacks us, will be answered, we will reply with cannons.

Arunachal has become financially independent: Amit Shah

Arunachal Pradesh earned Rs 927 crore revenue and the credit goes to Prema Khandu ji. It’s going to make this state financially independent: Amit Shah

Modi govt worked to make Itanagar as Smart City: Shah

Modi government worked to make Itanagar and Pasighat as Smart City, says Amit Shah. It’s for the first time that BJP is fighting on all the seats of state assembly of Arunachal Pradesh. Our winning streak started with this region when three MLAs of our party were elected uncontested.

Modi ji instructed his ministers to visit northeast every fortnight: Shah

Amit Shah says: Modi ji instructed his ministers to visit northeast every fortnight. It was done to pay attention to the issues and resolve them. All parts of northeast are now connected with airways and railways. The government gave Rs 50,000 crore for the development of roads of Arunachal Pradesh.

BJP brought peace in northeast: Amit Shah in Arunachal Pradesh

BJP president Amit Shah is addressing an election rally in Arunachal Pradesh. Says, “Five years ago, northeast was disturbed and there was hardly any development. After five years, BJP brought peace in the region and is on path of development.”

Rahul Gandhi to address public meetings in Maharashtra

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi will be in Maharashtra for a students interaction in Pune, and two public meetings in Chandrapur and Wardha.

Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu to sit on protest over IT raids on TDP candidates

Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu to sit on protest in Vijayawada over reported IT raids on TDP candidates and supporters

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra to hold roadshow in Ghaziabad in support of party candidate Dolly Sharma

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will hold a roadshow in Ghaziabad on Friday in support of the party’s candidate Dolly Sharma.

The Congress supporters and party workers believe that Priyanka’s visit would bolster the prospects of their candidate and will also unite the party. The party unit members said western UP in-charge Jyotiraditya Scindia is also likely to hold a rally, tentatively on April 7, in Dhaulana, which is part of Ghaziabad parliamentary seat.
