'PM Modi hugged everyone around the world but not Varanasi's poor,' says Priyanka Gandhi

AICC general secretary Priyanka Gandhi campaigns in Ghaziabad I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Congress general secretary (UP East) Priyanka Gandhi, while campaigning in Uttar Pradesh's Ghaziabad took a swipe at PM Narendra Modi for his penchant for hugging world leaders. He travels around the world and hugs everyone but he has never hugged the poor people of Varanasi.

"Dunia bhar ghoom aaye hain. Japan gaye wahan gale lage, Pakistan gaye wahan Biryani khaayi, China gaye wahan gale lage. Lekin Varanasi ke ek gareeb parivaar se gale lagte dekha hai?" Gandhi said while addressing a gathering in UP town.

Priyanka, while campaigning for Congress candidate Dolly Sharma who faces Union Minister VK Singh in Ghaziabad, said "PM Modi says Nehru did this, Indira did that, but tells us what did you do in these last five years".

Congress seeks a revival in politically crucial state of Uttar Pradesh which sends 80 MPs to Lok Sabha. In 2014, the grand old party was confined to the Gandhi family strongholds of Rae Bareli and Amethi. The party hopes to up its tally in the forthcoming elections with the of its charismatic leader Priyanka into active politics.

#WATCH Congress General Secretary for UP East, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, speaks on PM Modi, says "...dunia bhar ghoom aaye hain. Japan gaye wahan gale lage, Pakistan gaye wahan Biryani khaayi, China gaye wahan gale lage. Lekin Varanasi ke ek gareeb parivaar se gale lagte dekha hai?" pic.twitter.com/k7ntq4zYy4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) 5 April 2019

Lok Sabha Election 2019 Highlights:

11:28 pm: Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister and TDP Chief N Chandrababu Naidu reacting to transfer orders of chief secretary Anil Chandra Punetha by EC said the election watchdog should work in an unbiased manner.

"For what mistake did EC transfer the Chief Secretary? How can you transfer without telling the mistake he did?"

"I condemn the transfer of Chief Secretary. I am condemning center's conspiracies against Andhra. I will see if they will arrest me tomorrow or day after," Naidu said.

Andhra Pradesh CM and TDP Chief N Chandrababu Naidu on transfer of chief secretary Anil Chandra Punetha: I am condemning the transfer of Chief Secretary. I am condemning center's conspiracies against Andhra. I will see if they will arrest me tomorrow or day after. https://t.co/I8WBcnJCGE — ANI (@ANI) 5 April 2019

11:06 pm: The EC formally expressed its disaproval by issuing a Censure to Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath over his 'Modi ki Sena' remark. The Commission has advised him to be more careful in future, being a senior political leader.

EC issues Censure (Censure is to express disapproval of someone/something in a formal statement) to Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath over his 'Modi ki Sena' remark. The Commission has advised him to be more careful in future, being a senior political leader. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/v7Dh3iAfjy — ANI (@ANI) 5 April 2019

10:45 pm: BJP Odisha Vice President Samir Mohanty, in a letter to the Election Commision said BJD candidate from the Sambalpur parliamentary constituency Nalini Kanta Pradhan should be disqualified under the law as he is holding the post of Directorship of two govt companies as on today.

"The Returning Officer who is the Sambalpur DEO has been adopting dilly-dallying tactics with ulterior motive and is avoiding to take cognizance of the disqualification of Nalini Kanta Pradhan and rejecting his nomination," he wrote.

10:26 pm: Odisha Chief Minister Navin Patnaik was seen gearing up for the hustings as his state is headed for simultaneous parliamentary and legislative assembly elections. Watch:

Biju Janata Dal (BJD) releases video of Odisha CM Naveen Patnaik’s exercise regime. The CM says, "Getting ready to fight for the people of Odisha". pic.twitter.com/C15SqZRvoJ — ANI (@ANI) 5 April 2019

10:04 pm: Rahul Gandhi caused a stir with his pointed swipe at PM Narendra Modi and the BJP for sidelining the veteran leader Lal Krishna Advani ahead of the Lok Sabha elections. Advani was benched ahead of the elections and instead BJP president Amit Shah filed his candidature from the nonagenarian BJP leader's seat - Gandhinagar.

Gandhi's swipe at the BJP comes a day after Advani wrote a blog post on April 4 in which he said the BJP never considered its political opponents as "anti-national".

"BJP talks about Hinduism. In Hinduism, the guru-shishya relationship is sacrosanct and guru is considered to be supreme. Who is Modi's guru? Advani. Modi kicked him out ('Joota marke stage se utara')," the Gandhi said.

In the blog Advani urged his party to "look ahead, look within" and "democratic traditions" within.

PM Modi tweeted Advani's blog, saying "Advani Ji perfectly sums up the true essence of BJP, most notably the guiding Mantra of 'Nation First, Party Next, Self Last.' Proud to be a BJP Karyakarta and proud that greats like LK Advani Ji have strengthened".

9:13 pm: BJP MP from Mathura Hema Malini who is seeking a re-election from the constituency had an interesting reply to a question from a journalist. Watch:

#WATCH Mathura: BJP MP Hema Malini reacts on Rahul Gandhi's 'aaloo ki factory' reported remark. says, "Hamari sarkar bahut saari jagah mein factory laga chuki hai. Bahut saara aaloo ka ban raha hai, chips wagairah. Everything is being made, also export bhi kitna hota hai." pic.twitter.com/uenbasm1fZ — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) 5 April 2019

8:52 pm: After much back and forth between the Congress and its alliance partner RJD over Chatra constituency in Jharkhand, the grand old party on Friday decided to field Manoj Kumar Yadav from the contentious seat. Yadav's candidature might cause further discord between the two alliance partners as RJD has already fielded debutant Subash Yadav from Chatra.

The party has also announced the names of four candidates for the Odisha Vidhan Sabha elections.

Congress party releases list of 1 candidate in Jharkhand for #LokSabhaElections2019 and 4 candidates for elections to the state legislative assembly of Odisha. pic.twitter.com/nu2uqXhhgm — ANI (@ANI) 5 April 2019

8:21 pm: Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy at a public gathering in Koppa urged people not to believe PM Modi's "colourful words". "I'm pleading with you don't believe PM's colorful words.Why should we have enmity with neighbouring countries? Two yrs ago a military officer told me PM will build a story before election to get votes.They don't ask for votes on development work," said Karnataka CM Kumaraswamy on Friday.

K'taka CM HD Kumaraswamy in Koppa: I'm pleading with you don't believe PM's colorful words.Why should we have enmity with neighbouring countries? 2 yrs ago a military officer told me PM will build a story before election to get votes.They don't ask for votes on development work. pic.twitter.com/7E5usJEzJX — ANI (@ANI) 5 April 2019

7:50 pm: BJP leader Arun Jaitley slammed Rahul Gandhi for his "silence" on the chargesheet filed by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) in the AgustaWestland VVIP chopper case which has references to to Congress leader Ahmed Patel and "family".

Jaitley, in a press conference on Friday, urged the Congress president to answer who were referred to as "RG", "AP" and "family" in the documents cited by the economic intelligence agency in the probe against alleged middleman Christian Michel in the chopper scam.

As per the ED chargesheet, Michel has identified "AP" as Ahmed Patel, a senior Congress leader and close aide of Gandhi family. Michel on the other hand has filed an application in a Delhi Court said he has made no such claim.

"Right to silence is for accused not for the one who is dreaming to be the country's Prime Minister," Jaitley said. He said if Rahul fails to respond to these allegations then the country is "entitled to presume that no reply could have been given".

7:05 pm: Congress General Secretary for UP East, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, on Frirday took a dig on Prime Minister for his penchant to hug world leaders."Dunia bhar ghoom aaye hain. Japan gaye wahan gale lage, Pakistan gaye wahan Biryani khaayi, China gaye wahan gale lage. Lekin Varanasi ke ek gareeb parivaar se gale lagte dekha hai? (He has travelled the whole world. He went to Japan and hugged, went to Pakistan and ate Biryani, went to China and embraced but have you ever seen him hugging the poor families in Varanasi)," Priyanka Gandhi said in a rally in Uttar Pradesh's Ghaziabad.

#WATCH Congress General Secretary for UP East, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, speaks on PM Modi, says "...dunia bhar ghoom aaye hain. Japan gaye wahan gale lage, Pakistan gaye wahan Biryani khaayi, China gaye wahan gale lage. Lekin Varanasi ke ek gareeb parivaar se gale lagte dekha hai?" pic.twitter.com/k7ntq4zYy4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) 5 April 2019

6:41 pm: PM Narendra Modi held a rally at Amroha and Saharanpur and targetted the Congress party saying 'When India hits back at the enemy, some people here start crying'. Addressing another rally in Dehradun, Modi said that reference to 'AP' in AgustaWestland deal charge sheet stands for 'Ahmad Patel' and 'Fam' stands for 'Family'. Meanwhile, newly inducted Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra is slated to hold a roadshow in Ghaziabad later during the day.

In another notable political development, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister and TDP chief N Chandrababu Naidu warned PM Modi of "serious consequences" of ongoing raids against Telugu Desam Party (TDP) leaders.

Naidu, who has been on a sit-in protest in Vijayawada over reported IT raids on TDP candidates and supporters, said, "Raids are being conducted on TDP leaders on instructions of PM. Once elections are announced everything has to be conducted under ECI guidance. All parties should have equal opportunity, even one party they can't suppress, another party they can't support."

Andhra Pradesh CM N Chandrababu Naidu on a sit-in protest in Vijayawada over reported IT raids on TDP candidates and supporters. pic.twitter.com/GP0fmppVRA — ANI (@ANI) April 5, 2019

Stepping up his attack on PM Modi, he said that the Prime Minister will have to pay a "heavy price" for this. "I'm warning PM, if you do like this, you will have to pay a heavy price. We are fighting to save democracy and India. Who are you? You are an outgoing PM. Even the officers I am requesting, don't listen to him, if you listen, you will also face serious consequences," he was quoted as saying by news agency ANI. Meanwhile, PM Modi held a rally at Amroha and targetted the Congress party saying 'When India hits back at the enemy, some people here start crying'.

06:24 pm: As elections draw near, there is no dearth of politial leaders taking cheap shots at opponents. BJP president Amit Shah, during a rally in Assam called former Prime Minister and Rajya Sabha MP from the state, Manmohan Singh, as 'Mouni Baba (or a saint who has taken the vow of silence)'. Shah also took a jibe at the Congress president, saying Rahul Gandhi should ask for an account of work of ten years of Singh's government.

"'Mauni baba' Manmohan Singh was the Prime Minister for 10 years. He went to the Rajya Sabha via Assam. I would like to ask Rahul Gandhi, you speak loudly from stage, why don't you give an account for your 10 years of governance," Shah said.

5:55 pm: Union Minister Smriti Irani, while campaigning in Rahul Gandhi's Amethi constituency, once again trained her guns on him on the Congress president Friday. "2019 ka chunaav Amethi ki azaadi ka chunnav hai. Azaad ho Amethi laapata saansad ke changul se (2019 elections will be fought for Amethi's freedom. The constituency needs to be free from the clutches of missing Amethi MP)," Irani said during the BJP's Vijay Sankalp OBC Sammelan in Uttar Pradesh town.

Union Minister Smriti Irani at Vijay Sankalp OBC Sammelan in Amethi: 2019 ka chunaav Amethi ki azaadi ka chunnav hai. Azaad ho Amethi laapata saansad ke changul se. pic.twitter.com/YpF4bLVk6k — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) 5 April 2019

5.00 pm: Congress General Secretary for UP east Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party's candidate from the Parliamentary constituency Dolly Sharma hold a road show.

Ghaziabad: Congress General Secretary for UP east Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party's candidate from the Parliamentary constituency Dolly Sharma hold a road show. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/VrkS0ambLC — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 5, 2019

4.19 pm: PM in Dehradun: ...helicopter ghotale ke dalaalon ne jin logon ko ghoos dene ki baat kahi hai usmein ek 'AP' hai, dusra 'FAM' hai. Issi chargesheet mein kaha gaya hai ki 'AP' ka matlab hai 'Ahmed Patel' aur 'FAM' ka matlab hai family.

#WATCH PM in Dehradun: ...helicopter ghotale ke dalaalon ne jin logon ko ghoos dene ki baat kahi hai usmein ek 'AP' hai, dusra 'FAM' hai. Issi chargesheet mein kaha gaya hai ki 'AP' ka matlab hai 'Ahmed Patel' aur 'FAM' ka matlab hai family. #Uttarakhand pic.twitter.com/f2VskwSC6i — ANI (@ANI) April 5, 2019

4.09 pm: PM Modi in Dehradun: Congress aur corruption mil karke corruption ke naye record karte rehte hain. Congress ke raj ki pehchaan hai ki usmein bhrashtachar accelerator par rehta hai aur vikas ventilator par rehta hai. Yahi Congress ki pehchaan hai

4.06 pm: West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee in Naxalbari, West Bengal: "We don't want 'Dilli ka laddoo'. We want a leader who is connected to the ground, one who stands with the people in their bad and good times."

3.59 pm: Congress president Rahul Gandhi will file his nomination from the Amethi Lok Sabha seat on April 10 and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi will do the same from the Rae Bareli parliamentary constituency on April 11- news agency PTI reports citing sources.

2.37 pm: "Congress ne apne dhakosla patra mein jo likha hai uska matlab ye nikalta hai ki betiyon ke sath rakshasi aprad karnewalon ko bhi ab bail mil jayegi. Jo dahej ke karan bahu ko zinda jala dete hain,kya aise rakshaso ko bail milni chaiye? (Congress election manifesto can be interpreted as - those who commit crimes against our daughters will get bail. Should those who burn their daughters in law over dowry deserve bail)," says PM Modi in Saharanpur.

2.30 pm: "In the last 4 years, 300-km highway has been built in Manipur. Five helipads have been built under the UDAN scheme in the state by Modi govt. Govt has also started work on the expansion of Imphal airport & air cargo terminal," says BJP chief Amit Shah in thoubal.

1:30 pm: Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan says she doesn't want to contest the 2019 elections, appeals to the BJP to name a candidate from Indore, news agency ANI reported.

Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan's letter announcing that she doesn't want to contest the 2019 elections. She also asks why a candidate has not been declared yet from Indore, appeals to BJP to name a candidate pic.twitter.com/zruHJVCBXF — ANI (@ANI) April 5, 2019

1:10 pm: As the poll battle heats up ahead of 2019 General Elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a rally in Amroha and Saharanpur in UP. He is also scheduled to hold rallies in Dehradun later during the day. Newly inducted Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will also hold a roadshow in Ghaziabad in support of Congress candidate Dolly Sharma.

12.38 pm: "Replying to terrorists in their own language is not being liked by some people. When India hits back at the enemy, some people here start crying. When Pakistan is being exposed in front of the world these people start speaking in support of Pakistan," PM Narendra Modi in Amroha.

12.12 pm: PUNE: Rahul Gandhi continued to target the BJP government on Rafale deal and attacked PM Modi citing Nirav Modi, Mehul Choksi and Vijay Mallya.

12.03 pm: "The claims made by Laluji as reported are BOGUS. This is nothing but a poor attempt seeking relevance by a leader whose best days are behind him... Yes, we did meet many times before I joined JDU, but if I were to tell what all was discussed then he would be quite embarrassed," says Prashant Kishore.

The claims made by Laluji as reported are BOGUS. This is nothing but a poor attempt seeking relevance by a leader whose best days are behind him.



Yes, we did meet many times before I joined JDU, but if I were to tell what all was discussed then he would be quite embarrassed. https://t.co/9B5clUBxea — Prashant Kishor (@PrashantKishor) April 5, 2019

11.48 am: "I say this with full responsibility, Nitish Kumar made many attempts to get back and ally with us, he tried many different approaches, that also within 6 months of returning to NDA," says Tejashwi Yadav. Lalu Prasad Yadav, in an upcoming book, has claimed that Kumar wanted to rejoin Mahagathbandhan.

11.29 am: Supreme Court declines urgent hearing of an appeal filed against the Bombay High Court order which had refused to interfere with the release of the Vivek Oberoi-starrer 'PM Narendra Modi.'

10.49 am: Supreme Court today said it will hear the bail matter of RJD Chief Lalu Prasad Yadav. SC said bail matter would likely be heard next week

10.40 am: Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy: Election Commission and Income Tax Department are literally harassing me and my family. Let the EC officials perform their duties, but don’t harass us on mere suspicion. (04-04-2019)
