Will wipe out Naxalism in 5 years, says Rajnath at Sikandrabad rally

SIKANDRABAD: From Balakot to ASAT missile, with a few diversions to “Garibi Hatao” — Union home minister Rajnath Singh ’s rally at Jhajhar in Sikandrabad on Thursday played all the BJP themes, with Pakistan and Congress making star appearances. Highlighting the government’s achievements on the world stage, Singh cited the attack in Balakot, the anti-satellite missile launch and India’s success in routing Naxals. He also exhorted voters for “Congress-mukt Bharat” if they wanted a “garibi-mukt Bharat”.“The Air Force penetrated deep inside the Pakistani territory and neutralised terrorists following Pulwama attack. The terrorists had martyred our 44 CRPF personnel in Pulwama. The PM called an urgent meeting and the Air Force carried out the strike. The strike was so calculated that we only neutralized terrorists and not civilians. The US also supported us in this move,” the home minister said, addressing a gathering of around 5,000 people in Jhajhar which has a significant Thakur vote bank.“In previous regime, the forces used to display white flags during cross-border firings. This was a symbol that we do not want war. I told the armed forces that we should not fire the bullet first. But if any bullet is fired from across the border, our bullets should not be counted,” he said.Singh said India has emerged as a strong power in the world by recently testing an anti-satellite missile system. “Till now only Russia, China and the US had this technology. Our scientists had developed this technology in 2007. But then prime minister did not allow its test fearing this will anger the developed countries. When Narendra Modi became PM, he allowed the scientists to experiment. Now, India can destroy any suspicious satellite if they enter our orbit,” he said.Lauding the government for restricting Naxalite insurgency to just 7-8 districts now, the home minister said given another five years, “Naxals will be wiped out completely.” He also came down heavily on the Congress for making empty promises about poverty elimination. “Prime Ministers Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru, Indira Gandhi, Rajiv Gandhi all talked about this. Now, Rahul Gandhi speaks about the same. If you want poverty elimination, eliminate Congress and the poverty will automatically be eliminated,” he said.Talking about the government’s steps in bringing financial fugitives to justice, Singh said the Congress alleged Nirav Modi, Mehul Choksi, Vijay Mallya fled India during our regime. “The loans to these people were facilitated during the Congress regime. These criminals did not flee the country till the Congress was in power. But then the government changed and a ‘chowkidar’ has taken over, so they fled to other countries.”He said that the government has formulated the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act which will “drag” the offenders to face the rule of law. The home minister also tried to consolidate upper caste voters by saying the government recently announced 10% reservation for them. “The PM believes in ‘Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas’. He realised that some upper caste people are also poor and they need reservation,” he said.
