Court frames charges in 26 year old fake encounter against 9 cops

PATIALA: The court of Ropar Additional District and Session Judge Ravdeep Singh Hundal framed charges of murder and criminal conspiracy against nine cops including a former superintendent of police in an alleged 26 year old fake encounter case.The accused had allegedly killed a 20-year-old constable Paramjit Singh of Budha Bhora village in Ropar in July 1993 and then registered a case of the encounter between the police and the deceased along with his unidentified accomplice during the peak of militancy in Punjab.On Thursday, the court maintained the murder and criminal conspiracy charges against the then Chamkaur Sahib SHO Harpal Singh , who later retired as superintendent of police assistant sub inspectors (ASIs) Santokh Singh and Gurnam Singh; retired constables Parmail Singh and Rajinder Singh; a Head Constable Iqbal Mohammad, constables Mohinder Singh, Sukhwinder Lal, and Jaswinder Singh. Besides this, a woman Mohinder Kaur of Maujlipur village was also booked for murder as Paramjit Singh was allegedly killed at her house.A few days back, all the nine cops and accused Mohinder Kaur were placed under arrest by the court of Ropar judicial magistrate Harish Kumar under sections of murder and the case was committed to additional district and sessions judge for framing of charges.On Thursday the court also rejected the bail application filed by the accused cops. After 26 long years, the hope for justice has revived for deceased’s younger brother Randhir Singh and his family. The case was filed in 1998 by Paramjit’s grandfather Daljit Singh who continued his fight for justice till his death in 2009 at age of 95. Meanwhile, Paramjit’s father Dalbir Singh who retired as a Station House Officer also passed away in 2009. Randhir Singh, brother of the deceased, said, ``I was 15 when Paramjit was working as a constable in Sangrur , was killed. He had gone to the house of accused Mohinder Kaur to collect Rs 5000 as part of land dealing. Nine cops were already present in her house and allegedly fired on Paramjit leaving him dead on the spot. Later the cops concocted a story that Paramjit was killed in a police encounter while his accomplice managed to escape.’’ Randhir’s counsel argued in the court that the accused claimed around 250 rounds of fire were made in the cross firing but they could not any produce evidence on their claims.
