No Should Mean No! Two Murders In A Month In Kerala Over Rejected Proposals And It Has To Stop

On Thursday, Kerala woke up to the news of yet another gruesome murder, committed by a youth who had no prior criminal record but killed a young girl because she rejected his marriage proposal.

The incident happened at Chiyyaram, Thrissur in the early hours of Thursday. The victim, identified as Neethu was a third-year student of a private engineering college. She was stabbed multiple times before the accused pour petrol on her and set her on fire.

By the time Neethu's relatives rushed to her hearing her cry the 22-year-old had died. The murderer, identified as 32-year-old Nidheesh was caught by locals while attempting to flee.

According to reports, Neethu who lost both her parents at a young age and was living with her grandparents was in a relationship with Nidheesh for two years. But she allegedly turned down his marriage proposal, which made the MBA graduate furious and resulted in the murder.

This is the second such case in Kerala in less than a month. In March, a 20-year-old college student was set on fire in broad daylight by a youth in Thiruvalla.

The victim, Kavitha Vijayakumar, was on her way to college, when the accused, Ajin Reji Mathew, confronted her and set her on fire. Kavitha who sustained 65% burn injuries in the attack succumbed to her injuries eight days later.

Representational Image

Ajin who was Kavitha's classmate from school was caught by locals while trying to flee. Even though he claims that they were in a relationship, Kavitha's family said they were unaware of it.

Following the outrage over the incident, the sale of petrol in bottles were banned in Kerala.

Thursday's incident is the fifth such murder that has been reported from Kerala since 2017. In all the cases the trigger for the crime was the rejection of love or marriage proposal.

Commenting on the disturbing trend, Muralee Thummarukudy the Chief of Disaster Risk Reduction in the UN Environment Programme had observed that the reason behind such acts is the fact that men can't take no for an answer. He blamed movies which glorify stalking for giving a wrong message to men. He also noted that boys are not told about "no means no" from a young age.
