After US mag claims F-16 not shot down by India, Bhutto takes dig at PM Modi with 'India deserves better' jibe

The Indian Air Force displayed a portion of Raytheon manufactured AIM-120C-5 AMRAAM. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Hours after a prominent American magazine carried a report claiming that as per the US findings all the Pakistani F-16 fighter jets were present and accounted for, chairman of Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) Bilawal Bhutto Zardari in an apparent dig at PM Narendra Modi said: “The great nation of India deserves better.”

Taking to his Twitter handle, Bhutto termed the magazine report as “embarrassing” and said, “when you lie, you don’t hurt others, you hurt yourself.”

“Oh dear how embarrassing @narendramodi if you are going to lie at least try something more believable? Everyone knows you guys can’t aim. When you lie you don’t hurt others, you hurt yourself. The great nation of India can do better. Its people deserve better,” Bhutto tweeted.

The report by the US-based magazine cites 'US officials' as its source of information but does not name anyone. The magazine challenges India's claim that IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman’s MiG 21 Bison shot down PAF’s F-16 fighter jet when a Pakistani air armada tried to violate the Indian air space during an aerial dogfight on February 27. Addressing a press conference the next day, India displayed pieces of the AMRAAM missile as evidence to "conclusively" prove that Pakistan had deployed US-made F-16 fighter jets during aerial raids to target Indian military installations in Kashmir.

Oh dear how embarrassing @narendramodi if you are going to lie at least try something more believable? Everyone knows you guys can’t aim. When you lie you don’t hurt others, you hurt yourself. The great nation of India can do better. Its people deserve better. https://t.co/i19LWo4Dea — BilawalBhuttoZardari (@BBhuttoZardari) April 5, 2019

Pakistan had maintained that they hadn’t deployed F-16 fighter jets and added that no PAF jets were shot down by the IAF pilots.

Reacting to this report, chief spokesperson of Pakistan Armed Forces Asif Ghafoor said its time for India to speak the truth about false claims and actual losses on their side including the second aircraft shot down by Pakistan. Raking up Kashmir issue once again Ghafoor called on New Delhi to introspect over atrocities in the Valley adding that the region needs peace, progress and prosperity.

Allah be praised, truth always prevails. Time for India to speak truth about false claims & actual losses on their side including the second aircraft shot down by Pakistan. India needs introspection especially over atrocities in IOK. Region needs peace, progress & prosperity. https://t.co/5eCsQDSDYD — Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor (@OfficialDGISPR) April 5, 2019

The report which was published in the Foreign Policy magazine stated that Pakistan had invited the United States to count its F-16 planes after the incident as part of an end-user agreement signed when the foreign military sale was finalised, PTI reported.

Tensions between India and Pakistan escalated after 40 CRPF personnel were killed by a suicide bomber affiliated to Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14.

In response, the IAF carried out pre-emptive airstrikes on JeM terror camps in Pakistan after receiving inputs that the terror group was planning another attack like Pulwama.

In retaliation, PAF crossed the international border to target Indian Brigade HQ and Army installations when the IAF chased the jets away in a dogfight. During the aerial skirmish Wg Cdr Abhinandan’s MiG 21 Bison was shot down and he landed in Pakistan. After being captured by the Pakistani Army, PM Imran Khan returned the captured pilot to India on March 1. Pakistan claimed that the captured pilot's return was a “peace gesture” and India maintained that it was only a procedure prescribed under the Geneva Protocol that deals in terms of treatment to Prisoners of War (PoWs).
