Two labourers killed after under-construction parking lot in Bengaluru collapses

Two labourers killed after under-construction parking lot in Bengaluru collapses

The two dead were among the 12 who were sleeping in one of the floors of the parking facility.

news Accident

Two migrant labourers were killed in the wee hours of Friday after a portion of an under-construction multi-level car parking facility collapsed in Bengaluru’s northern suburb of Yeshwantpur. Both the deceased were labourers engaged in the construction project within the APMC premises. Others who were trapped have been rescued and are being treated.

The deceased have been identified as Rahul Kumar from West Bengal and Rajesh from Bihar. Police said the two dead were among the 12 who were sleeping in one of the floors of the parking facility. The other 10 suffered injuries and are being treated at a hospital.

Mohamed Mukarram, Inspector at the RMC Yard Police Station, told TNM, “We have detained one site engineer for interrogation. It is a government building that was being constructed by a private contractor within the APMC premises.”

“Two people died on their way to the hospital. All the other 10 are being treated at MS Ramaiah Hospital. We will record the statements of the people who were trapped,” another police officer working on the case told TNM.

MN Reddi, DGP, Fire and Emergency Services, Karnataka also tweeted about the incident.

“Under construction building (multi-level car park – first floor) at APMC premises, Yeshwantpur, a part of the slab collapsed. Around 4 am. Rescue teams from KSFES at the spot. All 5 labourers trapped rescued. 2 were critical but later died,” his tweet read.

In a subsequent tweet, he added, “There are no more trapped persons. Fire Force Rescue operations concluded.”

#BengaluruAPMCyardBuildingCollapse there are no more trapped persons. Fire Force Rescue operations concluded. https://t.co/XvP2CjXBei — M.N.Reddi, IPS (@DGP_FIRE) April 5, 2019

The incident comes less than two weeks after 19 people lost their lives in a building collapse in Dharwad. Rescue operations took place for five long days and three teams of the National Disaster Relief Fund had to be engaged.
