'Ranam' movie blast case: Kannada film producer Kanakpura Srinivas arrested

'Ranam' movie blast case: Kannada film producer Kanakpura Srinivas arrested

The blast had killed a mother and daughter, who were watching the shoot.

news Crime

The Bengaluru Police on Friday arrested the producer of Sandalwood film Ranam in connection with the death of a mother-daughter duo during the movie's shoot.

The Bagalur Police arrested Kanakapura Srinivas, the producer of the film, a week after a blast sequence during the shoot killed the mother and daughter. Srinivas was produced before the magistrate on Friday and has been remanded to judicial custody.

On March 29, a planned cylinder blast to shoot an action sequence for the film resulted in the death of 29-year-old Sumera and her eight-year-old daughter Aeyra. The film crew was shooting a car blast sequence in Bagalur Industrial Area, when the debris from the car hit a family of four. Sumera and Aeyra were killed in the blast, and the father and another child were injured and are admitted to Ambedkar Hospital in Bengaluru.

On Monday, the Bagalur Police had arrested the stunt master for the film – Subhash K and booked him for negligence.

Investigators of the case say that Subhash had not handled the set up for the blast sequence properly. “They were using a nitrogen gas cylinder for the explosion, which was to be kept between two colliding cars. The cylinder was placed by Subhash and he had not done that properly. When the blast occurred, it caused the cylinder to shoot up in the air. This caused the debris to land on the woman and the girl,” the police official said.

However, the police are yet to arrest the director V Samudra. Investigators say that he may be in Andhra Pradesh and police are still looking out for him.

Kanakpura Srinivas and Subhash K have been booked under sections 304-A (causing death by negligence) and 34 (common intention) of the IPC.

According to MN Reddi, DG of Fire Services, the film's crew had not obtained any prior permission to shoot the blast sequence.

Ranam, is a Sandalwood film starring Chethan Ahimsa and Chiranjeevi Sarja. The shooting for the film began on March 28.
