Top news of the day: Pakistan to release 100 fishermen next week, SC stays eviction order against AJL in National Herald case, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Pakistan will release 100 jailed Indian fishermen on Monday, diplomatic sources on both sides have confirmed. Pakistani officials have intimated India that the 100 fishermen will be released from prison on April 7 and taken to the Wagah border for repatriation to India the next day, the sources said.

The Supreme Court on Friday stayed the eviction and further proceedings against Associated Journals Limited (AJL), the publishers of The National Heraldnewspaper started by former prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru in 1938 to advance the freedom movement, from a centrally located building in the National Capital.

The Supreme Court on Friday agreed to consider a plea made by advocate Prashant Bhushan to stay the implementation of the electoral bonds scheme even as Attorney-General K.K. Venugopal dismissed the noted civil rights lawyer’s appeal as an “election speech”.

Christian Michel, the alleged middleman who was arrested in the AgustaWestland VVIP chopper scam case, told a Delhi court on April 5 that he did not name anybody in connection with the deal during investigation by the Enforcement Directorate (ED), which has filed a supplementary charge sheet.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi on April 5 said those who ill-treat gurus (teachers) cannot claim to be the custodian of the Hindu religion. Speaking at a public rally in Maharashtra’s Chandrapur District on April 5, the Congress chief took a veiled dig at Prime Minister Narendra Modi saying the disrespectful treatment of his teacher (senior leader L.K. Advani) was against the Hindu culture and its Shishya-Guru tradition. “Mr. Modi not only did that (ill-treat Advani) but practices a religion of hate, anger and divisive ideology,” he said.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on April 5 said the Congress was affected by a “Muslim League virus” and the Opposition party retaliated by saying it was he who was a “virus” that would be “eradicated” in the election.

Besides promising a ban on all political messaging that use the armed forces, to proposing the raising of an Ahir armoured regiment and a Gujarat infantry regiment, the Samajwadi Party's (SP) vision document for the coming Lok Sabha election takes a dig at the BJP's 'nationalism' narrative.

Lok Sabha Speaker Sumitra Mahajan on Friday announced that she would not contest the coming Lok Sabha election. In a statement, Ms. Mahajan said the BJP appeared hesitant in declaring a candidate for the Indore seat, considered one of the safe seats of the BJP in Madhya Pradesh.

A Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) jawan was killed and another injured in an encounter with Naxalites in Chhattisgarh on Friday, police said. The gunfight took place in the forest near Chameda village in Dhamtari district when a joint team of the CRPF’s 211 battalion and District Force (DF) was out on an anti-naxal operation, a police official said.

Embattled U.S. aviation giant Boeing on Thursday insisted on the “fundamental safety” of its 737 MAX aircraft but pledged to take all necessary steps to ensure the jets’ airworthiness. The statements came hours after Ethiopian officials said pilots of a doomed plane had crashed last month after following the company’s recommendations, leaving 157 people dead.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday slammed the opposition parties alleging their only agenda was to dislodge him from power and promote dynastic politics.

Here are our movie reviews for the weekend:

The past few weeks have seen two films pivoting on the missing men and half widows of Kashmir. Hamid, where the issue gets seen through the eye view of an eight-year-old child, is moving in its simplicity and humaneness. No Fathers In Kashmir looks at it through two teenagers-a British Kashmiri girl and a local Kashmiri boy-who share the trauma of missing fathers. In the former film, politics takes a backseat to focus on the human repercussions of political machinations. In No Fathers… Ashvin Kumar tries to bring in the humaneness and politics in equal measure on screen.

Calling Uriyadi 2 a ‘sequel’ means two things; one, it’s a serious insinuation done to one of the best independent films that has come from Tamil cinema. And two, it’s hardly a sequel. The second instalment shares no similarities with its predecessor except for its lead, Lenin Vijay (Vijay Kumar), who seems to have been airdropped in a milieu that’s oblivious to him.

Majili cements the presence of Shiva Nirvana as a writer-director from whom we can expect some good films. This is a different canvas from his debut, Ninnu Kori, and he uses it to make us forget the star-actors and look at the characters they are portraying. And that isn’t easy when the stars are the industry’s much-loved couple whose photographs on social media give many of their followers ‘couple goals’.

Romeo Akbar Walter (RAW) takes patriotism way back to 1971, to the times of Indira Gandhi, of all the prime ministers. At its core is a spy, who is only Hindustani, not a Muslim or a Hindu. Rehmatullah Ali aka Romeo (John Abraham) is the sort who would put nation before self, would sacrifice his present for the country’s future, would even go so far as to erase his identity for India and would choose the motherland over his mother (Alka Amin).

When someone abuses Rocket’s (G.V. Prakash) mother, he laughs it off. But the minute his “area” gets ridiculed, he’s up in arms. Kuppathu Raja firmly establishes what matters most in the script – and to Rocket, its protagonist. It’s the “area”, the locality they live in... and in this case, it’s the noisy environs of North Madras.
