Pakistan handed body of fisherman killed inside Indian jail

LAHORE – Indian authorities on Friday handed over the dead body of a Pakistani fisherman, who was allegedly beaten to death by Indian jail staff on March 29.

The victim, identified as Noor-ul-Ameen, had succumbed to his injuries inflicted on him by the prison staff.

The dead body was handed over to Pakistani authorities at Wagah Border.

Burney Trust International head Ansar Burney said that the fisherman’s dead body has been shifted to Karachi.

Ameen was buried in Korangi later today.

The deceased was arrested by the Indian coastguard on September 30, 2017 while on a fishing trip along with six other fishermen in the Arabian Sea. Their boats had drifted to the Indian side by mistake.

Despite the fact that Ameen had completed his prison term, he was not released by the Indian jail staff. Ameen left four young children, wife, and parents in mourn.

He was the sole breadwinners of his family.

Noorul Ameen's daughter informed Pakistani media that some two weeks ago they received a call in which they were informed that Ameen has died. The family had appealed the government to take measures to bring his body back to the country.

The fishermen organizations have termed Ameen's death a murder in the hands of Indian prisoners.

According to Pakistan Fisher Fork Forum, currently, over 150 Pakistani fishermen are languishing in Indian jails, including the three who have been in jail for the past 20 years.

Family demands trial at ICJ as Pakistan buries ... 07:09 PM | 3 Mar, 2019 SIALKOT – The grieving family of Shakirullah, who was brutally beaten to death by inmates in an Indian jail, has ...

Last month, 50-year-old Pakistani prisoner Shakirullah was beaten to death by a group of inmates at the Jaipur Central Jail. He was laid to rest at his ancestral village Jessarwala in Daska after his body was handed over to the Pakistani authorities after removing his brain and heart.

Shakirullah was murdered amid soaring tension between Pakistan and India in the backdrop of Pulwama attack for which New Delhi pinned blame on Islamabad without any evidence.
