Irrfan Khan shoots for Angrezi Medium on the streets of Udaipur - see photos

Bollywood actor Irrfan Khan | Photo Credit: Instagram

Bollywood actor Irrfan Khan, who had taken a break from work after his neuroendocrine tumour diagnosis last year, has started shooting for his next film, Angrezi Medium earlier today. The movie is a sequel to his 2017 hit Hindi Medium and is being directed by Homi Adajania. Recently, we stumbled upon a few photos of Irrfan from the sets of his upcoming project.

In the pictures which are being shared on social media, the 52-year-old actor is seen shooting on the streets of Udaipur. He is seen donning a brown and white striped shirt and grey pants. In one of the photos, Irrfan is even seen driving a scooter.

Angrezi Medium is being produced by Dinesh Vijan under the banner of Maddock Films and will also be shot in London. Check out the photos below.

Earlier today, two photos were shared on the official twitter handle of Maddock Films, announcing that the film has gone on floors. While one of them was of the clapperboard, the other one had Irrfan posing with cinematographer Anil Mehta, co-actor Deepak Dobriyal, producer Dinesh and director Homi right in front of Ghasiteram Mishthan Bhandar, one of Udaipur's most famous sweets shops.

What better start to this Friday than starting something that you all have been waiting for!

Our power team, Producer #DineshVijan, Director #HomiAdajania,

DOP #AnilMehta, @deepakdobriyal and the man himself @irrfank straight from the sets of #AngreziMedium in #Udaipur. pic.twitter.com/ANlJh1uX3x — Maddock Films (@MaddockFilms) April 5, 2019

According to a report in Mumbai Mirror, Angrezi Medium will feature Radhika Madan as Irrfan’s daughter. Reports have also suggested that Kareena Kapoor Khan has been roped in to play the female lead. She will apparently be seen portraying a cop in the film.

Meanwhile, Hindi Medium which starred Saba Qamar opposite Irrfan narrated the tale of a couple who struggled to get their daughter's admission done in an English medium school. The movie was not only praised and loved a lot by the audience but it was also one of the top grossers of 2017.

Stay tuned to this space for more updates!
