The Weather Channel India Weekly Digest (April 1-5, 2019): Top Weather, Environment and Science Stories of the Week

File photo of a farmer looking at monsoon clouds near Jaipur. (Bhagirath Basnet/BCCL/Jaipur)

A quick recap of the top weather, environment and science stories of the week.

Monsoon Arrival Delayed, Below-Normal Rainfall Expected: The Weather Channel

With two months to go for the monsoon’s official onset, The Weather Channel’s meteorology team has issued its forecast for Monsoon 2019. According to our analysis, a persistent El Niño and multi-decadal dry signal are moving the needle towards a drier monsoon. Based on current signs, overall rainfall volume during Monsoon 2019 could be around 93% of the long-term average for India, and there is an 80% chance of below-normal rain in some areas. Read more.

Beat the Heat with these Simple and Effective Tips

It’s that time of the year again. Temperatures in many parts of India are inching towards the 40-degree mark, and scorching days and sultry nights threaten to take the joy out of our lives. However, we’ve got you covered with these tips to protect your body from the summer Sun’s wrath. Here they are.

Heat Wave Spreads Across India; Temperatures Shoot Up

Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Odisha were some of the hottest states in India over the past week. Three people in Kerala were reported killed by sunstroke, and hundreds have taken ill across the country due to sun exposure. Another risk arising from the dry heat is the possibility of dust storms across north India. Read more.

These Six Strange Occurrences in India May Not Seem Natural, But They Are!

Even in this modern age, India remains a land of mystery. For instance, what causes ‘blood rain’ to fall in Kerala? Why do birds commit suicide in Jatinga in southern Assam? What is the ‘ghostly light’ that haunts the Rann of Kutch at night? Eerie though all this might seem, in reality all these occurrences are just Mother Nature in all her unpredictable glory. Read more.

Is Your "Health Food" Really Healthy?

Food manufacturers are sneaking in salt, sugar and unhealthy fat into food. To make it worse, many of these items are marketed as ‘healthy’ food. However, India’s Food Safety and Standards Authority of India will soon put paid to these unethical practices by making it compulsory for manufacturers to clearly label foods with high fat, salt or sugar (HFSS) content. Food items will have to mention HFSS content on their packaging so that customers can make an informed choice. Read more.

Bad Air Killed over 1.2 Million in India in 2017: Study

You can ‘kick the butt’, but giving up smoking may not be enough, because polluted air is a bigger killer in India than smoking cigarettes. The recently-released ‘State of Global Air 2019’ report says that 1.2 million people in India died from exposure to outdoor and indoor air pollution in 2017. Overall, long-term exposure to outdoor and indoor air pollution contributed to nearly five million deaths in the country from stroke, diabetes, heart attack, lung cancer and chronic lung disease in 2017. Read more.

How Dust Storms are Adding to Pollution Woes of North India

New research from India states that dust storms can cause changes in air quality and atmospheric chemistry that can be harmful for human health. According to the study, dust storms are followed by an increase in carbon monoxide and nitrogen oxide, which is likely to increase surface ozone. They also increase the levels of PM2.5 and PM10 and harmful greenhouse gases at the surface, which exacerbates the effects of pollution. Read more.

Scientists Find New Dimension to Dynamics of Indian Ocean

Advertisement Indian scientists have made a major discovery about a global weather phenomenon called the Madden-Julian Oscillation, or MJO. When the MJO--an eastward moving disturbance of clouds, rain, winds and pressure--reaches the eastern Indian Ocean, it transfers a part of its energy to the underlying ocean. This causes powerful waves that could have an impact on cyclone formation in the Indian Ocean. Read more.

AstroSat Unveils Star That Regained Its Youth by Feeding on Its Companion

A team of scientists from Bengaluru-based Indian Institute of Astrophysics claims to have cracked the secret of the ‘prolonged youth’ of Blue Straggler Stars (BSS). The scientists, along with their international collaborators, used AstroSat, India's dedicated space observatory, to solve this mystery. Click to read how they did it.

31 Killed in Nepal Thunderstorm

A violent thunderstorm that struck parts of southern Nepal on Monday caused extensive damage in the region. Thirty one people were killed in the storm. The storm, which was accompanied by hail and heavy rain, destroyed houses, toppled vehicles, uprooted trees and severed power supply in the area. Bara district of Nepal was the worst affected said local authorities. Read more.

26 Firefighters Die Battling China Forest Fire

An intense fire that ran through Muli county, in Sichuan province of China on Saturday, reportedly claimed the lives of at least 26 of the 689 fire fighters dispatched to douse the blaze. The state news agency also reported that 30 people went missing after a sudden change in wind direction caused an outburst of fire. The inferno broke out at a remote spot in the rugged mountains at an altitude of about 3,800 metres. Read more.

Mars Had Big Rivers for Billions of Years: Study

Mars was once home to hundreds of rivers that flowed across the red planet, reveals a study published in the Science Advances Journal. Researchers from the University of Chicago found that these rivers existed well after many believed they had gone extinct, and were bigger and wider than the rivers now presently found on Earth. Read more.

Temperatures to Cross 40°C in Delhi Today Due to Heat Wave Conditions

The onset of summer in India has brought intense and humid heat in many parts of the country, including the national capital: Delhi. According to regional met department, temperatures in Delhi are likely to cross the 40°C mark due to the prevalence of heat wave conditions over the region. Many other states like Gujarat, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh are also reeling under the heatwave. Read more.

Pollution and Sewage May Be Attracting Mass Flamingo Migration to Mumbai

The number of flamingos found in the creek of Thane has grown manifold due to an increase in the amount of raw sewage and industrial pollution that is discharged in the creek. The run-off from the nearby industries and city feed the algae in the water which are the main source of food for the flamingos. Other reasons such as drought-like conditions in parts of India and a decline in natural habitat force these birds to flock the creeks of Mumbai in large numbers. Read more.

As Nations Strew Junk in Earth’s Orbit, Time for Swachh Space Abhiyaan?

While countries are busy conducting numerous space research and tests, the consequences of these are not bearing well for the Earth’s outer atmosphere. Large amounts of space debris that are currently orbiting the Earth can pose a grave danger to other satellites and the Earth’s ionosphere. The recent testing of the A-SAT missile by India is believed to have generated 400 pieces of orbital space debris, thus demanding a clean-up of the space as well. Read more.

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel app (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
