Speech Analytica: In Chandrapur, Rahul Gandhi did not mention Balakot or Pakistan, said farmers 18 times

The Congress party has been trying hard to counter the BJP's narrative on national security. When Rahul Gandhi reached Chandrapur in Maharashtra to begin his rally, national security was the last thing on his mind as well in his public address. This is also a seat from where the Congress drew a blank in 2014 Lok Sabha elections.

Rahul Gandhi began his speech with "15 lakh" to corner the BJP government on the promises it made during the 2014 Lok Sabha elections. Corruption and black money were the axis of his speech. Not forgetting the core voters in Chandrapur constituency - the kisan (farmers).

Farmers and loan waivers

Word count of 'farmers': 18 times

Farmers was the most important keyword in the region of Vidharbha that comprises Nagpur and Amravati districts and has over 20 per cent of the state's population. The region has been ravaged by droughts and has been witness to the highest number of farmer suicides in the country.

Rahul Gandhi mentioned the Congress manifesto promise - The NYAY scheme within the first five minutes of his address. Launching a sharp attack on PM Modi, he said, "Modi lied about Rs 15 lakh but my Rs 3.6 lakh through NYAY is based on facts. I guarantee farmers, labourers, unemployed, women and backward castes earning less than Rs 12,000 that we shall put Rs 72,000 in their bank accounts annually."

"Poor farmers of Vidharba who failed to pay loans are being imprisoned. After 2019 elections, failure to repay loans will not result in imprisonment," he said.

Despite the launch of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Yojana and the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana, the BJP government has not been able to break the barrier with angry farmers from Maharashtra who have taken out two long marches to meet Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and one long march to meet PM Modi.

Rahul Gandhi also made a claim that the Congress government waived off farm loans in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh after forming governments.

"We asked for 10 days to waive off the farm loans, we did it in two days," he claimed. He promised that food processing factories would be created for agricultural produce in the Maharashtra region if the Congress-NCP alliance is voted to power.

PM is the only competition for Rahul?

Word count of 'Modi': 17 times

Rahul's attacks were centred on the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. He made no mention of the SP-BSP alliance which has decided to contest its candidates on 48 seats in Maharashtra. This could make a clean sweep for the Congress-NCP alliance a bit difficult. However, an alliance of the BJP and Shiv Sena is also in the Lok Sabha contest in Maharashtra making this an intriguing poll point.

Corruption formed a larger narrative

Word count of 'fugitive': 15 times

Ambani: 15 times

Chowkidar: 11 times

Rafale: Nine times

Rahul Gandhi led his speech straight to corruption and black money.

Our Speech Analytica reveals Rahul Gandhi used the term "Fugitives" or "Chor" 18 times during his 35-minute address. He also mentioned names of Nirav Modi, Mehul Choksi, Vijay Mallya as well as Anil Ambani and Gautam Adani.

The most mentioned name in his list of people, who Rahul Gandhi claimed have had their loans written off by the NaMo government, the name "Ambani" featured a total of 15 times.

This comes a day after a chargesheet, filed by Enforcement Directorate (ED) against Christain Michel in the AgustaWestland VVIP chopper deal, reveals that "AP" refers to Ahmed Patel and "Fam" is family. The chargesheet also mentions "Mrs Gandhi and RG" but does not explain in what context.

Recalling the #ChowkidarChorHai, a counter campaign to BJP's #MainBhiChowkidar, he said, "Have you seen a chowkidar for the kisan of this country?" The word chowkidar was mentioned 11 times in his speech.

Rahul Gandhi invokes Hinduism

Word count of Hinduism: Two

Hometown of RRS chief Mohan Bhagwat, even finance and forest minister of Maharashtra Sudhir Mungatiwar hails from the Chandrapur constituency. This resonates with Rahul Gandhi's strong mention of Hinduism in his speech and LK Advani's blog.

Launching a fresh attack on Modi with regards to LK Advani's blog, Rahul said, "The guru-shishya parampara is a corner stone of Hinduism. Modi side-lined his guru by rejecting him. Does Hinduism preach hatred?"

Earlier in the day, Rahul Gandhi had said that he has nothing but love for Narendra Modi. "I don't have any hatred for him," he said.

What Congress left out

Rahul made it clear that Pakistan and the national security is not a party poll issue. He did not mention national security or Pulwama attack or even the questions the Opposition raised on the Balakot airstrikes.

He recalled the UPA government's scheme MNREGA only once. Clearly, shifting to what the Congress party feels should be the narrative, Rahul Gandhi stuck with farmers, corruption, unemployment and the promise of NYAY for the people if voted back to power.
