Modi claiming false credit for army actions!

Modi claiming false credit for army actions!

The Congress party called Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s bluff, staking claim for the recent surgical strikes by Indian armed forces in Pakistan and boasting that it was only after Modi became the Prime Minister, the armed forces have become active.

Reacting to Modi’s speeches saying nothing had happened in the last 70 years, PCC leader Gudur Narayana Reddy alleged that the PM was trying to create a wrong impression that the Congress party had done nothing for the country in the last seven decades.

“His rhetoric gives a feeling as if India was born in 2014 and he was made the first Prime Minister," he said.

He reminded that even before Modi was born, India had won a war with Pakistan and also merged more than 500 Princely States into the Union.

When Modi was about 15 years old, India had fought and won its second war with Pakistan and had reached up to Lahore driving away Pakistan forces.

Even before Modi celebrated his fourth birthday, the Government of India had created the Atomic Energy Establishment Trombay (AEET) on January 3, 1954. It was later renamed as Bhabha Atomic Research Centre on January 22, 1967.

"When Modi was just 11 years old, Indian Army liberated Goa from the Portuguese and it was made a Union Territory. A year later, French-ruled Pondicherry (now Puducherry) became part of India as a Union Territory,” he pointed out.

Modi was just 14-year-old when Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) was formed on October 1, 1964. It was a consortium of Hindustan Aircraft Limited and IAF Aircraft Manufacturing Depot, Kanpur who were already manufacturing aircrafts and helicopters.

It is the same HAL which was awarded the contract to manufacture Rafale. But Modi snatched the contract from HAL and gave it to his friend Anil Ambani, he said.

“When Modi was 19-year-old in 1969, Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) was founded. In the same year on October 28, Tarapur Atomic Power Station became operational generating initial power of 210 MW of electricity," Narayana Reddy said.

When Modi turned 21 in 1971, India was fighting its third war with Pakistan. East Pakistan broke away from Pakistan and Bangladesh was born as an independent nation.

"It was India's success in proving two-nation theory wrong. Unfortunately, Modi Government promoted hatred to encourage the beliefs that a nation could be formed on the basis of religion," he said.

"When he was only 24, India conducted peaceful nuclear test at Pokhran in 1974. Much before Modi entered the electoral politics, India had its super computer and application of Information Technology was completed in all spheres of lives in India.

He also pointed out that much before Modi became the Prime Minister, India had already taken the initiatives for Chandrayan, Mangalyan, GSLV, Mono Rail, Nuclear Sub-Marine, Agni Missile, Chetak, MIG, Arjun Tank, Sukhoi, Dhanush, etc., Therefore, India was a powerful nation with a robust economy. The country was producing 3 lakh MW of energy.

“Modi and his bhakts would not have raised the question '70 Saal Mein Kuch Nahi Huva' if they would have read history," he said.

New App Alert: All OTT Apps & Release Dates Under One App
