Rahul proclaims he has unrequited love for Mr Modi

In Pune at a students’ event, the Congress president remained unperturbed by chants of ‘Modi’ in the air



Congress president Rahul Gandhi, who stole the show once with the ‘jadoo ki jhappi’ he gave Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Parliament, took another shot at ‘Gandhigiri’ on Friday, when he declared to students in Pune that he loves the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader — although the feeling is not quite reciprocated. However, Gandhi also took the opportunity to take pot shots at Modi’s skill development claims, saying jobs are being lost by the hour. He committed to deliver on the promises made in the Congress manifesto, with the snide remark that ending crony capitalism would help achieve the same.



Gandhi climbed onstage just as a dance troupe wound up performing to the hit number ‘Apna time ayega’, while 7,000-odd college students gathered on Laxmi Lawns at Hadapsar cheered. He launched head-on into an interactive session without the preamble of any introductory speech — after all, he had come to listen to the students’ views, he said.



~~68745843~~

Gandhi stressed that a lot of thought went into the manifesto, so that every promise made could be fulfilled. “We prepared the manifesto based on suggestions given by citizens. The idea of income guarantee of Rs 72,000 also came from the public. We will be able to implement it. Almost Rs 3.50 lakh crore due from the richest people of the country has been written off. The problem is that 15 of the richest in the country were given access to this money, instead of the common people. We are going to change that and will not be raising the income tax levy to do so,” he said.



Calling demonetisation an assault on the country that could not be set right, he asserted, “Millions of jobs were lost on account of DeMo. Even today, India is losing 27,000 jobs every 24 hours. Countering this, we propose to create jobs. We announced that entrepreneurs seeking to start a business will need no permissions for three years. We plan to build healthcare, education infrastructure at the block level.”



While he supported the recent air strikes undertaken, he added, “It is important for other countries to know they can’t mess with India. But it is the Indian Air Force that should be taking credit for the move. I am against its politicisation. I am uncomfortable with the manner in which the PM is politicising the action. But, that’s his choice.”



Critical of the changes wrought on the educational system in the past five years, Gandhi noted, “In our system, we don’t appreciate being questioned. A teacher preaches and students listen. I am here talking to 7,000 of you. Some of your questions may make me uncomfortable, but I have the guts to stand here. Why is the PM not doing so? It comes from an attitude of ‘I know everything and others no nothing’. That is problematic.”



Gandhi said he draws courage from what he had to face in life, but when walking on the path of truth, there is no fear. “I love Mr Narendra Modi. I genuinely have no hatred towards the man. He has hatred towards me, though.” To make his point, he shushed volunteers who tried to subdue the chant “Modi, Modi” rising from the crowd. He insisted he had no problem with the chorus.



MARRIED TO WORK



During the rapid fire question round, Gandhi countered a query on who could be cast as heroine in his biopic, stating he is married to his work. Sharing personal nuggets, he delved into the bond he shared with his sister, Priyanka Gandhi.



MEET AND GREET



In the 12 hours that he was in Pune, Gandhi met his party workers for 15 minutes when they came to greet him at the hotel. No strategy for work towards the upcoming polls or any other concerns were discussed. However, he devoted 25 minutes to Nationalist Congress Party’s Supriya Sule, who came calling with her party candidates for Shirur and Maval — Amol Kolhe and Parth Pawar.


