Devoleena Bhattacharjee: Why should I have any fear if I am innocent

On December 9, TV actress Devoleena Bhattacharjee aka Gopi bahu from the show 'Saath Nibhaana Saathiya' was summoned for questioning in the murder and abduction case of Mumbai-based, diamond trader Rajeshwar Udani. One of the accused who was arrested in the case, businessman Sachin Pawar is reportedly a good friend of Devoleena and there were talks if the actress was in a relationship with him. In an exclusive interview, Devoleena shares how she got embroiled in the controversy. Excerpts:I was interrogated by the police and they had every right to do so, but I was never troubled by them. What is unfortunate is that it was almost like a media trial. I was unnecessarily targeted. I co-operated fully with the police and in the future, too, I will continue to do so.Sachin Pawar is a good friend and I got to know him through my co-actor Ashish Sharma . Sachin and I worked on a music album together, too. I first met him when I was campaigning for a political rally. After that, I visited his office and we decided to do a few documentary films together on Assam, my home state. I got to know Sachin well and he wanted to visit Kamakhya Temple in Guwahati and he asked me if he could join me on my trip to Assam. When someone requests you, you generally don’t say ‘no’. Sachin came with me to Assam once. And thereafter, we became good friends and had plans to work together. The reason why my name cropped up in the investigation is, because a few months ago, I had attended Udani’s daughter’s wedding. Thereafter, he and I met only thrice, during which I asked him for advice for my own business endeavours.As far as my interrogation is concerned, I am surprised why it was blown out of proportion, because few artistes from the TV industry were also present at the police station before me.Of course, Sachin’s arrest has shocked me and it is only normal to be shocked. Tomorrow, if your friend is suddenly arrested how would you react? I know him since a year and I would not like to comment on this anymore, because the investigations are still on.Well, there were many false claims before that, too. It was said that I was detained by the police when in reality, I was questioned by the police. No, I was not in a relationship with Sachin. He is just a good friend and we were planning to make documentaries on Assam.I met him at the police station and wanted to know what exactly happened. My family and friends, who know me well, have stood by me. They did not believe that I could ever be involved in something like this. They were just concerned that I should not get trapped in anything. My brother is a lawyer and when this happened, I did not even inform him. So, my point is, why should I fear anything if I am innocent? I just want to say that people should not jump to conclusions before anything is proven.Not really, there are good offers coming in, but I am taking my time. I am still recovering from all this and trying to get things back to normal. I need to be mentally healthy and focus on my work. It might take time, but it will happen soon. Sometimes, I feel like my life has turned into exactly how my character Gopi bahu’s life turned out on the show ('Saath Nibhana Sathiya'). Gopi used to get trapped in situations where she was never involved and then she had to work hard to come out of them.
