For first time in Kolkata, Wajid Ali Shah’s kin to observe his queen’s death anniversary

KOLKATA: Metiabruz will see a new chapter in communal harmony on Sunday when the family of Wajid Ali Shah , the last nawab of Awadh, will observe the 140th death anniversary of his queen at the Sibtainabad Imambara. Begum Hazrat Mahal , who had created history in Lucknow — after the nawab abdicated his throne — by raising an army with Hindus and Muslims to fight the British, will be remembered as the family will give a clarion call for harmony.As the so-called Sepoy Mutiny raged all over the country, Shah left Awadh for England to meet Queen Victoria. The British intercepted him in Kolkata and kept him in custody. Metiabruz was where Shah lived out the last years of his life. Begum Hazrat Mahal stayed back in Lucknow to fight it out with the British. She placed her under-age son Birjis Quadr on the throne and ruled from behind the curtain. In the meantime she gave a clarion call to zamindars, talukdars, kings and other members of the nobility, both Hindus and Muslims, to forget their religious differences and unite so that she could raise an army to fight the British. Among those who joined hands with her were Raja Benimadhab Baksh, Digvijay Singh, Bal Krishna , Maan Singh, Jiyaa Lal, Sharfuddaulah, Khan Ali Khan and the like.The fire of the Sepoy Mutiny had spread to Awadh by May 1857. Barrackpore and Meerut were burning by then and the British found it difficult to contain the revolt. On May 7, Meerut overthrew the British who tried to avenge the defeat in Lucknow and crushed 2,000 soldiers, Unfazed, the Begum and her army attacked the British at Chinhat on June 30. Her army defeated the regiment of Henry Lawrence and dealt an irreparable blow to the Residency, holding 3,000 British hostage. The siege started on July 1 and on the fourth day, Henry Lawrence was killed. But she could not keep Awadh free for long and was soon overpowered. She fled Awadh with Birjis for Kathmandu, where she spent the last 22 years of her life. Her tomb is maintained by the government of that country and homage is jointly paid by both India and Nepal on her death anniversary.The branch of the last nawab’s family on the Begum’s side has now decided to observe Shamm-e-Azadi on Sunday to commemorate her contribution. This is the first time that the queen’s death anniversary will be observed in the city that she never visited. “The queen set a national example with her Hindu-Muslim army,” said Manzilat Fatima, great great granddaughter of the nawab and his queen.The family has also tied up with an organization — Know Your Neighbour — which has been working for the cause of harmony in the city.
