Irrfan Khan finds his daughter for Angrezi Medium in Radhika Madan; Read to know more

If there is one actor whose return on-screen is highly anticipated, it is Irrfan Khan. The star of Hindi Medium was out of action since last year after he announced he is suffering from neuroendocrine tumour. Immediately after that, Irrfan left the country and went to London. Now, he is back and looks absolutely hale and hearty. Yesterday, Irrfan kick-started his much awaited project, Angrezi Medium which is a sequel to his film Hindi Medium which was a super hit flick and starred Saba Qamar and Amrita Singh.

Yesterday, Dinesh Vijan, Deepak Dobriyal and the rest of the crew was seen shooting in the streets of Udaipur Rajasthan for Angrezi Medium along with Irrfan Khan. Now, amidst all the buzz the producer of the film, Dinesh Vijan has announced that Irrfan Khan’s daughter in the film will be played by none other than Pataakha star Radhika Madan. The actress will be seen playing the role of Irrfan’s daughter who wants to go abroad and study.

Amidst all the buzz, Dinesh Vijan also mentioned that the leading of the film will be announced soon and he is in talks with a few heroines for the same. Pinkvilla had exclusively reported that Kareena Kapoor Khan might be seen playing the leading lady in the film. However, no actress has been named as of now. Dinesh Vijan also expressed his happiness on Irrfan being back on set and mentioned, “When he gave his first shot everyone around got emotional. For me, it was one of those life-defining moments working with him again after Hindi Medium.”

When Irrfan Khan returned to India, many of the stars from Bollywood welcomed him. Irrfan also took to twitter after a long time to thank everyone for their support in the difficult phase of his life. Irrfan Khan’s fans have been rejoicing on his return and can’t wait to see him back on the big screen with the sequel of Hindi Medium. The plot of the film will be different from the first part and Irrfan will be seen playing a sweet shop owner with his brother, Deepak Dobriyal.

Also Read: Irrfan Khan’s FIRST day back at work decoded by Angrezi Medium producer Dinesh Vijan; Read details
