Amitabh Bachchan starts shooting for his next with Ramya Krishnan. See pictures

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Amitabh Bachchan starts shooting for his next with Ramya Krishnan. See pictures

Megastar Amitabh Bachchan was a firebrand in his previous crime-thriller film Badla. The actor garnered a lot of praises for his character in the Sujoy Ghosh film. Roughly a month after his release, Amitabh Bachchan has jumped back to work. The actor has started shooting for his next film Uyarntha Manithan with Baahubali fame Ramya Krishnan. The duo has worked together in Bollywood comedy Bade Miyan Chote Miyan. After decades, they have come together once again for the Tamil film Uyarntha Manithan.

Uyarntha Manithan is being directed by Tamilvaanan in Tamil and Hindi. The film also marks Amitabh Bachchan's first feature-length film in Tamil cinema.

"Ramya ma'am has been paired with Amitji. Audiences are going to see both of them in really interesting roles. It's really exciting to be bringing together actors with such fine calibre and working with them. We are currently shooting important scenes between both of them in Mumbai," the director told IANS.

SJ Suryah, who is the lead in the film, shared Amitabh Bachchan's first look on his official Twitter page. He wrote, "Happiest moment of my life. Thank you God, mom and dad for fulfilling a dream which I have never even dreamt of."

The film will also be made in Hindi simultaneously.

While talking to the media, Suryah said,"Even before I ventured into showbiz as an assistant director, I craved for this moment to work with him. Now to see it happening sends gold rush into my veins, but at the same time, I'm nervous to imagine that I am going to share screen space with him."

Amitabh Bachchan has set aside 35 days from his busy schedule for this film.

"We had requested him for 40 days. He showed me his calendar for next year and I was so inspired that he's so busy even at this age. He requested us to complete his portion in 35 days," he said in the statement.
