Here's what happened when Irrfan Khan gave his first shot at Angrezi Medium set

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Here's what happened when Irrfan Khan gave his first shot at Angrezi Medium set

Irrfan Khan had a tumultous journey last year with his health. The actor, who was delivering hits after hits, was diagnosed with Neuroendocrine Tumour last year, post which he left to the UK for his medical treatment. He returned to India last month, to start working on his next project which is a Hindi Medium sequel. Titled Angrezi Medium, the film is Irrfan Khan's first film after his return to India. The shooting commenced on April 5 in Udaipur. Producer Dinesh Vijan told the media what happened when Irrfan Khan gave his first shot at the first day of shoot of Angrezy Medium. According to him, the entire team got emotional when he gave his first shot.

Irrfan Khan-Angrezi Medium

"Irrfan is undoubtedly one of the best actors in the country. When he gave his first shot everyone around got emotional. For me it was one of those life-defining moments working with him again after 'Hindi Medium'. Having him and Homi together was something all three of us have always wanted," Dinesh said in a statement.

The producer said Irrfan was not emotional and remained his "usual self."

"Wry humour, crackling one-liners and back on his own turf. Deepak (Dobriyal) and his improvisations brought the house down. It was like the first day of 'Hindi Medium,'" he added.

While Irrfan's character in "Hindi Medium" was Raj Batra, a Delhi based businessman with a sari showroom, he plays Champak from Udaipur who is in the sweet business.

According to the synopsis, Irrfan and Deepak will play brothers in the film who have inherited a 100-year-old sweet business and are also rivals. A distant cousin, played by Manu Rishi, who owns the biggest sweet shop also adds to the rivalry within the family.

The film features Radhika Madan as Irrfan's daughter and talks are on for another leading lady. The crew will be shooting in Rajasthan till April end after which they move to London as in the film Irrfan's daughter has aspirations of studying abroad. Angrezi Medium is directed by Homi Adjania.
