Muslims have no choice

The sudden surge of enthusiasm Muslims in Kerala are showing towards Congress president Rahul Gandhi needs to be carefully analysed before rushing to conclusions. It would be inappropriate to judge that they see a messiah or a saviour in the Congress leader who can salvage them from their current predicament.

On the contrary, the affinity Muslims in Kerala have for Rahul sadly speaks volumes on the desperation of the community which has been pushed against the wall. They look towards Rahul like a drowning person clutching at a straw to save himself.

There were many in the Muslim community who believed that the Left parties, particularly CPM, would come to their rescue at a critical point. But recent developments have dashed that hope too. Muslims see the fielding of P Jayarajan, who is accused of the murder of the youth Ariyil Shukkur, as an open challenge to the community. A spate of incidents that happened in the past few years dimmed their faith in the Left movement in Kerala.

The CPM collected lakhs of rupees to help the family of SFI leader Abhimanyu who was murdered outside Maharaja’s College in Ernakulam. But the party looked away when many Muslim youths were murdered in similar manner. Kareem Moulavi, an employee of a mosque in Kasaragod, was brutally attacked during the hartal called by the Sangh Parivar in the Sabarimala issue. No minister or party leader took the trouble to visit him at the hospital where he was confined for months.

Muslim organizations like Jamaáte-Islami hoped that CPM would be a viable alternative to Sangh Parivar. They chose to tread different path from that of IUML in dealing with Left parties. But they too have come to accept the line of IUML and extend support to Rahul after seeing the plight of the Left parties in Kerala and elsewhere. All these incidents strengthened the belief of the Muslim community that there is no point in waiting for the Left. This realisation prompted them to get closer to the Congress led by Rahul, who became their last hope by default.

The Muslim community has not given a blank cheque to the Congress president. They are aware that the Congress can be as mischievous as the Sangh Parivar is at times. Rajasthan chief minister Kamal Nath has invoked National Security Act against those who allegedly stole cows. It was none other than Congress leader Digvijay Singh who boasted that his party was the pioneer in bringing ban on cow slaughter. The party’s senior leader Ghulam Nabi Azad was not permitted to do the election campaign the way he wished.

The enthusiasm shown by IUML leaders and cadres on the arrival of Rahul to Kerala need not be overestimated. The relationship between IUML and Congress is a marriage of convenience prompted by the immediate needs of both parties. The IUML has brooked many humiliations from Congress in the past. The discussions on the ‘fifth minister’ was a demeaning experience for IUML and we saw a repetition of the same game while fixing candidate for UDF this time too. The Muslim League has every right to be considered for one more Lok Sabha seat, but the party doesn’t have visionary leaders like C H Muhammad Koya or Bafaqui Thangal to assert before the Congress. The party is continuing as an ally of Congress because V S Achuthanandan has been stonewalling its entry to LDF.

To make matters worse, BJP has succeeded in establishing close ties with a section of Muslims in Kerala. The section doesn’t have any political understanding and is happy that their brand of Islam is not facing any threat from the Sangh Parivar. In reciprocation, BJP is keeping them in good humour by fetching some fancy titles for their leaders. With little chance of the emergence of a tall leader among the community, what can Muslims hope for in future while passing through the worst patch of its history? Rather than waiting for a saviour and invest all hopes in the person, Muslims should prove that they are the ‘Ideal Community’ referred to in the scriptures.

It is true that Muslims dynasties ruled the country for centuries, but they seldom concentrated on setting up an ideal system that could be an example for others to follow. Muslims in India can strive to achieve what the dynasties couldn’t accomplish. Even while rigorously sticking to religious principles, Muslims should strive to reach out to others. Such moves had paid rich dividends during the time of the floods when the community stood up and helped all those who faced the fury of nature. The rescue and rehabilitation work the community members did have won many hearts.

After the recent tragedy, Muslims in New Zealand have proved that they can re-emerge from the darkest depths. Muslims in India realise that Rahul Gandhi or anyone for that matter is only a temporary phenomena; the future of the Muslim community in India lies in their resolve to show to the world that they are the Ideal Community.

The writer is a popular political columnist

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
