'Angrezi Medium' Producer Shares Details Of Irrfan Khan's First Shot After His Cancer Treatment

After almost a year-long battle with neuroendocrine tumour in London, Irrfan Khan has finally returned to his first love-films. The actor began shooting for the sequel to his 2017 hit Hindi Medium.

Twitter





The team is currently in Udaipur for the first schedule of the film that is being produced Dinesh Vijan. Several pictures from the streets of Udaipur paved its way on the internet and made his fans happy and relieved. Sharing the details of Irrfan Khan's first day at the shoot, producer Dinesh Vijan gave an extensive statement.

Describing the intricate details of how everyone around him felt, he mentioned that everyone got emotional as the 52-year-old actor gave his first shot. He said,

“Having him (Irrfan) back on the set was a surreal feeling, he’s undoubtedly one of the best actors in the country. When he gave the first shot, everyone around got emotional. For me, it was one of those life-defining moments working with him again after Hindi Medium. Having him and Homi together was something all three of us have always wanted. Irrfan was his usual self…wry humour, crackling one-liners and back on his own turf. Deepak and his improvisations brought the house down. It was just like the first day of Hindi Medium.”

Irrfan had shared the heartbreaking details of the diagnosis on Twitter last year.

After the announcement, he flew with his family to London, where he underwent treatment. After being extremely low-key for a year, he finally returned to Mumbai and paps managed to spot him at the airport. Just a few days ago, he penned down a small thank-you note for all his fans and well-wishers who kept in their prayers. He wrote,

“Maybe somewhere in the pursuit of winning, we forget how much it means to be loved. In our vulnerability, we are reminded. As I leave my footprints onto these steps of my life, I want to pause to be grateful for receiving your immense love and support, it soothed me in my process of healing. So I travel back to you, thanking you from the bottom of my heart."
