Zomato: Zomato costs jump 6 times to $500 million, Retail News, ET Retail

BENGALURU: Online food delivery and restaurant discovery platform Zomato has managed to cut its losses for each delivery by over 40% to Rs 25 as it witnessed a threefold jump in its revenue for the financial year ending March 2019 at $206 million. But at the same time, the company saw an increase of over six times in costs to $500 million from $80 million in the previous financial year, according to unaudited financials released by the company.The revenue does not account for the discounting it does for every order as promotional cost. Revenue, after deducting the discounting cost, would be filed later in the year with the Registrar of Companies (RoC), Zomato’s co-founder and CEO Deepinder Goyal said in his ‘short form’ annual report on Friday evening.Incidentally, Zomato, which was largely an advertising-led revenue company till three years ago, is now seeing most (around 85%) of its revenue being transactions-led. Food delivery contributes the largest share of its revenue with $155 million, while recently realigned business segments like Dining Out — which counts subscriptionbased products like Zomato Gold , and the newer Sustainability (food supply chain) — contribute the rest. The food delivery business had a revenue of $38 million at the end of March 2018.Zomato has raised over $500 million since last year from investors like Ant Financial, Glade Brook Capital and Shuwei Capital besides also getting $172 million in cash through sale of its UAE business to Delivery Hero. The company is fighting a fierce battle with Swiggy , which has raised $1.3 billion in the same period, besides smaller rivals like Uber Eats and Foodpanda.Zomato’s last-mile delivery cost has come down to about Rs 65 now compared to Rs 86 in March 2018. “We have had tremendous growth aided by promotional marketing spends to acquire new users and be the first-to-market in many cities in India. In our experience, being first-tomarket gives us a distinct competitive advantage in the food delivery sector,” Goyal said in the annual report. He added the company will continue to make investments in its food delivery business, which is available in over 200 cities in India, up from 15 cities in March 2018.The company did not give a break-up of its net losses in the report. At present, Zomato is at an annual revenue run-rate of $350 million. The delivery run-rate is about $38 million, the firm announced earlier in the week.
