Citing US magazine report, Farooq Abdullah accuses PM Modi of 'lying' on shooting down of Pakistan's F-16

Farooq accuses PM of 'lying' on shooting down of Pak F-16 | Photo Credit: PTI

Srinagar: Continuing his tirade against the central government over the Balakot air strikes, National Conference (NC) president Farooq Abdullah has accused the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government of “lying” to the nation on the aerial attacks and shooting down of a Pakistani F-16 in IAF and PAF dogfight.

Addressing the media on Friday, Abdullah said the American government has refuted Indian Army’s claims of bringing down Pakistan's F-16 jet.

"They claimed that hey had brought down one Pakistani F-16, just today the American government has refuted that claim stating that all Pakistani F-16 jets are intact. Not one has been shot down. There is some basis to even a lie. Why do you lie Modi ji? Did you defeat Pakistan? Did Pakistan stop existing? Why do you lie Modi ji? Whichever government comes to power in the Centre, I pray this one doesn't come back,” he said.

Expressing doubt over the Balakot air strike, he said that as to how is it possible that 300 men died and there is no news about them.

"He first promised 15 lakh rupees in every Indians bank account, that never happened. For a few seconds, he sent some jets in Pakistan's Balakot to drop some bombs and then said 300 people died. Some said 500 had died, some 700. Even if one man dies everybody hears about it, so how is it possible that 300 men died without any news," Abdullah said, reported news agency ANI.

The NC chief, who is contesting the Lok Sabha polls from Srinagar constituency, alleged that the BJP government carried out the aerial strike as PM Modi’s had failed to fulfill the promises made during last general elections.

Abdullah’s remark comes in the backdrop of a US-based magazine report that claimed that US defence personnel recently conducted a physical count of Pakistan’s F-16s and found all intact and none missing.

In its article, Foreign Policy magazine, quoting unidentified defence officials said that America has not found any planes supplied to Pakistan missing from the inventory.

Meanwhile, Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan said that "BJP's attempt to win elections through whipping up war hysteria and false claims of downing a Pak F 16" has backfired with the report.

"The truth always prevails and is always the best policy. BJP's attempt to win elections through whipping up war hysteria and false claims of downing a Pak F 16 has backfired with US Defence officials also confirming that no F16 was missing from Pakistan's fleet," he said in a tweet.

The truth always prevails and is always the best policy. BJP's attempt to win elections through whipping up war hysteria and false claims of downing a Pak F 16 has backfired with US Defence officials also confirming that no F16 was missing from Pakistan's fleet. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) April 6, 2019

India claims that Pakistan’s F-16 was shot down by Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who was flying a MiG 21 Bison of the IAF in a dogfight on February 27.
