NIA arrests key conspirator in Lethpora terror attack case

National Investigation Agency (NIA) on Saturday arrested one more key conspirator who accused by provided logistic support to all terrorists who attacked CRPF group center in Lethpora of Pulwama. The arrested accused Syed Hilal Andrabi is an active Over Ground Worker of proscribed terrorist organisation Jaish-e-Mohammad and also key conspirator who provided logistic support in the form of sheltering the terrorists and conducting reconnaissance of the CRPF Group centre, Lethpora before the terrorist attack.

The terrorist attack was carried out in the intervening night of December 30-31 in 2017 by three terrorists of Jaish-e-Mohammad(JeM). Accuse Syed Hilal Andrabi is resident of Ratnipora, Pulwama, Jammu & Kashmir.

With the arrest of Syed Hilal Andrabi, total number of accused arrested in this case has risen to four. Three accused already arrested for being a part of the conspiracy for this attack include Fayaz Ahmad Magrey, Manzoor Ahmed Bhat and Nisar Ahmed Tantray.

The CRPF group centre in Lethpora was attacked by three terrorists and NIA was given the responsibility to probe this attack, which had claimed the lives of five CRPF personnel. The probe by NIA had revealed that the cowardly attack was carried by Jaish terrorists. The three terrorists involved in the attack were identified as Fardeen Ahmed, Manzoor Baba and Abdul Shakoor.

Last week NIA had arrested absconding Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorist Nisar Ahmed Tantray as soon as landed at Delhi airport after being deported from UAE.

Nisar, a resident of Tral in Pulwama district of Jammu and Kashmir, was involved in a fidayeen attack on a CRPF group centre at Lethpura .He had fled away to UAE on February 1, 2019 after one of his associates was arrested by NIA . Nisar was produced before NIA court for police remand. He is younger brother of Noor Tantray, the JeM commander who was killed by security forces in an encounter at Pulwama on December 26, 2017.

The three terrorists were killed by security forces after the attack. Fardeen and Manzoor were resident of Pulwama, while Abdul Shakoor was a Pakistani national.

The mastermind of this attack was Faiyaz Ahmed from Pulwama. He was arrested by NIA on February 4, 2019. According to NIA sources, Faiyaz was an overground worker of Jaish and he had provided shelter to the terrorists who carried out the Lethpora attack. Besides this, Faiyaz also provided all kind of logistic support to the three terrorists.
