Electrician arrested by Chennai police for murdering friend, sharing pictures of dead body on WhatsApp

A search is on for the remaining accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: Police have arrested a 32-year-old resident of Puducherry in connection with the alleged murder of a man whose dead body was photographed and the photograph circulated on personal messaging application WhatsApp. Anandan was arrested by Chennai police from his hideout in Puducherry after a murder investigation led police to him.

The matter came to light only on Thursday night when residents of the Army quarters in Nadambakkam contacted city police and indicated that a man is likely to have been killed and buried inside their locality which is surrounded both inside and out with bushy empty land. Residents of the army quarters claimed that the open ground was often used by youngsters to consume alcohol or smoke marijuana but this was the first time they had seen a number of men wandering around the empty land with shovels in their hands.

According to a report by Deccan Chronicle, a team of police personnel reached the spot and dug out a dead body in the presence of the Tahsiladar. Preliminary investigation revealed that the body was that of 37-year-old Nandambakkam-resident Subesh who was also a history-sheeter with several prior offenses listed against him, including burglary and murder.

A probe into the matter led police to believe that the victim had arrived at the empty land along with five of his acquaintances to settle a dispute. Alcohol was consumed and the men got into a heated argument following which Anandan and Karthik attacked Subesh with stones and beer bottles. An electrician by profession, Anandan then clicked a picture of Subesh's dead body and posted in on a WhatsApp group from where it reached other residents of the Army quarters.

Anandan will be remanded in judicial custody on Saturday and a hunt is on to nab the rest of his accomplices, including Karthik, an officer familiar with the matter told media outlets.
