Delhi police reunite child kidnapped from Jama Masjid with family following prompt search operation

The child was kidnapped from Jama Masjid area (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Delhi: Prompt action by the Delhi police resulted in the speedy rescue of a three-year-old boy who was kidnapped from Jama Masjid area on Friday. While the boy has been rescued and returned to his family, the identity of the kidnapper is yet to be ascertained awaiting a police investigation in this regard.

The boy's family alerted police officials who immediately uploaded his description on the Zonal Integrated Police Network (ZIPNET). A notice was then circulated in this regard across all police stations in the national capital region (NCR). Announcements were also made on loudspeakers in the Jama Masjid area and information about the missing boy was sought on social media platforms such as Facebook among others.

Soon after, police officials combing through closed-circuit television camera (CCTV) footage from the entry and exit points of Meena Bazaar and Jama Masjid spotted the boy with a woman near Urdu Bazaar Road. It was also brought to the attention of the officers that the woman went up to Bazaar Matia Mahal with the child and boarded a rickshaw ar Bazaar Matia Mahal moving towards Chandni Mahal.

It is believed that heightened deployment of police personnel must have scared the woman prompting her to drop the child before boarding the rickshaw. The boy was then rescued and handed over to his family. Meanwhile, police officials are in the process of questioning rickshaw pullers and combing through CCTV footage to ascertain the identity of the woman who kidnapped the child.

Earlier today, protests erupted in Juhu area of Mumbai over the abduction and murder of a 9-year-old girl who went missing from her home on Friday. The girl's body was found in a sack, dumped in a gutter not far from her residence. Mumbai police arrested one suspect who later confessed to abducting and murdering the child, however, investigators have not ruled out the possibility of rape.
