Lok Sabha polls 2019: Wayanad is agog with excitement about Rahul Gandhi

WAYANAD: When the boy from the grocery store next door came running into their restaurant with the news, neither Sreekala PK nor her boss believed him.“Onnu poda, kaliyaakkathey (Get lost, don’t fool around!)” they rebuked him with the scepticism the older and the wiser show towards young whippersnappers.But soon, the news was confirmed by more authoritarian sources. Incredible as it sounded, Rahul Gandhi , the chief of Congress , would indeed contest the Lok Sabha polls from their constituency – the verdant and hilly Wayanad -- in addition to his pocket borough Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.“Since then, that’s all our customers have been discussing,” says Sreekala, who is in her early 30s and one of the two waitress-cum-cooks at Daily Bread Hotel in Chungam locality of Kalpetta town.She would like to go see Rahul Gandhi the next day, April 4, when he is scheduled to land in Kalpetta, the Wayanad district headquarters, to file his nomination papers but remarks wistfully that she might not find the time during working hours.Faizal K has no such restrictions since he is fortunate enough to be the sole proprietor of his store, Thymas Traders. “Of course I will go! I will go even if I have to close the store.”Several of his friends working in West Asia, he says, even bought tickets to return home to vote as soon as they heard the Congress chief would contest from Wayanad. “We are looking at it as a vote for the future prime minister, not as a vote for a UDF [United Democratic Front] candidate,” says Saidalavi, a customer at Faizal’s store.In the voluble discussion that ensues outside the store, each participant generously increases Rahul Gandhi’s victory margin by a lakh votes, with Abbas, a porter, finally raising it to seven lakh. The only consensus is that it will be “a record margin”. “This is, after all, a UDF bastion,” says Saidalavi.Locals say the only reason the victory margin of MI Shanavas, their two-time Congress MP who passed away last November, shrank from over 1.5 lakh votes to a just over 20,000 because he was not much seen in Wayanad.The guarantee of a “safe seat” is one reason why the Congress party decided that its president should contest from the constituency carved out of the three northern Kerala districts of Wayanad, Malappuram and Kozhikode in 2009, and which it has held since then.The official party line is that Rahul’s candidature will create a Congress wave in Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala since Wayanad is a district bordering the two southern states.But the ruling Left Democratic Front in Kerala, which had been expecting to mop up the majority of the 20 Lok Sabha seats in the state before Gandhi’s entry, will have none of that.The Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M) mouthpiece, Deshabhimani, was incensed enough to refer to Gandhi as “pappu” in an angry editorial, a move that attracted widespread condemnation.“It is a short-sighted decision with no political logic. Let them create a Rahul wave in UP first,” says D Raja, a Communist Party of India MP, at a press conference on April 3 at Wayanad’s press club, in-between announcements about a local temple festival and a function at a veterinary university.Later in the evening, while campaigning for CPI candidate PP Suneer, Raja repeats these words, more loudly, at a well-attended street corner meeting in Mananthavady town.Instead of taking on communal forces represented by the BJP, Rahul Gandhi was betraying the secular cause by choosing to fight the Left, say speakers at the meeting.In a last-minute change after Gandhi’s candidature was announced, the BJP decided to field Thushar Vellappally, president of ally Bharath Dharma Jana Sena, from Wayanad. But the real fight is still expected to be between the UDF and the LDF.Akhil Benny, a final-year B.Com student watching Raja from across the road, agrees. Benny, a member of CPI-M’s youth wing, Democratic Youth Federation of India, is optimistic that “Comrade PP Suneer” will win.“Why should I waste my vote on Rahul Gandhi?” he says.But political loyalties apart, there are Left sympathisers who feel otherwise. “Rahul will definitely win, but he will resign and leave. What will happen to us then?” says Baby John, a resident of Mananthavady.For, Wayanad’s problems are many. The hilly district is among the least developed in the state. With practically no other industry to speak of, the local population is dependent on agriculture, particularly cash crops like pepper and coffee.But in the aftermath of the floods last year and a crash in global cash crop prices, farmers here are struggling to repay loans, an echo of the early 2000s when the district saw a spate of farmer suicides.Wayanad has also seen Maoist activity. Last month, police shot dead a suspected Maoist leader after a gunbattle at a resort in Lakkidi.But the longest battles in Wayanad have been fought by the adivasis, who have been demanding a redistribution of land since most of it is held by the settlers – the people who came from the plains.“In many places, people from the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are forced to dig up their kitchen and bathroom floors to bury their dead because they have no other space. This terrible state of affairs is unique only to this community,” says CK Janu, an adivasi leader whose Janadhipathya Rashtriya Party had announced an alliance with the LDF.She says Rahul Gandhi’s entry into the Wayanad poll scene will not make an iota of difference. “People say our problems will now get global attention. But how will that help us? We want varumaanam (income), not vaartha (news).”The voters of Wayanad are aware of all this. The average Kerala voter is, after all, jaded and well-read, up to speed with every political twist and turn. The veneration of filmstar-politicians is not for them. But none of this cynicism is visible in Kalpetta on Thursday morning, when the town is gripped by anticipation and excitement. From the previous evening, tens of thousands of people have been streaming in from neighbouring districts to catch a glimpse of Rahul Gandhi and his sister, Priyanka. They throng either sides of the main roads, lean out of balconies, climb trees and fill every inch of the road outside SKMJ Higher Secondary School grounds where the Congress chief’s helicopter will be landing.“When the helicopter lands, there will be a lot of dust. You should protect yourself,” a solicitous passerby tells a group of four young men leaning against a police jeep. “We survived the floods. What is a bit of dust!” one of them quips, evoking laughter.But the advice proves accurate -- delirious crowd pauses to cover faces to avoid the swirl of dust clouds as the helicopter lands with Rahul and his sister and then takes off.“I saw them! I had to cling to a barbed fence for over an hour, but I saw them,” says Rashid Bava, who runs a shop in Ernakulam, some 240 km away.The 31-year-old says he voted for the Left in 2014 but this year, his vote will go to the UDF thanks to Rahul Gandhi’s candidature. But like many others here, his vote is hitched to hope. “I will never get a chance to meet him, so you must tell him: We need a railway line and a medical college. You must let him know.”
