Mumbai: 9-year-old raped, body dumped in septic tank

Hundreds of residents from Nehru Nagar slums gheraoed Juhu Police station after body of a nine-year-old girl who had gone missing from April 4, was found in a toilet in the same locality on Saturday. The victim was raped and was then murdered, alleged police.

In order to control the angry crowd, Manoj Kumar Sharma, additional commissioner of police, (west region) used public address system and assured harshest punishment to the culprit. The police have arrested one person on the basis of suspicion. "On April 4, around 6.15 pm, I sent my daughter to a nearby shop to get a packet of tea after she was back from school," said victim's mother in her statement to police. She stays in Pirmal Chawl, Nehru Nagar slums in Vile Parle (W).

She later lodged a missing complaint and gave them details about the location and uniform she was wearing. "On Saturday body of our daughter was found in the septic tank of a toilet in Sri Lanka Chawl in Nehru Nagar area. She was brutally killed," victim's father told DNA.

The victim's body was taken to Cooper Hospital for post mortem. The preliminary medical report confirmed that victim was sexually violated. The locals gathered outside Juhu police station on Saturday afternoon in large numbers and carried out their protest demanding action against the culprit. "Some people informed us that they had seen the girl with Vadivel Devendra, 35, who is a local of Nehru Nagar slums, on the day she had gone missing. We have arrested the suspect and he will be produced before a local court for police remand," said a police officer, adding that Devendra was arrested in a criminal case in 2013.

Additional CP Sharma and DCP Paramjit Dahiya reached Juhu Police Station and addressed the crowd using public address system. "For this heinous crime, I assure you that we would get maximum punishment for the culprit. We would get the best public prosecutor to fight this case in court. A similar incident had taken place in JJ Marg area, 18 months ago, when a six-year-old girl was killed. In that case too, we got conviction for the accused, who was a minor. The accused in this case is an adult. We will also not spare the associates of the accused. Keep faith in the police, give us some time and we will show you how conviction is achieved in this case," said Sharma while addressing the angry crowd.

The police have applied section 302 (murder), 376 (rape) and 201 (causing destruction of evidence) of the IPC.
