CBI speaks to Nagori for the first time, outside jail

rationalist Narendra Dabholkar

arms dealer Manish Nagori

Arthur Road jail

Maharashtra ATS

Dabholkar murder case

The alleged arms dealer had been picked up by the Pune police after Dabholkar’s murder in August 2013, but is not named as an accused in the CBI charge sheet.Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) officials, who have been investigating’s murder case since 2014, spoke to allegedfor the first time and took his statement. The investigators spoke to Nagori outsideon Friday night after he was released on bail in another case.Nagori, however, refused to sign the statement and demanded that his video testimony be recorded. Nagori has been accused in around 20 cases of extortion, arms dealing and murder. Even though Nagori had been picked up by the Pune police after Dabholkar’s murder in August 2013, he is not mentioned in the CBI charge sheet. Nagori has already filed an application requesting that the charges against him be dropped.Nagori, who is now in Kolhapur after being released on bail, told Mirror over the phone, “I didn’t know Dr Narendra Dabholkar nor did I ever hear about his work about anti-superstition. I had no role to play in his murder case, I told this to CBI clearly.” The CBI has called him to record his statement on Thursday.Two years ago, CBI was set to junk the investigations conducted by theand Pune Crime Branch in Dabholkar’s murder. This is the first time CBI officials met Nagori, who had been earlier arrested by the Pune police and later granted bail. Earlier, CBI had recorded the statement of Nagori’s aide Vikas Khandelwal.Dabholkar was shot dead on August 20, 2013, by two bikers while he was on a morning walk near the Omkareshwar temple, in Pune. The Thane Anti-Extortion Cell arrested Khandelwal from alleged arms dealer Manish Nagori’s residence, in Koparkhairane at 11am the same day. Khandelwal was arrested under the Arms Act and for extortion. The Thane Anti-Extortion Cell had shown that the case was registered at Mumbra police station. A weapon was also recovered on the same day from Nagori’s residence.Manish Nagori and few others from his gang were also arrested in the same case on the same day from different locations.Following the arrests, the seized weapon was sent for ballistic evaluation. In October 2013, the Maharashtra ATS arrested Nagori and his gang members under the Arms Act.Nagori claimed that since the real accused, Virendrasinh Tawde of Sanatan Sanstha, had been arrested and there is no evidence against him, a closure report should be filed in the case. The CBI has also filed a supplementary charge sheet claiming Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar are the shooters in
