Beauty on the high street

Komal Rampal

unisex salon

OxyGeneo treatment

ancient Chinese massage technique

luxury spas and wellness centres

The wellness and hospitality professional is keen on changing the face of the city’s luxe skincare services.Beauty is in her genes you’d think, but for, it is serious business. She has just launched a high street face and body shop in Bandra with the promise of making luxe beauty more affordable. What’s more, she is also launching her own range of beauty products by the end of this month.“You don’t really have to burn a hole in your pocket for quality products or beauty treatments. What I am offering is the kind of superlative beauty care you can experience in high street salons in New York, Singapore or Hong Kong without paying through your nose,” says the 45-year-old wellness and hospitality professional.Rampal’s cleverly designed 500-sq-footboasts a complete range of state-of-the-art treatments with beauty services ranging between Rs 1,700 and Rs 50,000 (for multiple-session packages). Think traditional, electronic and laser facials, the much-feted, slimming and body-firming.Rampal is also introducing Mumbaikars to Gua Sha, anthat reportedly works wonders to combat wrinkles and certain skin diseases. “I like ‘value for money’ myself and I want my clients to get the same,” says the mother of three, who brings two decades of experience to the table.For Rampal, who is influenced by the European and Southeast Asian aesthetics of beauty, running her own business was a natural progression after working for a French luxury wellness company for 15 years. She worked her way up there from a spa manager and aesthetician to partner before setting upacross the country, including an award-winning one in Kumarakom, Kerala.“I always wanted to have my own salon, and it only took this long because I was in two minds about whether I wanted to settle in Mumbai,” Rampal says. She’s however, hardly a newbie in the biz world. Over the years, she has run several successful businesses — from a film production house to her own fashion line — but the pursuit of beauty, she says, has always been her true calling.“There’s so much to learn. I’ve signed up for courses in Miami, Paris and Bangkok, to name a few. I worked alongside formulaemakers and picked up the finer points of beauty business management as well,” Rampal says. And if that was not enough, she is also an MBA in marketing, and a certified Reiki and pranic healer.Even as her brother, Arjun moved towards modelling and acting, Rampal spent hours as a child mesmerised by the magical creams and pastes her mother and grandmother whipped up at home. “I studied industrial science in school and was always making creams, toothpastes and perfumes. Every morning, my mother would keep ground almonds mixed with ‘kaccha dudh’ for my face wash; or my mother would sometimes muscle up a nice scrub. My hair was washed with only reetha,” Rampal reminisces, adding that a lot of her family’s secret beauty recipes have gone into her line of eight products that is set to hit the stores.When she is not working on the nittygritties of her salon or whipping up magic potions for her family and friends — her anti-stretch-mark cream is said to be legendary — Rampal splashes colour on canvas. An International Baccalaureate in painting, she’s into acrylic, oil and recently, water colour. “There’s so much to do, and hardly enough time,” she says.
