Rahul on Wayanad trip

BRP Bhaskar

BRP Bhaskar

Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s decision to contest the Lok Sabha elections from Wayanad in Kerala, besides Amethi in Uttar Pradesh which he has represented so far, has energised the party’s workers in the state. It expects their enthusiasm to spill into the ranks of its allies in the state as well as its immediate neighbourhood.

For four decades, elections in Kerala have been a tug-of-war between two fronts, one led by the Congress and the other by the Communist Party of India (Marxist). In the Assembly elections, they are voted to power alternately. In the local bodies’ elections, the CPM-led Left Democratic Front (LDF) invariably fares better than the Congress-led United Democratic Front (UDF). In the Lok Sabha elections, the UDF usually has an edge over the LDF, but, there have been occasions when factionalism in the Congress has given the LDF an upper hand.

Sonia Gandhi’s Rae Bareli and Rahul Gandhi’s Amethi are constituencies with which the Nehru-Gandhis have been associated for long. In 2014, they withstood the Modi juggernaut which overran the rest of UP. But when the state, rising as one man, voted against the Emergency regime in 1977, they had deserted Indira Gandhi and her son Sanjay Gandhi. Smriti Irani, who challenged Rahul Gandhi at Amethi last time, had stayed in touch with the constituency even after her defeat with an eye on 2019. The central and state governments lavished 21 projects on Amethi. In characteristic manner, Prime Minister Narendra Modi taunted Rahul Gandhi for running away from Amethi fearing Hindu anger and seeking refuge in a Muslim majority constituency.

After the Rae Bareli defeat, Indira Gandhi had entered the Lok Sabha from Karnataka in a by-election in Chikmagalur. But Rahul’s southern odyssey may have been inspired by Modi’s example rather than his grandmother’s. Congress strategists reckoned that his Wayanad contest will create for the party an upsurge in the South similar to what Modi’s Varanasi contest did for the BJP in the Hindi region.

Rapturous scenes were witnessed when, on Thursday, Rahul Gandhi reached Wayanad accompanied by his sister and party general secretary Priyanka Gandhi. After he filed his nomination papers, they held a road show unparallelled in Kerala’s electoral history.

Rahul Gandhi’s entry on the Kerala scene has terribly upset the CPM that is looking up to Kerala, its last surviving stronghold, to provide it a respectable tally in the new Lok Sabha. In a bid to optimise its strength in the state, the party has denied seats to all allies, except the CPI, and asked Independents backed by it to contest on the party symbol. Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan has called Rahul’s entry a declaration that the Congress considers the CPM, and not the BJP, as its main enemy. Party state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan has vowed to defeat him. Gandhi has, meanwhile, refused to respond to CPM criticism.

Wayanad, the constituency in question, is a hill district at the trijunction of Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. It is one of the two districts where the state’s miniscule tribal population is concentrated, and the most backward one. As people flowed in from the plains seeking land for cultivation, the Adivasis lost the forest lands where they had eked out a measly livelihood. Some of the tribes were bonded labourers until the 1970s.

Apart from the three Assembly constituencies of Wayanad district, the Lok Sabha constituency that bears its name also includes three Assembly constituencies of the Muslim-majority Malappuram district and one of Kozhikode district. Extrapolating census data, analysts have estimated that Hindus constitute more than 41 per cent of its population and Muslims slightly less than 45 per cent. Christians and others make up the rest.

The LDF candidate in Wayanad is PP Suneer, a young CPI leader. He says the voters will prefer him over the guest candidate. Some BJP leaders have talked about Smriti Irani taking on Rahul Gandhi here too, but Amit Shah has decided to stand by the earlier National Democratic Alliance’s decision to allot the constituency to Bharatiya Jana Dharma Sabha, floated by the Sree Narayana Dharma Parpalana Yogam (BJDS), organisation of the backward Ezhava community. He, however, has insisted that BJDS chief Tushar Vellappalli must be the candidate.

Wayanad is no Congress pocket borough. Its long-standing alliance with the Indian Union Muslim League puts the party in a strong position. However, recent voting figures suggest that the constituency offers its opponents a fighting chance. In 2014, MI Shanavas of the Congress won the seat in a 15-cornered contest with 377,035 votes (41.20 per cent) against his nearest CPI rival Sathyan Mokeri’s 356,165 (38.92 per cent). The also-rans included candidates of BJP, BSP, AAP, Trinamool Congress, Social Democratic Party of India and Welfare Party of India. The last two are parties launched by two different Muslim groups.

For many decades, the Adivasis of Wayanad have been engaged in an unequal struggle with encroachers for survival. On several occasions, they have travelled to Thiruvananthapuram, the state capital, and mounted agitations that have the character of endurance tests. Each agitation has ended with the government of the day making promises that were never honoured. With Rahul Gandhi’s candidature attracting national and international attention, they are wondering if it will make a difference to their lives.

When spring thunder broke in West Bengal’s Naxalbari, a small band of people inspired by it moved into Wayanad to set up a base. Following an attack on a police station, several persons were arrested, included a teenager, K Ajitha, who later emerged as a champion of feminist causes. It was here, again, that a police team shot dead a young Naxalite leader, A Varghese, in a fake encounter. The constable who was forced by his officers to pull the trigger spilled the beans, leading, more than 40 years later, to the award of life sentence to K Lakshmana, an IPS officer, who had retired after rising to the rank of Inspector-General.

According to police reports, Maoists are now active in the area. Three belonging to the banned organisation, including two from Tamil Nadu, one of them a woman, were killed in the last two years in two alleged encounters. A year ago, a starving Adivasi youth was lynched to death by a mob for allegedly stealing food. From time to time, reports of Adivasi children dying due to malnutrition keep surfacing.

Rahul Gandhi has come to Wayanad even as the area which has a salubrious climate, thanks to its elevation of up to 2,000m, is undergoing a major change with resorts springing up and tourism booming.

Wayanad’s history, said to go back some 8,000 years, is yet to be studied in detail. In the late 19th century, while on a hunting trip, Fred Fawcet, a British police officer with an interest in history and anthropology, stumbled upon rock engravings in the Edakkal Caves. He averred the works of art were created by the ancestors of one of the two major tribes living nearby. The Indus Valley Civilisation had not come to light at that time.

Ten years ago, Dr MR Raghava Varier, a historian and epigraphist, found in the Edakkal engravings a recurring motif of the Indus seals showing a man with a jar. The late Iravatham Mahadevan, who did much work on Indus Valley epigraphy, termed it a major discovery. Edakkal’s tourism potential is being exploited but there is no effort to study the possible link with the Harappan civilisation.

Will Wayanad’s glory as a VIP constituency make any difference to the quality of life of the Adivasis or at least to the quality of policing?

Once the hotbed of Naxalism in Kerala, the constituency marks Rahul Gandhi’s foray into South India
