Facts in fiction

Alisha Sadikot conducts a tour which looks at the city through the eyes of novelists

Kala Ghoda

Dhanraj Mahal in Colaba, an example of Art Deco architecture, which Salman Rushdie once believed to be a play on the words ‘Art Dekho’.

old Watson’s Hotel

Esplanade Mansion

The old Watson’s Hotel, now called Esplanade Mansion, where Mark Twain once stayed during his visit to the city

Kala Ghoda, which is the subject of many poems written by award-winning poet Arun Kolatkar.

If you are a lover of literary things, take this walk through the pages of history.Did you know about India’s ice trade with America during the 19th century?” This is a question Alisha Sadikot always brings up when she stops at the Lion Gate — the entrance to the Naval Dockyard in Colaba — while conducting her Walking with Words tour. It is a heritage walk specially designed for book lovers and those who want to learn more about the city’s past, but told from the perspective of novelists and poets.As it happens, the British Raj, while battling the hot and sultry Indian weather, clamoured for ice that was supplied by American merchants in the 19th century. An ice-house was built at a stone’s throw from Lion Gate, to meet this demand. Today, the KR Cama Oriental Institute stands in its place. “While this information might surprise a few, and it has not been written about a lot, Rudyard Kipling did mention it in one of the stories of The Second Jungle Book,” shares Sadikot. The short story she refers to is The Undertakers in which a mugger crocodile, a jackal and an adjutant stork spend an afternoon bickering with each other. In it, the stork describes an encounter with one of the ships carrying the ice: ‘From the insides of this boat they were taking out great pieces of white stuff, which, in a little while, turned to water’.“I’m always on the lookout for new ways to tell the story of Mumbai,” explains Sadikot, who runs several heritage tours under the initiative The Inheritage Project. She holds a Master’s degree in History of Art from the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London, and between 2012 and 2015, she also worked as the curator of Education & Outreach at Dr Bhau Daji Lad Museum.“I also love to read about Mumbai a lot. The challenge was to figure out an organic way to connect the stories I read to the places that people can visit during the walk,” explains Sadikot. While the walk is certainly for literature lovers, she emphasises that no previous reading is required to be a part of this walk. “I want more people to discover lesser-known Indian authors and poets as well. It’s a way to use literature to access this city’s history,” she says.When the walk reaches theneighbourhood, Sadikot mentions a poet — the 1977 Commonwealth Writers’ Prize winner Arun Kolatkar. He wrote socio-political and satirical verses in both Marathi and English. Several of his poems highlighted the lives of the poor and the downtrodden of Kala Ghoda during the post-colonial 1960s. “Most of the readings I do during the walk are in English, but I strive to include translations, Marathi literature especially, to provide access to voices telling histories that aren’t recorded or memorialised in the heritage architecture of Mumbai,” she shares. She cites the example of another Marathi revolutionary poet, Narayan Surve, who championed the cause of the working class in his works. “I talk about his poem Mumbai, which is told from the perspective of a mill worker”. She mentions that even though this “messes up the image of South Bombay”, the harrowing words do make the walk more holistic rather than presenting a one-sided perspective. “It is evocative, and people like that — to be made uncomfortable and look beyond the regular stories that are told,” she adds.One of the joys of conducting this walk for Sadikot is to “find unexpected links”. For example, the— now called— was where Mark Twain stayed when he visited the city in 1896. The once luxury hotel, and now one of India’s oldest surviving cast-iron buildings, was mentioned in Twain’s travelogue Following the Equator. In it, Twain wrote a humourous passage on the crows he observed from the balcony of his hotel room: ‘If I sat on one end of the balcony, the crows would gather on the railing at the other end and talk about me; and edge closer, little by little, till I could almost reach them; and they would sit there, in the most unabashed way, and talk about my clothes, and my hair, and my complexion, and probable character and vocation and politics, and how I came to be in India…’.Kipling pops up again when she stops at Sir JJ School of Art, where Kipling’s father taught architectural sculpture before becoming its principal. “It is well known that Kipling was born in Mumbai and that his childhood years here were the happiest of his early life. I refer to his autobiography where he says, ‘Give me the first six years of a child’s life and you can have the rest’,” she says, adding that the beloved children’s author was also imperialist in his thinking. “It is critical to navigate and share his complex legacy, and I try to do this through a couple of very different readings”.When it comes to writers and Mumbai, Salman Rushdie can hardly be avoided. “In fact, I use a line from Midnight’s Children to introduce my walk. It goes ‘The fishermen were here first’. It was used to describe the Kolis. He also talked about what they caught and how they paired coconut and rice together. He is one of the early chroniclers of the city,” points out Sadikot. Rushdie also comes up as she comes by the Art Deco buildings on the walk. “When exploring the city’s Art Deco legacy, I bring in Salman Rushdie’s lament from The Ground Beneath Her Feet, where he shares how he grew up believing the style to be a local invention, its name a corruption of the words ‘Art Dekho’ — or look at the art,” she adds.The walk, which begins at Gateway of India and ends at Flora Fountain, might differ each time Sadikot conducts it. “It is a work-in-progress, as in if I discover anything new, I’ll add it to the walk,” she shares. According to Sadikot, it is important to highlight new perspectives and diverse voices as well. “To avoid making the walk driven by male authors, I’ve included a selection of women authors as well — though one will have to come on the walk to find out more about it,” she laughs.
