Telangana CM KCR and Asaduddin Owaisi are followers of 'Moditva', says Congress

Telangana CM KCR and Asaduddin Owaisi are followers of 'Moditva', says Congress

"KCR has been a Modi bhakt since the beginning. He never raised his voice against Modi," Congress leader Sameer Waliullah said.

news Politics

The Telangana Congress on Saturday lashed out at All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) president and Hyderabad MP Asaduddin Owaisi and Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and called them 'followers of Moditva'.

Speaking to reporters on Saturday, Hyderabad City Congress Committee (HCCC) Minorities Department chairman Sameer Waliullah was responding to Owaisi's comments, where he called the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) chief a 'true Hindu'.

"With less than five days left for the polling for Lok Sabha elections, neither TRS nor AIMIM has come up with a manifesto with the list of promises they plan to fulfill if they are voted to power. Now they are trying to polarise the elections by raising the 'Hindu-Muslim' topic. KCR has been a Modi bhakt since the beginning. He never raised his voice against Modi for attacks on minorities in the name of cow slaughter or love jihad. There is not a single policy of the BJP government like demonetisation or GST which was not supported by TRS. But Owaisi is supporting KCR which would eventually help the BJP. Both KCR and Owaisi are followers of 'Moditva' and they want to damage secular forces in the country," the Congress leader was quoted as saying.

"While BJP and RSS give the certification for 'patriotism' and 'nationalism', AIMIM is giving certification for being 'Muslims' or 'true Hindus'," he added.

Telangana has 17 Lok Sabha seats up for grabs in the upcoming elections scheduled on April 11. The ruling-TRS, which swept the Assembly elections held in December last year, is looking to win 16 seats and has left the Hyderabad constituency for its ally, the AIMIM.

KCR also has plans to form a non-Congress and non-BJP Federal Front; a consortium of regional parties, after the results of the election on May 23, and has stated repeatedly that Owaisi would be a part of it.
