India is planning another attack: foreign minister

India is planning another attack, Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi said in an address made to update the public on the situation between India and Pakistan on Sunday.

He said the attack could be any day between April 16 and April 20.

“If god forbid this happens, the foreign office decided to invite the ambassadors of p-5 in Islamabad and told them our concerns. We want the international community to take notice of this irresponsible attitude from India,” said Qureshi. He was speaking in Multan.

Related: India insists it downed Pakistani F-16 despite US denials

Islamabad has informed members of United Nations’ Security Council (UNSC) of its concern regarding Indian aggression .

He said Pakistan has credible information regarding Indian plans.

On February 26, when India violated Pakistani airspace, the world was silent, he said, adding that many countries, knowing that the Indian attack was against international law and the UN charter, still stayed silent. “Why is there silence?” he asked.

“Geopolitics is the reason for this silence. But the international community can’t stay silent if they want to see peace in the region. They have to play their role,” he said.

Conflict has risen between India and Pakistan after Pulwama, said Qureshi, but if the international community ignores this, it can effect the entire South Asia.

Related: The US says India never shot down a Pakistani F-16

He said it is the right of the people of Kashmir to raise their voice. The foreign minister went over how the relations between India and Pakistan took a dangerous turn recently. He said that the world also saw that India exposed itself in three ways:

India said they targeted three terrorist camps through their surgical strike. This was proved wrong. Only trees were destroyed.

India claimed it killed around 350 terrorists in the attack. But India was unable to show even one body.

India said it downed Pakistan’s F-16 jet. Pakistan denied this. This has even become news in Foreign Policy magazine now – that no Pakistani F-16 was shot down by India.

Qureshi said the public will be informed of any further developments.

He said India is consistently provoking Pakistan on the Line of Control since the Pulwama attack. Our civilian population is being targeted and there have been many casualties.

Follow SAMAA English on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
