India likely to launch attacks against Pakistan between April 16-20: FM Qureshi

ISLAMABAD: Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi on Sunday revealed that India is planning to launch yet another attack inside Pakistan between April 16 and 20.



Speaking at a press conference, he said Islamabad has informed members of United Nations' Security Council (UNSC) of its concern regarding Indian aggression.

"We have reliable intelligence that India has made a new scheme and the planning is underway and there are chances of another aggression against Pakistan and according to our information this action can take place between April 16 and 20," he said











"I am saying it with responsibility and I have a responsible position, I know each word I say would make headlines in the international press," he said, stressing the reliability of his claim.

He said the planned aggression was aimed at "increasing diplomatic pressure against Pakistan".

The statement came two days after US defence officials told Foreign Policy magazine that Indian's clam of downing Pakistan's F-16 aircraft was incorrect.



He urged the major powers to play their role instead of being silent spectators.

"International community should take notice of Indian's irresponsible behavior," said the minister.

Answering a question, he said Foreign Secretary has contacted China, Russia and UK to inform them of Pakistan's concerns.

The minister recounted the the recent events that unfolded between Pakistan and India after Pulwama attack and said New Delhi's claim of downing F-16 has turned out to be incorrect.

He said Pakistan released captured Indian pilot as a gesture of peace.

Asked what would be Pakistan's response, he said "We reserve the right to self defence".

Our correspondent from Multan, Nadeem Shah adds :

Foreign Minister said the whole world witnessed Indian non-serious attitude after February 14 Pulwama incident.

India held Pakistan responsible for Pulwama incident without investigation or authentication.

He said India has been whipping up war propaganda since the occurrence of Pulwama incident but Pakistan was continuously cooling down the situation for de-escalation.

He said that Pakistan has very serious concerns over continuous rights violations in Kashmir, adding that India has intensified atrocities against Kashmiris after Pulwama incident.





Shah Mehmood Qureshi said that Indian as well as international media has exposed Indian war hysteria and the reports proved Indian guilt and negative propaganda.

He said Modi claimed in media that India had destroyed three terror camps in Pakistan during air strike, showing not a single footage in support of his claim.

"The whole world witnessed there were no training camps. No dead body was found, no funeral held after Indian strike," he said.

He said Pakistan had invited five permanent members of United Nations’ Security Council to foreign office and briefed them about Indian plan to attack Pakistan. He said the world community should take up the matter seriously and stop Indian violations at LoC and targeting citizen of Pakistan across the LoC.


