War of words escalates on BJP, Congress campaign trail

By Aminul Islam Mirja

NEW DELHI, April 7, 2019 (BSS) – Leaders of India’s major political

parties are in hectic campaign in favour of their respective party candidates

ahead of the first phase of the 17th Lok Sabha election slated on April 11.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Congress President Rahul Gandhi’s

campaign have drawn media attention as the two leaders on their campaign

trail escalated their war of words during the last couple of days by

attacking and counter attacking each other.

Apart from addressing public rallies and small gatherings, they are also

using social media and other forms of electronic mechanism to interact with

the people especially the new generation voters to gain their support.

The main stream Indian newspapers had run different stories on the

campaign where the two leaders were engaged in their war of words attacking

each other.

Modi, at a public gathering in Maharashtra said yesterday that the

Congress was a “sinking ship like the Titanic” and its “dynast” had run away

to find a safe seat to contest.

Rahul hit back, accusing Modi of having favoured fugitive businessmen and

mistreating his own guru, the veteran politician Lal Krishna Advani, media

report said.

Rahul filed his nomination papers from Kerala’s Wayanad, and said he would

also run for election from his family bastion of Amethi.

Earlier, at a rally in Odisha, Modi launched an attack on Congress’s

promise of a minimum income guarantee scheme that the opposition party said

will entitle the poorest Indian families to an annual income of Rs 72,000.

On April 1, at a rally in Wardha in Maharashtra, Modi had said Congress

leaders were afraid of contesting “constituencies dominated by majority

population (Hindus)” – a speech the opposition party flagged to the Election

Commission for being a violation of campaign rules that prohibit, among other

things, claims that are communally sensitive, The Hindustan Times reported.

Addressing a rally in Uttarakhand, which goes to polls in the first phase

on Thursday, Rahul Gandhi reiterated his allegations against Modi.

He also spoke on the issue of BJP senior leader LK Advani not being a

party candidate in this general election.

In Bengal, chief minister Mamata Banerjee said Modi has been “blabbering

lies in the last five years and has not fulfilled a single promise made

during the last general election in 2014”.

Congress General Secretary in-charge of eastern Uttar Pradesh Priyanka

Gandhi also took aim at the Prime Minister and his party.

However, different speculations have surfaced about the result of the

upcoming general election in India.

The first phase of polling in the seven-phase election is scheduled to

take place on April 11. The last phase is due on May 19 and counting will be

taken up on May 23.

In the first phase, election will be held in 91 constituencies in 20

states. Among those, 25 constituencies are in Andhra, two in Arunachal, five

in Assam, four in Bihar, one in Chhattisgarh, two in Jammu and Kashmir, seven

in Maharastra, two in Meghalaya, one each in Monipur, Mizoram, Nagaland,

Sikkim, Tripura, Andaman and Lakshadweep, four in Odisha, 17 in Telengana,

Eight in Uttar Pradesh, five in Uttarakhand and two in West Bengal.

According to election commission, nearly 90 crore voters will be eligible

to vote for 543 Lok Sabha constituencies across the country.
