Congress working to oust Modi, blowing Pakistan's trumpet: PM

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said that Congress's manifesto is blowing the trumpet of Pakistan more than that of India. The prime minister was addressing a rally in Manipur's Imphal. Later in the day, he continued with the attacks on Congress and the Left Front in Tripura's Udaipur.

In Imphal, PM Modi asserted that the Congress is helping in spreading Pakistan's propaganda and noted that the party had claimed: "no one could tamper with Article 370 of the Constitution, an assertion which Pakistan agreed to".

"Congress is helping spread propaganda of Pakistan across the world. Congress's hypocrisy document [manifesto] seems to blow the trumpet of Pakistan more than that of India," PM Modi said.

He also attacked the Congress over former J&K Chief Minister Omar Abdullah's demand for a separate prime minister in the state. "Congress stands with those who want separate prime ministers for India and Jammu and Kashmir," Modi said.

Later in the day, PM Modi held a rally in Tripura's Udaipur and hit out at the Congress and the Left Front, saying that they were hell-bent on removing him from power, even if that meant singing paeans to Pakistan. Modi asserted that the opposition parties could stoop to any level to remove him from power.

"The Congress and the Left are working together to oust Modi. They have stooped too low, singing paeans to Pakistan even when the NDA government was taking on the terrorists on the soil of the neighbouring country," PM Modi said.

He further added that the Congress and the Left Front are fighting with each other but "holding each other's hands in Delhi".

He said, "If there was no help from the Left, or there was no game behind the curtains, why would the naamdar of the Congress [Rahul Gandhi] go to Kerala for the contest?" Congress chief Rahul Gandhi is contesting the Lok Sabha elections from Wayanad in Kerala and Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.

Taking a jibe at the Congress manifesto, Modi said, "The grand old party came out with its 50-60 page hypocrisy document, where there is no mention of middle-class. "The middle-class has long suffered under the Congress rule. Some parties, including the Congress, have said that more taxes should be levied on the middle-class."

Attacking the Left parties, the prime minister said they consider their "party's constitution bigger than that of the country's".
