Congress trying to enter Tamil Nadu through the back door, says Rajnath

Union Home Minister says the DMK stands to gain nothing from an alliance with a ‘sinking ship’, terms its alliance with the Congress unholy and preposterous

BJP leader and Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Sunday alleged that the Congress was attempting to make a “backdoor entry” into Tamil Nadu by either forging an “opportunistic alliance” or “imposing President’s rule”, in a bid to stay politically relevant in the State.

“The people of Tamil Nadu were among the first to ask the Congress to get out. However, the party is continuing to retain its political relevance in the State by forming coalitions or using Article 356,” he said, speaking at election meetings in the Perambalur and Madurai Lok Sabha constituencies in support of AIADMK candidates N.R. Sivapathi and V.V.R. Raj Satyen, respectively.

Contending that the DMK stood to gain nothing from its alliance with the Congress, he highlighted the fact that the national party had dissolved three governments in Tamil Nadu using Article 356, including two headed by former DMK leader M. Karunanidhi.

Stating that the Congress was a sinking ship with no leadership, he expressed surprise as to why the DMK formed an “unholy and preposterous” alliance with it. “I remember DMK patriarch Karunanidhi once saying that unholy alliances will end in disaster. That is what will happen to the DMK-Congress alliance,” he said.

The Minister, whose speeches in Perambalur and Madurai were largely identical, claimed that while the Congress may be aiming to form a government at the Centre by allying with the DMK and other parties, the people had decided to make Narendra Modi Prime Minister again. Claiming that none of the Ministers in the BJP-led NDA government faced allegations of corruption, he said leaders in the Congress-led alliance, on the other hand, were either in jail or on bail.

‘Strong leadership’

According to him, India’s dignity rose after Mr. Modi became the Prime Minister, and the entire world now saw India as a strong country. The strong leadership was evident from the “destruction of terrorist camps inside Pakistani territory” by the Indian Air Force within 15 days of the terror attack on CRPF jawans in Pulwama, the Union Minister said. Mr. Singh flayed the Congress and other opposition parties for “questioning the valour of the country’s soldiers” and seeking to know the number of dead in the Balakot air strike.

“The brave just eliminate enemies and head back without counting the dead,” he said.

The operation was carried out successfully on terrorists, based on credible intelligence inputs. It was not aimed at Pakistani civilians, its army or its sovereignty, the Home Minister said, cautioning Pakistan that India will not “spare and forgive” if it did not stop aiding terrorists.

Assuring that the BJP-led NDA government will take steps to make Tamil culture and heritage richer, Mr. Singh said Mr. Modi was keen on developing Tamil Nadu.

The Minister highlighted the successful demonstration of India’s anti-satellite missile capability as an achievement of the present government.

He began his speech by paying tributes to former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee (BJP) and former Chief Ministers Jayalalithaa (AIADMK) and Karunanidhi (DMK).

Leaders leave before speech

“The difference between previous elections and this one is that we do not have these three political stalwarts with us,” he said.

Interestingly, though the meeting in Madurai was organised to seek votes for AIADMK candidate V.V.R. Raj Satyen, he and other leaders of the AIADMK, including Cooperation Minister ‘Sellur’ K. Raju, left the stage for campaigning before Mr. Singh began his speech.
