Pak targets Indian posts, villages in Poonch

Pak targets Indian posts, villages in Poonch

POONCH, Jan 14: Pakistani army on Monday yet again violated ceasefire and targetted civilian areas and forward Indian posts on the Line of Control in Gulpur sector of Haveli tehsil in Poonch district.

PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation, said, “Pak initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation by small arms fire and also shelling with heavy caliber weapons in Gulpur, Poonch sector. Indian army retaliated strongly and effectively.”

Local sources said that Pak troops Monday afternoon initiated unprovoked firing and targetted forward posts and villages in Gulpur sector. They said Pakistan resorted to small arms and shelling with heavy caliber weapons. Indian side also effectively retaliated to the firing though no injury or major damage was reported, they added.

Zubair Ahmed, a resident of Gulpur, said, “This afternoon Pak army opened fire targeting our village and forward India posts thus ensuing heavy exchange of fire which was scary. We demand peace on the border. Frightened by heavy shelling, few villagers also started shifting to Poonch town.”

Local sources said, “This afternoon at around 12.04 PM, troops of 41 Baloch of Pak army opened unprovoked fire on civilian areas and Indian forward posts Cheeta and Sasur along LoC in Gulpur sector from their forward posts namely Bakri Main and Bakri. Indian troops of 15 MLI guarding forward posts retaliated and gave a befitting reply to the enemy. Exchange of fire continued till 12.55 PM.”

Pakistani army for the past ten days has been violating the ceasefire agreement on the LoC in Poonch and Rajouri sectors. Meanwhile on international border, infiltration attempts were also foiled by the BSF jawans in Ramgarh sector of Samba and Arnia, R S Pura belts of Jammu.

A Major and a Rifleman were killed in IED explosion on Saturday while an army porter was also killed in sniping fire in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri.
