Congress will tax middle class: PM Modi

RLD chief Ch Ajit Singh (left), Bahujan Samaj Party supremo Mayawati (centre) and Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav (right) wave at the supporters during their joint election campaign rally at Deoband in Saharanpur on Sunday. (Photo: AP)

Kolkata/Imphal/ Udaipur (Tripura): Four days before the first phase of Lok Sabha elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday launched a simultaneous offensive against the Trinamul, the Congress and the Left. Taking a jibe at the Congress manifesto, Mr Modi said, “The grand old party came out with their hypocrisy document of 50-60 pages. They haven’t mentioned the middle-class even once in the notification.”

“The middle class has long suffered under the Congress rule. Some parties, including the Congress, have said that more taxes should be levied on the middle class.”

He accused the Congress of “blowing the trumpet of Pakistan” and attacked West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for supporting those calling for breaking “India into pieces” and demanding “two PMs for India”.

Addressing election rallies in West Bengal, Manipur and Tripura, the PM trained his guns on the Left for joining hands with the Congress to remove him from power.

“The Congress and the Left are working together to oust Modi. They have stooped too low, singing paeans to Pakistan even when the NDA government is taking on terrorists on the soil of the neighbouring country.”

Attacking Ms Banerjee in Cooch Bihar, he said, “Promises of Maa, Mati, Manush are now on one side while the Trinamul’s truth is on the other.”

“For the sake of votes, Didi forgot Maa and has stood up with those who are giving slogans to break India into pieces,” he said.

He was referring to Ms Banerjee’s support for National Conference leader Omar Abdullah who recently sought a separate Prime Minister for Jammu and Kashmir.

Accusing Ms Banerjee of creating hurdles for development in West Bengal, Mr Modi said “speed-breaker Didi” has applied brakes on several Central schemes, denying people of the benefits available in other parts of the country.

The Trinamul president fired back at Mr Modi from the stage of her rally in Jalpaiguri and accused him of misusing government machinery and institutions to intimidate the Opposition. She also questioned the removal of Andhra Pradesh chief secretary by the EC for alleged model code violation.

Addressing his grand poll campaign rally for the second time in North Bengal, this time in Cooch Behar, the PM alleged, “Promises of Maa, Mati, Manush are now one side while the Trinamul’s truth is on the other. For the sake of votebank politics Didi however forgot Maa and has stood up with those who are giving slogans to break India into pieces. This is an insult to Maa. Didi, you have also committed treachery with Mati by protecting the infiltrators for political gains. She has crushed all hopes of Manush by handing over West Bengal to the goons of the Trinamul.”

At a rally in Manipur’s Imphal, the Prime Minis-ter said, “The Congress is helping spread propaganda of Pakistan across the world... Congress’ hypoc-risy document seems to blow the trumpet of Pakistan more than that of India.”

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses et all. Happy reading.
