Financier is suspected to have been killed in failed loot attempt

Surat: Police investigation in the murder of private financier Mahendra Shah has revealed that he may have died in a failed loot attempt last month. It is likely that the assailants panicked and one of them shot him dead before escaping without looting money for which they had come to his office located in a crowded area of the city.

Police are questioning Muddasir alias Mudra alias Dabba Gaji, 30, who was nabbed by crime branch sleuths in a joint operation with special task force of Uttar Pradesh Police from Meerut. He was produced in a court here on Saturday which remanded him in police custody for seven days. Police have gathered important information during his interrogation but are yet to establish the motive for the murder and get supporting evidence too. Gaji had told STF that he was given the contract by Javed, a resident of the city, to kill Shah for Rs9 lakh. However, crime branch sleuths suspect Gaji had fabricated the story to mislead police.

City police officials suspect that it could not be a contract killing but a murder for loot. “Javed was the first person nabbed by police who named the other accused. It seems that to frame him in the case, Gaji is naming him. Things will become clearer once the two other accused involved in the attack are also nabbed,” said a police officer. A search is on for Sunny and Zuber, who were also involved in the attack on Shah.

On March 5 afternoon when Shah was alone at his office in Navsari Bazaar, the accused arrived there armed with guns. Gaji had a country-made pistol and Zuber a sophisticated pistol. They told Shah to stay put but he stood up and tried to push them out. Gaji’s pistol fell on the floor in the scuffle and one live cartridge came out of it. Police had later recovered it.

Zuber fired three rounds from his pistol at Shah which hit him in chest and head. “People started gathering at the office on hearing the noise. The attackers escaped from there without looting anything,” police said.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
