Burglars strike techie’s house, escape with jewellery, cash

burglars

jewellery

Bangalore

A techie’s house was targeted by, who decamped withworth Rs 1.5 lakh. The incident took place on April 1, when Ajay Pratap Singh (40), who works at a private firm in the city, had gone to his hometown along with his family. The family had left the house on March 30.The burglars were keeping a close watch on Ajay’s house, which is located at the Royal Shelter’s Layout near Devachikkanahalli. They broke the lock on the door and managed to enter. Other than the jewellery, they also took Rs 5,000 in cash.Ajay Pratap Singh told BM, “I was in Prayagraj with my family on March 30. On April 3, my house owner called me and told me the house was burgled. I returned to the city on April 4. The CCTV camera installed at a neighbour’s house shows that two person, who came on a Honda Activa around 1.40 am on April 1, were behind the crime.They jumped the compound wall and they broke the lock with tools they were carrying in a small bag. After nearly 20 minutes of being in the house, they came out with the valuables.”An official from the police station toldMirror, “The burglars are yet to be traced. Their faces are not very clear in the CCTV footage. Investigation is going on.”An FIR has been registered at Begur police station under Section 380 (Theft in dwelling house), 454 (Lurking house tress pass) and 457 (House breaking in night).A 19-year-old house wife committed suicide by hanging herself to a ceiling fan at her residence, allegedly after she faced a lot of mental harassment from her husband. The deceased has been identified as Nandini. She was married to the Manu Kumar (24), a car driver, in February of this year. A few weeks after the marriage, the husband and wife started to fight. It is said that Manukumar demanded Rs 4 lakh as dowry from Nandini’s father.It is also alleged that Manukumar was suspicious in nature and was keeping a tab on Nandini’s mobile phone.On April 4, Nandini decided to end her life and she hung herself to a ceiling fan at her residence. Her father, Shivakumar, has registered an FIR against Manukumar at Begur police station.In a drunken brawl, a 37-year-old man was murdered by his friends on Saturday night in Rajarajeshwari Nagar Police station limits. The deceased has been identified as Ramesh. He was found dead on Sunday morning at an abandoned site in Krishnappa Layout in Rajarajeshwari Nagar. Police said that on Saturday night, he had gone out drinking with his friends, who attacked him on his head with a liquor bottle and killed him on the spot. Police suspect that he was murdered somewhere else and the body was later discarded here.The RR Nagar police have registered a case and are verifying the CCTV footage from the surrounding areas to identify the accused.In a hit and run case, a 60-year-old pedestrian was knocked down by a speeding unknown vehicle while he was trying to cross the road on Saturday evening in Basavanagudi traffic police station limits.The deceased has been identified as Mangulal, a resident of Basavanagudi. Police said that he had gone out for a walk and was returning home around 6:30 pm and while he was trying to cross the road near Jain temple, an unknown speeding vehicle knocked him down and fled the scene. The Basavanagudi traffic police have registered a case.
