Onus on KPCC to defend Rahul Gandhi

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: While Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP national president Amit Shah have been attacking Congress president Rahul Gandhi for contesting from Wayanad Lok Sabha constituency repeatedly, it has become the responsibility of the KPCC leadership to defend him saying he is not banking on Muslim league votes alone. Already, CWC leader A. K. Antony has kicked off his attack against the BJP as well as the Left leadership since Saturday.

Ever since Rahul Gandhi’s candidature was announced from Wayanad, it is alleged by the Congress leadership that there is a concerted effort from the BJP camp to unleash “communal tension” where they have been claiming that he ran away from Amethi’s Hindu constituency to Wayanad’s Muslim constituency.

As per the census report of 2011, Amethi has got a Hindu and Muslim populations of 66.50 percent and 33.04 percent respectively. On the other hand, Wayanad district’s Hindu population is 49.48 percent and Muslim population comes to 28.65 percent.

Senior Congress MLA Thiruvanchoor Radhak-rishnan told DC that there is a hidden agenda by the “Modi caucus” to create communal tension in North India by highlighting that Rahul Gandhi has ran away to a Muslim dominated constituency.

“Modi has been misusing his official powers where he is making deliberate efforts to create communal tension against the oath he had taken when he became the Prime Minister. Why can’t he and his team understand the statistics prevailing in Wayanad Lok Sabha seat”? said Thiruvanchoor.

Antony had visited the houses of the slain Youth Congress leaders, Sarat-hlal and Kripesh on Sun-day at Periya in Kasara-god where he came down heavily against the LDF government’s “murder politics”.

A Congress leader close to him told DC that by the time Antony reaches Wayanad district during his ongoing road show, he will don the role of a “sharp shooter” against the BJP. It should be recalled that Antony along with the top brass of the AICC leadership were keen on fielding Rahul Gandhi from a state where Congress was in the Opposition. K. P. Anil Kumar, senior KPCC general secretary told DC that it is high time the BJP’s top brass read history books.

“When the BJP entered in to alliances with PDP’s Mehbooba Mufti in Jammu and Kashmir and also in Haryana with Om Prakash Chautala, did Modi not notice the colour of their flags? Rahul Gandhi is fighting from Wayanad to see as “one India” and not to wreck the secularism”, said Anil Kumar.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses et all. Happy reading.
