Nothing like `Op All Out’, some using wrong term: Malik

Nothing like `Op All Out’, some using wrong term: Malik

‘Want children to come back, will rehabilitate them’

JAMMU, Jan 14: Governor Satya Pal Malik Monday stated that there was nothing like “Operation All Out” and his administration wanted the “children” gone astray to shun militancy and would do everything to rehabilitate them.

In an oblique dig at the National Conference president and former Chief Minister Dr Farooq Abdullah, Malik said that there was nothing like ‘Operation All Out’ and some people were using this wrong term.

However, he said that the fire by militants could not be responded with “flowers or bouquets.”

Responding to media queries on the sidelines of a function here, Malik though declined to comment directly on Farooq’s statement on “Operation All Out” and an inquiry into the killings in the Kashmir Valley after coming to power by maintaining, “He (Farooq) is a senior politician so commenting on him is not good.”

Yet in the same vein, he took an indirect dig at NC president staying that he (Farooq) was stating something new every day.

Malik also stated that his recent statement on Bihar was “wrongly projected.”

Asking the local youth to shun the path of violence, he assured that his administration was ready to do whatever it could for their rehabilitation. “There is nothing like ‘Operation All Out’ and some people are using this wrong term. We want these children to come back and we are ready to do what we can do for them,” Malik said.

“When a terrorist somewhere opens fire or hurls an explosive, it cannot be like this you will fire and we will give you flowers and bouquets. On our side, we do not have any ‘Operation All Out.’ They should leave this path as they will achieve nothing from this. There is nothing like ‘Operation All Out’,” Malik said.

Responding to questions on Farooq’s recent statement about forming the “Truth and Reconciliation Commission” if voted to power, the Governor said, “He is a senior politician and it is not good to comment on him. Mainstream politicians have political compulsions and in our country one can go to any extent for a vote. They are all political people and have political compulsions. For a vote, the people go too far in this country. I understand the compulsions of everybody and honour them.”

On the assembly polls in the state, the Governor said his administration was ready for the democratic exercise. “We are ready for polls and when the Election Commission will decide, we will hold the elections,” he said.

At Rajbhawan, while replying to media queries on Bihar, Malik sought to clarify his Patna-more- murder-prone-than-J&K remark. He said his statement was projected “wrongly” as “Bihar has zero tolerance to crime.”

Terming Bihar as repository of skill and agriculture under Nitish Kumar, Malik said the chief ministers of other states should follow the development model enacted by their Bihar counterpart.

“Nitish Kumar has zero tolerance to crime. Top criminals and Mafiosi have been eliminated by his Government. Nitish does not tolerate even a leader involved in any crime. His track record speaks for itself,” Malik said. He was replying to a query about his reported remarks that “J&K is like any other state and Patna records more murders a day than J&K does.”

Earlier while addressing the gathering after inaugurating a musical fountain and an open-air gymnasium constructed by the Jammu and Kashmir Bank at Rajinder Singh Park here in the morning, Malik said, “We are being demonized across the country that everything here is wrong. But I can say with authority that Jammu and Kashmir is far ahead with many of the states in the country and the J-K Bank is one such institution which is doing good.”

He suggested the bank to concentrate on providing easy loans to artisans and workers and said it has the ability to uplift the weaker sections of society.
