Modi in fresh slugfest with Mamata Banerjee over Bengal

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi is contesting the general election from Wayanad in Kerala and Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.

Kolkata/Imphal/Agartala: Four days before the first phase of Lok Sabha elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday launched a simultaneous offensive against the Trinamul Congress, the Congress and the Left. He accused the Congress of “blowing the trumpet of Pakistan” and attacked West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee for supporting those calling for breaking “India into pieces” and demanding “two PMs for India”.

Addressing election rallies in West Bengal, Manipur and Tripura, the Prime Minister trained his guns on the Left for joining hands with the Congress to remove him from power.

“The Congress and the Left are working together to oust Modi. They have stooped too low, singing paeans to Pakistan even when the NDA government is taking on terrorists on the soil of the neighbouring country,” Mr Modi said.

Attacking Ms Banerjee at an election rally in North Bengal’s Cooch Bihar, the Prime Minister said, “Promises of Maa, Mati, Manush are now on one side while the Trinamul’s truth is on the other. For the sake of votes, Didi forgot Maa and has stood up with those who are giving slogans to break India into pieces.” He was referring to Ms Banerjee’s support for National Conference leader Omar Abdullah who recently sought a separate Prime Minister for Jammu and Kashmir.

Accusing Ms Banerjee of creating hurdles for development in West Bengal, Mr Modi said “speed-breaker Didi” has applied brakes on several Central schemes, denying people of the benefits available in other parts of the country.

Mr Modi alleged that Ms Banerjee has been abusing him and threatening the Election Commission because she has started having sleepless nights and “frustration” as her political influence has been diminishing in the state.

The Trinamul Congress president fired back at Mr Modi from the stage of her rally in Jalpaiguri and accused him of misusing government machinery and institutions to intimidate the Opposition. She also questioned the removal of Andhra Pradesh chief secretary by the EC for alleged model code violation.

At a rally in Manipur’s Imphal, the Prime Minister alleged that the Congress in its manifesto claimed that no one could tamper with Article 370 of the Constitution that grants special status to Kashmir, an assertion which Pakistan agreed to.

“The Congress is helping spread propaganda of Pakistan across the world... Congress’ hypocrisy document seems to blow the trumpet of Pakistan more than that of India,” he said.

At a rally in Tripura’s Udaipur, Mr Modi mocked the love between the Congress and the Left.

“In Tripura, they (Left and Congress) are fighting each other, but in Delhi they stand united, holding each other’s hand. If there was no help from the Left, or there was no game behind the curtains, why would the ‘namdar’ of the Congress go to Kerala for the contest?” said Mr Modi.

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi is contesting the general election from Wayanad in Kerala and Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.

Elections to 42 Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal will be held in seven phases between April 11 and May 19. Voting for two Lok Sabha seats each in Tripura and Manipur will be held on April 11 and 18.

Addressing his grand poll campaign rally for the second time in North Bengal, this time in Cooch Behar, the PM alleged, “Promises of Maa, Mati, Manush are now one side while the Trinamul’s truth is on the other. For the sake of votebank politics Didi however forgot Maa and has stood up with those who are giving slogans to break India into pieces. This is an insult to Maa. Didi, you have also committed treachery with Mati by protecting the infiltrators for political gains. She has crushed all hopes of Manush by handing over West Bengal to the goons of the Trinamul.”

He claimed, “She has thrown their lives in risk. Didi is now supporting those who cry for ‘two PMs for India.’ Should there be two PMs in India? Can you ever imagine one of them for Jammu and Kashmir? Didi, your allies are demanding for two PMs for India. It should be remembered that a great son of this Bengal: Dr Syama Prasad Mookerjee had once sacrificed himself for ‘Ek Pradhan Ek Nishan Ek Vidhaan.’ The brave son of Bengal abolished the dream of two PMs for India for her unity. And Didi, you are sitting with those who demand ‘two PMs for India’?”

Mr Modi asked, “Isnt it the insult to Bengal? Isnt it also an insult to the sacrifices and brave martyrs of the country? In her battle opposing Modi Didi has now teamed up with such allies. If anarchy prevails in the country, Didi is not bothered. You have reposed your faith in her. But she dashed your dreams. The partnership of Bua-Bhatije ( read Ms Banerjee and her nephew MP Abhishek Banerjee ) is busy in turning this state into a den of goons, extortionists and infiltrators.”

Taking a dig at the Trinamul chief he noted, “Some people are pained to see our country becoming strong. When India is becoming a super power in space, Didi becomes very much bothered. She sees more problem when India flexes its power against terror. So she is now repeating same words day and night: Modi Hatao. Can anyone remove Modi against so much love and blessings from you? Can anyone oust Modi when so many mothers and sisters of the nation are standing for protection? Can anyone replace Modi when crores of youth of the country are fighting the perpeptrators risking their lives?”

Mr Modi observed, “The more you are chanting ‘Modi Modi’, the more someone is losing her sleep. Dont you know who is she? Who is she? Speadbreaker! Didi, the speadbreaker of West Bengal, is failing to sleep in peace. She is venting all her anger on the officers and the EC. How it feels to lose own political ground can be gauged by anyone from the degree of her fury. It is clear from the volley of abuses on me and attacks on the EC by her that how much she has been scared. All these are the signs of her panic.”

The PM also took potshots at Ms Banerjee referring to a dais her party has built for her rally adjoining the venue of his rally. He pointed out to the crowd, “The memorial of Didi’s defeat stands here. This is the live memorial of Didi’s destruction. The dais has been built here so that little space is left for you. Can an election be won through such childish acts? Sometimes when kids fight among themselves in their area, they tell others: ‘I will see you when you pass through my area.’ The drama Didi and her Ghulam (aides) have done here is a clear testimony of democracy’s reprimand.” Mr Modi bantered that the chief minister might lodge an FIR against him to pacify excitement in the crowd.
