After searing heat, rain expected tomorrow

Ludhiana: City residents continue to battle the hot conditions in the city, as day and night temperatures remained above normal. The good news for residents is that the Met department predicts chances of light rainfall in the city after two days.

As per the Met department, the maximum temperature in the city on Sunday was recorded at 35.1 degrees Celsius (2 degrees above normal). Even the minimum temperature on Sunday was witnessed on the higher side at 18.7 degrees (three degrees above normal).

As above normal temperatures prevailed in the city, the Met department’s prediction might cheer them up. “Weather during the next two days is expected to remain dry, and there may be a slight rise in day and night temperatures. However, around April 9 and 10, a western disturbance is expected to reach the city, which might bring light rainfall,” said Chandigarh Met department director Surender Paul. He added that rainfall might bring the temperatures down slightly during these days.

The Met department website predicts a fall in the day temperature to 34 degrees until April 9, whereas night temperature might decrease to 18 degrees by the same date. Meanwhile, residents were seen grappling with hot conditions prevailing in the city during the day and night.

“For the past about a week, the weather has started to get hot with every passing day. It seems that the harsh summer has already arrived. Apart from drinking plenty of fluids, we prefer not to venture out during the day time, especially in the afternoon,” said Vivek Verma, a businessman from Dugri.

Children are also finding the weather irritating. “It is so hot during the day I can hardly go out to play in the nearby ground, and instead I have to confine myself in the four walls of my room. Under such circumstances, one can either sleep or play computer games. I find the prevailing weather irritating,” said Jaskaran Singh, a nine-year-old from BRS Nagar.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
