Delhi woman denied bail in Ekta Bhati murder case

Court observes that she had motive to eliminate Bhati, links with the contract killer who carried out the crime



Four months after she was arrested in connection with murder of Ekta Bhati, a Delhi woman has been denied bail by Pune court. The 38-year-old woman was accused of hiring a contract killer to murder Ekta, who used to live with her husband and two children in a Chandan Nagar apartment.



The incident dates back to November last year when Ekta, who used to run a canteen along with her husband, was shot by an assailant early morning. The shooter, who was accompanied by another person, was identified with the help of CCTV footage from neighbouring buildings. The same evening cops went to nab the killer at Pune railway station, where he shot at the police team. A cop, who was leading the team, too suffered severe injuries.



Once the cops had the shooter in custody, they identified him as Shivlal alias Shivaji Babulal Rao. In no time, cops were able to establish that he was a contract killer and that he had been sent by a Delhi resident to eliminate Ekta.



Investigations revealed that Ekta’s husband Brijesh Bhati was in a relationship with the Delhi resident for some time and had even taken money from her. Brijesh and the lady from Delhi were in real estate business together. Cops found that Brijesh had not paid back the loan to the lady, which had irked her. Cheques he had issued to settle the account too had bounced, making it worse.



Initially the Delhi resident filed a cheque bouncing case. But the case was dismissed by court on technical grounds. She eventually filed a rape case against Brijesh, for which the 42-year-old spent two months behind bars in Tihar jail in 2017.



Pune cops, investigating the case, concluded that the Delhi resident had hired Shivlal to settle scores with Brijesh. A week after Ekta was murdered on November 21, cops nabbed the Delhi woman.



In February this year, cops filed charge sheet in the case, after which the lady sought bail. She stated that she had no connection to Ekta’s murder as she wasn’t at the spot. The court, while rejecting her bail, observed that police had evidence of Shivlal and the lady interacting before the murder.



Additional sessions judge AV Rotte observed that the lady had been introduced to Shivlal by her sister. Moreover, the two met at a joint in Janakpuri, Delhi. The court observed that not only did the Delhi woman have motive to eliminate Ekta, she also had links with Shivlal, which is enough for her bail to be denied.


