We will welcome the search party: P Chidambaram after income tax raids on MP CM Kamal Nath's aides

P Chidambaram (file photo) | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: On the backdrop of a series of raids by the Income Tax department on the residences of Madhya Pradesh (MP) Chief Minister Kamal Nath's aides, senior Congress leader P Chidambaram said that the I-T department may raid his residence in Sivaganga constituency of Chennai and added that the raids were being planned to 'cripple the election campaign'.

"The IT department knows that we have nothing to hide. They and other agencies have searched our residences before and found nothing. The intention is to cripple the election campaign," Chidambaram said in a series of tweets on Monday.

"I have been told that the I-T department has plans to raid my residence in Sivaganga constituency and in Chennai. We will welcome the search party! The people are watching the excesses of this government and will deliver a fitting lesson in the elections," he further said.

I have been told that the I T department has plans to raid my residence in Sivaganga constituency and in Chennai. We will welcome the search party! — P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) April 7, 2019

A team of nearly 200 IT officials carried out pre-dawn raids at 52 locations in Madhya Pradesh, Delhi on aides of MP CM Kamal Nath on Sunday. In a statement, Kamal Nath said, "The situation about the I-T raids is not clear yet. It would be appropriate to speak on this after the situation is clear. But the entire country knows how the constitutional institutions were used and against whom they were used during the past five years."

"Thousands of crores would have been recovered if the (I-T) raids were conducted at the houses of mama-mami (referring to former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan and his wife) and (BJP president) Amit Shah," said Congress leader and former MP CM Digvijaya Singh.

The joint team of officials from the I-T department and state police swooped down on the premises at around 3 am and "recovered undisclosed cash amounting to Rs 10-14 crore," news agency PTI cited officials as saying.

Chidambaram, who is the architect of the Congress election manifesto for Lok Sabha elections 2019, has also been probed in the Aircel Maxis and INX media cases.




