Irrfan Khan's first look for Angrezi Medium out: Mr Champakji all set to entertain once again

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Irrfan Khan's first look for Angrezi Medium out: Mr Champakji all set to entertain once again

Just a day after Kareena Kapoor Khan being a part of Angrezi Medium made waves everywhere, the makers have dropped Irrfan Khan's look for Hindi Medium sequel. Irrfan, who is making comeback to the movies with the film after recovering from neuroendocrine tumour, will be playing a sweet shop owner in the film. The actor shared a picture from the set of the movie, which is currently being shot in Udaipur, Rajasthan.

Taking to Twitter, Irrfan Khan shared his first look for Angrezi Medium and said, "GMB serving since 1900s It’s going to be fun to tell another story #AngreziMedium. Coming soon, with Mr Champakji... Aa Raha Hu phir entertain Karne Sabko #ItsTimeToKnowChampakJi #AngreziMedium".

In the photo, the 52-year-old actor can be seen dressed up as his character Champak.

Recently, Radhika Madan, who plays a vital role in the film gave us proof that Kareena indeed is a part of Angrezi Medium.

Producer Dinesh Vijan has expressed his happiness after reuniting with Irrfan on the sets. He had stated to Mumbai Mirror, "Having him back on the set was a surreal feeling, he’s undoubtedly one of the best actors in the country. When he gave the first shot, everyone around got emotional. For me, it was one of those life-defining moments working with him again after Hindi Medium. Having him and Homi (director Homi Adajania) together was something all three of us have always wanted."

According to the synopsis, Irrfan and Deepak Dobriyal will play brothers in the film who have inherited a 100-year-old sweet business and are also rivals. A distant cousin, played by Manu Rishi, who owns the biggest sweet shop also adds to the rivalry within the family.

The film features Radhika Madan as Irrfan's daughter and talks are on for another leading lady.

Angrezi Medium is directed by Homi Adjania and produced by Dinesh Vijan.

More Entertainment stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
