Country fighting a decisive battle against Modi govt: NC chief

Country fighting a decisive battle against Modi govt: NC chief

SRINAGAR, Apr 7: National Conference president Dr Farooq Abdullah today said the ensuing parliament elections are very significant since this time the country is fighting a decisive battle against an inhuman Modi led government.

Addressing separate election campaign rallies at Bota Kadal and Rajbagh localities here, Farooq said that the forthcoming elections are very crucial as it will be a straight fight between the people of India and the Modi government. “It are the people of India be it the farmers, the unemployed youth or artisans or the minorities, everyone has been at the receiving end due to the imprudent and ill-conceived policies of Modi Government. Every vital sector of the nation is in shambles. People across the country are beseeching for respite from this BJP government. Whatever PM Modi had promised to people during his 2014 election campaign, turned out to be a damp squib, even now when his government is nearing an end, he has nothing to say on the achievements of his government,” he said.

Farooq stated that the country is reeling under highest ever petrol prices, farmers are distressed in most parts of the country. The claims of Modi on providing jobs turned out to be a mere slogan, which was realized since he took the reins of power at center. The prices of commodities are soaring. Perhaps the biggest ever failure of this government is its sheer failure to control the prices of petroleum products including cooking gas, he said.

Farooq said that the development scenario in the state also presents a grimy tale of neglect. “Our state has been at the receiving end all long since Modi came to power. No effort was made to bring Kashmir on the Railway map of India, the railway stretch connecting Kashmir with the rest of country was supposed to be completed by 2014; unfortunately the dead line has been extended to 2022. Not just that the national highway connecting J&K with the rest of country was worked upon. The work on 30 mile stretch of Banihal and Ramban is still impending completion. On the other side we see China making fast strides towards connecting its country side with effective road and rail connectivity," NC president said.

He stated that the idea of India is facing threat from the communal forces who were responsible for assassinating Mahatma Gandhi. “The very constitutional rights were infringed upon since BJP took over the reins of power. We were told what to eat and what not to eat. Minorities throughout the country suffered immensely at the hands of cow vigilantes, hundreds of poor cattle traders were attacked upon and intimidated. A message was sent that India belongs to the adherents of a particular faith. Today opportunity is tapping our door; these parliamentary elections afford us an opportunity to clean the state and the country from the communal yolk. We should avail this opportunity and give BJP and its cronies a befitting reply for all the wrongs it committed and for lying to the nation,” he said.

“Situation is no different in our state; the city of Srinagar has suffered immensely at the hands of former BJP-PDP coalition. The roads, arterial are presenting a grimy tale of neglect; the past four years have seen no development in tourism sector. The employment is at its highest. The artisans have been left to fend for themselves. The essential services are not being monitored properly. People are hankering for basic amenities, running a house has become rather harsh. Who is to be blamed for this? It’s the BJP-PC-PDP combine which plunged the state into chaos, now they are parroting that they will save the special status of our state. How can they do it now? It is they who destroyed the fiscal autonomy of our state by implementing GST; they are the ones who implemented NFSA (food act). Why should we believe them? Didn’t they canvass in 2014 to keep BJP out," Farooq said.
