Rahul will be campaigning in Wayanad, Pathanamthitta and Thiruvananthapuram

Congress has decided to strengthen the campaign in the state by looping in Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi as only 15 days are remaining for the polls.

The trio has been officially requested by the KPCC to reach the state towards the end of the campaign days in the state. Therefore, hoping that their presence will have a direct influence on voters the KPCC has requested to schedule their dates after April 15.

As anticipated, Rahul will be campaigning in Wayanad for a day and address a convention each in Pathanamthitta and Thiruvananthapuram. Priyanka has also been requested to campaign in Wayanad for one more day and attend conventions in Kozhikode and Thrissur. Sonia is expected to address a convention in Wayanad.

"It is learnt that Rahul will be coming to Wayanad on April 17. We are waiting for his confirmation,'' said Kozhikode district Congress committee president T Siddique. In the same way, intimation has also been received by the Pathanmathitta district Congress committee that Rahul will be addressing a convention there.

Three senior state leaders have also taken control of three zones in Kerala to command the campaigns, apart from the star campaigners. Ramesh Chennithala, opposition leader, is taking responsibility of the southern districts, Oommen Chandy, AICC general secretary is observing the central districts and Mullappally Ramachandran, KPCC president is supervising the northern districts.

Wayanad and Chalakudy are the two constituencies KPCC leadership is giving special focus on, where the candidates are not capable to personally campaign. The campaign in Chalakudy is led by the MLAs from Thrissur district the in the absence of Benny Bahanan, who is instructed to take rest due to health issues. The Chalakudy campaign is being personally supervised by Chandy. As Rahul will mostly be in north India to spearhead the national campaigning, the KPCC president is himself camping in Wayanad.
