Pakistani F-16 was shot down, India has irrefutable proof, says Indian Air Force - SEE radar images

Pakistani F-16 was shot down, India has irrefutable evidence: Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor I Photo credit: Times Now | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: The Indian Air Force (IAF) in an official statement on Monday said it has "irrefutable" evidence that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman shot down a PAF F-16 fighter jet before his Mig-21 Bison was shot down.

The IAF issued a statement and released the AWACS radar images of the aerial combat displaying the location where the Pakistani F-16 was shot down.

IAF's statement comes after a US-based publication Foreign Policy contradicted India's claim quoting unnamed US defence officials who said they counted Pakistan's F-16s and found none were missing after the aerial duel with India. The report claimed that the US defence officials conducted the survey on Pakistan's invitation.

The US defence department later denied having conducted any such survey to count Pakistani F-16s after the February 27 confrontation with IAF.

India exposes Pak F-16 farce. More details by @madhavgk. | Watch first on TIMES NOW. pic.twitter.com/i9diGlVQmA — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) April 8, 2019

"The IAF has irrefutable evidence of not only the fact that the F-16 was used by Pakistan Air Force on February 27, 2019 but also that IAF MIG 21 Bison shot down the F-16," Air Vice Marshal RGK Kapoor said in a press conference Monday.

"There is no doubt that two aircraft went down in the aerial engagement on 27 February 2019 one of which was the IAF MiG-21 Bison while the other was F-16 of the Pakistan Air Force which conclusively identified by its electronic signature and radio transcripts".

"Have more credible evidence that is clearly indicative of fact that Pakistan has lost one F-16 however due to security and confidentiality concerns we are restricting the information being shared in the public domain," he added.

Air Vice Marshall Kapoor also said that the official statements made by Pakistan's Director General Inter-Services Public Relations (DG-ISPR) and later by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan after the aerial combat also corroborates IAF's stand.

"In his initial statement on 27 Feb, DG-ISPR Major General Asif Gafoor categorically said that ithree pilots (crashed landed) one of whom was taken into custody while two other were in the area," Kapoor stated. This shows that two aircraft went down separated by a time gap of 1.5 minutes or 90 seconds, Kapoor stated.

The IAF also released the radar images of the aerial battle, captured by the Airborne Warning And Control System (AWACS), which shows PAF F-16's track vanashing from the radar after the dog fight.






