Ranchi: Police find 2 bodies buried in 3 days, prime accused arrested

Police investigations suggest that the two murders are related. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Ranchi: In an appalling incident, two dead bodies were found in three days inside the burial ground of Anjuman Islamia Committee at Ratu Road in the capital city. At around 8 am on Monday morning, a 17-year-old girl's body was dug out while a man's body was found by the workers of the burial ground on Saturday morning.

The deceased man, who was identified as Anurag Vishwakarma alias Sonu alias China, was a resident of Badhai Mohalla under Sukhdeo Nagar police station limits. The minor girl had been missing since December 25, according to a report in Hindustan Times. Police investigations suggest that the two murders are related.

Also Read: Delhi: Juvenile stabs own father to death over a mere Rs 150

Sujata Kumari Kumari Veenapani, superintendent of police, Ranchi, said that after a minor boy who was involved in the double murders was questioned, the prime accused, Anmol Varma alias Kanti alias Sunny was arrested on Sunday. Varma confessed to committing the crime as he suspected that the victims were creating a rift in his love relationship with a woman. The accused wanted to take revenge from the deceased people.

The minor girl was murdered on the night of December 26 and Vishwakarma was killed on January 9. The police informed that three other people involved in the twin murders are still absconding. Raids are being conducted to nab them.

Reportedly, the deceased girl stayed away from home for days quite often and thus, her family had not reported to the police initially. Her missing report was registered on January 8.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
