Toilet, Ek ‘Hindutva’ Katha: How Modi’s Swachh Bharat Draws From The Oldest Upanishads

The lack of household toilets also forced Indian womenfolk towards open defecation where they have been victims of sexual predators. Barely months after Modi became Prime Minister, in Uttar Pradesh, then ruled by Akhilesh Yadav, two teenage girls who had gone into the fields because there was no toilet in their home, were found hanging from a nearby mango tree.

The Prime Minister himself referred to the incident in Parliament and expressed his anguish. By February 2019, in a function at Kurukshetra - the legendary battle place of the famous Mahabharata war - Narendra Modi was giving away the Swachh Shakti awards to a dozen women sarpanchs, who, as village head women, had excelled in motivating their villages to achieve 100 per cent sanitation.

While almost everyone, both positively and negatively, speak of the Hindutva connection to the surgical strikes, nobody speaks of the Hindutva connection to the phenomenal sanitary coverage that the Modi government has achieved.

It is plain and there for everyone to see. Pop-sociologists and masters of the academic hate-Hindutva cottage industry, including the pub-Gandhian variety who travel extraordinary light years inside the Hindutva mindset with the sole aim of proving it to be fascist and puritanical, Nazi-like and Brahminical, seldom even look at this glaring discrepancy.

But then, that is understandable. Their conditioning can never allow them to see the obvious. Modi will be lucky if they do not see a fascist, obsessive compulsive neurosis in a drive to keep the nation open-defecation free.

Then, what is the Hindutva angle in the toilet building campaign and sanitary coverage campaign?

Despite the relentless stereotyping of Hinduism as a religion obsessed with ritual purity, by colonial Indologists, Marxist academics, evangelical theologians and Islamist proselytizers, the Hindu-Vedantic traditions have shown a magnificent sense of inclusiveness that can do away with the sense of purity and pollution. Taittiriya Upanishad, when speaking of meditating upon the Divine in human functionality states:
