Candidates’ gender stats tell a sorry tale

The three fronts have fielded just two women each in the State

For all the talk about Kerala’s impressive social development indices, the bias over gender is pronounced in the electoral battle line-up. The three major fronts in the State have fielded two women candidates each, with the rest of the 18 constituencies allocated to men as has been the practice.

Kerala has sent women to the Lok Sabha 12 times, six of them from the Left front, with Susheela Gopalan making it three times. Savitri Lakshmanan is the sole Congress representative, while Annie Mascarene was the first woman Parliamentarian from the State elected as an Independent.

According to writer Gracy, the best reflection of male dominance in our society is the presence of very few women in the higher legislative bodies. The fact that when a deserving leader like K.R. Gouri never became the State’s Chief Minister even as her contemporary E.K. Nayanar held that position twice shows that even a ‘revolutionary’ party never considered her worthy of the post, says Ms. Gracy.

Women’s presence in the higher legislative bodies need not be a game changer in the immediate future, yet women’s representation in these bodies should be proportional to its population, argues the writer. “It is the right of women, not anyone’s generosity. A society’s approach to women is a measure of its culture,” she adds.

‘Better now’

C.S. Sujatha, former MP of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), defends her party’s women-friendliness, saying that there are now more women than before. She agrees that it still has a long way to go. “Women will not get their rightful place in legislative bodies until the Women’s Reservation Bill is brought about. Our party is committed to it,” she says. There were very few women in Parliament when the Domestic Violence (Prevention) Act was discussed, and it was dismaying experience, she recalls.

Renjini Suresh, former chairperson of Tripunithura Municipality and Kathakali artiste, says no party will bring women to the forefront of politics without reservation. “Women’s presence in the three-tier panchayat is ensured only because of reservation. Society has assigned her certain roles, and is not ready to accept her as politician,” says Ms. Suresh. The few women in legislative bodies are there because parties could not afford to ignore their presence, or for token representation, she said.

Former chief secretary Nalini Netto says a decision-making body which reflects the society’s cross section will perform better. “However, it is necessary that the women who are elected have a clear perspective of various problems, which comes only with experience in dealing with the public. Just token representation will not suffice,” she says.

Sarita Bhat, head of the Department of Biotechnology, Cochin University of Science and Technology, says women hesitate to take the plunge in politics as it is seen as the playground of rogues and manipulators. Gender issues will be better handled only with adequate representation of women in Parliament or Assembly, she says.

Sister Anupama, who is fighting ‘discrimination against women’ in the Church, is unequivocal about the stand women need to take wherever they are, even in politics.

Women have to take that step towards empowerment with responsibility and not just wait for reservation to come around, she says. “She is not abala (weak).”
