Security, farmers' welfare top of manifesto for BJP

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) A security regime focused on deterrence and a slew of welfare schemes for farmers were among the highlights of the election manifesto released yesterday by the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party.

The 46-page document was unveiled at an event attended by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, senior members of his cabinet and party president Amit Shah in New Delhi just three days before the multi-phase elections are due to begin.

The BJP manifesto said the government would follow a 'zero-tolerance approach to terrorism and mentioned 'surgical strikes and air strikes carried out recently.

It promised to speed up the purchase of weapons and defence-related equipment.

National security has been a big campaign focus for Modi and other BJP leaders since India carried out an air strike on what it claimed was a terrorist camp in Pakistan territory.

The strike came after 40 paramilitary troopers were killed in a suicide bomb blast in February in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir.

The ruling party also vowed to strip decades-old special rights from the people of Kashmir, that provoked warnings of a backlash in the country's only Muslim-majority state.

The BJP is widely expected to retain power after a general election that starts on Thursday, though with a much smaller mandate, hit by concerns over a shortage of jobs and weak farm prices.

It pledged to spend Rs100tn ($1.44tn) on infrastructure in the next five years, to help create jobs for the millions entering the workforce each year.

'Nationalism is our inspiration, economic development of the poor and backward sections our philosophy, and good governance our mantra, Modi said after releasing the manifesto.

The BJP has consistently advocated an end to Kashmir's special constitutional status, which prevents outsiders from buying property there, arguing that such laws have hindered its integration with the rest of India.

'In the last five years, we have made all necessary efforts to ensure peace in Jammu and Kashmir through decisive actions and a firm policy, it said in the manifesto.

'We are committed to overcome all obstacles in the way of development and provide adequate financial resources to all the regions of the state.

The party also reiterated its long-held desire to abolish Kashmir's autonomous status.

BJP supporters have sought the removal, expressing anger at many Kashmiris' resistance to rule by India, which, for three decades, has battled an armed insurgency.

'The BJP's campaign is largely around nationalism, national security and this is what is getting echoed in their manifesto, said Sanjay Kumar, director of think-tank the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies.

Repeal would bring widespread unrest, Kashmiri political leaders warned.

'Let them do it and it will pave the way for our azadi, Farooq Abdullah, president of Kashmir's National Conference party, told an election rally, referring to freedom for the region.

'They are wrong. We will fight against it.

The manifesto also listed a slew of welfare measures for farmers including an expansion of a direct income scheme and pensions promising to double their incomes by 2022.

Farmers form an important vote bank with about half of India's population depending on agriculture and related activities.

Their incomes have been dwindling in recent years due to a fall in prices of crops and other reasons.

In its manifesto last week, the main opposition Congress Party pledged to create more jobs, hand money to the poorest and change a law on special powers for troops in Kashmir.







MENAFN0804201900670000ID1098362341
