PM Narendra Modi to address Songadh voters on April 10

SURAT: Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address a public meeting at Songadh in Tapi district on April 10. Songadh is in Bardoli parliamentary constituency, which was won by BJP in 2014. Former union minister and Congress candidate Dr Tushar Chaudhary will fight BJP’s Prabhu Vasava for this seat. Vasava who won the seat in 2014 is seeking a second term from here.“Bardoli seat could be a hot ground for tall political leaders this time with both rival parties firmly convinced of a win here,” a political observer from Vyara of Tapi district said.BJP’s campaign on this seat will get a big boost with Modi’s presence and his addressing a public meeting in the predominately tribal area of Songadh will give the saffron party a distinctive advantage among voters in the Vyara assembly and villages of Songadh taluka in Nizar assembly seat too. Both these seats had been won by Congress in 2017 assembly polls. Poll pundits wait to see what interesting effects Modi’s public meeting will have on these areas.Convener of Bardoli seat for BJP and sitting Surat west MLA, Purnesh Modi said, “This one meeting is expected to galvanize the entire workforce of the party in the southern tribal belt. It will also have a huge impact on both Bardoli and Valsad parliamentary seats too.”With Vasda and Dang of Valsad Lok Sabha seat located near Songadh, the meeting has been strategically planned at the border of Mandvi assembly seat of Surat and Songadh in Tapi district in a bid to attract maximum tribal voters from all the four assembly segments. These comprise Vyara, Nizar, Dang and Vasda apart from other tribal areas of Mandvi, Mahua, Mangrol and Utchal.Meanwhile, Congress candidate Dr Tushar Chaudhary, who hails from Vyara, told TOI: “We (Congress) have also planned for a similar meeting with party high commands, Priyanka and Rahul Gandhi, in the area. We have asked for dates and once it is finalised, we will make an announcement. Such meetings go a long way in establishing and gaining confidence of the rural tribal votes.”
