Panjab University at number 9 in innovation, behind IITs, IISC and ICT

NIRF 2019: PU maintains lowest score in perception

CHANDIGARH: Panjab University secured ninth position among government-funded institutions in the first-ever Atal Ranking of Institutions on Innovation Achievements (ARIIA) rankings released on Monday at a time when it has been consistently performing badly in various international rankings.Eight institutions that scored better than PU are IITs, IISc Bangalore, and Institute of Chemical Technology (ICT), Mumbai.But PU slipped by a rank and stood at number 34 among Indian institutions in the overall category and at number 21 among Indian universities as per the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) 2019 released on Monday.For ARIIA, the parameters included budget and funding support, infrastructure and facilities; awareness and promotion of idea of generation and innovation; promoting and supporting entrepreneurship; intellectual property generation, technology transfer and commercialization; innovative learning methods and courses and innovation in governance of the institution. The scores of the parameters have not been released by the ministry of human resource development (HRD) yet.“Barring IISc and ICT, all others in the list are IITs. This essentially means that we have our innovation culture in place. We had started working in terms of innovations long back and now it is paying us back. Our VC is very serious in improving the incubation and innovation culture and start-up culture in PU. We had CRIKC meeting on Saturday only. It is because of the incubation facilities and innovation facilities that has given us this rank,” said Dr Ashish Jain, director, internal quality assurance cell (IQAC), PU.Panjab University has one incubation cell called BIONEST, Technology Enabling Centre, design innovation centre (DIC) in UIET also works as an incubation centre, innovation cell funded by MHRD and Chandigarh Region Innovation and Knowledge (CRIKC)In NIRF, PU was at number 33 in the overall category in 2018 and at number 20 in the university category, however, the score of the varsity has increased by a point.The university, like previous three years, has maintained its lowest score in perception. With a score of 27.09 out of 100, PU has improved its score from the last year, but it still has a long way to go as far as perception of the University is concerned. In 2018, PU had scored 23.58 points in perception, which was the lowest. In comparison with Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), which is at number 7, JNU has scored 55.27 in perception, clearly indicating that if PU wants to notch up its performance in NIRF rankings, it has to work on its perception.“Perception rank is based on a survey of peers. PU has always got low marks on this. This time too PU has only 27.09 marks. This indicates that the surveyed peers do not think much of PU. There could be a slew of reasons. One is that PU does not host too many outside academics in seminars/vivas/conferences/collaborations and not frequently enough. Second is that PU does not have much of a role in the professional bodies of academics like INSA in the country; and the third is that PU has a meagre role in administrative bodies of academics like the UGC, ICMR,” said Prof M Rajivlochan, former IQAC director and member, state higher education council, Chandigarh.The lowest score of perception is followed by PU’s poor show in research and professional practice (RPC) parameter in which the varsity has only scored 44.82 points out of 100.
