Defence counsel gets dates wrong, fails to turn up

Suleman Usman Bakery case

Mumbai riots

Joint Commissioner of Police Ram Dev Tyagi

B N Srikrishna Commission

Two witnesses were ready to testify from April 8; one witness has testified so far but declared hostile.Eighteen years after an FIR was filed against 18 policemen in theof the, charging them u/sec 302 (murder), the trial was to take off in earnest on Monday. Additional sessions court Judge UM Padwad had kept three consecutive days: April 8, 9, 10 for witnesses to testify.Though the judge had set aside all other matters, and two witnesses were ready to take the stand, the case did not proceed an inch because the accused’s counsel Shrikant Shivade did not appear. His junior told the court that his senior had wrongly recorded the dates as April 9, 10 and 11. In his absence, the junior submitted that he could not cross-examine the witnesses.An angry Judge Padwad pointed out that the original dates for this hearing had been changed to suit the defence counsel’s convenience. Witnesses should not be troubled, he said, adding that one of them had come from out of town. He imposed costs of Rs 500 on the defence, to be paid to the outstation witness, and adjourned the matter to Tuesday.The two witnesses who were to testify yesterday were both policemen – one serving and the other retired. Retired PSI Krishna Desai, 70, had come by train from Kolhapur. So far, only one witness has testified and he was declared hostile.Monday’s was just one more delay in a case that has seen many twists and turns since the incident took place 26 years back. On January 9, 1993, during the second phase of the post-Babri Masjid demolition riots, thenconducted a raid on Suleman Usman Bakery on Mohammed Ali Road. The raid left eight inmates of the bakery and the adjoining madarsa dead; none of them had any criminal record.The police said they had been fired upon by terrorists from the bakery’s rooftop, but neither any terrorist nor any firearm was found from the premises. Theof Inquiry into the riots indicted Tyagi and two of his assistants for the death of eight innocents.A Special Task Force, set up by the state government in response to a Supreme Court petition urging implementation of the Commission’s report, filed a case against Tyagi and 17 policemen in 2001.In 2003, Tyagi and eight accused policemen were discharged. The judge held that the remaining policemen must face trial for murder as police records showed they had been the ones to open fire on unarmed persons. The discharge was upheld by the Supreme Court in 2011.After the raid, the police had arrested 78 persons from the bakery and madarsa and charged them with attempt to murder. But the Bombay High Court discharged these accused in 2011.The government has not appointed any Special public prosecutor for the case, which has meandered from court to court.
