Mosquitoes have a field day in Kharadi as Pune Municipal Corporation fails clean-up act

The slack in vigilance has always kept the city susceptible to epidemics, be it dengue or malaria, but no lessons have been learnt. As mercury soars, residents of Kharadi find themselves haplessly battling swarms of mosquitoes bred in the stagnant waters of Mula and Mutha that converge in the area. The genesis has been accepted even by the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) officials, but they too are throwing up their hands, claiming to be acutely short-staffed to provide the real resolution needed.A senior citizen, Shailaja Rao, who stays at Nyati Empire, along with her husband, has tried every trick in the book to make their apartment mosquito-proof, with netted windows shut tight for weeks. But they have not been able to keep the stealthy insects at bay. “Hundreds of small mosquitoes invade our homes even through closed windows. We are barely able to sleep,” she pointed out to Mirror.~~68785642~~Any outdoor activity in the society has also been rendered impossible. “We have taken all the precautions needed, such as keeping our plants dry, not storing water, using all known varieties of repellents, but nothing seems to work,” she complained. Under the circumstances she had to miss out on hosting her grandchildren, who revisited their summer vacation plans after learning of the situation.Besides the Raos, Nyati Empire is home to 392 other residents who are grappling with the same infestation.Many had to give up on their walks, as the repellents and electric bats have proven inadequate to combat the menace at hand. Neither is the problem isolated to this one housing society. Almost 42 societies in the vicinity are afflicted by the same issue.At the neighbouring Ganga Arcadia Society, parents have stopped allowing their children to play in the open area. “In the evenings, the society wears a deserted look. Even people who used to sit around and socialise have stopped doing so,” informed Kiran Palse, chairman of the society. Another resident from the neighbourhood pointed out, “We cannot sit quietly even for a minute, constantly trying to wave away the mosquitoes. It’s as if we are constantly exercising. Even top floors are not spared.”Ramesh Patwari, manager of Raviraj Ariana Society, is distressed. “I am unable to sit in the office beyond a few minutes. Fogging and spraying are also not working. The situation has gotten impossible,” he complained. Mehazabin Saiyed is one of the residents from the area who has lodged several complaints with PMC. “Managements of societies have increased the frequency of fogging and spraying insecticides, especially in all the ducts. We are also ensuring the area around our sewage treatment plants is kept clean and powdered with chemicals,” she explained.But for all their efforts, the residents are aware that the problem lies elsewhere. “Water has been stagnating on the riverbed since the construction of the bridge connecting Kharadi with Mundhwa began. Construction material was dumped in the riverbed and not cleared even after the work was done. We raised this issue when the Kharadi Housing Societies’ Welfare Association met with PMC’s ward office officials. We were assured that the issue will be directed to the health department. Since then they sprayed once and it hasn’t helped. Are we waiting for the outbreak of an epidemic?” Saiyed argued.Echoing her worries, Nitin Memane, chairman of the association, reiterated, “We are getting worried now. It has been brought to the attention of the civic body that the debris, hyacinth and garbage are the roots of the current problem overwhelming us. But it has not yielded much action from the authorities.” One resident added, “They even tried introducing fish in the river to tackle the problem but that did not work either.”Officials at PMC are clearly blasé about the situation and say the residents will just have to bear with it for a while. “We have received complaints from the residents and are taking steps to resolve it. However, as the real resolution lies in removing the hyacinth clogging the riverbed, which requires manual labour, we are unable to address it, being short-staffed. It will take some time and meanwhile we are spraying and fogging constantly,” said Dr Sanjeev Wavare, head of PMC’s insect control department.
