BJP's election manifesto 'short-sighted and arrogant', says Rahul Gandhi

Congress president Rahul Gandhi took to Twitter to criticise the BJP manifesto/ Photo: Twitter: INCIndia | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: Congress president Rahul Gandhi continued the attack on the BJP manifesto and called it short-sighted and arrogant. Taking to Twitter, Gandhi said that unlike the Congress manifesto which was created 'through discussion', the BJP manifesto 'was created in a small room'. Contrary to Gandhi's claims, the BJP leadership, during the manifesto launch event, said that views were sought from millions of people, including via PM Modi's Mann ki Baat programme and incorporated in the document.

"The Congress manifesto was created through discussion. The voice of over a million Indian people it is wise and powerful... The BJP Manifesto was created in a closed room. The voice of an isolated man, it is short-sighted and arrogant," Gandhi said in a tweet.

Shortly after the BJP unveiled its vision document titles Sankalp Patra, the Congress party attacked the ruling party and said that the BJP manifesto consisted of only 'one person's Mann ki Baat'.

The Congress manifesto was created through discussion. The voice of over a million Indian people it is wise and powerful.



The BJP Manifesto was created in a closed room. The voice of an isolated man, it is short sighted and arrogant. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) April 9, 2019

"Our manifesto shows that the people of our country are important for us and for them, their face. Our manifesto incorporates the views of millions of people in the country, while the manifesto of the BJP has only one person's "Mann ki Baat". The country will now pronounce its decision," Congress said in a tweet on its official account.

Later, in a press conference, party leaders Randeep Surjewala and Ahmed Patel called the BJP manifesto 'jhansa patra' and a 'bubble of lies'. " "On one hand is the public on the cover of Congress manifesto, while the BJP document has only Modi's picture depicting 'me and only me'. I feel this BJP manifesto is 'lies versus justice'. I feel it is lies and only lies. It would have been better, if they issued an apology letter, as in the last five years they had nothing to show," Patel said.

"After we presented our manifesto, we held a detailed question and answer session. And immediately after BJP presented its manifesto, all of their leaders went home without even taking a single question. No answers on their 5 years? It is this arrogance which will bring them down on May 23rd," Patel tweeted.

In the 45-page manifesto titled Sankalp Patra, released by PM Narendra Modi, party chief Amit Shah, Home Minister Rajnath Singh and others, the BJP has reiterated its commitment to building Ram temple in Ayodhya and promised abrogation of Article 370, doubling of farmers' incomes by 2022, uniform civil code to name a few.
