Janhvi Kapoor says 'Itna bhi paisa nahi kamaya' when asked why she repeats her clothes

Janhvi Kapoor will be seen next on the big screen in Kargil Girl | Photo Credit: Instagram

Bollywood latest diva, Janhvi Kapoor never hold back in interviews and expresses her candid self on most occasions. In her most recent one on Anaita Shroff Adajania’s show, Janhvi Kapoor reacted to being trolled on social media for repeating her clothes. The actress candidly admitted to not having earned enough money to buy and flaunt a new set of clothes everyday.

“Itna bhi paisa nahi kamaya ki har roz naye kapde! (I haven’t earned enougn yet to afford new set of clothes everyday),” Janhvi Kapoor said. Basically, a number of times, the Dhadak actress has been trolled for repeating her gym clothes on photos posted by the paparazzi. Janhvi insists that if the criticism was about her work, she would have taken it seriously, but as it is not, this sort of trolling doesn’t affect her. “How I look outside the gym isn’t really my job,” Janhvi added.

Janhvi isn’t the first one of have gym clothes issues in Bollywood. In the finale episode of season 6 of Koffee With Karan, Kareena Kapoor Khan too revealed to host Karan Johar on how she wants the paparazzi to stop waiting outside the gym to click her photos. The actress said that she was running out of gym clothes.

Well said, Janhvi as we too think that outfits shouldn’t be a point of criticism about a performer and she has rightly mentioned that it is her acting chops that should be scrutinised if at all. Janhvi made her Bollywood debut with the 2018 film Dhadak. The film had also starred Ishaan Khatter, and was a superhit at the box-office.

Since then, Janhvi Kapoor is signed up for a bunch of new projects, including Karan Johar’s next directorial venture titled Takht, which also stars Ranveer Singh, Alia Bhatt, Anil Kapoor, Vicky Kaushal, Kareena Kapoor Khan and Bhumi Pednekar. However, her next is the IAF pilot Gunjan Saxena biopic titled Kargil Girl.

Janhvi was in Lucknow shooting for the film last month and leaked photos of her in Indian Air Force uniform had made its way on the web. Fans couldn’t stop gushing over how amazing Janhvi looked and it has surely boosted the anticipation of fans for the upcoming film.
