Congress manifesto echoes Pakistan stand on Kashmir: PM Modi in Maharashtra

Continuing his attack on the Opposition, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday said Congress manifesto stood for Pakistan more than for India on the issue of Kashmir.

ADVERTISEMENT

Addressing a rally in Latur of Maharashtra, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said, “Congress says Article 370 will not be removed from Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan is also saying what Congress’s manifesto says.”

Alleging that the Congress manifesto was about weakening the security establishment, Prime Minister Modi said the Congress and their friends have anti-national thinking and attitude. “The language that Congress speaks is the same language that Pakistan also speaks,” Modi said.

Narendra Modi said those who talk of a separate PM and secession of Jammu and Kashmir are the ones whom the nation had trusted once. “Their real thoughts are now in the open,” the Prime Minister said.

Earlier, National Conference leader Omar Abdullah had said his party will strive hard for restoring the autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir that could include having a ‘Sadar-e-Riyasat’ (President) and ‘Wazir-e-Azam’ (Prime Minister).

ADVERTISEMENT

Hitting out at the Congress, Narendra Modi said Congress and Pakistan both want that those who spread militancy and want India to break, roam freely in the country.

“Both Congress and Pakistan want that our soldiers don’t get the strength that they need to tackle the menace of militancy,” Narendra Modi said in Maharashtra.

On the other hand, Narendra Modi said under the BJP’s watch it was the policy of ‘New India’ that it will kill militants by barging into their dens. The prime minister reiterated his allegation that the opposition parties that they were questioning the valour of the security forces post Pulwama attack.

The Prime Minister said the BJP-led government will not sit quietly while terrorists get a free hand. “India will go in and eliminate militants. That is the mantra of new India,” Narendra Modi said in Latur.

While addressing the rally in Latur, Prime Minister Narendra Modi also mooted the proposal of a separate water ministry.

“If there will be wars in the future, they will be over water. In our next government, we will set up a new water ministry. Under this, all the rivers will be connected. Every house, every field will get water,” Narendra Modi added.
