Election Commission summons Revenue Secretary, CBDT chairman in connection with IT raids on Kamal Nath's aides

Inside visuals from the residence of Ashwin Sharma, associate of Praveen Kakkar (OSD to MP CM) as Income Tax raid is underway | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Election Commission (EC) on Tuesday called the Revenue Secretary and Chairman of Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) to discuss the ongoing Income Tax raids in Madhya Pradesh and other states. According to a PTI report, AB Pandey, Revenue Secretary and PC Mody, CBDT chairman have been summoned to explain the reasoning behind the ongoing raids in Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh.

The Congress party has alleged that the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) was using enforcement agencies to target the opposition during election season.

Bhopal: Trophies of black buck, tiger, deer, leopard etc have been recovered from residence of Ashwin Sharma, associate of Praveen Kakkar (OSD to MP CM). Hide of spotted dear also seized. Forest dept says 'Action to be taken under Wildlife Protection Act, after scrutiny of paper' pic.twitter.com/DcHIvSi2fx — ANI (@ANI) April 9, 2019

On Sunday, the Election Commission had advised the Finance Ministry to ensure that the actions by enforcement agencies should be 'neutral' and 'non-discriminatory'. The poll regulator also asked the Finance Ministry to keep it in the loop about all such actions.

Meanwhile, in its response to EC, the Finance Ministry has reportedly said that the enforcement actions are 'neutral', 'impartial' and 'non-discriminatory' irrespective of political affiliation- news agency PTI reported.

Bhopal: Inside visuals from the residence of Ashwin Sharma, associate of Praveen Kakkar (OSD to MP CM) as Income Tax raid is underway there. A team of Forest Dept is also present there. #MadhyaPradesh pic.twitter.com/8v42ZoiqVc — ANI (@ANI) April 9, 2019

The Income Tax department has, over the past few days carried out raids across Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh. In what the department calls 'widespread and well-organised' racket of a collection of unaccounted cash, the IT department seized Rs 281 crore during raids on close aides of Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath and others. They have also recovered Rs 14.6 crore unaccounted cash and diaries and computers files of alleged transactions between MP and Delhi.

According to PTI, the CBDT has 'detected a trail of' Rs 20 crore being moved to "headquarters of a major political party in Delhi" from the residence of an important person who resides on Tughlaq Road in New Delhi.

Commenting on the raids, Praveen Kakkar, Kamal Nath's officer on special duty (OSD) said that the operations were 'political'. "Despite the two-day-long raid, they (Income Tax Department) didn't find any document that they could seize, they didn't recover any cash or jewellery. They didn't find anything objectionable, it was a political operation," he told news agency ANI.
