Woman who defied mob to enter Indian temple is beaten up by her mother-in-law as she returns home

One of two Indian women who entered an ancient Hindu hill temple in southern India this month in defiance of a centuries-old ban on women of menstruating age alleged she was beaten up by her mother-in-law on Tuesday, police said.

Kanaka Durga, 39, a civil servant, suffered injuries to her head and had to be hospitalised, police said. She claims she was attacked only minutes after she returned to her home from spending a month at undisclosed locations fearing attacks by conservative Hindu groups, police said.

'We received a complaint from Kanaka Durga alleging that she was attacked by family members of her husband when she returned home after entering the temple,' said Jaya Mani, officer in charge of Perinthalmanna police station in Malappuram district, which is in the state of Kerala where the Sabarimala temple is located.

Kanaka Durga, 39, one of two Indian women to enter Sabarimala temple is seen at a hospital in Manjeri town, Kerala on Tuesday

Bindu Ammini, 42, and Kanaka Durga, 44, are escorted by police after an earlier failed attempt to enter the Sabarimala temple in Pathanamthitta last month

Police were investigating, Mani said.

A second police source said Durga had alleged she was assaulted by the mother-in-law. The mother-in-law had denied the allegation, he said.

Durga did not return calls seeking comment. The family members, including Durga's mother-in-law, could not be reached for comment.

The Sabarimala temple has been the site of tension since India's Supreme Court ruled in late September to end a ban on women and girls aged from 10-50 from entering.

The temple refused to abide by the ruling and subsequent attempts by women to visit were blocked by thousands of devotees.

The Lord Ayyappa temple at Sabarimala in the southern state of Kerala from which women were banned

Kanaka Durga, 39 (left) and Bindu Ammini, 40, became the first women to enter Sabarimala temple

That was until Bindu Ammini, 40, a law lecturer at Kerala's Kannur University, and Durga finally succeeded in entering the temple on Jan. 2 through a side entrance in the middle of the night. Some other women have claimed they have got into the temple since then.

Their entry sparked widespread protests and a day-long strike in Kerala led in part by members of India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party.

'The attack is a natural reaction of the family members, who are strong believers of the temple's customs and rituals,' Ammini said.

'Her friends told me that her family members were angry with her action. They have unleashed their anger when they saw her.'

Millions of women formed a 385-mile human chain over the Indian temple's rejection of Durga earlier this month.

Footage showed the staggering number of the 'women's wall' which even surprised its organisers, Kerala's governing Communist Party of India, who said five-and-a-half million turned out.

Riot police were deployed anticipating protests following reports of two women entering the Sabarimala temple

Protesters burn an effigy of Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan reacting to reports of two women entering the Sabarimala temple

Indian police fired tear gas, stun grenades and water cannon as clashes erupted across Kerala after news of the women entering spread.

Violent clashes were reported between scores of people in front of the state parliament in Thiruvananthapuram, while protests with sporadic violence were also reported in several other towns across the state.

A tense standoff lasting more than four hours in Thiruvananthapuram was ongoing, with neither side showing any sign of backing down as rival groups shouted slogans.

Police with batons also charged at protesters who were trying to enforce a shutdown of shops in the area. Several policemen were injured as protesters threw stones.

Police remove members of Kerala Students Union, the student wing of India's main opposition Congress party, as they take part in a protest after two women entered the Sabarimala temple
