Five reasons why artists are appealing citizens to vote out BJP

Over 1,000 filmmakers, visual and theatre artists have issued statements urging voters to not vote for the BJP and its allies in the Lok Sabha polls as the party has furthered its divisive agenda and propagated an ideology of hate and violence against the minorities and other weaker sections of the society.

“In the last few years, we have seen concerted attacks on freedom of expression, the imposition of a theocratic state, unchecked mob-lynchings, state-sanctioned terror against the most vulnerable sections of society, and corporatisation of India’s national assets,” one of the three statements released by the artists read.

Over the past week, three statements have been released — one signed by 131 writers and filmmakers, a second one signed by 116 visual artists and the third one by 835 theatre artists.

Here is a look at the five main points raised by the group of artists in their respective statements.

Hatred against minorities

All three groups focused on discrimination against minorities and their rights. The filmmakers who signed the petition said that the current government has left no stone unturned in polarising the country on religious and communal lines. They argued that instances of mob lynching and cow vigilantism are being used to split the country on the communal lines. The theatre artists warned that the rot of hatred has spread way too deep and demanded its immediate seizure.

“The seeds of hatred have entered our food, prayers and festivals,” the statement by theatre personalities, which has been endorsed by over 800 artists, said.

The visual artists were of the same opinion. They argue in their statement that the current government has prompted an atmosphere of fear and all-consuming hatred, which has destroyed our rich and diversified social fabric

“Terms like love-jihad, gau hatyare, tukde-tukde gang or urban Naxals are coined to incite violence on any flimsy ground against Dalits, Muslims, intellectuals, social activists, artists, writers and vulnerable sections of society,” it said.

They further added that the BJP has given a “free rein” to Hindutva goons to indulge in the politics of hate and violence.

Read also: More than 800 theatre artists make an appeal to vote out divisive politics from power

Freedom of speech

Any person who raises even slightest objection or dissent of the government is labelled an “anti-national”, the filmmakers said.

The visual artists recalled how activists Gauri Lankesh, Kalburgi, Pansare and Dabholkar were killed for voicing their dissent of the government. They accused the government of trampling on the freedom enjoyed by several autonomous institutes. “They have appointed persons with no relevant experience as head of these institutions who propagate unscientific and irrational beliefs,” the artists said.

Even schools and universities have failed to escape from the government’s interference, the artists alleged. “Their curriculums have been revised to promote Hindutva and key appointments to academic bodies and cultural institutions have been made disregarding norms, to fulfil the broad aims of the RSS,” they added.

The group also alleged that despite making several promises to root out corruption, it continues to rule the roost. The Rafale scam has exposed it at the highest level.

Crony capitalism

The BJP came to power as a result of the country’s biggest anti-corruption movement. The filmmakers, in their statement, said that the country has been turned into “boardroom property” of a handful of a businessman. The artists allege in their open petition that instead of clamping on black money, people who looted the country ran away. The artists also accused the government of manipulating the data and statistics to further its agenda. It said that as a result of the government’s flawed policies, the wealth of the rich has grown astronomically, while the poor have become even poorer.

Read also: Over 100 visual artists now appeal to save democracy

Economic policies

All the three groups accused the government of what they see as its flawed economic policies that ended up as extreme disasters. They say these were then made up to look like successes.

The groups called demonetisation a “colossal disaster” and also accused the government of carrying out rampant privatisation of the state-owned institutes.

In the statement released by visual artists, it was alleged that several state-owned institutions across a wide range of fields from HAL to ONGC and from BSNL to the finest of universities have suffered due to bad policies and undue interference.

Institutional autonomy

The artists said that cultural and scientific institutes in the country are under attack and even slightest of dissent is enough to earn one a label of “anti-national”.

The visual artists, in their statement, accused the government of “interfering” in the affairs of these institutes by appointing people who have little to no relevant experience and who propagate unscientific and irrational beliefs.

The institutes which were supposed to nurture argument, debate and dissent are being stifled for the same reason.

The central government has interfered with the functioning of autonomous institutions and constitutional bodies to further its self-interest and wield power, be it the RBI, the CBI, the ED or educational institutions. There have even been attempts to interfere with the judiciary and emasculate and even manage the Election Commission, they said.

Even schools and universities have not been spared, their curriculums have been revised to promote Hindutva and to fulfil the broad aims of the RSS, they said.

BJP dismissed statements, says politically motivated

Talking to timesofindia.com, BJP national spokesperson Nalin Kohli said finance minister Arun Jaitley has already referred to these people as “compulsive contrarians”. These are the same set of people who have been part of the ‘Award Wapsi Brigade’ or have at different periods of time signed motivated petitions or memorandums against the BJP or the Modi government, he said.

“They are entitled to stand in support of the Congress party and why should not they? Because they have been the beneficiary of the largesse distributed by Congress to many of them over the past several decades. Therefore, there is no need for them to pretend that this is supposedly a higher cause when in reality it is not,” Kohli added.

BJP MP from New Delhi and national spokesperson Meenakshi Lekhi said: “A very dangerous situation is being created in the country by the so-called seculars without realizing its repercussion for the secular fabric of the nation. In their enthusiasm to look and appear secular , they’ve been dividing the society on permanent lines of caste and religion and invoking artificial fear to create eternal phobia in the minds of a gullible population with the aim to become their messiah.”

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
