Dung 'cakes' are hurled through the air during the annual Pidakala War

Thousands of villagers descended on a pile of manure to take part in an annual 'good health' battle today.

It is a yearly tradition in the village of Kairuppala in Kurnool, southern India, for members of rival villages to gather for the Pidakala War.

The custom takes place the day after the spring festival Ugadi and is a symbolic war about a mythological marriage dispute.

During the yearly tradition in the village of Kairuppala in Kurnool, southern India, groups gather around a pile of manure for the Pidakala War

Those taking part are split in to those fighting for the goddess Bhadrakali and those for Lord Veerabhadraswamy - a fearsome form of the Hindu god Shiva.

Cow dung cakes are thrown by each side towards the other while crowds line the streets and onlookers gather on nearby buildings.

Thousands of people can be seen in this video watching on as the manure cakes are sent hurtling in to the air.

Thousands look on from nearby buildings as they watch the action below. Two groups throw the manure at each other as part of the battle

And members of the Indian Police Service look on to ensure no real riots break out as the battle for good health takes place.

According to legend, Lord Veerabhadraswamy wanted to marry the goddess Bhadrakali but there was opposition to the match that led to a dispute.

Bhadrakali's people used cow dung as their weapon of choice before the marriage was finally allowed.

The battle gets cloudy as the manure lands and splits open spreading dust and smaller amounts of manure in to the air

Gathering ammunition: The pile of dung cakes quickly disappears as it is flung across the street towards the opposition

Now the tradition sees manure flung high in to the air to bring health, prosperity and rainfall as the villagers celebrate the union at the end of a battle.

The festival Ugadi was celebrated yesterday to mark the beginning of a new year and a change in the moon's orbit.
