tata steel: Tata Steel arm finally buys Usha Martin unit, Auto News, ET Auto

KOLKATA: Usha Martin , one of the world’s largest wire rope manufacturers, is finally closing the deal with a Tata Steel subsidiary for selling its steel business on Tuesday. The discussions for the much talked about Rs 4,525-crore deal between Usha Martin and Tata Steel were on for more than a year. It had got delayed owing to various regulatory reasons.Sources close to the development told TOI that Tata Sponge , a subsidiary of Tata Steel , has paid Rs 3,500 crore into the designated escrow account for the deal as the first instalment. “Tata Steel will take control of the integrated steel plant of Usha Martin near Jamshedpur early April 9 morning,” added the sources.It is also learnt that a payment of around Rs 700 crore will be held back by the Tatas as an iron ore mine, a coal block and some land will be transferred later. “Most of the approvals for these things, including government approvals, are already there but it would take some more time,” added sources.The management of Usha Martin, which has a debt of around Rs 4,400 crore, could not be contacted for comment.In June 2018, the board of Usha Martin had given a goahead to MD Rajeev Jhawar to dispose of the steel business of the company. There had been a board-level coup led by SBI in Usha Martin last year that replaced chairman Prashant Jhawar by former Sebi chief G N Bajpai. The company had earlier planned to sell its wire rope business but, following lacklustre response from buyers, it changed its stance.“It is good that the deal is concluding without much hiccups. The lenders are also getting the money back without any haircut. This is a win-win situation for all. It is good for employees of wire rope business as well as the steel business. Usha Martin MD Rajeev Jhawar worked round the clock for this,” a former official of Tata Group added.Sources also added that a long-term wire rod supply agreement has been signed between Tata Steel and Usha Martin, which would be beneficial for the wire rope unit. The steel business that Usha Martin is selling includes a 135 MW power plant and a lucrative iron ore mine and coal block.
