Janhvi Kapoor rocks the traditional look yet again, but her flawless skin has all our attention - see photos

Bollywood actress Janhvi Kapoor | Photo Credit: Instagram

It won't be wrong to say that Janhvi Kapoor, who made her big Bollywood debut with Shashank Khaitan's Dhadak last year, has become tinsel town's favourite. The diva has not only won millions of hearts with her spectacular performance but has also become a trendsetter for many millennials. Be it her chic red carpet outfits or her simple kurtas, Janhvi has never failed to impress the fashion police.

Recently, the 22-year-old actress was seen acing the traditional look once again but this time it was her flawless skin that caught our attention. During her latest spotting, Janhvi was seen donning a matcha green kurta with pink and dark green thread embroidery. She teamed it up with palazzo pants and a dupatta of the same colour.

The diva accessorised her outfit with a pair of silver earrings and pink Kohlapuri flats. She kept her long locks open and no make-up made her look even more radiant. Check out the photos and videos below.

Check out Janhvi's other stylish avatars here.

On the movie front, Janvhi's debut film featured Ishaan Khatter as the male lead. Not only their performances but even their chemistry was applauded a lot by the audience. Soon after that, the actress bagged a vital role in Karan Johar's upcoming directorial, Takht. The period drama is set in the Mughal era and also stars Ranveer Singh, Kareena Kapoor Khan, Vicky Kaushal, Bhumi Pednekar and Anil Kapoor in lead roles.

Apart from this, Janhvi will also be playing the lead role in the upcoming Gunjan Saxena biopic. Gunjan Saxena, the first woman Indian Air Force combat pilot, played an important role during the Kargil War in 1999. For her daredevilry, she was conferred the Shaurya Chakra by the Government of India.

She will also be sharing screen space with Rajkummar Rao in Dinesh Vijan's horror-comedy, Rooh-Afza. The movie will also feature Varun Sharma in a key role.

Stay tuned to this space for more updates!
