Never said Rs 15 lakh will come into people's accounts: Rajnath Singh

2/5

When asked about Mehbooba Mufti and Farooq Abdullah's statements that tampering with Article 370 and 35A will not bode well for India, Singh said, "This is their frustration, let them speak what they want. We will go ahead and do what we have to do".

Replying to a question on the charge that BJP made false promises during the 2014 Lok Sabha poll, he stated, "Bilkul nahi kaha tha ki Rs 15 lakh aenge. Ye kabhi nahi kaha tha (We never said that Rs 15 lakh will come (to accounts of people). This was never said. We had said that we will take action against black money. Action is being taken against black money. It was our government which made SIT to crackdown on black money."

Days after BSP supremo Mayawati appealed to the Muslim community to vote for the BSP-SP alliance and not for Congress, Singh said that politics should not be carried out on the basis of "caste, creed and religion".

"It is very unfortunate (what Mayawati said). Politics should not be done on Hindu-Muslim basis. Politics should not be done on the basis of caste, creed and religion. Our (BJP) politics is not on the basis of caste, creed and religion. It is based on justice and humanity. We never say only Hindus should vote for us and not Muslims or vice versa. In a healthy democracy, you can't even imagine this."

On February 26 IAF strike in Balakot in Pakistan, the home minister said that India had carried out the action with utmost caution and responsibility to ensure only terrorists were impacted and no civilian was harmed.

He underlined that India had no intention to cause civilian casualties or get into a direct confrontation with Pakistani forces while carrying out air strikes on Balakot.

"Indian Air Force only attacked terrorist camps. We made sure that there should be no attack on Pakistan's sovereignty and integrity. We did not kill any innocent human in our strikes. We only attacked terrorist training centres," he added.
