High decibel Arunachal Pradesh campaign ends

The high decibel campaigning for the simultaneous election to the Arunachal Assembly and the two Lok Sabha seats in the north-eastern ended on Tuesday.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi was the star campaigner of the BJP and addressed two election rallies in the state



at Aalo in West Siang district on March 30 and Pasighat in East Siang district on April 3 while party president Amit Shah addressed a rally at Bordumsa in Changlang district on April 5 last.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi has also addressed an election rally. Veteran Bollywood actor Ashrani addressed several election rallies across the state in support of Congress candidates.

Altogether 181 candidates including 11 women are in the fray for 57 assembly constituencies out of total 60 seats in the state, while seven candidates including one woman are trying their luck in the Western Arunachal Parliamentary seat along with five candidates for the Eastern Parliamentary seat.

The ruling BJP had already opened its account in the assembly polls by winning three seats unopposed.

The winners are Kento Jini from Along East constituency in West Siang district, Taba Tedir from Yachuli seat in Lower Subansiri district and Phurpa Tsering from Dirang seat in West Kameng district.

The election campaign remained peaceful in the state barring stray incidents of violence in Tirap and Longding districts where NSCN (IM) militants killed a National Peoples Party (NPP) worker and another civilian.

The ruling BJP as well as the opposition Congress undertook hectic campaign trail almost in every nook and corner of the state along with other political parties including first Janata Dal United (JDU), Janata Dal Secular (JDS) and NPP who is entering for the first time in the states electoral scene besides, Peoples Party of Arunachal (PPA).

The BJP has fielded candidates in 57 Assembly seats while Congress is contesting in 46 seats, the NPP in 30 seats, JDU in 15 constituencies, JDS (12), PPA (9) and one from the All India Party (AIP).

There are also 11 Independent in the fray for the Assembly polls in the state.

The flying squads and static surveillance team appointed by the Election Commission, along with state police has seized unaccounted cash over five crore in the state, state Inspector General of Police Sunil Garg said.

A total of 7,94,162 voters, including 4,01,601 women, would exercise their franchise in the April 11 simultaneous polls in 2,202 polling stations spread across the state.

There are also 3000 odd physically challenged voters in the state.

This time, there are also 11 polling stations in the state that will exclusively be for women.

Polling Station no 52 at Naharalagun, under Itanagar Assembly constituency, has the highest number of voters at 1340, while Malogam polling station under Hayuliang constituency in remote Anjaw district bordering China has only one female voter.

Luguthang polling booth under Mukto constituency in Tawang district is the highest polling station located at an altitude of about 13,583 feet.

Eleven polling stations exclusively for female voters have also been set up in the state, the sources said.

The state has 281 vulnerable polling booths and 662 critical polling stations where adequate security personnel would be deployed.

According to election office sources, photo electoral roll coverage is 99.97 per cent while voter's photo identity card has been issued to 99.97 per cent in the state.

For the first time, Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) would be used along with electronic voting machines in all the polling stations.

For poll day monitoring, SMS-based poll monitor system would be used and vehicles carrying reserve EVMs would be fitted with GPS in all cellular network covered areas, the sources added.

Meanwhile, the Election Commission has banned publication and broadcast of all exit polls from April 11 till May 19 besides campaign activities from Tuesday evening.

Counting of votes would be conducted on May 23 next.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
