India election: Gunmen STORM hospital and shoot regional leader ahead of vote

India Pakistan: Deteriorating situation is concern says Qureshi

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Footage showing the aftermath of the murder of Chandrakant Sharma, 48, shows security personnel rushing in and out of the outpatients’ department at the Kishtwar district hospital. The 48-year-old, whose bodyguard was also killed, was a leader of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), the influential parent organisation of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Police said Security at Thursday’s elections is a major concern as around 900 million people are eligible to head to the polls.

A senior police officer, Kishtwar Angrez Singh Rana, told Reuters: "Sharma's personal security officer died on the spot and he was critically injured.” He said the party leader was airlifted to the Government Medical College in Jammu, but succumbed to his injuries. Following the double-killing, an indefinite curfew was imposed on the town of Kishtwar, which borders the contested Muslim-majority region of Kashmir claimed by both India and Pakistan. Mr Rana said additional troops had also been called in to prevent the rising sectarian tensions escalating into violence.

Security is a major concern ahead of Thursday's general elections

Chandrakant Sharma and his bodyguard were killed in an attack

Tensions are flaring between India and Pakistan since February's suicide bombing

India accused Pakistan of harbouring terrorists

The shootings come as India and Pakistan have been embroiled in a political crisis in recent months. In February a suicide attack that killed 40 Indian paramilitary troopers was claimed by a militant group based in Pakistan. This provoked hostilities between the nuclear-armed neighbours, with India accusing Pakistan of harbouring terrorists. Manmohan Vaidya, general secretary of the RSS, said: "He was the centre of hope and trust for a patriotic society that is against terrorism.

The ruling alliance has been propped up by nationalist sentiment over the recent violence
