Top news of the day: Five killed in Maoist attack on BJP convoy in Chhattisgarh, Kerala Congress (M) chairman K.M Mani passes away, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

BJP MLA from Dantewada Bhima Mandavi and four security personnel were killed on Tuesday when their convoy was attacked by Naxalites in Chhattisgarh’s Dantewada district, days before the first-phase polling in the State, police said. The incident occurred at Shyamagiri hills when the MLA’s convoy was heading towards Kuwakonda from Bacheli area, police added.

Kerala Congress (M) chairman K. M. Mani, the longest serving legislator in the State’s history, is no more. The 86-year-old passed away on Tuesday at a private hospital. Mr. Mani was admitted to the hospital on Friday with respiratory disease and was being treated for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The hospital authorities said that his condition had improved in the morning from the day before, but by afternoon it had worsened. He was admitted to the hospital on earlier occasions too with COPD but was discharged.

The Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) headed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi gave exceptional and unprecedented waivers to M/s Dassault Aviation and M/s MBDA in the offset contracts they signed with the Indian government on September 23, 2016 as part of the €7.87 billion Rafale deal. These waivers, granted on August 24, 2016 at the highest level of political decision-making, were exemptions given to the two private French companies from having to comply with provisions of the Standard Contract Document of the Defence Procurement Procedure, DPP-2013.

Asserting a strong government at the Centre was imperative for a strong India, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday said the Balakot air strikes have created a fear among the terrorists and those in power in Pakistan were getting nightmares. Addressing an election rally in Chitradurga, Mr. Modi attacked the ruling Congress-JD(S) combine in Karnataka saying when the whole world stood with India in the aftermath of the air strikes, the two parties were in tears.

The Supreme Court on Tuesday dubbed a challenge to film Prime Minister Narendra Modi a “non-issue” and refused to stop its release. A Bench, led by Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi, did not consider it necessary to entertain the petition, which alleges the film to be a “blatant propaganda” dressed up as a work of art in violation of the Model Code of Conduct for the Lok Sabha election.

Starting his poll campaign in Bihar on Tuesday, Congress president Rahul Gandhi addressed a public meeting in support of the mahagathbandhan (Grand Alliance) candidate Jitan Ram Manjhi of Hindustani Awam Morcha (Secular) and slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for promising to give “15 lakhs” to everyone’s account.

The Election Commission of India (ECI) on Tuesday announced the by-poll schedule for Aravakurichi, Ottapidaram (SC), Sulur and Tirupparankundram Assembly constituencies in Tamil Nadu, which are vacant due to the death of sitting MLAs in two seats and due to disqualification of legislators in the other two.

The first look and title for Rajinikanth’s next movie was released on Tuesday morning. ‘Darbar’ stars Rajinikanth and Nayanthara, and is the Tamil Superstar’s first collaboration with director A.R. Murugadoss. Going by the first look, which features a police cap, badge, belt, crime scene tape and handcuffs, this may be the first film after 25 years, where Rajinikanth will play a police officer.
