Mother of murdered Scarlett Keeling reveals torment as Indian officials 'prepare to close the case'

Scarlett Keeling, the 15-year-old who was found dead at Anjuna Beach in Goa, India in February 2008

Officials investigating the killing of teen Scarlett Keeling in India are set to close the unsolved case against the two suspects tomorrow - after 11 years.

Scarlett's body was found covered in 50 injuries on a beach in Goa in 2008 - but despite arrests nobody has been jailed for the 15-year-old's death.

Two men - who had been drinking with the teen - were arrested on suspicion of plying her with drugs, raping her, and then leaving her on the beach, but were acquitted in 2016.

The Indian High Court has now listed the case for disposal tomorrow, leaving whoever is responsible for her death to walk free.

Speaking today, her mother Fiona Mackeown, 55, from Bideford, Devon, said: 'The whole thing has been made a mockery of from start to finish.

'I feel like they hope we just go away after 11 years. If it ends tomorrow then Scarlett will have been failed.

'I fear it will never be solved but I'll never stop hoping. I can't bare thinking her killers may never be found. Her killers are still walking the streets.

'I just want it all to be over now and for someone to be held accountable. We want to get on with our lives.

'It has dominated our lives but we have all tried to move on. I'll be devastated if that's it after tomorrow.'

Fiona MacKeown the mother of murdered British schoolgirl Scarlett Keeling (pictured leaving court in India in 2016) revealed her despair at the decision to close the case

Placido Carvalho and Samson D'Souza - who had been drinking with the teen - were arrested on suspicion of plying her with drugs, raping her, and then leaving her on the beach, but were acquitted in 2016

The teenager was on a six-month family holiday in India in 2008 with her family - including her mum, her mother's boyfriend and seven siblings and half-siblings.

The family had stayed in Goa for two months, and then moved down the coast, but Scarlett begged her mother to let her return for a big Valentine's Day party.

At first Fiona refused, but then agreed after a family friend said they'd look out for her.

Scarlett's half-naked body was found covered in 50 injuries on Anjuna beach on February 18, 2008.

A postmortem revealed Scarlett had ecstasy, cocaine and LSD in her body

Police initially declared her death was caused by accidental drowning but mum Fiona fought for a second inquest.

A postmortem showed there to be ecstasy, cocaine and LSD in Scarlett's body as well as multiple cuts to her body and signs of sexual assault.

Barman Samson D'Souza, 36, and Placido Carvalho, 47, were charged with culpable homicide and grievous sexual assault.

The trial at Goa Children's Court started in March 2010, but a verdict was not reached until 2016 when judge, Vandana Tendulkar, acquitted the two accused.

The case - initially investigated by the Goa Police - was handed over to the CBI, India's premier investigation agency, who appealed the court's not-guilty decision.

But the Indian High Court has now listed the case for 'disposal' tomorrow (10), after claims in local media the CBI failed to attend hearings.

It is understood the CBI intends to send an official to the court tomorrow, to put forward a final challenge.

The family's former lawyer Vikram Varma said: 'There will be no other time given to the case.

'After this, the court will make its final decision on the matter. There will be no more submissions and no more hearings.'

Fiona Mackeown and her lawyer Vikram Verma speak with media as they leave a local police station near Anjuna beach in 2008

Mr Varma said the CBI could apply for the court to overturn the acquittal tomorrow.

But if the acquittal is upheld, the only option left would be to appeal to the not guilty verdict in the Indian Supreme Court.

Mum Fiona said she has been told the hearing tomorrow is the last chance to find her daughter's killer.

She said: 'All we want is to get justice but I don't know what else we can do. Scarlett's name is being dragged through the mud.

'The CBI aren't taking this seriously. This is a massive part of our lives and we just want justice for what has happened to her. We all miss her everyday.

'Scarlett deserves more than this. If it is dropped then Scarlett will have been failed.'

Fiona added she doesn't know 'where else to turn' in her quest for justice if the High Court does choose to end proceedings this week but she'll 'never give up hope'.

'Goa is a popular tourist place and is dangerous,' she said.

'Those people who did it are dangerous.'

The CBI and Bombay High Court have not responded to a request for comment.
