India elections: Imran Khan calls Indian leaders ‘MORALLY BANKRUPT’ over Kashmir threat

India Pakistan: Crossfire breaks out in Poonch district

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said one of his manifesto pledges would include ending Kashmir’s special autonomous status, which has been in place since 1954. He is trying to appeal to rising anti-Muslim and anti-Pakistan sentiment to help him secure a second term. The issue of Kashmir has been a big part of the general election following a suicide attack in February that killed 40 Indian paramilitary troopers and was claimed by a militant group based in Pakistan.



But the Prime Minister of Pakistan has hit back that Mr Modi’s pledge was breaking a United Nations resolution and his own constitution.

Mr Khan said: “Don’t their people feel a sense of outrage and wonder at how far they will go simply to win an election?”

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) said getting rid of the protections around Kashmir will help it integrate with the rest of the country.

Both India and Pakistan have claimed the territory as their own and this has resulted in military tensions between the neighbouring countries for many years.

India elections: Imran Khan called Indian leaders 'morally bankrupt'

India elections: Indian Border Security Force patrol a street for the upcoming general election

Meanwhile, at least seven people including a state legislator for the BJP were killed in two separate attacks today, officials confirmed.

Maoist militants detonated a bomb in the eastern state of Chhattisgarh, which killed five people including BJP’s Bheema Mandavi.

Mr Mandavi and his entourage were driving back from a campaign appearance, according to district magistrate Topeshwar Verma.

In another attack today, gunmen burst into a hospital in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir and killed Chandrakant Sharma, who was a regional leader of a Hindu group linked to the BJP, as well as his bodyguard.

India elections: Supporters for Mr Modi take to the streets
