MI vs KXIP: How to pick the winning Dream11?

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





MI vs KXIP: How to pick the winning Dream11?

09 Apr 2019

Mumbai Indians and Kings XI Punjab will be battling it out in match number 24 of the Indian Premier League (IPL).

Both teams won their respective previous matches and it promises to be a tight affair.

MI's bowlers will aim to come heavy on KXIP batsmen.

Fans, who are playing Dream11, will be looking to pick the winning team.

Here we decode the same.

KL Rahul leads a solid batting line-up

Batting

KXIP star KL Rahul has been performing well with the bat.

The wicket-keeper batsman is our choice as the captain of this Dream11 side.

He will be joined by Rohit Sharma at the top.

Rohit has the credentials to deliver the goods against any line-up.

In-form Mayank Agarwal lends stability.

The team gets support from Suryakumar Yadav and Kieron Pollard as the middle-order batsmen.

Pandya the go to man in all-round department

All-rounders

Hardik Pandya is quite the act when it comes to delivering during pivotal moments.

An able hand, who is well equipped in all three departments, Pandya is a genuine asset. He is the vice-captain of this side.

R Ashwin has given a solid account of himself for KXIP.

The senior spinner is also joined by the powerful Sam Curran in this department.

A look at the bowling unit

Bowling

Experienced Jasprit Bumrah has hardly stepped a foot wrong in IPL 12. His value at the death can be decisive for MI.

Bumrah will be supported by youngster Alzarri Joseph.

The West Indian picked up six wickets on debut against SRH in MI's previous game.

Joseph could have a sound impact with his pace and variety.

Spinner Mujeeb Ur Rahman adds crucial support.

Predicted starting XI and possible winners

Prediction

Predicted XI for MI: Rohit (captain), Quinton de Kock (wicket-keeper), Kishan, Suryakumar, Pollard, Hardik, Krunal, Markande, Bumrah, Behrendorff and Joseph.

Predicted XI for KXIP: Gayle, Rahul (wicket-keeper), Mayank, Sarfaraz, Miller, Mandeep, Curran, Ashwin (captain), Shami, Mujeeb and Rajpoot.

There is little to separate the two sides at the moment.

But with home advantage and a solid bowling attack, MI could win.
