BJP rejected Omar's request for CM in 2014: Sajad

BJP rejected Omar's request for CM in 2014: Sajad

SRINAGAR, Apr 9: Peoples Conference chairman Sajad Gani Lone today said National Conference leader Omar Abdullah met the top BJP leadership after the 2014 assembly elections and sought their support to become the chief minister. However, BJP rejected his request.

Sajad was addressing a gathering at Handwara. “Omar Abdullah, after the 2014 polls, met the top BJP leadership for more than two and half hours in a high rise building at Connaught Place and sought support from them to form the government. The deal that he had offered to them was for a rotational chief minister wherein he would be the chief minister for three years and the BJP would have their chief minister from Jammu for three years. However, the deal was rejected by the top BJP leadership,” the PC chairman said.

Sajad said that Omar, who has been beating everyone with the BJP stick, is in in fact a BJP reject. "Let him rebut what we are saying. Omar has been accusing every political opponent of being close to the BJP. May I ask Omar that if he is so ideologically opposed to the BJP, then why did he meet their top leadership for more than two and a half hours? Why did he beg for their support to become the chief minister? He was so desperate for their support that he was even willing to accept a Jammu’s CM for three years. However, his offer was rejected by the BJP leadership after which he has been beating everyone with the BJP stick. Had the BJP accepted his offer, he would have whole-heartedly accepted the BJP and their demand for chief minister from Jammu," Sajad said.

Referring to history, the PC leader said Sheikh Abdullah had gone to UN in his capacity as the chief Executive of the Maharaja and to which Pakistan had objected. They termed him as an employee of the Maharaja. "It is during that regime that the massacre of the Muslims took place in Jammu. In 1975, the Sheikh bartered away the post of prime minister and took oath as chief minister. In 1987, Farooq Abdullah rigged the polls and pushed Kashmir into a state of violence which shows no sign of abating and devours Kashmiri on a daily basis. The Kashmiris rose in revolt in 1989 and took up the gun. As the Kashmiris rose in revolt, thousands were killed, and mainstream political activity came to a halt,” he added.

Sajad further said that no Kashmiri party was willing to contest polls until the Indian state offered some political deal to the Kashmiris but Farooq Abdullah sabotaged any such possibility.

“Narasimha Rao as prime minister in trying to end the conflict made a speech prior to 1996 elections saying sky is the limit’ in terms of political concessions that the Indian state could offer to the Kashmiri people. It was a clear hint at offering internal autonomy. Farooq Abdullah starved of power yet again moved in sabotaged any such possibility. He cut a deal agreeing to contest in return for government on a platter. In what was more of a selection than election the NC was again handed over power through a theatrical election bereft of electors. He literally took on the role of a military administrator and some of the cruelest days that the Kashmiris endured were during his tenure in 1996-2002,” Sajad said.

He alleged that Farooq Abdullah scuttled talks between government of India and the Hizbul Mujhaideen in 2001.
