Lok Sabha elections: Parties go shrill with war talk

BENGALURU: Pakistan figures prominently in election rhetoric in Karnataka and the three major political parties have indiscriminately spoken of war with the neighbouring country. The discourse hit a low when chief minister HD Kumaraswamy suggested he was not surprised by the terrorist attack in Pulwama since he has been tipped off by a former Army officer that an attack like it would happen just before elections.

Kumaraswamy was alluding to BJP machinations to foment nationalist sentiment during elections, but state BJP leaders pounced on the Kumaraswamy’s comments and turned the issue into one of national security.

“If he had advance information on the attack, Kumaraswamy’s responsibility was to alert authorities,” said senior BJP leader Jagadish Shettar. “By keeping quiet, he is now a culprit and should be booked.”

Kumaraswamy alleged BJP leaders were twisting his statement “to mislead people”. “In fact, what I knew was that Modi was up to some gimmick related to war against Pakistan just before the election,” he told TOI.

But the rhetoric over war has been shrill. Congress leaders reminded voters about the 1971 war where India, under Indira Gandhi, crushed Pakistan. They pointed out that Indian armed forces took about 90,000 Pakistanis prisoners apart from getting the Pakistani army to sign a surrender pact.

“Modi has nothing to say about his government’s achievements, so he is talking about war against Pakistan and surgical strikes,” said Siddaramaiah, Congress legislature party leader and former chief minister. “But the fact is India defeated Pakistan hands down under Congress rule.”

JD(S) state president H Vishwanath even sought to remind people that it was BJP stalwart Atal Bihari Vajpayee who called Indira Gandhi Maa Durga after the 1971 war.

“BJP leaders think public memory is short, but the more they talk about Pulwama, the more they will help people remember the victorious wars against Pakistan,” Vishwanath said.

But BJP leaders say they will continue to talk about the surgical strikes. “What the nation needs is strong leadership,” said senior BJP leader CT Ravi. “The Balakot air strike shows Modi is a fearless leader.”

Analysts say the euphoria created in four (1947, 1965, 1971 and 1999) war victories against Pakistan helped people bond and this has become an easy tool for politicians to consolidate votes.

“Issues of national security and war euphoria are being used like never before. This is because rival parties kept it alive by their aggressive reaction to the BJP’s rhetoric,” said a political tracker MB Adinarayana.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
