10-year-old murder cracked, 4 held

VADODARA: Nearly a decade after they murdered an old woman, five persons including the deceased’s daughter-in-law were arrested by the prevention of crime branch near Darbar Chowkdi in Manjalpur on Tuesday.According to the police, the prime accused Anu Tibetan admitted to her role in the murder of her mother-in-law Kesarbai who was murdered by her paramour Dinesh Sharma and his aides in June 2009. Anu said she had decided to bump off Kesaribai as she was trying to force her two young daughters into prostitution.“Anu had married Pembasingh and used to stay with him in Pune. The couple then shifted to the city as Anu developed differences with Kesarbai over financial issues. Anu told us that Kesarbai used to run prostitution racket in Pune. Anu then started a Chinese food stall near Kirti Stambh ,” said R C Kanamiya, police inspector, PCB.However, after 2002 post-Godhra communal riots, they shifted to Pune again. But Pembasingh got alcoholic and started an affair with another woman. Anu then returned to the city with her two daughters around 12 years ago. She then got into relationship with Dinesh Sharma who used to work at a near-by food stall.“However, Kesarbai sold off her property in Pune and came to stay with Anu. Anu told us that Kesarbai began influencing her daughters and insisted that they too start prostitution. This enraged Anu,” Kanamiya told TOI.Kesarbai told Anu that she had got Rs 20 lakh from the property she sold in Pune. “Kesarbai told Anu that if she doesn’t allow her daughters in prostitution, she would shift back to Pune and not give her any money. Anu then decided to bump off Kesarbai,” Kanamiya added.Anu sought help of Sharma and offered him Rs two lakh to murder Kesarbai. Sharma in turn roped in his four other friends.Along with Anu and Sharma, police arrested Mukhes Kahar and Kishore Kahar, while Vijay Patel and Paresh Parmar were also involved in the crime. While Vijay committed suicide due to domestic problems in the city about eight months ago, Parmar is in Vadodara Central Jail in connection with another case and will be arrested soon. Sharma is now married to another woman.Even though Kesaribai’s body was found in Waghodia , police could not crack the case for so many years despite questioning Anu.About a month ago, PCB received a tip-off about their involvement from a person whom Anu had earlier contacted to bump off her mother-in-law. However, he had refused to help her then.“We kept watch on the movements of the accused for a one month before nabbing them,” the police added.
