‘Radio messages during Bombay riots 150 times more than normal’

Suleman Usman Bakery case

Mumbai riots

State Reserve Police Force

Umerkhadi and Kamathipura

Says wireless operator who identified the messages from a log book produced in court; witnesses not examined on second day due to lack of functioning tape recorder.Dilip Nikale, retired assistant sub-inspector, became the second witness to complete his testimony in the 18-year-oldon Tuesday. Nikale was wireless operator in the Police Control Room in January 1993. Seven policemen are facing trial for the murder of eight unarmed inmates of the bakery and adjacent madarsa during a police raid that took place on January 9, 1993. The second phase of thethat followed the demolition of the Babri Masjid was then on.Nikale told the court that he had written down messages received in the control room on January 9, 1993, from 11.54 am to 1.16 pm, in the log book. He identified these messages from the log book which was produced in court. Defence counsel Shrikant Shivade read out messages from Pydhonie I mobile to the control room received at 12.31 pm and 12.52 pm on that day. Both messages said the public was firing on the police from the bakery. At 12.34 pm, a message was sent that theshould be sent if available. Nikale confirmed that he had written these messages.Unable to locate one more message about firing from the bakery that Shivade alleged had been sent, Nikale agreed with him that may be a message was sent but no entry was made due to the workload. Shivade also read out messages pertaining to public firing on the police induring that time, which had been written by Nikale.Nikale agreed that several messages were received to the effect that people were firing at the police on duty during that period from that area, and that the messages showed that the situation was quite critical and unprecedented.He also agreed that during the riots, his workload had increased as the messages received were 100-150 times more than those received regularly, and wireless operators were under constant pressure to communicate these messages to their superiors.He also agreed that the messages were not recorded word for word, but their gist was written. However, if a message was not clearly audible, the wireless operators could ask for it to be repeated.Two witnesses present in court, including one who had come from Kolhapur and was to have been examined on Monday, could not be examined on Tuesday for want of a functioning tape recorder to play the audio cassettes containing these wireless messages.Last year, the hunt for a functioning tape recorder had stalled the proceedings for almost two months. After it was traced, one cassette was played and heard by the Registrar in the presence of the police, the defence lawyers and the PP.
