Dedicate vote to airstrike men: PM to first-time voters

shalender@tribune.com

Shiv Kumar

Tribune News Service

Mumbai, April 9

Addressing a joint rally with Shiv Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray in drought-hit Latur today, Prime Minister Narendra Modi played the Pakistan card.

“I want to tell the first-time voters to dedicate their votes to the brave jawans who carried out the air strikes in Pakistan. Will you dedicate your first vote to the martyrs who lost their lives in Pulwama?” Modi asked the audience.

He then went on to blame the Congress for the creation of Pakistan. “Pakistan would not have been born if the Congress had done the right thing at the time of Independence,” Modi said. He further accused the party of behaving in the same way in present times as well. “The Congress manifesto speaks the language of Pakistan... Today the Congress and the NCP are standing with people who want a separate PM in J&K,” Modi said.

The PM said unlike the Congress, which was “questioning the valour of our forces”, in BJP’s “new India”, terrorists would be killed in their hideouts. The PM also accused the Congress of working against national interests by working towards fulfilling Pakistan’s agenda. “The Congress wants to do away with laws against sedition. This is exactly what Pakistan wants. Can you trust these people?” the PM asked.

Modi also used the occasion to praise Shiv Sena founder Bal Thackeray. Calling Uddhav his younger brother, Modi thanked Bal Thackeray for not occupying the Chief Minister’s chair. “Parties like the Congress which believe in dynastic rule should learn from Balasaheb,” Modi said. He then went on to remind the voters that the government provided water to farmers and provided healthcare to all under the Ayushman Bharat scheme.

Accusing the Congress of corruption, Modi said the authorities were recovering stashed currency notes from the houses of its party’s leaders. “The party’s candidates are buying votes. This is their culture.”

EC seeks report on PM’s Remarks

The EC has taken cognisance of PM Modi’s remarks asking first-time voters to dedicate their vote to those who carried out the airstrike and sought a report from poll officials in Maharashtra. Sources said the chief electoral officer has been asked to submit a report at the earliest.

Deal PAK a Severe blow: Sena chief
