Left hates Indian culture, Modi raps Sabarimala stand

Taking the fight to his enemies’ camps on Tuesday, Prime Minister Narendra Modi warned both the LDF and the UDF that the day is not far off when the BJP would unseat them and win power in Kerala. Addressing a huge NDA rally at the historical Cantonment Grounds at Kollam, Prime Minister Modi lambasted the CPI(M)-led LDF as well as the Congress-led UDF for their stance on the Sabarimala Temple issue.

“The entire nation is speaking about Sabarimala. The blunders of the CPI(M) would go down in history as the most shameful act. The CPI(M) speaks about gender justice while they behaved in the most shameful and inhumane manner at Sabarimala Temple. Why did they oppose in Parliament the Bill banning triple talaq if they have concern for gender justice and welfare of women?” asked the Prime Minister.

Modi also said the Communists are known for their hatred to Indian history, culture and spirituality; the Congress is also no different in this issue.

“The BJP is the only political party which believes and works for the all-inclusive growth of the population,” Modi added.

He said the Congress is notorious for its double standard as well as hypocrisy. “What is their stance on Sabarimala? They speak something in Parliament only to contradict the same the next day outside the House. The LDF and the UDF are the two sides of the same coin. They are the ones who strengthened casteism, communalism and corruption in the country,” Modi said, and listed the achievements made by the country under the NDA regime during the last four and a half years.

The Prime Minister pointed out that Kollam, which was once famous for its cashew nut industry, is suffering because the Governments led by the UDF or the LDF did nothing to revive and resuscitate the sector. He assured the people of Kollam in general and Kerala in particular that the BJP would soon emerge as the ruling party of the State.

“I know the karyakartas of the BJP are being assaulted, attacked and victimised by the LDF Government. I would like to remind the Communists and the Congress that if we could win over people in Tripura where we had no representation, Kerala is not far away. Our workers will overcome and win Kerala too,” said the Prime Minister.

Earlier, the Prime Minister dedicated to the nation the 13-km long two-way Kollam bypass built at a cost of Rs 352 crore which would bring down the travel time between Alappuzha and Thiruvananthapuram.

“The project conceived in 1972 could be finished only after the BJP-led NDA Government took charge in New Delhi and released funds for the speedy implementation of all infrastructure projects which were facing inordinate delay,” Modi added while inaugurating the bypass.

The PM took strong objection to the delay in the execution and completion of the infrastructure projects. “I came across 250 projects which have consumed Rs 12 lakh crore and yet remaining incomplete after decades. This is a serious crime because the common man is deprived of the fruits of development,” said Modi.

Vijaya Mohan Valiathan, a chartered accountant, staying near the bypass said the project got delayed because of land acquisition issues. “Two huge bridges, lack of funds, tendering delays, estimate revision requirement and of course Government red tape were the main reasons for the delay the project,” Valiathan said.
