Inbrief.

Punjab’s job fairs from Feb 13 to 22

Chandigarh: Punjab Government would hold the fourth phase of job fairs from February 13 to 22 across the state. The state Employment Generation and Technical Education Minister Charanjit Singh Channi, after presiding over a meeting with the additional deputy commissioners to review preparations for the same, said that the Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh would hand over appointment letters to selected candidates on February 28.

HP Guv extends greetings on Military Day

Shimla: Himachal Pradesh Governor Acharya Devvrat on Tuesday congratulated the military personnel of the country on Military Day. He said this Day was celebrated to pay homage to the brave soldiers who laid down their precious lives for the cause of the nation. He said that the entire nation would always remain indebted to them for their supreme sacrifices.

Soni assures full support to associations

Chandigarh: Delegations of various associations on Tuesday called on Punjab Education Minister OP Soni, who assured them fulsome support from the government, while maintaining that their all legitimate demands will be fulfilled soon.

HPKVN’s review meeting held

Shimla: Aimed at mobilization of prospect trainees and their placement, a review meeting of Himachal Pradesh Kaushal Vikas Nigam (HPKVN) was held on Tuesday. Nigam’s managing director Rohan Chand Thakur met the district coordinators and training service providers, and directed them to make a detailed plan about mobilization process.

188 Officers given selection letter

Mohali: Punjab Health and Family Welfare Department on Tuesday gave away selection letters to 188 Community Health Officers under various Health and Wellness Centres across the state. The letters were handed over to the selected candidates by Punjab Health System Corporation chairman Amardeep Singh Cheema and National Health Mission, Punjab’s mission director Amit Kumar. Cheema exhorted newly selected officers to work selflessly and compassionately in their areas, and act as ‘agent of change’ for better healthcare services.

Haryana CIA team nabs drug peddler

Chandigarh: Haryana Police’s Crime Investigation Agency (CIA) on Tuesday seized 900 gram doda post from a person in Kalanwali area in Sirsa district. Spokesperson said that arrested accused was identified as Gurpreet Singh alias Gopi, a resident of Mandi Kalanwali. The CIA team during patrolling in Mandi Kalanwali area spotted a suspicious person who tried to flee away after seeing the police, and immediately nabbed him. When searched, 900 gram doda post was recovered from his possession.

One lakh boxes of fake desi ghee seized

Chandigarh: In a late night raid in Model Town area of Chhehrta, Amritsar, Punjab food safety team seized nearly one lakh, apparently counterfeit, boxes of desi ghee in varying sizes of one kg, 500 grams and 200 grams bearing the label as Dairy Shine desi ghee along with huge quantity of adulterants for preparing spurious desi ghee.

Mayor honoured Ann Anand

Chandigarh: The city mayor Davesh Moudgil on Tuesday honoured the team of Ann Anand for Animals, lead by Panjab University’s Centre for Social Work Assistant Professor Dr Gaurav Gaur. The special honour was given to the team of three students — Hiteshi Arora, Ishita Choudhary and Nitika Saini — who are pursuing their masters in Social Work from the varsity.

10th PU Rose Fest Secretariat inaugurated

Chandigarh: The festival secretariat of tenth Panjab University Rose Festival, to be held from February 8 to 10, was inaugurated on Tuesday by varsity Registrar Prof Karamjeet Singh. The festival’s poster was also unveiled by the Registrar, who also had hands on experience of the working of the festival’s website — www.panjabuniversity rosefestival.in. Registrar appreciated the website, particularly the online registration for competitions and efforts of the Organising Committee.

Special lecture held on Army Day

Chandigarh: Panjab University’s Department of Defence and National Security Studies on Tuesday organised a special lecture by Major General Amarjit Singh on the occasion of Army Day.
