Indian Fashion Guru Sabyasachi selects Seychelles as backdrop for his first ever destination wedding collection

The beauty of Seychelles is once again at the center of a media buzz as India’s distinguished Mr. Sabyasachi Mukherjee, publicized photos of the recent photo shoot conducted in the exotic destination for his first ever destination wedding collection.

The project initiated by the prestigious magazine Condé Nast Traveller, India for their April issue cover photo shoot, was executed in partnership with the Seychelles Tourism Board Office (STB).

Seychelles appeared grandiose in an enchanting white wedding setup featuring Miss World 2017 Ms. Manushi Chhillar, her handsome groom and the bride’s tribe all dressed and styled by Sabyasachi.

The photo shoot, which was conducted on gorgeous untouched beaches of the luxurious Four Seasons Resort Seychelles at Private Resort of Desroches Island, collaborating alongside STB for the event.

Seychelles crowns itself as an ideal wedding destination with its captivating beaches and sumptuous natural beauty providing breathtaking venue options for celebration of all special occasions including luxurious destination wedding that would evoke all kinds of Instagram goals similar to this photo shoot.

The destination, not only provided a perfect backdrop to the auspicious event, but was also an opportunity for local talent to be exposed to the international fashion scene.

Speaking on the collaboration on the project, STB Chief Executive, Mrs. Sherin Francis stated the commitment of the STB for Seychelles to remain a well-known wedding and honeymoon destination on the Indian market.

She indicated that collaboration with prestigious partners as the magazine Condé Nast Traveller, India accentuates the destinations presence on the desired platforms and beyond.

“For Seychelles Tourism Board, this collaboration was not only a media project but also a chance to showcase the destinations offerings to some very influential personalities. Partnering with flag bearers of the magazine world and the fashion fraternity in India was indeed an exhilarating experience. Condé Nast Traveller India has carved a niche among the readers and to be featured on the cover of their main magazine along with the special edition- The Destination Wedding Guide; both in the same month speak volumes of the beauty of the destination. Seychelles is amongst the top scenic locations for hosting celebrations. It is a privilege for us to have worked alongside the private island-resorts, Four Seasons Resort Seychelles at Desroches Island, which highlights evidently the best mix of luxury, and privacy that the destination can offer. We are extremely delighted by this collaboration and ready to welcome celebrations from India”, said Ms. Sherin Francis.

Talking about the collaboration, Ms. Divia Thani, Editor, Condé Nast Traveller India says, “The big fat Indian wedding is quickly becoming the intimate, chic, destination wedding. A few years ago, destination weddings were a novelty, but the Indian destination wedding market is booming, as couples are looking for more unique, personal and lavish ways to celebrate their once-in-a-lifetime occasion. Condé Nast Traveller’s annual Destination Wedding Guide 2019 is an exciting and one-of-a-kind collaboration between CNT, Sabyasachi Mukherjee and Seychelles Tourism, all to reveal Sabyasachi’s Destination Wedding/Resort edit and to introduce Seychelles as the perfect, beautiful place to celebrate special occasions. Get the April-May issue of Condé Nast Traveller India for the ultimate guide to Destination Weddings. See the top 10 wedding trends that will rule 2019, plus all the best places to tie the knot, whatever your style, and loads of ideas and inspiration!”

Mr. Sabyasachi Mukherjee, one of the leading designers and a trend setter for millions in India was not only wowed by the destination’s untouched beauty but also found its proximity to India extremely alluring and further added, “A big collaboration is always about having the right people and with Condé Nast Traveller India and Seychelles, all the elements came together to make this possible. The shoot was the perfect mélange of Condé Nast Traveller India’s vision, the pristine beauty of Seychelles, the uber luxe Four Seasons Resort and the beautiful Manushi Chhillar. It has captured the best of a destination wedding as it is very aspirational but does not have the big trappings of being over commercial at the same time. As destination weddings become a very important part of Indian wedding industry, I hope this shoot inspires people to create beautiful weddings which are luxurious yet soulful and intimate.
