Lt Gen Hooda backs limited military action against Pak terror groups

harinder@tribunemail.com

Aditi Tandon

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, April 9

Lt Gen DS Hooda (retd), who was Northern Army Commander during the 2016 surgical strikes across the LoC, has backed limited military action against Pakistan-based terror groups.

He has said that India must keep building global pressure on Pakistan to see that it desists from supporting terrorists.

In the “India’s National Security Strategy” document submitted to Congress president Rahul Gandhi recently, Lt Gen Hooda warned against growing radicalisation of youth in Jammu and Kashmir and said contentious issues (read abrogation of Articles 370 and 35-A of the Constitution) be kept on the backburner till political consensus is evolved.

The document, commissioned by Rahul Gandhi, is silent on the review of the Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) – something the Congress 2019 Lok Sabha manifesto promises.

Submitted post IAF strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot in the wake of the Pulwama terror attack, the report endorses limited military action against Pakistan when needed and says, “When required, India must be prepared for unilateral, limited military actions against terror groups in Pakistan.”

Lt Gen Hooda, while taking note of the fact that Pakistan’s attempts to bring India to the negotiating table by destabilising Kashmir had failed, adds, “The events following the Pulwama bombing have established new redlines in India’s response to terror flowing from Pakistan. The international support to India’s airstrikes at Balakot have also reinforced our policy on cross-border operations.

“However, there is also no doubt that military actions carry the risk of escalation and this needs to be factored into our future plans. There is a need to have a long-term strategy to build consistent pressure on Pakistan to desist from supporting terror. When required, India must also be prepared for unilateral, limited military actions against terror groups in Pakistan.”

The report defines national security as all encompassing and says true security can’t be achieved if large sections of Indians are faced with discrimination and inequality.

On Pakistan, Lt Gen Hooda says while India must not rule out dialogue, talks must progress only on the basis of visible results.

The former General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of the Army’s Northern Command, Lt Gen Hooda, warns against growing recruitment of J&K youth into terrorist ranks and says India should draft a policy of surrender and rehabilitation to check this trend. Importantly, Lt Gen Hooda calls on the government to solve the outstanding problem of the displaced Kashmiri Pandit community.
