Water gushes out after pipe breach near Tallah bridge

KOLKATA: Water woes in the city seems to refuse to end, with a water pipe running under BT Road near Tallah bridge springing a leak on Tuesday, leading to water gushing out onto the road. A team of engineers from the KMC headquarters as well as the Tallah water pumping station reached the spot but failed to trace the point of the breach Even as water continued to flow out, the KMC asked the police to divert the traffic on the stretch so that civic officials could cordon off the area and search for the possible leak point. A delay in detecting the breach and the subsequent repair could lead to water crisis in parts of north and central Kolkata, felt a civic official. “We need to detect the leak fast and repair it to prevent wastage of water. If we fail to repair the breach in time, residents in parts of north and central Kolkata may experience shortage in water supply,” said a KMC water supply department official.According to the cvic department official, the task was challenging as several water mains ran under B T Road carrying filtered water from the Palta water treatment plant to Tallah water reservoir and pumping stations. Despite best of efforts, the KMC water supply team could not trace the breach point till late on Tuesday night. “It is a challenging job. We need to go deep down the earth and find the origin of the leakage that may have sprung on any of the multiple pipelines running parallel below B T Road. We have decided to dig a trench on Wednesday and climb down to find the leak,” said a KMC water supply department official.A senior KMC water supply department official pointed out that at least five metres below the ground, four major pipelines—one with a diameter of 72 inch, one with 62 inch, one 60 inch and the fourth with a 48-inch diameter—carry filtered water from the Palta waterworks to Tallah water reservoir. “We have to carry out a detailed study to find the breach. We need to climb down below the ground and examine each of the pipelines running parallel,” said the official.The BT Road breach comes days after the KMC’s unsuccessful attempt at repairing a water main under the Cossipore railway tracks.
