India not in position to attack Pakistan: Rehman Malik

ISLAMABAD: Former interior minister and Chairman Senate’s Committee on Interior Senator Abdul Rehman Malik Tuesday said India was not in position to attack on Pakistan in the context of regional, national and global scenario.

“Following the Pulwama incident, the issue of Kashmir was highlighted internationally and the world acknowledged the fact that a use of force is not solution of any problem but the issues could only be resolve through dialogue and New Delhi has to come on table for the dialogue,” he said while talking to the News and Jang here on Tuesday.

Senator Abdul Rehman Malik said the whole nation united against India with full force and India even failed to create any “Brigade of traitors’ like they created in 1970 in the shape of “Mukhti Bahini”. “Another reason was that Pakistan was playing a role of facilitator for the mediation between the United States and Taliban and Washington did not want disturbance in the process of dialogue with Taliban.

He said China has made a huge investment in the region in the shape of China Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) and China did not allow India to roll back the CPEC. “Even the Russia has also asked India in clear terms to avoid create tensions in the region,” he said.

Senator Abdul Rehman Malik the war hysteria policy of Indian Prime Minter Narendra Modi has completely failed in India as the people of India also opposed the war hysteria policies of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. “If India has made any new move of aggression against Pakistan then Indian opposition and people will not accept it,” he said, adding that the Indian PM missed the bus and now Modi could not think of any aggression against Pakistan. However, he said it was an old habit of RSS and RAW to use anti-Pakistan emotions in India as a weapon in the elections in India. “Though there were concerns that India could use the anti-Pakistan sentiments in the upcoming elections in India yet we feel that elections are necessary in India for the peace in the region,” he said.

Senator Abdul Rehman Malik said Pakistan always stood for peace and have a firm belief that the issues could not be resolved through use of force but only through dialogue process.
