Thakur firm on Anil Sharma campaigning for party in Mandi

editorial@tribune.com

Lalit Mohan

Tribune News Service

Jaisinghpur, April 9

“Anil Sharma will have to campaign for BJP in Mandi if he wants to stay in party,” said Chief Minister Jai Ram Thakur. The Chief Minister reacted when asked to comment about Anil Sharma’s recent statement that it was for the Chief Minister to take action against him.

“Anil Sharma cannot continue like this and I would take action against him if he fails to campaign for party. However, I want Anil Sharma to himself clarify his position”, the Chief Minister said.

This is for the first time that the Chief Minister has hinted that he might take action against Anil Sharma for not campaigning for BJP in Mandi where his son Ashray Sharma is contesting as a Congress candidate.

Ever since his father Sukh Ram and son Ashray Sharma have joined the Congress and the latter has been declared a Congress candidate from Mandi, Anil Sharma has been in a fix. He has issued statements that he would not campaign against his son but can campaign for the BJP in other parts of the state. However, his assertion has not go down well with the BJP leaders in the state.

Sources here said that in case Anil Sharma himself resigns from the BJP, anti-defection law could be invoked against him and he may have to re-contest as an MLA. However, if the BJP ousts him from party Anil Sharma can continue as an MLA.

The Chief Minister, when asked about social media post of Congress MLA and former CM Virbhadra Singh’s son Vikramaditya that ED or income tax might conduct raids on his family, said that the cases against Virbhadra Singh and his family have been going on for the past several years.

The Chief Minister today campaigned for party candidate from Kangra parliamentary constituency Kishan Kapoor in Jaisinghpur and Palampur Assembly constituencies.

While addressing a public rally at Jaisinghpur, the Chief Minister praised Prime Minister Narendra Modi for surgical strikes. The previous UPA government, he said, resorted to just writing letters to Pakistan as it happened after the Mumbai attacks. However, now Pakistan knows that India might take fight to its territories in case proxy war was carried out against India, the CM said.

Former CM Shanta Kumar, while speaking on the occasion, said that the present NDA government had started so many schemes for the poor in the country. He urged people to vote Modi back to power so that the good work carried out by the present NDA government could be continued. Kishan Kapoor, the BJP candidate, said that he was seeking votes to strengthen the hands of Narendra Modi and re-elect him as the Prime Minister of the country.
