“Is Pakistan funding BJP’s elections through anonymous electoral bonds?” How BJP faced ridicule on social media

Hours after Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan supported Narendra Modi’s return as India’s prime minister after this year’s parliamentary polls, the BJP’s political rivals have begun questioning its alleged secret nexus with the neighbouring country.

The Pakistani PM, according to news agency Reuters, had said that Modi’s return as India’s prime minister will be a good news for Indo-Pak relations. No sooner did the Indian media outlets report on Khan’s comments batting for Modi, but critics of the saffron party also began to question the Indian prime minister’s secret deal with Pakistan.

Congress leader Randeep Singh Surjewala wrote on Twitter, “Pak has officially allied with Modi! A vote for Modi is a vote for Pakistan!” Another Congress spokesperson Sanjay Jha tweeted, “Imran Khan exposes the secret love story.”

Priyanka Chaturvedi of Congress wrote, “Two important developments which show why chowkidaar is a Chor and also how his carefully nurtured friendship with Pakistan is getting him Pak PM Imran Khan’s support. Imran Khan joins BJP’s # MainBhiChowkidar campaign.”

Two important developments which show why chowkidaar is a Chor and also how his carefully nurtured friendship with Pakistan is getting him Pak PM Imran Khan’s support. Imran Khan joins BJP’s #MainBhiChowkidar campaign. pic.twitter.com/VuhoIxO4Zj — Priyanka Chaturvedi (@priyankac19) April 10, 2019

Comedy group Aisi Taisi Democracy asked if Pakistan was funding the BJP’s election campaign. It wrote on the microblogging site, “Imran Khan says he wants NaMo to be PM again. Is Pakistan funding BJP through anonymous electoral bonds too?”

Journalists on social media too were seen mocking the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Journalist Rohini Singh wrote, “Tough day for IT cell and media panna pramukhs today on the pet themes of Pakistan & national security. First Imran Khan’s endorsement of Modi and now the SC decision on Rafale. The government should quickly organise another IT raid on some opposition leader to divert attention!”

Veteran journalist Nikhil Waghle concluded, “Imran’s statement raises doubts about Pulwama terror attack. Farukh Abdulla recently pointed out lapses in It. Did Modi Sarkar ‘allow’ the attack to take place? Why no investigation on lapses? (sic)”

India goes to polls in seven phases, starting tomorrow (11 April). The counting will take place on 23 May.
