Noida building collapse: Contractor, son arrested

A 59-year-old contractor and his 26-year-old son were arrested on Tuesday evening in connection with the collapse of the canopy of a building undergoing demolition in Nithari village of Noida on Monday evening which resulted in the death of a ten-year-old boy.

Police said Luv Subba, a native of Darjeeling, was killed in the incident that also led to three people getting hurt, including two girls who were admitted to Noida Medical Centre. According to officials, the three-storey building known as 90 Quarters was being demolished in order to build a new one. During the demolition, a part of the second storey fell onto the first-floor canopy which collapsed onto the street below, thereby trapping the passersby under the rubble around 4 pm on Monday. NDRF was roped to carry out the rescue operation, which continued till 10 pm.

A case has been registered at the Sector-20 police station based on the complaint given by Luv's aunt against the owner of the house, Vijendra Awana, the contractor and his son who was also working at the site under sections 288 (negligent conduct with respect to pulling down or repairing buildings) and 304A (culpable homicide) of the IPC.

"The Ghaziabad-based contractor, Moinuddin, and his son Sonu were arrested from near the Nithari T-junction at 4 pm on Tuesday evening. The owner, however, is absconding at the moment and we are on the lookout for him. His house is locked but we hope to nab him soon," said Manoj Kumar Pant, station house officer, Sector-20 police station.

According to locals, the street where the incident occurred is one of the busiest ones. The debris has now been cleared, said cops. The body of Luv was handed over to the family after the autopsy. His family may go back to Darjeeling for the last rites, said the police.

While one of the injured, Shakeel (12), was discharged on Monday after administering the first aid, the girls, Barkha Sharma and Sonali Yadav, are still undergoing treatment.

"They both have multiple fractures. Sonali will undergo surgery tomorrow while Barkha has a fractured hip bone for which she will be taken to a private hospital in Delhi. She also has a few internal injuries. But they are both responding to the treatment now. We have been assured that their treatment will be free of cost," said Ajay Sharma, Barkha's father who works as a tailor in Nithari village.
