India News: Politician Bhima Mandavi killed in suspected maoist bomb attack

Five people, including a local politician from the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), were killed in a bomb attack in central India yesterday, according to police.

The deceased politician, Bhima Mandavi, a state legislator from the Chhattisgarh state legislative assembly, was returning from an election rally when his convoy came under attack in Dantewada district of the central Indian state of Chhattisgarh.

Local police suspect Maoist rebels are behind the deadly attack.

Maoist rebels attacked a convoy of India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party with an improvised explosive device as it traveled through the central Indian state of Chhattisgarh, killing a state party lawmaker and four others in his vehicle, police said. (AP/AAP)

The other four who died were security personnel accompanying the politician, assistant superintendent of police Chandramohan Singh told CNN.

"There were three vehicles in the convoy. It was an IED attack followed by an ambush," Mr Singh added.

Politician Bhima Mandavi was killed along with four of his staff when an IED was detonated on their vehicle as they left an election rally in Chhattisgarh. (Bharatiya Janata Party)

Locals have taken to the streets over ongoing election issues as rebels target politicians and their staff. (AP/AAP)

India Prime Minister and leader of the BJP party, Narendra Modi tweeted: "Strongly condemn the Maoist attack in Chhattisgarh. My tributes to the security personnel who were martyred."

"The sacrifices of these martyrs will not go in vain. Shri Bhima Mandavi was a dedicated Karyakarta of the BJP. Diligent and courageous, he assiduously served the people of Chhattisgarh.

"His demise is deeply anguishing. Condolences to his family and supporters. Om Shanti."

The explosion comes as the world’s biggest democracy goes to the polls.

India's general election will be held over seven phases that will begin tomorrow and run until May 19.

More than 900 million voters expected to cast their votes at a million polling stations.
