India election 2019: Narendra Modi crisis as voter fury sees Prime Minister slide in poll

Donald Trump meets Prime Minister Modi in 2017

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The firebrand leader’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) party is preparing for the India’s national elections tomorrow. But as the Prime Minister begins to rally his nationalist supporters, new polls show predict his BJP alliance will just win a parliamentary majority. The latest figures show a sharp drop from his commanding mandate five years ago, when he vowed to turn India into an economic and military power. But following his promises, Mr Modi has seen a range of social issues plague his premiership, including low incomes for farmers and the Government’s inability to create over a million jobs per month.

Discontent in the world’s fastest growing economy is rising due to farmers being unpaid for produce and small businesses closing down for being unable to meet requirements of a steep national tax. Hindu nationalism expert and Modi biographer Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay said: “The election has become a lot closer than we think, sitting in Delhi. "There is anger and disillusionment in the countryside." In December, alarm bells rang for Modi's Hindu nationalist party after it lost three key states to the main opposition Congress and its allies, led by election hopeful Rahul Gandhi.

India elections 2019: Modi's race for leadership is looking tight thanks to socio-economic problems

But despite the mounting socio-economic problems, Modi’s popularity has risen due to a surge in tension with arch enemy Pakistan over the Kashmiri border. The Prime Minister has presented himself as a defender of national security, painting his rivals as weak and unpatriotic as he makes advances on the disputed border-territory which is shared with the neighbouring rival country. Modi ordered air strikes on a suspected camp of a militant group in Pakistan after it claimed responsibility for a deadly bombing in Indian Kashmir. It was the first raid since the neighbours' last war in 1971. On Tuesday, police said a regional leader of a Hindu group linked to the BJP and his bodyguard were killed by gunmen who burst into a hospital in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir, underscoring the BJP's concern over security in the region.

Militants fighting Indian rule in Muslim-majority Kashmir have warned people not to vote on Thursday. The BJP was also targeted in the eastern state of Chhattisgarh, when a bomb set off by left-wing militants killed a regional party legislator and another four people. Meanwhile, Pakistan prime minister Imran Khan branded India’s leaders as “morally bankrupt” for vowing to annex Kashmir just days before voting begins in the general election. Shiv Chandra Rai, an Uber driver in Mumbai, said: "People were very unhappy, angry that Modi makes tall promises and doesn't deliver.

India elections 2019: The country goes to the polls on Thursday - but Modi faces stiff competition

India elections 2019: The elections will happen over six weeks - but the BJP's popularity has fallen
