Rajinikanth begins shooting for Darbar in Mumbai with a puja [PHOTO]

Rajinikanth begins shooting for Darbar with a Puja in Mumbai | Photo Credit: Twitter

Rajinikanth is all set to begin shoot for his next, Darbar. The actor landed in Mumbai yesterday to shoot a portion of the film in the city. The cast and crew of the AR Murugadoss film will begin shooting today and they did so with a puja on the sets of the film. Lyca Productions, who are producing the film, posted photos on Twitter from the puja. The makers had also released the poster and first look of the film which promises a massy entertainer. Rajinikanth will be playing a cop in the film and will playing the role of a police officer after 25 years. The last film that he played a cop in was Pandiyan.

AR Murugadoss will be directed the actor and has also roped in Nayanthara to play the female lead in Darbar. A lot hasn’t been revealed about the story or the plot of the film but we do know that it’s going to be grand. Thalaiva has been associated with the production company for a lot of films earlier, including 2.0 and Enthiran. Rajinikanth and Nayanthara will also come together in this film after Chandramukhi. Their last two films clashed with each other and Nayanthara’s Viswasam emerged a winner over Petta. It would be great to see these two back on the big screens together after such a long time.

Check out these photos from the puja right here.

#DARBAR Shoot begins today with a formal POOJA at Mumbai@rajinikanth @ARMurugadoss #Nayanthara @anirudhofficial @santoshsivan @sreekar_prasad #TSantanam @Lyricist_Vivek#IdhuThalaivarinDarbar pic.twitter.com/cMoX1DR5ey — Lyca Productions (@LycaProductions) April 10, 2019

Darbar is scheduled to release during Pongal 2020. Considering the fact that Pongal releases have worked well for both the actors recently, we are pretty sure Darbar will also be a smashing hit at the box office. Nayanthara’s last film, Airaa, won her a lot of praises but the film didn’t fare too well at the box office. She will also be seen romancing Vijay in Thalapathy 63. Stay tuned with us for more updates.
