Uttar Pradesh: 19-year-old arrested for raping, killing minor in Ghaziabad

He also dumped her body and it was spotted on Sunday at around 10 am. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Lucknow: In a case reported from Uttar Pradesh, a 19-year-old youth was arrested for allegedly raping and killing a five-year-old girl in Muradnagar district. The arrest was made two days after her body was found at a farmhouse in the area. The police officials added that the accused and the victim were well known to each other as both of them lived in the same locality.

According to the Times of India (TOI), the accused was identified as Mahajan who was originally from Barabanki. The accused lured the girl to the nearby farmhouse while she was playing outside her house along with her two sisters and a brother. The police officials told TOI that Mahajan had forced himself on the girl and then strangled her to death fearing she would easily identify him.

Meanwhile, the girl's father told TOI that along with his wife he had gone to meet his relative around 10 am on Saturday and he left his four children at home. But when they returned home, they could not find their daughter and began searching for her.

On Saturday night they lodged a police complaint and the next day the police informed them about her death. The police officials had suspected Mahajan, a rickshaw puller, while interrogating the detained suspects.

However, on Tuesday, the police arrested Mahajan and he was questioned again. Neeraj Kumar Jadaun, Superintendent, Ghaziabad told TOI that the accused broke down while the police was questioning him. He added, the accused panicked after raping the victim and so he decided to kill her. He also dumped her body and it was spotted on Sunday at around 10 am.

The victim's autopsy revealed that she was sexually assaulted. Mahajan has been booked under sections 302, 201, 376, 377 of the Indian Penal Code and the provisions of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act. He was also produced in the court and has been sent to judicial custody for 14 days.
