Chirag Paswan: A promising next-generation leader of Lok Janshakti Party

Lok Janshakti Party leader Chirag Paswan | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: It was probably his political genes that made Chiraag Paswan choose the dust and grime of political life over the glamour and glitz of a Bollywood career. Yes, Chiraag Paswan -- the Miley Naa Miley Hum actor who is set to complete his first inning in politics (by completing his term as the Member of Parliament from Jamui) wasted no time in taking on the political mantle from his septuagenarian, politician father -- Ram Vilas Paswan.

Chirag, who made a thundering entry into politics by winning the Jamui Lok Sabha seat in 2014 general elections, is once again eyeing to repeat his previous feat from the same seat.

Family and personal life

Born on October 31, 1982, at Khagaria in Bihar, Chirag Paswan is the son of Lok Janshakti Party (LJP) president Ram Vilas Paswan and Reena Paswan. Chirag made his entry into the world of politics in 2014 general elections by defeating his RJD (Rashtriya Janata Dal ) rival Sudhansu Shekhar Bhaskar by the margin of over 85 thousand votes. In the polls, Chiraag got 2,85,354 votes

Chirag is following the footsteps of his father, the senior Mr Paswan ie. Ram Vilas Paswan - a veteran politician who first shot into the limelight in 1977 when he won the Hajipur Lok Sabha seat with the record margin of 4,24,545 votes. RV Paswan has served as the union minister heading various ministries since 1989 when for the first time took over the reins of the Ministry of Labour and Welfare under the government of Vishwanath Pratap Singh. Later, he served as the Union minister of Railways, Minister of Chemicals and Fertilizers, as a minister of Consumer Affairs, Food, and Public Distribution under various governments. The son has big shoes to fill if he has decided to toe daddy's line.

Educational Qualifications

Chirag completed his basic schooling from Delhi followed by B Tech degree in Computer Science from Institute Of Engineering and Technology, Jhansi, Bundelkhand University in 2005.

Political Journey

Chirag though had made up his mind in 2011 but decided to take the final plunge in politics three years later in 2014. Having registered an impressive win as Lok Jan Shakti Party candidate for the 16th Lok Sabha in 2014 he actively participated in the run-up to the 2015 Bihar Assembly elections.

The junior Paswan who smartly built his image as a mature and sensible politician is reported to have played an instrumental role towards bringing senior Paswan in alliance with Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) especially in the wake of his party’s debacle in 2009 Lok Sabha elections. As per the political experts, it was the political acumen and leadership role of Chirag Paswan that after his party’s poor performance in 2009 Lok Sabha elections, the LJP reverted by winning six out of the seven seats which it contested in 2014 elections.

Future Prospects

With the senior Paswan having shown recently his intention of not contesting the Lok Sabha elections, the news is doing the rounds that the victory of Chirag Paswan in 2019 elections could well make him the most promising face of the party in times to come.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
