‘Majithia should apologise for great grandfather’s role in Jallianwala Bagh Massacre’

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Aparna Banerji

Tribune News Service

Jalandhar, April 10

Shiromani Akali Dal leader Bikram Singh Majithia should apologise for his grandfather’s role in the Jallianwala Bagh Masscare, Aam Aadmi Party’s Punjab unit president Bhagwant Mann said on Wednesday.

As the country marks the 100th year of the massacre, AAP president demanded an apology from Majithia, a former minister in the previous SAD-BJP regime, as well as the UK government.

“The British government should apologise. I also demand that Bikram Singh Majithia should apologise for his great grandfather Sr. Sundar Singh Majithia’s role in the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre. He had hosted a dinner for General Dyer on the very day (April 13, 1919) that the massacre took place and also honoured him at the Golden Temple.”

“The Canada government had also apologised for Komagatamaru. Hence, the British government should also apologise for the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre.”

Colonel Reginald Dyer was the British officer who ordered British Indian Army to shoot at people gathered at a pro-independence assembly at Amritsar's Jallianwala Bagh on the morning of Baisakhi on April 13, 1919. Several hundreds were killed in the shooting. The protesters were unarmed.

Mann also told reporters that there would be no alliance with the Congress for the forthcoming general elections.

“We will not support any kind of alliance with the Congress in the state. I have already cleared that with the party. The AAP will fight on its own. Asin Datt ke larange (we shall fight with grit). We are contesting on 10 seats and the remaining three shall also be announced soon,” he said.

Mann was speaking at a press briefing at the inauguration of the AAP’s campaign office in Jalandhar. AAP’s Jalandhar candidate Justice (retd.) Zora Singh was also with him at the press conference.

Sacrilege

He said a recent transfer of Inspector General of Police Kunwar Vijay Pratap Singh out of a special investigation team that was investigating the 2015 sacrilege incidents in the state as well as subsequent firing cases was a case of Chief Minister Amarinder Singh “returning the favour”.

“It is the CM returning the favour to the Akali Dal for all the cases against them that they had withdrawn before he joined office. He had to something in return as award for that. The move is part of that. The cases in the sacrilege incident are hence being put on the backburner.”

The officer’s transfer followed Election Commission of India’s orders to relieve him of the charge. The development came after Akali Dal Member of Parliament Naresh Gujral accused him of violating election code after the latter’s interview on a TV channel on March 18 and March 19.

Mann said his party would take up investigation into the the Nakodar sacrilege incident in the Legislative Assembly.

“I shall also be taking up the matter with Harpal Singh Cheema,” Mann said.

‘Not an outsider’

Mann also defended the party’s decision to field Zora Singh after the party faced criticism of having fielded an “outsider”.

“Justice Zora Singh is not an outsider. He didn’t ask for the seat. We gave him to it. The local leadership supports him and so we’ve come to support him.”

Zora Singh chaired a commission set up in 2015 to probe sacrilege incidents in Punjab.
