Movies opening at Tampa Bay theaters: 'Hellboy,' 'Missing Link,' 'Little'

OPEN THURSDAY:

Hellboy

The demonic superhero from the graphic novels battles an ancient sorceress bent on revenge. With David Harbour, Milla Jovovich, Ian McShane, Sasha Lane, Daniel Dae Kim. Written by Andrew Cosby; based on the comic by Mike Mignola. Directed by Neil Marshall. (120 minutes, R)

Missing Link

A Bigfoot-like creature joins others on a quest to find his long-lost relatives in this animated tale. With the voices of Zach Galifianakis, Hugh Jackman, Zoe Saldana, Emma Thompson, Stephen Fry, Timothy Olyphant. Written and directed by Chris Butler. (95 minutes, PG)

Little

A stressed-out woman is magically transformed back into her carefree younger self. With Regina Hall, Issa Rae, Marsai Martin, Tone Bell, Justin Hartley. Written by Tina Gordon, Tracy Oliver; story by Oliver. Directed by Gordon. (109 minutes, PG-13)

OPEN FRIDAY:

The Perfect Date

Streaming on Netflix, the rom-com follows a high school student going into college who develops an app to offer his services as a fake date. With Laura Marano, Noah Centineo, Camila Mendes. Written by Steve Bloom, Randall Green. Directed by Chris Nelson. (89 minutes, NR)

LIGHTS, CAMERA, ACTION: Sarasota Film Festival

The festivities kicked off last week, but there's still lots of cinemagic to behold during the 21st annual Sarasota Film Festival. More than 200 flicks are screened every year, from features to documentaries to shorts. Highlights include the centerpiece film, The Tomorrow Man (the drama, starring Blythe Danner, explores the eccentric love story of an older couple), and the world premiere of closing night film Phil (the directorial debut for actor Greg Kinnear follows a man grappling with everyday life and what it means to "have it all"); both are showcased Saturday. Also on Saturday, the festival's award ceremony honors Danner with its Icon Award and Anne Heche with its Career Tribute Award. Runs through Sunday at various locations. sarasotafilmfestival.com.

CRITICS' PICKS

The Mustang: A violent convict is given the opportunity to participate in a rehabilitation program involving training wild horses. Nicely acted and ultimately moving.

Us: A woman and her family are terrified by masked home invaders at the beach home where she grew up. But the real shock occurs when the masks come off.

Captain Marvel: It's not only heroes who can have superpowers, movies can have them too, and you can add this to the small list of those that do thanks to a luminous and powerful Brie Larson.

Hotel Mumbai: The dramatic retelling of the bloody 2008 terrorist attack on a luxury Indian hotel that is melodramatic at times, but positively celebrates ordinary heroes.

UPCOMING RELEASES

All dates subject to change.

April 19: Drunk Parents; Little Woods; Under the Silver Lake

April 26: J.T. Leroy; Avengers: Endgame; The White Crow

May 3: UglyDolls; The Intruder; Long Shot

May 10: Pokemon Detective Pikachu; Tolkien; The Hustle; All Is True

May 17: A Dog's Journey; The Sun Is Also a Star; The Souvenir

Planning your weekend? Subscribe to our free Top 5 things to do newsletter We’ll deliver ideas every Thursday for going out, staying home or spending time outdoors. Loading... You’re all signed up! Want more of our free, weekly newsletters in your inbox? Let’s get started. Explore all your options

May 24: Aladdin; BrightBurn; Booksmart

Meaghan Habuda and Times wires
