Burdened by father’s Bofors sins, Rahul trying to smear others: PM Modi

PANAJI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday claimed Congress president Rahul Gandhi was spreading lies on Rafale because he was burdened with “Bofors sins” of his late father.“When I think why he is lying so much, I suspect that probably he is burdened with the sins of his father from the Bofors deal and is trying to wash them off. In his guilt, he is trying to smear the same sins on the rest of the world,” Modi said at a rally here.Without taking Rahul’s name, Modi compared the Congress president to an “expert pickpocket” and said he runs along with the mob crying “thief, thief” after picking his victim’s pocket.“Naamdar tried a similar stunt with Manohar Parrikar . After he went to inquire about Parrikar’s health, he uttered such white lies after stepping out that one cannot even imagine. This was at a time when Parrikar was battling for his life,” Modi told a 30,000-odd crowd.Former Goa chief minister Parrikar passed away on March 17 after battling pancreatic cancer for over a year.Rahul, after calling on Parrikar in January this year, had claimed that the CM told him that he (Parrikar) had no role in the Rafale deal. A day later, Parrikar had issued a stinging response: “Paying a courtesy visit and then stooping so low as to make a false statement for petty political gain has raised, in my mind, questions about the sincerity and purpose of your visit itself.”Modi also said BJP always looked at tax payers with respect and his government has not increased taxes in the past five years. “But Congress wants to increase the tax on middle class… they want to put additional burden on middle class to secure their vote bank,” he saidEarlier, Modi said he had an emotional connect with Goa through Parrikar and this was the first time he was visiting the state “when my friend” is not present. Praising Parrikar for his time spent at the defence ministry, Modi said he was proud to have worked along with him to give a new direction to the defence doctrine.The PM also said the surgical strike conducted when Parrikar was the defence minister has laid the foundation stone for a new India. “Hindustan has sent a message that we can attack terrorists deep inside their territory. This message has been sent to everyone in the world,” he said.“I also assured Goans that the BJP team in the state, which was trained by Parrikar, will follow the development path set by him.” he said.
