Big family show: Rahul Gandhi files nomination from Amethi with Sonia, Priyanka in attendance

Congress president Rahul Gandhi with his sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra before filing his nomination papers in Amethi on Wednesday. (Photo: Reuters)

As petals rained from terrace tops on Wednesday, Congress president Rahul Gandhi waved at the crowd flanked by his family on both sides. The roadshow in Amethi, his Lok Sabha constituency, has been a tradition ever since Rahul Gandhi took over the reins from his mother Sonia Gandhi.

The Congress president filed his nomination papers from Amethi seeking re-election from the Gandhi bastion for the fourth time.

What made this roadshow starkly different from the previous ones was not only the political equations, but also the display of bonding between the members of the Gandhi family.

In times when the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party has relentlessly attacked the Congress for its "dynastic politics", the roadshow saw Rahul Gandhi being accompanied by his young niece Miraya and nephew Rehaan.

The children waived at the crowd as they took their first lessons in political education. Rahul Gandhi was seen talking to Rehaan who wore white kurta pyajama and a Nehru jacket.

Rehaan has been to the Gandhi bastion earlier as well and has stayed overnight. On the other hand, East Uttar Pradesh Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra was seen explaining Miraya about the scenes that were unfolding in the political battlefront.

This is not the first time that the politicians have had their children accompanying them in political rallies. It is often seen as an attempt to showcase the younger generation to the public.

Priyanka's children would be the sixth generation of the Nehru-Gandhi family into politics if they take the plunge at all.

Rahul Gandhi's brother-in-law Robert Vadra was also seen cheering and engaging with the Congress workers.

As Rahul Gandhi completed a three kilometre roadshow, it culminated in the district magistrate office where Sonia Gandhi, the UPA chairperson, also joined them for filing the nomination.

However, Miraya and Rehaan were the stars of the show and their selfies with mother Priyanka went viral on social media on Wednesday. The pictures were also posted from Congress party's Twitter handle with the caption being, "Smt @priyankagandhi shares a light moment with her children."

To which Priyanka tweeted, "This one (picture) is a lot better than the selfie I was trying to take!"

With this the political battle lines were drawn. Amethi will see the filing of nomination of Union minister Smriti Irani on Wednesday, as the first phase of the Lok Sabha elections is set to kick-start. Irani will be accompanied by Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and other BJP leaders.

The BJP is determined on making it a prestige issue and a dedicated state leadership has been roped-in to put up a better show. Amethi will go to polls on May 6 which falls in the fifth phase of the polling.

ALSO READ | Your complete guide for 2019 Lok Sabha elections

ALSO READ | Voting in Lok Sabha elections? Get poll ready with India Today's interactive quiz

ALSO READ | Amethi: Rahul Gandhi files nomination as showdown with Smriti Irani looms

ALSO READ | Amethi was my father's 'karmabhoomi', it is sacred land for us: Priyanka Gandhi

ALSO WATCH | Rahul Gandhi files nomination from Amethi Lok Sabha seat
