Left out of poll politics, Assam’s Dalits cry for justice

DIBRUGARH: It’s a little past noon but the narrow lane leading into Shantipara Harijan Colony here is almost dark and dingy. Dirty, ramshackle quarters standing cheek by jowl on either side of the pathway cover most of the sky above. Clothes, looking faded because of prolonged use and repeated washing, are hung for drying in every possible open space.“You’ve now seen our colony, which, I think, truly represents our past and present and possibly future, too,” Raju Ravidas pours his heart out. “Like the cycle of elections and false promises, pain and sufferings never leave us alone,” grieves the 55-year-old Dalit , whose ancestors migrated here from faraway Punjab many generations ago.Scattered across the state, Assam ’s Dalits numbering close to 22 lakhs have very little to do in elections. No wonder why parties look disinterested in courting the ‘lost tribe’ of safai karamcharis. Dalit colonies virtually lie silent amid the bustle of campaigning for the world’s biggest democratic extravaganza.“Here, everybody talks of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and NRC (National Register of Citizens). These issues may help parties win elections, but they are not our issues,” remarks Guddi Das, Raju’s neighbour.“Day in and day out, we struggle to make our ends meet. But we have no one to represent us in Delhi. No MP has ever come to see us,” adds Shila Harijan (35), squatting next to Guddi.In the rest of the country, the history of Dalits is tied to the history of violence they have been subjected to. In the northeast, they remain invisible. It is only when incidents like the Punjabi Lane clashes, which brought Shillong to a standstill last year, happen that the existence of Dalit communities in the region comes up.Assam has one SC seat, Karimganj, in the Barak Valley, where the deciding factor for political parties is the stand they take on Bengali Hindus and Muslims. It’s not very different from the politics of Assam and the rest of the northeast, where the major talking point has always been the indigenous/outsider divide. Lost in the mix are the Dalits, for whom nothing has changed in more than a century.The settlements are still where they were set up in the 19th century by the British, close to railway lines or rivers, through which the Dalit workers were brought here. “Maut ke mooh mein rehte hain,” says Ramnath Bansphor (36). A few months ago, a section of the roof of a two-storey building where 14 families lived caved in. “No one was home then, fortunately. We may not be so lucky next time,” he adds.“We work as safai karamcharis. But see how we have to live,” laments Madan Bansphor (40), a municipal worker, pointing at the piles of garbage just outside the colony. “Our neighbours dump their garbage here. They think of us only as unclean sweepers,” he adds.“Our living conditions are pathetic. Long ago, the government promised us new quarters. That never happened. That is why we need our own leaders,” says Rajesh Bansphor, secretary of the Harijan Mazdoor Union.Open sewage lines criss-cross the settlement, overflowing whenever it rains. “Water comes up to the waist whenever it rains. We wade through the water, carrying our children and grandchildren, to get them to school,” says 65-year-old Laxmi Bansphor. “If we don’t, how will our children break out of this?” asks Rajesh.The work they do has been the same for more than a century and the working conditions have only slightly changed. “We can’t do other jobs. Most of us toil for years without getting permanent employment. We are not even paid on time,” Rajesh adds. Assam still has 542 manual scavengers, more than Gujarat (146) or Maharashtra (429), despite it being banned twice – in 1993 and, again, in 2013.“Modi washed the feet of four Dalits recently. We saw the photo in newspapers. Isse kya badlega? (Will anything change for us?)” Raju asks.
