Singh brothers: Sibling revelry gone wrong: Singh brothers, Singhanias, and others who went up against each other

Brothers Malvinder and Shivinder Singh, who once owned a pharma fortune, are now involved in a slugfest, with accusations of physical violence and threats being made. Here are a few others who went up against their siblings and family.



Agencies Shivinder Mohan(L) and Malvinder Mohan Singh at the launch of the Quan Spa at JW MARRIOTT, New Delhi.

Agencies On the left is Cyril Shroff and on the right is Shardul Shroff.

Agencies On the left is Rajesh Gandhi and on the right is Devanshu Gandhi.

Agencies Onkar Singh Kanwar is the chairman and MD of Apollo Tyres.

Agencies On the left are Akshaypat and Anant Singhania, and on the right is Gautam Singhania.

Hinduja Vs Hinduja; Ambani Brothers In Arms, And Other Family Feuds Of India Inc







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 11 It's NOT All In The Family Conventional wisdom dictates that family, almost always, comes first. But India Inc has shown that conventional wisdom doesn't always hold true. Over the years, a number of prominent business families have faced separation woes. And many have had to take some hard calls.



The Ambani vs Ambani saga that captured the country's imagination in 2004, and gave birth to various kinds of theories, saw rapprochement (of sorts) last year when elder brother Mukesh bailed out younger sibling Anil by paying Rs 453 crore dues in the Ericsson case, and thereby preventing the latter from being jailed.

And while the Ambanis have done course-correction, family ties seem to be shaking at the Hinduja household. The brothers, who run the $11.2 billion conglomerate, are not seeing eye to eye over the Switzerland-based Hinduja Bank. The disagreements have left the family's patriarch SP Hinduja and his daughters on one side, and the other three brothers - Ashok, Gopichand and Prakash on the other.



In Pic: Hinduja Brothers (L), Mukesh and Anil Ambani (R). Falling Apart The once closely-knit Hinduja brothers have become the latest business family to find themselves in the middle of a tussle over the future of their $11.2 billion fortune. Fissures have emerged among the four brothers, one of the world's richest, over a letter signed by them in 2014. According to the document, the assets held by one brother belong to all, and that each man will appoint the others as their executors.



However, the group's patriarch 84-year-old Srichand Hinduja and his daughter, Vinoo, want the letter declared worthless.



The dispute came to a light in a ruling delivered by a London judge, who said that the three other brothers, Gopichand, Prakash and Ashok, tried to use the letter to take control of Hinduja Bank - an asset that was in Srichand’s sole name.



The court also allowed Vinoo, SP’s younger daughter, to act as his ‘litigation friend’ to safeguard his interests, since he is said to be suffering from a form of dementia.



The ongoing litigation in the London court began in November last year. Vinoo is seeking to have the July 2014 agreement declared null and void. Not All Good At The Godrejs The 122-year-old $5-billion Godrej group seems to be the latest India Inc family to have been hit by an internal feud after differences cropped up among family members over development of land holdings owned by Godrej & Boyce.



Brothers Adi and Nadir Godrej control the group’s three listed companies — Godrej Consumer Products Ltd (GCPL), Godrej Properties and Godrej Agrovet. Godrej & Boyce, the holding company of the group with business divisions including aerospace, consumer, office and industrial products, furniture and appliances, is owned by all family members with Jamshyd Godrej as its chairman.



The dispute reportedly arose after the family members were split over the development of a 1,000-acre land parcel they own in Mumbai. According to reports, the crux of the issue is the concentration of the family’s land holding in Godrej & Boyce and its commercial exploitation by the group’s listed arm Godrej Properties.



While Adi and Nadir are in favour of development of the land, the Jamshyd Godrej side is believed to be against excessive development.



JM Financial chairman Nimesh Kampani and lawyer Zia Mody are advising Jamshyd Godrej, while Kotak Mahindra Bank CEO Uday Kotak and Cyril Shroff of legal firm Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas are assisting Adi and Nadir Godrej untangle the situation.



The family business board is led by group chairman Adi Godrej and includes brother Nadir, cousin Jamshyd and brother-in-law Vijay Crishna. The fourth generation of the family, which includes the children of Adi, Jamshyd, Nadir and Crishna who are past 18 years, attend meetings as invitees.





In Pic: (L-R) Adi, Nadir and Jamshyd Godrej inaugurate the 'Godrej Interio' store, a joint venture between Godrej & Boyce's Jamshyd Godrej and designer Krsna Mehta, at Godrej Bhawan in Mumbai on February 24, 2010. The Tale Of Two Brothers The Ambani war was no silent affair. From defamation suits, letters to the PM to dragging each other to court, the once-close brothers did it all.



India’s richest man Mukesh Ambani and his brother Anil Ambani's bitter feud began soon after the death of their father Dhirubhai Ambani, the founder of Reliance Industries, in 2002.



Ambani Sr. hadn't left a will, so his elder son Mukesh became Chairman and MD of Reliance Industries Ltd while Anil was Vice-Chairman.



The feud for control led to the split of the Reliance Group. However, in 2005, their mother, Anandiben, brokered a de-merger, giving Mukesh control of oil and gas, petrochemicals, refining and manufacturing, while Anil got electricity, telecoms and financial services.



Even though some shareholders opposed the decision, the Bombay High Court had approved the de-merger.



But that didn't settle things. Rather the oil wars continued between the brothers, with Anil even accusing involvement of the Government in supporting Mukesh.



Anil's Reliance Natural Resources Ltd. had even placed newspaper ads alleging that the Indian government had sided with Mukesh's Reliance Industries. And It Continued Till 2019 ... Things only went from bad to worse for the brother. In 2008, Anil filed a $2.12 billion defamation suit against Mukesh for remarks he made during an interview with The New York Times.

What started off as a family feud, was termed a matter of 'national interest' by India's then-finance minister Pranab Mukherjee, who requested the brothers to resolve the dispute privately.



After going to the Supreme Court in 2009 over the gas dispute (the court ruled in Mukesh's favour), Kokilaben once again intervened in May 2010 to broker a peace agreement. Officials of both their companies received notes that said the Ambani brothers would draft a non-compete agreement.



Soon after, Anil withdrew his defamation suit.



Now a few years later, the brothers are often seen together at family functions, and other events.

In 2014, it was revealed that Bharti Shroff, the mother of legal stalwarts Shardul and Cyril Shroff, had disinherited the latter. In her will, she bequeathed her properties and stake in Amarchand Mangaldas to her elder son Shardul. When Shardul moved court to implement his mother’s will, Cyril contested it.A team of mediators, comprising legal and business luminaries, was appointed by the Bombay High Court to resolve the matter. The result: the century-old law firm was dismantled, and each brother walked away with a piece.In 2015, thefamily got entangled in a feud that took them to the Company Law Board. On one side was Virendra Gandhi, and on the other, brother Rajesh Gandhi and cousin Devanshu Gandhi.The former alleged that the other two had joined hands and unlawfully taken over Vadilal Chemicals by removing him from the post of chairman and managing director as well as from the board. Over the past couple of years, talks of a sale as well as an out of court settlement have emerged.In the early 1990s, Onkar S Kanwar of Apollo Tyres was feuding with his father, Raunaq Singh, over company control issues.However, according to an article published at the time, one of the reasons for the fight was also believed to be the induction of Onkar’s half-brother, Satinder Pal, in the business. Then in the 2000s, came a fallout with his brother, Narinder, who claimed that there was financial mismanagement in the company.A property dispute over the Mumbai residence of the promoter family of Raymond pitted Gautam Singhania against his cousins, Anant and Akshaypat, as well as his father, Vijaypat. In an earlier interview with ETPanache, Akshaypat said that the conflict had done irrevocable damage to the family relations.In response, Gautam said that he did not have a great relationship with his cousins to begin with. So, there was no question of the fight impacting any family bonds.David and Charles Koch are two names that are constant on the rich list. But the billionaire brothers have had their share of drama. For starters, the original number of Koch brothers stands at four. The other two are Bill (David’s twin) and Fred Jr, the oldest of the four. Over the years, there has been scheming, name-calling, and backstabbing between the brothers. According to reports, Bill was fired after he launched a coup in 1980. He and Fred Jr then fought Charles and David over a settlement, where Koch Industries reportedly shelled out $620 million to Bill, while Fred netted $400 million for his share.
