Pakistan carried out Pulwama attack to benefit PM Modi, says Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal

Delhi chief minister Arvind Kejriwal | Photo Credit: PTI

Continuing his attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi through a string of tweets, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal on Thursday once again questioned why Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan is openly endorsing his Indian counterpart for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) Convener further asked whether Pakistan had killed 40 Indian soldiers in Pulwama on February 14 in order to help PM Modi in elections. Kejriwal's savage dig at the BJP spearhead comes on the day when the first phase of the Lok Sabha elections is being held across 18 states and two union territories in the country.

After stressing on a "secret pact" between Imran Khan and Narendra Modi, the Delhi CM went on to ask if Pakistan is funding the NaMo channel. His fiery attack on PM Modi's official TV channel came after a social media team member of the AAP claimed that there is no owner of NaMo TV on record.

Pakistan and Imran Khan are openly supporting Modi ji. It is clear now that Modi ji has some secret pact wid them.



Everyone is asking - did Pakistan kill 40 of our brave soldiers in Pulwama on 14 Feb just before elections to help Modi ji? https://t.co/hIh5PGqr9E — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) April 11, 2019

Arvind Kejriwal's recent dig at PM Modi came on Wednesday when news agency Reuters reported Imran Khan saying that if the next government in India is led by the Congress, then the party might be "too scared" to resolve the Kashmir issue. Khan then said that if "BJP, a right-wing party, wins", some kind of settlement can be reached in the Valley.

Not just the Delhi CM, other senior leaders in the opposition have targeted Narendra Modi and the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) over Imran Khan's comments. PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti, JKNC's Omar Abdullah, JD(S) president HD Kumaraswamy are among the few who have questioned PM Modi on Imran Khan's open endorsement of the BJP.

The 2019 Lok Sabha elections commenced on April 11 with 91 parliamentary constituencies in 18 states and two union territories undergoing elections in the first phase. Delhi, where the BJP rules all seven Lok Sabha seats, will see elections in the sixth phase on May 12, 2019.
