Modi is not only a big liar but is also anti-poor and anti-lower castes: Mayawati

BSP supremo and Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister, Mayawati showed criticism upon the Narendra Modi government and the Congress, saying both national parties have betrayed people previously and that it was time "to change the government" in Delhi.

"Modi is not only a big liar but is also anti-poor and anti-lower castes, the reservation system is also under great threat" Mayawati said while influencing people in Karnataka to vote for her party instead of both national parties and during a gathering in Mysuru.

Mayawati said her party is committed to progressing towards comprehensive improvements in the country as he BSP has retrieved candidates in all 28 constituencies of the state. "Send as many as BSP candidates to Delhi as your representatives so that BSP can play a bigger role in forming the government and it can bring about several pro-people and pro-poor reforms," she said.

The BSP leader said she was the first to suggest reservation for those from economically weaker sections of society. "But unfortunately today under the Modi government, the concept of reservation is under threat. The 10% reservation proposed for upper castes is only aimed at garnering votes and it is not going to benefit the upper caste poor," she said.

Mayawati slammed the Modi government over demonetization and GST and said: "Both were introduced without proper preparation. This led to a rise in unemployment and poverty in the country."

BJP of trying to win votes by raking up emotional issues, she accused. "The sad incident of Pulwama attack on our armed forces is being used to get votes, which is a dangerous trend. The chowkidar campaign is another drama being played by the BJP to divert the attention of the people from burning issues," she added.

The Congress was not spared by Mayawati too. "From Bofors to Rafale this country has suffered a lot due to the various scams during their period. All the dramas of the two parties will end with this election," she said.

A dance troupe from Chamarajanagar performed a show to project Mayawati as the next PM as she was accompanied by her nephew Akash Anand.
