Maharashtra: Man-animal conflict claims third life in a week! Shepherd killed by tiger in Chandrapur

Shepherd killed by tiger in Chandrapur | Representational Image | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chandrapur: In another life being lost due to man-animal conflict, Chandrapur saw a third person dying in a span of a week due to tiger attacks. The victim, a shepherd, was mauled in Mul Takula of Chandrapur district.

The deceased was identified as Maruti Puthawar, a resident of Yergaon in Mul taluka. While the shepherd was out for work on Tuesday afternoon, a tiger attacked him in the forest. The big cat overpowered the victim and killed him on the spot.

Third death due Tiger attack in Chandrapur

This is the third such incident in a week where a man was killed in a tiger attack in Chandrapur. On Saturday, a tiger attacked a villager in Hadadah area which comes under the Brahmapuri Forest. The deceased was identified as Divakar Gedam and he was a shepherd too. Earlier, on January 9, a youth who had gone to fetch fodder in the woods died after a tiger attacked him in Chandrapur. The incident came to light on Wednesday afternoon. The deceased was identified as 35-year-old Raju Nageshwar Gujlawar.

Also Read : Citizen killed by tiger in Chandrapur

On January 9, Raju, a resident of Lohara village, went to the forest to bring fodder from the border of Lohara and Mamala villages. During this time, a tiger attacked him, killing him on the spot. After a search operation was launched, the forest department found Raju's body around noon. After the post-mortem, the dead body was then handed over to his family members.

During the past one year, more than 25 people have died in tiger attacks as per the information given in Lok Sabha recently. This information was given by the Union Minister of State for Environment, Mahesh Sharma, in the Lok Sabha. Till December 31, 2018, 27 people died in tiger attack across India. In Maharashtra, 15 people were killed and four people in Uttar Pradesh had lost their lives due to the rising man-animal conflict.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
