Nuwakot – Inseconline

Accused of Rape Arrested Police have arrested Top Prasad Poudel, 44, of Kalika Municipality-4, Rasuwa district on September 21, 2021, on the charge of raping a 21-year-old woman. The victim had lodged a complaint at the District Police Office on September 20 alleging that the victim was taken to a friend's house in Bidur… Nuwakot

Rape Accused Arrested Milan Pandit, 33, of Dupcheshwor Rural Municipality-7 has been arrested by the police from a relative's house in Bidur Municipality-2 on July 10, 2021, on the charge of raping a 27-year-old woman. According to Inspector Janardan Ghimire, the victim's relatives filed a case against the accused at the District Police… Nuwakot

Rape Accused Arrested Police have arrested Kalamuddin Miya, 47, of Devighat in Bidur Municipality-5 on April 10, 2021, on the charge of raping a 15-year-old girl. According to Inspector Lalita Dhakal, the victim lodged a complaint against Miya at the District Police Office on April 7 alleging that the accused raped the girl… Nuwakot

Court Declares 11 Years’ Imprisonment to the Guilty of Rape Som Bahadur Tamang, 28, of Suryagadhi Rural Municipality-9 has been sentenced to 11 years in prison by a district court for raping a 22-year-old woman. A bench of District Judge Umesh Prasad Luitel convicted Tamang of rape and sentenced him to 11 years imprisonment, fined him NRs. 30,000 and charged… Nuwakot

Court Declares 10 Years’ Sentence to the Guilty of Human Trafficking Sukman Tamang, 28, of Dupcheshwor Rural Municipality-6 has been sentenced to 10 years in prison by the district court for trafficking a 20-year-old girl to India. A bench of District Judge Umesh Prasad Luitel on February 21 sentenced the accused Tamang to 10 years jail term and fined NRs 50,000.… Nuwakot

Prisoners of Nuwakot Lack Sleeping Space Due to Overcrowding As the number of inmates in the district jail exceeds its capacity, more than 45 inmates are forced to sleep in the passages of the prison daily. According to Prison Chief Durga Prasad Wagle, 45-50 inmates are forced to sleep in open spaces such as passages as there are 143… Nuwakot

Trafficking Accused Arrested Sukman Tamang, 36, of Ghyangphedi in Dupcheshwor Rural Municipality-1 has been arrested by the police on September 29 after he was found guilty of trafficking a 37-year-old woman to India on March 20, 2008. According to Bishnu Phuyal, Inspector at the District Police Office, the accused was arrested from Kathmandu… Nuwakot

Cooperation Between Civil Society And The Media Promotes Quality Development A discussion program between the representatives of civil society organizations and media persons was organized in Bidur on September 17 by INSEC Nuwakot. The cooperation of civil society and media for development was discussed through the virtual medium. Discussing the impact of development, civil society, media and coronavirus in the… Nuwakot

Sexual Abuse Accused Arrested Police have arrested Suresh Shrestha (48) of Bidur Municipality-9 on August 30 in accusation of sexually abusing a six-year-old girl. The victim was abused on August 29. She was lured by the victim. The complaint was filed at the District Police Office on August 30, informed inspector Bishnu Hari Phunyal… Nuwakot
