Kaski – Inseconline

Accused of Torture Sentenced to Jail for 25 Days Januka Nepali, 27, of Panchakanya Rural Municipality-2, Nuwakot has been given 25 days’ jail sentence for physically torturing a six-year-old boy. Januka Nepali had been working as the hostel warden of New Life School of Pokhara Metropolitan- 15. The bench of Judge Shree Krishna Bhattarai gave the verdict on January… Kaski

Student Physically Tortured in Hostel; Accused Arrested Police have arrested Januka Nepali, 27, of Panchakanya Rural Municipality-2, Nuwakot on December 21, 2021, on the charge of physically torturing a six-year-old boy. Januka Nepali has been working as the hostel warden of New Life School. The victim had been staying in the hostel of New Life School of… Kaski

Sexual Abuse Accused Arrested Police have arrested Robert Kinkle, 44, a Canadian citizen residing in Pokhara Metropolitan City-6 on October 23, 2021, on the charge of sexually abusing two 13-year-olds and a 14-year-old. The victim boys were rescued by the police. According to DSP Subash Hamal of the District Police Office, Kaski, the accused,… Kaski

We are Committed Towards Protection of Human Rights: Chief Minister Pokharel Krishna Chandra Nepali Pokharel, Chief Minister of Gandaki Province has said that the provincial government is committed to the protection of human rights. In a meeting with team INSEC led by Chairperson Dr. Indira Shrestha, Minister Pokharel said that the government of Gandaki Province would work with human rights organizations… Kaski

Accused of Human Trafficking Arrested Police have arrested Asmita Rai, 28, a permanent resident of Ilam Mai Municipality-8, Chisapani and now living in Pokhara Metropolitan City-6, Shantinagar. She was arrested on August 30, 2021, on the charge of forcing a 29-year-old woman into prostitution. Police had arrested the accused after raiding a hotel in Pokhara… Kaski

Accused of Killing after Rape Arrested Police have arrested Ram Bahadur Thapa, 45, of Harinas Rural Municipality-6 Chalise in accusation of raping and killing Kopila Pariyar, 17, of Madi Rural Municipality-9 Silpibeshi. Kopila had been living in her maternal grandparents’ house at Madi Rural Municipality- 9, Makaibari and had been missing since June 29, 2020. Her… Kaski

Intervention of Police Leads to Injury Shiva Parajuli, 24, of Pokhara Metropolitan City-5 was injured during a protest against the government’s ordinance on the provisions related to the party split of the Political Parties Act-2017. The protest took place in Pokhara Metropolitan City on August 18, 2021. Parajuli is also a member of the ANNFSU-Kaski District… Kaski

Journalist Threatened for Publishing News, Accused Arrested Ranjan Adhikari, 33, a journalist of Gandak News and a temporary resident of Pokhara Metropolitan-9 was threatened by Shree Krishna Shrestha, 37, a temporary resident of Pokhara Metropolitan-11 on July 24, 2021 for writing news about Kalika Secondary School. DSP Subash Hamal of the District Police Office said Shrestha was… Kaski

Accused of Trafficking Arrested Police have arrested Sonam Gurung, 53, of Amarsingh Chowk in Pokhara Metropolitan-12 and Roshan Gurung, 32, of Ritthepani in Pokhara Municipality-27 in accusation of forcing a 29-year-old woman into prostitution. Sonam Gurung is an owner of an eatery in Amarsingh Chowk. They were arrested on July 30, 2021. DSP Subash… Kaski
