Irrfan Khan’s wife Sutapa shares heartfelt note as he begins work post cancer treatment, finds it unbelievable

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Irrfan Khan’s wife Sutapa shares heartfelt note as he begins work post cancer treatment

After Irrfan Khan made his fans emotional with her heartfelt note as he bounced back to work after battling neuroendocrine tumor, his wife Sutapa Sikdar has taken to social media to shower their well-wishers with gratitude. She penned down a heart-touching note thanking each and everyone for their wishes and revealed that she never realized the true meaning of the word ‘unpredictable’ and called the last year to eb the longest.

Taking to her Facebook, Sutapa Sikdar wrote, “Longest year of our life . Time was never measured with pain and hope at the same time ever.while we take our babysteps back to work,to life I am submerged in prayers wishes and faith from friends relatives strangers and a connection with universe which gives us a small chance for this new start. It seems unbelievable …never ever I realized the meaning of the word unpredictable so well…never ever I could feel peoples wishes on my bones my breath my heartbeat which helped me to stay focused and kicking.. i cant take names because there are names and there are names I don’t even know who played angels. Sorry for not been able to answer individually but I know what you mean to us. I don’t see beyond one day and that day is today where everything seems fine. For today we go back to work.and the dance and song of life continues. Thank you for believing in your prayers.”

Just before returning to the sets of his next film Angrezi Medium, Irrfan Khan also took to his Twitter to thanks his fans for their support and wrote, “Maybe somewhere in the pursuit of winning, we forget how much it means to be loved. In our vulnerability, we are reminded. As I leave my footprints onto these steps of my life, I want to pause to be grateful for receiving your immense love and support, it soothed me in my process of healing. So I travel back to you, thanking you from the bottom of my heart.”

Currently, the actor is in Jaipur where he is shooting for Angrezi Medium along with actress Radhika Madan. Rumours has it that Bollywood diva Kareena Kapoor Khan will soon join them as she plays the lead opposite Irrfan in the film. The actor has already shared his first look from the film in which he plays a sweet shop owner named Mr. Champakji. Taking to Twitter, Irrfan Khan shared his first look for Angrezi Medium and said, "GMB serving since 1900s It’s going to be fun to tell another story #AngreziMedium. Coming soon, with Mr Champakji... Aa Raha Hu phir entertain Karne Sabko #ItsTimeToKnowChampakJi #AngreziMedium".

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
