Delhi: Smitten by her lavish lifestyle, women murder elderly woman; arrested

The accused allegedly robbed the deceased of gold rings, bangles and necklace (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A shocking incident took place in the national capital as a woman was killed owing to jealousy. The deceased, Geeta Saxena used to boast about her finances quite often. Saxena's banter about her wealth ended up sparking envy from her neighbours.

One of the accused was identified as Richa. Richa is employed as an assistant at an Aadhaar centre in Ashok Vihar went to check on her. The 25-year-old allegedly committed the crime with the help of her love interest.

Richa had dropped out of school after Class 11 and had been in a relationship with Sumit, a toy shop employee The couple was allegedly jealous of the lifestyle of the deceased and decided to rob her. The two allegedly asked their friends, Vikas and Ashu to help them in committing the crime.

While talking to the Times of India, Joy Tirkey, DCP of the Crime Branch said that the accused decided to target the deceased because her husband was away for work almost all day. On April 8, Richa went to the deceased's house in the afternoon. Richa said that she was in the neighbourhood so she decided to pay a visit to her. Meanwhile, the deceased asked the accused to watch TV as she finished her household work.

While waiting for the deceased, the accused allegedly called her allies. The allies entered the residence and threatened the deceased. Despite the warning, the deceased raised an alarm prompting the accused to strangle her with a cloth. The accused allegedly robbed the deceased of gold rings, bangles and necklace.

The accused allegedly robbed valuables from the entire house and escaped. The incident came to light when the deceased's daughter came to visit her. In a moment of weakness, the accused, Richa, narrated the entire incident to her friend and word of mouth caught up with the accused.

After the alleged story reached a police informer, the police conducted raids and caught hold of the accused. The arrest was made by a police team led by ACP Anil Dureja and inspector Shyam Sundar. A part of the loot was successfully recovered by the police.
