Naxalbari: Cradle Of Red Radicals Awash With Saffron

Nearly 52 summers ago, a nondescript village by the strange name of Naxalbari shot to infamy by cradling a terror movement that still convulses some pockets of India. Hardline members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) instigated landless peasants to forcibly take over the farmlands they were cultivating, triggering a cycle of violence that led to the lynching of a police officer on May 24, 1967 and deaths of 11 women and children in police firing the day after. The violence soon spiralled out of control and the hardline Marxists, drawing inspiration from China’s Mao, declared an armed revolution to overthrow the Indian state and bring the country under communist dictatorship.

Naxalbari has, since then, remained a hotbed of Maoist terror and home to many red extremists. Communist flags - the hammer and sickle set in a blood-red background -used to flutter from nearly every household till even the late 1990s. Most of the people here never used to exercise their franchise in what they used to call a “sham democratic exercise”. They still held on to their archaic and regressive communist beliefs and the unattainable dream of installing a communist regime through armed struggle. There were few places of worship here, and they remained mostly shut as few professed their faith; most folks in Naxalbari were communists and, thus, atheists.

But Naxalbari has taken a dramatic about-turn and how! This bustling township is now awash with saffron and BJP flags. The whole town wears a festive look with saffron flags fluttering gaily in the runup to this weekend’s Ram Navmi celebrations. And the number of BJP flags easily outnumber those of the Trinamool and other parties by a ratio of at least 3:1. Many houses proudly have the saffron dhwaja (flag) flying from their rooftops in what can only be a firm assertion of their faith. Many new temples have come up and a number of people in the town sport saffron tilaks on their foreheads. Hindu rituals are followed, and openly. And Naxalbari has not only shed its unsavoury past, but has also made a clean break from it, embracing modernity, consumerism , dharma and, of late, the BJP!
