Wedding Cha Shinema movie review: Saleel Kulkarni's directorial debut is a fun-filled yet emotional ride

Wedding Cha Shinema

Mumbai: Pre-Wedding shoots are so in these days that every wedding is almost incomplete without it. Every wedding film or a pre-wedding film per se gets quite typical and monotonous with almost the same elements, but Wedding Cha Shinema is just the opposite. Yes, this Marathi film has used all the regular elements of pre-wedding shoots, with the typical essence and has turned them into something extraordinary without beating around the bush. Ace music composer Saleel Kulkarni who is all set to make his directorial debut with this film has also written the movie and from the very first frame, the director-writer in him has a clear vision. As I said without beating around the bush, the wedding is fixed within the first five to six minutes of the movie and the story unfolds further with a steady pace. Keeping the viewers hooked.

Wedding Cha Shinema is the story of a Pune based girl named Urvi, played by versatile actress Mukta Barve who is long away from love, marriages and all the goody-goody stuff it involves. She is an aspiring filmmaker but unfortunately against her will has to do a wedding film to earn her livelihood. This is how she meets the cute couple Pari (Rucha Inamdar) and Prakash (Shivraj Waichal) who are madly in love and have an upcoming wedding for which Urvi is shooting the pre-wedding film.

The roller coaster begins here and takes you on a fun-filled yet emotional ride. Though Urvi is the lead alongside Pari and Prakash, each and every character in the film has played their parts so efficiently that you cannot really label the actors as supporting characters, be it Bhau Kadam as Madan or Pravin Tarde as Mac, Shivaji Satam as Aba Saheb Sahane or even Shankarshan Karhade as Dilip is outstanding. Alka Kubal is seen playing Prakash’s mother and her character gives a lot to the film as well as the audiences in the easiest way, without sounding philosophical at all. Yes, again a typical character but so calm and composed and has this innovative side to it, that you cannot keep yourself from falling in love with her.

The film has all the cheesy elements of a pre-wedding film but the director has used all in the most beautiful way, without stressing much or making it something huge, Saleel has put his point forward in smallest scenes an managed to crack most of them in the right terms. The film has many comedy angles but again they don’t disturb the main storyline nor take the focus away from the subject. There are many parallel tracks on in the story, from Pari-Prakash’s love story to Urvi fighting her own battle, from Pari’s parents’ fights to Madan’s simple yet sweet love life with his wife, etc. but none loses its own glory instead uplifts the film in so many ways and that is the beauty of this simple and fun filled wedding film.

There are a few instances which come and go, which if were not present would not really affect the story. Also, the gradual change in Urvi’s character, if it had been handled with more details it could have been better. Some places the director has taken cinematic liberties and some amongst them raise questions like, why would the would-be bride share a bedroom with the director of her pre wedding shoot? This seems weird knowing the groom’s family is very well to do and owns a bungalow, there would be many rooms than to make the bride share room with an unknown person. Nevertheless, these small glitches don’t really affect the entire impact.

Wedding Cha Shinema gets better and has a lot to offer from emotional connects to some chucklesome moments. As mentioned earlier, every actor has done their jobs really well, Bhau Kadam’s antics are hilarious, so does Pravin Tarde’s Mac gives good enough laughter dose, Alka Kubal-Shivaji Satam and Ashwini Kalsekar-Sunil Barve play the perfect parents to Prakash and Pari respectively, Pari and Prakash are the perfect innocent couple in love, but amongst all who the one who shines is none other than Mukta Barve, the actress as always does her bit so well, that in some scenes just her reactions do the needful, without a single word.

The film is well balanced with the apt amount of songs at right intervals and in accordance with the film’s mood. Though the film gets a little predictable towards the end, the predictable end has a surprise element and makes you go awe for sure. All these aspects make this a quintessential wedding film with many out of the box aspects, giving you the right amount of just everything and when you leave the theatre you sure do have a light heart.
