'Arya will kill Cersei wearing Jaime’s face': your Game of Thrones predictions

‘Arya steals the face of a White Walker and tries to assassinate the Night King but is caught’

Bran realises he needs to go back in time and inhabit the body of Jaime Lannister to push himself out of the window and trigger the series of events that allow him to become the Three-Eyed Raven. A huge troop of direwolves and wolves (controlled by Bran?) come to help fight at a battle in Winterfell. Cersei’s prophecy about being killed by a “little brother” refers to The Hound, the younger brother of The Mountain. The Hound and The Mountain fight to the death, and when The Hound realises what Cersei has done to his brother, he kills her as revenge. Arya steals the face of a White Walker in an attempt to assassinate the Night King, but gets caught and is killed. Fran, 26, student, Scotland

‘Cersei will sacrifice her baby to the Night King’

Cersei will have to give her baby to the Night King. Her story has been one-dimensional; it’s time she became more sympathetic. I believe this will involve some sort of sacrifice for the benefit of all. And those Starks, they are so connected to the coming winter. Winterfell – Winter Fell. There has to be something there. And, I hope there is a zombie Sean Bean – this would be his best performance yet! David, 49, designer, Windsor

‘Democracy will be born in Westeros’

I follow prediction videos on YouTube and recently came across an interesting theory, that aligns with my longstanding hope: an overthrowing of all the royal houses in favour of the people, or the realm. Varys and Tyrion have been hinting that this is where their true allegiance lies. The theory is they will break with Daenerys, probably because she will follow the path of the mad king. This will free them up to pursue a republic or a democracy. Anyway, the battle at Winterfell may leave most of Westeros devastated, and a battle between Cersei and Daenerys will take care of the rest. Democracy can be born in Westeros, and we can be done with our strange addiction to watching the ways of the royals, when we know we shouldn’t give them any real power. Martine, 49, arts curator, Amsterdam

‘Jon Snow will stab the Night King right through Daenerys’ heart’

Jon Snow is going to stab the Night King through Daenerys’ heart, so the sword catches on fire, just like the dragons shot flames through her in Qarth. The prophecy will therefore be fulfilled. Jon Snow will take the Iron Throne, although he doesn’t want it. At least he won’t have a barren queen (maybe he will marry an older Lyanna Mormont?). Sansa will rule for him in the North. Remember, in the dream, Dany didn’t get to touch the throne but got diverted in the end. Lucy, 50s, teacher, Australia

‘Tyrion or Dany will sit on the throne with bright blue eyes’

Will Tyrion be the last power player standing? Photograph: HBO

Cersei will refuse to join the fight against the White Walkers, considering their devouring of the world preferable to her losing face against the North and all her other enemies. Cersei’s ghastly personality is seen as a virtue by the Night King and she will be promoted up the ranks at record speed to a management-level White Walker leader. The Hound will defeat The Mountain in a suitably bloody Cleganebowl, played out in front of a curious herd of White Walkers. On ending the contest, The Hound axes himself as the White Walker gang move in on him. Jaime will die, Bronn will definitely die, as will Jon Snow.

I imagine Tyrion and Dany will survive, with one of them set to close the series by walking into the throne room and sitting on the throne, the sole remaining player in the power mix. Naturally, they will have their head bowed as they do so, and the final moment in the series will be them raising their head and revealing their bright blue eyes, a classic ending to denote the inevitability and unbeatability of the undead. Ben Bernards, 44, debit card program manager, Gothenburg, Sweden

‘Jaime and Brienne fall in love and die fighting’

The battle against the Night King will come down to Bran and his powers, most likely by warging into the zombified dragon. I don’t think Jon will survive but will marry and give a child to Dany that will eventually become king or queen after the show has ended. Jaime and Brienne fall in love and die fighting the White Walkers together. Theon dies an honourable death to save Bran. Likewise The Hound for Sansa. Cersei survives; her being pregnant has to mean something. Probably that Tyrion will spare her and let her live as a prisoner so as not to kill Jaime’s unborn child. The final scene is Melisandre telling Davos she told him so. Phil, 34, teacher, London

‘Gendry will end up on the throne’

The Night King will avoid Winterfell and fly his ice dragon straight to the Red Keep to burn all who sail in her. It’d be the most poetic end for wildfire-enthusiast Qyburn. Cersei and The Mountain will escape so The Hound can finish off his brother. Jaime will have to put an end to Cersei. Most major characters shall perish, but I think Gendry will end up on the throne in the end – why else would such a non-character still be around? Charlotte, 31, copywriter, Hertfordshire

‘Daenerys will claim the throne to rule the wartorn ruins of Westeros’

I have to believe that after seven seasons of fighting for the Iron Throne, the ending will involve no one prevailing to be king or queen of the Seven Kingdoms. Win or lose against the larger threat from the North, our heroes will either perish fighting them or if they win they will rule over nothing but the wartorn remains of Westeros, making their quest for the throne bittersweet. Having Daenerys claim the throne only to rule over the ruins of the Seven Kingdoms, after plotting her path so carefully to ensure she does not conquer by turning the country to ashes with her dragons, would be a fitting gut-punch of an ending. Andrew Northedge, 29, bank compliance manager, Gloucester

‘Melisandre and Bran will use the undead to kill the White Walkers’

Will Jon and Daenerys’ child rule the Seven Kingdoms when he comes of age? Photograph: HBO

Arya will kill Cersei wearing Jaime’s face. Melisandre and Bran will help the undead win the war against the White Walkers through magic and greenseer respectively. Gendry being the smith will make dragonglass weapons that will help decimate the White Walkers. Aegon (Jon) and Daenerys will sacrifice themselves to save Westeros and their child will rule the Seven Kingdoms when he comes of age. I hope at least some of it comes true. Pradeep Nagaraj, 32, Bangalore

‘Bronn will get his castle’

In keeping with the global warming metaphor, people will continue to ignore the threat of the White Walkers. The Wall has fallen but people will still refuse to do anything about it. Ultimately the living will defeat the dead. The Night King seems to ignore the water – he was apparently surprised by Jon using ships to evacuate the Wildlings. Jon will use the strategy Stannis used against the Wildlings: travel north by ship and attack from two directions at once, targeting the White Walkers. In other story arcs, Arya will kill The Mountain – she seems as quick as the Viper. Littlefinger will have made provisions for his death – he knew the maester might tell Sansa how he got that letter. Bronn will get his castle, the one Jon was born in, and Cersei will end up on the Iron Throne. Nelson Herbert, 26, insurance broker, Cardiff

‘The Night King wants his baby back’

I think the reason the Night King is finally invading Westeros is because he wants his baby back. The prophecy of a “prince that was promised” relates to Little Sam (Samwell Tarly’s stepson and Gilly’s son). Little Sam should have been left out for the White Walkers but Samwell rescued him and killed a Wight with dragonglass to boot. Hence he is “owed” to the Night King. I also think the religion of the Seven may play a part in the final battle. Perhaps the remaining protagonists will unite and unknowingly they fulfil the seven characters of that religion, such as Mother, Father, Maiden, Warrior etc. They unite to protect Little Sam and the concluding battle will result in all the main characters being killed, but Little Sam will survive and so it will carry on. Samwell Tarly will act as regent until Little Sam comes of age. Bittersweet! Denise Latino, 50, housewife, Peralada, Spain

‘Arya will be killed by her zombie relatives’

Will Arya use the powers of the faceless men to assasinate every key character from the whole show? Photograph: HBO

The Night King will push to Winterfell and use his dark powers to raise the dead Starks in the crypts beneath the castle. Arya will be pursued through the crypts by an unstoppable headless version of her father, and be unable to defend herself because Needle isn’t made of valyrian steel. She will be killed by her own zombie relatives, then in turn become a zombie who goes on a rampage, using the powers of the faceless men to systematically assasinate every key character from the previous seven seasons. This leaves the realm defenseless, and the Night King victorious. Westeros becomes a vacant wintry wasteland as the engorged army of the dead pushes south to continue its inevitable path to victory and world domination. Mercury Ellis, 40, operations manager, Brooklyn

‘White Walker Jon Snow will kill the Night King’

Sam deciphers the future in the astrolabe and sees that the Night King will take the throne. Having this knowledge he can glean when it will happen and allows it to unfold. The steady White Walker-isation of pretty much all of our favourite goodies and baddies (The Mountain, Jon Snow etc) ensues. All looks bleak. The Night King takes the throne. However, Sam has set a trap in which Snow is a White Walker secret agent. Snow, at the Night King’s side, is resurrected by Sam using his arcane knowledge of cures, and strikes down the Night King on his throne. Snow dies in the process and Sam takes the throne, vowing to use his power to abolish it and spread knowledge and wisdom throughout the kingdoms. Matt, 46, design director, Beckenham
