Inebriated man attacks female judge with sharp object outside courtroom in Himachal Pradesh

The accused has been remanded to police custody (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Shimla: A man has been arrested in Kangra district of Himachal Pradesh for attacking a female judge who was on her way to the courtroom after having lunch. The ghastly incident took place in the Dehra area when Judge Sheetal Sharma was walking towards the court complex which is barely 50 metres from the judges' residence.

Identified as Lakshman Roy, the accused charged at the judge with a sharp-edged weapon when she was walking back to the courts after having lunch at home. Fortunately, Judge Sharma escape the attack with no injuries owing to the prompt response by advocates present near the spot of the attack and security personnel deployed at the court complex.

Police officials familiar with the matter told Times of India that the accused was under the influence of alcohol when he attacked the judge. He hails from West Bengal, addded the official. As per the latest reports, Roy has been remanded to three days of police custody. However, the reason behind the attack is still unclear as the police are currently in the process of interrogating Roy and finding out why he charged at the Judge. More details in this regard are awaited pending a detailed police investigation.

A much similar instance had come to light from Nagpur in Maharashtra in December of last year when an assistant prosecutor attacked a sessions court judge in court premises. The accused, DM Parate allegedly slapped senior civil judge KR Deshpande outside the courtroom. While Parate was not arrested by Sadar police, reports suggested that he was miffed with the judge over a case-related decision. District government pleader Nitin Telgote had condemned the incident while stating that if the accused had any grievances, he should have taken up a proper channel of communication rather than taking law into his own hands.
