Kolkata puppies’ murder: 2 students arrested for inhumane crime, 3 more questioned

The puppies were found dead and tied up in three disposable bags in a parking lot of the campus on Sunday afternoon.

Kolkata: Two nursing students of NRS Medical College and Hospital were arrested on Tuesday for the mass killing of 16 puppies on the campus. The accused girls, Moutusi Mondal and Soma Burman who are studying in the first and second year respectively, were arrested after they were identified by two security guards.

The puppies were found dead and tied up in three disposable bags in a parking lot of the campus on Sunday afternoon. Investigation revealed that the brutal murder was planned. At least three other people were involved directly in the crime, according to a report in The Times of India. The appalling fact in the case is the cooperation and planning of the murderers of the innocent animals. The puppies and their mothers were tempted from different corners of the hostel premises into the backyard with biscuits and then confined inside a compound whose exits were blocked.

#UPDATE: Both the accused have been arrested in connection with the incident where 16 dead puppies were found in the garbage beside Gynaecology Dept of NRS Hospital (Entally PS area) in Kolkata on 13 January. #WestBengal — ANI (@ANI) January 15, 2019

About 55 students and staff members were interrogated by a hospital probe committee consisting of three members on Tuesday. Most of them refused to know anything about the incident. They gave bizarre reasons for the cause of the massacre. When a security guard identified the two students who were seen in a 28-second clip, the girls were arrested at about 4 pm. They confessed to having committed the crime with the help of a few others.

The probe committee will file a detailed report of the cold-blooded murder with the authorities after which strict action would be taken against those found guilty. The police also suspect that many more hostellers were involved in the "mass murder" of the puppies as it seems impossible that only two persons could have committed the crime.

Also Read: Mad dog? Man bites 2 girls over barking canines in Ahmedabad

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
