Forest department set up trap cameras, cage to caputure leopard which killed cows and attacked villagers in UP

The animal is yet to be captured by forest rangers (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Allahabad: The Uttar Pradesh State Forest Department has set up camera traps and a cage to catch a stray leopard which killed two cows and attacked locals in the Shahabpur village of Kunda in Pratapgarh district of Uttar Pradesh on Monday. A team of rangers has also been deployed in the area to ensure the safety of locals who were left terrified after the attack.

Going by reports, the big cat entered a cowshed owned by one Daddan Shukla late on Monday night. It attacked two cows and injured a calf before Shukla and other villagers arrived at the spot and tried to scare the animal away. However, the leopard pounced on the locals and fled towards the forest area.

The forest department was then alerted and rushed to the Shahabpur village without wasting any time. A team of rangers was deployed in the area to safeguard the locals from another attack by the animal. District forest officer, Pratapgarh BR Ahirwar told Times of India that officials examined the surroundings and confirmed the presence of the leopard on the basis of footage and pug marks recovered from the spot. Ahirwar also added that a cage has been set up by the forest department to trap the animal.

Earlier this month, a 12-year-old boy in Balrampur district of Uttar Pradesh died after a stray leopard entered his home and attacked him. The tragic incident took place in Binholi Kala village near Sohelwa forest range. A team of forest officials arrived at the spot and the boy's body was sent for post-mortem. Another glimpse of this bulging man-animal conflict in the state of Uttar Pradesh was seen in Bahraich district on April 5 when locals working at a sugarcane field in a village close to Kakraha range of Katarniaghat Wildlife Sanctuary beat a leopard to death after the animal injured as many as six people.
