In the aftermath of I-T raids, all eyes on Vellore

Chronic neglect of Palar river, acute water shortage, poor waste management irk residents

This constituency has been in the eye of the storm in Tamil Nadu after raids by the IT department.

The seizure of huge quantities of cash has muddied the waters in Vellore, currently represented by the AIADMK.

While the DMK fielded party treasurer Durai Murugan’s son D.M. Kathir Anand, the AIADMK allowed its ally, the New Justice Party’s president A.C. Shanmugam to contest on the ‘Two Leaves’ symbol. Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam (AMMK) has nominated a former Minister K. Pandurangan. Makkal Needhi Maiam’s R. Suresh, and Naam Tamizhar Katchi’s S. Deepalakshmi are also in the fray.

The constituency comprises the town of Vellore and leather fronts of Ambur, Vaniyambadi and Gudiyatham, besides Anaicut and KV Kuppam.

Minority votes

Political observers said that DMK was hoping to gain the support of minority voters who constitute a major chunk in the constituency, besides cashing in on the disenchantment of the small and medium entrepreneurs who were hard hit by twin strikes of demonetisation and GST.

Chronic neglect of the Palar river and linking of rivers like Thenpennai and Palar, not drawing up comprehensive plans to meet the acute water shortage in the entire constituency, lack of underground drainage, solid waste management, poor traffic management and law enforcement in major towns are the key issues the new incumbent should address immediately, say a number of voters from the different Assembly segments.

Palar Padhukappu Sangam president A.C. Venkatesan said, “repeated neglect of the Palar river by ruling as well as Oppositions parties has left us with no other choice but to field our own candidate.

“The Palar runs for 33 km in AP and 222 km in Vellore district and there is only one check dam in the district being built so far.

“While there is no rain in the catchment areas in the upper stretch of the river, there is no water in the river in places such as Ambur and Vaniyambadi.

“Letting of industrial effluents and raw sewage has caused heavy pollution in the river on which the people of four districts depend for water.

“From AP, the river touches down Tiruvannamalai, Vellore, and Kancheepuram and its ground water level has helped to quench the thirst of southern suburbs of Chennai city,” he said.

Perennial issues

Several protests in the wake of elections were held by residents of Ambur, Vaniyambadi and Gudiyatham, who said that the unabated extraction of groundwater in the Palar river bed for providing and augmenting water supply to the municipalities and the Vellore Corporation, besides for industrial purposes has resulted in a situation where there is no water for agriculture.

A cross-section of people revealed that they were aggrieved that the MPs never visited the constituency periodically after getting elected.

A septuagenarian voter from Sathuvachari P. Santhanam says that people have their own difficulties in each area.

The MPs should, therefore, appoint teams comprising 15 persons in each area who should assess the problems and submit reports to the MPs periodically.

Based on the reports, the MPs should visit the constituencies, get details about the problems and take steps to solve them. General public having knowledge of the area should be the members of such teams, he said.

Addressing grievances

The income-tax raids during the last one week lead to speculations of countermanding the elections in Vellore, but it did not happen and the voters were keen on electing a campaigner to address their grievances at least during this new term of office, he added.
