Pakistan says they have handed over their response to India’s dossier on Pulwama attack

Pakistan has continued to claim that the dossier did not contain any evidence of Pakistan’s involvement in the Pulwama attack. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Islamabad: Pakistan Foreign Affairs spokesperson Muhammed Faisal on Thursday said that Pakistan has handed over their response on the Pulwama dossier with a few added questions, but warned that if India responded with the “same response as February 27 if it had challenged their resolve”.

“We hope India will answer these questions soon,” Faisal said, adding, “India will receive the same response as February 27 if it challenges our resolve.”

Faisal told reporters during a media briefing that Pakistan’s Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi had “credible intelligence” that India was preparing for “another act of aggression” against Pakistan around April 16 and 20. Ironically, the 17th Lok Sabha elections are underway in India and it is highly unlikely India will engage in such an act of aggression along the border that will compromise peace and national security.

India handed over the dossier to the Acting High Commissioner of Pakistan on February 27 which contained details the presence of Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camps in Pakistan, following which Qureshi had said Islamabad will examine it with an “open heart”.

Indian Air Force fighter jets on February 26 launched a major offensive against terrorist organisations using Pakistani soil to carry out terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir and annihilated training camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammed in Balakot that falls in the Khyber- Pakhtunkhwa region, along with Muzaffarabad and Chakothi in PoK. The terror group is responsible for the dastardly terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14 where 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

The attack was carried out by 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets, ably aided by Indian Sukhoi jets that provided cover throughout the operation, around 3:30 am. The payload dropped by the Indian Air Force weighed as much as 1000 kilogrammes.

The very next morning, Pakistan Air Force jets entered Indian airspace from Nowshera sector but were immediately sent back by IAF jets on February 27.

Pakistan’s Foreign Office had back then stated that the dossier did not contain any evidence of Pakistan’s involvement in the Pulwama attack. In a press briefing on March 28, Faisal had categorically stated that the information provided by India was being looked into and “no linkage of Pakistan with Pulwama was found”.
