‘Modi ji has some secret pact with Pakistan’: Arvind Kejriwal – KashmirWatch

SRINAGAR, APR 11 (PTK): Pakistan’s Prime Minister Imran Khan has said he believes there may be a better chance of peace talks with India and settle the Kashmir issue if Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s party BJP wins the general elections.

Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal attacked PM Modi recently, as he wondered if Pakistan ‘killed 40 CRPF men to help Modiji’.

After Imran Khan said it would be better for Pakistan if BJP came back to power, Arvind Kejriwal tweeted: “Pakistan and Imran Khan are openly supporting Modi ji. It is clear now that Modi ji has some secret pact wid them. Everyone is asking – did Pakistan kill 40 of our brave soldiers in Pulwama on 14 Feb just before elections to help Modi ji?”

India will go to elections in seven phases beginning from Thursday.

“Perhaps if the BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party)….wins, some kind of settlement in Kashmir could be reached,” Khan told a small group of foreign journalists in an interview.

He said other parties would be afraid of right-wing backlash in case of settlement on the Kashmir issue.

Khan said Kashmir was the central issue between the two countries.

India maintains that the entire state of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of the country and Pakistan is in illegal occupation of a part of the state’s territory.

Tensions flared up between India and Pakistan after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) killed 40 CRPF personnel in Kashmir’s Pulwama district on February 14. (PTK)

I would like to remind Imran Khan that Kashmir is not anybody’s private property: Owaisi

SRINAGAR, APR 11 (PTK): Condemning statement of Pakistan Prime Minister, Imran Khan, that he sees a better chance of peace talks with India if BJP wins general elections, AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi said we have free and fair elections unlike in Pakistan where the electoral process is controlled by their Army and intelligence agency, ISI.

“I condemn the statement of Imran Khan. He has no right to interfere in the electoral process of a great country like India. He comes from a country where the electoral process is controlled by their Army and ISI. We have free and fair elections. It is completely wrong on part of Imran Khan to say that he wants Narendra Modi as Prime Minister of India so that Kashmir issue can be solved. I would like to remind him that Kashmir is not anybody’s private property,” Owaisi told reporters after casting his vote here.

The All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen (AIMIM) leader alleged that Modi has tried to portray himself as a victim of Opposition parties and Pakistan.

“Kashmir is an integral part of India. Kashmir is our heart. It is correct that there is a lot to do in Kashmir, in which Modi has failed. But the Prime Minister has tried to portray himself as a victim of Opposition parties and Pakistan, and that they do not want to see him as Prime Minister,” he said.

“But now Imran Khan is himself saying that the Pakistan establishment, that is ISI, wants Modi as Prime Minister. I request the proud people of India to ensure that we do not allow Imran Khan’s wish to get fulfilled. People will come out and decide who should lead our great nation,” Owaisi added.

Earlier Reacting to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s remarks that there might be a better chance of peace talks with India if his counterpart Narendra Modi’s party came back to power, former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Mehbooba Mufti took a jibe at the confusion Modi supporters might be facing over Khan’s comments.

“Bhakts scratching their heads & at wit ends wondering if they should praise Imran Khan or not,” Mufti tweeted. According to local media reports, Prime Minister Khan on Tuesday said there might be a better chance of peace talks with India if PM Modi wins the upcoming elections. He reportedly said that if the next Indian government were to be led by the Congress party, it might be too scared to seek a settlement with Pakistan over Kashmir, fearing a backlash from the right wing. (PTK)
