Kerala: Drug peddlers using performance bikes to evade cops

The youth who are caught peddling drugs on a high-end bike usually come from a financially poor income background.

Kochi: Performance bikes are being used by young drug peddlars to escape the excise department officials. Bikes like Harley Davidson, Duke, Pulsar 220, FC Yamaha and Karizma ZMR are the most sought after bikes by youth who transport drugs. These bikes which are above 200 cc are called entry-level bikes above 18-19 brake horse power (BHP).

When these young drug peddlers spot the excise teams, they increase the speed of the bikes and ride into narrow roads within no time. This way, the excise officials are unable to chase or catch them in their jeeps, according to a report in The Times of India.

Also Read: Kolkata puppies’ murder: 2 students arrested for inhumane crime, 3 more questioned

The speed of these high-end bikes can rise to 70-75 kmh in the third gear and to 120-130 kmh in the fifth gear. However, the speed of bikes below 150 cc reach only 50-55 kmh in third gear and touch 100 kmh in the fifth gear.

Reportedly, the excise officials of Mattancherry caught a Pulsar 220 biker with narcotic drugs in 2017. Aluva and North Paravoor excise teams caught a Duke biker each in 2018 and 2017. A Harley Davidson was caught in Perumbavoor in 2017.

Youngsters find it prestigious to possess performance bikes. Excise inspector of Mamala, Sujith told TOI that inspections focused on these bikes are being conducted. Sujith further said that the youth who are caught peddling drugs on a high-end bike usually come from a financially poor income background.

A biker was caught in Mamala when he was transporting ganja in Duke some months ago. The vehicles caught in Narcotic and Psychotropic Substances cases are kept in the excise offices.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
