Violence and technical glitches mar first phase of 2019 Lok Sabha elections

The first phase of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections began on Thursday. The world's biggest franchise exercise saw electorates coming out to vote in 91 of the 543 parliamentary constituencies in Phase 1 of the Lok Sabha polls. The overall voting percentage was 72 per cent.



The voting began on a brisk pace in north-eastern states and picked up speed gradually across the country. The first phase witnessed sporadic incidents of violence in Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh. A TDP worker died and former speaker from TDP K Shivaprasad Rao was injured in clashes that erupted in Andhra Pradesh. The state also witnessed widespread malfunctioning of Electronic Voting Machines (EVM). Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu shot a letter to the Election Commission and requested extension of polling time. The state is having simultaneous Lok Sabha and Assembly polls.



In Telangana, all the 17 segments, including Nizamabad saw over 170 farmers contesting demanding remunerative price for their produce. The state had recorded 60.57 per cent voting till 6 pm.



Naxals carried out an IED blast in Maharashtra while voting was underway. A similar blast was triggered by Naxals in Chhattisgarh's Narayanpur district in Bastar Lok Sabha constituency. People, however, defied terror by coming out in large numbers to vote. Shyamgiri, the target of Naxal violence, polled an impressive 77 per cent votes.

Polling was largely peaceful in eight seats of western Uttar Pradesh barring Kairana where paramilitary forces had to disperse a crowd that was trying to barge in a polling station. All the eight seats engaged in a tough triangular contest between BJP, Mahagathbandhan of BSP, SP and RLD and Congress. The Congress is expected to slice the votes of both the BJP and the grand alliance. Saharanpur polled highest with 70.68 per cent, while Ghaziabad clocked the least at 57.60 per cent. Overall polling percentage on eight seats was 63.69 per cent.

Polling on two seats in West Bengal – Alipurduars and Cooch Behar - was largely peaceful, barring minor clashes. The two constituencies recently saw high voltage campaign by PM Modi and chief minister Mamata Banerjee.



The four Lok Sabha seats – Nawada, Gaya, Jamui and Aurangabad in Bihar polled 53 per cent overall, a marginal increase of 1 per cent than 2014. All four seats fall in Left-Wing extremists affected districts.



Voters in the northeast states came out in large numbers to vote. A big question before the voters is the controversial citizenship bill which has also given hope to the Congress to wrest back some seats. The turnout was 81.8 per cent in Tripura, 69 per cent in Sikkim, 78 per cent in Nagaland and 78.2 per cent in Manipur. In the five seats that went to the polls in Assam, the turnout was 68 per cent.
