Nitin Gadkari's surprise defeat in Nagpur possible, says Madhusudan Mistry

Madhusudan Mistry, senior Congress leader and observer for Maharashtra Congress spoke with Sudhir Suryawanshi, and claimed that the Congress is in better position than the BJP in Maharashtra in this Lok Sabha poll.

Why should people vote for the Congress in the polls?

I visited many places in Vidarbha and my own observations are that no sections of society are happy with this government. People are tired of the BJP government and they want Congress back in power. We are confident of meeting expectations of the voters through various schemes and projects announced in our manifesto. The anger is so palpable that a surprise victory in Nagpur is possible.

Do you really think Congress can defeat a big leader like Nitin Gadkari?

I observed that people of Nagpur are not happy with this 'big man'. He is big in media and in government, not among people anymore. People had made him 'big', so now they will cut to size him in this poll. Gadkari had promised the Halba community the scheduled tribe reservation status but he could not fulfill it in the last five years. Therefore, Halba, Kunbi, Dalit and Muslim are likely to vote the Congress in large numbers. Even small time traders are unhappy with IT raids and complex GST filing.

Congress has been accused dynastic party or Gandhi family party, what is your take on it?

These are all false accusations. Dynastic politics is in every party now. We cannot compare the Gandhi family to any other family. They have sacrificed their lives for the country. People of India are emotionally connected with Gandhi family.

In Maharashtra, NCP has done the better candidates selections while Congress has messed up in Lok sabha polls, why?

To be frank, the candidate selection for Maharashtra process was over when I was appointed as an observer for Maharashtra. There were complaints but we were able to address it.

The Leader of Opposition and Congress MLA Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil has been campaigning for the BJP nominee and his son Dr Sujay Vikhe Patil, besides, Vikhe also reportedly participated in the Prime Minister rally planning meeting in Ahmednagar recently, Will Congress take action against him?

People join the Congress party voluntarily. We will not say good bye to him. Today, he may be participating in BJP campaign meetings but tomorrow, he may regret it and admit his mistake. He is now working for his family rather than the party. He has to take a call.
