Sonia files papers, aims for fifth win from Rae Bareli

shalender@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, April 11

Denying invincibility of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, UPA president Sonia Gandhi today reminded the people of 2004 when the then Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee was thought to be invincible, yet the UPA won.

Speaking to reporters after filing her nomination from Rae Bareli for the fifth consecutive term, Sonia Gandhi expressed confidence in the love of the people of Rae Bareli.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi, who was with his mother, once again attacked Prime Minister Modi.

He said: “There have been many people in Indian history that had the arrogance to believe that they are invincible and bigger than the people of the country. Modi ji has done nothing for the people in the past five years and his invincibility will be there for all to see after the elections.”

Responding to a question about PM Modi threatening to send him to jail, Rahul Gandhi said he was ready to face anything, but before that Modi ji should agree to answer his questions regarding the Rafael deal. For that, he was ready to go over to Race Course road if Modi ji wanted, he said.

Earlier Sonia Gandhi participated in a road show. Due to her frail health, she did not travel in an open truck, but preferred to be in an SUV. Thousands of supporters thronged the streets cheering Sonia Gandhi and the Gandhi-Vadra family, showering flower petals as the cavalcade inched towards the collectorate.

Besides Rahul, she was accompanied by daughter Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, son-in-law Robert Vadra and grandchildren Rehan and Miraya. Before filing her nomination, Sonia Gandhi, along with her family, performed a havan at the residence of Gandhi family’s guru Gayaprasad Shukla.

After filing her nomination papers, Sonia Gandhi followed the tradition of visiting the ancestral home of Islamic scholar late Maulana Ali Miyan. She also held a meeting with party workers.

Declares assets worth Rs 11.82 cr
