Indian Elections 2019: Oldest woman, aged 107, casts her vote

Indian Elections 2019: Oldest woman, aged 107, casts her vote

New Delhi - Almost 900 million of India's 1.3 billion people are eligible to vote.

By Web Report Published: Fri 12 Apr 2019, 6:21 AM Last updated: Fri 12 Apr 2019, 8:55 AM

At least people were killed on the first day of polling in India's general elections, which are seen as a referendum on Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party.

A ruling Telugu Desam party worker and another belonging to the main opposition YSR Congress were killed in a poll-related group clash in Anantapuramu district of Andhra Pradesh, police said.



The clash occurred at Veerapuram village under Tadipatri Assembly constituency in the afternoon. The deceased have been identified as Pulla Reddy of YSR Congress party and Sidda Bhaskar Reddy of the TDP, according to police sources.

Violent clashes were also reported elsewhere in the state, where voters are casting ballots for 25 members of India's lower house of Parliament, the Lok Sabha, and 175 state assembly seats.

Outside of Andhra Pradesh, voting was taking place in 17 other Indian states and two Union Territories Thursday in the first of a seven-phase election staged over six weeks.

With 900 million of India's 1.3 people registered to vote, it is the world's largest democratic exercise. Over the course of the election, 543 Lok Sahba seats will be decided from about a million polling stations across India.

With Modi as their frontman, the BJP won a clear majority in 2014 elections. Under the leadership of political dynasty scion Rahul Gandhi, India's National Congress party, which ruled the country for about half a century since the 1947 independence, has struggled to coalesce India's many opposition parties into a coherent effort that could go head-to-head with the BJP.

Surveys show the ruling party projected to come out first again in this year's polls, though with a smaller mandate.



5:20pm
