Election 2019: Cong announces names for MP, Punjab; Manish Tewari from Anandpur Sahib, Scindia from Guna

Congress President Rahul Gandhi. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: The first phase of Lok Sabha election 2019 concluded on Thursday with 91 constituencies in 21 states facing the ballot. The official figures of the Election commission showed that the trends were similar to those in 2014.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi while at the hustings in Karnataka's Koppal attacked Janata Dal-Secular (JD-S) leaders HD Deve Gowda and his son Kumaraswamy over the statements made by them previously.

"HD Deve Gowda ke bete ne kaha ki kendra mein agar phir sarkar ban gai toh vo rajneeti se sanyaas lelenge. 2014 ke chunav mein swayam Deve Gowda ji ne kaha tha agar Modi ji PM banenge toh main sanyaas le lunga. Unhone liya kya? Beta sanyas lega kya? (Deve Gowda's son has told that he would retire from politics if NDA again forms government in the centre. Do you believe him? During 2014 election, Deve Gowda ji had said that if Modi becomes PM, he would retire. As expected, he didn't retire from politics)" he said.

PM Modi in Koppal: HD Deve Gowda ji ke bete ne kaha ki kendra mein agar phir sarkar ban gai toh vo rajneeti se sanyaas lelenge. 2014 ke chunav mein swayam Deve Gowda ji ne kaha tha agar Modi ji PM banenge toh main sanyaas le lunga. Unhone liya kya? Beta sanyas lega kya?#Karnataka pic.twitter.com/4Q4X9642jH — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

Lok Sabha Election 2019 UPDATES:

10 pm: The Chief Electoral Officer of Meghalaya, FR Kharkongor, today said that he has requested the Election Commission to permit the re-polling in Konarchar as there was confusion between the Lok Sabha and by-poll voting that is being conducted simultaneously.

Chief Electoral Officer,Meghalaya: Perhaps because of simultaneous polls (LS & by-polls), there was human error, a mismatch of figures&crisscrossing of machines. Have recommended re-poll at Konarchar polling station under Selsella constituency to EC; waiting for EC's instructions https://t.co/81NrcTiquS — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

9:45 pm: Abhinandan Pathak, a lookalike of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, on Friday filed his nomination as an Independent candidate from the Lucknow constituency in Uttar Pradesh. "I'll also file my nomination from Varanasi on April 26... I am not a dummy candidate and I am not against anyone but 'jumla'. After winning, I'll support Rahul ji's PM candidature," he said. Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh is the sitting Member of Parliament and candidate from Lucknow.

Abhinandan Pathak, a PM Modi lookalike, filed his nomination as Independent candidate from Lucknow today. Says, "I'll also file nomination from Varanasi on 26. I am not a dummy candidate. I am not against anyone but 'jumla'. After winning, I'll support Rahul ji's PM candidature. pic.twitter.com/SUs0UgGApW — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) April 12, 2019

8:50 pm: Congress on Friday released a list of 7 candidates for the Lok Sabha Elections 2019 from Punjab, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir and Bihar. Member of Parliament Jyotiraditya Scindia to contest from his home constituency Guna in Madhya Pradesh and Manish Tewari will contest from Anandpur Sahib in Punjab.

Congress party releases their list of 7 candidates for #LokSabhaElections2019 Jyotiraditya Scindia to contest from Guna (Madhya Pradesh) and Manish Tewari to contest from Anandpur Sahib (Punjab). pic.twitter.com/NzjFiLAewo — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

7 pm: Congress president Rahul Gandhi fired a fresh salvo at the Bharatiya Janata Party and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and said that the ruling party at the Centre wants only "one man" to have all the power. "Election of 2019 is a clash between two different visions of our country. Congress says all different ideas, perspectives, languages, histories, cultures must live happily together. All voices must be heard. RSS-BJP say only one idea should govern India... We say power must be in the hands of the people, they say it must be in the hand of one man," he said in Tamil Nadu's Madurai.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi in Madurai, Tamil Nadu: We say power must be in the hands of the people, they say power must be in the hand of one man. https://t.co/4pxj7QKv4x — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

Congress President Rahul Gandhi in Madurai, Tamil Nadu: Mr Narendra Modi feels that just because he can control the Chief Minister, he controls this state. We don't want to control this state, we want people of Tamil Nadu to control this sate. pic.twitter.com/kdXxvRskN9 — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

6:20 pm: Union Minister Maneka Gandhi on Thursday appealed to Muslim voters in Sultanpur, citing various schemes of the Modi government over the past 5 years of its tenure.

"In the last five years, our government has worked for the advancement and development of all sections and communities; All the people have been equally benefited by the Government schemes. Our government has worked under the policy of ' Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas'," she said.

5:45 pm: HD Kumaraswamy has hit back at PM Modi over the latter's remark seeking the Karnataka Chief Minister's resignation. The Janata Dal (Secular) leader said that the Prime Minister is getting carried away by wrong inputs by state party (BJP) leadership.

"Despite clarifying on the false post by BJP Karnataka, PM Narendra Modi still gets carried away by wrong inputs of state leaders. The PM is using the patriotism of soldiers for his gain. He rides on such emotional waves because there are no development issues to talk about," HDK said at a political gathering.

Despite clarifying on the false post by @BJP4Karnataka, PM @narendramodi still gets carried away by wrong inputs of state leaders. The PM is using the patriotism of soldiers for his gain. He rides on such emotional waves because there are no development issues to talk about. pic.twitter.com/fhA6u3lA7p — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) April 12, 2019

5:30 pm: Congress party leaders who had signed the letter about an alleged security breach in party chief Rahul Gandhi's security on April 10 had already met Home Minister Rajnath Singh the very same day and the Home Minister had assured them that the alleged breach would be probed. Senior Congress leaders met Rajnath Singh late at night and the HM immediately tasked the Special Protection Group director to look into the security threat.

The SPG director later informed the ministry that the “green light”, which the Congress leaders had described as a ‘threat’, was actually that of a mobile phone used by AICC photographer, who was recording the impromptu press interaction of Rahul Gandhi.

In a big development, Cong party leaders who had signed the letter about an alleged security breach in Rahul Gandhi's security had already met Home Minister Rajnath Singh on 10th April & HM had assured them that alleged breach would be probed. @NikunjGargN with the details. pic.twitter.com/j5Hpy0HGCo — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) April 12, 2019

4:55 pm: On Friday, a massive row erupted over a purported letter written by armed forces veterans to President of India, wherein they sought his attention towards 'politicisation' of the armed forces. The Congress party was quick to blame the ruling party citing the letter. Shortly afterwards, two service chiefs mentioned in the letter said that they were not signatories to the same.

Congress also targetted BJP leader Smriti Irani over her educational qualifications. Irani, however, said that she will continue to work for Amethi, the constituency she will be contesting from against Congress president Rahul Gandhi.

4:30 pm: The Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) and the Jananayak Janata Party (JJP) enter into alliance in Haryana for Lok Sabha elections. Gopal Rai, AAP leader, says: "JJP will contest on 7 seats and AAP will contest on 3 seats in Haryana."

4 pm: Nasir Abbas Bismillah, grandson of Shehnai maestro late Ustad Bismillah Khan, on letter to PM asking to join his nomination process: "It's our desire to join him. If we get an offer we'll accept; regret we didn't accept in 2014 as few Congressmen brainwashed our elders."

3:50 pm: Himachal Pradesh Power Minister Anil Sharma has tendered his resignation as minister, reports ANI.

3:30 pm: Former union minister Krishna Tirath, who had quit the Congress in 2015 to join the Bharatiya Janata Party ahead of the Delhi assembly elections, on Friday rejoined the grand old party after four years in the presence of Congress general secretary Delhi in-charge P C Chacko.

Delhi: Former Union Minister Krishna Tirath quits BJP,rejoins Congress pic.twitter.com/zIrO0FuuMl — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

2:55 pm: Congress leader PC Chacko says the party has failed to reach a pre-poll alliance deal with the Aam Aadmi Party but are still ready to work out an agreement. "AAP wanted to have an alliance in other states also which is not practical. Every state is different; we will announce the seats (for Delhi) tomorrow or day after tomorrow. If they are ready for an alliance in Delhi with the Congress, we are ready even today," he said.

2.32 pm: Nirmala Sitharaman on the purported letter to Pres signed by Armed Forces veterans: Two senior officers said they have not given consent, worrying that fake letters being signed by vested groups. Condemnable. Rashtrapati Bhawan has also said that they have not received the letter.

2.30 pm: Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi after BJP delegation met EC: "Rahul Gandhi has crossed all limits by using such level of unparliamentary language for PM. He's the chief of Congress' 'gaali gang.' Have demanded action be taken against his statements, which aren't based on facts."

2:00 pm: The Supreme Court on Friday agreed to hear a plea challenging the Election Commission's ban on the release of a biopic on Prime Minister Narendra Modi till Lok Sabha elections are over. The plea will be heard on April 15.

1.47 pm: "Congress can keep insulting me. Nothing can stop me. The more you insult me, the more you suppress me, I will work that much more against Congress in Amethi," says Smriti Irani in response to Congress criticism about her educational qualification.

1.08 pm: Congress President Rahul Gandhi in Krishnagiri: We will never ever let the people of Tamil Nadu be ruled by Nagpur. Tamil Nadu is going to be ruled from Tamil Nadu & MK Stalin is going to be the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu.

12.22 am: Congress launches a scathing attack on BJP leader Smriti Irani over her educational qualification. Priyanka Chaturvedi of Congress said that she has misrepresented her educational qualification in earlier affidavits.

11.55 am: 71.41% poll percentage recorded in Meghalaya yesterday. Poll percentage recorded in 2014 was 68% and in 2009 it was 63% .

11:40 am: After filing a complaint against Congress chief Rahul Gandhi over his 'Chowkidar Chor Hai' allegations in connection with the Rafale deal, a delegation of the BJP will also meet the Election Commission over the same matter.

11.17 am: BJP files criminal contempt against Congress President Rahul Gandhi for comments that SC has observed that 'Chowkidaar chor hain'. Commenting on the SC verdict that ' stolen' Rafale documents were 'admissible' in the court, Gandhi had said that the SC had put the onus on PM Modi.

11.08 am: Makers of biopic 'PM Narendra Modi' move the Supreme Court against the stalling of the film's release. Supreme Court agrees to hear the case on April 15.

10.47 am: Supreme Court asks political parties to give details of donors who donated through electoral bonds, amounts received from them, details of payment received on each bond etc. to the Election Commission by May 30.

10.44 am: Electoral Bond judgement: SC orders all parties to submit details of all donors to EC, asks them to submit details by 30th May in a sealed cover

10.34 am: Tamil Nadu: More than 3000 people form a human chain at Pamban Sea Bridge in Rameswaram to spread election awareness for 100% voter turnout in Ramanathapuram Lok Sabha constituency.

Tamil Nadu: More than 3000 people form a human chain at Pamban Sea Bridge in Rameswaram to spread election awareness for 100% voter turnout in Ramanathapuram Lok Sabha constituency. pic.twitter.com/cCkpr94vJX — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

9.00 am: Rajasthan: Two groups of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers clash during a rally in Masuda, Ajmer.

#WATCH Rajasthan: Two groups of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers clash during a rally in Masuda, Ajmer. (11/4/19) pic.twitter.com/AMrJXTKlbg — ANI (@ANI) April 12, 2019

8.32 am: Shailendra Kumar, Chief Electoral Officer, J&K: Total voting percentage in Jammu was 72.19% & 35.01% in Baramulla. Polling was peaceful in both divisions, we congratulate all candidates, political parties, voters, police, & paramilitary forces

8.29 am: Sanbor Shullai, BJP candidate from Shillong parliamentary seat: As long as I'm alive Citizenship Amendment Bill (CAB) will not be implemented. I will kill myself, I will suicide before Narendra Modi but I will not let CAB to be implemented.
