Six fall sick after inhaling toxic chlorine gas in Adajan

SURAT: Six people fell sick after inhaling chlorine gas in a hotel in Adajan area of the city late on Wednesday night. The management at Hotel Golden Star had illegally stored two cylinders of chlorine gas for cleaning water in their swimming pool. One cylinder started to leak, leading to the accident. After being informed, fire and emergency department of Surat Municipal Corporation (SMC) rushed to the spot and sealed the premises after diluting the leaked cylinder. SMC has also informed police and district collector to take action against the errant hotel authorities.The whole episode came to light on Wednesday evening after some people suffered toxic effects of leaked chlorine gas in Jalaram residential society located nearby the hotel. Chief fire officer of SMC, Basant Parikh said, “There were two leaks that spread the gas in the nearby society. We found two100 litre chlorine gas cylinders being kept illegally in the hotel premises. We sealed the swimming pool area and diluted the cylinder by putting it in the water. We vacated residents of the residential society for safety and after clearing the effects of the gas at around 1am on Thursday, they were allowed to move into their homes.”Parikh also added that they have sealed the the hotel. “They didn’t have required permission to keep such chlorine cylinders. It is used for water purification, but these days people use the lesser toxic hypo-chloride. Action will be taken as per law against the hotel authorities, who are now absconding.”The fire staff went again on Thursday to inquire if any more people have suffered from the chlorine effect. They found six affected persons who inhaled the gas when they went to swim in the pool on Wednesday evening and have been admitted to BAPS hospital. They affected persons are Shubh Bhagat, 17, Bhagvan Park society, Yog S Bhagat, 15, Sangam society, Mihir Sopariwala Choksi wadi, Alok Farsanwala , Honey park, Veer Mehta , Deepa complex and Jignesh Mehta Deepa complex . However, all of them have been released on Thursday evening from the hospital after treatment.
