Farmers seek payment of crop insurance

RAJKOT: Farmers held a rally in Rajkot on Thursday seeking release of crop insurance, especially in those talukas which had been declared drought-affected officially by the state government. The agitating farmers, who also demanded permission for euthanasia , clashed with the police. Cops detained 34 farmers, including eight women, who were released later.The Bhartiya Kisan Sangh which organised the rally in Rajkot has alleged that the insurance company and government did injustice to the farmers while paying crop insurance. Around 29 farmers have committed suicide within a year because of crop failure and financial crunch.President of Rajkot unit of Bhartiya Kisan Sangh, Dilip Sakhia said, “The government itself declared Padadhri and Vichiya taluka drought-affected. However, till date no assistance has been received as per the prevalent rules. The farmers and cattle breeders here are facing immense problems for water and fodder, especially grass.”The farmers also held a public meeting near race course and wanted to take the rally to the collector’s office to submit a memorandum. However, police prevented them from doing so leading to a clash between them and the agitating farmers. After heated arguments with the police, the collector allowed five representatives of the farmers’ association to enter into the office and submit their memorandum.The Bhartiya Kisan Sangh also submitted a memorandum demanding payment of crop insurance from October last year. The organization said that in many talukas the amount is yet to be released and in some talukas, where it has been, the amount is very less. The farmers also alleged that in 2016-17, the insurance company paid claims for groundnut crop, but not for cotton The memorandum pointed a major gaffe on part of the government while paying insurance. It asked: “How come the government does not know that if groundnut crop fails because of insufficient rain in an area, then other crops in the same area would fail for the same reason too?”
