Thiruvananthapuram: Man murders neighbour, rapes his wife; local court awards death sentence

Anil Kumar was the neighbour of the deceased and shared a friendly equation with them (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Thiruvanathapuram: Death sentence was awarded to a man by a local court for murdering another man and allegedly raping the latter's wife. The sentence was awarded to the accused by Mini S Das, additional sessions judge. A penalty of Rs 1.75 lakh was also levied on the convict.

The alleged incident took place in Koliyoor which falls under the jurisdiction of the Kovalam police station. The incident took place in July 2016. The convict was identified as Anil Kumar alias Kolusu Binu.

While one of the accused was given a death sentence, the second accused, Chandrasekharan of Tamil Nadu was awarded a life sentence. Chandrasekharan was accused of trespassing, murder, robbery and attempt to murder. A penalty of Rs 1 lakh was imposed on Chandrasekharan.

According to the Times of India, the incident took place on July 7, 2016. A man and his wife were sleeping at their residence in Koliyoor when the two accused allegedly attacked him. The husband was attacked with a sledgehammer and an iron rod. The wife was attacked with the same weapon. After attacking the wife, Anil Kumar allegedly raped her.

The woman went into a coma due to brain damage. Though the woman gained consciousness, her memory was lost. The accused then ransacked the house and robbed the couple of their valuables. The crime came to light after the children of the deceased woke up after a few hours. The accused were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

The case of the prosecution was being handled by Special public prosecutor VS Vineeth Kumar. Since the case did not have any eye witnesses, the decision was taken on the bases of circumstantial and scientific evidence. Anil Kumar was the neighbour of the deceased and shared a friendly equation with them. Kumar had made several attempts towards the victim but after she refused, he decided to commit the crime.
