22-year-old on a mission to motivate youngsters to vote

Ludhiana: For 2019 general elections, Initiators of Change, an NGO is running the ‘I Vote, I Lead’ campaign in two states — Delhi and Punjab. A two-phase campaign mainly focuses on first-time voters and PWDs (people with disabilities). In the first phase, the team conducted 64 seminars all over Punjab and Delhi, and reached out to 60,000 first-time voters. In the second phase, the team is planning attractive on-ground activities for first-time voters and PWDs, in which there are weekend activities planned every Saturday and Sunday until the elections are over.

Activities such as nukkad nataks, roadshows, flash mobs, human chains, and bike rallies will be conducted to create a voting festival for the city’s youth at public places. Gauravdeep Singh — an initiator of this campaign — is 22 years old, and a passout from SCD Government College. He said: “The target is not only to ensure maximum voting, but also smart voting.” The team with 200 core committee members is making the youth aware about the importance of reading the party manifesto and the candidate’s profile before voting, so that more effective and educated candidates can be elected. We have a target to impact at least 1.5 lakh youth voters of the state by the end of the campaign. On the polling day, the team will provide pick-and-drop facility to PWDs and senior citizens to ensure no one is left behind.”

Gauravdeep was awarded with the National Youth Award by the Government of India for this campaign in 2018. He was 17 years old when he started working on voter awareness for the 2014 general elections. An idea struck his mind when he read that Bhagat Singh sacrificed his life so that the people of India have a freedom to choose their own leader, which means that he and other freedom fighters sacrificed their lives for voting rights.

Gaurav started going to 27 villages in 2014 and interacting with the youth to ensure everyone voted. He named this campaign ‘I Exist’ campaign. In 2015, he founded Initiators of Change, a youth empowerment organisation to make youth socially and politically aware. The organisation, which started with four youngsters, grew to a team of 200 in 2017, and launched a campaign ‘I Vote, I Lead’ to ensure maximum voting in the Vidhan Sabha elections. The young team collaborated with the Ludhiana district administration and worked extensively to reach out to 40,000 young, first-time voters. The team also created a national record of the largest gathering of youth voters at one place by clicking a drone shot of over 6,000 first-time voters.

BOX

FIRST-TIME VOTERS SPEAK UP

Yukta Nayyar:

“My vote will go only to a deserving person. I wish every person casts his/her vote in a fair manner. Any person who casts his or her vote on the basis of the products they receive for a short span of time must wake up soon, as the person who is giving you things or money for some time just to get votes will never work for your welfare. So, people must not look at short-term benefits, which they are getting from a particular leader. Instead, they should look from the viewpoint of the country’s development. I, as a first-time voter, will cast my vote to a fair and just person, and use my voting power in the right manner. I will vote for a leader who is smart and contributes to the nation’s development, who is taking steps to improve the country’s infrastructure, who can ensure equal rights for men and women, remove discrimination, and promote a fairer distribution of wealth.”

Atul Sharma:

“As a first-time voter, I am very curious about this year’s elections. Voting is about your future, so you should know about the candidate’s activities and what they have done for you and your area. There are many problems we face as a nation due to lack of education, lack of job opportunities, etc. My vote will be for that candidate who can solve these problems and make major improvements in the education scene in Punjab. I don’t vote according to party, I vote only according to the candidate of my area.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
