After Mulk, Taapsee Pannu reunites with Anubhav Sinha for another sociopolitical drama?

Taapsee Pannu and Anubhav Sinha unite for another sociopolitical drama, Thappad? | Photo Credit: Instagram

After their successful big screen outing in last year's Mulk, Bollywood actor Taapsee Pannu and filmmaker Anubhav Sinha have reunited for another. Titled Thappad, the film is reportedly a sociopolitical drama, inspired by true-life incidents.

According to a report in Mumbai Mirror, the film is set to go on floors in the month of August and will be shot in Delhi. Quoting a source close to the film's development, the report states that Taapsee's casting was finalised while they were shooting Mulk.

The actor, who is currently shooting for Anurag Kashyap's Saand Ki Aankh, will play a middle-class girl in the female-oriented film. The source has been quoted as saying, “Anubhav had decided on casting her while they were still shooting Mulk. It’s a female-oriented subject that defies narratives typecasting women. It questions the society and will deliver a poignant message on world domination by women. Taapsee’s protagonist will be a middle-class girl.”

While Taapsee is occupied with Kashyap's next, Sinha has completed the shoot of Article 15, featuring Ayushmann Khurrana in the lead. The report further states that he wrapped up the film this Monday and headed to Rishikesh for the final touches on the Thappad script. The source also informed the publication that Sinha, who is also producing the film, plans to release it on the International Women's Day weekend the next year.

The source has been quoted as saying, "Anubhav is also producing the film and plans to release it on the International Women’s Day weekend in 2020. The film will feature a strong supporting cast. Readings and workshops will commence closer to the shooting date."

Meanwhile, Taapsee is shooting for Saand Ki Aankh alongside Bhumi Pednekar. The actor had previously opened up about her preparation in an interview with news agency PTI. Sharing that her character was both physically and mentally challenging, Taapsee had revealed that the toughest part of it all was to get the body language of 60-65-year-old woman right.

Opening up about getting Harayanvi right for the film, Taapsee was quoted as saying, "They are Haryanvi but based out of UP, there is an interesting crossover of Haryanvi and Hindi of UP. But we had to keep it simple for the audiences to understand. My Hindi is good because I have lived in Delhi. I have heard Haryanvi before but never tried speaking it. It was a challenge to learn it. I had to behave like a mother and grandmother. These are the emotions I have never experienced. Every scene is a challenge."
