Etihad comes to Jet Airways rescue, may raise stake to 49%

File photo | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Lifting the veil of uncertainty, Abu Dhabi-based Etihad Airways has finally offered to buy a stake in debt-laden Jet Airways. The development comes after the financially-troubled carrier suspended its international operations till Friday (April 12) morning as its fleet size has been reduced to 14 planes and the carrier is facing a massive funds crunch. It may be noted that Jet has grounded over 75 per cent of its 119-aircraft fleet.



Etihad has reportedly submitted an expression of interest (EoI) to buy a stake in Jet Airways, bringing huge relief to Jet lenders. The Gulf-based airline can raise its holding in Jet to 49 per cent, the maximum that a foreign airline carrier can hold in a domestic carrier. The lenders were leaving no stone unturned to convince Etihad to bid for a majority stake in Jet. Etihad, which holds a 24 per cent stake, was unwilling to buy more earlier. The Abu Dhabi carrier had told Jet’s lenders in March it would not increase its stake in the crisis-hit airline and wanted the banks to buy out its shareholding at Rs 150 per share.



At present, the Gulf-based airline has joined the race to pick up stakes in Jet that have been put on sale by lenders as part of a turnaround plan. The lenders have extended the deadline for investors to bid for a controlling stake in the beleaguered airline till Friday (April 12).



Meanwhile, Jet founder Naresh Goyal on Thursday pledged about 26 per cent stake in the carrier as security for loans from Punjab National Bank, the airline said in a separate statement to BSE. Several media reports mentioned that Naresh Goyal may submit an EoI jointly with another foreign partner. Under Jet rescue plan, Naresh Goyal’s holding came down to 25 per cent last month from 51 per cent earlier.



It is also learnt that the country’s first sovereign wealth fund National Infrastructure Investment Fund (NIIF), as well as private equity firms such as TPG Capital and Indigo Partners, had shown interest in buying a stake in Jet.



Many industry watchers are of the view that working capital is crucial for Jet, which has around Rs 8,500 crore in debt, and owes money to banks, suppliers, pilots and lessors — some of whom have already started cancelling leases with the embattled carrier.
