The Story Of 21-YO War Hero, Late Arun Khetarpal, Who Single-Handedly Destroyed 7 Pak Tanks In 1971 War

Bollywood has been churning out some quality biopics and historical drama films. Be it Vicky Kaushal's 'Uri' or more recently, Akshay Kumar's 'Kesari', these kind of films based on true events and facts are a hit amongst Indian audience for obvious reasons.

© Hounourpoint

Not only do such films make us more aware, but they also instill a sense of patriotism and belongingness from time-to-time. It seems like another such biopic is in the pipeline and this one shall be based on the life of a 21-year-old Indian Army daredevil who single-handedly destroyed seven Pakistani tanks during the 1971 Indo-Pak war.

© Alchetron

The brave martyr's name is 2nd Lieutenant Arun Khetarpal, and he is the reason why India won the war against Pakistan in 1971. However, before we tell you more about the biopic on Arun Khetarpal, let us tell you who he was and what he did for India's victory.

The Crowning Glory Of Battle of Basantar

Daredevil in the truest sense of the word, 2nd Lieutenant Arun Khetarpal, was part of the Poona Horse regiment, and was posthumously awarded the Param Vir Chakra for his unrivalled bravery and sacrifice for the nation in the Battle of Basantar which was during the 1971 Indo-Pak War.

© Hounourpoint

A courageous youngman of 21-years-old, Khetarpal had just joined the Indian Army as a 2nd Lieutenant when he was called on duty to the war front in 1971. Born in Pune on 14th October 1950, he came from an army background. His grandfather had served in the British Indian army during World War I while Arun's father, Brigadier M.L. Khetarpal, served in Indian Army's Engineering Corps until his retirement.

1971 Indo-Pak War

When war was finally declared between India and Pakistan in 1971, Arun's regiment was given the task to set up a bridgehead across the Basantar river. Close to Sialkot, the territory was of strategic importance for both sides. During the course of the war Indian troops reported alarming artillery onslaught from the Pakistani side and requested for tank support. Thus on December 16th, two Poona Horse tank troops (of which, one was under the command of 2nd Lt Arun Khetarpal) were moved towards Jarpal in Pakistan.

© Lazydesiauthor

Enroute the Basantar river crossing, they were attacked by Pakistani tanks. The Indian side retaliated effectively. However, during the battle, the other Poona Horse tank came under attack and the commander was killed. That left Khetarpal alone to fight off the Pakistani tanks.

2nd Lt Khetarpal Changes The Course Of History

Undeterred, Khetarpal led a strong counter-attack, that would eventually lead to his martyrdom and also give India the final push towards victory. Aboard a Famagusta JX 202, Khetarpal single-handedly destroyed five enemy tanks before getting hit by a shell.

© Wikipedia

A gravely injured Khetarpal was asked to withdraw at this point, but the 2nd Lieutenant refused to give up. He had told his commanding officer “No Sir, I will not abandon my tank. My gun is still working and I will get these bastards!”

Until his dying breath, Khetarpal managed to destroy a total of seven Pakistani tanks. This gave the Indian troops a much needed upper hand that not only led to an eventual victory for the Indian side, but was also the beginning of the end of war.

Biopic On Param Vir Chakra Khetarpal

© India today/Wikipedia

As per latest reports, it is being said that filmmaker Sriram Raghavan shall be directing the biopic on Khetarpal, which has been titled 'Ekkis'. It is also being said that the makers have approached Varun Dhawan to play the role of Khetarpal in the movie.
