Indian elections met with complete shutdown in IHK

ISLAMABAD/NEW DELHI: The Indian general elections were met with a complete shutdown in Indian occupied Kashmir on Thursday as denizens protested against the ongoing repression against the Kashmiri people and their leadership.

According to the Kashmir Media Service, the call for the shutdown was given by the Joint Resistance Leadership (JRL) comprising Syed Ali Geelani, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq and Muhammad Yasin Malik. In a statement, the JRL appealed to the people of the occupied territory to stay away from the polling.

The protest is also aimed at protesting the “victimisation and harassment” of Hurriyat leaders and their families by India’s National Investigation Agency (NIA), the closure of Kashmir’s main highway for civilians for two days in a week and the attack by Indian police and troops on inmates at Srinagar Central Jail. Polling for the first phase of the five-phased polls in the disputed territory began in the Baramulla Lok Sabha constituency. Over 32,000 additional Indian troops and police personnel were deployed there.

Election officials reported a heavy turnout across the 20 states of India taking part in the first day of the massive exercise which involves 900 million eligible voters and will take nearly six weeks to complete.

While the 68-year-old Modi remains popular because of his tough stance on national security, he is under pressure over unemployment and controversial economic measures. Insults and fake news have surged on social media in the run-up to the poll as Modi’s right wing Bharatiya Janatha Party (BJP) and the opposition Congress party stake their claims.

On the ground, security forces were on high alert and two members of regional parties were killed in clashes outside a polling station in Tadipatri, Andhra Pradesh state, media reports said. After five people including a local lawmaker were killed by a roadside bomb planted by suspected Maoist rebels on Tuesday, the insurgents were blamed for two voting day blasts in Chhatisgarh and Maharashtra states.

Thousands of parties and candidates are running for office in the seven separate days of voting in 543 constituencies up to May 19. Final results will be released on May 23. Some 1.1 million electronic voting machines are being taken around the country for the votes, with some transported through jungles and carried up mountains, including to a hamlet near the Chinese border with just one voter.

About 142 million people were eligible for the first day of voting. Polling stations in northeastern states like Arunachal Pradesh bordering China were the first to open, followed by parts of Bihar in the north. In Assam in the northeast, queues started forming well before voting began, including many of the 84 million first-time voters who could play a decisive role in the outcome.

Modi appealed in an early-morning tweet to his 46.8 million followers to “turn out in record numbers. He swept to power in 2014 with the biggest landslide in 30 years. Critics, however, accuse him of imposing a Hindu agenda, emboldening attacks on Muslims and low-caste Dalits, re-writing school textbooks and re-naming cities.

Rahul Gandhi, leader of the Congress party and the latest member of his family dynasty hoping to become premier accused Modi of causing a “national disaster”.
