Katrina Kaif’s weekend plans are revealed through her latest Instagram post; See Pic

Bollywood stars often get engrossed in work so much that they don’t get a day off. Back to back, they might be engaged in promotions of a film or in the shooting of one. However, whenever they do get time, they like to laze around and chill. Speaking of lazing around, Katrina Kaif shared a photo on Instagram which revealed her weekend plans. Katrina just returned from a vacay with her team from the Maldives and as soon as she returned, she dived back into work but in a pretty chill way.



Today, Katrina shared a photo on Instagram in which she is seen chilling on a couch in her pj's. While her caption revealed that she wasn’t really chilling, her look made her fans think otherwise. Katrina was shooting for Anaita Shroff Adjania’s show and for that, Katrina had donned a chill and lazy look. The photo of Katrina on Instagram was before the talk show was being shot.



Even Katrina’s hairstylist took to Instagram to share some more pictures of the gorgeous actress for her fans. In the photo, we can see Katrina sporting a lazy look in a white zipper and a white pyjama. Katrina teamed it up with white sneakers to keep it sporty. Her hair was left open with soft curls in them and she looked absolutely fresh and beautiful in the photos. The yellow backdrop just added a natural hue to Katrina’s look.

Check out the photos:

On the professional front, Katrina will be seen in Ali Abbas Zafar’s Bharat which stars Salman Khan. The film is based on a South Korean film, An Ode to my Father. Bharat also stars Disha Patani, Jackie Shroff, Tabu, Sunil Grover and Nora Fatehi. Bharat has been shot in multiple locations like Abu Dhabi, Ludhiana, Delhi and Mumbai. The teaser left everyone eager to see Salman in an action film. Bharat is slated to release on Eid, i.e June 5, 2019.

Also Read: Katrina Kaif shares a cute throwback photo but it's her luscious locks that have caught our attention; See Pic
