Jet Airways cancels all international flights till Monday, April 15, PMO calls urgent meet: Sources

Jet Airways has cancelled all the international flights up till Monday, April 15, 2019. | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Jet Airways, the debt-laden private airline, has been battling to survive amid repeated cancellations of international as well as domestic flights. Jet Airways has cancelled all the international flights up till Monday, April 15, 2019, according to ET Now sources. Today itself, Aviation Secretary Suresh Prabhu has said that he has directed Ministry of Corporate Affairs, Government of India to review the issues related to Jet Airways and has asked to take necessary steps to minimise passenger inconvenience.

SBI Capital has acquired 5.19 per cent in Jet Airways on April 11 after the pledge of equity shares by Naresh Goyal. Prime Minister's Office (PMO) has called for an urgent meeting on Jet Airways at 6 pm today in which PMO Principle Secretary Nripendra Mishra is expected to chair the meeting. Aviation Secretary and Director General of Civil Aviation Chief is likely to brief the PMO on Jet Airways. According to government rules, an airline should have at least 20 planes for operating internationally.

"Jet has decided to extend suspension of its international operations till Monday, due to severe cash crunch," news agency PTI reported citing unnamed airline sources. According to the PTI report, Jet has left with only 14 planes for domestic operations as of late Thursday way below from the fleet count of 123 planes in operations till a few months back.

DGCA Sources to @tyagi_parisha: @jetairways has a fleet of 16 operational aircrafts as of today. All international flights cancelled till Monday#JetDebtSaga #SavingJet pic.twitter.com/8aydetpdWH — ET NOW (@ETNOWlive) April 12, 2019

Out of the 14 aircraft operated by Jet Airways till Thursday evening include seven wide-body B777s and an A330, which are conventionally used for long-haul international operations, the PTI report said, adding, the remaining six planes were, three B737s, which are largely used for flying on domestic routes besides on short-haul international destinations and the rest three are regional ATRs.

Directed Secretary @MoCA_GoI to review issues related to #JetAirways. Asked him to take necessary steps to minimise passenger inconvenience and ensure their safety. — Chowkidar Suresh Prabhu (@sureshpprabhu) April 12, 2019

Aviation Secretary Pradeep Singh Kharola had told PTI that the ministry has been awaiting a report from the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) to decide whether Jet Airways can continue to fly on international routes.

On the domestic front, all Jet operations to and from the Eastern and Northeastern states were suspended till further notice. Following this, there would no Jet flights to and from Kolkata, Patna, Guwahati and other airports in the region, PTI reported citing an anonymous travel industry source. Further, Jet Airways flights Mumbai-Kolkata, Kolkata-Guwahati and Dehradun-Guwahati-Kolkata flights stood cancelled till further notice due to "operational reasons."
