When Mumbai dance group The Kings' performance on Malhari blew JLo's mind

Mumbai-based dance group The Kings that kick-started World of Dance with their hip-hop performance competed with the Motiv Crew. The Kings performed on Malhari from Bajirao Mastani, which highly impressed the judges. Dressed in red and black, the Kings pulled off a series of acrobatic stunts along with some amazing flips. After the performance was over, the audience burst into cheers and applause.

By the end of the performance all three judges Jennifer Lopez, Ne-Yo and Derek Hough were on their feet. The dance routine was crazy for Jennifer Lopez while Derek Hough lifted the microphone and cheered for The Kings. "Oh my god. That was so insane. Everybody gets the same amount of time to come out here, but some people pack so much into that time. It was like a five-course meal. There was so much in there. I'm so full when I am done. Literally, I was like don't blink. I was like, 'don't blink cause you're going to miss something," said JLo

Jennifer Lopez the performance so much that even wished to watch it again. "I wish we could watch it one more time and go, 'that part. That part. Oh my god, that part.' There were things we'd never seen before. This is what I mean unique."

American dancing idol Derek Hough called The Kings a complete package and loved their cultural integration. He was left so impressed that he even joined the dance group on stage and tried one of their steps. Watch the video below.

Ne-Yo was dumbstruck after The Kings' dance routine. "You guys come out here dancing to music that only you can pull off, doing the moves that only you could do. You all are like fireworks. I am still trying to wrap my head around what I just saw," said Ne-Yo.

The Kings scored an average of 99.3 points in the duel round while Motiv Crew got 90. With the lead, Mumabi-based dance group secured their place in the third round and will soon be seen giving a jaw-dropping performance on World of Dance Season 3.

Actor Gurmeet Chaudhary shared the video on Twitter and praised the dance group. He wrote, "These guys are amaaaazing @NBCWorldofDance #TheKings They were literally on fire. Rooting for them all the way." (sic)

These guys are amaaaazing @NBCWorldofDance #TheKings They were literally on fire Rooting for them all the way https://t.co/azQWIWtmaQ Gurmeet Choudhary HT (@GurmeetHT) April 11, 2019




