12 killed in road mishaps in two Telugu States

Hyderabad: Roads soaked with blood in the two Telugu States as fatal accidents claimed 12 lives on Friday. Two accidents occurred in Andhra Pradesh and one in Telangana State. In all the three ghastly accidents, drivers themselves embraced death due to rash and negligent driving.

In Anantapur district in Andhra Pradesh, a mini bus and a lorry collided head-on killing seven persons, including two women, on the spot on the national highway No 42 in Tanakallu village under Nallacharuvu mandal. Nine others who were grievously injured were admitted to government general hospital. Condition of three of them remained critical.

The ill-fated mini bus coming from Kukkanti cross with the victims bound for Kadiri rammed the lorry at Parakuvandlapalli cross in Tanakallu mandal killing five persons. Eyewitnesses said the accident occurred due to rash and negligent driving of the mini bus driver. Driver reportedly fled immediately after the accident. On being informed, Tanakallu police sub-inspector rushed to the spot and took up investigation.

In another accident in Kurnool district, three persons were killed when a car belonging to Yemmiganur dashed against an oil tanker parked on the national highway at Halaharvi village under Nandavaram mandal at 5.30 am. The deceased belong to Yemmiganur. Local SI Mallikharjuna visited the place of accident spot and shifted the bodies to the Yemmiganur government general hospital.

In Telangana State, two youngsters were killed in a road accident on Sangupet to Andole road as a car rammed into an RTC bus on Friday morning. The deceased were identified as Dattu Goud (26) and Kiran Goud, natives of Sangupet village. Both the deceased, children of close relatives, were proceeding to Andole to pick up Kiran’s sister, who was studying in a residential school in Andole. Both the boys crushed to death as the car and bus involved in head-on collision. Bodies were rushed to Area Hospital, Jogipet for postmortem.

[source_without_link]NSS[/source_without_link]
