Meet Taniya Sanyal, first woman firefighter appointed by AAI

Special note by guest editors: Taniya Sanyal's story is a huge inspiration in breaking gender stereotypes and showing the world that women are equal if not more competent to be appointed as firefighters by the Airports Authority of India. It is a fine example of how any dream is possible to achieve if one has the confidence in their abilities, focus and the will to put in the hard work necessary to attain their goals. Such women are also heroes for the younger generation since they are sure about what they want and how to go about it, whether it's the training or parental support or how to deal with the society when certain people say, "It is impossible."

Next Story : All about Divya Jain's amazing educational initiative

Last year, Taniya Sanyal, born and brought up in Kolkata, made history—she became the first woman firefighter to be appointed by the Airports Authority of India (AAI). Till 2018, AAI recruited only men as its firefighters, but the rules were relaxed last year and Sanyal, who had always wanted to pursue a challenging and offbeat path, became the lone woman candidate to storm the male bastion. “The moment I saw the advertisement for this position in a newspaper, I grabbed the opportunity,” recalls the 27-year-old firefighter, who now trains both men and a handful of women aspiring to be firefighters with the AAI.After she cracked the online written test for the job, Sanyal was called to Bhubaneswar for medical, physical, and driving tests. To clear the tests, she started working out and running so that she could pass the physical endurance tests that required firefighting aspirants to run, climb ladders, and carry a 40kg sandbag for a distance of 60 metres, among other things. Needless to say, Sanyal passed all the tests with flying colours.After a rigorous training at the Fire Training Centre, New Delhi, Sanyal was posted at the Kolkata Fire Training Centre as a trainer. At present, she is training 61 aspirants from Bengaluru airport. Apart from this, Sanyal’s job also requires her to help evacuate people in life-threatening situations using mobile high-performance vehicles, fight fires with a range of equipment such as hoses, foam branches, and monitors, participate in organised drills for fire control, and rescue work; conduct fire safety inspections; inspect fire alarm boards; test and maintain fire vehicles and other equipment; operate Fire Control Centres at airports; and observe aircraft arrivals and departures, among other things.Asked about the fitness and mental alertness levels required for her job, Sanyal says, “Mental alertness is of utmost importance. Airport fire service is not only about firefighting, but also about rescue operations on aircraft. As per the International Civil Aviation Organisation rules, our response time is 138 seconds. So, you can imagine the kind of mental alertness we need.”To stay fit, Sanyal prefers to do free hand exercises over training with equipment in a gym. In any case, the intense physical activities at work help her stay in shape. She elaborates, “My day starts at six every morning. I conduct physical training sessions, parades, technical learning classes, and teach trainees to handle fire equipment such as hoses, ladders, and other firefighting paraphernalia.”She signs off, “Apart from physical barriers, women need to cross their mental barriers as well. Believe in yourself, set targets, and tell yourself that you can achieve whatever you want in life.” And that’s the motto Sanyal has always followed in her own life.***This article has been guest-edited by students Deeptha Dinakar, Kavya Pullanoor, Enakshi Debnath, N.K Nekha Shree and Harshith Shetty.
