100 years of Jallianwala Bagh: PM Modi, Rahul Gandhi pay tribute; British envoy expresses 'deep regret'

Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: ANI

Amritsar: April 13, 2019, marks the 100th anniversary of Jallianwala Bagh massacre, one of the bloodiest chapter in the colonial history of India. On this day, Brigadier General Reginald Dyer ordered indiscriminate fire into the crowd of more than 15,000 Baisakhi revellers, gathered at the Jallianwala Bagh in Punjab's Amritsar. Officials figures of the massacre reveal that only 379 people died, however, the Indian National Congress had then pegged the figure at least 1,000 people killed and 500 injured.

The event is a glaring reminder of atrocities and the radical violence by the British and was this week condemned by the British PM Theresa May. She reiterated the "deep regret" over the incident but it's still far away from an apology for the shameful scar on the British-India history.

To mark the 100th anniversary, while a candle march was taken out on Friday night, Congress President Rahul Gandhi on Saturday reached Amritsar and paid his tribute at the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial. The Gandhi family scion was accompanied by Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh and state minister Navjot Singh Sidhu.

“The cost of freedom must never ever be forgotten. We salute the people of India who gave everything they had for it. Jai Hind,” Gandhi wrote in the visitors’ book at the memorial.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi lays wreath at #JallianwalaBagh memorial on commemoration of 100 years of the massacre. Punjab CM Captain Amarinder Singh and state minister Navjot Singh Sidhu also present. #JallianwalaBaghCentenary pic.twitter.com/nEae7OUKHv — ANI (@ANI) April 13, 2019

Earlier, British High Commissioner Sir Dominic Asquith visited the memorial and echoed British PM's remarks. "The events of Jallianwala Bagh a 100 years ago reflect a shameful act in British India history. We deeply regret what happened and the suffering caused," Asquith wrote in the visitors' book.

Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has also tweeted paying tribute to all the martyrs of the massacre. "Today, when we observe 100 years of the horrific Jallianwala Bagh massacre, India pays tributes to all those martyred on that fateful day. Their valour and sacrifice will never be forgotten. Their memory inspires us to work even harder to build an India they would be proud of," PM tweeted.
