Modi govt's officials involved in biggest money laundering scam, claims Congress

NEW DELHI: India's main opposition Congress party on Tuesday revealed that Modi-led government officials and BJP leaders were involved in a money laundering scam that exchanged demonetised currency notes past the deadline set by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for commission.



During a press conference at the Congress headquarters, former Indian law minister Kapil Sibal, played out a video clip of a sting operation in which, he claimed, a government official said BJP’s top leadership was involved.

The official, reportedly identified as one Rahul Ratharekar from the government’s intelligence agency, claimed to an undercover reporter that officials from 26 department were involved in the money exchange operation.

According to Indian media, the video was shot at a Mumbai hotel in July last year. RBI’s deadline to exchange old currency expired on December 31, 2016.

A media outlet, citing Sibal, reported that the Indian intelligence agency official said currency notes worth thousands of crores were printed abroad and transported into India by special aircraft.

According to report, a team of government officials drawn from different departments were engaged in the exchange of old notes for new post demonetisation.

Another video clip showed the official of a private bank carrying out the exchange of old currency for new ones.



He, however, did not authenticate the videos and maintained that all the names mentioned in the clip were in the public domain and could be independently verified by the official.



Sibal was quoted as saying: "The government, CBI and ED will not arrest them, because ED [Enforcement Directorate] protects those who loot the country."

The former Law Minister’s press conference on Tuesday was said to be the second in a series on the issue of demonetisation. On March 26, Sibal had reportedly played out another sting by TNN, where an alleged BJP worker was involved in such an exchange of old currency.

Another Congress member Randeep Surjewala was quoted as saying: "If this is not ‘anti-national,’ then what is? Will the Supreme Court show the courage to take note and hold the corrupt accountable?”
