Royal ghosts: The previous residents of Meghan and Harry's mysterious family home

Royal ghosts

FREE now and never miss the top royal stories again SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up fornow and never miss the top royal stories again We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Meghan Markle: Prince Harry is 'viciously protective' says expert

Meghan Markle and Prince Harry already have a special connection with Frogmore Estate as it was the scene of their wedding reception in 2018. So it seemed a natural choice for the couple as they broke away from Kensington Palace to set up their own household ahead of the birth of their first child. But the grand grounds of Frogmore Cottage, nestled in a quiet corner in the grounds of the Frogmore Estate are, steeped in history and intrigue.

Who else lived in Frogmore Cottage? Frogmore Cottage has served as a refuge for royals escaping bad-tempered Kings as well as those escaping persecution. Since World War Two, the cottage is believed to have been used as a home for members of royal household staff, although mystery surrounds its occupants. Below are some of the fascinating stories from inside the walls of the new Sussex home. READ MORE: Meghan Markle birth plan REVEALED - How yoga and chanting will help Royal Baby birth

Meghan Markle news: A picture of the cottage taken in 1872. It was built between 1860 and 69

Meghan Markle news: A recent image of the newly renovated cottage

Meghan Markle news: Since World War Two, the cottage is believed to have been used as staff housing

A PLACE TO ESCAPE THE MADDENED KING From the very beginning, the cottage was intended as a secluded refuge from the pressures of royal life, with records of its occupants scarce. Queen Charlotte, wife of King George III, had it built in 1792 as a place for her and her daughters to escape the court. At the time it was fashionable for the wealthy to build large homes disguised as idyllic rural cottages. However, the queen also wanted somewhere for her daughters to "go off and escape George's madness", according to the writer and historian Helen Rappaport. Dr Rappaport said: “It was like a large retreat on the Windsor estate where she could go off and hunker down. “The King had bouts of madness. He was probably quite difficult to live with and she probably used Frogmore Cottage as a retreat."

Meghan Markle news: Queen Charlotte, wife of King George III

A HOME FOR VICTORIA’S ABDUL Abdul Karim, an Indian Muslim, arrived in England in 1887 to serve at Queen Victoria's table during her golden jubilee celebrations. The 24-year-old made such a big impact on the ageing monarch that within the year he had become an established figure at court (and the subject of the successful 2017 film, Victoria & Abdul). The Queen made him her teacher - or munshi - instructing her in Urdu and Indian affairs. She lavished honours, titles and gifts on him, one of which was the use of Frogmore Cottage. She visited him at the cottage "every second day" and "never missed a lesson" from Karim, according to the writer Shrabani Basu. Ms Basu, who discovered diaries detailing their relationship, said Victoria developed an almost maternal relationship with Abdul and would sign letters to him as "your loving mother" and "your closest friend". Abdul refurbished the house and lived there with his wives from 1893. However, this close relationship with the Queen angered her family and courtiers and her death in 1901 brought his life at Frogmore - and in the UK - to an abrupt end. Within hours of her funeral, the new King Edward VII, who "hated" Abdul, had his residences raided and his papers destroyed. He ordered him to return to India, where he died a few years later, aged 46.

Meghan Markle news: Queen Victoria and Abdul Karim

A REFUGE FOR SURVIVORS When Tsar Nicholas II and his family were murdered by the Bolsheviks in 1918, his surviving relatives fled to the UK in a warship sent by their close relative, King George V. Among them was the Tsar's sister - and the King's cousin - Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna and her children. On arrival in the UK, the family lived independently for a while but soon ran out of money. In 1925, the King put them up in Frogmore Cottage, along with several of her sons and their families. When it became too crowded, the king made the nearby Home Park Cottage available as well. Marlene Koenig, an expert on British and European royalty, said the Grand Duchess was "nearly destitute" by the point she moved in. But the poverty of the Grand Duchess meant the cottage soon fell into disrepair. Ms Koenig said: "Wallpaper was tearing off the walls, the ceilings were dirty and the plaster was breaking off from the walls. “The house needed more than a mere lick of paint."

Meghan Markle news: Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna and her children

Meghan Markle news: Cousins Tsar Nicholas II and King George V

But now, the Duke and Duchess of Sussex have seen it restored to its former glory. The 10-bedroomed home has a yoga studio and gym newly installed. The renovations reportedly cost within the ballpark of £3million. The home was a git from the Queen, who approved the Sussexes breaking away from The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to set up their own household.
