Salman Khan and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan’s THIS throwback photo is going viral and it will remind you of the 90s

Whenever we come across a picture of Salman Khan and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, we are transported back to the days of Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam and instantly reminded of their sizzling chemistry and on-screen romance because let's admit these two are indeed magic together. And today, on a lazy Saturday, while we were browsing through social media, we happened to come across a major throwback picture of Salman Khan and Aishwarya Rai Bachchan where the two are seen posing for the camera. While Aishwarya is sipping on her tea/coffee, Salman is seated next to her and posing for the camera.



It all started with Sanjay Leela Bhansali's 1999-film Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam when their affair started so much so that later, Aishwarya got close to Salman’s family and started meeting them often and also, shared a very good rapport with his sisters - Alvira and Arpita. While it was reported that Aishwarya's family was never in favour of this relationship and sooner than later, Aishwarya Rai Bachcahn and Salman Khan called it quits. After breaking-up with Salman, Aishwarya was quoted as saying that he would call me up after the break-up and talk rubbish and he suspected me of having affairs with my co-stars. AIshwarya even said that there were were times that he got physical with me.

Talking about Aishwarya, she was last seen in Fanney Khan where she played the role of a superstar opposite Anil Kapoor and Rajkummar Rao. Recently, it was being reported that Aishwarya and hubby Abhishek Bachchan will come together for Anurag Kashyap’s Gulab Jamun, however, the two opted out of the film due to script issues. As per latest reports, the actress will be seen in Surender Reddy’s next with Chiranjeevi. As for Salman Khan, he will next be seen in Ali Abbas Zafar’s Bharat and Dabangg 3 and while the shooting of Bharat has wrapped up, Salman is currently shooting for Dabangg 3.

ALSO READ: Aishwarya Rai Bachchan’s maha throwback pic goes viral; Check out her 'Before Miss World' picture
