Chettinad trip and disdain for history by Indians

History was one of my favourite subjects in school and I would have surely liked to pursue my interest in the same. But that was not to be and I was left satiating my thirst for knowledge in the area by reading and travel. The latter made me associate with Kerala Historical Research Society which conducts various historical trips and seminars. This article is about one such trip undertaken in February 2019 to Chettinadu region of Tamil Nadu and the historical city of Madurai.

We were a group of 40 odd individuals hailing predominantly from central Kerala sharing a common passion for history. The team comprised of college/ school teachers, both serving and retired, gulf returnees, ex-military, retired bank and public sector employees, aspiring film makers, among others.

A brief history of Chettinad would be in order since most of the readers outside of south India would be unaware of the community. Chettiars are the mercantile community of South India with their area of inhabitation being called Chettinad, comprising of Sivaganga and Pudukkottai district of present-day Tamil Nadu. The word Chetti is supposed to be derived from Sanskrit word ‘Shreshti’ meaning prosperity and fame. The community calls themselves by the name Nattukotai Chettiars or Nagarathars. Being a community of merchants, the members of this community moved to various places in South Asia from present day Philippines to even Africa with Myanmar and Malaysia occupying pride of place in their trading kingdom. The wealth generated by the community was brought back to their home town and was displayed for all posterity by the palatial homes they constructed with Belgian chandeliers, Burma teak, Chinese pottery etc. The Second World War brought curtains down on the prosperity of the community with vast properties being taken over and nationalised by the newly independent nations of South Asia. The community is presently diversified into educational and movie industries with Alagappa Chettiar, Annamalai Chettiar, Meiyappan Chettiar, P Chidambaram and Kaviarasu Kannadasan being the prominent members of the community in post-independence era.

We started our journey on Friday night and reached Karaikudi, the most prominent town in Chettinad region the next morning. We were lucky to have amongst us one of the members of Chettiar community, who offered to help us with our travel arrangements. After freshening up in a hotel the group proceeded to Ariyakudi Thiruvengadam temple, Pillayarpatti Karpaga Vinayagar temple, Athangudi palace, Kanadukathan palace, Kundrakudi Murugan temple, Mahalakshmi handloom a small-scale unit manufacturing famous Kandaangi sarees, Aayiram jannal veedu the house with thousand windows and also a tile making unit of famous Athangudi tiles. Since many in the group wanted to sample the famous Chettinad cuisine, the group tried to find a good hotel serving the authentic regional food. Sadly, none of the restaurants in our hotel vicinity could lay claim to being authentic purveyors of the famed cuisine and the group felt mostly unsatisfied on that count.

The next day began with a visit to famous Tirumayam fort in the morning on our way to Madurai city. Being located on a hillock the fort offers panoramic view of the surroundings. The Gandhi museum was our first stop in Madurai where we reached around noon. It houses a history museum of the freedom struggle and various memorabilia related to the father of the nation, including the blood-stained cloth he wore when he was shot. Meanwhile, the team had completed lunch and was ready.

Thirumalai Naicker Mahal was our next stop with its Indo-Saracenic architecture and long history. To imagine that the present structure is only one third or one fourth of the original structure gives a clue to what a majestic structure it was in its heyday. Meenakshi temple was our final stop where we reached under the evening sun. The group members proceeded to understand the history and architecture of the place with the help of Archaeological Survey of India officials who provided a background of the temple history. Aayiram Kaalmandapam or hall with thousand pillars was visited and its architecture feasted upon. The temple complex also houses a small museum shedding light on the past. Believers among the group proceeded to have darshan of the deity. After the temple visit, the team was given freedom to do a bit of shopping before boarding the bus back to the place where we came from.

The trip was unlike any other group tours being organised by operators along the length and breadth of the country. This was my second trip with this same eclectic bunch of individuals who have nothing but passion for history, unbiased by religious or caste sentiments. The trip was also unique in terms of opportunity it provided for having long winded discussions on history and politics. The general sense which I could gather from the discussions was the need to inculcate a sense of responsibility towards history among the people of the country. The current climate of creeping majoritarianism and totalitarianism needs an antidote to spread and veins of the people, especially the youth. Visits to any historical monument, for which there is no shortage in the land with long history and all you will find are empty spaces and lovers in secluded corners. This is indicative of two things: the repressive social climate of the land where love is to be hidden and utter neglect of historical monuments. The graffiti on the walls of these structures shows the matters of heart not getting proper channel to let out and being displayed in a crass manner. Majestic monuments of the past being destroyed forever just to impress a member of the opposite gender.

Even setting aside the juvenile tendency on display in all these structures, the Indian society has lot to answer for the treatment it has meted out to its historical legacy. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is tasked with maintaining and preserving the heritage of the land but is terribly understaffed and underfunded. Hampi, a UNESCO certified World Heritage Site which would have been pride of any European country, was subjected to destruction by Indian youth just for fun. Innumerable forts including one in my native town has been subjected to local exploitation with people showing no remorse in taking bricks of these ancient structures to build their homes or fences. Only the name survives in the local language to indicate the existence of a structure in the said location. Illiteracy and poverty are often cited as the reasons for neglect of history in India. But the graffiti in many of these locations indicate otherwise with college students being the main culprits.

The reasons, according to me for the utter disregard for history by Indians are multi-fold. History as taught in Indian schools is just a long list of battles and statistics which no one is able to relate to. Students mug up the years just to clear their exams. No effort has been made to humanize the people in the books. Creeping right wing nationalism which is more interested in remaking a glorious science fiction in history is another extreme in perversity. This only serves in myth making, suiting the rulers of the present day. How did India end up with so many invasions? Why did none of the invaders leave? Did all invasions end up destroying the so-called “purity” of the land? Answers to these questions will be found only on objective evaluation. It is funny to note in the present social scenario when everyone is obsessed with religion and caste identities – the two great sons of India, Emperors Akbar and Ashoka – both were adherents of Din-i-Ilahi and Buddhism, respectively, a fact unknown to a common man. Both the religions are extinct for all practical purpose in India.

Another example can be the controversy over Tipu Jayanti celebrations in Karnataka because of the destruction he caused to temples and conversions which took place in Canara and Malabar regions. My community, too, had been subject to his atrocities but that doesn’t reduce his contribution in fighting the British. How many of the protesters would know Tipu had huge number of ministers and officials from majority community or that the best gunners in Sivaji’s army were from the minority community. History needs to be seen in the context of the period in which it was forged and not through the eyes of the viewer who lives in a different world scenario. The way to go forward I believe is to catch them young. School children should be asked to write their family tree which will develop in them an innate curiosity for history. History as taught in schools needs to be less about battles taught in a distant land. An example would be the present scenario where Indian history text books are mainly about north Indian history which are of little interest for a south Indian. This needs to be changed. Books need to evolve to include local history. Teachers have to take students to local monuments and museums and explain the context. Museums which are another repository of knowledge needs to become more student friendly and well maintained. During all my trips if there is one thing, I have noticed, it is that the foreign tourists appreciate Indian history more than we Indians do, who are more interested in taking selfies. Most of these locations can be maintained by self-generated funds if only there is some vision like providing the locations for organising film shoots or family functions provided a sizeable sum is collected and no damage takes place to the structure. We have a long way to go in this area but something needs to be done soon if we are to save what remains of the gift from our ancestors.

Coming back to the trip, we returned to our homes on Monday morning with sweet memories and enlightened thoughts about our glorious past.
