Jackals throng to Surat airport in Gujarat, three captured in over a month

The operation by forest department has been suspended for now (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Surat: As many as three jackals have been rescued from the operational area of the Surat airport in Gujarat in the last one month. Fortunately, these members of the wolf family did not stray onto the runway or disrupt any day-to-day operations. However, the presence of these animals inside the campus of the airport raises serious concerns about the safety and security of not just passengers but also the airport staff.

About three months ago, airport management contacted the forest department and informed them about the movement of jackals inside the Surat airport operational area. Forest rangers arrived at the scene and conducted an initial survey following which a cage was constructed to trap the animals inside the airport itself. Since then, three jackals have been caught by forest department officials.

Deputy conservator of forest (DCF) Puneet Nayyar told Times of India that forest rangers were unable to ascertain the presence of more jackals inside the Surat airport premises and the operation to catch the canines has been suspended for now. However, Nayyar also said that how the three jackals trapped by the forest department entered the airport is a "million dollar question". There may have been an underground opening, added Nayyar.

This is not the first time such an incident has come to light from Surat airport. In 2014, a SpiceJet plane hit a buffalo while proceeding for take-off in Surat. While no one was injured, the airline decided to suspend operations to the town in Gujarat in the wake of the incident.

Meanwhile, airport director Sanjay Kumar told the national daily that four-iron grill traps have been permanently installed at the airport premises to cage animals. Public data suggests that Surat airport has 27 domestic flights and one international flight with a daily passenger footfall of 4,500 passengers.
