Rangers issue warning to villages around Bareilly over 'cannibal leopard' which may pose severe threat

Forest department officials are on the lookout for the animal (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bareilly: Officials with the Uttar Pradesh State Forest Department have identified a leopard they believe is capable of causing damage to human life and property in the Bareilly district. This is the same leopard who killed and partially ate another leopard whose half-eaten carcass was found in a field adjacent to Palia range of Dudhwa Tiger Reserve (DTR) on April 7, added a forest ranger.

While officials have been probing the death of the leopard whose half-eaten carcass was discovered earlier this month, the image of the male leopard believed to be responsible for the attack was captured by motion sensor cameras installed in the forest just recently. The cameras were installed near the spot where the body of the sub-adult leopard was found and rangers have reason to believe that the attacking leopard is about five-years-old. However, the same is yet to be confirmed.

Field director of DTR, Ramesh Pandey told Times of India that rangers are on the lookout for a leopard who has shown signs of cannibalism by killing and eating the flesh of another leopard. He added that the most recent attack by this big cat occurred near Sumernagar village. Pandey also added that the picture of the leopard shows him releasing phermones which is a chemical substance sprayed by animals to mark their territory. The animal's tail was pointing upwards which indicates aggressive behaviour, said Pandey adding that nearby villages have been advised to keep their children and themselves away from forest areas until the leonine is caught.

The cameras which caught a glimpse of the deadly leopard were installed by the forest department after they recovered the half-eaten carcass of a leopard near Sumernagar village. Images retrieved from the trap cameras revealed that the leopard which attacked the other big cat is a dominating male showcasing an aggressive behaviour and may pose a serious threat to villagers, children, and cattle in the region. Injury marks spotted on the animal's body indicate that it may have attacked other leopards over territory, said a wildlife official.
