Cong urges poll panel to cancel candidature of Khandu

Itanagar: Alleging violation of manual on model code of conduct (MCC) by BJP candidate from Mukto Assembly constituency Chief Minister Pema Khandu, Congress has urged the poll panel to cancel the candidature of Khandu.

In a complaint letter addressed to the CEO of Arunachal Pradesh, Kaling Tayeng on Friday, state unit Congress president Takam Sanjoy wrote, ‘a complaint submitted to CEC, New Delhi by Legal, Human Rights & RTI department of AICC on April 11 regarding complaint against blatant violation of manual on MCC by the candidate of the party in power from Mukto Assembly constituency Pema Khandu.’

On April 11 during the polling day, AICC’s Legal, Human Rights & RTI department shot off a letter to the CEC, alleging that Khandu and his supporter indulged in the activities of violence and intimidation against the electors asking them to vote for him. Sanjoy urged the office of the CEO to take necessary action for disqualification the candidature of Khandu in this regard to ensure the purity and transparency of election process. He also shot off separate letters to the CEO alleging BJP of indulging in violence activities and intimidation of electros to ensure that they must vote in favour of its candidate, and urged the office of the CEO to conduct re-polling in those polling stations where the incident took place. Alleging that in Pating and Cheri polling stations under Nyapin Assembly seat of Kurung Kumey district, the polling agents of Congress party were not allowed to enter and seat in the polling station during the polling day.

‘The BJP indulged in the activities of violence and intimidation against the electors to ensure that they must vote in favour of BJP candidate. I request your office to conduct re poll in Pating and Cheri polling stations,’ Sanjoy stated.

He also wrote a letter to the CEO, alleging violation of election procedure of four polling stations under Koloriong Assembly seat and requested for immediate re-poll of Arunachal West parliamentary seat which falls under it. In a separate letter, Sanjoy further alleged that 181 voters were not allowed to exercise their franchise in 38-Rakso polling station under Paling Assembly seat of Kra Daadi District, and requested for a re-poll in this polling station. (UNI)
