Brother jailed for killing his sister, setting car ablaze

The Pimpri-Chinchwad police arrested a man on Saturday for allegedly murdering his sister and setting her car ablaze near Wakad for insurance money worth Rs 30 lakh in September 2018. The case, which was deemed to be an accidental death, was reopened after the cops received an anonymous letter.



The arrested person has been identified as John Daniel Borde, 40, of Soundarya Colony, Nakhathe Vasti in Rahatani. He killed his sister Sangita Manish Hiwale, 44.



As per the accident case recorded earlier, Hiwale was killed when an old CNG-fitted car caught fire while she was being taken to a hospital on September 10, 2018. According to Borde, who answered to the fire brigade and police, the car developed a snag and engine temperature had shot up. He ventured out to check the bonnet when the car caught fire.



This week, Pimpri-Chinchwad police officials received an anonymous letter by post, citing this was a murder. They interrogated the suspect, who quickly confessed that he hit his bedridden sister’s head against the wall around 9 pm on September 9. When lost consciousness, Borde told their mother, Maya Daniel Borde, 65, and Hiwale’s 15-year-old son that she had developed low blood pressure. The trio took her to hospital.



“Hiwale was already sick, so there was no suspicion then. However, Borde began driving back and forth past Sayaji Hotel, Wakad, claiming he wanted to get her to a bigger hospital. After a while, he complained of a snag after which, he asked his mother and nephew to get down. He pretended to take the car to corner and it caught fire. He confessed to having poured petrol on his sister and on the car before he lit it,” said deputy commissioner of police (zone 2) Namrata Patil.



“Sangita had some medical conditions. She was estranged from her husband and was living with her brother, his wife and their mother. Borde was providing money for Sangita. He hit her head against a wall when she demanded money,” said police inspector (Hinjawadi) Ajay Jogdand, who is investigating the case.



According to him, Hiwale had no steady income and so Borde was paying the premium of the Rs 30 lakh insurance police. “Sangita’s mother and her son were said to be the nominees,” he added.



Borde was produced before a court that gave him police custody. The accused was booked under Indian Penal Code sections 302 for murder and 201 for causing the disappearance of evidence of the offence.


