With UP’s arch rivals finding common cause, BJP faces an uphill contest

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

On Tuesday morning, two memes in a WhatsApp group caught my attention. Some Dalit activists from the UP side of Bundelkhand befriended during a reporting tour in late 2016 before the assembly polls had added me to the group. Such groups give a glimpse of the digital content produced by India’s political and ideological ecosystems and I remain a silent observer in them quietly lapping up their content even when I disagree with them.

The first meme was a “janmadhin ki shubh kaamnayein” to “Saansad Shrimati Dimple Yadav”. The second was a longish “janmadhin (jankalyankari divas) ke shub avasar par haardik shubh kaamnaayein” to saamajik parivartan ki mahanayika – aadharniya mananiya Behan Kumari Mayawati Ji. As is evident the overt deference and the surfeit of honorifics for Mayawati clearly indicated the sender’s preference. But the fact that it was accompanied by a greeting to SP supremo Akhilesh Yadav’s wife and Lok Sabha MP Dimple signalled to me that the alliance had traction on the ground.

SP and BSP’s decision to contest 38 seats each may well be the defining moment of the 2019 elections. A discernible political and social phenomenon in recent decades has been the conflict between intermediate castes which have moved up the social mobility ladder and weaker communities like Dalits struggling to climb. Thanks to the rise of political Hindutva and upper caste resurgence in UP riding on the BJP’s wings, the SP-BSP alliance in UP seeks to upend established beliefs about Dalit-OBC antipathy.

While Prime Minister Narendra Modi unlocks one goodie after another like Ayushman Bharat, upper caste quota, Citizenship Bill and farmer investment support, it will be read as a defensive ploy. After all, he was opposed to the quota as Gujarat chief minister. Moreover, the question of when the benefits from the scheme actually kick in also matters.

In elections to Gorakhpur, Phulpur and Kairana Lok Sabha seats, BSP had refrained from putting up candidates allowing SP and RLD to win these seats. Gorakhpur is UP CM Yogi Adityanath’s bastion, UP deputy CM Keshav Maurya was MP in Phulpur, and Narendra Modi even did a mega-rally in neighbouring Baghpat, a day before the Kairana polls. Losses in such key seats was a morale booster to the opposition and a sign that BSP votes do shift to the party of its choice. However, the converse hasn’t been proven yet of SP votes transferring to BSP.

Ultimately, the UP elections are going to boil down to an interplay of multiple identities like religion(Hindu-Muslim), caste(Jatav-Yadav-Thakur-Brahmin-nonJatavDalit-nonYadavOBC), occupation (farmers-government servants-teachers), and class (BPL, consumers). The BJP can count on a Hindu vote, upper castes, BPL, and consumers (because of low food prices). But the opposition arithmetic comprising Jatavs, Muslims, Yadavs, and farmers may just prove to tip the scales. Also the question of whose votes a resurgent Congress will eat into remains to be answered.

Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati have scripted history by this coming together. The credit must go to Akhilesh because it was he who saw the utility of this alliance long before the 2017 polls and made moves to heal SP-BSP ties. The scripted press conference in which Akhilesh and Mayawati announced the alliance also indicated that the two leaders will stay directly in touch without relying on intermediaries. Congress leaders busy fighting their factional battles in Rajasthan, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, and Haryana would do well to learn from this coming together of such arch-rivals. If BJP has an edge in 2019 it is in states where Congress is the main opposition. Against regional parties, the BJP is on a weak footing.

Except for 1991 and 2004, UP’s MPs have largely dictated which party forms the government at the Centre. The seats won from UP propelled BJP to a stunning victory in 2014. Will UP stall the Modi juggernaut in 2019. Does Modi have an ace up his sleeve for UP too? The road to Delhi will lie through UP this time too.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
