PM Modi is a wall between people and country, says Jyotiraditya Scindia

Reacting to Prime Minister Narendra Modi's stance on abrogation of special status given to Jammu and Kashmir, Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia likened PM Narendra Modi to a wall between people and country.

Earlier in the day, PM Modi said he will "stand as a wall" to prevent those separating Kashmir from India. PM Modi also said that he will not let "Abdullahs and Muftis" divide the country and will "stand like a wall" for united India.

"PM Modi is, instead, a wall between people and country. I may disagree with someone, but their voice still deserves my respect (about Kashmiri leaders protesting any change)," Scindia told exclusively to India Today TV.

He, however, did not clarify Congress's stand on Article 370 and 35A.

"The matter is subjudice. Not best to comment on an issue pending in court and must wait till the decision is out," Scindia said.

The Armed Forces Special Power Act (AFSPA) is another contentious issue in J&, and PM Modi accused Congress of "diluting" the issue.

He said, "Every law can have adequacy and inadequacies. Will take steps that do not condone inhuman treatment against women and injustice against anyone. But at the same time, we are not against strengthening the Army's position. It must be judiciously done. To attempt correcting inadequacies does not mean something wrong with the law or it needs to be dismantled. Inadequacies need to be addressed but Modi Ji does not get into details."

Campaigning for brother-in-law, Vikramaditya Singh, son of Dr. Karan Singh, Scindia, faced another charge by Modi - that of dynasty politics.

"Is it my fault that I am the son of my father (Madhavrao Scindia)? We fight hard and face difficulties to win an election," he questioned.

"How come Modi does not see dynasty among industrialists like Ambani and Adani? What about dynasty within BJP? This is a democracy. People will is strongest we bow down to it. We go to them with our best candidate, their capability and policies of Congress party. The energy I witnessed in Udhampur will create trouble for BJP," he added.

Countering PM Modi's comments that Congress will be wiped out, Scindia said, "Modi not only believes in Congress-mukt Bharat but also Dalit and farmer-mukt Bharat. The party has done nothing for armed forces, neither for OROP that was initiated by Congress," said Scindia.

"Our PM forgets he has been in power for 5 years. If his testimony is to attack Congress (for border tensions) then it is the testimony about the rule of BJP. Indeed, borders and people of the nation are not safe. Farmers and women are not safe. There is a wide yawning chasm between jingoism and jumla of BJP and reality of India".

"We talk of issues that matter to people. Our manifesto is about the collective will of people, unlike BJP manifesto that is about one individual. Their manifesto is simply a cut-paste job of 2014 to 2019. I do not believe in using lines like Ali or Bajrangbali in my campaign rallies. I believe in a secular India. A strong, progressive nation with economic resilience," Scindia said.

On speculation about Priyanka Gandhi contesting against Narendra Modi from Varanasi, UP west general secretary said, "Such a decision needs to be taken by the individual after deliberations. Eventually, she and party president will take any final decision on it."
