Engineer kills girlfriend, stuffs body in suitcase

Carries body in bus till KPHB Colony, takes cab to dump it

A 25-year-old mechanical engineer was arrested by Cyberabad police for allegedly killing his girlfriend, who was pestering him to marry her, stuffing her body in a suitcase and dumping it in Suraram village.

Killed her in hotel

Sunil Kumar allegedly killed the woman in a hotel room inside the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) complex in Shamshabad late on April 4 and then dumped the body beneath a culvert at Suraram village, nearly 75 kilometres from the airport in Hyderabad.

Sunil Kumar, a resident of MIG in BHEL, stuffed her body in a trolley suitcase and carried it in an TSRTC bus till KPHB Colony.

From there, he took a cab to Suraram village to dispose of the body, Ramachandrapuram police said.

Lavanya, a resident of Ramachandrapuram, was in love with Sunil, who was her classmate and graduated from Malla Reddy Engineering College in 2015.

Victim pestered him

“After sexually exploiting Lavanya, Sunil was not interested in marrying her,” said Miyapur ACP S. Ravi Kumar. Lavanya started pressuring him to marry her.

Unable to bear that, he decided to eliminate her and told the victim and her family members that he got a job in Muscat. Sunil also convinced Lavanya’s family that he would take her with him to Muscat so that she could also get a job there, Mr Ravi Kumar said.

Pretended sickness

On April 4, Lavanya’s family dropped them at RGI Airport for their journey to Muscat. They went inside the airport by showing morphed tickets to Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) personnel. “Minutes before the flight, Sunil pretended to fall sick and went to the wash room,” Mr. Kumar said. After coming out, he told Lavanya that they missed the flight and checked into a hotel there. He throttled her after a heated argument and stuffed the body in her suitcase, the ACP said.

Posed as victim

Before leaving, Lavanya told her parents that she would be back on April 7.

When she did not return that day, Lavanya’s sister texted her on WhatsApp to know her whereabouts. Posing as Lavanya, Sunil replied to her sister and told them that she was leading a happy life with him in Muscat and was not interested in coming back to Hyderabad and switched off the phone.

Lavanya’s father Srinivasa Rao suspected a foul play and lodged a complaint. Ramachandrapuram police registered a missing person case and launched a probe on April 8. “After analysing the cellphone location, we nabbed Sunil on Saturday evening. He confessed later,” police said.

Police recovered the victim’s decomposed body after Sunil told them where he hid it. He was arrested and remanded in judicial custody on Sunday.
