Won't let Muftis and Abdullahs divide India: Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched a blistering attack on Abdullahs and Muftis, blaming them for fanning separatism in Jammu and Kashmir during his campaign trail in the state on Sunday.

Addressing a massive election rally in Kathua district - part of Udhampur-Doda Lok Sabha constituency - which is going to polls in the second phase, PM Modi said that he won't allow the National Conference (NC) and the Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) to separate Kashmir from India.

"I won't allow Abdullahs and Muftis to divide this nation. I will stand as a wall before the forces who want to break India. Let me make it clear to Abdullahs and Muftis that I'm Modi. I'm non-corrupt, I'm not afraid of anyone, I can't be cowed down," he said amidst a thunderous applause and 'Modi Modi' chants.

In his hard-hitting speech, PM Modi also accused NC and PDP of destroying and ruining three generations of the state, while appealing to the people to once again repose their faith in the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

It was not just NC and PDP, the PM also took a dig at the Congress and blamed it for ethnic cleansing of Kashmiri Hindus (Pandits) from the Valley. "It was because of the policies of the Congress party that the Kashmiri Pandits had to flee from their homes in the Kashmir valley. I'm committed to the honourable return and rehabilitation of displaced Kashmiri Pandits," he said.

In his address, PM Modi also raked up the issue of surgical strikes and Balakot airstrikes. He accused the Congress of insulting the armed forces. "For Congress, Army is a source to earn money. It indulged in corruption in defence deals. Congress' blood has been infected with germs. It wants to withdraw Army from J&K and dilute AFSPA," said PM Modi at the election rally organised in support of BJP candidate from Udhampur Lok Sabha seat Dr Jitender Singh.

Remembering the Jan Sangh founder Dr Shyama Prasad Mukherjee, PM said that his slogan, "One nation, one flag, one Constitution" remains a guiding principle for his party.

"In the recent past, you saw how 'mahamilawat' of the Congress, the National Conference and the PDP got exposed. What was in their hearts for decades and for which they were working clandestinely has come out in the open. Everyday they are threatening to separate Jammu and Kashmir from India, talking about bloodshed and a separate prime minister. Earlier, Pakistan also used to warn India of its nuclear weapons but it was deflated," Modi said.

Modi, who started his speech in Dogri, said the heavy turnout of voters in the first phase of elections on April 11 in Jammu and Baramulla constituencies is a setback to terrorists, their mentors and those parties championing their cause.

"I visited the entire country after starting rallies last month and witnessed an intense wave in favour of the BJP. Surveys by various agencies also make it clear that the BJP will get three times higher seats than the Congress," he said.

(With PTI inputs)
