Holyoke honors Sikh community with City Hall flag raising, call to prevent violence

HOLYOKE — Mayor Alex B. Morse has proclaimed April “Sikh Awareness and Appreciation Month” and he marked the occasion with a City Hall flag raising.

Gurninder “Tony” Dhaliwal, the owner of Dino’s Pizza on Homestead Avenue, and the mayor’s staff organized the Saturday morning event, which included City Councilors Linda Vacon, Peter Tallman and David Bartley.

Morse and the Sikh community raised the orange and blue Sikh National Flag.

Harjinder Singh, who presided over the ceremony, said the principles of Sikhism are equality, justice, and respect for all.

Thirty-million people identify themselves as Sikhs, making it the fifth largest religion globally. Around 700,000 of the devoted live in the U.S. The religion traces its origins to the late-15th Century in Punjab, India.

Singh said Sikhs pray in the morning and evening for the “welfare of all mankind.” He added that Guru Nanak Dev, the religion’s founder, said, “Recognize the whole human race as one.”

Sikhs arrived in America around the late-18th Century, mostly on the West Coast.

“Although Sikh-Americans have been here that long, they’ve been highly misunderstood and regular targets of discrimination, and occasional victims of hate crimes,” Singh said. “It’s ceremonies like this that propagate the message of Sikhism to Americans so that the misrepresentation of Sikhs can be reduced this way.”

Morse thanked Dhaliwal and the Sikh community for reaching out to his administration. In November 2018, the city remembered the victims of the 1984 Sikh genocide, in which thousands of Sikhs were killed in India.

“Those historical events remain in many of our hearts and minds in 2019,” Morse said. He added that the community and the nation should educate themselves about the Sikh faith. “I know in the City of Holyoke we go above and beyond recognizing all aspects of our community.”

The mayor added, “It’s not just about one population, one immigrant group, but it’s about all of us and how we contribute to what makes Holyoke the place we know and love.”

Morse said Sikhs at home and abroad continue to be targets of hate crimes, violence, and misperceptions. The mayor issued the formal proclamation declaring Sikh Awareness and Appreciation Month.

Patricia Duffy attended on behalf of State Rep. Aaron Vega (D-Holyoke).
