Hopes of plastic-free Rajkot crushed

RAJKOT: Crushing all the high expectations , the Reverse Vending Machine (RVM) failed to reverse Rajkot’s fight with plastic garbage. Though Rajkot Municipal Corporation (RMC) was the first to implement the much-hyped concept of installing the plastic bottle crushing machine, lack of awareness and poor publicity killed the initiative in the bud.The machine was meant to provide incentives to users while the whole project would be operated on build operate and transfer (BOT) model. RMC entrusted a Delhi-based company to install vending machines at various locations in the city. It wanted to install these at 10 places in the first phase, but the vendor agreed to install it at five places only. The vendor agreed to pay royalty of Rs 11,000 per machine to RMC every month. However, the firm failed to set the revenue model and could not pay the royalty to RMC and so limited machines to two only.As per the deal, the civic body will provide the vendor space to install these machines, give rights to advertisement around the kiosks and help in getting electricity connection. When asked why it failed to take off, sources in the know of the development claim that the scheme failed because it was not properly advertised, the incentives which were supposed to be given to the people were not fixed and the vendor could not manage to get advertisements even though the kiosk were located at prime places.Currently the kiosks are installed at Kisanpara Chowk near race course and Sarveshvar chowk on Yagnik road — two places that are favourite hangouts of food lovers. The vendor’s pending loyalty dues to the RMC has gone above Rs 2 lakh, of which he has paid only Rs 55,000. “We have also tried to convince some outdoor publicity agencies to help them get ad revenue and thereby sustain our efforts to meet the target, but even that didn’t work out,” the source lamented.The vendor has to pay royalty to RMC, electricity bills besides providing people with incentive coupons in consultation with some food outlets, malls and multiplexes to attract them to crush their plastic bottles. In turn, the vendor gets the plastic waste and the advertising rights to generate revenue.When contacted, municipal commissioner, Bancchanidhi Pani said, “We are finding out ways to make the project a success because we are collecting royalty of Rs 11,000 from the vendor. However, our aim is not just to generate revenue, but to make the city clean. We also plan to ask all the malls, schools, commercial establishments to keep a separate dustbin to collect such plastic bottles and then take it to the crushing machine in bulk.” Vadodara Municipal Corporation and Jamnagar Municipal Corporation too evinced interest on the model and had asked the RMC to provide tendering details to study.
