20-yr-old accused in ‘smiley face’ murder is out on bail

Bombay High Court

Siddhant Ganore

smiley-face

bail application

Siddhant Ganore; (right) The message scribbled in blood at the crime scene

Vakola police station

Court finds evidence not strong enough to hold him behind bars.Thehas granted bail to, who is accused of killing his mother. After allegedly committing the crime, the 20-year-old drew awith the victim’s blood next to the corpse before absconding.Though bail, even in murder cases, is not an exception, it is not granted easily, either. Given that Ganore has been granted bail in less than two years of his arrest, coupled with certain observations made by Justice Ajey Gadkari while granting bail, one wonders whether the case against him is weak.The court observed that the accused being the last person to be seen with the victim is the only plausible evidence as of now. “Prima facie, it appears that there is the only circumstance of the last-seen together which is available on record at this stage,” observed Justice Gadkari, while granting bail to Ganore for Rs 25,000, with one or two sureties in the like amount. Justice Gadkari didn’t find enough merit in the other two pieces of circumstantial evidence.During the hearing, the prosecution relied on three main circumstances – that Ganore was the one who was last seen with his late mother Deepali; that he absconded after committing the crime and could be nabbed only two days later in Rajasthan; and traces of his mother’s blood on the half-pant he was wearing at the time of the crime, which was recovered from his home in Santacruz.Senior Advocate Ashok Mundargi, appearing for Ganore, submitted that the evidence cited by the police was not strong enough to keep him in custody. He also mentioned absence of any criminal antecedent and completion of the investigation as additional reasons to seek bail. Prosecutor Amit Palkar, however, defended the police’s case and sought rejection of theThe court did not seem to have given a lot of importance to the discovery of his mother’s blood on his half-pant as the recovery panchnama does not mention blood stains at all. “The list mentioned in the panchnama describes the seizure of a wet T-shirt and a grey colour half-pant from the bathroom,” the HC order notes. It observes that the panchnama is silent on the presence of blood stains.The judge further observed that the fact that he went absconding immediately after the alleged crime, was not a circumstance good enough “on its own.” The order says, “It is the settled position of law that, absconding may lend weight to the other evidence establishing the guilt of an accused, but, by itself, is hardly any evidence of guilt,” adding later that even an innocent person may, when suspected of grave crimes, attempt to evade arrest. “Such is the instinct of self-preservation in an average human being…Even assuming that the fact of absconding has been established by the prosecution, it cannot be held that the applicant was the author of the crime in the absence of evidence pointing to his guilt,” the court observed.On the point of the prosecution’s theory of ‘last-seen together,’ the order notes that it was based on an alleged call made by Ganore’s father Dnyaneshwar – a police officer himself – to the deceased hours before the crime was discovered.Ganore allegedly killed his 42-year-old mother as he was tired of her constant bickering with him for not being serious about his studies. Deepali was stabbed multiple times by a kitchen knife, including on her neck, on May 23, 2017. Ganore was arrested from a hotel in Jodhpur on May 25. This newspaper had reported on May 29, 2017, about how his parents considered him a big disappointment, and his father Dnyaneshwar – a police officer – would frequently take him to the police station and make him stay there all day “in order to turn him into something useful.”Ganore has been directed to attend theevery Monday, and, in case he doesn’t do so on two consecutive Mondays, the prosecution can seek cancellation of his bail.
