Delhi youth shot days after he tells friend he got into "a mess"; police probe on

The incident took place while the victim was riding a bike (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A shocking incident surfaced in the national capital as a youth was shot dead. The incident took place near Baba Haridas Nagar. The victim was allegedly an SSC aspirant. The victim was shot and then robbed of his bike and mobile phone.

The victim was identified as Tarun. A resident of Bahadurgarh, the victim was shot at from close proximity. The incident took place while the victim was riding a bike.

After the incident, the victim was taken to a hospital by the locals. The doctors declared the victim dead on arrival. An autopsy was conducted before giving the body of the victim to his family. A criminal who had just been given a parole is being suspected to have a role in the incident.

According to the Times of India's report, a friend of the victim stated that the latter had been under stress since the past few days. The victim had allegedly told him that he was "stuck in a mess". The victim did not share what exactly he was going through.

The CCTV footage of the nearby areas is being scanned to trace the accused. The Haryana Police was also informed about the incident. The police are tracking the mobile phone of the victim. Since the bike of the victim was also robbed, the number of the vehicle was given to informers. A case of murder was registered at the Baba Haridas Nagar police station.

A similar incident came to light in the national capital a day before this incident when a youth was shot dead in his car. The incident took place near the Ranjit Singh flyover. The family of the deceased alleged that it was a murder and that there was foul play involved.

The 19-year-old had received a phone call from his friends stating that they wanted to go to India Gate. The deceased was driving a Creta car. The deceased was allegedly taken to the hospital by his friends. The family of the deceased alleged that the friends of the deceased were involved in the incident.
