Punishment is disproportionate to alleged guilt: HC on ‘coward’ CRPF constable

CRPF

High Court

A Central Reserve Police Force () constable on sentry duty was sacked from his job after he ran away from the post watching another constable chasing a senior officer with gun in hand. He was charged with cowardice, but thesaid the punishment was too harsh.Paramesh G Nayak is the constable in the dock. He approached the HC after being sacked from his job. He was appointed to the job in 2003 and was serving in Lamphel Kote, Imphal, Manipur. The alleged incident occurred on October 11, 2010. His advocate submitted to the HC that he was suffering from back pain and was not given the duty of sentry as a reason as it would require him to stand for two hours with a machine gun.However, another constable was not available for sentry duty on the said date and he was posted as sentry between 5 am and 7 am at Kote. While he was on duty, another constable, Fomin Mohan, was seen chasing the head constable U Vincent. This happened in front of Paramesh G Nayak. Nayak allegedly did not try to intervene or stop Fomin Moham. Mohan hopened fire and killed three constables.Nayak's case was that in the said situation he was not in a position to do much as Fomin Mohan was in an enraged condition. He could not have done anything and if he had tried, even he would have been killed.The advocate for the CRPF argued that Nayak's dismissal from service was right as he "being an armed sentry belonging to the disciplinary force should have at least attempted to diffuse the situation." He could have shot at the legs of Fomin Mohan when he was trying to kill U Vincent. However Nayak took shelter inside the Company office, "which is an act of cowardice."The HC noted that Nayak had gone inside the barrack where the Company office was situated right after the first shot was fired by Mohan. He had also not been able to provide any evidence of his contention that he was not guilty. "However, this Court is of the opinion that the punishment imposed against the petitioner is disproportionate to the guilt alleged against the petitioner," the HC said.The HC set aside the CRPF order terminating Nayak from service saying, "the punishment of removal from servide is highly disproportionate, even if it is held that the petitioner was guilty of an act of cowardice." Disposing the case, the HC said, "It is needless to observe that the respondent-authority is required to reconsider and pass orders as expeditiously as possible and at any rate within a period of three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order."
