Lok Sabha elections: Don't use 'soldier' word for political gains, armed forces servingcountry in best possible: Satara’s ‘military village’ Apshinge

Apshinge village

Narendra Modi

United Nations

We have to trust the forces when it comes to the defence of the country , and let them do their job —Dadasaheb Jadhav, ex-serviceman

After Prime Ministerurged first-time voters to dedicate their vote to those who carried out airstrikes in Pakistan’s Balakot and the martyrs of Pulwama attack, a ‘military village’ in Satara district of western Maharashtra has a message for politicans and parties: “Do not politicise the military.”Joining the defence forces has been an old tradition in the Apshinge village. At least one person in every family in this village has been in the defence services since the World War I.The ex-servicemen in the village, who gather at the temple every morning and evening for interaction, openly discussed with this correspondent military-related issues and recent incidents from Pulwama to heated television debates on India’s security. But they were of the opinion that no party should use the word ‘soldier’ for political or electoral gains. The armed forces are serving the country in the best possible way, they observed.Located at a distance of about 20 km from Satara city, along the highway, the Apshinge village has a rich history of rendering military service.At present, about 500 men are serving in the armed forces across the country, and every year 10 to 12 youths enrol themselves into different wings of defence services.Hindurao Ramrao Patil, 85, one of the eldest ex-servicemen, had joined the army in 1957-58 as sepoy. He fought the war with China and was taken as war prisoner for two years. His grandfather served during the World War I and his father went missing in the World War II. “Why is there so much of propaganda about soldiers?No political party should speak on soldiers or use their names for political or propaganda purposes. They have no right to do so. The armed forces know their duty and are serving the nation in the best possible way,” Patil said. He quit the army after he was sent back under prisoners’ exchange programme between India and China monitored by theWhen asked if he has read the recent statements of politicians and ministers about the military after the Pulwama attack, the army veteran said yes. “I was even invited by the local television channels to participate in the debate on the issue. The people talk without having any knowledge,’’ he said.Apart from their desire to serve the nation, poverty has also been a reason for the villagers to join the army. Over the time, the financial condition of the villagers has improved.The village has built a small memorial, Vijay Sthambh, for the soldiers who sacrificed their lives in various wars and battles.After serving for 28 years in the army, Dadasaheb Jadhav, 72, retired as Subedar Major. He fought in the Indo-Pakistan war of 1971. “Activities at the border are common; soldiers from both the sides get killed. But public outcry is more when the news appears in papers or on television. There is no doubt that we have defeated our enemy. We have to trust the forces when it comes to the defence of the country, and let them do their job. Do not question army’s intentions,” Jadhav said.Jadhav' son, Vilas, too retired as a Havildar from army in 2018. “About 85 per cent of the men in the village have served in the military. It’s in our blood. But we do not bring politics into it. We have no political pressure from any party. We have been just serving the country for generations. Even during this election period, no politician in our area talks about the Pulwama attack or any such incidents,” Vilas said.Kakasaheb Nikam, former sarpanch of the village, was also of the opinion that no one should exploit the bravery and achievements of our armed forces for political gains. “Things have improved for the armed forces over the years. When I was child, a postman used to bring telegrams which were usually about somebody’s death in the army. Every household used to wait in anxiety where the postman would stop. Then even corpses of the soldiers were not sent back home. Now, the corpses are sent home with due respect and dignity,” he said.
