Gaya: Weavers’ group claims father of beheaded girl subjected to electric shocks, forced to confess ‘crime’

The weavers' community in Gaya has demanded that the investigation be handed over to the CBI (File Photo) | Photo Credit: ANI

Patna: In a shocking turn of events, the autopsy report of a 16-year-old girl who was found beheaded in Gaya district of Bihar has ruled out any signs of sexual assault. Protests had erupted in the region after the girl's decomposing body was found on January 6 with her parents claiming that she was tortured and raped before being murdered.

Members of the weaver's community in Gaya of which the victim was a part, claimed that the police is trying to portray it as a case of 'honour killing' to frame the girl's family. In fact, local police had arrested the deceased's father and one of his friends for her murder. Following protests, CID and forensic teams reached the district on Monday and initiated a probe into the matter.

Bihar: A 16-year-old girl was allegedly gang-raped and killed in Gaya's Patwatoli on 12 January. Police say "A detailed investigation will be done based on all inputs. Everything is being verified. We will uncover the truth soon." pic.twitter.com/WX0dF9k3gr — ANI (@ANI) January 13, 2019

Additional Director General (ADG) of police, Kundan Krishnan confirmed that the girl's autopsy report had ruled out rape, reported Hindustan Times. However, this did not stop members of the weavers' community from claiming that the minor girl was indeed tortured, raped and murdered. During the course of the investigation, CID found blood stains in the girl's house.

In a meeting held at the Patwa Toli temple premises on Tuesday, president of the weavers' community, Prem Narayan Patwa was quoted as saying that the girl's father was subjected to electric shocks and forced to confess to a crime he did not commit. While maintaining that other members of her family were also harassed, Patwa demanded a CBI inquiry into the matter.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Kerala nun rape case: Congregation alleges nuns demanding Bishop's arrest using case as 'excuse'
