Modi is anti-Muslim, anti-Kashmiri: Abdullah - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

Omar accuses BJP of changing colours

Excelsior Correspondent

SRINAGAR, Apr 15: National Conference president and former Chief Minister Farooq Abdullah today called Prime Minister Narendra Modi “anti-Kashmiri and anti-Muslim”.

Addressing a party convention at Sher-e-Kashmir Park, Abdullah, in response to yesterday’s statement of Prime Minister Narendra Modi in which he said that Abdullahs and Muftis have ruined lives of three generations of the State, said Modi is dividing the nation in the name of religion.

“Modi is pointing fingers at us that we want to divide the nation. Had National Conference tried to divide the nation then India would not have existed today. Thousands among those who were killed in Jallian Wala Bagh were Kashmiris but you never remembered them,” he added.

Click here to Watch Video

The NC president challenged Modi to address an election rally in Kashmir. “You can’t address election rally in Kashmir because you deceived Muslims and did no justice to Kashmiris. If you believe Kashmir is an integral part of India then why don’t you address rally here. You made strict laws, used pellets but could not win hearts of Kashmir”, he said.

Abdullah said it was National Conference, which contested polls in 1996 when no one was interested to come into electoral politics.

The NC president also questioned the Government of India’s claims that they carried out attack on Jaish-e-Muhammad camps in Balakote.

Abdullah applauded Omar for not forging alliance with BJP in 2014. “I was undergoing my treatment overseas, however, the BJP and its cronies had approached Omar and other party members for hobnobbing an alliance. However, the recourse taken by Omar and his other associates is worth appreciation”, he said.

“The party leaders had rejected the offer of forging alliance with those who have the blood of Muslims on their hand. I want to make it clear for all times that Farooq Abdullah will never join hands with those who have the blood of minorities on their hands,” NC president said.

The NC leader while exuding confidence in the workers and party functionaries said: “Every worker irrespective of his position is important to us, it is he who strives for the party on grass roots. If we want to save the identity and integrity of our State, we have to make the party’s regional units dynamic. Ours is the only party that is the representative of the State’s pluralistic visage.”

The former Chief Minister Omar Abdullah while addressing the rally, asked people to vote for the candidate who will protect the special status of the State. “It is a test for us how to defeat the conspiracies being hatched against the State. This is ample clear now what is the agenda of the BJP,” Omar said, reacting to BJP’s manifesto where the party said they are committed to abrogate Article 370 and Article 35 A.

Reacting to Prime Minister that Abdullahs and Muftis have “ruined” lives of three generations of the State, Omar asked: “When I was Minister in Atal Bihari Vajpayee Government, the BJP had then no problem even when passed a resolution for autonomy of State. Modi made a similar statement in 2014 rally but later made Government with the PDP. You are always changing your colours?”

Omar said that NC leaders told Mehbooba Mufti in the Assembly the JK’s special position was under threat. “But she did not listen to us. Even the then Law Minister had sent a file to Chief Minister’s office for cancellation of fake permanent resident certificates but she did not act. How can we expect she will protect JK’s special status?” he asked.
