Criticisms over BJP promise to remove every single infiltrator Except Buddhists, Hindus and Sikhs from India

SHAFAQNA- India’s ruling party faced criticisms after a top official promised to throw out every infiltrator in an apparent swipe at Muslims and other religious minorities if the party is voted back to power.

Later in the day, BJP posted a tweet on its official Twitter handle quoting Shah that apart from Buddhists, Hindus and Sikhs, every infiltrator will be removed from the country.

“We will ensure implementation of NRC in the entire country. We will remove every single infiltrator from the country, except Buddha, Hindus and Sikhs: Shri @AmitShah #NaMoForNewIndia,” tweeted the BJP, quoting Shah.

“After coming to power, the BJP would find these termites and throw them out”, he asserted, adding that citizenship would, however, be granted to every Hindu, Buddhist and Sikh, Caravan Daily told.

He promised to do so by implementing the National Registry of Citizens nationwide. The NRC is a hugely controversial policy mooted last year in Assam, a region of India which shares a porous border with Bangladesh.

The move has prompted fears of possible deportation among Assam’s hundreds of thousands of Bengali-speaking Muslims, with an estimated 4 million people’s citizenship at risk.

Implementation of the registry has been long delayed, but Shah’s comments have put the issue front and center in the country’s weeks-long general election, which kicked off on Thursday.

Shah’s comments came in for widespread criticism Thursday.

Tony Joseph, a journalist and author of “Early Indians”, said the BJP was the “true inheritor of Nazism”.

“Since the ruling party is campaigning purely on hate (and) vitriol, the results of 2019 will show clearly how much of the 2014 votes it received was on account of bigotry (and) how much on account of people being taken in by its promise of ‘development, development, development’,” he added in a later tweet.

Model and actress Gauhar Khan said she was “shocked at how blatantly divisive” the BJP’s statement was.

Historian Ramachandra Guha said Shah’s words would be warmly received by some in India’s neighboring country, however.

“Amit Shah’s insinuation, that Muslims shall not and cannot be safe and secure in India, will be widely acclaimed in one country: Pakistan,” he said. “Shah’s majoritarian bigotry is music to the ears of those who rule that country.”

BJP’s political rivals also weighed in. Preeti Sharma Menon, spokeswoman for the Aam Aadmi Party, accused the BJP and Shah of “threatening large scale persecution, or maybe they will resort to their favorite method — genocide?”

“You may have all departments dancing to your tunes now, but soon India will respond back to this threat,” she added.

This is the “new India” they want, one completely devoid of unity & brotherhood. The BJP has made it clear that they have no respect for our Constitution & no remorse in dividing our nation on communal lines.

It is the responsibility of every Indian to vote out this hatred. https://t.co/otQr1qp6yL — Congress (@INCIndia) April 11, 2019

In a statement on its official Twitter account, Congress said the BJP “has made it clear that they have no respect for our Constitution (and) no remorse in dividing our nation on communal lines”, CCN told.

A Hindu nationalist party, the BJP has long faced accusations of anti-Muslim rhetoric.

As chief minister of Gujarat, Modi faced local and international criticism for violent rioting along communal lines in 2002 in which more 1,000 people were killed, most of them Muslims. He has never faced charges in connection with violence.

And since he became Prime Minister in 2014, critics have pointed to a rise in high-profile anti-Muslim rhetoric.
