On the road with Sambit Patra: BJP's TV face goes all out rural in Puri

PURI: The doctor in Sambit Patra often comes to the fore as he diagnoses the problems ailing the Puri Lok Sabha constituency and offers his cures.Aware of the fact that he will have to be invested with power by the people to get the job done, the BJP national spokesperson is sparing no effort to woo the electorate of Puri. On a scorching Saturday, TOI followed Patra as he, accompanied by BJP ‘karyakartas’, appealed to voters to give him a chance to fulfill his promises for Puri.“I feel at home in Puri because I have relatives here. My parents live in Bhubaneswar,” says Patra ahead of yet-another road show at Atharnala, on the outskirts of Puri, preparations for which started very early in the day. Despite having gone to bed late the previous day, Patra is up at dawn to complete his morning ritual of scanning newspapers and his social media feed and meeting BJP workers. By 8, the day’s plan is ready, down to the last detail.Far removed from the air-conditioned comfort of TV studios, where he is a fixture, Patra in Puri often spends the night at villagers’ homes. He bathes with them in the local pond and pays a visit to the village temple. Breakfast is usually ‘chuda chakta’ if he is in a village and idlis or ‘chakulis’ with ‘ghoogni’ if he is in a hotel.As the road show begins at Atharnala, the 45-year-old man seems to be at ease with the humidity of Puri. He smiles genially at the people who line up the roads to catch a glimpse of him. Dressed in traditional dhoti and punjabi with a ‘gamucha’ thrown across his shoulders and shod in a comfortable pair of slippers, Patra is in his element.The summer-appropriate clothes cannot prevent the sweat that beads his forehead from rolling down his face. Wiping the moisture away with the ‘gamucha’, Patra and his entourage move from Atharnala to Chakrabartipatana, a kilometre away. Songs taunting the Naveen government rent the air, at times getting drowned in slogans like ‘Vande Mataram’, ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jay’ and ‘Modiji Zindabad’ raised by the BJP workers.“I have just three pairs of dhoti-punjabis and two ‘gamuchas’. This morning, I was gifted the third ‘gamucha’. Even when I am in Delhi, I wear dhotis. I like smearing my forehead with sandalwood paste and vermilion,” he explains.At the end of each song is an appeal to the people to help the lotus bloom in Odisha as only a ‘double-engine sarkar’ can ensure development in the state. As more such appeals fill the air, the 1,000-odd workers trailing Patra speed away on their bikes, followed by Patra’s rath in which he stands with folded hands and a smile writ large on his face. A specially-decorated open truck for important women party members, buses, an LED vehicle and an auto-rickhshaw playing songs and cars follow him.At Chakrabartipatna, Patra gets down and enters the village with Puri MLA candidate Jayanta Kumar Sarangi, seeking votes for ‘parivartan’. “He asked us to change our mind this election,” says Anala Nayak, a housewife. Villagers crowd rooftops, balconies and windows to see the man of the moment and sometimes pose for the cameramen of different media houses trailing Patra.Around 500 metres away at Batamangala, he pays obeisance to the goddess before taking a right turn into Harekrushnapur where he garlands the statue of Jay Rajguru, stirring up emotions in an area considered to be dominated by BJD. He meets villagers, who welcome him with open arms, and gives them a patient hearing.“We feel if BJP comes to power, it will ensure the safety and security of women. That’s why we are campaigning for him,” says Ranjita Padhi, an executive member of BJP’s women’s wing.The meet-and-greet routine is repeated at Beldala, which he accesses from the Puri-Konark marine drive. Two farmers — Banabihari Pradhan and Jagannath Pradhan — say they are elated that Patra has come to their village. “We often see him on TV and are happy to see him here. We also know that our vote is precious,” they smile.From Beldala, he leaves for Narayani Pitha, where party leaders and workers are served a sumptuous lunch of rice, dalma, ‘aambula rai’, ‘saga’ and ‘khiri’. On most days, Patra prefers ‘pakhala’ at villagers’ homes. From Narayani pitha, located amid a forest of casuarina trees, he moves on a bike while chewing a paan and then nimbly hops on to the ‘rath’ again to move around in Chhaitana, Alasankha, Gadabindura, Goindal and other villages in Puri Sadar.“As has been rightly pointed out by PM Modiji, Puri should be made the cultural capital of India. Sadly what has happened is that it has become the crime hub of India. I will make Puri crime-free,” says Patra as he winds up another day of campaigning.
