EC to seek report on missing Rs 6.66 cr, forward it to Delhi

editorial@tribune.com

Aman Sood

Tribune News Service

Patiala, April 15

Waiting for over a fortnight after Rs 6.66 crore “robbed” by a Khanna police team went missing, the Election Commission has finally decided to “seek a detailed report” from the state police and forward it to Delhi.

Meanwhile, legal experts suggest that the whole Khanna police team should face an FIR pertaining to “armed robbery” as they did not follow any rule and now the cash “forcibly collected” by them is missing.

Following reports on how the police cat-turned-informers were running the Khanna police and intervening in raids that were conducted during the code of conduct, the Election Commission has decided to “get a first-hand report” even as the police top brass remains silent.

“The Khanna police had conducted an illegal raid in Jalandhar without informing the local police and under the pretext of Election Commission guidelines. The teams had later shown the money as unaccounted cash, recovered from a naka,” sources said.

“We have decided to get a detailed report from the additional DGP (Election Cell) and will send it to Delhi for necessary directions,” said Punjab Chief Electoral Officer, S Karna Raju. “Initially we were waiting for the SIT report but it is yet to be completed, so we have decided to act on the whole matter. There are certain lapses as huge cash is missing,” he said.

Insiders in the Police Department told The Tribune that the Khanna police, armed with weapons and taking along civilians, barged into the priest’s house in Jalandhar and forcibly robbed him off his cash, later showing the money to have been recovered from Khanna. “This is in violation of the model code of conduct and also police rules. The Khanna officers deserve nothing but exemplary punishment as otherwise the men in khaki will trespass anywhere without rules,” they said.

Legal experts suggest that the case is very serious. Senior advocate Barjinder Singh Sodhi said this was a case wherein the men in uniform flouted all norms and conducted an armed robbery. “An FIR should be registered against the entire Khanna police team under Section 392 of the IPC pertaining to punishment for robbery and Section 120Bof the IPC pertaining to conspiracy,” he said.

A senior IPS officer confirmed that the government should have till now acted against the “guilty” officers and “paid back the missing money to Father Anthony”.

“The Khanna police also tried to hoodwink the Election Commission by holding a press conference claiming to have recovered Rs 9.66 crore from a vehicle at a naka, while it did not account for the missing Rs 6.66 crore,” he stated.

The role of senior officers, including SSP, Khanna, Dhruv Dahiya is under scanner after the police team, handpicked by him, failed to report back with the cash. Two ASIs missing along with huge cash seized during the raid on the priest’s house in Jalandhar were specially selected by the SSP. The police have issued a lookout notice against the two ASIs — Joginder Singh and Rajpreet Singh — and suspended them, though they are yet to add Sections 392 and 120B to the FIR.

Dist police chiefs asked to arrest accused

The SIT on Monday issued a notice to all police chiefs of the state to arrest the three accused allegedly missing with Rs 6.66 crore. Pictures of the three accused — two ASIs and an informer — have been forwarded to the district police chiefs.
