politics: With more LGBTQI+ representatives... It’s an inclusive battleground in the Lok Sabha polls this time

On Sunday, American politician Pete Buttigieg announced that he would be running for the post of US President. If elected, Buttigieg will be the first openly gay man to hold the highest office in American politics. While Ireland has an openly gay Prime Minister — Leo Varadkar (who also happens to be of Indian descent), countries like Belgium, Iceland and Serbia have had heads of the government from the LGBTQI+ community in the past. Over the years, queer visibility in world politics has seen a rise and wider acceptance, and the same is on the verge of happening in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections in India. Closer home, a new wave of acceptance has taken over the Indian political scenario. With an increase in voter enrolment from the third gender, Sneha Kale becoming the first transwoman to contest the polls from Mumbai, gay rights activist Harish Iyer scripting history by joining a national political party (Indian National Congress), a first for an openly gay man in Indian politics, and Chinju Aswathi, the first intersex candidate to be contesting elections from Ernakulam in Kerala, this year has been a lot of firsts for the LGBTQI+ community.In fact, for the first time, a political party has included LGBTQI+ rights in their manifesto as well. Times are changing. But what lies ahead? Will these developments positively impact queer representation in the country’s politics?On joining politics, Harish had said, “I have officially joined politics to weed out homophobia, transphobia, Islamophobia and the politics of hate.” He feels that it is high time the queer community was represented by someone from within it. “When someone who doesn’t have experience like us represents or speaks for the community, their ignorance reflects in the policies that are drafted. The time is right to stop cursing the system and get involved in it to make a difference,” says Harish.The first intersex candidate ever to contest elections in Kerala, Chinju Aswathi, a resident of Angamaly, aims to reform societal acceptance of LGBTQI+individuals and implement the rights of his community through positive and constructive activism. “While rights for the transgender and queer community are assured by the state and the repressive Section 377 has been struck down by the Supreme Court last year, there has not been much of improvement in the lives of people belonging to the community. The stigma is still there, like a shadow,” says Chinju adding, “I am contesting as anindependent candidate, without the support of any party, and will continue with my attempts to reform our society.”Sneha Kale who is contesting the Lok Sabha polls from Mumbai, questions why people from the community are eligible to vote but are deprived of basic rights. She says, “Politicians visit, us, seek our blessings and promise change before elections. After the results, it’s as if we don’t exist! I think that needs to change and I am taking a step towards that.” She adds, “If I win the elections, the first thing I wish to do is to build a hospital that is transgender friendly. Also, even though many transgenders are well-educated, they don’t get good jobs; I intend to open avenues for the same. I’m glad that many of our community members are lending me their full support in this endeavour.”—Prashant Warkar, a transgender candidate, contesting the Lok Sabha elections from Satara—Priya Patil, Bombay Municipal Corporation’s first transgender candidate—Kajal Nayak, a transwoman contesting the elections from Korei assembly constituency in Odisha—M Radha, a transgender candidate from Chennai South constituency is Tamil Nadu's first independent candidateApsara Reddy, the national general secretary of the Mahila Congress, opines that policies made by governments affect the life of every citizen in the country. “Be it infrastructure, health or taxation, the policies are for everyone and I aim to be a part of the larger discussion on formulating policies that largely affect women, children and transgender individuals because I feel they are the most neglected in the country. This is also the only way that mainstreaming of the community will happen,” she says.Meera Parida, a 38-year-old transwoman, just made history by becoming the first transgender to hold the position of vice-president of Odisha’s ruling political party. Meera, who has been working as a social activist, was made the VP of the Biju Mahila Janta Dal (BMJD) in Odisha. “Many asked me why I chose the women’s wing. I see it as a small step towards a bigger future. The very fact that I have got a chance to be the voice of my people is a step forward, according to me. My opinion or suggestions can now reach the right people who are responsible for policy-making and can improve the state-of-affairs for the LGBTQI+ community.” She also informs that in Odisha, two other transwomen are contesting the elections.A transgender model and actress from Manipur, Bishesh Huirem has been engaged as the State Icon by the Election Commission (EC) to inspire voters in Manipur to vote in the ongoing polls, while Mumbai-based social worker Shree Gauri Sawant, another transwoman, has been appointed as an election ambassador for Maharashtra by the EC. Even the Punjab district electoral office appointed a transwoman, Preeti Mahant, as the district icon for awareness activities under the Systematic Voter Education and Electoral Participation Programme.Generating awareness among sex workers and housewives about the importance of voting is necessary. Sex workers and their welfare does not feature on the agenda of any political parties, and that’s why they don’t bother to vote. But this must change, and I am working towards the same.— Shree Gauri Sawant, social worker and transgender activistIt is heartening to see greater representation from the LGBTQI+ community in the general elections, but we all have to do our bit if we want it to translate into something substantial. A lot of transgenders have got their voter IDs, but I was disheartened to see that many of them didn’t vote in the first phase on April 11. There are some LGBTQI+ members who are contesting elections. If you don’t participate in the democratic process, you have no right to crib later.— Vidya Kamble, the first transgender on Maharashtra’s Lok Adalat juryI will support those individuals who have promised to safeguard the rights of the LGBTQI+ community. I also want people to choose leaders who will take the nation forward in a cohesive manner. We are poised at the threshold of change and, as a nation, we can't afford to go wrong in our selection of candidates.— Anand Chandrani, a gay rights activistAccording to the Maharashtra Election Commission, the number of registered transgender voters in the state went up from 918 in 2014 to 2086 this year. Nationally, the number of third gender voters in 2019 is 41,292, a rise of about 45 per cent from 2014, when the EC first introduced the category.
