Sanjay Dutt Reveals Pakistani Connection Behind His Reason For Choosing “Kalank”

Sanjay Dutt just revealed that he signed up for his role in Karan Johar’s Kalank due to an emotional connection with Pakistan.

The period drama Kalank is set in pre-partition Pakistan. Sanju revealed that first of all his character is named Balraj. And guess what? That’s his father’s real name. Secondly, Sanju’s father (the late actor Sunil Dutt) migrated to India from Pakistan.

“My character is named Balraj, which is my father’s (Sunil Dutt) real name. He too came from Pakistan during Partition, so it has an emotional connect.”

ALSO READ

New Bollywood Movies to Watch Out for This Year

A Pakistani Connection

That’s the emotional connection right there.

To add to that, Sanju Baba told India Today that Dharma Productions is like a family to him and the film Kalank is actually the brainchild of the late film-maker Yash Johar. That’s why Sanju had to do the film, for family.

“During the shoot of Gumrah, Yash uncle had briefly mentioned about the story. Dharma Productions is like family; so when Karan approached me with the film, I had to do it.”

In fact Sanju had known about Yash Johar’s Kalank since his Gumrah days. Sanjay Dutt first heard about Kalank while shooting Yash Johar’s Gumrah back in 1993.

Rumored Romance Initially, there were speculations that Sanju was doing the film for a reunion with rumored ex-beau Madhuri Dixit. The two were speculated to be dating back in the 90s.

Sanju was even nervous shooting with Madhuri after 22 years apart.

Advertisement

“It was great to work with her again. I was a little nervous, but she made things easy. She’s got terrific command as an actor. We spoke about our kids. In fact, I made my children [Shahraan and Iqra] meet her when they dropped by on the sets.”

The two happily married artists got past the awkwardness and bonded over their kids. In fact, Sanju made his twins Shahraan and Iqra Dutt meet Madhuri Dixit on the film sets.

Originally the late icon Sri Devi was set to play Bahaar Begum. After her death, Madhuri was roped in for the role.

Kalank Connects with Pakistan

Recently actress Alia Bhatt revealed that she drew inspiration from Sanam Saeed’s Kashaf in Zindagi Gulzar Hai for her role in Kalank. This certainly got Pakistani audiences excited.

ALSO READ

Alia Bhatt Took Inspiration from Sanam Saeed in ‘Zindagi Gulzar Hai’ for This Role

To add to that the film is allegedly set in Lahore.

All these tantalizing references and emotional connections are tickling the audience in the right way.

Besides Sanjay Dutt, Madhuri Dixit and Alia Bhatt, the multi-starrer Kalank cast Varun Dhawan, Sonakshi Sinha and Aditya Roy Kapoor in supporting roles.

Advertisement

Kalank release date is said to be April 17.
