Dalit groups incensed at relief for Milind Ekbote

To challenge relaxation of bail conditions in High Court

Dalit outfits are irked at a Pune court’s decision to grant relief to Hindutva leader Milind Ekbote, who is accused of orchestrating the Bhima-Koregaon clashes on January 1 last year.

FIRs had been lodged on January 2, 2018 against Mr. Ekbote, who heads Samasta Hindu Aghadi, and Sambhaji Bhide, founder of the Sangli-based right-wing group, Shiv Pratishthan Hindustan.

On Monday, the court lifted restrictions on Mr. Ekbote holding public rallies, speaking to the media and making mandatory appearances at the Shikrapur police station. In a bid to quash the relief, the Republican Yuva Morcha is planning to move the Bombay High Court. Meanwhile, the Ramdas Athawale-led RPI (A), an ally of the BJP, has accused the Home Department of covertly backing Mr. Ekbote.

‘Going soft on accused’

RPI (A) leader Siddharth Dhende accused the Pune police of deliberately “going soft” on Mr. Ekbote and failing to make a strong case against him despite ample evidence. Mr. Dhende said, “It is ironic that the Pune police are overzealous about prosecuting an eminent writer, educationist and civil rights activist like Anand Teltumbde, who is not remotely connected with the Bhima-Koregaon clashes. Yet, they fail to make a case against Mr. Ekbote, the chief instigator of the riots. The police’s slipshod probe has led the court to relax the stringent conditions.”

Mr. Dhende said the police’s soft-pedaling of a habitual offender like Mr. Ekbote could only imply “pressure from above”. He said Mr. Ekbote would now ratchet up tensions at Bhima-Koregaon and its neighbouring villages, and threaten witnesses to the January 1 violence. Mr. Dhende said, “Our party president, Mr. Ramdas Athawale will speak to Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis on re-imposing controls and checks on Mr. Ekbote.”

Rahul Dambale, State president of the Republican Yuva Morcha, said if Mr. Ekbote was ‘innocent’, then why did the Pune rural police issue prohibitory orders against him on the eve of the 201st anniversary of the Bhima- Koregaon battle this year. Mr. Dambale said, “The least the Pune police could have done was to present a strong case before the court to maintain the conditions of Mr. Ekbote’s bail till he was chargesheeted. This clearly proves that the authorities are being pressured by the State government and the Home Department.”

He said in October 2001, when Mr. Ekbote came under the police scanner after a riot in Saswad, top district authorities mulled action against him under the Maharashtra Prevention of Dangerous Activities (MPDA) of Slumlords, Bootleggers, Drug-Offenders and Dangerous Persons Act, 1981.

‘Infamous for rioting’

Mr. Dambale said, “Mr. Ekbote, who was notorious even then for aggravating social tensions, narrowly evaded arrest in 2001 only by the reported intervention of a person no less than senior BJP leader L.K. Advani, who was the then Union Minister for Home Affairs.”

He said since then, Mr. Ekbote has been embroiled in at least 27 cases of rioting. Mr. Dambale said, “Our outfit is going to challenge the ‘relaxation’ in the Bombay High Court. We demand that he [Mr. Ekbote] be prosecuted under the MPDA Act.”

Anita Ravindra Salve, a member of the Bahujan Republican Socialist Party, and Anjana Gaikwad had filed an FIR in Pimpri-Chinchwad against Mr. Bhide and Mr. Ekbote. The Shikrapur police had also lodged a case against Mr. Ekbote under Section 307 (attempt to murder) under the Indian Penal Code, and relevant sections of the Maharashtra Property Damage Act. While Mr. Bhide has never been questioned in connection with the clashes, Mr. Ekbote was granted conditional bail in April last year.
