26/11 terror attack key accused now FBI's most wanted

Sajid Mir is believed to be foreign recruiter for LeT and key person for their training camps | Photo from Twitter/FBI

Sajid Mir, the wanted accused in the 2008 Mumbai terror attack has been declared most wanted by the United States's Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).

With that development, it has also made Sajid Mir world's most wanted terrorist in the world.

The FBI has also declared a reward on Sajid Mir who is believed to be in Pakistan.

"Rewards for Justice Program, United States Department of State, is offering a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest and conviction of Sajid Mir," an FBI statement read.

Sajid Mir was referred by David Headley during his deposition and revealed that he was key member of Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT).

Sajid Mir was also part of LeT team which conspired and executed the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks.

According to Headley, Sajid gave him instructions to make videos of places in Mumbai where attacks were planned by the LeT.

Sajid Mir is believed to be a foreign recruiter for LeT and a key person for their training camps.

According to Indian security agencies, Mir visited India in 2005 using a fake passport issued by Pakistan on the name of Mohd Awan.

According to the FBI, Sajid Mir, who is in his early 40s, goes by aliases Ibrahim, Wasi, Khalid, Vashi, Vashibhai, Bhai Ali, Ali Bhai, Moosa Bhai, Wasi Bhai, Wasi Ibrahim, Sajid Majeed, Sajjid Mir, Bhai Moosa and Ibrahim Shah.

The FBI, in a statement, also said that Sajid Mir is wanted for his alleged involvement in the 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, India.

Beginning on November 26, 2008, and continuing through November 29, 2008, 10 attackers, trained by the Pakistan-based foreign terrorist organisation Lashkar-e-Taiba carried out a series of coordinated attacks against multiple targets in Mumbai, including hotels, cafes, and a train station, killing approximately 170 people.

"Six Americans were killed during the three-day attack. Mir allegedly served as the chief planner of the attacks, directing preparations and reconnaissance, and was one of the Pakistan-based controllers during the attacks," the FBI statement addedd.

According to the federal agency, Mir allegedly conspired to commit a terrorist attack against a newspaper and its employees in Denmark between 2008 and 2009.

Mir was indicted in the United States District Court, Northern District of Illinois, Eastern Division, Chicago, Illinois, on April 21, 2011, and was charged with conspiracy to injure property of foreign government, providing material support to terrorists, killing a citizen outside of the US and aiding and abetting, and bombing of places of public use.

An arrest warrant was issued on April 22, 2011 by a US court.
