AP CM Chandrababu Naidu visits Chennai, urges TN to vote Modi out

AP CM Chandrababu Naidu visits Chennai, urges TN to vote Modi out

He addressed reporters about VVPAT and other issues concerning elections at the DMK headquarters in Chennai.

news Lok Sabha 2019

“What is there in Tamil Nadu now is not Anna DMK (AIADMK). It is Modi MK. Even one vote put for AIADMK is a vote put for Modi,” said Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu in Chennai.

He was addressing reporters at the DMK headquarters on Tuesday when he went all guns blazing against Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Starting off his speech in Tamil, he said that the relationship between the Tamil and Telugu people is like brothers. “A hundred farmers protested in Jantar mantar for 100 days, did Modi pay attention? Did he intervene in Jallikattu issue?” he asked.

Continuing his speech in Tamil, Naidu said that leaders like Periyar, former chief ministers MG Ramachandran and Annadurai were supportive of the people when they faced difficulties. “Modi must learn from them. Kalaignar is a leader praised by the world. Stalin is like that now. People want to see Stalin as the Chief Minister,” he said.

Urging the people of Tamil Nadu to vote against Narendra Modi, Chandrababu Naidu said that Modi has betrayed the nation and hence every vote polled for the ruling AIADMK will be a vote in support of Narendra Modi.

Stating that all Income Tax raids are happening at the properties related to opposition parties, he asked if there were any I-T raids in BJP-ruled states. “This is the costliest election I am seeing in my lifetime. BJP is spending tons and tons of money and all opposition parties are being raided and they are creating psychological fear,” he said.

“It is in the interest of the nation and not for me, my election is over. To save democracy, to protect democracy, I am moving everywhere. We are all – all political parties – working together to protect democracy,” he said.

Tugging at the Tamil Pride and the history of the Dravidian movement in the state, Naidu alleged that Modi is looking to impose a monoculture in Tamil Nadu.
