I-T Department conducts raids at residence of DMK's Kanimozhi

Chennai: Just two days before the Lok Sabha election in Tamil Nadu, the Income Tax Department, along with Election Commission's static surveillance team, carried out a joint search at the Thoothukudi residence of DMK leader K Kanimozhi on Tuesday.

However, I-T sources said that nothing suspicious was found at Kanimozhi's residence during the raid. "On the information shared by a local administration, I-T Department searched premises related to Kanimozhi. Verification is on. Kanimozhi was there and she cooperated with the team. I-T Department found nothing. Search is over," ANI quoted I-T sources as saying.

Tamil Nadu: IT Dept conducts raids at house where DMK candidate Kanimozhi is staying, in Thoothukudi pic.twitter.com/DDuELwxEfX — ANI (@ANI) April 16, 2019

Kanimozhi is contesting the Lok Sabha poll from Thoothukudi against the BJP`s state unit chief Tamilisai Soundararajan.

#Visuals Tamil Nadu: IT Dept conducts raids at house where DMK candidate Kanimozhi is staying, in Thoothukudi pic.twitter.com/NkKnuCF999 — ANI (@ANI) April 16, 2019

On the raids conducted as his sister's residence, DMK president MK Stalin hit out at the Narendra Modi government and alleged: "Crores and crores of rupees are kept in Tamilisai Soundararajan's residence, why no raids there? Modi is using IT, CBI, judiciary and now EC to interfere in elections. They are doing this as they fear losing."

MK Stalin on IT raids on Kanimozhi: Crores and crores of rupees are kept in Tamilisai Soundararajan's(BJP TN Chief) residence, why no raids there? Modi is using IT,CBI,Judiciary and now EC to interfere in elections.They are doing this as they fear losing pic.twitter.com/31Q7Lalf5M — ANI (@ANI) April 16, 2019

Meanwhile, a large number of DMK workers also queued up outside Kanimozhi's residence to protest against the raids.

Tamil Nadu: DMK workers protest as IT Dept conducts raids at house where DMK candidate Kanimozhi is staying, in Thoothukudi pic.twitter.com/Ybhyb20Wjh — ANI (@ANI) April 16, 2019

Polling to all 39 seats in Tamil Nadu is slated for April 18 in the second phase of the Lok Sabha election. Voting for the 18 assembly seats will also be held simultaneously.

On Tuesday, the President rescinded the election in Vellore parliamentary constituency on the recommendation of the Election Commission after a huge haul of cash was found there.
