Apple Executive murder: UP Police constable jailed in Vivek Tiwari case granted bail

UP police recreating the crime scene along with Tiwari's former colleague who was with him at the time of the incident (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Lucknow: Over six months after a constable with the Uttar Pradesh police shot at a private company employee in state capital Lucknow leading to his death, a court has granted bail to constable Sandeep Kumar who was with prime accused constable Prashant Choudhary at the time of the incident. The order was passed by justice DK Singh of the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court on Tuesday.

On the night of September 29 of last year, constable Prashant Chowdhary shot at an SUV being driven by 38-year-old Apple store manager Vivek Tiwari who was accompanied by a former female colleague in Gomti Nagar. The bullets fired by Chowdhary hit Tiwari who later succumbed to his injuries sparking a public furor against Uttar Pradesh police. A special investigative team (SIT) was formed to probe the matter and found that the accused constable opened fire at Tiwari "without any provocation".

The constable accompanying Chowdhary at the time, Sandeep Kumar was sent to jail on March 22 for allegedly causing harm to Tiwari's female associate. Judge Singh directed Kumar to refrain from using his bail to influence the train concerning Tiwari's murder. Both Kumar and Chaudhary were dismissed from service following the incident after which Chaudhary claimed that he fired at Tiwari's SUV after the latter refused to stop the vehicle for routine checking and instead tried to speed off.

A case of murder was lodged in this regard on the basis of a complaint by the family members of Vivek Tiwari. In his bail plea to the Allahabad High Court, Kumar claimed that he is innocent and his name has not featured in the police charge sheet as a murder accused.

Inspector General Sujeet Pandey who led the investigation into Tiwari's murder had said in his 16-page charge sheet that the murder was not pre-planned and occured in the spur of the moment after Tiwari tried to leave the spot after being intercepted by the two bike-borne constables. Pandey had also recommended action against the then Gomti Nagar station house officer (SHO) and then circle officers (CO) for delay in transporting Tiwari to the hospital which may have resulted in his death.
