EC raids AMMK office in Tamil Nadu’s Andipatti, Rs 50 lakh cash seized

The flying squad of the Election Commission raided an AMMK office in Tamil Nadu's Andipatti and seized approximately Rs 50 lakh in cash. (Photo: PTI/Representational image)

A flying squad of the Election Commission of India (ECI) on Tuesday seized Rs 50 lakh from an Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam (AMMK) office in Andipatti in Theni district of Tamil Nadu.

An EC team reached the particular AMMK office based on a tip off that AMMK cadres are hoarding money and planning to distribute the same to voters in the region.

However, soon after the team reached the location, party workers started protesting against the raid. According to reports, some of the party workers event threatned the EC team which tried to enter the office.

Police had to fire four rounds in the air to bring the situation under control and five people have also been detained.

After conducting the raid, the EC team has seized at least Rs 50 lakh from AMMK office in the region.

Apart from polling in Lok Sabha elections, bypolls for Andipatti Assembly constituency will be held simultaneously on April 18.

The Andipatti Assembly constituency is also set for bye-polls on April 18, along with the Lok Sabha Elections.

Meanwhile, the I-T department also conducted another raid at a house where DMK candidate Kanimozhi is staying in Thoothukudi. DMK's Kanimozhi is the candidate for the Tuticorin seat.

Soon after the raid, DMK workers protested and party's chief MK Stalin blamed Prime Minister Narendra Modi for using independent agencies to "interfere" in the Lok Sabha elections.

"Crores and crores of rupees are kept in Tamilisai Soundararajan's (BJP TN Chief) residence, why no raids there? Modi is using IT, CBI, Judiciary and now EC to interfere in elections.They are doing this as they fear losing," he said.

After conducting the raids, I-T department said it was just a false tip and no case has been registered.

Earlier in the day, polling for Lok Sabha elections in Velore was cancelled after President approved EC's recommendation after almost Rs 12 crore cash was recovered from a DMK leader.

Serious concerns have been raised in Tamil Nadu over political parties using unaccounted cash to influence voters ahead of phase 2 of the Lok Sabha elections.
