Rangoli Chandel alleges Mahesh Bhatt threw 'chappal' at Kangana Ranaut at 'Woh Lamhe' preview

Dear Soni ji, Mahesh Bhatt never gave her a break, Anurag Basu did, Mahesh Bhatt ji works as a creative director in his brothers production house....(contd) @Soni_Razdan https://t.co/SD22ztrQ29 April 16, 2019

(Contd).... please note that he doesn’t own that production house, after Woh Lamhe when Kangana refused to do a film written by him called ‘Dhokha where he wanted her to play a suicide bomber he got so upset that he not only shouted at her in his office..... (contd) @Soni_Razdan — Rangoli Chandel (@Rangoli_A) April 16, 2019

.... but later when she went for Woh Lamhe preview to a theatre he threw chappal on her, he didn’t allow her to see her own film, she cried whole night .... and she was just 19years old . @Soni_Razdan — Rangoli Chandel (@Rangoli_A) April 16, 2019

It seems the war between Kangana Ranaut and Alia Bhatt is far from getting over. Alia’s mother Soni Razdan, while replying to a tweet by Nina Arora, said that Kangana continued to attacked the ‘Kalank’ actress despite getting launched in the industry by Mahesh Bhatt . Kangana’s sister Rangoli expressed her displeasure over Soni’s tweet and said that Mahesh never gave Kangana her break in Bollywood. Rangoli made shocking allegations against Mahesh Bhatt and said that he threw a chappal at Kangana during the preview of ‘Woh Lamhe’. Randeep Hooda supports Alia Bhatt, calls Kangana Ranaut ‘chronic victim’; Rangoli Chandel HITS back ‘’Dear Soni ji, Mahesh Bhatt never gave her a break, Anurag Basu did, Mahesh Bhatt ji works as a creative director in his brothers production house....(contd) @Soni_Razdan,’’ Rangoli wrote on the micro-blogging site.In her next tweet, Rangoli wrote, ‘’ please note that he doesn’t own that production house, after Woh Lamhe when Kangana refused to do a film written by him called ‘Dhokha where he wanted her to play a suicide bomber he got so upset that he not only shouted at her in his office..... (contd) @Soni_Razdan.’’ She mentioned that Mahesh shouted at Kangana for refusing to do the film.Rangoli further wrote, ‘’ but later when she went for Woh Lamhe preview to a theatre he threw chappal on her, he didn’t allow her to see her own film, she cried whole night .... and she was just 19years old . @Soni_Razdan.’’ She said Mahesh Bhatt threw a chappal (slipper) at Kangana and the actress cried the while night. Check out her tweet!It seems things will get murkier after Rangoli's allegations against Mahesh Bhatt. We wonder how will the filmmaker react to it. Watch this space for more updates!
