Indian Military Thwarting 'Daily' Pakistani Attempts to Breach Border – Reports

Indian Military Thwarting 'Daily' Pakistani Attempts to Breach Border – Reports

Sputnik News

14:56 16.04.2019(updated 15:28 16.04.2019)

Tensions between the two Asian rivals remain high after a series of back-and-forth skirmishes which followed an Indian Air Force raid into Pakistani territory targeting al-Qaeda affiliated terrorists who claimed responsibility for a deadly car bombing attack in the India-controlled region of Kashmir.

The Indian Army is "taking all possible steps to thwart" efforts by Pakistani 'Border Action Teams' (BATs) to infiltrate the fragile Line of Control border in Kashmir, a senior Army source told The Economic Times.

According to the source, the military receives intelligence reports "every day" about BAT teams' efforts to "target" Indian security posts along the LoC.

These efforts have prompted the Indian military to beef up security along LoC fences, taking action 'against any movement' from the Pakistani side and even carrying out preemptive activity, according to the sources.

According to the newspaper, Pakistan's efforts have including encouraging BAT teams and militants from the terrorist groups Jaish-e-Mohammed* and Lashkar-e-Taiba* to wear civilian clothing in place of uniforms to carry out their actions, which include surprise attacks against Indian positions along the LoC.

The Economic Times' sources accused the Pakistani side of trying to violate the ceasefire along all sectors after tensions escalated in February following the Indian Air Force strikes in Balakot.

Tensions between India and Pakistan grew to their highest level in years starting in mid-February, when Jaish-e-Mohammed affiliated militants attacked an Indian police convoy in Pulwama, killing over 40 security personnel. The attack led India to carry out airstrikes in Balakot, Pakistan. The escalation led to an aerial dogfight in which at least one Indian MiG-21 was downed, and to weeks of skirmishes along the LoC between troops using small arms fire and artillery. At least 10 Pakistani civilians and 4 Indian civilians have been killed in the violence.

India has accused Pakistan of failing to effectively combat Islamist extremism on its own territory. Pakistan has denied the claims. Last week, Islamabad asked New Delhi to provide actionable intelligence regarding Pakistan's alleged involvement in the Pulwama attack.

*Al-Qaeda affiliated terrorists groups. Al-Qaeda is outlawed in Russia and many other countries.

© Sputnik

NEWS LETTER Join the GlobalSecurity.org mailing list Enter Your Email Address






