Govt orders Bangladeshi actor to leave India

Bangladeshi actor Ferdous Ahmed was ordered to leave the country immediately and his business visa cancelled, an official said Tuesday, two days after he allegedly campaigned for West Bengal's ruling TMC that sparked a political row. He was seen campaigning for All India Trinamool Congress candidate Kanahiya Aggarwal in West Bengal.

Ahmed has also been blacklisted by Foreigner Regional Registration Offices (FRRO).

The Ministry has sought a report from FRRO Kolkata to understand what visa conditions have been violated by Ahmed.

"We have received report from Bureau of Immigration regarding visa violations committed by a Bangladeshi national Ferdous Ahmed,"said a senior MHA officer, adding that his visa has been cancelled and issued notice to him to leave India.

A huge political storm erupted in West Bengal with BJP accusing violation of Model Code of Conduct (MCC), questioning how a foreigner can campaign for Indian candidate.

BJP alleged that Aggarwal had requested Ferdous who is is a famous actor in Bangladesh to take part in road shows in the Lok Sabha election and he agreed to the request.

On Monday, Ferdous campaigned in Karandighi and Chakulia areas of North Dinajpur. On Sunday, he was seen to have participated in road shows at Raiganj and Hemtabad along with Tollywood actors Payel Sarkar and Ankush.

The BJP has also moved to the Election Commission and filed a complaint against the TMC.

The home ministry officer said that none of the categories for visa allow a foreigner to participate in a political campaign. "In case of violation, the Bangladeshi star can be asked to go back or in extreme case even be deported," the officer said.

The Ministry is looking into the matter purely through of rule books. The FRRO is responsible for providing visa services to all foreigners.

Interestingly, the Election Commission said there there's nothing mentioned in the rulebook about foreign nationals campaigning. In the meantime, taking cognisance of the matter, the Bangladeshi High Commission had asked Ferdous Ahmed to return immediately to Kolkata from Raigunj and then to take flight to Dhaka.

No specific rule
