Mumbai: Crime against women shoots up

Even though a number of laws and policies to curb violence against woman are in place, cases of violence against them are steadily increasing in the city.

Statistics released by Mumbai Police has revealed that crime against women in the first quarter of the year has shown an increasing trend, as compared to last year's first quarter. Cases of rape and molestation have seen an upward trend, so did cases of murder, attempt to murder and robbery.

According to the statistics, 209 cases of rape were registered in the city from January till March this year, of which 172 cases were detected. Last year, 201 cases of rape were registered during the same period. Out of the 201 cases, 163 were detected.

The statistics further revealed that 694 cases of outraging the modesty of women (molestation) were registered in the first quarter, out of which 518 were detected. Last year during the same period, the total number of cases stood at 682, out of which 515 cases were detected.

Similarly, reports of other crimes have also risen in the city.

Statistics revealed that the city recorded 34 cases of murder in the first quarter of this year out of which two are yet to be detected. Last year, 28 cases of murder were registered last year during the same period, out of which one case remains undetected.

Attempt to murder cases has also witnessed a rise in the city. 78 cases of attempt to commit murder were registered in the first quarter of this year out of which three are undetected, as compared to 63 cases registered last year of which four are undetected.

Incidents of robberies also saw a spike. While last year's first quarter saw 256 cases of robberies registered of which 202 cases were detected, this increased to 260 cases this year of which 227 were detected.

"With more and more women coming forward coming with their complaints against their tormentors, there is an increase in the number of cases registered. In most of these cases, we have observed that the accused involved is known to the victim. The detection rate of murder cases is over 90 per cent in the first quarters of both the years. Mumbai Police is taking all possible measures to curb the crime rate in the city and make the city a safe haven for citizens," said a police officer, on the condition of anonymity.
