We don’t believe in talks with those who kill our soldiers: Amit Shah

Aluva (Kerala): In a veiled reference to Pakistan, BJP president Amit Shah on Tuesday said that the government does not believe in talks with those who kill soldiers and asserted that a befitting reply would be given in this regard.

“We don’t believe in engaging in dialogue with people who kill our brave soldiers. A befitting reply will be given to anyone who indulges in such activity,” Shah said addressing a public meeting organised here for BJP candidates Alphons Kannanthanam in Ernakulam Lok Sabha seat and A N Radhakrishnan in Chalakkudy.

Questioning Congress president Rahul Gandhi’s silence over NC leader Omar Abdullah’s remarks on separate President and Prime Minister posts for Jammu and Kashmir, Shah said that “no one” can separate Kashmir, as it is an integral part of India.

“Kashmir is an integral part of India and no one can separate it. Congress and Communists can’t keep our country secure and safe. Only Prime Minister Modi is capable of doing this,” he said.

Slamming the Congress for not adopting a tough approach on terror, Shah said that the most important task accomplished by the BJP government is providing security to the country.

Taking a potshot at the Congress and CPM, the BJP president dubbed the two parties as “corrupt”, saying both of them “covered for each other” when their turns used to come to form the government in Kerala.

“Both UDF and LDF are corrupt. They cover for each other when either of them is in the government. If we form the government in Kerala, we will put all the corrupt behind the bars,” Shah said.

Continuing his attack on the Pinarayi Vijayan government, Shah claimed, “Kerala government has not sanctioned land for many developmental projects and thus, it’s stalling Kerala’s development.”

“Around 2,000 devotees of Sabarimala are behind bars due to the excesses of the Communists. In our manifesto, we have stated that we will make every effort to provide constitutional protection to Sabarimala,” he said.

Taking a swipe at Congress’ ‘Garibi Hatao’ (eradicate poverty) slogan, Shah said, “Rahul Gandhi claims that he will eradicate poverty. However, none of his family member who ruled India could remove poverty. We have taken rapid strides to uplift the poor.”

Earlier today, Shah had accused the LDF government of fanning violence against BJP and RSS workers in the state.

“More than 120 BJP and RSS workers have been killed in Kerala. The maximum number of killings took place in your district (Kannur). Around 525 incidents of mob lynching and violence have taken place,” Shah had said at a rally for the Thrissur Lok Sabha Seat Suresh Gopi.

“The Kerala government has unleashed violence on the devotees of Sabarimala at the pretexts of the Supreme Court’s order. What message does the Kerala Chief Minister (Pinarayi Vijayan) want to send through the violence on the devotees?” he had added.

Kerala with 20 Lok Sabha seats goes to polls on April 23. Counting of votes will take place on May 23.

[source_without_link]ANI[/source_without_link]
