Karnataka: Chincholi Assembly by-poll to be held on May 19

New Delhi:

PM Narendra Modi will address election rallies in Maharashtra and Gujarat. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will also hold a public meeting at Ambaji town under the Banaskantha Lok Sabha seat today. In his Day 2 of Kerala visit, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi will meet UDF leaders of Kannur, Kasargode and Kozhikode districts. He will then travel to Wayanad to campaign from the second constituency he is contesting from. Speeding up the poll campaign of his party in poll bound Odisha, BJP’s national president Amit Shah will hold a road show in Cuttack. Track all the latest news and updates about the upcoming Lok Sabha elections 2019 here.

20:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bharatiya Janata Party President Amit Shah holds roadshow in Cuttack, Odisha.

19:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sanjay Singh, AAP: In order to stop BJP we were ready for an alliance with Congress, but Congress is not in a mood for any coalition. It is a matter of sadness, that even after so many efforts, Congress is not ready for any kind of compromise.

19:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Biju Janata Dal (BJD) files a complaint with Election Commission demanding action against Dharmendra Pradhan for allegedly 'misbehaving and preventing govt officers from conducting their duties of checking his helicopter along with a sealed suitcase in his possession yesterday'.

19:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In In Kashmir, a Congress ally is saying that 'if anyone will abuse Pakistan, I will abuse India even more.' Congress is standing with such people, can any citizen of Gujarat do the mistake of voting for such people? asks PM Modi.

19:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In PM Modi addresses another public rally in Gujarat's Anand.



PM in Anand, Gujarat: Congress has said in its manifesto that it wants to remove the sedition law, so that stone pelting in J&K & Naxalism in rest of the places in the country can be strengthened, 'tukde tukde gang desh ke tukde karne ki apni shararatein khule aam kar paayein' pic.twitter.com/Xqd1Ktqn9g

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



16:53 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Karnataka: Chincholi Assembly by-poll to be held on 19th May, counting on 23 May.

16:52 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP releases list of four candidates for Lok Sabha Elections 2019 in Madhya Pradesh; Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur to contest from Bhopal against Congress's Digvijaya Singh.

16:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Live coverage can be done on Namo TV but any pre-recorded content cannot be streamed for 48 hours before the polling date. State Chief Election Commissioners (CEC) have been informed to observe this strictly.

15:28 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP writes to Election Commission over alleged biopic of West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee named 'Baghini'.

15:11 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Vote for a strong and honest government by pressing the button on the lotus flower (BJP's poll symbol).Vote for new India. Your vote will go directly to Modi's account: PM Modi

15:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Family system is the strength of and pride of the country. The life Modi is living today, he has also taken inspiration from families. Bhagat Singh, Sukhdev, Rajguru, Mahatma Phule, Baba Saheb, Sardar Patel, Veer Savarkar had elaborate families. This family is our inspiration: PM

15:02 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Election Commission flying squad checks luggage of Chief Minister and BJD president Naveen Patnaik at a helipad in Rourkela.



Election Commission flying squad checks luggage of Chief Minister and BJD president @Naveen_Odisha at a helipad in Rourkela



ðŸ“¸: ANI #ElectionsWithNewsNation



More updates: https://t.co/28FTiE4iMC pic.twitter.com/EHIeLkni3z

— News Nation (@NewsNationTV) April 17, 2019



14:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress national spokesperson Priyanka Chaturvedi hits out Congress after party leaders reinstated some leaders who had recently misbehaved with her. “Deeply saddened that lumpen goons get preference in Congress over those who have given their sweat & blood. Having faced brickbats & abuse acrossthe board for the party but yet those who threatened me within the party getting away with not even a rap on their knuckles is unfortunate (sic),” she tweeted.



14:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Derek O'Brien, Trinamool Congress on BJP claiming they will win 30 out of 42 seats: BJP people are also saying they will win 50 out of 42 seats as they don't even know how many seats are there. Let them dream, ppl of Bengal are with Mamata Banerjee and TMC. May 23 we'll see where these people hide.



Derek O'Brien, TMC on BJP claiming they will win 30 out of 42 seats: BJP people are also saying they will win 50 out of 42 seats as they don't even know how many seats are there. Let them dream, ppl of Bengal are with Mamata Banerjee&TMC. May 23 we'll see where these people hide. pic.twitter.com/1LFiH197hb

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



14:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In NCP Chief Sharad Pawar: How will he (PM Modi) know how to run a family? That's why he peeps in others' homes. I can say more also but I don't want to stoop to low-level.

14:18 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sharad Pawar: Modi Ji says 'Pawar Sahab is a good man but has family issues. His nephews are out of his hands.' I wanted to ask him what does he have to do with issues at my home? But then I realised I've my wife, daughter; son-in-law, nephews visit us, but he has no one.

13:41 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In We appeal to Election Commission to give a notice to Ashok Gehlot and to give a directive that no political party should make a remark critical of the President of India, GVL Narasimha Rao said while addressing a press conference.

13:41 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Piyush Goyal: Rahul Gandhi is afraid of defeat in Amethi and has to run all the way to Wayanad... he has lost the confidence of people of India. I am sure the people of Kerala will defeat him so that in the next election, he will have to look for a constituency in some other country.





13:36 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP won't allow two prime ministers in India: Amit Shah.

13:30 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Election Commission has appointed former Bihar Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) Ajay VNayak as special observer for West Bengal, a senior official said on Wednesday.

13:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Complaint filed with State Women Commission against BJP candidate from Mysuru Pratap Simha for alleging mentally and physically harassing a woman.

13:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Hitting out at BJP, Navjot Singh Sidhu said, "I was born in a Congress family, don’t talk to me about nationalism. A person who sidelined such senior leaders like Advani and Joshi ji, he has made BJP a private limited company which is run by only two people and both are Rahu and Ketu, charted accountants like Nirav Modi and others. What kind of nationalism is this where the stomach is empty and you are teaching yoga. No food to eat but toilets are being made."





13:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rahul Gandhi talked about poor people in his speech. I want to ask him for so many years your party rule. What have you done for poors: Amit Shah while addressing a rally in Maharashtra

13:20 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Union Minister Suresh Prabhu reaches Matoshree to talk to Uddhav Thackeray about the poll campaigning strategy for coastal Maharashtra.

13:19 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In The Indian National Lok Dal (INLD) announced the names of candidates from 6 seats in Haryana. For the Rohtak, Gurugram, Kurukshetra and Mahendragarh seats, names would be announced soon.

Ambala: Ram Pal Valmiki

Karnal: Dharmveer Pada

Sonepat: Surendra Shikara

Hisar: Suresh Kot

Sirsa: Charanjeet Singh Rodi

Faridabad: Mahendra Singh Chauhan

12:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur in Bhopal: I have formally joined BJP, I will contest elections and will win also. Read here:



12:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Ravi Kishan, BJP candidate from Gorakhpur: What derogatory comments are being made on women! Jaya Prada ji is a sr in our industry, we respect her a lot. Just because she has come to Rampur to contest elections you will comment on her? Dignity should be maintained during election.





12:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Madan Mitra, TMC on TMC leader Anubrata Mandal reportedly threatening Central forces: I didn't see the statement of Anubrata. Yes, we are not afraid & not suffering from fear psychosis. The central forces may be with BJP but the people of Bengal are with Mamata.



12:19 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In CPI candidate Kanhaiya Kumar was surrounded by angry locals in Begusarai during his campaign and was questioned over his 'azadi' slogans.

12:17 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I'm not like PM of India, I'll not come here & lie to you because I respect your intelligence, wisdom & understanding. I don't want to have a relationship of couple of months with you, I want to have a life long relationship with you, says Rahul Gandhi in Wayanad.

12:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bihar Chief Minister and JD(U) leader Nitish Kumar will address rallies in Supual, Jhanjharpur and Madhepura.

12:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In RLSP candidate Akash Singh will also file his nomination from Motihari in the presence of Shatrughan Sinha, Jeetan Ram Manjhi and Upendra Kushwaha on Wednesday.

12:08 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "When CBI went to SC, Lalu sent his messenger Prem Gupta to Arun Jaitley, asking to not let CBI appeal to the SC in the case. He said that if they get help '24 ghante mein Nitish Kumar ka ilaaj kar dunga'," said Bihar Deputy CM Sushil Modi.

12:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I understand there are complex problems here. I am not here to tell you my Mann Ki Baat...I want to know what is in your hearts, Rahul Gandhi said while addressing a rally in Wayanad.

12:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Is Malayali or Tamilian less important to others? I thought it is important for me to not only represent Amethi but also south India .. I wanted to give southern states the feeling that you are as important as other states. Kerala and Wayanad are examples of peaceful co-existance. You don’t believe in violence...I feel privileged to be among you...I am not here as a politician...I am here as your brother...your son: Rahul Gandhi

12:01 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In For the last five years, we are fighting the ideology of Narendra Modi and RSS. And the thinking of their ideology is that one person should only rule, Rahul Gandhi said in Wayanad.

12:00 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Rahul Gandhi addresses a public meeting in Wayanad, Kerala.

11:57 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Madhya Pradesh: Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur has arrived at the BJP office in Bhopal and is currently meeting senior BJP leaders Shivraj Singh Chouhan, Ramlal, and Prabhat Jha.



Madhya Pradesh: Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur has arrived at the BJP office in Bhopal and is currently meeting senior BJP leaders Shivraj Singh Chouhan, Ramlal, and Prabhat Jha. pic.twitter.com/9rG7KuLiq0

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



11:56 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Pawar steeped in dynastic politics; his model is a special (Gandhi) family in Delhi: PM Modi.

11:45 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Why label entire backward community thieves by calling, says PM Modi targeting Rahul Gandhi.

11:44 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In People braving scorching heat to hand over India's reign to Modi again: PM Modi.

11:43 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Those sitting in AC rooms in Delhi and keeping a tab on things which will happen after who hugs whom, after who shakes hands with whom, after who looks at whom, they don't know the ground reality.

11:35 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP, Congress eyeing to set caste equation right in Barmer after BSP candidate's nomination rejected.

11:34 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In To run such a big country, you need a strong leader: PM Modi.

11:32 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "In order to make India advanced, the country should have a similar government at the Centre and state to deliver new heights in the 21st century. It was because of the saffron sea that Sharad Pawar left the field. He is a big player and understands which side the wind blows," PM Modi.

11:30 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal on Rahul Gandhi's temple visit in Wayanad: As per pujari's directions he has performed all rituals for his grandmother, father, forefathers & victims of Pulwama incident.



Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal on Rahul Gandhi's temple visit in Wayanad: As per pujari's directions he has performed all rituals for his grandmother, father, forefathers & victims of Pulwama incident. https://t.co/fuHgHC6gJN

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



11:30 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal on Rahul Gandhi's temple visit in Wayanad: As per pujari's directions he has performed all rituals for his grandmother, father, forefathers & victims of Pulwama incident.



Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal on Rahul Gandhi's temple visit in Wayanad: As per pujari's directions he has performed all rituals for his grandmother, father, forefathers & victims of Pulwama incident. https://t.co/fuHgHC6gJN

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



11:29 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In

Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal on Rahul Gandhi's temple visit in Wayanad: Last time also he had wished to come here but because of security restrictions, he could not do it. Here is the place where the ashes of Rajiv Gandhi were immersed, in Papanasini river.











Congress General Secretary KC Venugopal on Rahul Gandhi's temple visit in Wayanad: Last time also he had wished to come here but because of security restrictions, he could not do it. Here is the place where the ashes of Rajiv Gandhi were immersed, in Papanasini river. pic.twitter.com/ZKzpfWJLxo

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



11:26 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Addressing rally in Madha, PM Modi said on thunderstorm and rains: We will provide all possible help... I want to assure that the government is standing with you. Modi in his tweet said that “An ex-gratia of Rs 2 lakh each for the next of kin of those who lost their lives due to unseasonal rain & storms in MP, Rajasthan, Manipur & various parts of the country has been approved from PM’s National Relief Fund. Rs 50,000 each for the injured has also been approved.”

11:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In More visuals from Wayanad as Congress President Rahul Gandhi performs rituals, after offering prayers at the Thirunelli temple.



More visuals from Wayanad as Congress President Rahul Gandhi performs rituals, after offering prayers at the Thirunelli temple. #Kerala pic.twitter.com/MUzC1SpXU0

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



11:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi is addressing a rally in Madha, Maharashtra.

11:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be addressing a rally at Madha in Maharashtra shortly. He will be also addressing rallies in Himatnagar, Surendranagar and Anand today.

10:45 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In P Chidambaram tweeted, “It’s news that nothing was retrieved from Kanimozi's residence after the IT raid. How is that IT receiving tips only on opposition leaders!? The mark of Assembly elections is IT department's doctrinal partial activities.” Officials of the Income-Tax Department and a static surveillance team of the Election Commission on Tuesday evening carried out a search at the residence of Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) candidate and Rajya Sabha MP Kanimozhi in Thoothukudi in southern Tamil Nadu. The action came less than 48 hours before the second phase of elections on April 18, which will be held in 97 constituencies.











10:37 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Congress chief Rahul Gandhi visited the Thirunelli Vishnu Temple in Wayanad, the second constituency he is contesting from apart from Amethi.



Wayanad: Congress President and party's candidate from Wayanad parliamentary constituency, Rahul Gandhi offers prayer at the Thirunelli temple. #Kerala pic.twitter.com/8uuZta227m

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



10:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Tamil Nadu: AIADMK ally and Vellore candidate AC Shanmugam to move Madras High Court today against EC's decision to cancel Vellore Lok Sabha polls.

10:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP candidate from Gorakhpur Ravi Kishan meets Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath.



10:20 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In TMC MLA from Chakdaha, Ratna G Kar: This time, it's even more challenging, but there’s nothing to be scared. I’ll go to each&every booth & we won't care about central forces, if they're pro-active, I'll request Mahila Morcha members to pick up broomsticks & chase them away.



TMC MLA from Chakdaha, Ratna G Kar: This time, it's even more challenging, but there’s nothing to be scared. I’ll go to each&every booth & we won't care about central forces, if they're pro-active, I'll request Mahila Morcha members to pick up broomsticks & chase them away.(15.4) https://t.co/Mh8WwtHAve

— ANI (@ANI) April 17, 2019



10:20 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In TMC MLA from Chakdaha, Ratna Ghosh Kar: If you want to win a war, there’s nothing fair or unfair, democratic or undemocratic way of winning. You've to win it by any means. I've seen in 2016 elections, how central forces beat up our boys, there was bloodbath.

09:51 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In During an interview with ANI, on Imran Khan’s statement, Sitharaman said that, “such statements come around elections in India and also there have been eminent Congress leaders who've gone there to seek help 'Modi hatane ke liye madad karo business.'”

09:47 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on why she is not contesting Lok Sabha elections 2019: On the election, I think it is the party which decides who contests from where. So I go by that.

08:55 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In I think that there should be consciously somewhere in the back of our minds when we're discussing in politics - Is that what is going to be the legacy we leave for the next generation?," Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman told ANI.

08:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In RJD leader Tejashwi Yadav is scheduled to address rally in Begusarai and Araria.

08:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP candidate Rama Devi will file her nomination from Sheohar Lok Sabha Seat.

08:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In RLSP candidate Akash Singh will also file his nomination from Motihari in the presence of Shatrughan Sinha, Jeetan Ram Manjhi and Upendra Kushwaha on Wednesday.

08:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In BJP leader Radha Mohan Singh will file her nomination from Motihari.

08:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In DMK candidate Kanimozhi on IT raids at the house where she is staying, in Thoothukudi: BJP cannot prevent my success through this income tax raid. The raid is anti-democratic, deliberately planned and tested, and no documents have been seized.



DMK candidate Kanimozhi on IT raids at the house where she is staying, in Thoothukudi: BJP cannot prevent my success through this income tax raid. The raid is anti-democratic, deliberately planned and tested, and no documents have been seized. #TamilNadu pic.twitter.com/ldpt5BRthz

— ANI (@ANI) April 16, 2019



08:12 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In "The CEC has implemented the order given by Delhi. There is admittance at some level that polls in Tripura on 11 Apr wasn't free and fair as claimed by BJP govt in state," Pradyot Kishore, Congress leader on deferment of second phase polling in Tripura East Lok Sabha constituency.



Pradyot Kishore, Congress on deferment of 2nd phase polling in Tripura East LS constituency: CEC has implemented the order given by Delhi. There is admittance at some level that polls in Tripura on 11 Apr wasn't free & fair as claimed by BJP govt in state. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/NJ5s1Rsv2e

— ANI (@ANI) April 16, 2019



08:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In India will see Priyanka Gandhi Vadra as 'thief's wife', said BJP leader Uma Bharti.

08:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In EC issues notice to Congress MLA Kawasi Lakhma for controversial remark on EVM.

08:10 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will visit Ayodha today.

07:05 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Bundles of cash seized from shop in Tamil Nadu, police open fire to disperse AMMK cadres.

07:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Speeding up the poll campaign of his party in poll bound Odisha, BJP’s national president Amit Shah will hold a road show in Cuttack.

07:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will also hold a public meeting at Ambaji town under the Banaskantha Lok Sabha seat today.

07:04 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In In his Day 2 of Kerala visit, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi will meet UDF leaders of Kannur, Kasargode and Kozhikode districts. He will then travel to Wayanad to campaign from the second constituency he is contesting from.
