Grenade lobbed at NC candidate's rally misses target at Tral, no damage caused

Terrorists lobbed a grenade at National Conference (NC) leader's residence when its candidate for Anantnag parliamentary constituency Justice (retd) Hasnain Masoodi was holding a workers rally, at Burhan Wani's hometown of Tral in South Kashmir's Pulwama district.

The grenade missed the target and exploded outside the residence without causing any damage to life or property.

The incident occurred in the morning when Justice Masoodi was holding workers rally inside the compound of local NC Mohammad Ashraf Bhat's residence.

Terrorists lobbed a grenade towards Bhat's house which however missed the target and exploded some distance away. Security forces immediately rushed to the spot and launched the operation to track down the terrorists responsible for the incident.

"When our rally had concluded and everybody had dispersed, there was some explosion. I do not how far away it happened. I do not know what was the motive", said Justice (Retd) Hasnain Masoodi.

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president and former J&K chief minister Mehbooba Mufti took to twitter and prayed for the safety of the NC leaders.

"Very sorry to hear about a grenade attack on NC's Anantnag Parliamentary candidate. Relieved to know that he is safe and no other casualties/ damage was reported. Allah sab ko salamat rakhay (May Allah protect us all)," she said.

Mehbooba's arch rival and National Conference vice president Omar Abdullah too was quick to thank PDP chief for her concern.

"Thank you for your concern. Allah was kind, thankfully the programme had concluded and Masoodi Sahib & other colleagues were in a nearby home when the grenade fell. Sadly this is the umpteenth time Ashraf and his family have faced this sort of attack in recent years," Omar tweeted.

The incident occurred a day after stone pelters attacked the cavalcade of the Mehbooba Mufti injuring a driver of one the police escort vehicles at Khiram village in south Kashmir's Anantnag district on Monday.



Meanwhile, sub divisional magistrate of Dooru was allegedly manhandled by security forces near Dalwach Qazigund evoking sharp reaction from Mehbooba and 2010 IAS topper Shah Faesal.



"Army thrashing civilians in the state is nothing new. But manhandling civil officers marks a new low. The valley & its people are being choked to a silent death. For how long will you oppress them in their own land? Is this what we deserve for choosing India over Pakistan?" tweeted Mehbooba
