Cowetans saddened by fire at Notre Dame

Flames and billows of smoke rise into the Paris sky on Monday. French President Emmanuel Macron has pledged to rebuild Notre Dame Cathedral within five years.

Coweta residents who have visited Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris say they are saddened by the massive fire there on Monday, but heartened that many art objects were saved and that there are plans to restore it.



For Doug Kees and Nicole Andrews-Kees, the ancient church has a romantic quality. The two visited it on their first international trip together in May 2015. That trip inspired them to get married in England.

Be in the know the moment news happens Subscribe to Daily and

Breaking News Alerts

It was early morning when the couple visited Notre Dame. Andrews-Kees, who is a veterinarian in Moreland, said she was “so very sad to hear about this treasure burning.”

Mark and Brenda Mitchell of Newnan were there last March.

“When we got there I realized I had left my camera in the hotel room, so we got an Uber back to the hotel so I could get my camera. Now, I am so glad I did that and have those pictures I took that day,” Mark Mitchell, a Newnan attorney, said.

“It was horrible to watch that beautiful structure going up in flames. I am so glad that I got the chance to visit and experience its incredible beauty,” he added. “It is a loss to the world.”

Senoia resident Cheryl Crook Thompson also has visited Notre Dame and reflected on those who built it.

“There were a lot of people who believed so strongly in God that they were willing to spend much of their lives anonymously, contributing to making this beautiful church,” she said. “There must be something they knew about God.”

Divya Chadha, who lives in Bangalore, India and has family in Coweta County, visited Notre Dame with her husband in 2017.

“I have never felt a sense of peace and calmness as I did at Notre Dame,” she said. “The aura of the place makes you feel like we are all equal, irrespective of nationality, religion, caste, creed.”

Tim Gresham, Cathy Kee and Melinda Hemphill are among those who recall seeing the cathedral while overseas during military service. Gresham, a Newnan resident, described the place as “very beautiful and peaceful” and the architecture as “just breathtaking.”

Hemphill has been to Notre Dame three times – in 1996, 2012 and 2017. During the 2012 visit, Hemphill said the experience engaged all her senses – “the playing of the grand organ as visitors and pilgrims walked among the ages in this grand cathedral … incense in the air from a service that had just ended, reminding people that our prayers are lifted up to God … water fonts at each entrance reminding us of being united to Christ in our baptisms.”

Notre Dame “has been a wonder of architecture, art, government, leaders, national history and a connection to Europe and the world for over 800 years,” Hemphill said, reflecting on the fire “in this holiest week for Christians everywhere.”

Kee, who now lives in Richmond Hill following a military career, grew up near Luthersville. She said she remembered thinking Bethel Baptist Church near Luthersville was huge when she was a girl – and then having the opportunity to experience the vast spaces at Notre Dame.

She remembered the tour bus pulling up to Notre Dame in 1993.

“I was overwhelmed with the size of it and how old it was,” Kee said. “It is hard to fathom that it could stand strong and last this long.”

Monday’s catastrophic fire engulfed the upper reaches of Notre Dame Cathedral as it was undergoing renovations, as tourists and Parisians looked on aghast from the streets below, according to the Associated Press.

The blaze collapsed the cathedral's spire and spread to one of its landmark rectangular towers, but Paris fire chief Jean-Claude Gallet told the AP the church's structure had been saved after firefighters managed to stop the fire spreading to the northern belfry.

The 12th-century cathedral is home to incalculable works of art and is one of the world's most famous tourist attractions, immortalized in Victor Hugo's 1831 novel "The Hunchback of Notre Dame."

The exact cause of the blaze was not known, but French media quoted the Paris fire brigade as saying the fire is "potentially linked" to a 6 million-euro – $6.8 million – renovation project on the church's spire and its 250 tons of lead. The Paris prosecutors' office ruled out arson and possible terror-related motives and is treating it as an accident.

In a building with such ancient wood, “even a stray spark” could be disastrous, Thompson observed.

Flames shot out of the roof behind the nave of the cathedral, among the most visited landmarks in the world. According to the AP, hundreds of people lined up bridges around the island that houses the church, watching in shock as acrid smoke rose in plumes.

Built in the 12th and 13th centuries, Notre Dame is the most famous of the Gothic cathedrals of the Middle Ages as well as one of the most beloved structures in the world. Situated on the Ile de la Cite, an island in the Seine river, its architecture is famous for, among other things, its many gargoyles and its iconic flying buttresses, according to the AP.

Among the most celebrated artworks inside are its three stained-glass rose windows, placed high up on the west, north and south faces of the cathedral. Its priceless treasures also include a Catholic relic, the crown of thorns, which is only occasionally displayed, including on Fridays during Lent.

Hemphill talked about people singing hymns outside the burned cathedral.

“These people didn't have a physical temple anymore, and yet their faith continued in prayer and song with the word of God as their guide,” she said.

“On a good note, the news is saying that most of the art and relics were saved, rare things that could never be replaced,” Cathy Kee said. “Hopefully they can rebuild.”

According to the AP, French President Emmanuel Macron has pledged to rebuild the beloved Roman Catholic architectural landmark and wants to see it completed within five years.

“Small country churches like I love – and ones unique to the world like the Notre Dame Cathedral – all have something in common: people who cherish and love them,” Kee said.
