New initiative at the Tihar jail helps inmates struggling with mental health issues; suicides reduced

More than half of the inmates of the Tihar jail suffer from mental illness (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A new initiative in the Tihar jail has helped inmates in improving their mental illness. The new initiative has helped in reducing suicides in the jail. More than half of the inmates of the Tihar jail suffer from mental illness.

To improve the mental health of the inmates, the initiative was launched as a tie-up between the prison and AIIMS Psychiatry department and the Mental Health Foundation of India (MHFI). The initiative is called Samarthan.

Samarthan was launched a year ago and has amounted to lesser suicides behind the jails. While talking to the Hindustan Times, prison director general Ajay Kashyap said that in past year more than 300 counsellors began working with the prison department.

The counsellors started with training jail officials to identify the inmates with mental issues. Then, steps were taken to help the inmates come out of depression. There were seven cases of suicide in the jail but after the initiative, the number fell down to one. Kashyap added that they are working towards eradicating suicide completely.

It is not only suicides that have been reduced in the jail. The cases of violence have also reduced in the past year. The resident medical officer of the prison, Dr Sanjay Lakra stated that when people come to the jail, they are often depressed and unable to converse. If they are further neglected, the problem increases and often mounts to depression.

Dr Lakra acknowledged the reduction in mental disorders and behavioral issues among the inmates. He also added that around 600 to 650 prisoners battle psychiatric disorders. Under Samarthan, wardens identify inmates with problems and send them for psychological evaluation. After their evaluation, the counsellors work with the inmates. The initiative has amounted to a better jail environment in the Tihar.
