36 killed, several injured as thunderstorm batters Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh

New Delhi:

At least 36 people were killed after a thunderstorm caused by western disturbance hit Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. 16 people were killed in Madhya Pradesh while nine in Rajasthan and 11 deaths were reported from Gujarat. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has announced a relief of Rs 2 lakh each from the Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund for the next of kin of those killed in the thunderstorm. In a tweet, the prime minister's office said, PM Modi, has approved an ex gratia of Rs 2 lakh each from the Prime Minister's National Relief Fund for the kin of those who have lost their lives.



“PM @narendramodi has expressed grief at the loss of lives due to unseasonal rains and storms in MP, Rajasthan, Manipur & various parts of the country. The government is doing its best to provide all possible assistance to those affected. The situation is being monitored closely (sic).”



In Rajasthan, nine people were killed and 30 others injured. While 4 people killed in Jhalawar, one each died in Udaipur, Rajsamand, Alwar, Jaipur, and Hanumangarh. In the education hub, Kota, tonnes of food grain stored in Bhamashah Mandi was spoiled due to heavy rains. Hailstorm in Sri Ganganagar caused severe damage to the crops as harvesting was underway in most areas. Heavy rains and gusty winds up to 50 km per hours speed also brought down the mercury.



The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a warning of adverse weather conditions in the state due to the cyclone created above the Arabian Sea and the confluence of moist winds from the Bay of Bengal. The IMD predicted the state would witness another spell of heavy rains accompanied by gusty winds over the next few days.



In Gujarat, 10 people dead and several injured, officials said on Wednesday. Rain and dust storm was reported from areas including districts in North Gujarat and Saurashtra region, on Tuesday afternoon, they said.

“According to preliminary reports coming from different parts of the state, at least 10 people have lost their lives,” G B Manglpara, the state government’s director (Relief), told PTI on Wednesday.

“Most of the deaths were reported in North Gujarat due to lightning strike and falling of trees,” he said. Also, a portion of a tent erected for Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s rally in Himmatnagar town of North Gujarat was also damaged in the dust storm, an official earlier said.

Union Health Minister JP Nadda has expressed grief on the loss of lives due to the unseasonal storm in several states. The Minister has asked the Union Health Secretary to be in touch with the officials of the affected states to provide all possible support, news agency ANI reported.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
