Pipe Organs Enhance Beauty of Cathedrals

The famed pipe organ at Notre Dame has survived the Holy Week devastation at the cathedral. So has the blazing gold Cross at the altar, along with some other artefacts, including the sacred Crown of Thorns (believed to be the one that was placed on the head of Jesus Christ at Crucifixion)!

Pipe organs are priceless and majestic creations that enhance the beauty of cathedrals and big churches, delivering melodic Christian music.

I had not paid much attention to the pipe organ that I used to see at The Kirk (St Andrew’s) in Chennai, with the legendary Handel Manuel playing it. Nonetheless, it was clear what an imposing, complex instrument it was – with hundreds of pipes in a range of formations for sound with pressurized air producing notes in different tones and pitch.

Organists Among Most Respected

The organ at Notre Dame is said to have been built with 7,800 pipes (there are much larger ones too) and I struggle to imagine how challenging it will be for those playing it. For church organists, it is a hobby they are passionate about.

While the towering inferno has not, mercifully, consumed the iconic Notre Dame organ, I have been reading reports about how organists are among the most respected in France and, possibly, in the Christian world.

The pipe organ at Notre Dame – an AP image from the Chicago Tribune

Digitisation, Pop Culture

Amid the all-encompassing sweep of digital music and pop culture holding the new generation in a thrall, the popularity of the pipe organ may be on the wane. It is largely a backstage instrument, so those playing it will miss frontline charisma.

There is nonetheless no doubt that the organ will continue to keep church congregations worldwide in awe.

My father-in-law, Winfred Samraj, incidentally, used his leisure time to serve as an organist at a church in Chennai – something my wife has always been proud of. I, however, did not have the opportunity to hear him play. My two daughters can play the piano.

That aside, in July 2008, I had made an electrifying visit to Paris from London when I got to see the city’s landmarks, including the Notre Dame cathedral.

While French President Macron has vowed to build “a more beautiful Notre Dame”, it can never be the same again. He may be right. Yet, restored landmarks cannot match the glory and grandeur of the original structure built with a creative spirit, untouched by technology, eight centuries ago!

G Joslin Vethakumar
