Tips to sway your anger in the digital age

On social media you can get an insight into a different view and become more accepting of diverging realities. (Photo: Representational/Pexels)

New Delhi: Are you frustrated with your monotonous work routine and the pressure of deadlines? Has academic competition gotten on your nerves to the extent that it might someday drive you to insanity? Is the daily news on hate crimes, murders, warmongering, terrorism and rapes making you experience a bout of negativity, so much so that you want to throw up? Are you sick of the maddening world of social media and the perpetual cyber bullying? We assume it’s a Yes.

In today’s world, it has become hard to express yourself freely. Everything we say or do is judged and monitored so closely that we have lost out on our freedom of speech and expression. Our opinions are moulded by those who hold power as we are apprehensive of putting our real side in front of the world for the fear of being evaluated.

We have lesser friends in the real world and more in the virtual world, which makes us, feel lonely and deprived of emotional attachments. Relationships suffer in the midst of this, making us feel more depressed. Mental health is aggravated by the constant pressure to think a certain way, to look a certain way and to behave a certain way.

Individuality has lost out on significance and everyone wants to become a clone of their favourite celebrity or YouTuber. Anxiety and depression have become so common that every third person has been on medication for it.

Latch on to a Social Networking Platform

We feel trapped in our own minds and in our bodies. To get rid of this toxicity and to alleviate our stress, it is good to take a break once in a while and pen down our thoughts. When we write things down, it not only enables us to vent out our anger and frustration but also releases the negativity that keeps building up in us when we don’t talk about our problems. Indian social media platforms have given people the opportunity to freely and anonymously express themselves.

Find a Space where you can express unabashedly

Since individuals can set their identity to anonymous on such top social networking sites, it becomes easier for people to put out their true emotions and opinions, sans the fake layers that people generally pad themselves up within the social world.

Anonymity is like an added advantage because you not only can express your opinions, but you can do it with your identity hidden from the world, which makes your lay, bare your soul. It is definitely easier to speak about issues when you know that you will not be judged or ridiculed for it.

Express and Emote

We know the world can be a cruel place to live in, people can be mean and disappointing, loneliness can make you feel miserable – such top social networking platforms can come to your rescue in situations like these. Write down your opinions on everything and anything – ranging from politics, showbiz, international affairs, love, and relationships – and post it anonymously.

Sometimes talking is important to prevent your emotions from building up into a volcano that might erupt at a time when you are not ready to handle it. Yet, at times, we do not feel like talking to people who know us. It is, often; better to share things with someone who has no bias and preconceived notions about your life. Again, these platforms prove to be of utmost importance and help for such people who want to talk about their problem, but only under conditions of anonymity.

Join a Community

Despite having people an instant message away, we tend to feel that we have no one to talk to, which is because the world is coming closer with technology, yet is moving far from having true and meaningful relationships. Such platforms form a community where people can read and feel inspired by stories of other people like them. In case of those who are not like them, they can get an insight into a different view and become more accepting of diverging realities.

Sharing your stories on such websites can help you overcome many of your problems and can also give you clarity of thought. Letting out your feelings can make you break free from a multitude of negative thoughts. Building this community can be of immense help to those who have been battling depression. For introverts too, this can be a blessing in disguise.

So, dive right into this world of anonymity to escape loneliness and to get the taste of free speech.

*Disclaimer: The article has been contributed by Sumit Mittal, Founder & CEO of VentAllOut. The opinions expressed in this article are the personal opinions of the author. The faces and views appearing in this article do not reflect the views of Deccan Chronicle, and Deccan Chronicle does not assume any responsibility and liability for the same.
