12 deaths reported due intense lightning and thunderstorm, Maharashtra on alert with more rains

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

Since the last few days, Maharashtra has been witnessing widespread pre-Monsoon rain and thundershower activities accompanied with violent lightning strikes, dust storm and thunderstorms.

In fact, lightning strikes and thunderstorms on 5 days this month have claimed 12 lives across various districts of Maharashtra.

As per data by the disaster management authorities in the state and Pune district, during the last three day i.e. between April 14 and 16, five people were fatally struck by lightning. Previously also on April 4 and 5, four more deaths were reported.

FATALITY FIGURES

On Tuesday, three people identified by the officials as Sampat Udar (65) of Akrale village, Hausabai Kuwar (71) of Vazgaon village and Yogesh Shinde of Ayane village were killed when lightning struck them in district.

According to district authorities in Pune, on Monday evening, a house of a villager in Indapur caught fire because of the gusty winds. His cattle that included 2 cows, 15 hens and 7 goats were burned to death in the house.

On April 15, a 28-year-old man, Mahesh Dashrath Bhor, was struck by lightning in the Mauje Bhorwadi area of Junnar as per reports by Pune district disaster management office.

In Nashik as well, disaster management authorities said three people while working in the field were struck by lightning on April 14 in Manori, a village in Dindori taluka of the north Maharashtra district.

With some more activity in offing, the government of Maharashtra is alerting people against lightning strikes through jingles, posters and social media messages from time to time. According to weathermen at Skymet Weather, the intensity and spread of these pre-Monsoon activities would increase as we proceed further.

March to May is considered to be the pre-Monsoon season for the country. Heat is the main trigger for these activities, thus, we would see most of these activities during the later part of the afternoon only.

Credits: Times Now

Please Note: Any information picked from here must be attributed to skymetweather.com
