Kamal Nath slams Modi for ignoring MP, other states in thunderstorm tweet, PM tweets again

New Delhi:

Massive thunderstorm accompanied by heavy rains killed at least 36 people in four states, including Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Manipur on Tuesday. Soon, Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed his grief and announced compensation for the kin of deceased but only for Gujarat. This irked Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath, who slammed the prime minister for ignoring two Congress-ruled and one North Eastern states.

“Modiji, you are the prime minister of the country and not Gujarat. At least 10 people have been killed in MP also. But your sensitivity is limited to Gujarat only? Although the BJP is not the ruling party here, but people do live here too,” the Madhya Pradesh chief minister said.

After a gap of one and a half hour, the prime minister probably sensed the criticism and expressed grief over the storm killing in Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Manipur as well. He also announced compensation for the family members of the victims in these states too.

“PM Narendra Modi has expressed grief at the loss of lives due to unseasonal rains and storms in MP, Rajasthan, Manipur & various parts of the country. The government is doing its best to provide all possible assistance to those affected. The situation is being monitored closely,” PMO tweeted.

At least 36 people were killed after a thunderstorm caused by western disturbance hit Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. 16 people were killed in Madhya Pradesh while nine in Rajasthan and 11 deaths were reported from Gujarat.

In Rajasthan, nine people were killed and 30 others injured. While 4 people killed in Jhalawar, one each died in Udaipur, Rajsamand, Alwar, Jaipur, and Hanumangarh. In the education hub, Kota, tonnes of food grain stored in Bhamashah Mandi was spoiled due to heavy rains. Hailstorm in Sri Ganganagar caused severe damage to the crops as harvesting was underway in most areas.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued a warning of adverse weather conditions in several North Indian states, including Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Haryana, and Himachal Pradesh, due to the cyclone created above the Arabian Sea and the confluence of moist winds from the Bay of Bengal. The IMD predicted the states would witness another spell of heavy rains accompanied by gusty winds over the next few days.
