"I cried during Bharat auditions," Nora Fatehi opens up about her battle with depression

Celebrities have a very demanding professional life which leaves them with little time to pay attention to their personal life and health. But, in the lack of it, the same can take a toll on their careers. Nora Fatehi, the face behind hit dance numbers like 'Dilbar Dilbar' and 'Kamariya', went through a similar phase.The actress, 27, in an interview recently revealed that she suffered from depression post her breakup with Angad Bedi. Talking about going through this phase, she mentioned that there were days when she would have no motivation or energy to even work. Her mental health took a hit and drove her through the doors of depression.Getting emotional and honest, Nora Fatehi said that post-breakup, life had become difficult for her. She says, “All girls go through at least once in their life! For me, it was a little bit difficult because it was an unexpected experience and I was broken by it. I don’t want people to think that when you are low and dabble with depression that you are not strong. You are still strong! I lost my drive for 2 months!"She also added that she shied away from talking about the same because of the prevalent stigma around depression. She did not want to fit into any stereotypes.Nora felt that she could never get back her old self but at the same time, she calls her experience a 'transformational' one."However, I must say that experience really just transformed me. In between, I had lost hope for a bit in terms of perusing my career but when that breakup happened I got that fire again and I was like let’s go."She also said that there was a time when she hit such a low and cried for no reason at all. This happened to her during the auditions of Bharat, which also stars Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif.“When I was called to audition for Bharat which was way before Dilbar happened… I remember after my audition, I came down I was sitting on the bench, crying and felt shitty that where are my drive and my ambition?"Given her high- profile career, Nora understood that she had to do some damage control and live life again.“I feel like after the experience I went through in 2018…after you go down, you only go up, there is no other way. Hence, I needed that boom you know for me to come back and say now I am ready,”“I am passionate again, I want to work, I want to make my mark, I want to prove everybody wrong and I can’t regret that break up because if it wasn’t for that breakup, my fire wouldn’t have come back and I needed that fire to kind of just explore.”There were times she questioned herself and started comparing herself to other people.‘Nora wake up! Where is your hunger? There are hundreds and thousands of people who are talented just like you, who are good looking, who are killing themselves to make that happen, you need to get back’, and suddenly, I got my confidence back and that was it.”We are so glad Nora spoke up. It takes efforts to be this frank and honest about your mental health and make way for others to speak up too. More courage and positivity coming her way!
