PIL challenges appointment of Parliamentary Secys

public interest litigaiton

Parliamentary Secretaries

Gazette notifiation

Karnataka

High Courts across the country and the Supreme Court struck down similar posts which carry salary and other perks of a minister(PIL) in the High Court has challenged the appointment of MLAs and MLCs as Parliamentary Secretaries. The PIL calls the KarnatakaAllowances Act 1963 as unconstitutional. Awas issued on January 7, 2019 appointing eight MLAs/MLCs as Parliamentary Secretaries. These posts carry the salary and perks of a minister. High Courts across the country and the Supreme Court has struck down similar posts in other states.MLA Dr Anjali Hemanth Nimbalkar, MLC Ivan D’souza, MLA Koujalagi Mahantesh Shivananda, MLA Roopakala M Shashidhar, MLC J Govindaraj, MLA K Raghavendra Basavaraj Hitnal and MLA DS Hoolageri are the latest appointees as Parliamentary Secretaries. One more MLA was announced for the post but the Gazette notification is yet to be issued. The petition by one MB Adinarayana has been filed in the High Court ofand his advocate mentioned it before the division bench headed by the Chief Justice. However, there were no arguments regarding the issue on Wednesday. The petition seeks the removal of the eight MLAs/MLCs from the post.Among the arguments in the petition is the post of Parliamentary Secretary is an attempt to bypass the law that the strength of the ministry should not be more than 15 per cent of the total strength of the Legislative Assembly which is mandated by Article 164(1-A) of the Constitution of India.The petition cites the case in the Supreme Court which declared the Assam Parliamentary Secretaries Act 2004 as unconstitutional. Similarly the Calcutta High Court in its 2015 judgement struck down the enactment of West Bengal Parliamentary Secretaries Act 2012. The High Court of Meghalaya had similarly struck down the Meghalaya Parliamentary Secretaries Act 2005 in 2017.“It is respectfully submitted that in view of the above decisions the Karnataka Parliamentary Secretaries Allowences Act 1963 are to be declared as unconstitutional and the appointments of Respondents 3 to 10 (MLAs and MLCs named above) to be declared as invalid,” the petition seeks. The case has now been listed for hearing on January 18.
