Thunderstorm calamity: Kisan Sabha seeks compensation for farmers

AIKS seeks compensation for the families who have lost their members due to the thunderstorm and for those farmers who are facing the loss of the crops.

A big region of the country has been hit by rain and thunderstorm in the last few days, due to which there was a huge loss of life and property

Our Correspondent / New Delhi

All India Kisan Sabha, AIKS has expressed deep grief and sorrow for those killed due to rain and thunderstorm in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and some other parts of India and demand adequate compensation for the families of those who lost lives due natural calamity. It also demanded competition for farmers who have lost their crop due to the thunderstorm.

A big region of the country has been hit by rain and thunderstorm in the last few days, due to which there was a huge loss of life and property. AIKS expresses consolation with the families of those killed due to it. According to the reports till now 31 persons has died. Prime Minister Narandra Modi has announced compensation for families those whose members were killed only in Gujarat. This is not justifiable Prime Minister and the Central Government must declare compensation for the victims of every state.

AIKS demands compensation for each family who lost their family member in this natural calamity. It is also harvesting time for the Rabi crop but stand the ing crop has been destroyed in lakhs of acre of land. AIKS demand proper compensation to all farmers who have lost their crops due to this storm.

Rain, Thunderstorm claims 30 lives across India, badly affect farmers

AMN

At least 30 people have lost their lives due to unseasonal rain and dust storm in several parts of the country.

In Gujarat, officials said, 10 people were killed from different areas, including districts in North Gujarat and Saurashtra region. Most of the deaths have been reported from North Gujarat due to lightning strikes and falling of trees.

In Rajasthan, gusty winds and rains affected normal life in the state yesterday. Several trees and electric poles were uprooted in different parts due to high-velocity winds. 10 people were killed. Four people each died in Jhalawar and Jaipur, while deaths were also reported from Baran and Udaipur.

In Madhya Pradesh, unseasonal rain, dust storm and lightning wreaked havoc, claiming 10 lives in the state. 3 people in Indore, two in Badnavar, Khargone and one each in Ratlam, Shajapur and Sheopur died. Chief Minister Kamal Nath also described these incidents as tragic.

The Meteorological Department has also predicted more such weather in coming days due to western disturbances.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has announced an ex-gratia of two lakh rupees each for the next of kin of those killed due to rain and storms in various parts of Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Manipur and other parts of the country. 50 thousand rupees each for the injured have also been approved.

In a tweet, Mr Modi said, the government is doing its best to provide all possible assistance to those affected and the situation is being monitored closely. He expressed grief at the loss of lives.

Home Minister Rajnath Singh today said the Centre is ready to provide all possible assistance to the states affected by heavy rains and storm.

In a tweet, Mr Singh said, he is deeply pained and anguished by the loss of precious lives due to untimely rains and thunderstorms in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and certain other parts of the country.

Congress President Rahul Gandhi has expressed sadness over the loss of lives in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Manipur, Madhya Pradesh and various other parts of the country due to the dust storm.

In a Facebook post, Mr Gandhi said, his thoughts and prayers are with the families of the victims. Congress has also urged its workers to support the government in its relief efforts.
