au ruckus: Allahabad University hostels raided after ruckus, murder

ALLAHABAD: A team of senior officials of the district police and their counterparts of Allahabad University raided two hostels of AU, on Wednesday.

The raid at Tara Chand and Sir PCB hostel follows two recent incidents that occurred in these two hostels. While in the former, a group of inmates created rucks at a marriage party near the hostel, in the latter, a youth was murdered and the absconding accused are students of AU.

According to reports, a group of inmates of the TC hostel had entered a marriage party being held at a guest house near their hostel, on Tuesday night. These ‘uninvited’ inmates first had dinner and some of them started passing objectionable comments at the females attending the ceremony following which they were chased away by the family members of the groom and the bride.

These inmates later returned along with around 150 odd inmates of the same hostel who collectively created rucks at the ceremony and damaged several vehicles. The chaos continued till the time police arrived at the spot and chased away the unruly students. Later, a clash was also reported within the hostel among two groups of inmates.

“We have arrested an inmate of TC hostel named Kunwar Swatantra Vikram Singh alias Satyam Singh in connection with the disturbance that was created at the marriage ceremony and have lodged an unnamed FIR against around 150 other inmates in the same case,” said SP City Brijesh Srivastava. Singh was the one who initiated the clash at the marriage ceremony, he added.

In this backdrop, police raided the premises of Tara Chand hostel on Wednesday and siezd 58 rooms which were illegally occupied.

“While 58 rooms were illegally occupied, police also recovered objectionable material, from room number 4/31, which was supposed to be used to make crude bomb,” said AU’s chief proctor, Prof RS Dubey. Police also recovered a crude bomb from room number 2/43, he added.

Following the raid, on the compound the hostel witnessed a number of coolers thrown haphazardly. “Police did threw the cooler outside the rooms because of two reason, one being it’s against the rules to use cooler or heaters and secondly, there was no one to claim for the same,” said varsity proctor Prof Dubey.

Police also seized six motorcycles, including four from TC hostel and two from PCB hostel, along with three cars, two from TC and one from PCB.

Likewise, Sir PCB hostel was also raided by the police on Wednesday. It is the same hostel which was in news a couple of days back because of murder of a youth named Rohit Shukla. Although six persons, including three inmates of the hostel who are also the students of AU, have been named in the FIR registered by Colonelganj police, all are absconding.

A total of 43 rooms were seized by the authorities. “We have locked all the 43 rooms. If anyone comes with the proper documents, the same would be given the keys,” said the proctor.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
