Smitten with ruins: why Hyderabad is fast becoming a spot for ruin porn

Many of Hyderabad's historical landmarks, like the medieval Golconda Fort and the Qutb Shahi tombs, have been a magnet for 'ruin porn' even before the phrase was coined.

The World Heritage Site status has proven to be a chimera for Hyderabad. It has nearly been a decade since Hyderabad’s Qutb Shahi tombs, Golconda Fort and Charminar were added to the list of tentative sites, but nothing more has been heard about the progress. However, Hyderabad has rapidly become a spot for ruin porn or ruin photography. Two days ago, Jonny Bairstow of Hyderabad Sunrisers visited the Golconda Fort and posted a photograph from the location on multiple social media sites using the #ruins, #history and #incredibleindia. Within the fort, he chose one of the locations where there has been no restoration, with the rock arches creating an incredibly raw backdrop.

At the dozens of heritage walks that have become routine in Hyderabad, walkers are as keen on walks and stories as the photographs of ruins that they plan to post on social media. Visitors to the city, including people like Ivanka Trump, have used the ruined backdrops for photo-ops.

“I for one would not like buildings to be completely restored. The surfaces of buildings in a ruined condition have a texture that is artistically compelling. An exposed stone surface has a much better appearance than a painted one. There are other ways of restoration without destroying the surface texture,” says Sravani, an architecture student of Jawaharlal Nehru Architecture and Fine Arts University, speaking about the restoration work at the Moazzam Jahi Market. The early 20th century building which incorporated Gothic elements in the use of stone, battlements and arches has been undergoing an extensive makeover. The restoration has included a surface layer that covers the stone surface as well as badly-needed restoration of the jack arch ceiling, which was in danger of collapse.

The medieval Golconda Fort and the Qutb Shahi tombs have been a magnet for ruin porn even before the phrase was coined. Dozens of Hindi, Telugu and Bengali movies have been shot at the location. Photographers are known to sneak in equipment and models for shooting in the stunning backdrop of Qutb Shahi tombs, where some monuments have been restored, while others are in the process of being restored.

“I don’t think the ruins of Golconda Fort can ever be fully restored. The fort is way too damaged to be restored in any form and I guess, its better the way it is now with what’s left of it. However, it does lack proper maintenance and if that could be done, it would make a world of difference to it,” says Mohammed Habib, who has photographed Hyderabad’s rich built and natural heritage.

The ruins of buildings from the Nizam’s era too have been a rich draw for people seeking the ruins. The Shah Gunj, Chowmhalla, Phisalbanda, Shahalibanda and Darulshifa areas have been happy hunting grounds for many with their ruined walls, grand doorframes, doorways, keystones and architectural styles.
