‘Face of Brussels attack’ joins staff petition to save Jet

Hours after Jet Airways announced a temporary suspension of operations, Nidhi Chaphekar — the airline’s former flight attendant who became the face of the Brussels terror attack after suffering multiple injuries — joined an online petition with fellow employees and their families, to save the carrier and its 16,000 employees.

Ms. Chaphekar told The Hindu the brand needs to be kept alive. “We have all nurtured the airline and are working to bounce back. I am sure Jet Airways will be up and about again.” Her photograph, in which she sat stunned after a bomb ripped across the Brussels airport in 2016, made front pages across the world.

She said 18,000 people had signed the petition within hours of it going online. Ms. Chaphekar, who continues to work with Jet, joined others in demanding instant financial help for the airline from the government.

In a post, an employee said, “Since last month Jet Airways’ financial crisis is making headlines … We, the family of these employees of Jet, are hoping for its survival each and every day. The lender’s revival plan was the only ray of hope for us. But all these hopes now seem shattered. Our livelihood and source of income is completely dependent on Jet Airways.”

The daughter of a staff member wrote, “My father has been associated with the airline for more than 20 years. But at this stage, loss of his job will be a huge setback for our family. We would need to compromise with our every dream and aspiration. Even pursuing my education would become quite difficult. The survival of Jet Airways is a necessity for us. We are also citizens of India and the taxpayers of the nation. We have contributed for the development of nation. Thus seeking help from Prime Minister is our right.”

Meanwhile, NCP leader and Jet Airways Officers and Staff Association president Kiran Pawaskar will meet the management of the airline at its Andheri headquarters on Thursday.

In a statement Jet Airways said even in the toughest times, employees had worn a smile on their face and put their duty towards the guests and the nation first. “We are worth investing in, you are worth investing in and we are confident that we will be back to share the joy of flying with our fellow guests once again. However, we must also be realistic that the sales process will take some time and will throw up several more challenges for us, many of which we don’t have the answers to, today. For example, we don’t have an answer today to the very important question of “what happens to us employees during the sale process,” the statement read.

Airline CEO Vinay Dube said, “I must request the many people that continue to provide essential services for our guests, partners and suppliers to keep doing their job as best as possible. Since our guests, partners and suppliers have also stood by us through thick and thin, we must do whatever little we can, under the circumstances to ease their difficulties. As and when we have further clarity on this topic we will communicate with you. Jet Airways is unique and it is unique because of its employees. We must be given another chance. As before, to you, the most amazing employees of Jet Airways, you have our unequivocal gratitude and respect in equal measure.”
