Sheila Dikshit defends Tytler's presence as she takes charge of Delhi Congress

Former Delhi CM Sheila Dikshit on Wednesday took charge as the new president of Delhi Congress, in the presence of 1984 anti-Sikh riots accused Congress leader Jagdish Tytler - sparking a row and criticism from other parties including ruling Aam Aadmi Party. She also indicated that there was no chance of an alliance with Aam Aadmi Party. (AAP).

Tytler, 74, was seen among the leaders sitting in the front row on stage during the event at Delhi Congress office on DDU Marg.

"Why should he not come, we are privileged to have him here," Dikshit said after the function. Tytler, a former MP and Union minister in Manmohan Singh's cabinet was accused by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) of inciting a mob that killed three persons.

The CBI later tried to close the case but the court has not accepted it. "I am a soldier of the party and will be present in every party event. There is no FIR against me in 1984 riots cases. CBI has clarified I have nothing to do with the riots," Tytler said in response to questions.

His presence invited criticism.

"Indira Gandhi to Rajiv Gandhi to Rahul Gandhi, Tytler was their right hand man. It is a clear signal to Sikhs of the country," said Union Minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal, an ally of the ruling BJP. Another Akali Dal leader and MLA in Delhi Assembly, Manjinder Singh Sirsa said, "The Congress wants to send a message to the witnesses that the party high command supports Tytler and nobody should even try to testify against him," he said.

On the first day of her office she said that she will be focusing on elections and will help Rahul Gandhi.

"Rahul Gandhi is leading us. Whatever we will do and achieve, will help him. We will focus on betterment and development of economically weaker sections," said Dikshit, who turned 83 last year. The three time CM also said there was "no talk of any alliance with the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP)" yet, while invoking the recent controversy in Delhi assembly "AAP and BJP, both are an equal challenge to us. We will meet the challenges together. The way they talked about Rajiv Gandhi in the assembly... we were hurt by it and it was not right," she said.
