Raid on hostels after murder & wedding brawl, 1 arrested

Allahabad: Hours after a group of Allahabad University students gatecrashed a wedding and created ruckus at the venue late Tuesday night, police raided Tara Chand and Sir PCB hostels and arrested one student in connection with the case on Wednesday.The raid comes two days after a former student, Rohit Shukla, was shot dead at Sir PCB Hostel by another student. A named FIR against six persons was filed in the murder case and all the accused are currently on the run.According reports, a group of inmates from Tara Chand Hostel went to a wedding uninvited, being organised at a guest house nearby on Tuesday night.The uninvited inmates had dinner and then some of them started passing objectionable comments at a few women present at the venue. They were chased away by the hosts. However, the students later returned with around 150 more hostel inmates and started creating ruckus.The damaged several vehicles. The chaos continued till police arrived at the spot and chased away the students. On the same night, two rival groups of inmates also reportedly clashed at the hostel.“We have arrested an inmate of Tara Chand hostel, Kunwar Swatantra Vikram Singh alias Satyam Singh, in connection with the case. An unnamed FIR against around 150 other inmates has also been lodged,” said SP (city) Brijesh Srivastava.The SP said that Singh was the one who led the students during the chaos at the wedding. AU chief proctor RS Dubey said that the police found that 58 rooms were encroached at Tara Chand Hostel and recovered materials used for making crude bombs from room number 4/31.He said that crude bombs were seized from room number 2/43.Following the raid, the verandahs of the hostel were lined with banned items like coolers, which the students had been using illegally.“Police threw the coolers outside the rooms because it’s against rules to keep cooler or heaters in hostel rooms. Also, the items were thrown away as there was no one to claim them,” said Dubey.“Hostel rules do not permit students to keep cars. Inmates can keep motorcycles but that too only after permission from the superintendent,” said dean of student welfare (DSW), Prof Harsh Kumar.Police also seized six motorcycles, four from Tara Chand hostel and two from Sir PCB hostel. They also recovered three illegally kept cars, two from Tara Chand and one from Sir PCB hostel.At Sir PCB hostel, police found 43 rooms were encroached. “We have locked the 43 rooms and if anyone comes with the proper documents, they would be given the keys,” said the proctor.
