The Shillong Times

BSF women constables keep hawk eye vigil on border

Ferozepur: On this year’s Republic Day, the nation watched the daredevil performance of Border Security Force women bikers. The 113-member ‘Seema Bhawani squad’ was a beacon of women empowerment but it was not the last one. The women constabulary of BSF is deployed for border domination on the India-Pakistan border on a regular basis. Punjab or Rajasthan, the women combat soldiers are deployed near the western border in sizeable numbers. The women constabulary or ‘Mahila Constables,’ deployed on the border, patrol in pairs from point to point on the specified area and also deployed at watch tower to keep eye on the activities of Indian farmers working on their field outside the fence. (UNI)

Complaint against publisher of satirical booklet on Modi

Ahmedabad: A police complaint was Wednesday filed against the publisher of ‘Chowkidar Pe Charcha’, a booklet that takes a dig at Prime Minister Narendra Modi over his government’s promises and policies. The complaint was lodged at Paldi police station in Ahmedabad against Jayesh Shah, the publisher of the booklet, on the directions of the district election officerafter it was found thatits publication violated the model code of conduct (MCC). The district election officer had on April 4 received a complaint on WhatsApp regarding the booklet, which is a compilation of over 60 cartoon strips on Modi that takes a dig at him over various issues, including demonetisation, GST, Rafale fighter jet deal, among others. The matter was investigated by the election officer, who authorised the executive magistrate to take necessary action. “We submitted the complaint to Paldi police inspector to register an FIR against the publisher of the booklet – ‘Chowkidar Pe Charcha’ – as its publication violates the MCC,” Mamlatdar (Sabarmati) Shakrabhai Desai said. (PTI)

Two arrested with explosives

Banda (UP): Huge stock of explosives, including 200 detonators and 1200 gelatin rods, were recovered from two houses in the district and two persons arrested, police said Wednesday. Additional Superintendent of Police Lal Bharat Kumar Pal said, “Based on a tip-off, police conducted raids at two houses in Barua Syogarh and Chandranagar villages”. “200 detonators, two quintal ammonium nitrate, 1200 gelatin rods, and exploder and other material used for explosion have been recovered,” he said. Two persons identified as Anuragi and Vijay Shankar have been arrested in this connection. “Both of them do not have any licence to store explosive material. Generally, those who are engaged in mining use these explosive materials for carrying out mining activities. However, both of them do not have a mining lease,” he said. In view of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s scheduled election meeting on April 25 in Tindwari, police has been undertaking search activities in the district. (PTI)

Absconding man held after 12 yrs

Thane: Thane crime branch officials have arrested a man wanted in a 2007 murder case from Bhind in Madhya Pradesh, a senior police officer said here Wednesday. However, three out of the total four accused are still on the run. The crime branch team tracked down one of the accused, Rajkumar Rajawat, in his home town Mehandawa in Bind district of Madhya Pradesh earlier this month, said DCP, Crime, Deepak Deoraj. He was arrested on April 15 with the help of local police, he said. Three other accused wanted for allegedly killing Shailendra Singh Dansingh Shekhawat, 27, are still on the run, the DCP added. The senior officer said that Shekhawat, who used to work as a job agent, was strangulated to death by Narendra Singh Rajbirsingh Rajawat and Pintusingh Bittusingh Rajawat for not providing them job despite taking money. Shekhawat’s body was later found dumped in a nullah. Rajkumar and Rishi Dong were the two other accused who were involved in the crime. (PTI)
