Courier firm owner killed over money

Police at the crime spot where courier firm owner Dinesh Bawaria was killed

Rajkot: Three murders have rocked Saurashtra in the past 24 hours. The crimes were reported from Jamnagar, Gondal and Kotda Sangani of Rajkot district.

A courier firm owner was stabbed to death by an assailant on Tuesday night at a commercial complex opposite Jamnagar bus stand.

The deceased was identified as Dinesh Bawaria alias Danish (40), a resident of Nalanda Apartment near Jamnagar TB Hospital and the accused as Hardevsinh Jadeja.

According to police, the murder was the result of a financial dispute between Bawaria and Jadeja. Bawaria owed some money, the exact amount of which is yet to be ascertained, to Jadeja, which Jadeja had been demanding from him.

“On Tuesday night, Jadeja went to Bawaria’s office and when Bawaria refused to give him the money, he flashed out a knife. This triggered off an altercation between them, following which Jadeja stabbed Bawaria. So angry was Jadeja that he did not allow Bawaria to stand up from his chair and dealt him two fatal stabbing wounds in his stomach,” said K K Buwal, inspector of Jamnagar A-Division police station. Ironically, it was Jadeja who called 108 emergency ambulance to the spot, but when he realized that Bawaria was dead, he fled the place. Before leaving, he also allegedly threatened to kill Bawaria’s employee Manish, if he revealed his name as a culprit. Jadeja was booked on the complaint of Bawaria’s father Babubhai. Police are yet to arrest Jadeja.

The second murder was reported from the terrace of a shopping complex near Gondal Central Talkies in Gondal on Tuesday night, where the body of a 50-year-old man was found. “The identity of the deceased is yet to be ascertained. His head was smashed and there was a blood-stained brick lying nearby. We are yet to establish the identity of the accused,” said an official from Gondal city police station.

The third killing was reported from Piplana village of Kotda Sangani taluka, where the body of a 25-year-old man from Madhya Pradesh was found on Wednesday morning. “The deceased was identified as Mukesh Loliprasad, a labourer, who was identified by his fellow workers. It appears that he was bludgeoned to death as he had received severe head injuries. After killing him, the assailants, whose numbers and identities are yet to be ascertained, dragged his body to the nearby shrubs by the roadside,” said Y B Rana, sub-inspector of Kotda Sangani police station.


