Characters details of Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt revealed in Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Inshallah? Details inside

Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt to star in Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Inshallah | Photo Credit: Instagram

The internet erupted last month when Sanjay Leela Bhansali officially announced that his next project Inshallah will star Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt in the lead. While there were some who rejoiced the casting decision, but majority on social media displayed objection and outrage over the age difference or age gap between the two lead actors. It went on to be a matter of discussion for days – memes began to circulate on social media.

Now, a report in Mumbai Mirror has revealed several character details about the ones Salman and Alia are set to play. According to a source, Salman will play a 40-year-old businessman while Alia Bhatt will portray a 20-year-old aspiring actress. Yes, the two will be romantically inclined in the film, but the source confirmed that the storyline will justify the age gap between them.

"Salman is a businessman in his mid-40s. The character is reminiscent of his turn in his 1997 romcom Jab Pyar Kisise Hota Hai. Alia plays a 20-something aspiring actress. All the factors, including age gap, have been taken into consideration. The story will justify the teaming up of two actors, from different generations, on a romantic journey," – the source told the tabloid.

Not that one should have doubted Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s decision to cast the two actors from different generations in the first place. The filmmaker, over the years, has delivered some iconic films and we are sure that even in this new one, the director will showcase a fresh and exciting story.

It’s been 20 years but I am glad Sanjay and I are finally back in his next film, Inshallah. Looking forward to work with Alia and inshallah we will all be blessed on this journey.#Inshallah #SLB @aliaa08 @bhansali_produc @SKFilmsOfficial — Salman Khan (@BeingSalmanKhan) March 19, 2019

I was 9 when I first walked into Sanjay Leela Bhansali's office, all nervous and hoping and praying that I would be in his next film. It's been a long wait. — Alia Bhatt (@aliaa08) March 19, 2019

Meanwhile, it was earlier reported that SLB has been in and around cities such as Haridwar, Rishikesh, Varanasi and others while scouting for locations. According to a report in TOI, a line producer Chinmay Pandit has confirmed that SLB liked multiple spots in these cities where he wants to shoot portions of the film.

Bhansali sir last week yahan aaye thay aur unhone Haridwar aur Rishikesh mein kuchh locations dekhen hain jo unhe pasand bhi aaye hain (Sanjay Leela Bhansali was in Haridwar and Rishikesh last week to scount for locations and he has liked a few spots)," Chinmay revealed after he took the filmmaker around for location scouting.
