Scholar Says US Military Ties Could Be Trap for India

The transformation of Indo-US defence relations can be attributed to multi-dimensional causes and has faced strong criticism from Indian strategic circles. According to Bharat Karnad, a research professor with the Center for Policy Research, New Delhi, the US is traditionally an unreliable partner, but a closer partnership with them will only cap India's true military potential in the near to long term.

There are three main drivers of the current Indo-US military partnership.

First, the US needs a major maritime partner that fits with its vision of a free and open Indo-Pacific region with significant naval combat capabilities. This need is born out of its threat perception as a global maritime power.

According to John Richardson, US chief of Naval Operations, in his briefing to the House Armed Services Committee during a Congressional hearing, "China is trying to create its own globally decisive naval force."

Second, China's deepening military ties with countries located in proximity to India is a cause of concern for India.

Third, simultaneous deterioration of US relations with Pakistan and China has allowed India to develop a strategic role for the US in South Asia.

While it appears that constraints from past Indo-US relations have diminished, the consequences for India's strategic autonomy over the short and long term remain uncertain. Developing military ties with a distant power while neglecting relationships with countries in the surrounding region is not a sustainable strategic policy.

READ MORE: Indian Regulator Gives IndiGo Airlines Notice Over US-Made Engines — Source

Two events in 2017, the China-India border standoff and the announcement of the largest ever Malabar series of US-India-Japan trilateral naval exercises in the Bay of Bengal, continue to serve as a reminder of the strategic trap that India could find itself in the near and distant future.

The views expressed in this article are those of the speaker and do not necessarily reflect those of Sputnik.

This article originally appeared on the Global Times website.
