Lok Sabha elections phase II: 5 seats to watch out for in Karnataka

In the battle of ballot at the hustings, the ally of ruling Janata Dal-Secular (JD-S) and Congress face a tough fight with the Bhartiya Janata Party in five of the 14 Lok Sabha seats going to the polls in the state on Thursday.

With the allies fielding joint candidates under their pre-poll seat-sharing arrangement, the Congress is contesting in 10 seats and JD-S in four against 13 candidates of the BJP.

The top five seats are Bangalore South, Bangalore North, Mandya, Hassan and Tumkur, as their outcome may have a bearing on the survival of the 10-month-old fledgling JD-S-Congress coalition government in the southern state.

Of the five seats, JD-S is contesting three, with its supremo H.D. Deve Gowda from Tumkur and his two grandsons -- Prajwal and Nikhil -- from Hassan and Mandya, respectively, which are the traditional bastions of the party over the past three decades.

In the three Bangalore parliamentary seats, the Congress is pulling all stops to wrest them from the BJP, which has retained them since the 2004 general elections.

Mandya

The JD-S has high stakes in this constituency where Nikhil Gowda is up against multi-lingual South Indian actress Sumalatha Ambareesh as an Independent, supported by the BJP. L.R. Shivarame Gowda of the JD-S had won the by-election from here in 2018.

The son of state Chief Minister H.D Kumaraswamy, Nikhil's (28) contest against Sumalatha is being billed as the "mother of all battles." Sumalatha (55) is also backed by the Kannada film industry, led by its superstars Yash and Darshan, and thousands of fans of late rebel star Ambareesh, who hailed from Mandya and represented the seat in the Lok Sabha thrice, twice as Congress member and once as JD-S member.

Though the JD-S won from all the eight assembly segments in the Mandya parliamentary constituency in the May 2018 state assembly polls, the electorates face a Hobson's choice as both the main contestants belong to the politically dominant Vokkaliga community, which has a large presence in the old Mysore region.

Hassan

Prajwal Gowda faces a tough contest in Hassan despite it being a bastion of the Gowda clan, as the party's committed voters are miffed with the 86-year-old Deve Gowda for shifting to Tumkur to make way for his grandson Prajwal.

Prajwal (29), the son of state PWD Minister H.D. Revanna, is up against BJP's A. Manju, a former Congress Minister who lost to Deve Gowda in the 2014 general elections.

Though the leaders of the JD-S-Congress formed a post-poll alliance to form the coalition government in May 2018, ostensibly to keep the BJP out of power, there is no bonhomie between their cadres at the grassroot level to campaign for their joint candidates.

The bitter rivalry of three decades between the allies may work in favour of the BJP in Hassan.

Tumkur

In this key constituency, Deve Gowda faces G.S. Basavaraju of the BJP, who is also a strong face of the powerful Lingayat community which equally dominates the constituency.

In 2014, S.P. Muddahanumegowda of the COngress had won the seat, beating BJP's G.S. Basavaraj.

Bangalore North

In this prestigious constituency, BJP's Union Minister D.V. Sadananda Gowda is locked in a straight contest with Krishna Byre Gowda, a Congress Minister in the state. With both the candidates being Vokkaligas, votes of other communities will decide their fate.

Union Minister for State Sadananda Gowda had won from here in 2014, defeating C. Narayanaswamy of the Congress. Of the 16 elections held in this constituency so far, the most successful party is the Congress which has won on 12 occasions from here.

Bangalore South

In this high-profile seat, which has thousands of techies, youth and millennials as voters, the contest is between BJP's young turk Tejasvi Surya, a 28-year-old high court lawyer and a member of the RSS, and Congress veteran and Rajya Sabha member B.K. Hariprasad, who has been living longer in Delhi than in the city or the state.

The sudden demise of Union Minister N.H. Ananth Kumar, who won six times from the seat since 1996, has created sympathy for the BJP although it did not field Kumar's widow Tejaswani.

The BJP is betting on the popularity of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the 'achievements' of the NDA government to retain both the seats in Bengaluru.
