Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt’s role details in Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Inshallah OUT? Read to know more

The recent talk of the town of the tinsel town has been Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt due to their casting in Inshallah which is being helmed by Sanjay Leela Bhansali. Since the time the unusual casting was announced, fans have been trying to wrap their heads around the difference of age between Alia and Salman. However, from the start, Sanjay had mentioned that the age difference will be justified in the film. Amidst this, many rumours started coming in stating that Salman and Alia will be siblings in Inshallah.

While none of those reports is coming out to be true, a new one revealed some important details about Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt’s role in Inshallah. Yes, as per a report in Mumbai Mirror, Salman Khan will be seen playing a middle-aged businessman while Alia Bhatt will be seen as an aspiring young actress who wants to make it big in the business. A source of the Mumbai Mirror also mentioned that the difference of age will be understandable once the film is out.

As per the source of Mumbai Mirror, “Salman is a businessman in his mid-40s. The character is reminiscent of his turn in his 1997 romcom Jab Pyar Kisise Hota Hai. Alia plays a 20-something aspiring actress. All the factors, including age gap, have been taken into consideration. The story will justify the teaming up of two actors, from different generations, on a romantic journey.” Also, the report also revealed the locations in which the film might be shot. As per that, Inshallah makers are debating to shoot in Haridwar, Rishikesh and Varanasi in India. For foreign locations, the makers are picking the US.

Meanwhile, Salman is gearing up for the release of his next film, Bharat. Over the past 3 days, Salman has revealed three different posters of the film in which we can see how his looks change with time. Helmed by Ali Abbas Zafar, Bharat is a remake of a South Korean film, An Ode to my Father. It stars Katrina Kaif, Jackie Shroff, Disha Patani, Tabu and Sunil Grover as well. Bharat’s trailer will be out April 24 as per reports and it is slated to release on June 5, 2019.

Also Read: Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt starrer Inshallah to be shot in THESE locations; Find out
