Kangana Ranaut writes heartfelt note for Panga director Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari, shares adorable picture

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Kangana Ranaut writes heartfelt note for Panga director Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari

Bollywood diva Kangana Ranaut has been ruling the headlines these days for various reasons. While her verbal tiff with actress Alia Bhatt is getting a lot of attention, she is busy with her upcoming film Panga. The actress was in the capital city New Delhi recently to wrap up the shoot of the film and her pictures were proof enough that she enjoyed her stay along with Panga director Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari. Recently, the ace director also shared a picture on her social media of a note that her leading actress Kangana Ranaut wrote for her.

Ashwiny shared a picture of a handwritten note that she received by Kangana Ranaut and captioned it as, "Thank-You ‘K’. Only spreading love everyday" She also shared a picture with the actress in which they look absolutely adorable. In the note, Kangana has written, “Thank you for being unassuming bright light superwoman all day every day.” Looks like this actor-director duo has hit all the right chords with each other while shooting for Panga. Check out the post here-

Earlier also, Ashwiny has shared a number of special moments from the shooting days of the film. A while back she shared a heart-warming picture with Kangana in which they were seen having a good laugh. In the picture, Kanagan is seen resting on Ashwiny’s lap. She captioned it as, “After a long day,nothing is worth more than the golgappa laughters & aallu tikki chats straight from the heart” Check out some picture of Kangana Ranaut and Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari here-

Filmmaker Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari, who is collaborating for the first time with actress Kangana Ranaut in the film Panga, earlier said they share a beautiful relationship and their love for each other will only increase as the shooting progresses. "Kangana and I share a beautiful relationship. I think I had one of the best times ever when I was shooting the first schedule of Panga and our love is just going to increase."

The film is based on the life of a national level Kabaddi player and her triumphs and failures. Panga is helmed by Ashwiny Iyer Tiwari and is being produced by Fox Star Studios. It is slated to release on January 24, 2020.

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
