Hyd man allegedly kills his two kids after fight with wife, third child escapes

Hyd man allegedly kills his two kids after fight with wife, third child escapes

The police said that the accused, identified as 38-year-old Devaraya Kumar, doubted his wife's fidelity and picked up a fight.

news Crime

In an incident of double murder from Hyderabad, a mason allegedly killed two of his children in an inebriated condition at Bombay Colony in the city's Ramachandrapuram area late on Tuesday. The third child managed to escape. The police said that the accused, identified as 38-year-old Devaraya Kumar, doubted his wife's fidelity and picked up a fight with her, which led to the gruesome incident, resulting in the death of a six-year-old girl and a four-year-old boy.

The police said that Devaraya was an alcoholic who used to beat his family. Tired of his behaviour, his wife had left home, leaving behind the three children. On Tuesday, the police said, Devaraya visited his wife's paternal house in Patancheru mandal and picked a fight with his wife, insisting that their three children stay with her and not with him. An angry Devaraya then went back home heavily intoxicated and found his three children asleep.

“Devaraya reached home around 12.30 am and by then, the children were fast asleep. He took his son and younger daughter to another room and hanged them. But when he found that the two were still alive, he took a knife and slit their throat, before attempting to kill the eldest of the three,” the investigators were quoted as saying.

The eldest daughter reportedly woke up during this attempt and saw her siblings lying in a pool of blood, following which she rushed out of the house and raised an alarm, and woke up the neighbours, who, in turn, called the police. Officials found Devaraya unconscious in his house when they arrived.

Media reports suggest that Devaraya had threatened to kill the children on multiple occasions if his wife refused to return.

Speaking to a media outlet, the accused’s elder sister said, “Kumar tried to kill them a week ago. We stopped him and warned him not to harm the children. We thought he would listen. We never expected that he would kill them.”

Meanwhile, the police registered a case under Section 302 (Murder) and 307 (Attempt to murder) of the IPC and took Kumar into custody for further questioning. The bodies of the two children were sent to the state-run Gandhi Hospital for autopsy.
