Here is the latest news from The Associated Press at 11:40 p.m. EDT

Estimated read time: 2-3 minutes

This archived news story is available only for your personal, non-commercial use. Information in the story may be outdated or superseded by additional information. Reading or replaying the story in its archived form does not constitute a republication of the story.

WASHINGTON (AP) — Special counsel Robert Mueller's report has finally been released to the public, and it spells out how President Donald Trump tried to seize control of the Russia probe and choke off the investigation of possible obstruction of justice. Trump is claiming vindication, but Mueller said the president was thwarted only by the refusal of some of those around him to follow his orders.

WASHINGTON (AP) — President Donald Trump responded with profane fury and something resembling panic when he learned a special counsel had been appointed to investigate his campaign and Russia. That's according to Robert Mueller's report, which quotes those in the room with Trump as saying the president was in a rage. And he was slumping in his chair in the Oval Office, uttering profanity and commenting that the probe was the worst thing ever to happen to him.

NEW ORLEANS (AP) — A second man has been reported dead in Mississippi due to a storm system moving across the South. WLBT-TV reports that 24-year-old Kenderick Magee was killed Thursday while driving in the storm. Amite County Coroner Campbell Sharp says Magee's car crashed near the rural town of Gillsburg in southwest Mississippi, killing Magee.

LITTLETON, Colo. (AP) — Colorado schools that were shuttered ahead of the 20th anniversary of the Columbine school shooting have reopened, a day after authorities found the body of a young Florida woman obsessed with the shooting. Many schools increased security Thursday. The FBI said the body of Sol Pais was discovered Wednesday in mountains outside Denver with what appeared to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound. About 500,000 students in metropolitan Denver and Colorado Springs were affected.

NEW YORK (AP) — The National Enquirer is being sold to the former head of the airport newsstand company Hudson News. Tabloid owner American Media says it is selling the supermarket weekly to James Cohen, the former head of newsstand retailer Hudson News. The deal comes after a rocky year for the tabloid in which it was caught up in a federal probe of illegal campaign contributions to Donald Trump's presidential campaign in 2016.

Copyright © The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

×

Tags World
