Karnataka: 'Siddaramaiah-Shivakumar power tussle triggered Karnataka crisis

BENGALURU: The Congress leadership might be thrilled with the manner in which BJP's 'Operation Lotus' has floundered, but sources said all is not well as the crisis was triggered by seniors in the party. Sources said credit for defusing the crisis should go to chief minister and JD(S) leader HD Kumaraswamy , who stepped in and monitored the situation on a case-to-case basis."As this coalition government is the creation of AICC president Rahul Gandhi, the CM was in touch with Congress leaders in New Delhi and party MLAs being tapped by BJP," a source said. "This is why he was unperturbed about the situation."Sources said one big reason for the three-day crisis was the power tussle between Congress legislature party leader Siddaramaiah and water resources minister DK Shivakumar, who is acknowledged as the best trouble-shooter in the party. Plum posts in the cabinet and boards and corporations going to their acolytes is said to have fanned discontent which BJP tried to exploit."BJP was not the original instigator of the crisis," a minister said. "It only saw an opportunity and responded to the situation," he added.Deputy CM G Parameshwara admitted Congress is to be blamed for the crisis, saying: "I don't deny it. Naturally some people who intend to join the cabinet or become ministers express their feelings in different ways whenever there is an (cabinet) expansion or an issue of ministry. But after some time, this feeling subsides and they realise that not all can become ministers. We also try to accommodate them in as many ways as possible."Parameshwara also justified Kumaraswamy acting as the mediator on behalf of the Congress: "He is the chief minister of the state and not of any party," he said. "Of course he was in touch with the legislators and spoke to them."Kumaraswamy is said to have tasked Congress leaders MB Patil and BZ Zameer Ahmed Khan, both ministers in his cabinet, with ensuring that disgruntled MLAs returned to the fold."I got in touch with B Nagendra, JN Ganesh, LBP Bheema Naik, Amaregouda L Bayapur and H Nagesh (who withdrew support to the government)," admitted Khan, who declined to reveal the modus operandi. "I was asked to go to Mumbai, but instead operated over the phone."The minister said he was confident of getting legislators Ramesh Jarkiholi and Umesh Jadhav back to the fold on Thursday. Patil said all disgruntled MLAs were in touch with some of them and news that the government was in trouble was "only hype".However, insiders admit the party cannot function this way. Some are also upset that AICC general secretary KC Venugopal is not giving the state unit enough time as he is preoccupied with politics in Kerala.
