Police and RAF jawans raid hostels on Allahabad University campus, recover crude bombs

At least 13 youths were detained during the raid (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Prayagraj: Following the murder of a former student at the PC Bannerjee Hostel on the night of April 14, teams of security personnel on Wednesday raided the Tarachand and PCB Hostels on the Allahabad University (AU) campus. Shockingly, the material used to make crude bombs was recovered during the raids along with a large number of liquor bottles and a fake pistol. The raid was carried out as part of a joint-operation by Prayagraj Police and Rapid Action Force (RAF) jawans.

Reports indicate that the operation was in response to an observation by the Allahabad High Court which expressed concern at the frequency of crimes being reported from inside the AU campus. Acting on the court's concerns, a team of police officials led by superintendent of police (SP) Brajesh Kumar Srivastava and Colonelganj circle officer (CO) Shreesh Chandra reached the Tarachand hostel in the early hours of Wednesday along with RAF jawans. AU proctor RS Dubey also accompanied them.

A door-to-door inspection was then carried out at the Tarachand hostel which resulted in security personnel sealing as many as 58 rooms. The team then moved on to the PC Bannerjee Hostel where they sealed another 43 rooms. According to a report by Hindustan Times, a majority of the sealed rooms were being occupied by former students who were living there illegally. Police also recovered close to 20 motorcycles, a toy gun, crude bombs and materials used to make them.

As a result of the raid, security personnel have detained 13 youths, who were living inside the hostel illegally, for questioning. They have also reportedly detained Nirbhay Singh who is believed to be the driver of student leader Abhishek Singh alias Micheal. The detainees are also being quizzed in connection with the murder of former varsity student Rohit Shukla who was shot dead following an altercation with one Adarsh Shukla who contested the students' union elections earlier.
