Briefing

NEW DELHI

Skipping the two earlier summons sent by the NIA, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq on third notice finally landed in New Delhi to appear before the investigating agency in connection with a “2017 terror funding case.” Accompanied by other top leaders of the Hurriyat which he heads, Mirwaiz reportedly was questioned hours together for three consecutive days. However, the mainstream in Kashmir continues to condemn the treatment, while Mirwaiz is back and addressed people on Friday. Meanwhile, JKLF chairman Muhammad Yasin Malik, lodged in Jammu jail was shifted to Tihar jail from where his custody was sought by NIA. The local court has granted his custody to NIA for 12 days in connection with an alleged funding case.

POONCH

Last week when All India Civil Services final Examination 2018 results were announced by UPSC, Kashmir and Ladakh divisions of J&K were left blank, surprisingly. However, seven aspirants from Jammu were selected. A doctor from Poonch’s Salwa village, Rehana Bashir bagged 187th rank. His brother, Amir Bashir is already serving officer of Indian Revenue Service.

RAJOURI

Shame has no name. The latest heartbreaking incident was reported Thanamandi area of Rajouri where a 15-year-old girl was gang-raped after being kidnapped by a driver-conductor duo of the bus she was travelling in. Victims’ father who formally lodged the complaint with the police alleged that his daughter was kidnapped on Saturday when she had gone for some work and had boarded the bus of the accused men. She, the father said, was taken to Rajouri, where the crime was committed and later dropped back on Sunday night. Police swung into action and claim to have arrested the main accused.

SHOPIAN

Death seems to be in love with Shopian. The village known for apples is also in news for militancy, CASO, and Killings. Last time, no gun roared, but a life was lost following a dispute between two orchardist families over sharing of irrigation waters. A resident of Homhuna village, Adfar Ahmad Parra, was killed by a sharp-edged weapon. The accused has been arrested by the police and investigations are going on.

LONDON

Name Kashmir resonates continuously for different reasons. This time the title goes to Sapphire. As being reported, this month. This month the 17.43 carat Kashmir sapphire, dating back late 19th or early 20th century, previously owned by a European noble family, will be on sale at Bonhams. It is expected to fetch $391,080 to $521,440.

RAINAWARI

When early risers in Rainawari area of old city sensed the typical Friday smell of tear smoke shells, it created an alarm. The buzz reached to other parts that all is not well in the city central jail. As the different rumours took their flight, the authorities snapped the internet connectivity. What later came out was a fight between the jail authorities and inmates. As the entire night was consumed in the brawl, 10 injuries were reported, with few structures set on fire. Police claimed that the inmates were asked to shift the barrack as there were renovation plans but they pick the fight and resorted to stone pelting and damaged the property. But as per the report filed by advocates who were assigned to visit the jail the incident happened after the inmates saw desecration of the holy Quran. As injured inmates are recuperating, State police chief has constituted the SIT to probe the incident.

83 security personnel,
