Forest Rangers capture leopard who dragged toddler out of bed, mauled him to death in Gujarat

The animal is being kept under observation at the forest departments' rescue centre in Pavagadh (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Vadodara: Less than 24 hours after a nine-month-old boy was killed by an adult leopard in the Chhota Udepur city of Gujarat, forest officials on Wednesday captured a leopard not far from where the boy's decapitated body was found the day before. Rangers believe that the trapped animal is the same who might have attacked and killed Dhaval Rathwa while he was sleeping beside his mother on a cot outside their home in Zari village.

Around 4 am on Tuesday, the big cat dragged the child out of his bed and fled away. The matter came to light only the next morning when locals discovered the child's decapitated body in the forest area near the village. The Gujarat State Forest Department was alerted and rangers were sent to the Zari village to catch the animal. Trap cages with baits inside them were placed in the area to capture the animal before it could attack other villagers.

(A cage similar to this one was used to capture the big cat)

The Rangers caught a break in the early hours of Wednesday when the eight-year-old male leopard spotted the bait and tried to attack it. Once captured, the big cat was transported to the forest departments' rescue centre in Pavagadh, which is nearly 70 kilometres from Chhota Udepur. Meanwhile, the animal has been kept under observation. Deputy conservator of forest of the area, Nilesh Pandya told Times of India that a compensation of Rs 4 lakh has been given to the deceased child's father as per the norm.

In January of this year, a male leopard was rescued from Bandi village in Chhota Udepur after four repeated incidents of attacks on humans came to light from the area within a span of three days. As many as 150 forest officials along with a team of wildlife activists and veterinary doctors were deployed in the area to ensure the safe capture of the big cat. This leopard was also taken to the departments' rescue centre in Pavagadh.
