Trains Stop And Slow Down To Avert Accidents While Robbers Make Merry In Delhi

Railway theft is a regular business for criminals in India. Once the train arrives at the platform, it becomes a safe haven for thieves to start robbing on-boarding passengers. Gold, cash, jewellery and other precious items are often stolen at the blink of an eye.

At stop-overs or encroachments, robbers get plenty of opportunities to board trains and steal valuable items. They can easily escape the law due to lack of patrolling. Times of India reported that certain stretches in Delhi have become an area of concern for the policemen. Police have now started to suspect the role of interstate criminals in rail thefts.

Reportedly, patrolling has now been increased in industrial areas of Mayapuri and Naraina to curb thievery. Criminals are having a free run along Naraina Vihar route because trains have to be slowed down here to prevent accidents.

Photo: BCCL/Shakurbasti slums near railway tracks in New Delhi

The land around these railway tracks is heavily encroached therefore, criminals can easily hide in these places. Reportedly, forested areas are their ideal hiding place. These stretches are dark and devoid of any lighting which makes it even more difficult for the police to catch them.

The railway tracks between Mayapuri and Sarai Rohilla are busy routes that further connect the national capital with neighbouring states like Haryana and Rajasthan. Commuters alleged that criminals climbed on the train when it would slow down in such areas.

Photo: BCCL/Railway crossing at Premnagar in Delhi

For instance, after Delhi-Cantonment, the drivers are forced to lower the speed below 35-40 kmph to avoid any mishaps. Criminals use such situations to their advantage and flee with bags and other merchandise.

The garbage-strewn area is also a safe harbour for drug addicts. Sometimes, criminals even use drug addiction as an excuse for committing a crime. While the tracks remain largely unmonitored, the police are now conducting raids in adjoining colonies to catch petty criminals.

Photo: BCCL

TOI reported that items worth Rs 11.67 lakh, including 39 stolen mobile phones, two laptops and 70 grams of gold, have been recovered in the last 10 days and 32 snatchers have been nabbed. The Railway Protection Force (RPF) has special teams to catch such offenders.

The Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Railways D K Gupta informed TOI that they are also in the process of uploading data online so that Government Railway Police (GRP) can access it and be aware of all the criminals.
