Kerala mein kushti, Delhi mein dosti: PM Modi attacks Cong, CPI(M); questions RaGa's Wayanad choice

PM Modi in Kerala I Photo credit: @BJP4India | Photo Credit: Twitter

Thiruvananthapuram: Prime Minister Narendra Modi while speaking in Kerala’s Thiruvananthapuram questioned Congress president Rahul Gandhi's decision to contest from Wayand in Kerala, stating it was meant for "appeasement". Modi said, "the Congress president had to come to Wayanad to secure his place in the Parliament".

"He says he won't speak a word against CPI(Marxist). Kerala mein kushti, aur Delhi mein dosti, yahi inka khel hai (Enmity in Kerala and friendship in Delhi, that’s their play)"

“Congress' 'Naamdaar” says he is contesting from Wayanad because he wanted to send a message to South. Couldn't you contest from Trivandrum to give the message? It's the capital. It's not a message to South but a message of appeasement politics”.

"Friends for the past 5 years the country is progressing at a rapid space. We are a more secure nation today, be it on space or land. Our country need not worry anymore. Your chowkidaar is always there to protect you with a security sheild".

PM Modi in Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala: Congress' 'Naamdaar' says he his contesting from Wayanad because he wanted to send a message to South. Couldn't you contest from Trivandrum to give the message? It's the capital. It's not a message to South but a msg of appeasement politics pic.twitter.com/vws5kJQ0sz — ANI (@ANI) April 18, 2019

While reminding the Keralites of the tortures endured by space scientist Nambi Narayan during the Congress rule, Modi said, "This could have happened earlier. We knew how scientist Nambi Narayan was treated by the politicians in Kerala. How can we forget that?"

The Prime Minister appealed to Kerala to shun the culture of political murder as “propagated by the communists”.

"This election is not just about forming a new govt. This election is about the aspirations of a new India. Kerala which is the Gods own country is now witnessing political violence. This is not the culture of Kerala…if the state wants to forward, we need to assure both the IDF and UDF needs to be removed,” Modi said.

Look how Thiruvananthapuram welcomed PM Modi... these visuals will truly give jitters to Shashi Tharoor! #EveryVoteForModi pic.twitter.com/Toyy6RbCmQ — BJP (@BJP4India) April 18, 2019

Modi dubbed the Cong-Communist as a 'mahamilavat (adulteration)' which, he said, is propagating culture of violence against BJP workers.

"In Kerala they are contesting against each other, while in Delhi they are together. Cong Prez says in Wayanad that he won't speak against communists".

"They say they want to send a message by contesting from Wayanad. Why can't he contest from Trivandrum or Pathanamthitta instead "...

Taking to the saffron pitch, Modi accused the Communists of being Hindu faith. The situation is such that even if we take the Lords name, faithful are thrown behind bars are beaten with lathis, in a reference to Sabarimala.

"Friends, I would like to promise you that once the Modi government is formed, we will fight for the religious rights and we will make sure that we will take the Constitutional route on that regard," Modi told the gathering in Thiruvananthapuram.
