'It's a Dharamyudh': Terror accused Pragya Thakur on faceoff with Digvijaya Singh in Bhopal

BJP nominee for Bhopal LS seat Sadhvi Pragya Thakur I File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

Bhopal: A day after the BJP fielded the 2008 Malegaon blast case accused Sadhvi Pragya Thakur, 48, from Bhopal parliamentary constituency, party leader Ram Madhav defended the move stating she was the "right candidate" to take on Congress nominee Digvijaya Singh, who he accused of propagating the idea of "saffron terror".

Madhav said “she is right challenger for someone like Digvijaya who propagated the dubious and mischievous idea of Hindu terror in this country. He needed a proper challenger”.

The BJP General Secretary also dubbed 'Hindu terror' as "a creation of the UPA", adding that no such thing "existed or exists now”. “Some people were wrongfully put in jail," Madhav said referring to Thakur, adding that no one can question the constitutional validity of putting up a candidate who has mere allegations against her.

Pragya Thakur, while speaking to party workers in Bhopal, alleged that she was was detained "iilegally" and tortured in jail. "Vo kehalvana chahte the ki tumne ek visfot kiya hai aur Muslimo ko maara hai.....subah ho jati thi pit'te pit'te, log badal jate the peetne wale, lekin pitne wali main sirf akeli rehti thi (They wanted me to confess that I perpetrated a bomb blast and killed Muslims. They beat me the whole night and the persons who did the beating changed but I was there alone taking the beatings)".

Thakur, who is currently out on bail, has been relieved by a court on charges under the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) Act in the 2008 blast case. However, she remains under trial for other criminal charges under Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. While addressing party workers at the Manas Bhawan auditorium in the city, she broke down while narrating the “torture” by police.

She also accused her opponent, former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Digvijaya Singh, of propagating the concept of “Hindu and saffron terror”.

Thakur, who spent many years in jail, said she was illegally detained and beaten up by the police. "They threatened to hang me upside down and strip me. No other sister should face this kind of pain," she said, while breaking down.

Reacting to Thakur’s statement, Congress spokeperson Pankaj Chaturvedi told PTI, "Pragya Singh was arrested by the Madhya Pradesh police in the Sunil Joshi murder case when the Shivraj Singh Chouhan-led BJP government was in power. She should ask the BJP who conspired against her".

Thakur was acquitted of all charges by an MP court in connection with all accusations related to the 2007 murder of Joshi. In a move dubbed as “polarisation of the electorate” by the Opposition, Thakur dubbed her fight as a "dharmyuddh (religious war)”.

Tehseen Poonawalla filed a complaint with Election Commission (EC) against candidature of Thakur from Bhopal seat BJP for the Lok Sabha Elections 2019 and requested the poll body to “debar her from contesting elections as she is a terror accused".
