This Indian drink is helping Deepika Padukone brave Delhi summer

Delhi's summers are unbearable is a fact and shooting in scorching sun during the summer months in Delhi is something nobody wants to experience. But braving all odds, Deepika Padukone is shooting in the capital for her upcoming film Chhapaak with the help of one Indian drink that is quite popular in Indian states of UP and Bihar.

Beating the heat, Deepika Padukone is taking extensive care to shield herself from the soaring temperature. Ever since she has started shooting for the film in the city, the actress has been drinking sattu at regular intervals. The Padmaavat actress has been provided with one-month quota of sattu to fight Delhi summers.

The Sattu Sharbat is popular across the country and has its own variations in states like Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh.

In Chhapaak, Vikrant Massey is playing Deepika's love interest. The film which is based on acid attack survivor Laxmi Aggarwal will show Vikrant as social activist and Laxmi's partner Alok Dixit.

It is for the first time that Vikrant Massey is working with Deepika Padukone. Talking about sharing screen space with Deepika Padukone in Chhapaak, Vikrant told a daily, "Working with an actress of her caliber is not just an opportunity but also a huge responsibility. I'm both nervous and excited."

Deepika unveiled her look as Malti for Chhapaak in March this year. Her transformation into an acid attack survivor for her upcoming film has gained appreciation from all quarters. From fans to Bollywood stars, everyone praised Deepika Padukone for bringing the story of an acid attack survivor on the big screen with Chhapaak.

The film is expected to wrap up by May after two-month schedule in Mumbai and Delhi. The film is set to hit the screens on January 10, 2020.

ALSO READ | Deepika Padukone as Malti from Chhapaak is all smiles on film set. See pic

ALSO READ | Chhapaak first look: Deepika Padukone transforms into acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal
