10 New Books We Recommend This Week

Troubling history lives on, vividly and urgently, in this week’s recommended books. Julián Herbert’s latest book revisits, with “shame and fury,” the massacre of 300 Chinese immigrants in the city of Torreón during the Mexican Revolution. Mark Bowden follows detectives as they crack open a 40-year-old cold case involving the disappearance of two sisters. “The Lions’ Den” examines how thinkers on the left have grappled with the idea and the reality of Israel. And the starkly titled “Hate” is about the history — and the present — of anti-Semitism in France.

We also look at one of the year’s most highly anticipated novels, “Normal People,” Sally Rooney’s follow-up to “Conversations With Friends,” and at two debut novels: one comic and one terrifying.

John Williams

Daily Books Editor and Staff Writer

NORMAL PEOPLE, by Sally Rooney. (Hogarth, $26.) Rooney’s second novel, following “Conversations With Friends,” was longlisted for the Man Booker Prize. It’s about Marianne and Connell, gifted teenagers from different social classes in Ireland. The book tracks them across four years. They are never quite boyfriend and girlfriend in the conventional sense. They “merely break each other’s hearts over and over again,” our critic Dwight Garner writes. Rooney’s “intimate and pared-down style can be reminiscent of Rachel Cusk’s,” Garner says, and her novels are satisfying “because there aren’t dueling narrators or cat’s cradles of plotlines. You buy Rooney’s ticket, you take her ride.”

THE HOUSE OF THE PAIN OF OTHERS: Chronicle of a Small Genocide, by Julián Herbert. Translated from the Spanish by Christina MacSweeney. (Graywolf Press, $16.) The latest by Herbert, a Mexican writer and musician, tells the story of a massacre that took place in the city of Torreón, over the course of three days in 1911, during the Mexican Revolution. Three hundred Chinese immigrants were shot and bludgeoned to death in the streets. The crime has been misunderstood and misrepresented. But it has never been truly forgotten. Our critic Parul Sehgal writes: “The great strength of Herbert’s book, written with such shame and fury, is that it is not framed as epitaph but as dispatch from a live crime scene, attentive to the silences, the still seething resentments, relinquishing nothing to history.”
