Kamal Haasan’s ‘Indian 2’ to finally start rolling from January 18

Kamal Haasan’s ‘Indian 2’ to finally start rolling from January 18

However, neither Lyca Productions nor Shankar is yet to officially announce the rest of the cast.

Flix Kollywood

After the dismal performance of Vishwaroopam 2, actor-filmmaker-politician Kamal Haasan is gearing up to commence work on Shankar’s Indian 2, which will be bankrolled by Lyca Productions on a lavish budget. On Haasan’s 64th birthday last November, it was officially announced via a video that Lyca Productions will produce the highly anticipated sequel to Shankar’s Indian.

However, neither Lyca nor Shankar is yet to officially announce the rest of the cast. The industry grapevine is that the principal shooting of Indian 2, which will mark Haasan’s return as the octogenarian vigilante Senapathy, will commence from January 18 in Hyderabad.

The shoot was supposed to begin in December 2018; however, due to his political commitments, it had to be postponed. The film will be predominantly shot in places like Taiwan and Ukraine, apart from Chennai and Hyderabad. Kajal Aggarwal has been confirmed to play the leading lady. At the pre-release event of her Telugu film Kavacham last month, Kajal made it official and went on record to say that her next film will be with Kamal Haasan. In a recent interview to IANS, Kajal said that she sees signing Indian 2 as a step up in her career.

In preparation for his role, Kamal has been closely working with a team of international trainers to shed weight in the highly anticipated sequel to the 1992 blockbuster Indian, which featured Haasan in dual roles as a father and son. It’s not sure if Haasan would return as the older character, as the first part hinted that he has settled in a foreign place and will return if needed. According to reliable sources, a team of trainers from the US was flown down in December to help Haasan achieve the desired look for the film, which will have music by Anirudh Ravichander.

Content provided by Digital Native
