'Milind is the man for South Mumbai': Mukesh Ambani supports Congress candidate

Mumbai

Milind Deora

Mukesh Ambani

South Mumbai

Uday Kotak

From small shopkeepers to large industrialists - for everyone, South Mumbai means business. We need to bring busin… https://t.co/6BB5KMdaMu — Milind Deora (@milinddeora) 1555525489000

Arvind Sawant

From public debates to social media squabbles, its a prestige battle that's playing out for theSouth seat. Now, Congress candidatehas found support in Reliance Industries ChairmanDeora has posted a 2 minute 17-second video on his Twitter account where shopkeepers, residents and industrialists are openly endorsing him."Milind is the man for," says Mukesh Ambani in the video."Having represented South Mumbai for 10 years, I believe Milind has in-depth knowledge of social, economic and cultural eco-system of South Mumbai constituency," he adds.Interestingly, Mukesh Ambani is endorsing Congress candidate while party chief Rahul Gandhi is constantly attacking his brother Anil Ambani over fighter jet Rafale deal.The shopkeepers and entrepreneurs who appear in a video said that the Congress candidate has supported them on several occasions. "He stands for us whenever we have a problem."Kotak Mahindra Bank'swho also appeared in the same video said Milind truly represent 'Mumbai ka connection'. "I genuinely believe Milind understands and relates to Mumbaikars. His family has been associated with Mumbai for a long time," said KotakIn a tweet along with a video, Milind said that there's a need to bring businesses back to Mumbai and make job creation for youth a top priority.Deora is trying to win back the South Mumbai seat from incumbent Shiv Sena MP. In 2009, Milind Deora had won the seat with 2.72 lakh votes. In 2014, he lost to Sawant.On Wednesday, attacking Shiv Sena - BJP regime, Deora asked residents of Mumbai not to pay property tax till the time the saffron alliance fulfilled its promise.Deora has also expressed confidence that his party along with partner NCP will win all the six Lok Sabha seats in the metropolis. In the previous election, the party had drawn a blank in Mumbai, with BJP-Shiv Sena registering a clean sweep.
