Students bat for Turahalli’s animals

Freedom Park

wild animals and birds

Turahalli forest

Bengaluru

Manmade fire burns 10 acres of Turahalli forest

By Y Maheswara ReddySix youngsters collect over Rs 9,000 in a single day from people atSheer concern towards thirstyinmade these six students battle the blazing heat to collect voluntary donations from the public at Freedom Park inDheeraj Naidu, Nabeel Hussain, Sunidhi Sudhir, Gagana DS, Zui and Nidhi Srikanth, who have registered as volunteers for People for Animals, wanted to spend summer holidays in participating various activities and programmes organised for the welfare of animals and birds.“It is summer. Cheers to mangoes and water melons. But not many of us know of the uglier side. Turahalli is a 590-acre forest area, 20 km from Bengaluru, off Kanakapura Road. This forest area is protected by the Karnataka Forest Department. Small water ponds in the forest have been drying up. Its inhabitants, like 200 spotted deer, peacocks, and other species of animals, are wandering out of the forest in search of water,’’ says Sunidhi Sudhir, a student.The People for Animals in association with other non-governmental organisations (NGOS) has been sending water tankers to fill up the ponds inside the forest. It needs Rs 1,40,000 for three months to fill up the ponds inside the forest through water tankers.“So to create awareness and to get people to donate for a good cause, team PFA was in Freedom Park on Mahavir Jayanti. We went there and spread the message to save Turahalli. Many people enthusiastically contributed and a few preferred to transfer the amount online. Then we went to Chickpet. After a whole day effort, we collected Rs. 9,250. All happy smiles,’’ says Sudhir.Emphasising on the need to donate generously for the welfare of wild animals and birds, Nabeel Hussain, a student, said animal welfare, has been overlooked in the country.“The intense summer heat this year has already caused the death of numerous deer, kites, and peacocks due to dehydration. Going to Freedom Park to collect donations to refill watering holes in Turahalli Forest was a step in the right direction for us as a city to come together and save Bengaluru’s urban wildlife,’’ Hussain said.Gagana DS said the volunteers wanted to replenish water bodies in Turahalli forest till the onset of the monsoon. She said the animals living in Turahalli forest come outside their habitat and enter roads and streets in search of water if replenishing of water bodies is not done in summer.“Many of them die due to road accidents or are severely injured. By filling up the ponds in the forest, the animals will not leave their habitat. With the help of the public funds, the deaths of the wildlife can be reduced,’’ Gagana says.*****On Wednesday, fire spread on 10 acres of the Turahalli forest. The fire is said to have been lit by unidentified miscreants, who escaped, as most of the forest employees were deployed on election duty. As soon as the volunteers and forest staff saw the smoke coming out of the forest, they rushed to the spot to see it spreading. The employees doused the fire using bushes, water tanks and other firefighting materials. In the process, some of the staff also sustained minor injuries. A volunteer said, “It’s surprising that miscreants light up fires knowing the consequences and how it could also harm the dwellers here.”R Gokul, Chief Conservator of Forests, says, “Since most of the officials were deployed on election duty on Thursday, the miscreants got a chance to get away with lighting the fire. We are on the lookout for the culprits and as soon as caught, we will arrest them. Fortunately there was no major damage and only the grass was burnt in the affected 10 acres of area.”
