2 caught with Rs 12 lakh charas

editorial@tribune.com

Chandigarh: Two drug peddlers, natives of Nepal, have been arrested by the local police with 12 kg of charas, valued at around Rs 12 lakh. The police said the charas was smuggled to India from Nepal and was meant to be sold in Chandigarh and further smuggled to Goa. A team of the crime branch, led by Inspector Amanjot Singh, nabbed the two drug peddlers, Kiran Kumar (33) and Khusal Paudel (35). SP (Crime) Vineet Kumar said in view of the Lok Sabha elections, sleuths of the crime branch were patrolling the area near the Sector 3 gurdwara when the duo was stopped for checking on suspicion. During the search, 12 kg of charas was found in bags. The police said the value of 1 kg of charas in Chandigarh was around Rs 1 lakh. “The price is much higher in other places like Goa,” the police said. Police investigations revealed that Kiran had visited India several times earlier during which he came in contact with drug peddlers based in Himachal Pradesh, who made him take to smuggling charas from Nepal on the lure of making a quick buck.

Man stabs wife over money

Chandigarh: A Sector 56 resident was stabbed by his wife over some issue on Thursday. The victim was injured and admitted to the PGI. According to the police, Jagroop Singh, a resident of Palsora, had an argument with his wife Shashi Kanta over money. Sources said Jagroop had given Rs 18,000 to his wife and asked her to keep it safely. However, he found some cash missing on Thursday. The incident led to an altercation between the duo. The woman got a knife from the kitchen and stabbed her husband on the chest. Neighbours gathered at the spot after which the police were informed. The victim was rushed to the PGI, where his condition is stated to be stable. The Sector 39 police are looking into the matter. TNS

Hit by speeding car, biker dies

Lalru: A 35-year-old man died while another sustained injuries after the motorcycle they were riding on was allegedly hit by a rashly driven car near Handesera village here on Wednesday night. The deceased has been identified as Pawan Kumar. The incident took place around 8 pm on Wednesday when Pawan, along with one of his relatives Suraj, was on his way towards Lalru on their two-wheelers. When the duo reached near Handesera, a car heading in the same direction hit the bike from the rear. Pawan fell off the bike and died on the spot, while Suraj was rushed to the Civil Hospital, Dera Bassi. Meanwhile, the police have registered a case. OC

1 more held for cop’s murder

Ambala: The local police have arrested a suspect in the Avtar Singh murder case. Avtar was beaten to death by some people over old enmity in the Baldev Nagar area on April 12. The suspect has been identified as Narender. The deceased, a resident of Panjokhra, was a head constable and was posted at the ADGP Office in Ambala Cantonment. The suspect was produced before a court which sent him to one-day police remand. Prime suspect Kamaljeet has already been arrested. TNS

Sandy powers IDS to victory

Chandigarh: Sandy scored a quick-fire half-century before Ravi and Shailnder shared six wickets between them to help IDS register a 115-run win against TCC in a Tricity League match here on Thursday. Batting first, IDS made 188/5 in 20 overs. Sandy hammered a 42-ball 74, while Chandan scored 25-ball 35. In reply, TCC were all out for 73 runs in 11.3 overs. Ravi and Shailnder claimed three wickets apiece. TNS

Pranil helps NWCA win

Chandigarh: An all-round performance by Pranil Khera enabled Narinder Walia Cricket Academy (NWCA) beat hosts Dikshant Global Cricket Academy (DGCA), Zirakpur, by 32 runs in a Hot Weather Cricket Tournament match here on Thursday. Batting first NWCA scored 123/9 in 20 overs. Advay Gupta made an unbeaten 28, while Khera remained not on 19. DGCA, in reply, were bowled out for 91 runs. Khera took 3/13. tns
