Vadodara: Woman, mother killed by jilted lover

VADODARA: Residents of Sayaji Park Society on Ajwa Road woke up to loud cries early on Thursday morning when a married woman and her mother were brutally murdered by a history-sheeter identified as Priyakant Solanki alias Bhaylu. The police have launched hunt for Solanki who fled from the spot after committing the murders.According to police, Solanki was in relationship with 21-year-old Payal Palkar few years ago. But Payal got married to another person named Mahendra Palkar in 2016. “Solanki, however, remained obsessed with Payal and wanted to continue his relationship with her. Mahendra told us that Solanki used to pester his wife and asked her to stay with him,” said T G Bamaniya, Bapod police inspector.“Though Payal wasn’t interested in continuing the relationship, Solanki kept calling her and she thwarted his advances. This left Solanki fuming,” Bamaniya told TOI.Mahendra, who works in a garage, told police that Solanki had told his friend on Wednesday that he will kill Payal. The friend immediately informed her and Payal called Mahendra to tell him about Solanki’s threat.On Wednesday evening, Palkar was taking his wife to the Karelibaug police station, reportedly to file a complainat against Solanki. On way, he met his friend Harish Saraniya who asked him to accompany him for some work. Mahendra then asked Payal to go to her mother’s house Sayaji Park saying he would get late. Mahendra also lives in Sayaji Park close to Payal’s house.At about 3.30 am on Thursday, Mahendra got a call from his brother-in-law who informed him that Solanki had killed Payal.When Mahendra was rushing to Sayaji Park, he bumped into Solanki who asked him to go and see the condition of his wife and mother-in-law and fled from the spot. On reaching Payal’s house, he saw her lying in a pool of blood. His mother-in-law, Jayshree , who was badly injured, too was lying next to her.The mother-daughter duo died before they could get any treatment.Police said that Solanki went to the terrace and first attacked Jayshree with a heavy iron rod. Then he turned to Payal and slashed her throat with a sharp weapon before injuring her both hands. Solanki then slashed Jayshree’s throat too. Payal’s two-year-old son was sleeping right next to her when she was murdered.The police said some neighbours gathered and raised alarm after which Solanki fled from there.Police said Solanki is a headstrong person who is accused in an attempt to murder case and sexually harassing a girl in 2016. He was also detained under Prevention of Anti-Social Act (PASA) in the past.
