Beef ban, drought killing Baramati’s cattle bazaar

IN BARAMATI

cattle trade

Holstein breed cow

beef ban

The ongoing drought in the state has also led to a scarcity of fodder

Traders lament 30% drop in prices; added burden of rearing old cattle unfit for milking, farming.Cattle traders in and around Pune are reeling under the dual distress of drought and the Centre’s ban on the sale and purchase of cattle for slaughter, leading to a massive slump in prices and trade.Once the district’s most thriving cattle market, the Baramati bazaar had seen a visible drop indirectly affecting the rural economy.Cows are being sold at Rs 20,000 to Rs 30,000 less than their original prices.The rising drought situation in the state has further worsened the crisis: farmers are struggling to feed their cattle, especially the old and frail ones that are unfit for milking and farming.Pundlik More, a resident of Malshiras village, who had come to the cattle market to sell his, had to bear a more than 30 per cent loss. “This cow gives 20 litre milk per day. But now the rates have come down. Earlier, while it would sell for Rs 1lakh and above, I am being forced to take a loss. Due to the ongoing water crisis, there is no fodder to feed the cattle. How will they survive? And then nobody wants to buy a weak animal,” More lamented.Functioning since 1967, Baramati’s weekly cattle market is central to several villages in the tehsil and attracts traders from all corners every Thursday. The transactions are either done in cash or credit. The buyers check the cattle’s health and milk capacity before bargaining for a good price – often 20-30 per cent less than the one a couple of years ago.There are, however, those who are milking the price slump. Ambadas Yede bought an Indian Khillar breed bull for a measly Rs 34,000.The trader who sold him the bull was clearly not happy. “The animal should have sold for no less than Rs 50,000 but now the prices have reduced substantially. There are no buyers for cattle like earlier. The biggest problem is that we are straddled with the old and unfit cattle too as they cannot be slaughtered putting an additional burden on us to feed them. Thehas affected us adversely,” Sampat Atule told Mirror.Khillar Bulls, Jersey, HM, Geer, F1 Geer are some of the prominent breeds that are bought and sold in the market. The sellers decorate their cows with colourful ribbons, metal beads and sharpen their horns to make them attractive.Hanumant More from Kambalwadi, a cattle dealer who wanted to sell 11 cows of Jersey and Holstein breed was struggling to get even his asking price. “The cattle market is down for the last two years. Now, people buy cattle only if necessary. Beef ban, agriculture crisis, low milk prices everything has affected our business. Cattle prices have come down by Rs 25,000 to Rs 30,000. Also, we have to bear the expenses of transporting the cattle to the market every week in case there are no buyers,” he said.“There is no option to get rid of old cattle. We feed them until their natural death. Even if they leave the cattle out in the open, what do they eat and drink? There is no green fodder and water due to drought. The farmers are forced to rear them.”At one point, the market saw at least 1,000 cattle transactions per week. Now, the number has fallen to 700-800, Bapat Kamble, director of the Krishi Utpanna Bazar Samitee, Jalochi, Baramati told Mirror.“There is no guarantee that the cattle would be sold in one go. No one wants to buy old cattle; use of bulls for farming has reduced. Baramati’s Jalochi market used to be one of the best and busiest in the area,” he added.
