Modi Maintains Attack on Lalu Family over 'Benami' Properties

Patna: A day after the Income Tax department attached an alleged 'benami' property worth over Rs. 3 crore owned by the Lalu family, Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi in Patna on Saturday produced a number of documents to prove the property in Sheikhpura was indeed owned by former Deputy Chief Minister Tejaswi Yadav through a number of shady transfers with the help of fake companies created with the intent to keep the deal hidden.

"The property in question was acquired by Tejaswi Yadav and other members of his family through a shell company named Fairgrow Private Limited. The fact that a property worth over Rs. 3.5 crore was transferred in the name of Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) chief Lalu Prasad Yadav's family members came into light last June but only recently the investigative agency was able to identify the property itself that happens to be the one in Sheikhpura area. This 2-storied building is located close to Patna Airport and is built on an area of 7,105 sq. ft," the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader said.

Modi further said that after tracing the registration information of the Sheikhpura property, it became clear that it passed through the fake company associated with the Lalu family that had 20 names listed as its shareholders. A number of Lalu's family members, including Tejaswi Yadav, Tej Pratap Yadav, and their sister Ragini, are listed as the shareholders and members of the Board of Directors of this FairGrow Pvt. Ltd, he said.

"This was an elaborate scheme hatched by the Lalu family to defraud the system. False names, false street addresses were used to hide the identities of the owners. In one case, Ragini's home address is listed as 1 Anne Marg, the Bihar Chief Minister's official residence. Ragini's mother Rabri Devi lived in this bungalow until 2005 but this document was prepared in 2014 when Nitish Kumar was the Chief Minister of Bihar. Tejaswi Yadav," Modi said adding Tejaswi Yadav, the leader of the opposition in Bihar Assembly, needed to come out clean on how he came to become the owner of this property when he had never held a job in his entire life.
