Varun Dhawan OPPOSES the furlough granted to Jitendra Rana, accused of Keenan Santos & Reuben Fernandez murder

While Bollywood stars don’t usually get embroiled in court cases which are already going on, next-gen star Varun Dhawan isn’t in that category. Varun is among the stars who asks the right questions when needed and this is exactly what he did after a furlough was granted to the alleged murderer of Keenan Santos and Reuben Fernandez. As per reports of TOI, Keenan and Reuben were trying to protect their female friends from a group of men passing lewd comments on them. This incident had taken place on October 11, 2011.



When Keenan opposed the men and their behaviour, Reuben also joined him. Later, the same group of men returned with knives and weapon and attacked Keenan and Reuben there and then. The two tried to put up a fight but Keenan died on the spot and Reuben passed away a week later due to severe injuries with knives. Jitendra Rana was the main accused in their murder. The murderer has recently been granted leave in the case by Bombay High Court.



This decision of the court didn't go down very well with many Mumbai citizens including Varun Dhawan. The star took to Twitter to express his anger and opposition to this decision. Varun also sought justice for Keenan and Reuben. He even mentioned that he knew Reuben personally and as Mumbaikars, this can’t be allowed. Varun wrote, “This cannot be allowed this man has committed murder how can he be allowed out. I knew Reuben personally Keenan and he deserve justice we cannot allow this #mumbai.”



Check out his tweet:

As per the reports of TOI, the judges of this case Justice Bhushan Dharmadhikari and Justice Prakash Naik said, “The furlough arrangement has been statutorily made so as to enable the convict to maintain contacts with his family and society.” During his furlough, Jitendra Rana will have to report to a police station from time to time so that the cops can keep a track of his activities. Apart from Jitendra, the Sessions High Court in 2016 had convicted Satish Dulgaj, Deepak Piwal and Sunil Both in Keenan and Reuben’s murder.

Also Read: Photos: Alia Bhatt, Varun Dhawan, Shweta Bachchan and Zoya Akhtar arrive at Karan Johar's residence
