Mukesh Ambani: Asia's richest man keeps his friends close, has a fixed salary since 10 years, and is a favourite headline name

Hurun Rich List: Mukesh Ambani Debuts In Top 10, While 23 Other Indians Join The Club; Bezo...







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 7 Money Talk Amazon's Jeff Bezos, whose wealth has been making headlines due to his impending divorce with wife Mackenzie, topped the Hurun Rich list for the second year. The 55-year-old's net worth is a staggering USD 147 billion. He is followed by Bill Gates at USD 96 bn, Warren Buffett at USD 88 bn, Bernard Arnault at USD 86 bn, and Mark Zuckerberg at 80 billion.



This year's list also saw RIL Chairman Mukesh Ambani make it to the top 10 for the first time. Here's a look at some interesting stats that the list brought out.

(Clockwise from left: Jeff Bezos, Bill Gates, Mukesh Ambani, Warren Buffett) Tech Titans Despite a tough year for tech giants Facebook and Google, the founders of both the companies were among the top 10 richest people in the world.



The social media network, that celebrated its 15th anniversary in January, was embroiled in the Cambridge Analytica scandal, and has been facing allegations of data breach and privacy violation. However, that doesn't seem to have had much of an impact on founder Mark Zuckerberg's (C) wealth that was still up by USD 1 billion. As for the ranking, the 34-year-old dropped just one place to fifth on the list, yet remaining the youngest of the Top 10.



Google, too, has been at the receiving end of questions on privacy invasion, and parent company Alphabet was recently fined a record US$5.1bn by the European Union for abusing Android’s dominance in the smartphone market. But despite the tough times, 45-year-old Sergey Brin (L) and 45-year-old Larry Page (R) both made their debut in the top 10 on the list. Brin, who is also an avid data miner of Ethereum - the second largest crypto, was at No. 8 with USD 54 billion, while Page with USD 53 billion ranked at the 10th spot.

Tale Of Two Brothers Reliance Industries Chairman Mukesh Ambani became the first Indian to break into global top 10. The 61-year-old, who is the only Asian among the top 10, saw a USD 9 billion or 20% surge in his wealth, taking his net worth to USD 54 billion.



Ambani bucked the poor stock market trend in India in the last year, and Reliance Jio Infocomm announced the launch of international roaming between India and Japan, a first for India’s 4G mobile operators to provide VoLTE-based international roaming services in India. He also expanded investment in the entertainment sector with acquisitions worth USD 700 million in Hathway and Den.



Ambani, whose wealth is based on telecom, retail and energy, had also topped the Hurun India Philanthropy List 2018. Currently, the business tycoon is busy with the pre-wedding celebrations of his son Akash - for which he hosted over 850 guests in St. Moritz. In December last year, Ambani hosted the high-profile wedding of his daughter Isha.



Interestingly, Mukesh and his brother Anil Ambani both started with similar amounts after their split, but in the 7 years since then the older Ambani has added USD 30 billion, while Anil has lost over USD 5 billion - amounting to USD 1.9 billion this year. Recently, Anil Ambani was held in contempt of court by the Supreme Court for not paying up Ericsson Rs 540 crore. Flying High Elon Musk jumped 10 places to the 30th spot with USD 28 billion, on back of increase in SpaceX valuation. The Tesla boss, who has been courting trouble with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission due to his tweets that reach out to 25 million followers, ranked 3rd on the Top 10 Immigrant Billionaires list. Musk, who is originally from South Africa, follows Google's Sergey Brin, and Maria Franca Fissolo of Ferrero Rocher on the immigrant billionaires list. Going Down The report also had some other interesting numbers. 430 billionaires dropped off the list this year, of which 40 were due to deaths and 1,246 saw a drop in their wealth. China lost the maximum number of billionaires - 213, followed by India with 52. Rupert Hoogewerf, Hurun Report Chairman and Chief Researcher said, “a 23% drop in the Chinese stock markets coupled with a 6% drop in the Chinese Yuan were the main causes of the dropoffs in China, whilst for India it was a 10% decrease in the value of the Rupee.”



However, in the 201 new additions to the list, China took the lead with 52 billionaires, followed by the USA at 39, and India with 23.



(Representative image)

Akash's 'baraat' a party; Mukesh, Nita, Isha Ambani bring the house down with SRK, Ranbir After weeks of pre-wedding festivities, Akash - the son of Asia's richest man Mukesh Ambani - is tying the knot with diamantaire Russell Mehta's daughter Shloka. Watch Mukesh, Nita, Isha Ambani bring the house down with SRK, Ranbir.

Mukesh Ambani with mother Kokilaben and wife Nita at the 36th Reliance Industries Limited AGM in 2010.

From Heeraben Modi To Nita Ambani: Moms Who Are Actually Supermoms







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 15 Supermom 101 Every mother loves her children and tries to give the best to them, irrespective of what situations they may be in. Moms make life look so easy. They fit everything into their life and still be incredible moms to their children. Take a look at some supermom-children duos who are taking the world by storm: The Invisible Force Narendra Modi - Heeraben Modi

Kudos to the mother who has brought up the man who isn't leaving any stone unturned to transform India into a progressive nation. Heeraben Modi may not have been present when Modi was being elected as the 14th Prime Minister of the country, but her blessings were with him. Modi's mother may not be staying with him but he ensures that he meets her every year on his birthday. When he went to meet her on his 64th birthday, she gifted him Rs 5001 which he promptly donated to the Jammu & Kashmir flood relief fund.

The Perfect Role Model Nita Ambani - Anant, Isha, Akash Ambani



Nita Ambani took up a weight-loss programme only to lead by example for son Anant. Anant Ambani weighed 108 kgs and was suffering from obesity due to medications taken for chronic asthma since childhood. What better way to motivate you child other than follow the same exercise regimen, diet and lifestyle that he follows to achieve results. The younger Ambani had a stellar transformation, he lost 18 kgs in one year, all thanks to his grit and determination and his mother's solid support.





In Pic: From the left, Anant, Shloka Mehta, Akash, Nita Ambani, Mukesh Ambani, Isha. The Artist Sridevi Kapoor - Jhanvi & Khushi Kapoor



Sridevi essayed every role with finesse. And, when she became a mother to two beautiful daughters, it was no different. She immersed herself in the role of a mother so well that she even gave up her career for that. She stopped acting in films, her craft which drove her to give stellar performances. The actress made her big-screen debut when she was very young without much prep o face the arc lights. She had big dreams for her children and was an extremely supportive mother. Unfortunately, she couldn't live to see Jhanvi's debut film, 'Dhadak'.



(Image: Instagram/Sridevi)

The Sensitive One Neerja Birla - Ananya, Aryaman, Advaitesha Birla



Neerja Birla has successfully been able to pass-on the entrepreneurial skills and creative prowess to both her children. While Ananya strikes a balance between her corporate responsibilities and music career, Aryaman is a rising star in the world of cricket. He is currently playing for the Rajasthan Royals. The mother-daughter duo have together started a powerful initiative, Mpower, a movement that caters to championing mental health causes and creating awareness to prevent suicides. And, it was Ananya who pushed her into taking the first step towards the cause.



(Image: Instagram/Aryaman bBrla)



Hinduja Vs Hinduja; Ambani Brothers In Arms, And Other Family Feuds Of India Inc







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 11 It's NOT All In The Family Conventional wisdom dictates that family, almost always, comes first. But India Inc has shown that conventional wisdom doesn't always hold true. Over the years, a number of prominent business families have faced separation woes. And many have had to take some hard calls.



The Ambani vs Ambani saga that captured the country's imagination in 2004, and gave birth to various kinds of theories, saw rapprochement (of sorts) last year when elder brother Mukesh bailed out younger sibling Anil by paying Rs 453 crore dues in the Ericsson case, and thereby preventing the latter from being jailed.

And while the Ambanis have done course-correction, family ties seem to be shaking at the Hinduja household. The brothers, who run the $11.2 billion conglomerate, are not seeing eye to eye over the Switzerland-based Hinduja Bank. The disagreements have left the family's patriarch SP Hinduja and his daughters on one side, and the other three brothers - Ashok, Gopichand and Prakash on the other.



In Pic: Hinduja Brothers (L), Mukesh and Anil Ambani (R). Falling Apart The once closely-knit Hinduja brothers have become the latest business family to find themselves in the middle of a tussle over the future of their $11.2 billion fortune. Fissures have emerged among the four brothers, one of the world's richest, over a letter signed by them in 2014. According to the document, the assets held by one brother belong to all, and that each man will appoint the others as their executors.



However, the group's patriarch 84-year-old Srichand Hinduja and his daughter, Vinoo, want the letter declared worthless.



The dispute came to a light in a ruling delivered by a London judge, who said that the three other brothers, Gopichand, Prakash and Ashok, tried to use the letter to take control of Hinduja Bank - an asset that was in Srichand’s sole name.



The court also allowed Vinoo, SP’s younger daughter, to act as his ‘litigation friend’ to safeguard his interests, since he is said to be suffering from a form of dementia.



The ongoing litigation in the London court began in November last year. Vinoo is seeking to have the July 2014 agreement declared null and void. Not All Good At The Godrejs The 122-year-old $5-billion Godrej group seems to be the latest India Inc family to have been hit by an internal feud after differences cropped up among family members over development of land holdings owned by Godrej & Boyce.



Brothers Adi and Nadir Godrej control the group’s three listed companies — Godrej Consumer Products Ltd (GCPL), Godrej Properties and Godrej Agrovet. Godrej & Boyce, the holding company of the group with business divisions including aerospace, consumer, office and industrial products, furniture and appliances, is owned by all family members with Jamshyd Godrej as its chairman.



The dispute reportedly arose after the family members were split over the development of a 1,000-acre land parcel they own in Mumbai. According to reports, the crux of the issue is the concentration of the family’s land holding in Godrej & Boyce and its commercial exploitation by the group’s listed arm Godrej Properties.



While Adi and Nadir are in favour of development of the land, the Jamshyd Godrej side is believed to be against excessive development.



JM Financial chairman Nimesh Kampani and lawyer Zia Mody are advising Jamshyd Godrej, while Kotak Mahindra Bank CEO Uday Kotak and Cyril Shroff of legal firm Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas are assisting Adi and Nadir Godrej untangle the situation.



The family business board is led by group chairman Adi Godrej and includes brother Nadir, cousin Jamshyd and brother-in-law Vijay Crishna. The fourth generation of the family, which includes the children of Adi, Jamshyd, Nadir and Crishna who are past 18 years, attend meetings as invitees.





In Pic: (L-R) Adi, Nadir and Jamshyd Godrej inaugurate the 'Godrej Interio' store, a joint venture between Godrej & Boyce's Jamshyd Godrej and designer Krsna Mehta, at Godrej Bhawan in Mumbai on February 24, 2010. The Tale Of Two Brothers The Ambani war was no silent affair. From defamation suits, letters to the PM to dragging each other to court, the once-close brothers did it all.



India’s richest man Mukesh Ambani and his brother Anil Ambani's bitter feud began soon after the death of their father Dhirubhai Ambani, the founder of Reliance Industries, in 2002.



Ambani Sr. hadn't left a will, so his elder son Mukesh became Chairman and MD of Reliance Industries Ltd while Anil was Vice-Chairman.



The feud for control led to the split of the Reliance Group. However, in 2005, their mother, Anandiben, brokered a de-merger, giving Mukesh control of oil and gas, petrochemicals, refining and manufacturing, while Anil got electricity, telecoms and financial services.



Even though some shareholders opposed the decision, the Bombay High Court had approved the de-merger.



But that didn't settle things. Rather the oil wars continued between the brothers, with Anil even accusing involvement of the Government in supporting Mukesh.



Anil's Reliance Natural Resources Ltd. had even placed newspaper ads alleging that the Indian government had sided with Mukesh's Reliance Industries. And It Continued Till 2019 ... Things only went from bad to worse for the brother. In 2008, Anil filed a $2.12 billion defamation suit against Mukesh for remarks he made during an interview with The New York Times.

What started off as a family feud, was termed a matter of 'national interest' by India's then-finance minister Pranab Mukherjee, who requested the brothers to resolve the dispute privately.



After going to the Supreme Court in 2009 over the gas dispute (the court ruled in Mukesh's favour), Kokilaben once again intervened in May 2010 to broker a peace agreement. Officials of both their companies received notes that said the Ambani brothers would draft a non-compete agreement.



Soon after, Anil withdrew his defamation suit.



Now a few years later, the brothers are often seen together at family functions, and other events.

Reliance Industries Chariman Mukesh Ambani is a name recognised across the globe - from a corner in rural India to a room filled with billionaires in Davos. With a net worth of USD 54 billion, the business tycoon became the first Indian, and only Asian, to break into the global top 10 on Hurun’s Rich List this year, apart from being featured at the 13th spot on Forbes’ Billionaire list – just two of the several coveted lists where the 62-year-old made appearances.Earlier this week, he was named among Time magazine’s 100 most influential people along the likes of Facebook boss Mark Zuckerberg, US President Donald Trump, and former US first lady Michelle Obama. In an introduction about Ambani for the magazine written by Anand Mahindra, who is also his close friend, the auto-maker recalls a time in 2003 when thehead 'promised Indians in a well-known advertising tagline that his company would put the world in the palm of your hand'. Mahindra goes on to write that 'it won’t be long before he delivers on that promise', adding that Reliance could give Amazon ‘a run for its money’.While making headlines is common-day activity for him, it’s not always for his gigantic oil and gas industry – which according to Forbes has a revenue of $60 billion. His twin children, Isha and Akash’s, lavish weddings grabbed international attention, and when he bailed his once-estranged younger brother Anil out by clearing a debt of Rs 453 crore dues in the Ericsson case – business headlines once again featured a family saga.But for the man who has, and seems to be doing, it all, it’s often family first (overlooking his infamous fallout with Anil after the death of their father Dhirubhai Ambani in 2002).Born in Aden, Yemen to Dhirubhai Ambani, who at the time worked as a gas-station attendant, he was the eldest of four children. The family moved to Mumbai when Ambani was 7-years-old, living at the Bhuleshwar neighbourhood in Bombay – those were the simpler days. In the time to come, as Dhirubhai Ambani would go on to form Reliance, a lot would change.The family moved from Bhuleshwar to Usha Kiran at Altamount Road and then to Sea Wind (they currently reside at the extravagant 27-storey Antilia), and Ambani went on to finish his chemical engineering from the University of Bombay, before heading to Stanford University for his MBA – which he left mid-way to join the family business in 1981. Ironically, Ambani’s daughter Isha went on to complete her MBA from Stanford University.In 1985, Mukesh Ambani wed Nayantara Dalal – a school teacher – who, known as Nita Ambani after wedlock, would go on to play an important role both personally and professionally. Theirs was a love story custom-made for Indian cinema, Dhirubhai had spotted Nita at a dance programme and later called her to ask if she would meet his son. During their courtship, Mukesh Ambani would drive his green Fiat for three hours from Patalganga - where the Ambanis were building a plant at the time – to Mumbai to meet his then- fiancée, and eventually popped the question at a busy intersection in Mumbai. The story blossomed in front of the Piramals – who are now their daughter Isha’s in-laws.All along the way, Ambani – who draws a fixed salary Rs 15 crore since 2009 - has kept his friends close. In a 2007 interview to MoneyLIFE, Ambani had said that while from an external perspective his life had changed – but personally he saw consistency.His childhood friend, Anand Jain, who has known him since sixth grade and was often referred to as Dhirubhai's 'third son', was a prominent voice at Reliance (he is no longer actively involved), while college friend, Manoj Modi was often credited with being the man who saw the completion of Reliance’s projects.Even now, as the telecom, retail and energy conglomerate continues to grow, it remains a family-run show, with Ambani often giving the credit of the idea behind Jio to his children.Dishing out some important life and business lessons, Ambani - who has said that 'anything and everything that can go digital is going digital' - had revealed that he learnt in college how it's not just about solving the problems, but rather about first spotting them and then solving them.
