The less-known story of Rahul Gandhi's second constituency Wayanad

(This story originally appeared in on Apr 18, 2019)

On April 4, as Congress president Rahul Gandhi headed towards Kalpetta, headquarters of Wayanad , the district shot to peak online popularity, according to Google Trends.A verdant, undulating patch of God’s own country bordering Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, tucked away in the Western Ghats , the unassuming district at first appears blessed with plenty. From Stone Age petroglyphs and ancient temple ruins to forested hills that are home to Kerala’s largest tribal communities and largest tigers population, Wayanad has had it all. But it took politics to catapult it to national limelight.Under the surface, though, deep problems lurk. Even within Kerala, Wayanad comes with a range of stark contrasts. One of the youngest districts (formed in 1980) and constituencies (established in 2009) in the state, it has among the longest records of human settlement in Kerala, attested by 7,000-year-old rock carvings at Edakkal. Wayanad has also witnessed the highest number of farmer suicides in Kerala, even being called the ‘Vidarbha of the South’.The district is endowed with enviable natural beauty and resources. It’s Kerala’s pepper basket and produces over 80% of the state’s coffee. But Wayanad is the only district in Kerala that finds a place among 115 most backward aspirational districts listed by Niti Aayog A third of the district is under forest cover. Its natural heritage is among India’s most ecologically rich and yet extremely fragile.The otherwise laidback district has started relishing its new-found status as a VVIP constituency. The tourism sector, badly hit by the August 2018 floods, is seeing brisk business with many hotels booked for the next fortnight as politicians and media arrive in large numbers. “Rahul Gandhi’s candidature is going to be a game changer for tourism, just like AB Vajpayee’s visit to Kumarakom in 2000,” said B Anand, secretary of Wayanad District Tourism Promotion Council.But it’s not all postcard-perfect. Behind the lush fields and plantations lie tales of silent suffering and deprivation. Farmers are battling acute distress. The once fertile land has been robbed of its productivity by chemical intensive farming and farmers trying various crops. Farmers make up 90% of the district’s residents.“No other area has seen such frequent changes in crops in 70 years. Farmers who migrated from central Travancore from 1950s onwards initially grew lemon grass, then moved to tapioca, which made way for coffee. Then pepper. Also, paddy cultivation has shrunk from 30,000 hectares 30-40 years ago to 8,000 hectares today. All this has reduced soil fertility, besides causing the water table to fall,” said P U Das, assistant director, soil survey and conservation department.“Five farmer suicides have been reported here in the last seven months. Agriculture is fast becoming unviable. The demonetisation drive during the peak harvest season and last year’s floods have dealt a lethal blow to farmers,” said Rajesh Krishnan, a biotechnologist turned farmer.Wayanad is the point of origin of 13 rivers, making it integral to the water security of both Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Kabini, Wayanad’s major river, drains around 94,000 million cubic feet to Kaveri.“Almost all the problems plaguing the district are because the region’s unique ecology is not considered in policiy-making,” said environmentalist N Badusha. The ecological crisis is largely attributed to deforestation.Far from this debate, Chippy and Kamala, a couple of the Kattunayilla tribe in Ponkuzhi near the Karnataka border, continue with their lives as their ancestors have for thousands of years. They are honey gatherers. They depend solely on the forests for their livelihood. Every day, they go to the forest, offer prayers to their gods and climb trees in search of honey.“Forest produce is dwindling. Last year’s floods impacted honey yield,” Chippy said. Tribals make up 18.5% of the district but suffer from land alienation and poor access to housing, healthcare and education.
