2014 was a mandate for hope and aspiration, 2019 is about confidence and acceleration: Narendra Modi

(This story originally appeared in on Apr 18, 2019)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi exuded confidence about a “massive mandate” when he metamid the ongoing Lok Sabha polls, saying he still sees himself as a “challenger” like in 2014, rather than an incumbent, as he remains committed to combatting corruption, dynasty and terrorism Emphasising his ‘change agent’ image, the PM said, “A ‘chalta hai’ attitude held our nation’s progress hostage for a long time. I am challenging it. Forces of negativity try to obstruct an aspirational India. I am challenging them.”He made light of the SP-BSP alliance in UP, widely seen as the biggest impediment to BJP’s return to office, saying it was an unconvincing combination. “Instead of vision they are busy with division. SP has repeatedly accused BSP of loot and corruption. BSP has repeatedly accused SP of goondaism and bad governance. When there’s so much history between them, how can there be any chemistry?”Asked about the elections turning into a referendum on him, Modi suggested that it had to do with the opposition’s obsession with him. Simultaneously, however, he also said BJP’s projection of his leadership reflected its confidence in the government’s achievements. “It is to BJP’s credit that it has gone to people in the name of Modi government’s track record, and unlike the previous government, the party is not afraid to ask for votes in the name of its leader.”The PM said, “2014 was an election which the Bharatiya Janata Party fought, along with its allies in the NDA. 2019 is an election which is being fought by the Bharatiya Janta (Indian people).”He denied BJP has focused on ‘hyper-nationalism’ after the Balakot air strike to divert attention from ‘real issues’. “You can check any speech of mine. A large portion is dedicated to issues of development. However, it never makes headlines. Talking about real issues, can we consider decades of terrorism and death of our soldiers as not being a ‘real issue’? Deshbhakti is not a disease. Just as hyper-secularism was invented to strike at the root of India’s culture and ethos, similarly the terminology of hyper-nationalism has been invented to portray deshbhakti in poor light.”Asked what he would do differently if re-elected, the PM said, “It would be good if I speak on this after May 23.” Taking a swipe at the “knee-jerk” promises made by the Congress, he said, “My agenda is not built on wishful thinking to get votes. It will take shape on the foundation of a solid economy, entrepreneurial workforce, secured and healthy citizenry, and futuristic infrastructural development.”Modi said he would be relentless in his anti-corruption drive, adding, “The looters have been brought to the gates of prison. The next five years will ensure they go to jail.”Asked about cow vigilantism, ‘awards wapsi’ and charges of ‘intolerance’, the PM said, “My consistent stand has been that nobody should take the law in their own hands. Anybody who indulges in violence will be duly punished…As for democratic values, we belong to that ideology that firmly resisted the Emergency and protected democracy. It is our firm belief that dissent, discussion and debate are an integral part of democracy… As far as the phenomenon of award wapsi and letters of appeal are concerned, there are various organisations driving these campaigns. Many have their operations here but funding sources abroad. They and the Congress are working in tandem, trying to misguide people to spread falsehoods against us and our government.”
