‘Tired of changing houses due to her boyfriend’, says woman who killed her teen daughter

Ghaziabad: A 42-year-old mother, with the help of her son, murdered her 15-year-old daughter over her relationship with a boy. The police officials of Loni Border police station arrested the mother and her 17-year-son for allegedly murdering her daughter and destroying evidence.

The incident came to light when the locals of Sangam Vihar in Ghaziabad’s Loni Border police station area spotted the accused carrying the girl's body on a two-wheeler and alerted the police.

Chand Ansari, one of the complainant told Times of India that while he was sitting at a dairy near his house, a young man came to him and asked if he had seen his yellow plastic bag that contained construction tools. After he left, locals spotted a similar bag on a scooty that belonged to the duo and they were about to leave their house.

Ansari, along with his friends, went closer to the vehicle and saw the body of a girl with her legs tied up inside the plastic bag. Locals also said that the brother of the victim was visibly shaken earlier in the day and was rescued by them when he was found standing on a railway track.

In the meanwhile, locals were mulling what to do next when the boy started his scooty with his mother was seated on the rear seat with the bag contating the corpse. Locals intervened and they asked the duo to stop the vehicle. The duo could not reply to the queries of the crowd and remained mute when questioned.

The accused were arrested and during the course of the interrogation, the woman told that she was upset about constantly changing rented houses and added that she had changed as many as eight houses in the past three months as her daughter would, each time, tell the location of their new house to her boyfriend who would then start visiting her.

Neeraj Kumar Jadaun, superintendent of police (rural) told TOI that the family has a native residence in Mansoorpur, Muzaffarnagar district of western UP, and the mother of the victim was a widow while her son did small chores at a nearby shop to eke out a living.

On the basis of the complaint from Ansari, an FIR was registered against the duo at Loni Border police station and the duo has been booked on charges of murder along with the other relevant Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections for trying to destroy the evidence. The body of the girl had been sent for an autopsy.
