Extreme Brutality: Engineering Student’s Half Burnt Body Found Hanging From Tree In Karnataka

They say that humanity is the true religion of mankind. Perhaps, humanity is dying a slow death. Barbaric and atrocious incidents are coming to light with every passing day. While women safety finds a mention in all political party manifestos, it is a concern only on paper.

Women in different parts of India continue to get brutally assaulted by gangsters. In a heart-wrenching incident, a female engineering student was tortured, raped, burnt to death before she was hung to a tree in Karnataka.

The incident reportedly took place on April 13 when the girl was reported to be missing from her college. The girl who was in her early 20s was found hanging from a tree on April 16; three days after she went missing.

Horrific pictures and videos of the deceased have been surfacing online. The graphic sensitive content has enraged social media users and they are demanding justice for the woman.

Appalled by the barbaric incident of alleged rape & murder of an innocent girl in Raichur. I have directed the DGP to conduct thorough investigation & I assure that impartial investigation will be done into this inhumane incident & the culprits will be brought to justice. — M B Patil (@MBPatil) April 19, 2019

Her body was discovered around 5-6 kms away from the college. According to local media reports, the police claimed that a suicide note was discovered in which it was mentioned that she committed suicide because she scored poorly in examinations and nobody else was responsible for her death.

However, the family has strictly denied that she committed suicide. Some social media users wrote that the killers forced her to write the suicide note. The parents of the girl accused her boyfriend for the ghastly crime. The Raichur SP said the victim's boyfriend had been arrested based on her parents' complaint.

The police have confirmed that she was burnt to death though, they are awaiting the post-mortem report for further investigation.

Raichur: A protest broke out yesterday (18th April), after the murder of a 23-year-old female engineering student who was missing since April 13 and was found dead on April 16. One person has been arrested in connection with the case. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/VBkA458P0v — ANI (@ANI) April 19, 2019

A protest broke out on Thursday at Navodaya Institute of Technology, Raichur to demand justice for the student. A hashtag demanding probe in the matter and to bring media attention to the case was also trending on Twitter.

An online petition on change.org was also started in the name of the girl by a native from Dharwad district in the state. The petition had gathered 1,50,610 signatures by Friday afternoon.

Hundreds of people held a candlelight march in Raichur's Teen Kandil Circle and urged the state government to take required actions against the culprits who claimed her life.
