Rohit Shekhar Tiwari was murdered in inebriated state, likely with pillow: Sources

New Delhi:

Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, the son of former Uttar Pradesh chief minister and Congress stalwart N D Tiwari, died an 'unnatural death' and was probably killed by being smothered with a pillow, according to sources in Delhi Police.

Sources added that the post-mortem report has revealed that Rohit had consumed alcohol before he was murdered.

Meanwhile, the investigation pertaining to Rohit's death has been transferred to the Crime Branch which was registered a murder case under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against unknown people.

Rohit was taken to Delhi’s Max Hospital by his mother where he was declared brought dead. According to police, no external injury marks were observed on his body.

His mother, who was in Max Hospital at that time for her treatment, received a call from home that Rohit was unwell and bleeding from his nose. She took an ambulance that brought Rohit to the hospital.

While the servants at his house told police that he suffered nose bleed, his mother Ujjwala Tiwari claimed that her son died natural death.

"His death is natural. I have no suspicion, but I will reveal later what circumstances led to his death," she had said.

Rohit had fought a six-year-long legal battle to prove that he was ND Tiwari's "biological" son born out of an affair between the former Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand chief minister and his mother Ujjwala. Tiwari married Rohit's mother at the age of 89 in 2014 after Rohit won the paternity suit against him.

Narayan Dutt Tiwari died at the age of 93 on October 18, his birthday, last year. He too was undergoing treatment for age-related complications at the Saket hospital.

The Congress veteran, who had served in various positions at the Centre, was the chief of minister of Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh.

Rohit Tiwari joined the BJP ahead of the 2017 Uttarakhand assembly polls and recently indicated he could join the Congress.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
