Times Now Exclusive: The PM Modi Interview @ 9 PM

PM Narendra Modi during the interview | Photo Credit: Times Now

In his most compelling interview this election season, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has opened up about a number of issues from the decision to field controversial terror-accused Sadhvi Pragya, the impact of DeMo, the I-T raids on political opponents, the SC order on Rafale deal, and his challengers in the context of the 2019 poll.

In the exclusive interview with Rahul Shivshankar, Editor-in-Chief, Times Now, and Navika Kumar, Managing Editor, Times Now, the Prime Minister did not shy away from answering why people should vote for him or the Bharatiya Janata Party, even though many are claiming that the promises made to them in 2014 have not been fulfilled over the past five years.

The Prime Minister was asked if he viewed Rahul Gandhi, Mamata Banerjee, Mayawati, Akhilesh Yadav or N Chandrababu Naidu as his principal challengers; the answer will surprise viewers.

The Prime Minister was further asked whether the BJP-led NDA would stitch new alliances with YS Jaganmohan Reddy and K Chandrasekhar Rao if it fell short of a majority.

#PMModiOnTimesNow will respond to all the questions that you want asked.



Tonight at 9 PM, join @RShivshankar & @navikakumar, as they bring to you the most electorally relevant interview with PM @narendramodi. pic.twitter.com/SbDtgtyHxd — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) April 19, 2019

The PM’s response to the question on whether he believed the ‘Modi magic’ was still visible was very interesting.

The PM also spoke on the question of a controversial alliance between the BJP and the PDP in Jammu and Kashmir and if it had prevented the full integration of the state with India.

The PM came up with a hard rebuttal to claims that his Kashmir policy had failed.

On the sensitive NRC (National Register of Citizenship) issue, the PM shared his views on Amit Shah’s promise that no infiltrator will be allowed to stay in India.

PM’s defence on the decision to give terror-accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur a ticket from Bhopal to contest the Lok Sabha Elections will spark a new debate.

One of the biggest controversies over the past several months has been the Rafale fighter jet deal. The PM spoke on his government’s position regarding classified documents, copies of which have been submitted in the top court by the petitioners. He was asked: If his government was on the defensive and was it trying to suppress facts from the Supreme Court.

The Opposition has been hitting out at the government for misusing the state machinery for targeting their leaders. The PM responded to this charge as well, during the interview, which will elicit sharp responses from those raided.

Further, the PM also shared his views on one of the biggest issues this election – unemployment. He was asked why job creation has not happened at the rate his government had promised.

The question regarding action against the corrupt and accountability in the matter was also put to PM Modi. It was pointed out that Robert Vadra is yet to be charged, while the probe in the AgustaWestland VVIP chopper scam is still dragging. The PM was also quizzed on the uncomfortable question as to why absconders like Vijay Mallya and Nirav Modi were allowed to leave the country in the first place.

Last but not least, the PM spoke on his government’s priority areas if it manages to win a second term.
