Indian woman who defied Kerala temple ban 'beaten by her mother-in-law'

Kanaka Durga, 39, is one of the two women who enraged Hindu right-wing protesters by entering the Sabrimala Temple earlier in January.

A civil servant, Durga said she was attacked by her mother-in-law within minutes of entering her home on Tuesday, after at least two weeks spent in hiding because of threats she received from Hindu extremists.

She said her mother-in-law attacked her with a wooden stick and kept hitting her until she could barely stand. Durga was then thrown out of the house, said the NDTV report.

"She said who is there? When I replied it was me, she came from the kitchen, took a wooden stick and started beating me,” she told reporters after being admitted to a hospital.

“She said I'd slept with many people, they [mother-in-law and husband] didn't want to be at that house and started abusing me."

Durga said she was hit 10 to 12 times on her head and other parts of the body. “I couldn't even stand properly after being hit; still they dragged me out and shut the door."

She did not try to resist her mother-in-law while she was being hit on the head, face and back. "It's really painful and I can barely move."

Kanaka Durga, 39 (L) and Bindu Ammini, 40, the first women to enter Sabarimala temple which traditionally bans the entry of women of menstrual age, pose for a photo after an interview with Reuters at an undisclosed location on the outskirts of Kochi, India, Jan 10, 2019. REUTERS

A case has been filed against her mother-in-law, said the NDTV report.

Jaya Mani, chief of Perinthalmanna police in Kerala’s Malappuram district where the Sabarimala temple is located, told Reuters that her station has Durga’s complaint about being attacked by family members of her husband.

The temple has been the site of tension since the Supreme Court in India ruled on Sept 28 to end the age restriction on women. The court order has not been accepted by the devotees and protesters who believe women should not be allowed near the shrine's deity 'Ayyappa'.

Since the court order, all attempts by women to visit the shrine were blocked by thousands of devotees - until Kanaka Durga and 40-year-old Bindu Ammini entered the shrine with heavy police escorted before daybreak on Jan 2.

Durga met opposition from her family, friends and the police. "I knew my life will be in danger but I still wanted to go into the temple. We are proud that we have made it easier for women who want to go to Sabarimala now," she had told NDTV after her daring visit.

"It's about devotion but it's also about gender equality," she said.

After their visit, there were widespread protests in Kerala and a day-long strike led by right-wing groups and in part by members of the ruling BJP and the Congress.
