Provided jobs to more than 100 pilots, cabin crew, technical staff who lost due to closure of Jet Airways: SpiceJet CMD

Following the suspension of cash-strapped Jet Airways flight operations, SpiceJet Managing Director and Chairman Ajay Singh Friday said that the airline is giving first to those who have lost their jobs due to the closure of Jet Airways.

In a statement issued by Chairman and Managing Director, Ajay Singh said, "As we expand and grow, we are giving first preference to those who have recently lost their jobs due to the unfortunate closure of Jet Airways. We have already provided jobs to more than 100 pilots, more than 200 cabin crew and more than 200 technical and airport staff."

"We will do more. We will also induct a large number of planes in our fleet soon. SpiceJet is making all possible efforts to minimise passenger inconvenience and serve Indian customers who are finding it difficult to get seats in this busy season."

Apart from SpiceJet, Air India is also planning to include Jet Airways planes to its fleet.

The cash-strapped airline stopped all flight operations indefinitely on Wednesday evening after a consortium of lenders led by government-owned State Bank of India declined to extend more funds to keep it afloat.

"The lenders after due deliberations decided that the best way forward for the survival of Jet Airways is to get the binding bids from potential investors who have expressed expression of interest (EOI) and have been issued bid documents on April 16," the consortium said in a statement.

"Lenders are reasonably hopeful that the bid process is likely to be successful in determining fair value of the enterprise in a transparent manner," it said.

The carrier with roughly 1.2 billion dollars (about Rs 8,350 crore) of bank debt has been battling for survival amid bruising competition from low-cost carriers like IndiGo and SpiceJet, which are expanding their fleet size and network operations.

The shortfall in seat capacity and booming demand has pushed up airfares by 30 to 40% since September, according to rating agency ICRA.

Jet Airways shares plunged over 27% on Thursday over doubts whether the grounded Indian airline will fly again. At 12:30 pm, Jet shares were trading 27.06% down at Rs 176.40 each. Reports said the company's worth is now estimated at about 260 million dollars (about Rs 1,808 crore).
