'Hemant Karkare would never resort to torturing suspects', former IPS officer responds to Pragya Thakur

Hemant Karkare Memorial (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: November 29, 2008, was a day no Indian citizen can possibly forget. It was the day security forces put their own lives on the line to rid India's economic capital, the city of Mumbai from ten members of terrorist group Lashkar-e-Taiba. The audacity with which terrorists targeted innocent civillians triggered widespread global outrage. During the terror attack which lasted for almost 74 hours, the terrorists murdered 165 Indian citizens, including civillians and security personnel.

Among those who laid down their lives to protect the city of Mumbai was Maharashtra Anti-Terrorist Squad (ATS) chief Hemant Karkare who was awarded the Ashoka Chakra (posthumously) on January 26, 2009. An Indian Police Service (IPS) officer of the 1982 batch, Karkare was gunned down by terrorists Ajmal Kasab and Ismail Khan who opened fire at a Qualis occupied by officers Vijay Salaskar, Ashok Kamte, Hemant Karkare and four other constables. It has often been reported that as the head of the ATS, Karkare could have monitored the situation from the control room but instead chose to protect his city on the front lines.

We demand that BJP withdraws Sadhvi #PragyaSinghThakur's ticket and candidature immediately. Election Commission should ban her from contesting in #LokSabhaElections2019 @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/Ba2syvkjN3 — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 19, 2019

(The police van in which Vijay Salaskar, Hemant Karkare, Ashok Kamthe and two constables killed by two terrorists near Rang Bhavan, behind St Xavier Corporation Bank ATM)

Earlier today, Pragya Singh Thakur, the Bharatiya Janata Party's (BJP) candidate from the capital city of Madhya Pradesh compared Karkare to 'Raavan' and claimed that it was her curse which led to his death. An accused in the Malegaon Blasts, Thakur was interrogated by Karkare who was the lead investigator of the case. Thakur went even further to claim that she was tortured during interrogation and coerced to confess. Barely minutes after her statement prompted outrage from all sections of the society, the party which has fielded her from Bhopal distanced itself from her statement, claiming that it was her personal stance.

Why has the BJP not taken any action against #PragyaSinghThakur for saying something so hurtful to the citizens of this country, if you really believe in zero tolerance towards terror?



How much more should we put up with?@fayedsouza questions BJP's @AnilaSingh_BJP pic.twitter.com/TMgQgK1VFo — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 19, 2019

It is worth noting that the case against Pragya Thakur is still being heard by a special CBI court. In her plea for a special bail, Thakur claimed that she has breast cancer and demanded bail in order to gain easy access to 'ayurvedic medicine' for her ailment. However, it has also been reported by sections of the media that Thakur herself confessed to charges of murder and criminal conspiracy among others, however, her confession is now missing. In fact, she herself withdrew her statement against Karkare with a barely timid response, claiming that her statement was empowering 'enemy forces'.

#HemantKarkare faced 3 bullets in his chest and sacrificed his life. He was a brave soldier: Senior Journalist, @ashutosh83B to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/LBy5t9okkp — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 19, 2019

Former IPS officer Sudhakar Suradkar told Mirror Now, "The way allegations are being made against Hemant Karkare is wrong, he never tortured anyone, he did not even allow his men to do anything illegal." The officer who worked closely with the late Hemant Karkare further said that police officers never resort to third-degree with suspects such as Pragya Thakur. "Hemant would never do it, he investigated by the book," added Suradkar.

We should all rise above caste & religion and take action against a terrorist. The way an alleged terrorist is being promoted and protected is not the way to deal with terror: Former IPS Officer, Sudhakar Suradkar to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/sdehPImOsP — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 19, 2019

While the Election Commission of India (ECI) has taken note of Pragya's condemnable comments, no action has been taken either by the polling body or the political party which is fielding a candidate who is a terror accused and is out on special bail on the pretext of cancer medication.
