Jalandhar: Two murder cases solved; 1 held, NRI booked

JALANDHAR: Jalandhar Rural police on Friday announced to solve two murder cases by arresting the accused.SSP Navjot Singh Mahal said that killer of a priest in Baba Balak Nath Mandir, in Kartarpur town was arrested on Thursday late night from Rattangarh city in Rajasthan . The accused has been identified as Bhupinder Singh alias Vicky of Bhagwati Nagar, Jammu. The cops have also recovered the weapon was used in stabbing the priest during the intervening night of April 7 and 8.SSP added that during investigation, while checking the CCTV footage of Gurdwara Nanded in Maharashtra and on asking from the local persons, it was found that he had visited the place but before the police party reached to nab him, he moved to other place. Then a police party led by Inspector Ram Singh arrested Bhupinder on Thursday at 10pm from outside a dhaba in city Rattangarh of District Churu, Rajasthan.Mahal told that in preliminary interrogation, the accused revealed he and his family members were devotees of the priest and he used to visit Baba Balak Nath Mandir, Kartarpur. Priest Balvir was assuring him that he would get the job and would also get married soon. He alleged that priest was making false assurances.The accused told the police that on April 7 late night, he came to meet the priest at the temple and in the wee hours on April 8, he again asked priest when would he get married and the priest repeated the assurance. He told his interrogators that priest asked him to keep faith in him but he got angry and stabbed the priest many times with a knife.In the second case of a minor girl whose body was found dumped in village Hussainabad of Nakodar sub-division of the district was also solved. SSP said that on March 8 Sucha Singh of village Hussainabad informed the police that his minor daughter had left the house at 7:30pm without informing anybody. On April 12, a decomposed dead body of minor girl was recovered from an abandoned well situated in the fields of Iqbal Singh resident of Hussainabad. From the medical report, it was established that the girl was murdered by strangulation.He said that during the probe, it was found that Surjit Singh alias Dhesi of Husainabad was in contact with the girl and he returned from Italy a short time ago. The girl used to force him to marry her following which Surjit manhandled and strangulated her and threw her body in an abandoned village in Hussainabad and returned to Italy. Surjit has been nominated as accused in the case and further investigation is carried out.
