“I’m hoping that the fallacy that India is salvation for the sick is changed” – Emma Ugolee narrates how His Sister’s Donor Kidney was Swapped During Surgery

Earlier the week, a Twitter user @tobi_marshal_ shared how his mum died “as a result of medical negligence and malpractice from a hospital in India”.

His mum was diagnosed of degenerative Lumber canal stenosis with instability and scoliosis at L4-5 & L3-4, he shared.

He narrated how he was “lured” from a Nigerian hospital to India where he claimed his family was deceived that they were going to spend a maximum of $10,000.

He shared how after the surgery, his mum was still sick and they were told she had bacterial meningitis and multiple strokes. They were later told she had an infection in the

“You see I type this message with soo much pain as pray for my mother they made her go through a lot and they were unbothered I came to the realization that my mum wasn’t only the victim. I had visited a lawyer in India and he told me he had several cases from Nigerians about hospitals there in India and that there was a case that was exactly the same with my mother and he showed me proof and I was soo sad. Please my point here is I want to tell Nigerians that India is not safe to do surgeries and treatment they extort soo much money from us and still use us as lab rats,” he wrote.

You can read the full story here.

A couple of other users also corroborate his story:

This is just sad! However, it’s nothing new. I’m not going to go into long sermon of how Nigerian leaders have failed the health sector. Become a vocal advocate, help dissuade Nigerians from going to India. The money you guys spent in India would have treated her in the US or UK! — Peter E. Edwards (@efe_edwards) April 18, 2019

On Friday, media personality Emma Ugolee who had battled kidney disease, corroborated @tobi_marshal_’s story, sharing how his sister’s kidney was swapped at an Indian hospital.

His sister was supposed to donate her kidney to him, but he got another kidney instead, and had to battle for his life after the complications began.

He wrote:
