Congress stalwart N D Tiwari’s son Rohit Tiwari strangled to death: Police

NEW DELHI: Three days after the death of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, the son of former Congress stalwart N.D. Tiwari, the autopsy report revealed that his death was “unnatural”. Police sources claimed that he was most probably killed either by strangulation or by smothering with a pillow.

The autopsy reports reveals the unnatural death. The 40-year-old Rohit Tiwari, was earlier said to have died due to cardiac arrest.

The district police has transferred to the Crime Branch of the Delhi police which has registered a case of murder and initiated a probe.

The autopsy report, whi-ch came on late Thursday night, suggests that the cause of death is unnatural.

“Following the postmortem at All India Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), police on Thursday registered acase of murder and transferred it to the Crime Branch for probe, a senior police officer said.

The autopsy was conducted by a medical board comprising five senior doctors of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).

“The medical board unanimously concluded that the cause of death in this case is asphyxia as a result of strangulation or smothering. It is a sudden unnatural death, placed in the category of homicide,” the head of the AIIMS’ forensic department, said Dr Sudhir Gupta.

Crime Branch officials on Friday visited Rohit Shekhar’s house in Defence Colony and questioned his family members and domestic helps. His wife Apoorva is currently not in Delhi. A forensics team too visited the house.

Police sources said that there are seven CCTV cameras — of which two don’t work - in Rohit Shekhar’s house.

“Rohit had gone to Uttarakhand to vote on April 12 and returned on the night of April 15. He could be seen on CCTV taking support of the wall while walking in an inebriated state,” police sources added.

Police sources said that they are scanning call records of Rohit, his wife, relatives and few others who were in regular touch with him also. They are also trying to reconstruct last seven days of his life and the person whom he met for the last before breathing his last.
