In 24 hours, five killed in three separate road accidents in Delhi

One was crushed under DTC bus; arrests made in all three cases, say police

Five persons have been killed in three separate road accidents in the Capital within 24 hours, the police said on Friday. Arrests have been made in all the three cases, they said.

In one of the incidents, which was reported in the early hours of Friday, three persons were killed and their friend sustained injuries when the autorickshaw they were travelling in toppled over in south-east Delhi’s New Friends Colony.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (South-East) Chinmoy Biswal said that the victims have been identified as Ashok (18), Devraj (23), and Ram Singh (40). Amar Singh, the friend of the deceased sustained injuries. One Vijender alias Kale has been arrested in connection with the case.

“The police received a call around 1.15 a.m. and when they reached the spot, opposite to the CRRI gate, they found an autorickshaw that had met with the accident. The injured persons were taken to Apollo Hospital in a PCR van,” Mr. Biswal said.

Three of them were declared brought dead at the hospital. Mr. Amar told the police that they all worked with a caterer company and were returning from Jaitpur to their residence in Nehru Nagar after working at a function. “He said that the driver was speeding and when they were on Mathura Road, the driver allegedly took out a cloth and started cleaning the front glass due to which he lost control of the control. He hit the divider and the auto toppled over,” Mr. Biswal said, adding that the driver had fled the spot but was later arrested.

In the second incident, a 24-year-old Industrial Training Institute student lost his life after he was crushed under a DTC bus after being hit by a speeding bike in south-east Delhi’s Nizamuddin on Thursday afternoon, the police said.

Mr. Biswal said that the victim has been identified as Honey Meena, a resident of Madangir. The driver identified as Naval Kishore Meena has been arrested, he added.

The deceased’s maternal uncle, Shiv Kumar, said that Honey and his friend Amjad were going to buy lunch. They were crossing the road around 12 p.m. when Honey was hit by a bike. “He fell down after being hit and then was crushed under a speeding DTC bus. His friend had already crossed the road by then,” Mr. Kumar said.

Mr. Biswal also said that while Honey was rushed to the hospital, a group of students gathered and cordoned the bus. The driver was rescued and sent to the police station.

Honey is survived by his father Suresh who works at a sofa repair shop, his mother Maya and elder brother Prashant who is also a student. The family said that Honey was working part time and was about to complete his industrial training.

In the third incident, a worker, identified as Bharat (24), a resident of Ghaziabad, was killed around 10 p.m. on Thursday night in north-east Delhi’s Harsh Vihar.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (North-East) Atul Thakur said that Bharat was sitting on a tractor loaded with bricks and fell off the vehicle as it jerked and came under the wheels. The driver, identified as Abhay Singh, has been arrested, Mr. Thakur said.
