High Court seeks report on eight-year-old murder case trial

From State govt and a Karkardooma trial court by May 17

The Delhi High Court has sought a report from the city government and a Karkardooma trial court on a murder case proceeding which has not been concluded for over eight years.

Justice Sangita Dhingra Sehgal sought a status report from the State government and a report from the court concerned that is hearing the murder case, by the next date of hearing on May 17.

The court’s direction came on the plea of the father of the victim, who was 22-year-old and was studying in Delhi University when he was allegedly killed.

Trial not concluded

In the plea filed though advocate Pritish Sabharwal, the father contended that the trial of the case which began on September 2011 has not been concluded since the last eight years.

“Since the initiation of the trial and recording of evidence, most of the prosecution witnesses, including the star witness, have turned hostile. Few of them have died,” Mr. Sabharwal said.

Contending that the rights of the father of the victim has been “greatly prejudiced”, the plea has sought direction of the Karkardooma court to expedite and conclude the trial in a fixed time frame.

The case dates back to July 12, 2010 when a witness saw the victim standing at a bus station being kidnapped by the accused persons in a car. Later, he was brought dead at GTB Hospital.

On the basis of the information provided by the witness, a chargesheet was filed in October 2010 and a supplementary chargesheet in January 2011.

‘No substantial hearing’

The plea said that the trial is pending before a Karkardooma court since then. It added that since the last 37 dates, the matter has been listed for different purposes of hearing but no substantial hearing took place.

“The matter has been repeatedly re-listed on the grounds of exemption application being moved and have been granted, on the non-availability of concerned public prosecutor and due to non-availability of the counsel of the accused persons,” the plea added.
