Cheat India to Why Cheat India, Padmavati to Padmaavat: 5 original film titles changed upon objection by CBFC

5 times original film titles that were changed by the CBFC | Photo Credit: Instagram

After going through major cuts and a significant change in the movie's title, Emraan Hashmi starrer Why Cheat India is scheduled to release this Friday. The film directed by Soumik Sen is going to be the Hamari Adhuri Kahani actor's debut as a co-producer.

A week ahead of its release, the title of the movie based on the cheating mafia in the Indian Education system, was changed from Cheat India after a 'Why' was added ahead of the original title. The actors and the makers of the movie were left fuming at the last minute change but reportedly had no option other than complying.

But this was clearly not the first time the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) expressed its objection against the title of a movie and got it changed. Let's take a look at some of such other films, titles of which had to be changed upon Censor Board's command.

Padmaavat: 2018's biggest controversial release, the Deepika Padukone, Ranveer Singh and Shahid Kapoor starrer released after major setbacks from Karni Sena. One of the other hurdles that the Sanjay Leela Bhansali film had to face was a change from the title Padmavati to Padmaavat.

Loveyatri: The title was changed to this from Loveratri following a complaint that it hurt the religious sentiments of the Hindu community as the word rhymed with their festival Navratri.

Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela: Before Padmaavat, Sanjay Leela Bhansali was in legal trouble for hurting the religious sentiments of the Hindu community with the initial title of the Ranveer- Deepika starrer, which was Ramleela.

R...Rajkumar: The movie was initially supposed to be released as Rambo Rajkumar but ran into copyright trouble with makers of Hollywood series Rambo that starred Sylvester Stallone. Also Read | Emraan Hashmi’s Cheat India is now Why Cheat India, courtesy the CBFC

Billu: The star-studded movie with power-packed performances by Shah Rukh Khan, Irfan Khan, Lara Dutta, Priyanka Chopra, Deepika Padukone and Kareena Kapoor was originally titled Billu Barber. The filmmakers were given a choice to replace the term 'barber' with 'hairdresser' after drawing backlash from the association of hair stylists in India but director Priyadarshan dropped the word altogether.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month. Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
