Ex-lover planned to kill his friend a week ago

VADODARA: The detection of crime branch (DCB) nabbed Priyakant Solanki from the city a day after he brutally murdered his paramour and her mother. Solanki, who admitted to his crime of passion, was arrested from Sardar Estate on Friday afternoon when he had gone there to borrow money from a friend.Jaydeepsinh Jadeja, DCP (crime), said the victim Payal Palkar, 21, had filed an application in Karelibaug and Bapod police station against Solanki accusing him of harassing her. “Solanki was in relationship with Payal who got married to one Mahendra Palkar. For the past 15 days, the victim had stopped taking Solanki’s calls and had also asked him not to contact her. This irked Solanki who kept trying to meet her but to no avail,” he said.Jadeja said Solanki formed up plans to kill Payal about a week ago. “He went to Fagvel in Kheda and got a agricultural tool. He knew that she would be at her mother’s home at that time early on Thursday morning, and so went there. He first got into verbal duel with Payal, who too shouted back at him. When Payal asked him to leave the place, Solanki attacked her with the sharp tool, slashing her throat,” he said.At this, Payal’s mother Jayashree, 50, tried to intervene and Solanki hit her on her head. Both Payal and Jayashree died on the spot. Solanki then fled the spot on his motorbike which he had parked nearby. “The accused first went to Jambusar to a relative’s place where he changed clothes. But as he had only Rs 20 with him, he began calling up friends seeking money,” Jadeja said.Solanki did not carry his mobile phone and so he had to stop random passers-by saying he wasn’t feeling well and so wanted their cellphones to call up his relatives.On Thursday night, a desperate Solanki returned to the city and spent the entire night in an open field near Gotri canal. On Friday, he was again calling up his friend when the cops learnt about it and set a trap. Solanki told the cops that Payal had promised to marry him and that he lost his cool when she refused to keep any relationship with him.Interestingly, Solanki tried to frame a common friend, Kartik, by telling cops that the latter was involved in the crime. But the police could not find any prima facie evidence against Kartik. Cops reconstructed the entire crime scene at Payal’s home on Friday morning.
