The jury is out on forgotten post-mortem of constable

police constable Pramod Devkule

accident

BMC-run Rajawadi Hospital

Devkule’s bike was hit from behind in Ghatkopar on March 13

post-mortem report

Sion Hospital

KEM Hospital

Police didn’t order autopsy when Pramod Devkule died of head injuries after being hit by a speeding car; some forensic experts say lack of report might weaken the case and become a hurdle in claiming insurance, others say it’s unnecessary when cause of death is known.The Pant Nagar police are in a tight spot over forgetting to ask for post-mortem of, who succumbed to head injuries on April 16, almost a month after his bike was hit by a speeding car on 90 Feet Road in Ghatkopar East. Feeling that a postmortem report is mandatory to claiminsurance and strengthen the case against the accused, the police are now seeking advice from forensic experts. While some experts are saying that an autopsy report rules out foul play, others feel that it’s redundant in cases where cause of death is known.All that the cops have for now is the cause of death as specified by doctors from Wockhardt Hospital in Mumbai Central, where Devkule was being treated for close to a month. Wockardt, however, is a private hospital and cannot conduct postmortem; it can only be done at a municipal or a government-run hospital.Devkule’s bike was hit by a speeding car from behind at Shiveneri Chowk at 3.30 am on March 13. The impact of the accident was so strong that he was thrown about seven metres away on to a pavement and was critically injured. Attached to Versova police station, Devkule, 38, was rushed by passers-by to. In need of neurosurgery, he was later shifted to Wockhardt Hospital, where he battled for life for over a month. Though the driver of the car, Amit Akhtar Shaikh, 20, was arrested for rash and negligent driving, he has now been charged under section 304 (culpable homicide not amounting to murder) of the Indian Penal Code. Devkule is survived by his parents, wife and two daughters. The family performed the last rites in Sangli.According to cops, it is a medicolegal case and insurance claim cannot be processed without a. Also, the case against the accused might weaken without the report. Dr Parag Rindani, associate vice-president of Wockhardt Hospital, told Mirror that due procedure was followed in the case and the investigating officer was informed of all the developments, including Devkule’s demise on April 16. However, he has no clue why the police didn’t ask a municipal hospital to conduct post-mortem. “The victim was brought in critical condition and had suffered head injuries. We tried our best to save him but unfortunately couldn’t. We handed over the victim’s mortal remains to his family in the presence of cops with all the required documents,” said Dr Rindani.While Dr Rajesh Dere, head of forensic department of, felt that an autopsy report confirms the nature of injuries to claim accident insurance and is also given weightage in the court of law, Dr Harish Pathak, the head of forensic department at, is of the opinion that it’s not mandatory in medico-legal cases where the cause of death is known. Even Dr Shailesh Mohite, head of the forensic department of Nair Hospital, felt that an autopsy report rules out foul play and negligence in the death of the accident victim. “In several firearm injuries and murder cases, accident victims are admitted in private hospitals for months. But after they succumb, a post-mortem is always conducted to confirm the injuries,” he said.“As per section 174 of CrPC, is an accident victim was admitted in the hospital for a long time and the doctors are in a position to give the cause of death, lack of post-mortem report will not affect the case and the insurance claim. In fact, in India post-mortem is conducted unnecessarily in every medico-legal case,” said Dr Pathak. Deputy Commissioner of Police Akhilesh Singh also said the police have enough evidence against the accused and doesn’t feel the need for a postmortem report.
