Morning digest: Electoral bonds benefited BJP the most, traders slam govt. for suspension of cross-LoC trade, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day.

A break-up of donations made to two major national parties, the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Congress, and revealed in their audited annual statements for the last two fiscals shows that the implementation of the electoral bonds scheme has substantially reduced the cash component of donations.

The trader community is the backbone of the economy, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said here on Friday, adding that the government stood in support of the country’s traders and would create bodies to address all their problems.

The constituency which has been chosen by the BJP as its launchpad in Kerala is witnessing a three-way contest of Hindutva, Hinduism, and communism. Varghese K. George finds that the intense churn offers newer opportunities for political mobilisation

Bharatiya Janata Party leader Raman Singh speaks at his Raipur residence about his party’s electoral prospects, combating anti-incumbency and naxalism.

Traders and politicians in Kashmir have criticised the government over the sudden suspension of cross-Line of Control trade, which the government said had been triggered by issues including illegal trade of U.S.-origin California almonds, funneling of counterfeit currency, and the funding and promotion of terror groups and anti-India operations though the trade.

A study commissioned by the Union Water Resources Ministry to probe the “unique properties” of the Ganga found that the river water contains a significantly higher proportion of organisms with antibacterial properties.

Amid widespread outrage over the BJP’s Bhopal candidate, Pragya Singh Thakur’s derogatory commentsabout 26/11 martyr Hemant Karkare, the Congress on Friday demanded an apology from Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

First coined in 1945, the words ‘chemist’ and ‘druggist’ are headed for a change, with the Union Health Ministry replacing them with ‘pharmacy’. Besides being a long-standing demand of the industry, a senior health official explained that the phrase ‘chemists and druggists’ was coined over seven decades ago, is quite old, and has lost its relevance in the current scenario.

The threat to life was real. Every time a batsman went in to bat in the pre-helmet era, he was putting his life at risk. Wearing protective headgear has altered the craft of batting, but the fundamentals remain as relevant and important as ever

Pragya Singh Thakur may not be the first person to contest in an election despite facing serious charges, but her candidacy on behalf of the BJP in the Bhopal Lok Sabha constituency stands out as exceptionally controversial. She is arraigned as the prime accused and principal conspirator behind the September 2008 blast at Malegaon, in which six persons were killed. In other words, a person accused of a ‘terrorist act’ and against whom charges have been framed under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act is being fielded as a candidate, by a party that wants to underscore its anti-terrorism credentials.
