Some will go to Hotwar, some to Tihar jail if Modi voted to power: Raghubar Das

Chief minister Raghubar Das on Friday hammered the opposition parties for carrying the sole agenda of ‘Modi Hatawo’ (remove Modi) saying their corrupt leaders know that some of them will go to Hotwar and some to Tihar jails in Ranchi and New Delhi if Modi were voted to power again.

Das’ attack on opposition parties came during his election rallies at Bhawnathpur and Banshidhar Nagar in Palamu parliamentary constituency from where BJP’s VD Ram is contesting elections for second consecutive term.

The chief minister said, “The leaders of grand alliance of opposition parties are uttering a single sentence ‘Modi Hatawo’ because they are corrupt and they know that some of them will go to Hotwar jail in Ranchi and some to Tihar jail in Delhi if Modi were voted to power again.”

BJP’s VD Ram is up against Rashtriya Janata Dal’s Ghuran Ram who is a joint candidate of the opposition grand alliance. Ghuram Ram had won Palamu Lok Sabha by-election in 2006 on RJD ticket.

Urging the people to be alert and vote for BJP, Das said the opposition parties wanted to bring lantern era in Palamu.

“Lantern (election symbol of the RJD) has now been replaced by electricity. The double engine governments of the BJP at the centre and the state has brought cheers in Palamu which has been set free from Maoist menace. Last four and half years is marked with unprecedented development in this backward region,” Das said.

He added that the Prime Minister Narendra Modi in early this year had laid foundations of several irrigational projects worth Rs 1059 crore in drought prone Palamu. “Within two years, people will start getting water in their fields as well as in their houses,” he said.

Reminding the people of the numerous schemes brought by the centre and the state governments for poor and downtrodden, the chief minister said that the government was spending Rs 1200 crore granted by 14th finance commission for three specific purposes in villages.

“The money will be utilized for setting up street lights, overhead water tanks and paver block roads in 32,000 villages across the state. Work will commence soon after declaration of general election results on May 23,” Das said.

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
