PM Modi does not know the difference between Balakot and Bagalkot, says Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy

Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy | Photo Credit: ANI

Bangalore: Responding to PM Narendra Modi’s latest jibe aimed at the Congress-JD(S) alliance when while addressing a rally in north Karnataka he had asked whether Congress and the JD(S) vote bank is in Bagalkot or Balakot Kumaraswamy said that the PM does not know the difference between the two.

In an interview with ANI Kumaraswamy attacked the PM for using Balakot air strike incident for political gains in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections.

Comparing his father HD Deve Gowda's ten-month-long tenure as the Prime Minister of India with PM Narendra Modi’s reign Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy said that his father’s term was much better than PM Modi's as far as the country's internal security is concerned.

Kumaraswamy further said that when his father was the PM the country was peaceful as there was not even a single terror attack.

Janata Dal-Secular supremo Deve Gowda was the Prime Minister of the country for less than a year from June 1, 1996, to April 21, 1997.

Giving the example of Jammu and Kashmir Kumaraswamy said that the valley was calm when his father was the PM and there was no bomb blast in the state. On Pakistan, he said that there was no clash with the neighbouring country and things were calm at the border.

"He can speak but misusing his office is wrong. In this country, several Prime Ministers came. Several times the India-Pakistan war took place. Nobody has taken advantage of those issues for their personal benefits," ANI quoted him as saying.

Answering a question as to why he broke down at an event in Bengaluru recently, the CM said that he wept because he is a very emotional and sensitive man.

“I am always looking at the mood of the people. I was a little bit upset, so I wept in the beginning,” he said.

Making a pitch for Congress president Rahul Gandhi as the PM, Kumaraswamy said that if Rahul Gandhi becomes the PM then the JDS supremo will advise him to run a good administration as he is an experienced person and is better than everybody.

Responding to PM Modi's sharp attack over "dynastic" politics in the Congress-JD(S) alliance, Kumaraswamy said that people want us and are demanding our family members to contest that’s why it is not an issue.

He also said that because of the pressure from the people and party workers the party had to field family members in the poll.

The final phase of Lok Sabha polling in Karnataka will take place on April 23, while the first phase of polling took place on April 18. The counting of votes will take place on May 23.
