Jalandhar: Police claim to have solved two murder cases

JALANDHAR: Jalandhar rural police on Friday claimed to have solved two murder cases by arresting the accused.SSP Navjot Singh Mahal said that killer of a priest in Baba Balak Nath temple in Kartarpur town was arrested on Thursday late night from Rattangarh city in Rajasthan . The accused has been identified as Bhupinder Singh alias Vicky of Bhagwati Nagar, Jammu. The cops have also recovered the weapon which the accused used to stab the priest on April 7 night.The SSP added that during investigation they checked the CCTV footage of Nanded gurdwara in Maharashtra and showed Bhupinder’s photograph to local persons there. Police found that he had visited the place but before the police party reached there, he got away. Finally, a police party led by inspector Ram Singh arrested Bhupinder 10pm on Thursday outside a dhaba in Rattangarh, Rajasthan.Mahal told that in preliminary interrogation, the accused revealed he and his family members were devotees of the priest and he used to visit the Baba Balak Nath temple. Priest Balvir was assuring him that he would get the job and would also get married soon. He alleged that priest was making false assurances.The accused told the police that on April 7 late night, he came to meet the priest at the temple and in the wee hours on April 8, he again asked priest that when he would get married and the priest repeated the assurance. He told his interrogators that priest asked him to keep faith in him but he got angry and stabbed the priest many times with a knife.In the second blind murder case of a minor girl, whose body was found dumped in village Hussainabad of Nakodar sub-division of the district, was also solved. SSP said that on March 8, Sucha Singh of village Hussainabad informed the police that his minor daughter had left the house on March 8 around 7.30pm without informing anybody. On April 12, a decomposed dead body of minor girl was recovered from an abandoned well situated in the fields of Iqbal Singh resident of Hussainabad. From the medical report, it was established that the girl was murdered by strangulation.He said that during the probe, it was found that Surjit Singh alias Dhesi of Husainabad was in contact with the girl and he returned from Italy a short time ago. The girl used to force him to marry her follow which Surjit manhandled her and strangulated her and threw her body in an abandoned village in Hussainabad and returned to Italy, SSP said adding Surjit had been nominated as accused in the case and further investigation was being carried out.
