BJP insulting martyrs like Karkare, says Owaisi

Hyderabad, April 19 : AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi on Friday alleged that the BJP is insulting martyrs like police officer Hemant Karkare who died fighting terrorists during the Mumbai 26/11 attack.

Reacting strongly to Malegaon blast accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur's remark that former Mumbai Anti-Terrorist Squad chief Hemant Karkare had treated her badly and died because of her "curse", Owaisi, in a tweet, said: "Hemant Karkare died fighting people not very different from yourself.

"He didn't die because a terror accused 'felt bad' & 'cursed' him. The man died fighting to protect our rights to vote & elect a government How dare BJP insult our martyrs like this?"

Thakur, the prime accused in 2008 Malegaon bomb blast case, alleged that Karkare falsely implicated her in the case.

Karkare was heading the probe into the blast that killed six people and injured over 100. The Maharashtra Anti-Terrorism Squad (ATS) had arrested Thakur and others belonging to a Hindu extremist group on October 24, 2008.

A little over a month later, Karkare was killed while fighting terrorists who had attacked Mumbai.

ates. Whether Lalu has taken permission of the court to distribute the party symbol?" Kumar said.

The JD-U leader said that he has urged the CEC to take action in this connection.

Lalu had reportedly distributed the RJD symbol to the candidates after the party authorised him to do so.

The Rashtriya Janata Dal is contesting on 19 out of the 40 Lok Sabha seats in the state as per the seat sharing formula of the opposition grand alliance.

Lalu was convicted in three fodder scam cases in December 2017 and January 2018 and was awarded 14 years imprisonment. He has applied for bail in the Supreme Court.

Lalu Prasad, as President of the RJD, is entitled to distribute the party symbol. He is currently undergoing treatment at the Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS) in Ranchi.

Earlier, a PIL was filed in the Patna High Court questioning the legitimacy of the distribution of the party symbol by Lalu Prasad who, the PIL stated, could not hold the post after being convicted in corruption cases.
