Azim Premji varsity student brutally thrashed, stripped, urinated upon and robbed

Bengaluru, Jan 17: In a horrific incident, an undergraduate student of Azim Premji University in Bengaluru was brutally assaulted after being abducted by three miscreants who were under the influence of narcotics and alcohol. The 21-year-old was also stripped naked, branded, spat on, urinated upon and robbed off his possessions by the assailants.

The incident took place on January 14 at around 7pm when the student was walking from his hostel to a bus stop on Sarjapura road, nearly 1.5 km from his university. He had missed the university shuttle bus, and was headed to meet his friends for dinner.

“I noticed three men coming towards me, one of them tall. All three were swaying and walking, as if they were under the influence of narcotics or alcohol. One of them bumped into me, and started randomly abusing me. Then, they all started assaulting me for no reason whatsoever,” the victim said.

“There was no provocation or even resistance from me. I was trying to remain calm and looking for a chance to flee. The tall man whom the others called Shiva, and another short man, turned really aggressive and dragged me to a field nearby. The trio abused me in a mix of Kannada and Hindi,” he added.

The student was unsure if he can raise an alarm fearing the miscreants could even kill him. It was a dark and isolated spot. The trio then started stripping him. Meanwhile, Shiva got hold of the victim’s phone, smart watch and wallet containing his debit cards and other identity cards. They didn’t even spare his clothes or shoes.

In the ordeal that lasted almost 20 minutes, the trio lit up some plastic which was lying around, and using the molten plastic, they branded him on his thighs, back, hands and legs, burning his jeans as well. They sprinkled marijuana on him, spat and even urinated on his body.

“While Shiva was being aggressive, the other two men were having fun watching my plight,” said the victim. The trio continued to assault and humiliate him who had lost consciousness by then.

When the victim gained consciousness, he found himself lying naked in a field. His hands were tied with his belt, and his legs bound with his jeans. He had to hop his way to an under-construction building nearby, where he was shooed away by the security guards. Later, a Good Samaritan noticed him, gave him a jacket, and informed the police.

Further on, a police van dropped him to his hostel after which he was taken to a hospital. The following morning, the victim’s father, lodged a complaint at the Sarjapura police station.

“Even after the brutal attack that night, my brave son spoke about rising social disparity and what the rapid urbanisation has done to the city which is in fact the trigger to such incidents,” said the victim’s father who wished to remain anonymous. “I am sure, my son will pull through this easily,” he added.

“The university has been supportive after the ordeal with frequent follow ups. We deeply appreciate and acknowledge their support,” said the victim’s father.
