The A-Z of vote 2019

Nandita Sengupta is a senior editor with The Times of India. Her blog aims to be mainly about all matters women, which includes men on occasion. Share your ideas with her on nandita.sengupta@timesgroup.com and please keep comments and feedback civil. LESS ... MORE

My vote this time will remember…



Akhlaq: The killing of a Muslim

The 52-year-old resident of Dadri barely 60km from Delhi, who was lynched in 2015 by a saffron mob guided by lies. The killers, out on bail, were front-row participants at Yogi Adityanath’s campaign rally earlier this month

Bulandshahr: The mob killing of a policeman

In December 2018, a police officer was murdered by saffronites, the main accused still roam free. Killed because he was trying to control saffron janta baying for blood in the cow’s name. Killed only to put the fear of god even in the police.



Cow: The killing of the cow economy

In five years the cow became a liability from an asset. The cattle menace has vexed millions in rural India, fed up of the disruption and destruction of their trade and way of life. And all those lynchings in the name of the cow



Deaths: Too many

Rohith Vemula & Kaliko Pul. Vemula killed himself in 2015, suspended after BJP union minister Bandaru Dattatreya described him as “anti-national, casteist” elements on campus. HRD’s Irani responded to his death saying attempts were being made to “instigate” students around country.

Kaliko Pul, sitting CM of Arunachal, took his life in 2016. Police reported a suicide note, Union home ministry said none. Still a mystery to all, barring perhaps a handful, what made Pul choose death over office. The man was expelled from Cong, became CM with BJP’s support.



Too many killings and hate. Targeting Muslims included, bulk of ‘political’ murders were a result of the enabling climate BJP at the Centre created for Islamophobes, and immunity from law.



Environment: The murder of norms

Easy clearances to plunder protected areas. How wily Javadekar disregarded greens’ alerts to snatch habitats, livelihoods, hills, from tribals, foresters and the non-mainstream. How this govt reduced pilgrimages to tourist spots, made Kumbh a garish spectacle. The needlessness of a char-dham highway. Four-lane highways and SUVs are not needed for pilgrimages



Fear: The terrorising of law-abiding citizens

Never forgive Modi for the anguish he caused the elderly with demonetisation. The sense of loss, the fear of government destroying cash savings anytime. Businesses tripped yes, but this, more than any other fear, among all other fears, hit each and every family. An old woman’s guilt as denotified notes tucked in purses and folds of saris tumble out well after exchange days… So pointless.



Gandhi: A grassy spot

Grudging acknowledgement for a teflon-coated Rahul Gandhi who Modi has not been able to trample. Like grass, he springs right back up. Trample, up again, crush, up again. Grassroots run deep in many, many ways .



Hinduism: The deathly militarisation & end of the sacredness of saffron



India: The idea of India



To keep alive the idea in the Constitution. We work towards that

Junaid: A chilling murder



How can we have reached a point where a teenager about to celebrate a festival is killed out of hate by random strangers

Kashmir & Kathua: Killing the stabs at peace

Five years of unceasing effort to equate Kashmiriyat with terrorism, pushing the state down a jagged slope in trails of fresh hot blood. After the Kathua child’s rape, that a BJP legislator in J&K would openly back the rapist would have horrified a halfway decent man, not so this PM.

Lies: The fakery, the half-truths, the falsehoods

All netas lie. But on Modi’s watch, ministers made lying THE weapon of governance. Starting with education minister lying about her degree. From Sushma on visa to ‘fugitive’ Lalit Modi, to Sitharaman’s half-truths on Rafale in Parliament to the growth numbers, government’s bedrock was a lie. Then, look into fridge, lie, kill. Look into bedroom. Lie. Kill. Stop me from my money basis a lie…

Modi: Never again

A tenure spent crippling institutions, building fears, shaking faith and designing systems of alienation. And then, he stands for nothing. On his watch, every Muslim family in the country regardless of standing, lives cautiously, if not in outright fear

Najeeb: The missing student

On the chowkidar banality, BJP netas prefixed their names with chowkidar, the JNU scholar’s mother spoke up: ‘A mother is asking a chowkidar where is her son?’ This vote for that mother.

The Other: Every non-Hindu

I look to non-Hindus, and Dalits and the poor to steer the country to never again flirt with Hindutva. We, the ‘majority’, have so failed. I turn to Anand Teltumbde’s words: “Hindus are nothing but a bunch of castes which makes India a country of minorities”

Pulwama: The failed intel

Blame for Pulwama lies with GOI. Why make sitting ducks of our jawans? Whose head rolls for the massive intel failure?

Question: The strangling of media

The government that cannot be questioned is questionable. It led to Gauri Lankesh’s murder. Government’s vicious intimidation of slightest criticisms led to the bulk of media buckling while the bigger ones volunteered to go down on their knees — to live to fight another day perhaps?

Rohini: The woman of substance

Special public prosecutor Rohini Salian for her courage after her sacking by NIA in 2014 for not toeing the line on going easy on Hindu terror cases, the Malegaon blasts. This vote for all those who stepped down in respect for their office



Salman: The bonesaw brothers

House of Saud was once faceless, the kingdom’s tentacles reached deep into Muslim boroughs nurturing Wahabbism world over. With 56” tyrant bin Salman greedy to be world leader beyond keeper of all things Islam & oil, he has found a friend in India, another extreme RW. Not good

Textbook: To reclaim the textbook

This vote, remember when Irani as HRD minister sought to saffronise the texts. Propaganda- filled nonsense, attempts at which continue under Javadekar but perhaps in not so blatant a manner. Just the other day, NCERT drops chapter on democracy for Class 9. Be very alert

Umar: Safe hands

Umar Khalid, Kanhaiya Kumar, Anirban Bhattacharya, Shehla Rashid, Rama Naga & thousands like them in DU and JU and Osmania. For being the wall that protects. In their hands, the country’s safe

Vikas: The biggest lie

For every story scrambled, disregarded, muted, pushed away, we know economy’s limping. Close your eyes, that dream job is indeed a dream. Modi could not provide jobs, instead his government has allowed the demographic dividend of Hindus to be weaponised to be unleashed like a pack of wolves at their master’s call



Wahhabi Hinduism: What RSS-BJP’s Hindutva is

Vote in self-interest. To hold onto the freedoms our elders fought for and take the fight for equal access to health, pay, food, rights to the next level. To fight so that women can shake off the ma-behen templates in both role and slur

Yogi & Ilk: To fight the fringe at the party’s heart

Militant Hinduism must be rejected, fact that BJP finds an able candidate in a terror-accused Pragya. Fact that they’re all Hindu ‘monks’. Never forget, Hindu terror can consume the country. A Hindu terrorist killed Gandhi

Xenophobia: BJP’s CAB. Its hate for Rohingyas, refugees, migrants.

The most divisive politics of all. For all its faults, India has been sanctuary for peoples of all sorts. Its strength is indeed its khichdi. Modi made khichdi the national dish, but wants to choose, going against India’s spirit, who he allows to make India home.

Zakia Jafri: To the next step to justice

We owe the 80-something this. At the end, this vote to be ready for the Supreme Court to hear in July 2019 her challenging the SIT’s clean chit to Modi. Add this to the Rafale petition. Vote to ensure the case is heard in the Supreme Court. We owe her a closure

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
