On Dabangg 3 sets, seeing Salman Khan in moustache left Arbaaz Khan astonished

Arbaaz Khan opens up about Salman Khan as Chulbul Pandey | Photo Credit: Instagram

Salman Khan has been making headlines for quite some time and his fans just can't keep calm. The actor will soon be seen in Ali Abbas Zafar's Bharat and recently the makers of the film dropped several posters online. While his film with Katrina Kaif is currently in the post-production stage, Salman has already started shooting for the third installment of his Dabangg franchise and recently his brother and producer of the film, Arbaaz Khan, opened up about easily Salman got into the character 7 years after the release of Dabangg 2.

In an interview with Indian Express, Arbaaz was quoted as saying, "I was very surprised when I went on the first day of the shoot. Salman has done a lot of work after Dabangg 2. It has been seven years, but the moment he put on that moustache and gave the first shot, I thought this man lives this character. He just lives it. It didn't take him a second to get the same attitude and dialect. It was perfect. I was like, 'Wow, this guy has made this character his own'."

Further talking about his film, Arbaaz said, "We know this is a very loved franchise and Chulbul Pandey is a very loved character. We know that there is a big loyalty base. We will leave no stone unturned to make the audience feel that they have got something fresh, new and exciting. We are very conscious of it."

Meanwhile, along with Salman, the film will star Sonakshi Sinha as the female lead, and Sudeep as the antagonist. After completing the first shoot schedule, the entire team and cast headed to Mumbai to start working on the second schedule. As reported by Mumbai Mirror, a source was quoted as saying, "On the first day, Salman will shoot for an outdoor action sequence in Malad. Sudeep, who plays the villain, will be joining in later in the Mumbai schedule. After the two-month schedule, the team will be heading to Wai, where the songs will also be filmed. But that will happen only after the monsoons."

Dabangg 3 is being directed by Prabhu Deva and is being produced by Salman Khan, Arbaaz Khan, and Nikhil Dwivedi. The film is slated for a December 2019 release.
