Rohit Tiwari murder case: Wife questioned; mother says he didn't have 'cordial relationship' with spouse

Rohit Tiwari I File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The investigation in the unnatural death of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, 40, which is being probed by the Crime Branch of Delhi Police, took a dramatic turn today.

The police on Saturday questioned Rohit’s wife Apoorva in the mysterious death case, which the post mortem report established was caused due to asphyxia due to strangulation. Rohit, the son of former Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand chief minister ND Tiwari, was found dead on April 16.

To make matters more complicated for Apoorva, Rohit’s mother in a statement said he did not share a cordial relationship with his wife. She also said Rohit was upset about his political career was doing well.

The Delhi Police registered a case of murder shortly after the autopsy was conducted and the case was transferred to the Crime Branch.

"It is shocking to learn that my son was murdered. What do I say? Let the mourning end. Why was Rohit not woken up when he was sleeping till 4 pm (on Tuesday)?" his mother Ujjwala questioned in a statement given to the news agency PTI.

“They (Rohit and wife Apoorva) had issues since day one of their marriage,” Ujjwala said.

Recounting the journey that the mother-son duo undertook before the ill-fated day, Ujjawal said they returned to Delhi on April 15 after their travels to Haldwani to cast their votes April 11 and later to Ranibagh. She slammed media reports that Rohit was drunk.

According to Joint Commissioner Delhi Police Devesh Shrivastava, Rohit suffered a nose bleed which his servants reported to his mother, who was already at Max hospital undergoing health checkup. She rushed to her residence in an ambulance from the hospital and returned with her son, who was declared brought dead.

Rohit fought a six-year-long court battle to prove that he was ND Tiwari's son after the former Uttar Pradesh and Uttrakhand CM refused to acknowledge him.

ND Tiwari had refused to give his blood sample for DNA test in 2012 but later agreed. Rohit was declared ND Tiwari's biological father by the court after which the senior Congress leader finally accepted that he was his son. The same year, ND Tiwari married Rohit's mother at the age of 88. The senior Congress leader died on his 93rd birthday last year.


