‘A PM who is afraid of criticism is not a strong PM,’ says Priyanka in Wayanad

Priyanka Gandhi, the Congress general secretary for Eastern UP, on Saturday, continued her attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi and claimed that there had never been a “weaker prime minister and a weaker government than the one currently in power”.

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra was campaigning in Wayanad, the parliamentary constituency from where her brother and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi is contesting the Lok Sabha elections 2019.

“A prime minister who is afraid of questions, one who is afraid of criticism, one who cannot tolerate dissent is not a strong prime minister. A government that suppresses its own people, does not allow them to practice freedom of speech and expression, does not allow them to practice freedom of religion is not a strong government,” the Congress leader said in an obvious reference to the growing atmosphere of intolerance in the country.

“The weakest of all is a government that divides the people instead of uniting them,” she said.

Asserting that the BJP government had “betrayed” the people, who voted for them, she said, “Have you ever seen a picture of PM Modi hugging an unemployed youth? Have you seen him talking to ladies in distress? Have you seen his photo with a debt-ridden farmer? In five years, he has not visited the home of any person in Varanasi, the constituency which voted him to power. He has not spoken to anyone in person or asked about their struggles.”

Referring to BJP leaders invoking Pakistan in their election speeches recently, Priyanka said that they never speak about India. They do not speak about the hopes and aspirations of the people nor how they intend to fulfil them, she said. “The fundamental problem with this kind of politics is that they believe the power to run the country belongs to them. They do not believe that the power is a gift and a privilege that the citizens have given them,” Priyanka said.

Urging the people of Wayanad to question the policies of the Centre, Priyanka said, “Democracy is your weapon. Your vote is your weapon. Nothing that the incumbent government does is a favour to the electorate. It is their duty to work for the people.”

Emphasising that the Congress party has a record of delivery rather than of empty talk, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said that the people of Wayanad should vote for the party only if they recognised the benefits of the various policies that the Congress has proposed to implement if they came to power at the Centre. She spoke about Nyay, of creation of jobs, of free healthcare and education for those grappling with poverty.

She signed off by reminding the people that it was in their interest to vote for stability at the Centre for a better and brighter future for the children of the nation.
