Terrorists Planning Pulwama-Like Attack, Some Relief For Jet Airways Staff And Other Top Stories

Even as the country is yet to recover from the shock of the terror attack in Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir on February 14, intelligence agencies have warned of another possible attack.

The development comes even as there is a heightened security deployment across Jammu and Kashmir, like other parts of the country, due to the ongoing Lok Sabha polls. Read more

SpiceJet Hires 500 Jet Airways Employees Including 100 Pilots, Planning To Recruit More

Jet Airways has shut down and over 16,500 of its employees were rendered jobless. However, at this hour of desperate need, budget carrier SpiceJet said it has already absorbed over 500 employees, including 100 pilots, of the grounded carrier Jet Airways and it is open to inducting more as it adds more aircraft and routes in the times ahead.

The Gurugram-based no-frills airline has already announced the induction of 27 more planes -22 Boeing 737s and five turboprop Bombardier Q400s - in the fleet to help overcome to an extent the capacity deficit due to Jet Airways temporarily withdrawing its domestic and international services. Read more

A Senior Jet Airways Pilot Has Some Serious Questions For The Management As They Stare At Bleak Future

22,000 staff including some 6,000 contractual employees of the now grounded Jet Airways are slowly coming to terms with the reality of the uncertainty that awaits them in the future. Many who have worked with the company for decades, some right from day one are now left without a livelihood and months of unpaid salaries.

Neither the company nor the lenders have given any assurance to the troubled staff members on how and when their due salaries will arrive. Read more

17-Year-Old Girl In Bihar Battles For Life After Acid Attack For Resisting Rape Attempt

In a horrific incident, a 17-year-old girl has been left critically injured after she was doused with acid by a group of men for resisting rape.

The incident happened in Bhagalpur district on Friday night. According to police four men, led by the main accused, identified as Prince, barged into the house of the victim who lives with her mother. Read more

UN Lists Bhopal Gas Tragedy That Killed Over 15,000 People, Among World's 'Major Industrial Accidents

The 1984 Bhopal gas tragedy remains one of the darkest episodes in modern Indian history.

The disaster which according to government data, killed over 15,000 people was the result of a gas leak in Union Carbide pesticide plant in Bhopal. Read more

Quick Thinking CRPF Man Saves Life Of Election Officer By Taking Doctor's Instructions On Phone

Presiding Officer (PO) Ahsaan ul Haq, who was deployed at booth number 13 in government girl’s school, Buchpora had suffered a heart attack while on duty.

CRPF constable Surinder Kumar, who was posted at the booth noticed that the officer was unwell and despite giving him first aid, Haq fell unconscious within minutes. Read more
