Asaduddin Owaisi challenges PM Narendra Modi to make clear his stance on Karkare

AURANGABAD: MIM chief and MP Asaduddin Owaisi on Friday came down heavily on Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his government for making Malegaon blast accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh the BJP candidate from Bhopal. Owaisi asked the prime minister to clarify whether he agreed with the stance of the BJP candidate on Hemant Karkare, IPS officer who headed the Anti-Terrorism Squad in Mumbai and was killed in the attacks on 2008.Owaisi condemned Sadhvi Pragya’s claim that Karkare was killed after she cursed him. Owaisi asked PM Modi to clarify whether he was on the side of the officer who laid down his life fighting terrorists, or on the side of a woman accused of terrorism.Owaisi along with Vanchit Bahujan Aghadi chief Prakash Ambedkar, were speaking at a mega gathering as part of the campaign for their joint candidate, Imtiaz Jaleel, contesting from Aurangabad Lok Sabha constituency.Owaisi said, “We are wrongly tagged as heirs of Babar and Razakars, but actually we are heirs of Siddhi Hilal, loyalist of Shivaji Maharaj and Malik Amber, (of Ethiopian descent who came to be known as the prime minister of the Ahmednagar Sultanate).Taking on the BJP-led government, Owaisi said that Hemant Karkare never discriminated between Pakistani terrorist Ajmal Kasab, who committed 26/11 attacks on Mumbai and terror accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh, who was arrested for the Malegaon bomb blasts.After getting the BJP ticket of Lok Sabha elections from Bhopal, Pragya Singh raked up a controversy by claiming that Karkare was killed after she cursed him for forcing her into confessing to a role in the Malegaon blasts. She later apologised. The National Human Rights Commission had ordered a probe into allegations of torture, and the probe report had concluded that there was no evidence to back the Sadhvi’s claims.Owaisi, making an emotional appeal, made the gathering stand up for a minute and pay silent respect to the memory of Karkare, who he said led a heroic life, making a clear-cut case in the Malegaon blasts matter and taking on terrorists head-on in 2008. “He laid down his life while fighting terrorists and has been awarded Ashok Chakra and she claims that her curse made Pakistani terrorists kill him. I want to know if the people of Maharashtra and Maharashtra police will ever accept this,” Owaisi asked, challenging the prime minister and the Shiv Sena to make their stance clear.Owaisi said though the PM has been claiming that he would wipe out terrorism by attacking terror camps in Pakistan, “Minister of external affairs Sushma Swaraj claimed that no one was killed in Pakistan in the aerial attack by Indian Air Force.”Owaisi said innocent people were framed in the Bhima Koregaon matter and branded anti-nationals. He called on the people to resist communal politics.VBA chief Prakash Ambedkar took a dig at former chief minister Ashok Chavan and expressed confidence that the VBA candidate would win in Nanded as well. He said, “Ashok Chavan has allegedly spent Rs 100 crore in the elections. He will still lose. I asked people if they had accepted any money, and they told me that such money could not be hard-earned. It had to be stolen from somewhere.”
