Bullet fired during celebratory firing hits 12-year-old boy in the head, condition said to be critical

The boy's condition is said to be critical (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A young boy was shot today as a result of celebratory firing in the national capital. The shocking instance which has come to light from Rithala area shows the brazen practice of celebratory firing which claims several lives in Delhi every single month.

As per the latest reports in this regard, the bullet hit the 12-year-old boy in his head. He has been rushed to a hospital where his condition is said to be critical. More details in this regard are awaited pending a police inquiry into the matter. This is not the first time such an incident has come to light from the capital city.

Delhi: 12-year-old shot in the head in celebratory firing at a wedding in Rithala; admitted to hospital in a critical condition. More details awaited. — ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2019

In January of this year, a 19-year-old bride incurred a bullet wound in her leg allegedly as a result of celebratory firing at her own wedding. The girl was rushed to a hospital from the venue, a community hall in Shakarpur area, and later returned to attend her wedding after being administered first-aid. Media reports at the time had asserted that the bullet grazed her leg which led to profuse bleeding. A police official probing the matter had claimed that he had identified the man who fired the shot which led to the tragedy as a florist from the groom's side. The accused was booked under section 326 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Arms Act but later fled the spot and was nowhere to be found.

Yet another incident was reported from the New Usmanpur area in the same month when a 42-year-old man was arrested for allegedly shooting his own minor son to death during celebratory firing. Identified as one Yasin, the accused later confessed that it was he who fired the bullet which ended up killing his 8-year-old son Rehan. Yasin also told police officials that he had acquired the gun from one Ravi Kashyap, a resident of Loni in Uttar Pradesh. Yasin was later arrested and the weapon which led to the child's death recovered by Delhi police.
