Lok Sabha elections 2019: BJP for ‘desh bhakti’, Congress for ‘vote bhakti’, says Modi

Days ahead of the third phase of the staggered Lok Sabha elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday attacked the opposition for allegedly questioning the Balakot air strike in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack and prioritising “vote-bank” politics over national security, triggering sharp reactions from rival parties.

Hitting out at the Congress and its allies, Modi said at a rally in Bihar’s Araria that they were rattled by the trends that have emerged from the first two phases of the general elections. “... The trends of the first two phases of elections have left them rattled. They no more have the temerity to demand proofs of the valiant cross-border operations conducted by our armed forces,” he said.

Modi further alleged that while the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) stood for “desh bhakti”, the Congress’s “vote bhakti” was the reason the previous United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government had not retaliated after the 2008 Mumbai terror attacks. “It was known to all that the terrorists had come from Pakistan, which was behind the terror attack in Mumbai. The army had sought permission to retaliate, but the Congress-led government refused to do anything,” he said.

Addressing another rally in Buniadpur in South Dinajpur district of West Bengal, the prime minister spoke about his government’s commitment to passing the Citizenship Bill in Parliament even though some political parties, he said, are trying to mislead people on the issue. “Be it the TMC, the Congress or the Left, they have only indulged in politics of dividing people, but we believe in taking everybody along with us,” Modi said.

He also lashed out at West Bengal chief minister and TMC leader Mamata Banerjee, and said that “speedbreaker didi” has lost her sleep after just first two phases of the parliamentary election. He also accused the CM of fooling people in the name of ‘ma, mati and manush’ (mother, land and people) -- the TMC slogan.

Banerjee hit back at PM Modi later in the day, saying that the prime minister is suffering from “haratanka” – a phobia of losing elections and trying to win by dividing voters along communal lines. “He (Modi) knows that he will lose the elections and that is why his face has turned pale. He is now suffering from ‘haratanka’ and everyday is uttering nonsense thinking about losing in Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, New Delhi, Punjab, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Odisha and others,” she said at a rally in Bengal’s Panighata in support of party candidate for Krishnanagar Lok Sabha constituency, Mohua Moitra.

Reacting to BJP’s allegations that she hasn’t done anything for the state despite being in power, Banerjee said that people will seek answers from her if the claim was true, appealing voters not to cast their ballot for BJP if “you want to save the country”.

On Saturday, Congress president Rahul Gandhi attacked PM Modi and said the country has “decided to relieve the chowkidar (watchman) of his duties”.

While addressing a rally in Supaul, Bihar, Gandhi said: “Let him (Modi) try as much as he can, the people of Bihar, the people of the country have made up their minds that they will not allow the chowkidar to have another term in office.”

The Congress chief reiterated his promises of giving annual assistance of Rs 72,000 to five crore poor households under the party’s proposed Nyay (Nyuntam Aay Yojana) scheme. “The Modi government has done a lot of ‘anyay’ (injustice). We will rectify that with our Nyay (or justice),” he said.

The seven-phase elections end on May 19 and counting of votes will be held on Mar 23.
