3-year-old raped by minor in Balangir

BALANGIR/BALANGIR: A three-year-old girl was allegedly raped by a 15-year-old boy of the same village under Sadar police station in Balangir district on Saturday. The girl was admitted to a hospital in a critical condition.According to police, the incident occurred around 2pm in the afternoon when the minor girl was playing outside her house with two other kids.Police said as the place was deserted, the accused took advantage of it and committed the crime.The girl’s mother said her daughter was frightened and crying inconsolably when she came to the house. The mother noticed that the girl was bleeding from her private parts. The girl revealed the cause of her bleeding and identity of the boy, who raped her inside a nearby toilet. “We want justice and the accused must be arrested soon. I request police to take stringent action against the culprit,” said the girl’s mother.The child welfare committee (CWC) visited the girl in the hospital and took a stock of the situation. Babita Suna, member of the CWC, said, “The condition of the girl is stable according to the doctor. I submitted a report to the CWC. The girl’s family will be provided assistance as per norms,” she said.“A team has been formed to nab the accused and I am sure he will be arrested soon,” said K Shiva Subramani, superintendent of police, Balangir.At least two rape cases were reported from Ganjam district over this weekend. While a Class VII girl was allegedly raped by a 22-year-old youth in a village under Polasara police station limits, a 19-year-old girl was also allegedly raped by a 20-year-old labourer from Tudapalli called Shankar Das, near Chhatrapur.Das was presented in front of a court after a medical examination at MKCG Medical College, said the inspector in charge of Chhatrapur police station, P R Chotray. He said the accused initiated physical relations with the girl after promising to marry her. When he did not keep his word, she lodged an FIR against him.The Polasara incident, police said, had taken place in a jungle on April 13 but it came to light when the girl’s mother lodged an FIR on Friday. “We seized the mobile on which the accused made a video of the incident,” said inspector in charge of Polasara police station, Jeetendra Kumar Mallick.The victim — an 11-year-old girl — had lost Rs 50 while she was going to the Meru festival in her village on April 13. As she looked for her money, the accused offered to help and took her to the jungle, where he forced himself on her. ‘We registered a case against the accused but he is absconding,” said Mallick. The accused and girl belong to the same village. He works in Surat and had come to the village for the Meru festival, police added.
