Man forces wife to join him in killing her beau

Ludhiana: The Samrala police booked a woman, Sandeep Kaur, and her husband, Avtar Singh, on Saturday evening on the charges of beating up her lover to death at Kotla village. Accused Avtar Singh is a carpenter.

The murdered man, Gurjant Singh, 45, belonged to the nearby village of Kakrala Khurd and worked as a railway clerk in Madhya Pradesh. Reportedly, he had illicit relations with Sandeep Kaur for the past six to seven years and after her husband came to know about it, he told her to call Gurjant home on some pretext or he’d kill her. Two days ago, the clerk had come home on leave of absence.

The cops investigating the case say that the couple plotted the murder at home. An officer said: “As part of the plan, when Gurjant came to Sandeep’s house on Friday evening, the couple attacked him with a wooden stick and an iron rod. They hit Gurjant so brutally that he fell unconscious within minutes because of injuries to the head. The couple then moved him to the Samrala civil hospital, claiming that he was an intruder who had come to steal and they had attacked him in self-defence.

As the doctors declared Gurjant Singh brought dead, the hospital authorities called police to the spot. By then, the couple had fled. The murder investigation began at the hospital itself. Samrala station house officer (SHO) Sukhvir Singh said: “Police, later, booked the couple under sections 302 (murder) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The postmortem examination will be done at the Samrala civil hospital on Sunday.”

Samrala deputy superintendent of police (DSP) Davinder Singh said: “The accused are on the run and we have launched a manhunt for them. We have leads about their possible hideouts and we hope to catch them soon.” Sandeep Kaur, aged about 45, is mother of three—a grown-up daughter and a minor son and daughter. The eldest child studies in Canada, while the son studies in Samrala.

Killer affairs

Jan 1 | Ludhiana police booked a woman’s alleged lover on the charges of burning her husband because he used to allegedly beat her up

Oct 14, 2018 | Police arrested “main conspirator” Balwinder Singh in the contract killing of Mandeep over his alleged affair with Balwinder’s wife. On October 11, architect Mandeep Bansal, 32, of Dhandran Road was killed in Dugri’s Phase I by two shooters on a motorcycle

Aug 23, 2018 | Ludhiana police arrested a woman and her tenant on the charges of murdering her husband after their illicit relation came to light. The shopkeeper, 45, was found dead on his terrace in Durga Colony, Dhandari, on August 16



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
