Cong, SAD workers clash in Ludhiana; five injured

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Ludhiana April 20

Workers of the Congress and the SAD clashed over a minor issue at Sundar Nagar, Mundian Kalan, late last night. Five persons sustained minor injuries and were taken to the local civil hospital. They were later discharged.

SAD workers Ricky and Micky, who live in Sundar Nagar, alleged that three youths, owing allegiance to the Congress, were answering the nature’s call outside their house and when they were objected, the former argued with them. The matter was settled and the youths left.

Later, they allegedly barged into their house and attacked them and their family members, including women. The accused allegedly ransacked the house and damaged the furniture.

Ricky alleged, “When we reached Jamalpur police station to file a complaint, the police refused to take any action and told us that Congress leader Gurmel Singh was supporting the assailants.”

SAD MLA from Sahnewal Sharanjit Singh Dhillon then went to the police station along with his supporters. He also called Police Commissioner Dr Sukhchain Singh Gill and told him to register a case or the SAD workers would lay a siege to the police station.

Gurmel Singh, whose wife is a Block Samiti member, denied the allegations and claimed that it was a political drama enacted by the SAD MLA, who wanted to gain mileage ahead of the elections. He claimed that the three youths had come to meet him for some work. “Ricky and Micky along with their aides attacked them and levelled false allegations against them,” he alleged.

SHO Surinder Singh said the matter was being investigated and action would be taken on merit.

Minor issue

SAD workers Ricky and Micky, who live in Sundar Nagar, alleged that three youths, owing allegiance to the Congress, were answering the nature’s call outside their house and when they were objected, the former argued with them. The matter was settled and the youths left. Later, they allegedly barged into their house and attacked them.
