sri lanka: Nearly 300 injured as six blasts hit three churches, three five-star hotels in Sri Lanka

Sri Lanka

St Anthony's Church

Colombo

Batticaloa

PM Modi expresses grief

Indian mission in Lanka monitoring situation, issues helpline numbers

Explosions have been reported in Colombo and Batticaloa today. We are closely monitoring the situation. Indian citi… https://t.co/MOlWRgmBzL — India in Sri Lanka (@IndiainSL) 1555823847000

In addition to the numbers given below, Indian citizens in need of assistance or help and for seeking clarification… https://t.co/rc3MIJm5Yd — India in Sri Lanka (@IndiainSL) 1555824257000

Eight near simultaneous explosions rocked three churches and four hotels frequented by foreigners inon Easter Sunday morning, killing 207 people and injuring over 450 people, in one of the deadliest blasts in the island nation's history.The blasts targetedin, St Sebastian's Church in the western coastal town of Negombo and another church in the eastern town ofaround 8.45 a.m. (local time) as the Easter Sunday mass were in progress, police spokesman Ruwan Gunasekera said.Three explosions were reported from the five-star hotels - the Shangri-La, the Cinnamon Grand and the Kingsbury. Foreigners and locals who were injured in hotel blasts were admitted to the Colombo General Hospital.Harsha de Silva, Sri Lanka's Minister of Economic Reforms and Public Distributionm, said that there have been "many casualties including foreigners."Two fresh blasts hit Sri Lanka's capital Colombo, killing more people, after a string of explosions at churches and hotels.Police spokesman Ruwan Gunasekera said that the seventh blast hit a hotel in the southern Colombo suburb of Dehiwala. It was the seventh attack to hit the country on Sunday, with police saying more than 150 people have been killed."I have been shocked by this totally unexpected incidents. The security forces haven been asked to take all action necessary," Sirisena said.Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe termed the blasts as "cowardly attacks" and said his government was working to "contain the situation.""I call upon all Sri Lankans during this tragic time to remain united and strong... The government is taking immediate steps to contain this situation," he tweeted.The Sri Lankan government has summoned an emergency meeting called. All necessary emergency steps have been taken by the government, a minister said, adding that an official statement will be issued soon."Horrible scenes. I saw many body parts strewn all over. Emergency crews are at all locations in full force. We, at 1990 also have close to 20 units at the various locations. We took multiple casualties to hospital. Hopefully saved many lives," Harsha de Silva said.The first blasts were reported at St Anthony's church in Colombo and St Sebastian's Church in Negombo just outside the capital."A bomb attack to our church, please come and help if your family members are there," read a post in English on the Facebook page of the St Sebastian's Church.The blasts were followed by explosions at three hotels in Colombo and the church in Batticaloa.Strongly condemn the horrific blasts in Sri Lanka. There is no place for such barbarism in our region. India stands in solidarity with the people of Sri Lanka. My thoughts are with the bereaved families and prayers with the injured.India on Sunday said that it was closely monitoring the situation in Sri Lanka."Explosions have been reported in Colombo and Batticaloa today. We are closely monitoring the situation. Indian citizens in need of assistance or help and for seeking clarification may call the following numbers : +94777903082 +94112422788 +94112422789," the Indian High Commission in Colombo tweeted.No group has claimed responsibility for Sunday's attacks.However, most of the deadly attacks in the past in Sri Lanka were carried out by the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) which ran a military campaign for a separate Tamil homeland in the northern and eastern provinces of the island nation for nearly 30 years before its collapse in 2009 after the Sri Lankan Army killed its supreme leader Velupillai Prabhakaran.
