WATCH: I-T seizes Rs 2.30 crore cash stuffed inside the spare tire in a car

The commission also seized unaccounted cash of Rs 16.65 lakh from Kozhikode South, Kerala. Till Saturday, the squads seized Rs 78.11 lakh from the district in connection with the Lok Sabha polls.

The Income Tax officials on Sunday caught a man who was transporting Rs 2.30 crores in cash stuffed inside a spare tire kept in his car. News agency ANI posted a video in which a person can be seen pulling out a number of currency bundle of Rs 2000 notes.

“Rs 2.30 cr in cash stuffed inside the spare tire in a car seized by Income-Tax officials. The cash was being transported from Bengaluru to Shivamogga,” ANI said.

#WATCH: Rs 2.30 cr in cash stuffed inside the spare tire in a car seized by Income-Tax officials. The cash was being transported from Bengaluru to Shivamogga. #Karnataka pic.twitter.com/yUeRdKVyzY — ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2019

The seizure comes just before the third phase of polling on Tuesday (April 23). This is election season and the poll authorities have stepped up their operations to keep a check on unaccounted cash that could be used to bribe the voters. Till last week, the Election Commission had seized cash, liquor, and precious metals of Rs 2,600 crore in value.

#Visuals A man was intercepted & Rs 2.30 cr in cash in Rs 2,000 denomination was found stuffed inside the Spare tire in the car. It was being transported from Bengaluru to Shivamogga. Cash over Rs 4 crore has been seized in searches by Income-Tax department in Karnataka-Goa today pic.twitter.com/Cv0U78JYUC — ANI (@ANI) April 20, 2019

The Income-Tax department seized Rs 1.48 crore cash stashed allegedly by supporters of TTV Dhinakaran’s AMMK party to bribe voters in Theni district of Tamil Nadu.

The commission recently canceled elections in Vellore after over Rs 11.48 crore worth unaccounted cash was recovered during a raid at a DMK leader’s house. Multiple raids have taken place in the last few weeks.

READ ALSO | Sadhvi Pragya says proud of Babri demolition; EC slams notice

On Friday, poll officials seized unaccounted Rs 7.85 lakh cash from a car in south Mumbai. A flying squad checked the car and seized the cash from one Vatsal Dharmesh Shah who could not give a satisfactory reply to why he was carrying the cash.

The commission also seized unaccounted cash of Rs 16.65 lakh from Kozhikode South, Kerala. Till Saturday, the squads seized Rs 78.11 lakh from the district in connection with the Lok Sabha polls.
