Never initiated fire, yet not to hesitate if compelled: IG BSF

Never initiated fire, yet not to hesitate if compelled: IG BSF

Rich tributes paid to Asstt Commdt Prasad

JAMMU, Jan 16: Inspector General BSF, Jammu, N S Jamwal Wednesday stated that his BSF personnel never initiated firing but would never hesitate ‘to give a befitting reply if compelled to resort to fire.’

He stated this while paying rich tributes to Assistant Commandant Vinay Prasad who was killed in sniper firing by Pakistan Rangers along the International Border (IB) in Kathua district on Tuesday morning. A solemn wreath laying ceremony for the slain officer was held at the BSF frontier headquarters here.

IG BSF said his force had a history of bravery and commitment to ensure sanctity of the IB and the Line of Control (LoC). “Martyr Prasad’s brave act has once again proved that bordermen are always ready to sacrifice their lives when it comes to the security of the nation,” he said.

“We have never initiated firing from our side but will never hesitate to give a befitting reply if we are compelled to resort to fire,” the IG BSF said, adding “martyr Prasad was a brave and sincere officer and the nation will always remain indebted to him for his supreme sacrifice.”

The BSF and senior officers of the J&K Police joined other ranks to pay tributes to the officer and bid him an emotional adieu. Director General of Police Dilbag Singh, Inspector General Police, Jammu, M K Sinha, among others attended the ceremony Wednesday, the spokesman said.

The BSF troops were carrying out border domination along the IB, when snipers of Pakistan Rangers opened fire on them at around 1050 hours Tuesday in Hiranagar-Samba sector of Kathua. Prasad was critically injured in the sniper fire and was evacuated to the Military Hospital at Satwari (Jammu), where he succumbed to injuries.

Prasad made the supreme sacrifice while fighting valiantly against the enemy, BSF spokesperson said.

“Despite being hit by a bullet in heavy firing from the Pakistani side, the officer reflected immense courage and camraderie by providing cover to his colleagues and ensuring their safety. He did not care for his own life for the safety of his junior comrades,” the spokesman said.

Floral tributes were paid to the slain officer, whose mortal remains would be sent by air to his home town Howrah in West Bengal, he said.
