#SriLankaBlasts: Three Indians among those killed, says Sush...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





#SriLankaBlasts: Three Indians among those killed, says Sushma Swaraj

21 Apr 2019

Three Indian nationals were among those killed in the bomb blasts in Sri Lanka today, said External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj.

She tweeted that the Indian High Commission in Colombo informed about the death of the Indian nationals.

As many as 207 people, including many foreigners, were killed in a series of eight deadly bomb blasts at churches and high-end hotels in Sri Lanka.

We are ascertaining further details, tweets Swaraj

Details

"Indian High Commission in Colombo has conveyed that National Hospital... informed them about the death of three Indian nationals. Their names are Lokashini, Narayan Chandrashekhar and Ramesh. We are ascertaining further details," Sushma Swaraj tweeted.

"Indian High Commission in Colombo @IndiainSL will provide you all help and assistance. Our helpline numbers are: +94777903082, +94112422788, +94112422789," she wrote in another tweet.

Most attacks carried out by suicide bombers: Defense Minister

Fact

Police have arrested seven people who are suspected of having links with the terror attacks in the country, according to Sri Lanka's Defense Minister Ruwan Wijewardene. He added, "Most the attacks were carried out by suicide bombers."

30 among the deceased believed to be foreigners

Attacks

Of the 207 killed in the bomb blasts, as many as 30 people are believed to be foreign nationals, according to Sri Lankan authorities.

The blasts left hundreds of other people injured. While six of the blasts took place in quick succession, the other two blasts took place a few hours later. The attackers targeted luxury hotels and churches during the Easter services.

India ready to provide all humanitarian assistance: Swaraj

Fact

In another tweet, Sushma Swaraj wrote, "I conveyed to the Foreign Minister of Sri Lanka that India is ready to provide all humanitarian assistance. In case required, we are ready to despatch our medical teams as well."
