JD(S)-Congress government in Karnataka will collapse after Lok Sabha elections: Yeddyurappa

Voters are impressed with Narendra Modi’s rule, the Karnataka BJP chief says.

Claiming that more than 20 MLAs of the ruling Congress in Karnataka were upset with the style of functioning of Chief Minister and Janata Dal (S) leader H.D. Kumaraswamy, BJP State president B.S. Yeddyurappa predicts that coalition squabbles will bring down the government after the Lok Sabha election.

How will the Lok Sabha election results impact Karnataka politics?

We will win at least 22 seats [of the total 28] this time and in many seats, the tussle between the Janata Dal (Secular) and Congress leaders will benefit the BJP. There would be serious blame game between the JD(S) and the Congress on the result of the Lok Sabha election that would pave way for the collapse of the coalition government in the State.

The BJP has been accused of constantly trying to destabilise the government.

The BJP will not make any effort to destabilise this government. There is strong discontent among the Congress MLAs against Mr. Kumaraswamy’s style of functioning. The pre-poll alliance between the JD(S) and Congress for the Lok Sabha election has further annoyed them. The coalition government will collapse owing to these differences.

During the 2018 Assembly election, the BJP had projected you as its chief ministerial candidate. If the BJP gets an opportunity to form the government, what will be your role?

It is too early to comment on this. The decision on who will head the government will be taken after assessing the political situation that will prevail then.

After the Lok Sabha poll, will there be change of guard in the State BJP?

Naturally. A single person cannot continue in the post for a long time. My term as president of party State unit will conclude shortly and a new appointment would be made. I will continue as Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly.

Is there any change in the political scenario between the Lok Sabha election of 2014 and the present one?

In the previous Lok Sabha election, there was a strong anti-incumbency sentiment against the Congress-lead United Progressive Alliance government. This time, the voters are impressed with the rule of Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government in the Centre. The voters are eager to give another chance to Mr. Modi.

There was low voter turnout in Bengaluru. Is that a disadvantage for your party?

In the previous elections also, the BJP had won in all three Bengaluru seats despite a low turnout.

There is allegation from JD(S) and Congress leaders in Karnataka that the Income Tax Department was misused by the BJP that is in power at the Centre to intimidate its political rivals?

The I-T officials have discharged their duty in an impartial manner. Based on the tip-offs, they have conducted search operations. Chief Minister H.D. Kumaraswamy leaking the information on IT raids and the subsequent protest he staged over the issue were unbecoming of his position.

So far, the BJP has not succeeded in developing a strong base in the old Mysore region. What are your chances this time round?

Over the years, we have worked hard to strengthen the party here. The efforts will yield dividends this time and our performance here will be good. The JD(S) will suffer setback in South Karnataka, considered its stronghold.
