Bollywood: Heard this? Siddhant Chaturvedi to star in Ritesh Sidhwani and Zoya Akhtar's next, a spin-off on MC Sher

Ranveer Singh

Ritesh Sidhwani

Zoya Akhtar

Gully Boy

Bollywood

Siddhant Chaturvedi

rapper MC Sher

Siddhant Chaturvedi and Ranveer Singh in Gully Boy

The film is entirely based on Siddhant’s character and traces MC Sher’s journey to becoming a hero. This will also give the makers a chance to delve deeper into the hiphop culture and you can expect many engaging rap battles. Source

Alia Bhatt

Siddhant Chaturvedi,’s mentor in a recent musical drama, returns to front a spin-off being planned by producerand directorThe Zoya Akhtar-directed musical dramahas brought India’s underground hip-hop culture into mainstream. And while the film was undoubtedly a showcase for Ranveer Singh who played Murad with conviction—a Dharavi boy on the cusp of graduation whose songs vent his frustrations and eventually push him into the spotlight—another actor,, also grabbed eyeballs with his swagger as Murad’s mentor,Since the film’s release in February, the debutant has become a household name and a campus heartthrob with viewers, in particular young girls, fervently wishing there was more of MC Sher in the film. Questions about how he came to rule the stage and what happens to him after his protégé’s meteoric rise, have refused to die down in these last few months. And in keeping with the interest which shows no signs of abating, Mirror has learnt that producer Ritesh Sidhwani and Zoya are planning a spin-off which will focus on their overnight sensation and his charismatic Sher.“The film is entirely based on Siddhant’s character and traces MC Sher’s journey to becoming a hero. This will also give the makers a chance to delve deeper into the hiphop culture and you can expect many engaging rap battles,” a source told Mirror.Gully Boy was inspired by Naezy aka Naved Sheikh who exploded on the music scene at 22 with “Aafat” recorded on his iPad. The boy from Kurla who was introduced to rap by Sean Paul’s “Temperature”, found a following with “Tehelka”, “Asal Hustle”, “Haq Hai” and “Aane De”.The other muse was Divine aka Vivian Fernandes whose 2013 home-made video, “Yeh Mera Bombay” shot in his gully, went viral. He followed up with hits like “Jungli Sher”, “Farak”, “Paintra”, and in 2015, collaborated with Naezy on “Mere Gully Mein” which made it to the film with Ranveer joining the duo on the mic. Divine’s “Azadi”, “Sher Aaya Sher” and “Apna Time Ayega” with Ranveer also made it to the album.The 18-song album has around 54 contributors, which include rappers from across the country, deejays, music producers and beatboxers. Besides Divine and Naezy, other names included Sez on the beat, Rishi Rich, Dub Sharma, Ishq Bector, MC Altaf and MC TodFod. Ankur Tewari was the music supervisor. Siddhant confided that he was in the final year of CA when he decided to gamble with acting. He caught Zoya’s eye at the success bash of his web series and was asked to audition for the role of MC Sher with no guarantee of making it to the screen because she was looking for someone older and more established.The night before, he wrote a poem and rapped it. He nailed the audition and at 24, had bagged his first film with Ranveer Singh and. When quizzed on his next step, Siddhant confided that while he’d not signed anything officially, he was reading a lot of scripts which had him as the solo lead. “Even Ritesh is developing something for me,” he revealed.Ritesh, in an interview (March 11), described Siddhant as a versatile artiste with great screen presence and admitted that they were helping him focus on his strengths. “He is clear he wants to only play a protagonist and we are developing a script with him as the lead,” he revealed. Buzz is, this is that film and MC Sher is ready to roar again.
