Murder investigation stalled: police try to track down person of interest who moved to india

The top cop in the Toyah Cordingley murder investigation admits he will probably be retired before the case is solved.

Queensland Police Commissioner Ian Stewart says he fears the killer of 24-year-old dog walker won't be caught before he retires in July.

Indian nurse Rajwinder Singh was reported in the media as a person of interest, and it's believed he left Australia for India the day after Ms Cordingley was killed on Wangetti Beach in October last year.

'When we have people ... who leave the state and in this case, potentially even leave the country, obviously it involves the Australian Federal Police and the countries where these people go to,' Stewart told the Courier Mail.

Stewart confirmed police are working closely with the Australian Federal Police on the 'intense investigation'.

'What I would say is that (Mr Singh) is a person of interest and obviously at an appropriate time we would hope to at least speak to that person and have conversations with him about this incident,' he said.

Stewart said an investigation can become quite an 'involved process' when international law is at play.

Rajwinder Singh (pictured) had quit his job and flown to India in the aftermath of Toya Cordingley's body being discovered on October 22

Ms Cordingley was found dead by her father Troy on Wangetti Beach, north of Cairns in Queensland, on October 22.

'It was lovely to see people's tributes and so hard to lay golden penda flowers where I found my little girl,' Mr Cordingley said in January when he left flowers and a tribute to his daughter.

'We will never give up.'

Queensland Police Commissioner Ian Stewart says he fears the killer of the 24-year-old Carins pharmacy assistant won't be caught before he retires in July

She was killed in what police said was a 'sexually motivated murder' on the beach between 2pm and 2.30pm on October 21.

She was reported missing at about 10.50pm that day and her body was located at about 7.45am the next day by her father.

About 500 people including police, SES, close family members and members of the community have been involved in search for evidence to find her killer.

Toyah Cordingley was found dead by her father Troy (pictured) on Wangetti Beach, north of Cairns in Queensland, on October 22 last year

Several helped scour the beach from the early hours of the morning into the late afternoon since the 24-year-old was reported missing.

At least 6,000 bumper stickers, which say 'Toyah, the community will never give up', have been distributed within the community.

Since the horrific incident, Wangetti Beach and its surrounds have been virtually deserted.
