3 Indians, woman with Kerala roots killed in Colombo

NEW DELHI: Three Indian nationals were killed in the coordinated terrorist bombings of churches and luxury hotels in the Sri Lankan capital Colombo on Sunday.

Also killed was a Sri Lankan woman whose roots lay in Kerala's Kasaragod district but had been born and brought up in Sri Lanka before moving to Mangaluru after getting married. She held a Sri Lankan passport and was to check out of Colombo's Shangri-La Hotel when the bomb went off.

External affairs minister Sushma Swaraj confirmed the identities of the Indian nationals as Lakshmi, Narayan Chandrashekhar and Ramesh. "Indian high commission in Colombo has conveyed that National Hospital has informed them about the death of three Indian nationals," Swaraj said in a tweet, adding, "We are ascertaining further details."

The woman from Kasaragod, P S Raseena (61), had been holidaying with her husband, Abdul Khader Kukkady, in Sri Lanka for the past 10 days and had planned to stay on with her brother, Basheer, who lives there, for a few days while her husband flew back to Dubai where he worked as a chemical engineer, her nephew, K C Irshad, said. Her brother had gone to drop her husband to the airport and was to return to pick her up and take her to his home. Basheer identified her body in a hospital. Khader's brother, Usman, however told TOI in Mangaluru that she had been supposed to fly to Bengaluru in the afternoon.

Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan has promised the distraught family all help in bringing the woman's body back .

Many Indians stuck in Colombo reached out on social media to the Indian government for help. A man from Kerala, Dilip K S, said he was at Colombo's Hotel Nelly and was worried about being able to return to India on Monday as pla-nned. "Please provide us necessary help for our safety," he tweeted to external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj. In response to another Indian, An-and Srivastava, a management professional from Benguluru who sought advice on whether he could travel to Sri Lanka on Monday, Dilip replied on Twitter: "It is not safe. Embassy says bombs are planted in other areas, including near airports." Srivastava cancelled his trip.

The Indian high commission in Sri Lanka was flooded with requests for help. Some Indians in Sri Lanka tweeted that the helpline telephone numbers tweeted by Swaraj and the Indian high commission in Sri Lanka were unresponsive.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
