Boyfriend's fury as Indian men who 'drugged, raped and beheaded his girlfriend' are freed on bail

The boyfriend of a woman who was drugged, raped and beheaded before her body was found hung upside down in a forest, has reportedly blasted the Indian legal system as a 'total farce' as those accused of her murder continue to roam free.

Andrew Jordan, from Dublin, travelled to India for the case on Thursday but was said to be left horrified when the two men, suspected of murdering his partner Liga Skromane, failed to show up to court.

Umesh and Udayan - known only by their first names - were arrested and charged with first-degree murder and rape last May, but were released on bail until a trial date could be set.

Liga Skromane (pictured) was seeking treatment for PTSD at a wellness retreat in Kerala when she disappeared

Speaking to Mirror Online, Andrew, 42, said: 'Why are they out on bail in the first place? If they are guilty then they are a clear danger to other women.

'If those guys did what they are accused of doing to Liga then they are animals and they should not be allowed to roam the streets.'

Latvian-born Liga, who lived in Ireland with her partner, was seeking treatment for PTSD with her sister at a wellness retreat in Kerala when she disappeared on March 14 last year.

The victim's sister Ilze and partner Andrew handed out leaflets before her body was found in April last year

The 33-year-old's headless, decomposing body was found almost 40 days later near a mangrove forest in Thiruvallam on April 21.

Police later arrested and charged Umesh and Udayan with first-degree murder and rape.

The 33-year-old's headless, decomposing body was found almost 40 days later near a mangrove forest in Thiruvallam on April 21

They were released on bail until a trial date could be set, which was scheduled to be decided last Thursday.

However, as the pair failed to show up to court, a new hearing has been planned for June 12 when the accused will be read their charge sheets and a date will be set for their trial.

The delay could see the trial be postponed until next year.

Andrew told the publication that the slow pace of justice system in the South Asian country has been discouraging and that he was promised Liga's case would be fast-tracked.

He said: 'I try not to let it get to me but the delays just prove that it's not really being taken seriously. We were told that the police have an airtight case against them so why are they allowed out on bail? It's a total farce.'
