Ground Report: What farmers of Gujarat want as they go to vote for Lok Sabha polls tomorrow

15 lakh farmers in Rajkot await compensation (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Gujarat: Gujarat will see polling for the general elections 2019 on a single day during the third phase of polling across the country on April 23. Voting in Gujarat will be held for 23 Lok Sabha seats.

No-payment for the crop insurance has emerged as a major election issue in Saurashtra and north Gujrat regions as farmers are battling semi-drought and water scarcity.

It was reported that around 1.5 million farmers await compensation from the government after crops failed from serious drought and water scarcity in 2016 and 2018. Over 51 talukas in 15 districts were declared drought-hit. Farmers say that the Pradhan Mantri Fasal Bima Yojana scheme is a failure and most farmers haven't received crop insurance as they were promised.

#IndiaVotes | 15 lakh farmers in #Rajkot await compensation after crop failure due to severe #drought and water scarcity. Farmers say the PMFBY has been a failure and most of them haven't yet received the crop insurance.



MIRROR NOW's @disha2791 gets you this ground report pic.twitter.com/pzNbWdBmhG — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) April 19, 2019

While speaking with Mirror Now, farmer Kishor Jadeja claimed that the farmers in Gujrat are suffering a lot and suicide is the last option left for them.

Another farmer, Suresh, claimed that in the name of insurance, the farmers haven't received any insurance relief as promised by the government. There is a water crisis and the insurance is just on papers.

A female farmer, Lataben, also mentioned the same issue that they have not received insurance money for the last three to four years. She further claimed that the women have to walk for 2 km in burning heat to get the water.

Reportedly, farmers of the Saurashtra region are battling with non-payment of crop insurance while the land is barren and dry. However, only 20 per cent of the claims have been settled so far.
