MMA Fighter Hits Man For Leering At Her & Masturbating During Beach Shoot

Joyce Vieira, a trained MMA (mixed martial arts) fighter beat up a man who while watching her swimsuit shoot on Praia do Braga beach in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, started masturbating. Vieira first went up to him and asked him to stop but he refused, and that’s when she literally took matters into her own hands and tackled him.

This man made the grave mistake of trying to hit Vieira, not knowing he messed with the wrong woman

Vieira told a Brazilian newspaper that the man, Josinei Ferreira, had his shorts pulled down, “was visibly erect” and was “making noises and groaning.” Vieira also told local news channels that unlike others who deny it or stop when caught, he kept doing it. Disgusted at his refusal to listen to her or stop, she kicked him, after which he punched her. To quote an iconic film, “Big mistake. Huge.” The fighter, who is trained in Muay Thai and Jiu-Jitsu then threw such punches at him that he realised who he was up against and ran.

Vieira has lodged a police complaint against him, but he claims he was just peeing. Hmm...

Knowing that such people are a public menace, Vieira lodged a police complaint against him, but unfortunately, the man was let go because he justified his behaviour by claiming to have been urinating.

Disappointed despite having defended herself and taken every possible course of action legally, Vieira expressed her frustration at his release: “We feel powerless. It’s very strange because he’s going to be in the same city as me, and who knows he might be in the same places … I have received an innumerable number of messages from women saying that (in such situations) they didn’t file a report, because they know the suspects would end up being released. I think the punishment for these cases should be more severe.”

In India, too, people claim that the onus of defending oneself falls on survivors, and when people like Raya Sarkar name and shame perpetrators who have gone unpunished, the “innocent until proven guilty” excuse comes out to defend them again. Given that, Vieira’s reaction is not only warranted, but the only way to actually deter sexual predators from creeping up on unsuspecting women thus.
