Sri Lanka bombing victims were from at least 12 countries

COLOMBO, Sri Lanka (AP) - At least 290 people were killed in bombings of churches and hotels in Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday.

Sri Lankan authorities say at least 31 foreigners died in the attacks. Some details on the victims:

SRI LANKA: The vast majority of the victims were Sri Lankan, many from the island nation's Christian minority. Their names and other details of their lives were slow to trickle in and difficult to report, in part because Sri Lankan authorities blocked most social media after the blasts.

But among them was Dileep Roshan, 37, a carpenter who left behind a wife and daughter, his family told The Associated Press.

"His wife and daughter won't be able to do much now because he is gone," his older brother, Sanjeevani Roshan, said. "The real question is what will happen to their future."

UK: Sri Lanka's top diplomat in Britain says authorities know of eight British nationals killed in the bombings.

People attend special prayers for the victims of bomb explosions in churches and hotels in Sri Lanka, in Lahore, Pakistan, Monday April 22, 2019. (AP Photo/K.M. Chaudary)

Among them were lawyer Anita Nicholson, son Alex Nicholson and daughter Annabel Nicholson, her husband, Ben Nicholson, confirmed in a statement. Nicholson said the family was on holiday, sitting at the table of the restaurant of the Shangri-la Hotel when they were killed. He said: "The holiday we had just enjoyed was a testament to Anita's enjoyment of travel and providing a rich and colourful life for our family, and especially our children."

INDIA: Indian officials say eight Indians died in the attacks.

DENMARK: The Bestseller clothing chain confirmed Danish media reports that three of the children of its owner, business tycoon Anders Holch Povlsen, were killed in the attacks. However, spokesman Jesper Stubkier gave no details in an emailed response to a query on the matter and said the company had no further comment.

SPAIN: Spain's foreign ministry says a Spanish man and woman were killed but didn't provide further details. The mayor of Pontecesures in northwest Spain, Juan Manuel Vidal, tells Radio Galega he knew the local pair and says they were in their 30s, according to a report by Spanish private news agency Europa Press.

AUSTRALIA: Australia's prime minister says a mother and daughter from that country were killed. Manik Suriaaratchi and her 10-year-old daughter Alexendria were attending a church service in Negombo when they died.

UNITED STATES: The State Department says at least four Americans were killed and several others seriously injured. It gave no details about the victims' identities.

Fifth-grader Kieran Shafritz de Zoysa, spending a year in Sri Lanka on leave from the private Sidwell Friends School in Washington, D.C., was among those killed, the school said in an email to parents, according to the Washington Post . The email said: "Kieran was passionate about learning, he adored his friends, and he was incredibly excited about returning to Sidwell Friends this coming school year."

Dieter Kowalski, who lived in Denver and worked for international education company Pearson, died in the blasts shortly after he arrived at his hotel for a business trip, the company and his family told AP . A Friday Facebook post reads "And the fun begins. Love these work trips. 24 hours of flying. See you soon Sri Lanka!"

SWITZERLAND: The foreign ministry says a Swiss national, a Swiss dual national and a non-Swiss member of the same family were killed. It didn't identify the second country or give other details on the victims.

CHINA: State media say two Chinese died in the blasts.

OTHERS: The Netherlands, Japan and Portugal have confirmed their nationals were among the dead.

Mourners grieve at the burial of three members of the same family victims of Easter Sunday bomb blast at St. Sebastian Church in Negombo, Sri Lanka, Monday, April 22, 2019. Easter Sunday bombings of churches, luxury hotels and other sites was Sri Lanka's deadliest violence since a devastating civil war in the South Asian island nation ended a decade ago. (AP Photo/Gemunu Amarasinghe)

FILE - In this Aug. 21, 2017 file photo, Danish billionaire and owner of fashion business Bestseller Anders Holch Povelsen, in Aarhus, Denmark. The owner of fashion business Bestseller Anders Holch Povelsen lost three out of his four children in Sundays terror attacks in Sri Lanka. (Bo Amstrup/Ritzau Scanpix via AP, file)

Relatives carry a coffin for burial during the funerals of three members of the same family, all died at Easter Sunday bomb blast at St. Sebastian Church in Negombo, Sri Lanka, Monday, April 22, 2019. Easter Sunday bombings of churches, luxury hotels and other sites was Sri Lanka's deadliest violence since a devastating civil war in the South Asian island nation ended a decade ago. (AP Photo/Gemunu Amarasinghe)

A relative carries a portrait of Calistas Fernando ahead his coffin for burial during the funerals of three people of the same family, all died at Easter Sunday bomb blast at St. Sebastian Church in Negombo, Sri Lanka, Monday, April 22, 2019. Easter Sunday bombings of churches, luxury hotels and other sites was Sri Lanka's deadliest violence since a devastating civil war in the South Asian island nation ended a decade ago. (AP Photo/Gemunu Amarasinghe)

Pakistani citizens from different faiths light candles at a vigil for the victims of bomb explosions in churches and hotels in Sri Lanka, in Lahore, Pakistan, Monday April 22, 2019. (AP Photo/K.M. Chaudary)
