Ranbir not moving in with Alia because of his parents?

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Ranbir not moving in with Alia because of his parents?

22 Apr 2019

It's been a year since rumors about Bollywood's hot couple, Ranbir Kapoor-Alia Bhatt, moving in together have been doing the rounds.

The duo was also spotted near a real estate agent's office two days back, further fueling the speculations.

However, recent media reports suggest that Ranbir has no plans to shift with Alia as he wants to stay with his ailing father for now.

Rishi admitted to same hospital where Sonali Bendre was recuperating

Fact

Ranbir's father, Rishi Kapoor, is currently battling an unspecified illness in a hospital in New York, United States.

Notably, that's the same hospital where cancer survivor Sonali Bendre was getting treated.

So as soon as Rishi returns to India, the Sanju actor will move back with his parents.

The reports further suggested that Rishi's illness has brought the father-son closer, which wasn't so earlier.

I know I've screwed up my relationship with Ranbir: Rishi

Past interview

Rishi had once admitted that his relationship with Ranbir is tensed, though the latter is "a great son, listens to me."

"I know I've screwed up my relationship with Ranbir even though my wife kept telling me about what I was doing. It's now too late to change it; both of us will not be able to adjust," the veteran actor had said.

'Rishi's illness has brought Ranbir close to his father'

Comment

However, "the recent circumstances (Rishi's illness) has brought Ranbir close to his father. He wants to spend maximum time with his parents," says one of Ranbir's friends.

It should be mentioned that Ranbir used to stay with his parents till his career took off, and then he started bringing his girlfriends to his house to stay overnight, which Rishi didn't approve of.

Ranbir then moved in with Katrina

Fact

When Ranbir started dating his Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani co-star Katrina Kaif, he moved out of his parents' home and started living in with her in a plush pad that the duo bought together. To this Rishi had expressed his disappointment earlier.

How can one room be enough for a 33-year-old: Rishi

Anger

"My father gave me space when I moved out after marriage and I give Ranbir his space too when he decided to move out and share a home with his girlfriend. In this house, he had one room: how could that be enough for a 33-year-old boy," Rishi had asked in an earlier interview.

However, Ranbir and Katrina broke up in 2016.

Gauri Khan had designed the interiors of Ranbir's new house

Designing

When that happened, Ranbir started staying with his grandmother Krishna Raj Kapoor in their family bungalow, Krishna Cottage, Chembur.

In 2016 itself Ranbir's bachelor pad, Vastu, got ready, with its interior designing done by Gauri Khan.

Notably, he paid a stunning Rs. 35cr for the plush apartment.

Rishi had also thanked Gauri for making "a home out of Ranbir's house."

Ranbir now plans to mend ways with Rishi

Father-son

Ranbir continued staying in Vastu even after his affair with Alia became public knowledge.

However, now he probably plans to mend things with his father, and take care of him.

This development comes despite several reports suggesting that Ranbir had asked his mother Neetu Singh to search for a property in NY for him and Alia, apart from meeting a real estate agent recently.

Alia's buying of new house also added fire to rumors

Fact

Alia had also bought a house in Juhu this January, which gave rise to live-in rumors. However, the Kalank actress quickly clarified, saying, "It is a place I've bought as my office space. I've started my own production house and named it Eternal Sunshine Productions."

'Looking forward to working again. I am much better now'

Information

Meanwhile, Rishi, who was last seen in Netflix's Rajma Chawal, is recuperating well, and is looking forward to returning to India.

"Looking forward to working again. I am much better now. Many people have been constantly inquiring. Sanjay Dutt, for example, has been in touch regularly. Actually more than me, it is my wife Neetu whom everyone messages about my health," the 66-year-old said.

Ranbir, Alia planning to get married after 'Brahmastra'?

Plans

Ranbir, on the other hand, is working on Ayan Mukerji's Brahmastra, opposite Alia, where he will seen playing a DJ/superhero.

Reportedly, the duo will get married after this film, which also stars Amitabh Bachchan, Nagarjuna Akkineni, Mouni Roy and will release on December 21.

Ranbir is also working on Karan Malhotra's Shamshera alongside Sanjay Dutt and Vaani Kapoor, a July 30, 2020 release.
