Jamia Millia engineering student arrested with 3 guns; wanted to rob businessman

When the patrolling team signalled Khan to stop, he tried to escape by speeding and taking a U-turn(Representative image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: A mechanical engineering student of Jamia Milia Islamia was arrested for possessing three country-made pistols near north Delhi's Lahori Gate. The accused was identified as 20-year-old Aman Khan. The police caught him when he and his two accomplices were following a businessman they allegedly planned to rob.

While checking vehicles on main Chandni Chowk road, a patrolling team signalled a man on a blue scooter with a backpack to stop. The rider tried to escape by speeding and taking a U-turn, according to a report in Hindustan Times. However, the policemen chased him and caught him before he could escape.

Also Read: Who killed the cat? Thane man files police complaint of his cat's murder

Khan could not give a satisfactory answer on being asked why he was trying to flee. Nupur Prasad, Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP), north, said that he did not have the documents of the two-wheeler. When his backpack was checked, the police received three country-made pistols.

The accused told the police that he and his friends were conducting a recce to rob a businessman. He also said that they were informed that the businessman was carrying a huge sum of money. Khan also told the police that the guns were arranged by one of his friends for robbing the businessman. The scooter that Khan was riding belonged to one of his friends who are absconding. Police has identified the two friends and is searching for them.

Public relations officer of Jamia Milia Islamia, Ahmed Azeem, said that they have no information about the incident. They would look into the matter when they receive a complaint from the police.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
