Sonia Gandhi shed tears for Batla House terrorist but not for martyred police officer: Amit Shah

4/5

On the contentious issue of the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill and the NRC, Shah said refugees need not worry as after returning to power, the BJP will first bring the bill in Parliament to provide them citizenship and then implement the NRC across the country to weed out infiltrators.

"The Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Christians refugees will not face any problem. They will be given citizenship and will remain in this country with full dignity," Shah said.

The Citizenship (Amendment) Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on January 8 but was not tabled in Rajya Sabha where the BJP does not have a majority.

The bill could not be passed in the Rajya Sabha due to opposition by certain political parties, including the Trinamool Congress, Shah said adding that there will be no problem in passing the bill after 2020 as the 'picture' in the Rajya Sabha will change by then.

To a question on alleged discrepancies over citizenship in Congress president Rahul Gandhi's poll affidavit filed at Amethi, Shah said the returning officer concerned should look into it.

He ridiculed West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's claim that a "parallel government" is being run in the state by the Election Commission and the BJP.

"She is complaining against EC as she is afraid of losing polls. When she was fighting the Left Front in 2011, several police officers were changed and special observers were appointed. She had then never complained against it," Shah said.

He was referring to the 2011 assembly election in West Bengal which brought Banerjee to power.

"Now when the EC is doing is the same thing, she is saying a parallel government is being run. She is fearing that her goons cannot have a free run," he alleged.

On allegations raised by TMC that several leaders who were accused in chit fund scam have joined BJP, Shah said, "We have inducted them in the party after checking their record.

When there is a complete investigation, you will get to know the truth."
