Pulwama payback: 19 JeM cadre eliminated since February 14 attack on CRPF convoy

The blast site of Pulwama attack where 40 CRPF troops were martyred I File photo | Photo Credit: PTI

Srinagar/New Delhi: The Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) was responsible for the horrific February 14 Pulwama attack on the CRPF convoy, but their (JeM's) cadres have paid a heavy price for it.

According to highly-placed government sources, there were 60 JeM cadres in Jammu and Kashmir at the beginning of the year. So far, 27 have been eliminated and 19 of them since Pulwama.

Many of them were involved in and responsible, directly or indirectly, in planning and executing the attack. Right after the attack, intelligence agencies began to identify JeM cadres involved in the attack.

After interrogating over 40 suspects, including "overground" workers who had links with Maulana Masood Azhar's organisation and electronic surveillance, security forces were able to neutralise four terrorists and four others who were aware of the plot.

Among those eliminated were:

Kamran, the district commander of Pulwama, who was killed near Pinglena village in Pulwama.

Mudashir Ahmed Khan eliminated by the security forces, who provided logistical help in Tral. He had provided the explosives for the attack and was in touch with Aadil Ahmed Dar, the suicide bomber. Also killed that day was Sajid Bhat from Anantnag. The Maruti car used in the attack was registered in his name.

Two others, including Nisar Ahmed Tantry are in custody. Tantry, from Aripal, Tral, was aware of the plot and had fled to the UAE weeks for the attack. UAE sent him back. Both Mudashir and Nisar were in touch with Yasir, a Pakistani explosives expert, who may have prepared the car-bomb used in Pulwama.

Sajjad, another JeM member, was arrested in Delhi. He was in touch with Mudashir and two "overground" workers. Sajjad told security forces about Mudashir's role in the planning and execution of the attack.

Muhammed Umar, JeM's chief operations commander in Jammu and Kashmir, was killed in an operation on March 29 in Sutsu Kalan, near Srinagar. Umar's father was Ibrahim Azhar, Masood Azhar's brother and the leader of the group that hijacked the flight IC-814 on Christmas eve in 1999. Umar had attacked the Police Lines in Pulwama in August 2017.

The JeM is responsible for a number of major attacks in Jammu and Kashmir. They include the attack on the Army camp in Samba in September 2013, the attack on the Pathankot air base in January 16, the Uri attack in September 2016 and the one on the Sunjuwan base in Jammu in February last year.
