Modi’s indefensible defence of Pragya Thakur: It paints everybody with the same broad brush

Robin David is resident editor of The Times of India's Hyderabad edition. His first book, City of Fear, was shortlisted for the Crossword Book Award in 2007.

Does one morally repugnant act justify another unrelated but equally morally repugnant act? Going by the defence that Prime Minister Narendra Modi has mounted for nominating Sadhvi Pragya Thakur as the candidate from Bhopal, it would seem that one can put all immoral acts and utterances from across the political spectrum into a blender, manufacture an indistinguishable paste and smear it on everyone’s face.

That way everyone is sailing in the same boat with the same gooey stuff on their faces. It does not matter that the boat is riddled with holes. At least we are all in the same boat and we all look alike.

In the midst of an already bitter campaign in which all parties have tested the boundaries of civility, Pragya said recently her curse killed Hemant Karkare, the police officer who died while facing the bullets of the 26/11 terrorists in Mumbai. In effect she triggered supernatural forces that brought the terrorists to Mumbai who finally brought retribution for her alleged torture by Karkare. By this logic, the 175 people who died in the terrorist attack were unavoidable collateral damage just so that Pragya could get justice exclusively for herself.

In her defence, Modi invoked Congress candidate from Bhopal, Digvijaya Singh’s comments calling the 2008 Batla House encounter with terrorists in Delhi fake. Mohan Sharma, a police officer, was killed in that encounter and, according to the PM, Digvijaya too had undermined a police officer’s supreme sacrifice. But then the bigger question is, how is Pragya any different from Digvijaya?

Digvijaya may have tried to use the encounter for his own political motives, which is unquestionably bad, but does Digvijaya’s immorality justify Pragya’s utterances? By this logic, a murderer can demand to be set free because he is not the only murderer in the world and there are many in the murderer community who are not behind bars.

When the PM was asked why his party had nominated Pragya given that she was still an accused in the Malegaon blast case, he remembered Rajiv Gandhi’s words about a big tree falling to justify the anti-Sikh riots of 1984.

There is no doubt that Rajiv’s words were vile and that the anti-Sikh riots were indefensible acts of terror, but is the PM saying that Rajiv’s vile words of 25 years ago justify Pragya’s vile words of today?

For all practical purposes, this means that there is no difference between Rajiv and Pragya and that BJP has fielded a Rajiv clone in saffron robes from Bhopal for the ongoing Lok Sabha election. The people of Bhopal should be truly worried if the two most important political parties in the country can’t provide the city of nawabs with a better list of candidates.

Deflecting attention from one person’s wrongdoing by raising the issue of wrongdoing of another person whether perceived or real is not a new strategy. It even has a name – whataboutism. Someone accuses you of a crime and, instead of accepting guilt or providing a logical defence, you point out acts of wrongdoing of the accuser or a third person.

According to some commentators, the art was perfected by the Soviets during the Cold War. Every time the US criticised the USSR, Kremlin brought up America’s racist past and how blacks were lynched or some other dark nugget from US history. The aim was to give moral equivalence to all acts without any reference and say that no one is perfect. If no one is perfect, what is the point of criticising anyone? Let’s just do whatever we like. The point of the entire exercise is not to win an argument or bring clarity to a complex issue, but to confuse the issue.

There is every possibility that Pragya is truly innocent, that she had no role in the Malegaon blasts and that she was tortured by policemen in custody. If this is true, she has every right to hold a grudge against Congress and police officers like Karkare. But then we have to ask if our sacred electoral process should be used as a platform for revenge by one individual. Pragya has every right to seek justice, but is fighting an election the best way to seek it?

It is now left to the political parties to decide how far they want to go in making this already coarse election campaign coarser.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
