Court seeks more info from SSP, AU

Allahabad: Hearing a PIL relating to murder of a former student of Allahabad University (AU) in its PCB Hostel on April 15, the Allahabad high court on Monday directed the SSP, Allahabad to file a better affidavit on the steps taken to check criminal activities in the city and its adjoining areas.

Besides, the court also directed the AU registrar to file a better affidavit apprising it about the steps taken to make the campus, including the hostels, free of criminal elements and remain present on next date of hearing.

During the course of hearing, the court noticed that the affidavit filed by the SSP did not disclose how the administration will improve the law and order situation in and around the city.

Similarly, the affidavit filed by the university also did not disclose what steps were taken to make the campus and hostels free of criminal elements. Hearing the PIL, a division bench bench comprising Justice Pradeep Kumar Singh Baghel and Justice Rohit Ranjan Agarwal fixed May 17 as the next date of hearing.

Earlier, while taking suo moto cognizance of the murder, the high court had on April 16 directed the SSP, Allahabad to file a status report of the steps taken to check criminal activities in Allahabad and nearby areas.

The court had also directed the AU registrar to file an affidavit about the steps taken by the university administration to make the entire university campus, including the hostels, free from criminals for creating an atmosphere for studies. The registrar was also directed to provide details about regular courses and the mandatory attendance of the students.

Passing the directives, the court had observed, “As a matter of fact, it is not only the university campus but the entire city of Prayagraj and its outskirts are in the grip of criminals. The newspapers are full of reports relating to criminal activities existing in the city of Prayagraj and the areas nearby. The citizens of the area are not feeling themselves safe and protected by the law maintaining authorities.”

The court while directing its office to register this case as a PIL, had also issued notices to UP chief secretary and director general of police. Senior Allahabad officials, including divisional commissioner, district magistrate, SSP and also AU registrar were also asked to explain the circumstance by filing their affidavits.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
