Murmur of protest, but Modi holds sway in south Gujarat

Despite murmurs over his leadership, Prime Minister Narendra Modi still continues to inspire awe across south Gujarat, which has emerged as a BJP stronghold over the years.

A large section of voters DH interacted with in the region pitched for a second term for Modi at the Centre contending that it was necessary to streamline the administrative processes to ensure that the benefits of governance reach one and all.

“Look what has happened in Gujarat. During his 12 years as chief minister, he has put in place a robust system. Another five years at the Centre for Modi will work wonders for the nation,” Pankaj Wani, a petrol pump owner in Bharuch said.

Similar views were echoed by Sajnaben Macchi in Bhadbhut village about 50 km from Bharuch. Sajnaben, 50, sells fish during the rainy season but is forced to do odd jobs like washing utensils at dinner parties to make ends meet.

“I may die of hunger, but still vote for Modi. He makes us feel safe,” she told DH claiming that the prime minister had helped check hooliganism during his tenure as chief minister of the state.

South Gujarat comprises five Lok Sabha seats – Bardoli, Bharuch, Surat, Navsari and Valsad. Two Union Territories – Dadra & Nagar Haveli, and Daman & Diu – are situated near Valsad and also go to polls on April 23 along with the state.

However, a few kilometres away, 54-year-old Abdul Ismail has a different view. Abdul ferries supplies to grocers in villages near Bharuch and has bitter experiences about the after-effects of note ban and Goods and Services Tax.

“Earlier, I used to make four trips to these villages in a day. Now, I barely get to do one odd trip to the villages. Things are really difficult,” he said as his attendant unloaded huge tins of edible oil in a shop in Kasva village.

At Valod village near Bardoli, 28-year-old Javed Shaikh is not too forthcoming on a discussion on politics. A little more prodding and he reluctantly lets out that he is a Congress supporter. “What’s the use, sir. In the end, it is Modi who will win,” Shaikh said.

A little further away, the mere mention of Modi lightens up the wiry frame of Amrutlal Patel, a 65-year-old retired panchayat employee in Ambheti village near Valsad. “Desh main kewal ek hi mard hai – Modi. (There is only one man in the country – Modi),” said Patel.

“I read newspapers. I know how he carried out air strikes in Pakistan. Would any other person had the daring to do this,” Patel said.

Elsewhere, in Mahegam village that lies on the estuary of Narmada, Narottambhai Gohil lashes out at the Modi. “He has done nothing for farmers. Congress is good, but Rahul Gandhi is not doing enough. Congress should have been more forceful in presenting an alternative,” Gohil said.

“This election is not like 2014. Modi will still return, but with less numbers,” the 65-year-old farmer said.
