Sabarimala: Triple plot on Kerala's bipolar pitch; battle b

Thiruvananthapuram: Kerala’s bipolar politics has three prominent features this time: The Congress-led UDF is hard-pressed to deliver a huge tally for the party’s Delhi calculations, the CPM-led LDF is trying to prove Kerala Communists can buck the trend of nation-wide meltdown and BJP has found an emotive issue in ' Sabarimala .' In 2014, the UDF won 12 seats in Kerala, against LDF’s 8, while the BJP drew a blank, though its vote share went up to 10.3% from 6.4% in 2009.LDF’s 2016 victory in the assembly polls was remarkable as it bagged 45% of the vote share against UDF’s 39%, in a state that sees wafer thin difference in percentages. The Lok Sabha polls comes a month ahead of the Pinarayi Vijayan government’s third anniversary and will be seen as a mandate on the regime’s political and administrative narrative. This is also the first real Pinarayi Vijayanled LDF campaign as his in-house rival VS Achuthanandan has been sidelined. Vijayan’s ‘tough leader’ image faces the biggest test, after he has been projected to be behind the ‘token implementation’ of the Supreme Court order to allow women of reproductive age to enter the Sabarimala shrine. Will the ‘Pinarayi stand,’ applauded by the Left intelligentsia, shore up the LDF? Or, will it prove to be self-goal, handing the advantage back to the UDF, besides gifting an opening for the BJP?“The BJP is deliberately playing politics with Sabarimala only for electoral opportunism,” said Babu, a shopkeeper in Thiruvananthapuram . “I will again vote for the Left but many devotees, especially women, are hurt and angry,” said Manoj, a taxi-driver in Pathanamthitta . The CM has rallied the CPM organisational network and resources to mount an all-out LDF campaign against the UDF and BJP. “This election is being fought on national issues. People know, the more Left MPs in Parliament, the stronger and stable will be a secular government. The Modi government has also been anti-Kerala, by not providing financial aid for the LDF regime’s projects, even during the 2018 flood,” CPM state secretary Kodiyeri Balakrishnan told ET. On test will be Left’s ability to hold on to its traditional social base among Hindus and sections of Muslims and Christians. Retaining the support of Left backers in the coircashew-handloom sectors will not be easy as they remain gloomy despite LDF’s revival promises.The state Congress is working more to turn the rivals’ fault lines into its strengths. With an eye on Hindu votes, the UDF has projected the LDF and BJP as parties that have played negative politics on Sabarimala. It contents that the LDF regime facilitated “violation of long-established customs” and BJP turned the shrine into a ‘battleground’ even as the Modi regime “betrayed devotees” by “failing to take legal and legislative measures” to undo the SC order. There is speculation that the state Congress leadership has won the informal backing of the Nair Service Society, which the BJP was wooing, in key seats barring Thiruvananthapuram. Equally, by projecting the polls as ‘Congress Vs Modi’, the UDF is hoping to rally support of large sections of Muslims and Christians who may have voted for LDF in 2016. “Only the Congress and allies can defeat the Modi government. Kerala voters know that the Congress always stands by devotees, customs and preaches social harmony. Our stand on Sabarimala has been consistent with the affidavit the Chandy government submitted in SC in 2014,” PCC chief Mullapally Ramachandran told ET.The UDF hopes to capitalise on the popular resentment against a series of recent political murders which it argues is a sign of the spread of CPM’s ‘Kannur culture’. But the biggest challenge is to ensure internal unity and organisational mobilisation, especially in CPM strongholds of north Kerala.No other election in Kerala has seen BJP on such an all-out campaign. For a party that has never won a single Lok Sabha seat in Kerala and could manage just one assembly seat, the BJP has literally rained its resources and ‘Delhi stars’ to trigger a blitzkrieg. By working on the Sabarimala plank, the BJP is trying to create a social churning in a state that has remained politically aloof to even the Ayodhya movement. The party is also playing up the ‘Modi factor’ to make up for the lack of effective leadership and organisational unity in the state BJP and also appeal to the middle class. BJP’s ambitious game plan has been to emotively woo sections of Nairs and Ezhavas in a state that has over 40% non-Hindu votes and combine it with floating voters.“People of Kerala are fed up with the UDF and LDF brand of politics. Since they join hands in Delhi after their mock fight in Kerala, people know that only BJP is the real opposition in Kerala and the genuine alternative. For us, Sabarimala is a matter of defending people’s rights and faith,” BJP state president PS Sreedharan Pillai told ET.BJP is perceived to be in a very close fight in Thiruvananthapuram, while remaining in the reckoning in Pathanamthitta and Thrissur. While it faces the task of matching its hype with results, both the UDF and LDF are closely watching the votes BJP candidates could secure in many seats where the close margins separate the winner from the vanquished.
