Farmer killed ‘in firing’ with cattle thieves was ‘unarmed’

GREATER NOIDA: Ratan Singh, the farmer killed in firing by alleged cattle thieves in Jarcha’s Khurshidpura village on Sunday, did not own a gun licence and was not in possession of any arms, according to police. At the time of the incident, he was unarmed, eyewitnesses have told TOI.A suspected cattle thief had also died in the “exchange of fire”. While the villagers claimed that the two were hit by bullets fired by the thief’s accomplices, police did not rule out the role of a local resident.Ratan’s cousin Harendra, who was the first to be attacked, said: “He did not even have a stick, else he would have hit the accused with it.”Cops confirmed that no pistol or gun had been recovered from the spot. “There are no arms in the village as all were deposited with the district administration ahead of the elections. We have not recovered any arms from the spot,” Jarcha station officer Prabhash Chand said.Villagers in Khurshidpura have been forced to protect their cattle with sticks. They say cattle theft in the area has increased in the last three months, especially since about 10 gun licencees had to deposit their arms ahead of the Lok Sabha polls.Vijay Singh (50), who lost a buffalo, said: “In March, a buffalo belonging to Bishanpal was stolen from his cowshed. On April 3, a buffalo was taken away from my cowshed. I lodged a complaint at the police station but they refused to register an FIR,” he said.Bishanpal Singh (55), a resident, blamed illegal slaughter houses. “There are ample cases of theft that the village has witnessed due to its location on the border of three districts. The thieves sell off the cattle to illegal slaughter houses across Hapur, Bulandshahr and Jarcha,” Bishanpal claimed.The illegal slaughter houses are being run with police protection, alleged Baldan Singh (80), another resident. Cops denied the allegations of any collusion between them and cattle smugglers.Meanwhile, police recovered an ID card from the deceased thief which mentions the name of a Delhi resident. Its details are being verified by the police.Asked whether the thief and Ratan were killed with the same gun, Chand said police are awaiting the report from the forensic lab.
