DyDE mediates Amanora School vs parents tussle

School to roll back TCs served to those who protested fee hike; parents to approach court



Parents of students who study at Amanora School, Hadapsar went on a 10-day protest after it served transfer certificates (TCs), following discrepancies over fee hike. The agitation came to a conclusion after the school agreed to retract the TCs.



Of the 277 students who were served the certificates after parents failed to pay the entire fees — and instead pay the “legitimate” fee — 166 protested outside the campus. Parents had paid Rs 49,950 instead of the prescribed Rs 67,500. The escalating situation prompted a meeting between school and education officers, where the deputy director of education (DyDE) suggested the parents take the case in court. Also, the school was asked to reinstate students, who were not allowed to enter the school after it reopened on April 10.



As parents protested, activists from various schools also met education commissioner on Saturday, who decided to send education officers to school on Monday and look into the matter.



Pune DyDE Meenakshi Raut said, “We took the decision in favour of students. Education officers tried to resolve the tussle by asking parents to approach the court. For now, they will have to pay the post-dated cheques of the difference in fees. Students will be now taken in the school on April 24 and we have also asked the management not discriminate among students due to nonpayment of entire fees.”



Depending on the court order, the parents will have to pay the remaining fees (for which they have already given the post-dated cheques) or the school will have to exempt the difference.



Sonal Kodre, one of the parents who had been protesting, said, “The education office and school together decided that students should be reinstated in the school from April 24. While we are ready to pay the postdated cheques of the remaining amount — as we have already paid Rs 49,950 — we will now also start the process to take the matter in court.”



She added, “We have paid the legitimate fees. The executive committee of parents-teachers’ association should not have given a nod to the fee hike. We had also demanded that school should not discriminate among our students and other students over the fee hike issue.”



Spokesperson of the school confirmed that there was a meeting held with the education officers, parents and school management and would inform the school’s take on the same once minutes of the meeting are finalised.


