CONFIRMED! Salman Khan’s Tere Naam to get a sequel; will the Dabangg 3 actor star in the film?

Will Salman Khan star in the Tere Naam sequel? | Photo Credit: YouTube

Whether you loved it, hated it or just made fun of it, but you can’t disagree that one of Salman Khan’s most iconic roles in his career was as Radhe Mohan in the 2003 drama Tere Naam. His long locks falling on his face, his dark glasses or his unique body language, the character has been etched in the memory of fans forever and to this day, used as a reference during conversations. A remake of the Tamil film Sethu, Tere Naam was directed by actor and filmmaker, Satish Kaushik.

“The sequel is a new story, Satish finished writing the script recently.It is a love story revolving around a gangster and will be set in North India. Satish and Salman share a great bond and have recently worked together in Bharat. But it is yet to be decided if Salman will feature in the film or a new cast will be brought on board,” – a source told Mumbai Mirror.

It has been 16 years since we saw Salman on the big screen sporting those locks and playing the Radhe character. Though, he may still seem like the ideal choice to reprise the role, but one has to keep into consideration that ‘Bhai’ has a full plate on the work front. While he will soon be busy with the promotions of his upcoming film Bharat, the trailer of which was dropped yesterday, the Bollywood superstar is currently busy shooting for his upcoming Dabangg 3, which will hit theatres in December.

Following that, Salman is set to collaborate with Sanjay Leena Bhansali in Inshallah, where he will be seen on the big screen, for the first time, with Alia Bhatt. Salman has expressed his excitement about reuniting with his Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam director after two decades in a tweet which he shared when the film was announced officially.

Now, Inshallah will hit theatres in Eid 2020, which once again begs the question if Salman will be able to give dates for a Tere Naam sequel? A lot depends on if Satish Kaushik is willing to wait and if Salman too willl be keen to reprise his role of Radhe Mohan. The tabloid got in touch with the director, who confirmed that he is working on the sequel of Tere Naam, but refrained from giving out any further information.

“Yes it’s true, I am making Tere Naam 2 which is a love story. That’s all I can say for now,” – Satish Kaushik said. The filmmaker too is currently busy with the post-production of the Pankaj Tripathi-starrer Kaagaz.
