Deepika Padukone wraps Delhi shooting schedule of Chhapaak, director Meghna Gulzar shares pics

Actor Deepika Padukone has wrapped up the first shooting schedule of her film Chhapaak in Delhi. The actor plays an acid-attack survivor called Malti in the film and was spotted with makeup and prosthetics in the capital.

Director Meghna Gulzar of Raazi fame shared the wrap up pictures from the sets of the film on her Instagram account and captioned them, “Happily halfway done! Delhi schedule wrap for team #chhapaak.” Actor Vikrant Massey of Balika Vadhu fame plays the male lead in the film and can be seen along with Deepika who is dressed in a purple salwar suit with a maroon dupatta.

Meghna Gulzar with the team of Chhapaak.

A few days before, a video of Deepika and Vikrant’s kissing scene from the film leaked online. The two actors can be seen romancing each other at the terrace while shooting for the scene. They are surrounded by several onlookers who are hooting in the background in the video.

Not only this, several other pictures and videos of the actor shooting for the film have surfaced online. A video shows her in a school dress whereas several others show her dressed in different salwar suits.

Chhapaak is based on the life of acid-attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal from Delhi. It is scheduled to release on January 10, 2020. The film also marks Deepika’s debut as a producer. Deepika had announced the project in her tweet that read, “A story of trauma and triumph. And the unquashable human spirit. Elated to collaborate with Fox Star Studios on #Chhapaak @meghnagulzar @masseysahib @foxstarhindi.”

Also read: Will Salman Khan return to play Radhe in Tere Naam sequel? Satish Kaushik confirms it is a love story

A story of trauma and triumph.

And the unquashable human spirit.

Elated to collaborate with Fox Star Studios on #Chhapaak @meghnagulzar @masseysahib@foxstarhindi — Deepika Padukone (@deepikapadukone) December 24, 2018

The actor had told Mumbai Mirror in an interview, “When I heard this story, I was deeply moved as it’s not just one of violence but of strength and courage, hope and victory. It made such an impact on me, that personally and creatively, I needed to go beyond and so the decision to turn producer.”

Follow @htshowbiz for more
