Death toll in Sri Lanka blasts rises to 310

Sri Lankan police media spokesperson SP Ruwan Gunasekara said that 40 people have been arrested in connection with the attacks. The suspects have been sent to custody and all of them are Sri Lankan nationals.

At least 310 people have lost their lives in the multiple bomb blasts that rocked Sri Lanka during Easter celebrations, police said on Tuesday.

Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena will meet foreign envoys and high commissioners and will brief them on the bombings and seek international assistance, according to the country's defence ministry.

"The intelligence agencies have reported that there were international organisations behind these acts of local terrorists. Hence, it has been decided to seek international assistance for investigations," a statement from the ministry said.

Mass funeral on day of mourning

As Sri Lanka marked national mourning today, Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe said that the entire nation mourned the "senseless loss of innocent lives" lost in the multiple blasts.

"I would like to thank the military and police forces, the medical personnel and all those who have worked bravely and tirelessly without concern for their own safety, to ensure the safety and security of our citizens. It is imperative that we remain unified as Sri Lankans in the face of this unspeakable tragedy," Wickremesinghe wrote on his Twitter handle.

In the aftermath of the bombings, Sri Lanka is in a state of emergency. All schools across the country have been shut till Wednesday, while the authorities are continuing their search and rescue operations.

On April 21, eight explosions rattled various suburbs in the Sri Lankan cities of Colombo, Negombo, Kochchikade and Batticaloa as the Christian community celebrated Easter Sunday. Out of the deceased, around 31 people have been identified as foreigners.

Sri Lanka announces compensation for blast victims

The Sri Lankan government on Monday announced that a compensation would be provided for those who have lost their lives in the bomb blasts that hit churches and luxury hotels in Sri Lanka, killing 310 people and injuring over 500 others during Easter celebrations.

8 Indians found dead in Lanka blasts

At least eight Kannadigas, including JD(S) workers hailing from Bengaluru and nearby districts were killed in the serial blasts that ripped through Sri Lanka on Easter Sunday.

Kerala offers medical team to Sri Lanka

The Kerala Government has constituted a medical team to extend medical aid for the victims of the serial blasts that rocked Sri Lanka.

Coast Guard beefs up surveillance after blasts

The Indian Coast Guard has beefed up surveillance and deployed more ships and aircraft for patrolling following a series of devastating blasts in Sri Lanka.

World leaders condemn series of blasts

138 people have been killed in Sri Lanka, with more that 600 badly injured, in a terrorist attack on churches and hotels. The United States offers heartfelt condolences to the great people of Sri Lanka. We stand ready to help! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) April 21, 2019

Queen Elizabeth II has led tributes by the royal family to the victims of the attacks.

"Prince Philip and I were deeply saddened to learn of the attacks in Sri Lanka and send our condolences to the families and friends of those who have lost their lives," the Queen posted on Twitter.

"I pay tribute to the medical and emergency services who are providing support to those who have been injured. Our thoughts and prayers are with all Sri Lankans at this difficult time."

Prince Charles said he and Camilla were "utterly horrified and profoundly saddened to hear of the barbaric attacks"

"Such acts of dreadful brutality, wherever they occur, are an appalling assault on our shared humanity and our values of understanding and compassion," he said.

The Queen has sent the following message to the President of Sri Lanka.

Read the message here https://t.co/lTaZq3kRdD — The Royal Family (@RoyalFamily) April 22, 2019

Prime Minister Scott Morrison said he was saddened by the horrible news and saddened to hear two Australians were killed.

"Manik and Alexendria were killed in the Negombo in the church there and this is just such horrible news," he said.

"People have seen those photos of the beautiful mother and daughter and their heart would have broken as mine certainly did when they saw the photos."

Victoria grieves with the people of Sri Lanka – and tonight and tomorrow night, Flinders Street Station, Bolte Bridge, Melbourne Town Hall, the Arts Centre spire, NGV, Melbourne Museum and the Royal Exhibition Building will be lit up in solidarity.



We will not let hate win. — Dan Andrews (@DanielAndrewsMP) April 22, 2019

Read more:



2 JD-S members among Indians killed in SL blasts

Indian actress has narrow escape in Colombo

Sri Lanka imposes curfew again
