Pepper country pins hopes on VIP Rahul Gandhi

For many in Kerala, Wayanad remains frontier territory where fortunes were built around pepper . The lure of the spice drew many migrants from central Kerala who left home in the early 50s to explore the backward and hostile terrain up north in the Western Ghats . Their first stop was Pulpally, a small town in Sultan Bathery, before moving into the higher reaches.“In 1956-60, migrants started growing lemon grass and tapioca. It was only later that they started growing pepper, especially in Pulpally where the soil was ideal,” said Jose Kutty, whose family owned pepper plantations. Back then, old timers say, you could set out to buy a jeep with a jeep full of pepper.Today, the spice has spawned distress and suicide. Prices of pepper have crashed to Rs 300 a kg from Rs 750 a kg in 2015-16. The rates are back to what they were in 1995-97. Besides low prices, farmers have had to contend with cheaper imports, diseases like quick wilt, and climatic changes which have taken a toll on the output.As Wayanad goes to vote on Tuesday, farmers are seeking solutions to free trade agreements, disease control and better remuneration, not to speak of hopes pinned on a prime ministerial candidate.In the 80s, growing and exporting pepper meant an instant lifestyle change, better housing, healthcare and education. “However, the dream run, which began around 1985, seemed to be coming to an end by 1995. The spice started getting affected by disease and climate change , including a rise in temperature. No solutions were found, resulting in large-scale losses to farmers,” Kutty said.M Surendran of Harita Sena, a farmers’ organisation, points out that when the prices of cash crops like coffee and pepper were high, banks held loan ‘melas’ lending farmers more than they needed. When the crop failed and prices fell, many were saddled with huge debts, resulting in suicides.In 2000-05, government records say 525 farmers committed suicide, but farmers’ outfits say the numbers are higher. “Farmers are victims of policies made by the government,” says PT John, South Indian convenor of the Rashtriya Kisan Mahasangh. “We have a lot of expectations from our VIP candidate, Rahul Gandhi.”
