Maharashtra drought situation gets worse as villagers struggle for drinking water

Administration has failed to provide adequate help to villagers from the Marathwada, Lamangaon and Jalna districts (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: In October 2015, the Maharashtra government declared 151 talukas as drought-ridden and after two months, 931 villages were added to the list. On a ground check, it was found that the situation has only gone from bad to worse. In October 2018, nearly half of Maharashtra had been declared drought-hit with over a thousand villages struggling to find even drinking water.

On performing a ground check of the Marathwada village which has 8 districts and is 350 kilometres away from Mumbai, is seeing the worst of all times. The villagers in Marathwada are fighting a constant battle in an attempt to get water for their crops and cattle. Another part of this list is the Jalna district which is facing similar issues.

On speaking to Parmeshwar Kolhe, a farmer from the Jalna district, Mirror Now found that the district administration and the government, both have failed to provide adequate water to the villagers. It was also observed that the summer crops (also called Kharif crops) had suffered damaged due to the drought. However, the winter crops (also known as Rabi crops) could not be sown due to the lack of water. On asking further, the farmers revealed that they have no other means of earning and day-to-day activities have seen a halt due to the scarcity of water. The drought has also led to a decrease in the land prices and people are not willing to buy it. This has closed the last door of hope for various farmers who wanted to make both ends meet by selling off their properties. Another village which is a part of this list is Lamangaon. The women of Lamangaon have to travel to neighbouring villages in order to get drinking water.

On speaking to the District Collector, it was found that the problem can only be solved with tactful methods. He laid emphasis on the judicious use of water and that there should be proper division of water among all the villages and districts. If the experts are to be believed, the villages have fallen prey to the personal ambitions of authorities and officials.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Also Read : Teenage son forced to carry mother's lifeless body on bicycle after locals refuse to help owing to her 'caste'
