All you need to know about Bilkis Bano gang-rape case - 17 year fight for justice

The Bombay HC reserved its order on an appeal filed by 11 convicts against life imprisonment awarded to them. | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: In the much-awaited judgement, the Supreme Court on Tuesday ordered the Gujarat government to give Rs 50 lakh as compensation to gang-rape survivor Bilkis Bano within two weeks. The apex court also directed to provide her a government job and a government accommodation. During the 2002 Gujarat riots, pregnant Bilkis Bano was gang-raped on March 3 in Randhikpur village.

The incident happened when she was fleeing the uproar in the aftermath of the Godhra Train burning case in Gujarat. In the riots, Bano lost 14 members of her family. Earlier, she had refused to accept Rs 5 lakh compensation offered by the Gujarat High Court.

Here is the timeline of events in the Bilkis Bano gang-rape case:

March 3, 2002: Bilkis Bano's family was attacked by a frenzied mob near Ahmedabad and seven members of her family were killed by the mob. 19-year-old, Bilkis five-month pregnant was gang-raped and meanwhile six other members of her family managed to escape from the mob.

2002-2003: Local police officials constantly refused to register her case, citing lack of evidence and threatened her if she decided to proceed with the matter. In December 2003, Bilkis then approached the National Human Rights Commission and submitted a petition in the Supreme Court. The apex court then directed the Central Bureau of Investigation to look into the matter.

January 2004: The CBI arrested all the accused named in the complaint by Bilkis after all the pieces of evidence were collected against them.

August 2004: The trial was shifted from Ahmedabad to Bombay by the Supreme Court after Bilkis pointed out fear of evidence tampering and that the witnesses could be harmed.

January 2008: The trial court passed the verdict in which 13 people were convicted for raping Bilkis, criminal conspiracy and murder and out of which 11 were sentenced life imprisonment. The accused then filed an appeal in the High Court challenging the conviction and sought for the trial court's order to be quashed.

July 2011: The CBI moved to the Bombay High Court seeking the death penalty for the convicts.

July 15, 2016: The Bombay High Court began hearing the appeals filed for 11 convicts for 2002 gangrape case.

September 2016: The Bombay HC rejected an application by the convict's lawyer, who sought for a re-examination of some witnesses in the case.

October 2016: Bombay HC bench ruled that the application cannot be allowed under the Criminal Procedure Code, but as the court mentioned that Bilkis may convert her application into an appeal.

December 2016: The Bombay HC reserved its order on an appeal filed by 11 convicts against life imprisonment awarded to them. Also, the HC reserved its order on an appeal filed CBI seeking death penalty of three convicts, mentioning it as rare of the rare cases.

May 2017: The HC upheld the life sentence of the 11 convicts.
