PM Modi takes on 'speed breaker' didi in Bengal, says TMC desperate enough to rope in foreign actors

PM Modi in West Bengal's Asansol I Photo credit: @BJP4India | Photo Credit: Twitter

Asansol/New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi in West Bengal’s Asansol took pot shots at Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee’s Trinamool Congress for roping in actors from neighbouring Bangladesh for its poll campaigns. Modi said the TMC is such dire straits that it has to call actors from abroad to attract actors from abroad to attract people to its rallies.

“I feel pity for you didi, look what the brave people of Bengal have done to you,” Modi said referring to Banerjee using her moniker ‘didi’ or elder sister.

Yesterday, BJP leader Mukul Roy wrote to the West Bengal Chief Election Officer (CEO) demanding that registration of TMC be cancelled for getting Bangladeshi actors to campaign for it.

Bangladeshi actors Ferdous Ahmed and Gazi Abdun Noor were seen campaigning for TMC Raigunj and Dum Dum candidates prompting BJP to make a formal complaint with the EC.

PM: Mutthi bhar seatein ladkar hamari 'didi' PM ban'ne ka sapna bhi dekh rahi hain, agar auction se PM ka pad mil jaata to Congress aur didi, dono auction mein, jo maal luta usko lekar aa jaate. Didi, ye PM pad auction mein nahi hai jo Sharda, Narada ke paiso se kharida jaa sake pic.twitter.com/6XDOaWlv9q — ANI (@ANI) April 23, 2019

During his speech in Asansol Modi also evoked Saradha scam and Narada sting operations stating, “Mutthi bhar seatein ladkar hamari 'didi' PM ban'ne ka sapna bhi dekh rahi hain, agar auction se PM ka pad mil jaata to Congress aur didi, dono auction mein, jo maal luta usko lekar aa jaate. Didi, ye PM pad auction mein nahi hai jo Sharda, Narada ke paiso se kharida jaa sake (Didi dreams of becoming the prime minister with only a handful of seats, if auction were a route to get prime minister’s post then both Congress and Didi would bring the cash acquired in loot. Didi, this PM post cannot be bought in an auction from money acquired in Saradha and Narada).

Modi said before 2014, the Congress government had made a record in corruption. “Today TMC government is giving tough competition to the Congress. Corruption and crime are non-stop in TMC rule. And 'Speed-breaker Didi' is also there,” Modi said.

The BJP and TMC have been at loggerheads for quite some time beginning CBI-Kolkata police faceoff to disallowing BJP’s rath yatra in the state. The saffron party expressed fears that TMC might use the state’s institutions to influence polling in the state.




