Rohit Tiwari murder: Strained marriage, ex-boyfriend add twist to mysterious death

New revelations in the murder of Rohit Tiwari, son of late Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand chief minister ND Tiwari, point to a domestic fight as a possible motive for the killing.

Rohit Shekhar, 40, was smothered to death on April 16 at his New Delhi home.

According to an ongoing investigation being carried out by the Delhi Police Crime Branch, the murderer was related to Rohit Tiwari.

The Delhi Police registered a case of murder hours after Rohit Tiwari's autopsy report revealed the cause of death to be asphyxia due to strangulation. The case was later transferred to the Crime Branch for further investigation.

The police has already questioned Rohit's wife Apoorva, brother Siddharth and the Tiwaris' servant and driver in connection with the murder case.

NO SIGNS OF FORCED ENTRY

The police suspect the killer lived in the Tiwaris' Defence Colony home as no signs of forced entry were found at the house.

Among the seven CCTV cameras installed in the premises, two were not functioning, sources said.

The sources said that experts from the Forensic Science Lab in Rohini visited Rohit Shekhar's home on Sunday where they recreated the crime sequence and opined that no signs were found to suggest that Tiwari resisted while he was smothered.

"Rohit had gone to Uttarakhand to vote [in the 2019 Lok Sabha election] on April 12 and returned on the night of April 15. He could be seen on CCTV taking the support of the wall while walking in an inebriated state. No one has come and gone out of the home at the time Rohit was smothered," investigators said.

Rohit and his mother went to Haldwani in Uttarakhand to cast their votes on April 11. On April 15, the mother-son duo returned to Delhi. While Shekhar went to his residence in Defence Colony, his mother went to Tilak Lane and returned later.

"When I came back, I asked Apoorva (Shekhar's wife) about him, she told me 'he was tired, so he had dinner and went to sleep'. Meanwhile, Shekhar came down and said he was exhausted," the mother told media.

WIFE UNDER SCRUTINY

The police are looking at Apoorva as the prime suspect in the murder case. She has been questioned by the police for three days in a row now.

Investigators have also collected DNA samples from Apoorva. She was made to submit nail and hair samples at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).

This was done as strangulation marks were found on Rohit's neck.

STRAINED MARRIAGE

Sources said Rohit and his wife Apoorva did not share a cordial relationship. The two had gotten married last year.

Rohit and Apoorva had met through a matrimonial site in 2017. They first met each other in Lucknow after which they proceeded to be in a live-in relationship for a year. They got married on May 12, 2018.

Last month, the couple had gotten into a huge fight after which Apoorva began staying at her parents' house. However, she returned home on March 30.

According to police sources, Rohit and Apoorva had discussed getting divorcing several times and in fact decided to end their marriage in June.

Rohit's mother Ujjawla has hit out at Apoorva and her parents alleging they had their eyes on his property.

"Apoorva's family wanted to take control of the properties of my both sons -- Siddharth and Rohit -- because this house is nearer to the Supreme Court where Apoorva was practising law," she said.

Sources also suggest that Apoorva had a boyfriend before marrying Rohit and was in touch with him even after she got married. And this was why Rohit and Apoorva slept in separate bedrooms.

(with inputs from PTI)
