Looking at voting in first 3 phases, I can say BJP will form majority govt: Amit Shah in Varanasi

Amit Shah (File image) | Photo Credit: ANI

Varanasi: BJP chief Amit Shah visited Varanasi, one of the crucial seats in the Lok Sabha elections and the parliamentary constituency of Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday. Shah inaugurated a media centre in the city, and expressed confidence that PM Modi would be re-elected from the constituency in the 2019 Lok Sabha polls.

Addressing reporters at the launch of the media centre, Shah said that the BJP was all set to come back to power and win a full majority in the polls. He said, “After looking at the voting in the first three phases, I can say that the results are going to come in BJP's favour. We are going to make a full majority government.”

The BJP president further said, "Today I have completed my visits on 253 seats, and now I can confidently say that ‘Phir ek baar Modi Sarkar’ slogan has been owned by people.” Shah claimed that the "massive wave across the nation" would make Modi the prime minister again.

Shah informed the media that PM Modi would file his nomination from Varanasi on April 26 at around 11:30 am. Following this, the Prime Minister would hold a massive roadshow from 3 pm to 7 pm in the city.

(Amit Shah at the inauguration of media centre in Varanasi)

Meanwhile, the third phase of the Lok Sabha elections held today was a big day for the BJP president as he made his electoral debut. Shah is the BJP's candidate from Gandhinagar in Gujarat after he replaced party patriarch LK Advani as the candidate from Gandhinagar.

All 26 parliamentary constituencies in Gujarat went to polls on Tuesday, with a voter turnout of 62.36% recorded in the state.

On the other hand, Congress president Rahul Gandhi stirred controversy on Tuesday after he referred to BJP chief Shah as “murder accused” at a rally in Madhya Pradesh. “Murder accused BJP President Amit Shah....waah! kya shaan hai....Have you heard Jay Shah's name? He is a magician, he made Rs 50,000 into Rs 80 crore in 3 months," Gandhi said, referring to alleged disproportionate assets case against Amit Shah’s son.
