Lok Sabha Elections: One killed in clash, 78.97% turnout in five Bengal seats

A 55-year-old man was killed and two others were critically injured as violence marred polling in five constituencies that went to polls in the third phase of Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal on Tuesday. The average polling in five seats till 5pm was 78.97 per cent.

A clash between workers of the Trinamool Congress and the Congress in Murshidabad district led to the death of Tiarul Sheikh, who the Congress claimed was its member. Election Commission’s special observer to West Bengal, Ajay V Nayek, said, “So far today’s poll was safe and good.”

“The poll was conducted peacefully with some stray incidents being reported. There was a clash between two groups, stones were pelted…. people attacked each other with bamboo sticks and rods. Four persons were injured. Our team rushed to the spot and took them to nearby hospital. One of them was declared brought dead,” said Chief Electoral Officer of West Bengal, Aariz Aftab.

The poling began amid tight security in Malda Uttar, Malda Dakshin, Jangipur, Murshidabad and Balurghat Lok Sabha seats at 7am. However, reports of violence from all these constituencies started pouring in as the day progressed.

The first poll-related casualty from the state during the 17th Lok Sabha elections was reported after a TMC-Congress clash at Bhagwangola in Murshidabad constituency. According to reports, the clash broke out around 300 metres from booth number 188 at Bhagwangola.

Tiarul Sheikh was declared brought dead at Lalbagh Hospital. The Congress claimed Tiarul was a member of the party and accused the TMC for the clash. He was attacked with a sharp weapon. Mohtab Sheikh (18), son of the deceased, said, “My father was attacked with a hansua (a sharp weapon). He was bleeding profusely. I took him to hospital on a motorbike but could not be saved.”

Mohtab who works in Kerala, came home to cast his vote for the first time. He was also beaten up but his injuries were not serious. “My father took me to the polling booth to help me cast my vote. I can’t believe he is no more. He was not into politics,” Mohtab said.

Bombs were reportedly hurled outside a booth in Balurghat seat of West Bengal. (PTI) Bombs were reportedly hurled outside a booth in Balurghat seat of West Bengal. (PTI)

Tiarul Sheikh’s brother, Tahriul Sheikh, said they were not into politics and came home from Kolkata, where they work, to cast their vote. “My brother and I work as labourers in Kolkata. We came here to cast our votes. We were standing in queue at the booth when the clash broke out between TMC and Congress workers. I ran for my life and called out to my brother to join me. But he was caught in the clash and one of the TMC workers attacked him with a sharp weapon. We were never into politics,” he said.

Another Congress worker, Mehboob Sheikh, and one TMC worker, Tajarul Sheikh, were injured. They are admitted to Lalbagh Hospital where their condition is said to be critical.

Police said three persons were arrested in connection with the incident, including the prime suspect, Lalu Sheikh, a TMC worker. “An FIR has been registered on the basis of the complaint filed by Hira Bibi, daughter of the deceased. Three persons have been arrested, including the prime accused Lalu Sheikh who is a relative of the deceased. We are probing from all angles. Six people were named in the FIR,” said Siddhinath Gupta, IG (law and order).

The EC sought a report from Murshidabad district administration on the incident and said the poll process at the booth was not disrupted. Local people alleged that the central force deployed at the booth did not come to the rescue of those who were being beaten up.

Click here for more election news

Explained More forces lined up for sensitive booths in Bengal Following a casualty in poll-related violence on Tuesday, the Election Commission has prepared an elaborate plan, including central forces at 98 per cent of polling booths for the remaining four phases of polls in West Bengal. With a bigger number of sensitive booths in the forthcoming phases, the EC is not only concentrating on deploying adequate forces inside polling premises but also increasing patrolling in politically sensitive areas. The fourth phase will witness deployment of 552 companies of CAPF — the highest so far in West Bengal. The EC is also under pressure over the demand to provide better security for poll personnel in the state.

Congress candidate from Murshidabad seat, Abu Hena, said, “One of our party workers was killed today (Tuesday) by TMC workers. The ruling party is indulging in violence to terrorise the voters.”

The TMC, however, denied the allegations. “Our three workers — Ahajul Islam, Lal Mohammad, Manirul Islam — were seriously injured. They have been sent to Berhampore Hospital. Congress workers attacked our men. The Congress and the CPM have entered into a nexus to stop the TMC here. As a result, one innocent voter was killed. We want a full-fledged probe into this and punish those who are responsible,” said Abu Taher Khan, TMC candidate from Murshidabad.

The BJP, too, blamed the TMC for the violence. “One peroson was killed by the TMC in Bhagwangola. This is very unfortunate,” said Joy Prakash Majumdar, state BJP vice-president.

In other incidents of violence, three people were injured in two seperate incidents where crude bombs were hurled at

Domkal area and adjoining Tiktikipara in Murshidabad district. At Tapan in South Dinajpur district, a local BJP leader was allegedly attacked by TMC workers with a sharp weapon. He is hospitalised and the District Magistrate has sought a report on the inident.

At Kaliachak under Malda Dakshin Lok Sabha seat, local people alleged that crude bombs were hurled outside an election office of the Congress, injuring three party workers. At Ratua in Malda Uttar seat, a presiding officer was removed by the Election Commission after he allowed one person to help others cast their votes.

“We have not received any major complaint from our workers or polling agents from Malda district. In some places, our polling agents were barred from entering the booths. We have brought this to the notice of the Election Commission,” said Sanjit Sinha, BJP Malda district president. “Total four FIRs have been filed. Total arrested persons were 231 out of which 224 were preventive arrests and seven others were arrested in specific cases. Total 9 persons were injured in different incidents,” said IG (law and order).

At Kotowali, where family members of former Union minister, ABA Ghani Khan Choudhury, lives, voting was largely peaceful. All three candidates of Ghani Khan Choudhury family — Abu Hasem Khan Choudhury and Isha Khan Choudhury of the Congress and Mausam Noor of the TMC cast their votes.

The Election Commission deployed a total of 324 companies of central forces, covering over 92% of the polling booths to ensure free and fair polling. Just a day ahead of the third phase of polls, the Election Commission of India (ECI) transferred seven police officers, out of which three comes under the jurisdiction of two out of the five constituencies that went to polls on Tuesday.
