1 killed in violence-marred Bengal polls

IANS

Kolkata

One Congress worker was killed in clashes outside a polling booth, and hurling of bombs, bids to intimidate voters and EVM snags marred the third phase of Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal on Tuesday.

Around 68 per cent voting was recorded in the five constituencies — Balurghat, Malda North, Malda South, Jangipur and Murshidabad — till 3 pm. The polling began at 6 am and will continue till 6 p.m.

The happy morning scenario of enthusiastic men and women queuing up outside polling booths to vote changed during the course of the day as reports of armed clashes between workers of rival parties started pouring in.

According to voters standing outside booth number 188 in the Bhagwangola Assembly segment of Murshidadbad constituency, Trinamool Congress and Congress activists attacked each other with bamboo sticks and sickles. A Trinamool panchayat member and few Congress workers were injured.

One person, identified as Tiyarul Sheikh, succumbed to injuries, a Ranitala police station officer said. According to an Election Commission official, Sheikh was attacked outside the booth when he came out after casting his vote.

Meanwhile, an EC official said till 3 pm, the overall voting percentage was 67.78. Balurghat recorded 72.02, Malda North 64.66, Malda South 66.04, Jangipur 68.41 and Murshidabad 67.75 per cent polling.

Crude bombs were hurled by bike-borne miscreants outside polling stations at Tiktikipara in Domkal, Murshidadbad, and Kaliachawk in Malda South. Both Domkal and Kaliachawk are known for their history of political violence.

In Domkal, a Trinamool Congress councillor’s husband was also beaten up allegedly by Congress-backed goons.

In South Dinajpur district, a Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader sustained serious injuries when he was attacked with a sharp weapon, allegedly by Trinamool-backed goons at Tapan, while the BJP’s Balurghat candidate Sukanta Majumdar was threatened. In the Kusmandi area, Trinamool

activists allegedly thrashed BJP supporters.

A former Trinamool lawmaker Mahmuda Begum was seen intimidating police personnel for heavy security deployment at a booth in Balurghat’s Kumarganj.

Opposition parties — the Congress and the CPI-M — alleged that Trinamool supporters threatened their agents and voters in many booths in Murshidabad’s Bhagobangola and Jalangi areas. Firings by miscreants, purportedly owing allegiance to the Trinamool Congress to threaten opposition agents, were also reported in Murshidabad’s Kumripur.

Faulty Electronic Voting Machines stalled voting in a few polling stations in Malda North seat.

Meanwhile, Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress supremo Mamata Banerjee accused the central forces personnel of influencing electorate to vote for the BJP and said an “official complaint” has been lodged with the EC against

offenders.
