Sri Lanka attacks: Who are the victims?

As the first funerals for the victims of the Easter Sunday attack in Sri Lanka are held, more details about those killed in the blasts are being released.

Photo: The Associated Press.

The island nation was rocked by a series of co-ordinated blasts in churches and hotels on Sunday, killing 321 people and injuring 500.

In total, six bombs were detonated in the capital Colombo, Negombo and Batticaloa.

A mass funeral for about 30 victims took place on Tuesday as Sri Lanka marked an official day of mourning for the victims.

A state of emergency remains in effect to prevent further attacks.

Police have now detained 40 suspects in connection with the attack, all of whom were Sri Lankan nationals.

Photo: The Associated Press

The archbishop of Colombo, Cardinal Malcolm Ranjith, said at least 110 people were killed at St. Sebastian's Church.

Most of those who died in the attacks were Sri Lankan nationals (283), 38 have been confirmed as foreign nationals with another 14 unaccounted for.

One of the first victims to be publicly identified was Sri Lankan celebrity chef Shantha Mayadunne and her daughter Nisanga Mayadunne, who had posted a picture of the family having breakfast in the Shangri-La Hotel in Colombo shortly before the deadly blast.

Another Sri Lankan victim, Dileep Roshan, 37, was a carpenter who left behind a wife and daughter, his family told The Associated Press.

"His wife and daughter won't be able to do much now because he is gone," his older brother, Sanjeevani Roshan, said. "The real question is what will happen to their future."

Photo: The Associated Press.

Of the foreign nationals killed, at least eight have been confirmed as British citizens as well as 10 from India.

Among the Britons' killed were lawyer Anita Nicholson, son Alex Nicholson and daughter Annabel Nicholson, her husband, Ben Nicholson, confirmed in a statement.

Anita Nicholson was a former legal adviser at the British Treasury and would be remembered by colleagues there as "a brilliant and dedicated lawyer".

Ben Nicholson said the family was on holiday, sitting at the table of the restaurant of the Shangri-la Hotel when they were killed.

He said: "The holiday we had just enjoyed was a testament to Anita's enjoyment of travel and providing a rich and colourful life for our family, and especially our children."

Photo: The Associated Press

Dr Sally Bradley, of Manchester, and Bill Harrop who were described as "soulmates" by those who knew them.

Siblings Daniel and Amelie Linsey were also confirmed to have died in the blasts.

Three of Danish billionaire Anders Holch Povlsen's children were killed in the attack - Mr Povlsen owns the Bestseller clothing chain and holds a majority stake in clothing giant Asos.

Ten Indian nationals, some of whom were political party workers from Bangalore, died in the bombings at the Shangri-La.

The party workers have been identified as KG Hanumantharayappa, M Rangappa, KM Laxminarayan, Lakshmana Gowda Ramesh, H Shivakumar, A Maregowda and H Puttaraju. They were all members of the Janata Dal Secular (JDS).

The JDS workers were on holiday in Sri Lanka after polling for the Indian general elections ended in the state on 18 April.

The chief minister of the Indian state of Karnataka, HD Kumaraswami said in a tweet that he had known some of the party workers personally, adding that he was "deeply pained".

Photo: The Associated Press.

The Indian High Commission also identified two more Indian nationals as Vemurai Tulsiram and SR Nagaraj.

Another Indian, Razeena Khader Kukkady was killed in the same blast.

The 58-year-old, who was originally from Kerala, lived in Dubai with her husband but travelled to Colombo to meet her relatives.

He left for Dubai on Sunday morning and she was due to leave Colombo on a later flight on the same day.

The victims' nationalities

Sri Lanka: 283 confirmed dead including Sri Lankan celebrity chef Shantha Mayadunne and her daughter Nisanga.

India: 10 Indians have been confirmed to have died in the attacks.

UK: Sri Lanka's top diplomat in Britain says authorities know of eight British nationals killed in the bombings.

USA: The State Department says at least four Americans were killed and several others seriously injured.

Denmark: The Bestseller clothing chain confirmed Danish media reports that three of the children of its owner, business tycoon Anders Holch Povlsen, were killed in the attacks.

Switzerland: The foreign ministry says a Swiss national, a Swiss dual national and a non-Swiss member of the same family were killed.

Spain: Spain's foreign ministry says a Spanish man and woman were killed.

Australia: Prime minister Scott Morrison says a mother and daughter from that country were killed. Manik Suriaaratchi and her 10-year-old daughter Alexendria were attending a church service in Negombo when they died.

China: State media say two Chinese died in the blasts.

Others: The Netherlands, Japan and Portugal have confirmed their nationals were among the dead.

- BBC/AP
