This time Modi wave bigger than 2014, says CM Devendra Fadnavis

Stating that there is a hidden Modi wave within the middle and lower sections of the society — the kind that was evident in 2014 Lok Sabha poll — Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis, on Tuesday, said that the BJP-Shiv Sena mega-alliance would win all the ten seats, including six in Mumbai and four in Thane, Kalyan-Dombivli, and Palghar. He said that the BJP and Sena alliance would not only retain but would cross its tally of 42 seats in 2014.

Fadnavis, on Tuesday, gave an interview to a group of journalists before the fourth phase of polling in the state. The fourth and the last phase of polling is slated on April 29, where Mumbai would also go for polling. The chief minister during an hour-long interview answered questions on local and national issues. Here are the excerpts:

What is your assessment of the situation on the ground?

There is a bigger Modi wave this time; even bigger than what we had witnessed in 2014. This time it is somewhat hidden and we can see it only during the campaigns. This time it is amidst the lower middle class and poor sections of the society. You go to any village and talk to any woman working in a field, you would realise the Modi wave.

Would it translate in votes?

My prediction and assessment are that we would cross our tally of 42 seats this time. We would win all the ten seats in MMR including six in Mumbai, three in KDMC, Thane, and one in Palghar.

What about an appeal to voters by Mukesh Ambani?

I think he had made such an appeal even in 2014, but the Sena won the South Mumbai seat and it would be repeated this time too. He has made an appeal for only one candidate, which is Milind Deora and Sena would win this seat despite Ambani's appeal.

Despite the claim of development, the BJP is depending on nationalism and its attack on Pakistan during campaigns. What is the reason?

Prime Minister Narendra Modi devotes a major part of his speech on development and only 25 per cent on nationalism. There is a strong sentiment of nationalism after the Pulwama terror attack. What is wrong in talking about nationalism in national elections? If you go to the United States, there is a practise of sealing the borders during their elections.

BJP has been targeting NCP President Sharad Pawar. The Prime Minister, in his every speech, has criticised Pawar and his family. Why Pawar and why not Congress?

Firstly, let me make it very clear that the Congress party is the B team of NCP in Maharashtra. Pawar himself announced that he was an architect of the so-called mega-alliance of the Opposition at the national level and it is obvious that criticism will be hinted at him. Another reason is, if we criticise Rahul Gandhi, journalists do not publish it enough, but if we criticise Pawar, the press gives wider publicity.

BJP made a hue and cry over the corrupt practices of the Congress and NCP; in that case, why has BJP inducted the generation next of these parties?

Yes, we have exposed their corruption, but it does not mean all Congress, NCP leaders are corrupt. Ranjitsinh Mohite-Patil is not involved in any case and nor is there any allegation against him. Whether it is Ranjitsinh or Dr Sujay Vikhe-Patil, if generation next of these dynasty families are ready to believe in BJP, why should we reject them?
