Bilkis Bano case SC directs Gujarat Govt for compensation; special stamp on Ramayana – Current Affairs

Story 1: Bilkis Bano Case: SC orders to give Rs 50 lakh compensation, job, accommodation

The Supreme Court directed the Gujarat Government on April 23, 2019 to give Rs 50 lakh compensation, a job and accommodation to Bilkis Bano. She was gang raped during the 2002 riots in the Gujrat. This compensation comes two years after the Bombay High court delivered justice, convicting eleven of the accused, including five Gujarat policemen and two doctors for tampering with evidence.

Bilkis Bano had earlier refused to accept the offer of Rs 5 lakh and had sought exemplary compensation from the state government in a plea before the Supreme Court. In 2002 Gujarat riots 14 members of Bilkis' family were killed, including her two-and-half-year old daughter.

Supreme Court’s Verdict The Supreme Court has asked the Gujarat government to give Rs 50 lakh to Bilkis Bano as compensation and also provide employment and an accommodation if she is willing to accept them. The Supreme Court said, "While the state eventually punished the perpetrators of the crime, the victim was left devastated after seeing human fury at its worst. Not only was she raped, her daughter was smashed to death. Ever since the appellant has been living a nomadic life and surviving at the charity of NGOs. The appellant is now 40 year old and not very well educated. She has lost her entire family."

Bilkis Bano Case

On March 3, 2002 Bilkis Bano's family was attacked by a mob at Randhikpur village near Ahmedabad during the Godhra riots. Fourteen members of her family were killed.

She filed a case and trail began in Ahmedabad. Supreme Court transferred the case to Mumbai in August 2004.

A special court had on 21 January, 2008 convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment 11 men for raping Bilkis and murdering seven of her family members.

The high court, on May 4, 2017, convicted seven people under charges of not performing their duties and tampering of evidence.

The Supreme Court had on July 10, 2017 dismissed the appeals of two doctors and four policemen.

Story 2: Indonesia releases special stamp on Ramayana theme

Indonesia has released a special commemorative stamp on the theme of Ramayana on April 23, 2019 to mark the 70th anniversary of establishment of its diplomatic ties with India. A specially signed version of the stamp will be on display at the Philately Museum in Jakarta.

The stamp, designed by renowned Indonesian sculptor Padmashri Bapak Nyoman Nuarta, featured a scene from Ramayana in which Jatayu valiantly fought to save Sita, said a statement issued by the Embassy of India.

Key Highlights

India's Ambassador Pradeep Kumar Rawat and Indonesia's Vice Foreign Minister Abdurrahman Mohammad Fachir were part of the stamp release occasion.

It was jointly organised by the two countries to flag off the 70th anniversary commemorations of establishment their diplomatic ties.

Rawat underscored the significant strides that both nations had made in the last 70 years in their ties with a high point being the elevation of their relationship to a Comprehensive Strategic Partnership in May 2018 during Prime Minister Narendra Modi's visit to the country.

The event showcased a special photo exhibit chronicling some of the landmark moments in India-Indonesia ties from 1949 to 2019.





About Nyoman Nuarta

Nyoman Nuarta is an Indonesian sculptor and one of the pioneers of the New Art Movement (1976). He was born in Tabanan, Bali on November 14, 1951. He is best known through his masterpieces such as the Garuda Wisnu Kencana Statue (Badung, Bali), Jalesveva Jayamahe Monument (Surabaya), and the Indonesian Proclamation Monument (Jakarta). Nyoman Nuarta received his bachelor's degree in fine arts from the Bandung Institute of Technology and until now settled in Bandung.

Garuda Wisnu Kencana statue (also GWK statue) is a 121-meter tall statue located in Garuda Wisnu Kencana Cultural Park. It was designed by Nyoman Nuarta and inaugurated in September 2018, however construction was began on June 8, 1997. The total height of the monument, including the 46-meter base pedestal is 121 m (397 ft). The statue is about 30m higher than the Statue of Liberty, but Liberty is tall and thin, while Garuda is almost as wide as it is high, its wingspan is 64m. The statue was designed to be the Indonesia’s tallest statue, that was inspired by a Hindu myth about the search for Amrita.
