ND Tiwari's Son Was Drunk, Couldn't Fight Wife Who Killed Him: Cops

Rohit Shekhar Tiwari's wife Apoorva was arrested and sent to two-day police custody.

Highlights Apoorva Shukla Tiwari was questioned for three days before arrest

Rohit Shekhar was allegedly suffocated with a pillow on April 16

"She later destroyed the evidences," a police officer said

A week after the death of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, the son of former Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister ND Tiwari, his wife Apoorva Shukla Tiwari was arrested and taken away by the police from their south Delhi home. Apoorva strangled her husband and choked him with a pillow after a huge fight, the police said on Wednesday. She was later sent to two-day police custody.

Apoorva, a lawyer, was questioned for three days as the police investigated the mysterious death of 40-year-old Rohit Shekhar on April 16. He was earlier believed to have died of a cardiac arrest.

"She confessed that she has murdered her husband and said their marriage was unhappy. She said her hopes and dreams were all dashed," said senior police officer Rajiv Ranjan.

"They had a fight which became violent. She pounced on him and strangled him. He had been drinking, so he was in no position to resist."

Delhi Police had interrogated Rohit Shekhar Tiwari's wife Apoorva at her residence for 3 consecutive days

Rohit Shekhar was murdered in his room around 1 am. "She later destroyed the evidence. All this happened within one-and-a-half hours," said the police officer.

Earlier that day - April 15 - Rohit Shekhar, his mother Ujjwala and a relative had driven back from Kathgodam, where he had gone to cast his vote for the Lok Sabha election.

"He had been drinking all the way along with a woman relative," said the officer.

No one tried to wake Rohit Shekhar the next morning because he had insomnia. Someone went in hours later, around 4 pm, and saw him lying unconscious, with a nosebleed.

Rohit Shekhar, son of ND Tiwari, was brought to a hospital, where he died (File)

Rohit's mother Ujjwala Tiwari was at Max Hospital for treatment when she received a call from home that he was unwell. She then took an ambulance that brought Rohit to the hospital.

At that time of the phone call, Rohit Tiwari's wife Apoorva, his cousin Siddharth and domestic helps were at home, the police said.

Rohit had fought a six-year-long battle in court to prove that he was the son of ND Tiwari, a veteran Congress leader who was chief minister of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

ND Tiwari had refused to give his blood sample for a DNA test in 2012 but relented later. In 2014, the Delhi High Court declared that ND Tiwari was Rohit Shekhar's biological father. The same year, ND Tiwari, aged 88, married Rohit Shekhar Tiwari's mother. The senior leader died last year on his 93rd birthday.
