Urmila Matondkar determined to continue political career in spite of personal attacks on social media

Mumbai: Urmila Matondkar,one of the leading heroines in the Hindi film industry in the 1990s has recently joined the Congress and has been nominated to contest from the Mumbai North Lok Sabha constituency. She has said that since her entry into politics she has faced a lot of trolling on social and personal attacks. However, she is unfazed by these and she is determined to continue her political career.

Matondkar is contesting from a seat which is known to be a BJP stronghold. But she is determined to fight it out stating that the polls will decide the direction in which the country will go and if democracy will be saved. Polling for the Mumbai North seat will take place April 29.

“I have never left anything incomplete… be it studies or career. The decision to join politics was well thought of and I will give more than 100 per cent to it. My intentions are clear,” Matondkar, who is pitted against the BJP’s sitting MP Gopal Shetty, told this agency, Wednesday.

“Women should understand they need to have nerves of steel to be in politics. I understand criticism, but have had to face negativity, dirt and filth. I have not played the victim card in all these days. I am here to stay,” asserted the ‘Rangeela’ star.

Referring to a recent incident in suburban Borivali, when a scuffle broke out between Congress and BJP workers during her rally, Matondkar said she believes in freedom of expression and has nothing against people chanting anybody’s name.

“But the way the scene unfolded later was unacceptable and appalling. This is politics of hatred and negativity. Violence is not always physical but also at a mental level… After joining politics I have faced tremendous trolling (on social media) and personal attacks,” informed Matondkar.

Matondkar said when she returned to Mumbai after formally joining the Congress in Delhi, she was surprised to find a hostile media. “I was taken aback by the kind of questions asked. Having a huge career of 27 years and making a name for myself as a film star, I never faced such negativity,” Matondkar said.

The actor asserted that her decision to join a party which is out of power showed her integrity. She said she has chosen a political role to fight against hatred and negativity.

“Today, the society is driven by fear. The film industry is very vulnerable. After a huge career and making a name, when people voice opinions about their children’s well-being, they are asked to go to another country. I fail to understand when we stooped so low,” pointed out Matondkar .

“This Lok Sabha poll is not just an election but will decide in which direction the country is going and will democracy be saved,” she added.

Taking on her opponent, Matondkar said, “I am going to them (voters), asking them to make me their representative. Gopal Shetty says he has lived in the slums for 55 years. I haven’t. They tried to project as if I have come from Mars.”

Shetty had defeated Mumbai Congress chief Sanjay Nirupam in the 2014 elections.
