Exclusive: As people fear gau rakshaks in UP, NGOs make cash cows out of scared farmers

The farmers of Uttar Pradesh are facing another big challenge in the state. India Today investigation caught on camera shows how the farmers in western UP’s Baghpat district are being fleeced by NGOs to transport stray cattle destroying their fields out of the state. Farmers cough up anything between Rs 3,500 and Rs 6,000 per cattle.

The Yogi Adityanath government had set a deadline for the district and civic officials to catch and herd these animals into cow shelters as well as fine the owners when they come to reclaim them. The January 10 deadline has already passed, leaving farmers in the lurch.

Punishment to stop cow slaughter and cattle smuggling in the state has led to a sharp increase in the cow population. On the other hand, NGOs are cashing in on the misery of farmers. During the investigation, an ambulance meant to ferry sick cattle was caught in the act on camera in Pusar village of Baghpat. In the video, the ambulance of NGO Dhyan Foundation can be seen taking away stray cattle which were locked up in a panchayat building by villagers.

The volunteer escorting the ambulance claimed he was taking them to their cow shelters in Narela for free. He said, We are doing this for free. These cattle are being attacked by villagers since they are destroying their crops. We are doing this as we care for them. We are from Madam Maneka Gandhi's NGO People for animals.

The villagers have, however, contradicted the NGO’s claim. The service comes at a hefty cost since regular transporters have given up the practice out of fear of getting lynched by gau rakshaks. Rishipal Singh, a villager, said, We are collecting money at the rate of Rs 40 per acre from each farmer in the village. We have paid Rs 20,000 for five cattle at the rate of Rs 5,000 per cattle. We want all stray cattle to be transported out...they are a threat to our crops.

Farmers of Uttar Pradesh are facing a big challenge in the state

Union minister Maneka Gandhi has asked for written queries to which the ministry will respond. India Today contacted PETA’s Ambika Shukla who is yet to respond.

There are 510 registered cow shelters in the state, while new ones are in the pipeline for 50 districts. The annual budget for each shelter is Rs 1.20 crore whereas there is 0.5 per cent cow welfare cess to fund cow shelters. According to estimates, 90 per cent of the abandoned stray cattle are male calves.

With Rabi season cash crops such as sugarcane, mustard, and potato almost ready in the fields, farmers were not taking any chances and ready to pay arbitrary money demanded by the NGOs to smuggle stray cattle destroying their crops.

Harendra Singh, the husband of sarpanch of Doghat village, said, I can confirm that they have taken away cattle from four to five villages in our neighbouring areas. This is happening for the past 10-15 days. Each day one vehicle ferries cattle. First, they come in big vehicles to cut the deal and then bring their transport vehicles. They are not giving any receipt, I cannot confirm what they are doing with these cattle. They just take them away from here.

While the Yogi government has announced that those villagers abandoning their cows will now face action, this warning has failed to stop stray cattle menace forcing farmers to approach NGOs. Bhagyaveer Singh, former sarpanch of Pusar village, told India Today TV, Cow shelter people are asking for Rs 6,000 per cattle. In our village, there were 60-70 stray cattle. Now, one can calculate how much we will have to cough up collectively. The problem is after 15 days, we will have more coming to our fields. The government should impose fine on those who are abandoning their cow and calves...if this continues, we will have to sit in gurdwaras with our kids.

The Yogi government’s crackdown on illegal slaughterhouses and checks on cattle smuggling have led to a massive surge in the cattle population. Lack of cow shelters has compounded the crisis. Officials admit the arrangement of cow shelters and limited land for grazing is not a long-term solution.

Sanjiv Agarwal, chairman of Nagar Panchayat, Khair Tehsil in Aligarh, said, We have speeded up construction of cow shelters. The government has allocated 50 acres of land for shelter and grazing area. We hope to house all stray cattle of the area here, but yes, this is not going to be enough given the rate at which their population is rising.

The Yogi government is upbeat about its policy. State animal husbandry minister said they are working on bovine sex selection to contain bull population. Minister SP Singh Baghel claimed, In future, only cow will be born and not bull or male calves. We have signed a MoU in this regard with a foreign company. Milk will be flowing in our villages soon.

Privately managed cow shelters have run out of space, forcing them to house in open sheds. At a privately-run open shelter in Tappal near Aligarh, winter chill is taking its toll on the sick cows. Chandra Bhan, a local veterinary officer, said, "It is a temporary shelter and all the cattle cannot be housed in a covered area. They are exposed to extreme cold. Cows are also attacked by bulls kept in same sheds; some of them are dying every day.

As the sun goes down, farmers in Karthala village in Aligarh gear up for the bigger challenge. A long night vigil awaits them to save their potato and mustard crops from stray cattle, but this has turned them into an enemy of the state. Pathak, a young farmer said, We cannot even protect our crops. When we venture out with our lathis and torch in our fields, police catch us. They call us thieves. One of our villagers is still in jail for catching a cow and locking it up in a school.

For elderly farmers with small land holdings, the problem is even bigger. They are forced to keep awake the whole night to save their crops. A 75-year-old widow Dayawati in Pusar village of Baghpat said, I am a widow. My kids are out. I have to keep going to my fields to check if there are stray cattle in the field. I am so stressed out. I can’t even see properly. I am scared of bulls as they attack us. The government should put them in cow shelters. How can they allow cattle to destroy my crop.

Last year, the Yogi government had added more teeth to the anti-cow slaughter law by making it punishable under the National Security Act and Gangster Act. However, it failed to come up with timely measures to check the stray cattle menace. Though farmers initially welcomed the cow policy a year and a half later, they are its biggest casualty. Farmer unions said the arrangements are not enough and the cow policy of the Yogi government is flawed. We want cow welfare schemes to be linked to the rural economy for sustenance, they added.

Mahendra Singh, farmer union leader of Tappal tehsil, told India Today TV, It is not a permanent solution. Our cow has a life span of 20 years. We have come to this situation in just past one and a half years. Imagine what will happen in the future when their population will grow. There is a shortage of land in village panchayat. The government struggles to find land for hospitals, schools because farmers demand high compensation. The only solution to this problem is that the government should find economic management of this issue.

According to a 2012 government census, there were close to two crore cows in the state. The Yogi government has allocated funds for a fresh cow census to get an estimate of the cow population.

Also read: Cow vigilante attacks are anything but spontaneous, reveals India Today sting

ALSO WATCH| Ex-bureaucrats write to Modi government about gaurakshak attacks
