'She was unhappy with her marriage': Week after Rohit Shekhar's death, his wife arrested by Delhi Police for murder

The Delhi Police on Wednesday arrested Rohit Shekhar Tiwari's wife Apoorva for her alleged role in his murder, a week after the son of former Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand Chief Minister ND Tiwari's son died under mysterious circumstances.

The Crime Branch was Delhi Police, which was investigating the case after the police registered a case of murder into his death, had taken into custody Apoorva and two house helps for interrogation. Sources said police were looking at Apoorva as the prime suspect in the murder case.

The Crime Branch had questioned Apoorva for over eight hours on Saturday at Rohit Shekhar's residence in South Delhi's Defence Colony area, they said.

A case of murder was registered on Thursday, hours after Tiwari's autopsy report stated that he died of asphyxia due to strangulation. The case was then transferred to the Crime Branch.

Rohit died on April 16 under mysterious circumstances.

Motive for murder

Unhappy with the marriage, Apporva Shukla Tiwari smothered her husband Rohit Shekhar Tiwari to death while he was drunk, the police said after her arrest.

"She was unhappy with the marriage, Apoorva smothered him while Rohit was drunk. She committed the crime herself without any help. She will be produced in the court soon," officials of the Delhi Police Crime Branch said.

Apoorva was arrested today after three-day of interrogation. The arrest comes after the Crime Branch of Delhi Police on Sunday took Apoorva, a maid and a servant to an undisclosed location for interrogation in connection with Shekhar's death.

Crime Branch Probe

A case of murder (Section 302 of Indian Penal Code) was registered on Thursday after the post mortem examination report revealed that Rohit died an "unnatural death" due to "strangulation and smothering."

After the revelations of the post-mortem report, the case was transferred to the Delhi Police's Crime Branch for further investigation.

A team of the Central Forensic Science Laboratory (CFSL) had also reached the Defence Colony residence of Rohit and recreated the crime scene and collected evidence in an attempt to unravel the mystery behind the death of veteran Congress leader's son.

Sources revealed that Rohit's main servant Bhupendra alias Bholu, who is said to be a close aide of the deceased, was quizzed several times by the investigators. "Till now the statement of three servants have been recorded," said sources.

Testimonies of Tiwari's servants and the CCTV footage in the case revealed that Rohit came to his house on April 15 in an inebriated condition and straight away went to his room and slept.

"There were 7 CCTV cameras in the house of which two were not in working condition," sources said.

Rohit slept during the night of April 15 and was found mysteriously dead at 4 pm next day, but it is shocking to note that no one went to wake him up between the said time span.

What Rohit Shekhar's mother said about Apoorva

On Sunday, Rohit Shekhar's mother Ujjawla hit out at Apoorva and her parents alleging they had their eyes on his property.

"Apoorva's family wanted to take control of the properties of my both sons -- Siddharth and Rohit -- because this house is nearer to the Supreme Court where Apoorva was practising law," she said.

Refuting rumours that Rohit and Apoorva met in the Supreme Court complex, Ujjawla said that they both had met in Lucknow through a matrimonial website in 2017.

They were seeing each other for a year and later took a break in between. Rohit Shekhar maintained distance from her and said he did not want to marry her, she said.

They were not in touch from January to March, 2018. But on April 2 they came to me and expressed their wish to get married, Ujjwala said.

They also discussed mutual divorce several times and later decided to end their marriage in June, she added.

Ujjwala said Apoorva was also against giving a share of property to son of Rajiv Kumar, a relative and aide of Tiwari.

Apoorva always had issues with Rajiv and his wife, Ujjawla said, adding that reports of Rohit Shekhar having affair with Rajiv's wife is "baseless and false".

"My elder son Siddharth expressed his wish to give a share to Rajiv's son Kartik Raj but Apoorva was disappointed and expressed her displeasure over this," she said.

Rohit had fought a long battle in court to prove that he was the son of the Congress leader ND Tiwari. The former Chief Minister had refused to give his blood sample for a DNA test in 2012, but later accepted that he was indeed Rohit's biological father.

(With inputs from PTI, ANI)
