Rohit Shekhar's wife Apoorva arrested for his murder

The wife of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, son of the late Congress leader ND Tiwari, has been arrested for his murder.

The accused Apoorva Shukla Tiwari, a Supreme Court lawyer, murdered her husband Rohit Shekhar on the intervening night of April 15-16, police said on Wednesday.

According to sources in the Crime Branch, Apoorva confessed to having killed Rohit Shekhar.

Sources said the accused Apoorva had a heated argument with her husband over Rohit meeting his woman friend. Amid strained relations between the two over a house for Apoorva’s parents, the argument led to a scuffle.

Late UP and Uttarakhand CM ND Tiwari's son Rohit Shekhar Tiwari's death case: Apoorva Tiwari, the wife of Rohit, who has been arrested today in connection with the case, being taken for questioning by Delhi Crime Branch on April 21. #Delhi pic.twitter.com/7YqZ1z9E0Y ANI (@ANI) April 24, 2019



During the scuffle, Apoorva killed Rohit, sources added.

Crime Branch sources said following the murder, Apoorva formatted her mobile call data.

Police said the needle of suspicion pointed at Apoorva as she kept changing her statements and the CCTV near Rohit’s room was also not working.

THE MURDER CASE

The high-profile murder of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari had taken a twist, with the needle of suspicion pointing at three individuals his lawyer wife Apoorva, chauffeur Akhilesh and domestic help Golu.

The three were the only people present on the first floor of Delhi's Defence Colony bungalow where Rohit, the 40-year-old son of former Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand Chief Minister ND Tiwari, was killed on the intervening night of April 15-16.

Earlier, police had questioned Rohit Shekhar Tiwari's wife Apoorva in connection with the murder case.

The Crime Branch team, probing the mysterious murder of Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, had earlier said it was awaiting for the forensic report to establish the role of the three suspects who were seen in a CCTV footage going to the first floor of the house where the deceased lived, an officer had said on Tuesday.

The Crime Branch officer had said that Rohit's murder took place possibly following some sudden provocation. "We have identified the suspects but are waiting for forensic science laboratory report to prove it with scientific and concrete evidences," he had said.

He said: "We are investigating the case with all possible angles. It could be a sudden provocation after Shekhar saw something objectionable happening in his house, and Apoorva and Akhilesh smothered and strangulated him."

The other reason could be a verbal fight between Apoorva and Rohit -- which they indulged in very often -- taking an ugly turn on April 16, leading to his kiiling, he had added.

"As per medical reports, Rohit was regularly taking sleeping pills. Besides, he was also drunk that night which could be the reason for his failure to resist the killers."

READ | Rohit Tiwari murder mystery: plot thickens, three prime suspects now

READ | Rohit Tiwari murder: Strained marriage, ex-boyfriend add twist to mysterious death

READ | Who is Rohit Shekhar: The man who fought paternity battle with father ND Tiwari
