Television actress Renee Dhyani opens up on her battle with depression and facial paralysis

TV star Renee Dhyani opens up on her battle with depression

Yeh Teri Galiyan actress Renee Dhyani recently opened up about her battle with depression for almost a year now. She revealed that she wanted to talk about the issue so that she can create awareness. In recent years, many celebrities have opened up about depression and have tried to shed light on the issue. In an interview, the actress spoke of her journey and how she dealt with health issues like hypertension syndrome and PCOD. All these things led to facial paralysis and the left side of her face was affected.

Renne Dhyani talked about her confusion in the beginning and said, “Initially, I couldn’t understand what was happening to me. I would suddenly break into tears, throw things around and yell. I was not mentally healthy, and was also harming myself.”



The actress also opened up about her relationship with fellow actor Lalit Bisht and said that she came across as a fiery and feisty girl who wouldn't take anything lying low but she experienced a lot of pain because of her relationship. Both Lalit and Renne had known each other since their Delhi days as both of them were Pahadis. Reene mentioned that Lalit's career did not shape up according to his expectations and she would always blame herself for the same. Reene's beau would also blame her during their fights and then she started having severe mood swings and would start crying without a reason during the shoot.

According to Reene, Lalit never visited me when she was hospitalised. She was quoted as saying, "In fact, he was so self-centred that he didn’t even want to know what was happening in my life. I guess, he needed space and I had to take care of myself.”

The actress was a part of Roadies 8 and Bigg Boss 8 and was later seen in Kasam Tere Pyaar Ki starring Ssharad Malhotra and Kratika Sengar. She is playing the role of Beauty in Yeh Teri Galiyan currently.
