Cong rebel MLA says he and members backing him would decide

Rebel Congress MLA Ramesh Jarkiholi Wednesday said he along with legislators who are with him would discuss and decide on resigning from the party soon.

Jarkiholi said he was only "technically" in the Congress and was firm on his stand to quit the party.

The former minister said his resignation was delayed because those with him suggested on quitting in bulk.

"I have said what I had to yesterday and today, I willnot say anything more in front of media. I'm firm on my stand..

you will have to wait for my result..

you will get good in a few days," Jarkiholi told reporters.

Stating that he had intended to resign earlier but decided to wait as his well-wishers and other legislators suggested about quitting in "bulk", he said "I'm only technically in Congress.... it is a group decision, not mine alone.

I will have to hear others also, we will all sit together today andtomorrow and take a decision," he said without divulging howmany are with him and any specific date.

Asked if any attempt was being made to destabilise the Congress-JDS coalition government, he said "I can't say anything as I'm still in Congress, I cannot speak against Congress."



Earlier too, Ramesh Jarkiholi had threatened to resign as Congress MLA, but had gone incommunicado after that.

Speaking to reporters at Belagavi earlier, Jarkiholi said he was heading for Bengaluru and would resign Wednesday itself, as he accused his brother and Forest minister Satish Jarkiholi of "cheating".

The Gokak MLA also said he would contest the by-election that will be necessitated by his resignation from the assembly segment itself, but would opt for Yemkanmardi, currently represented by Satish during the next election.

Amid speculation about the longevity of the Congress-JD(S) coalition government in the State once the Lok Sabha poll results are announced on May 23, Ramesh Jarkiholi had on Tuesday indicated about quitting Congress.

Accused of hobnobbing with the BJP, and not attending cabinet and party meetings, he was dropped in the rejig of the H D Kumaraswamy-led Congress-JD(S) coalition cabinet in December last yearthat saw induction of eight new ministers, including Satish.

Ramesh Jarkiholi has been claiming the support of a sizeable chunk of party MLAs and had come under the party's scanner over reports that the BJP was trying to tap him to remove the Kumaraswamy government.

Jarkiholi had even camped in Mumbai along with some Congress MLAs in January pushing the state into a political turmoil as it had threatened the government, and did not attend the budget session initially, for which Congress leadership has moved a disqualification motion against him andthree other MLAs before the speaker.

He also did not campaign for Congress candidates during Lok sabha polls and even stayed away from Rahul Gandhi's events.

Hitting out at brother Satish, RameshJarkiholi accused him of starting the dissidence activities, while he was happy as Minister.

"I was cheated by Satish Jarkiholi and no one else, he (Satish) came home and cried saying don't sit thinking you have become Minister, we will face setback politically if we don't act now.

He was the one who started it, but now is projecting himself as loyal Congress man. Because of such people, the Congress has come to such a situation today....hecheated me and became the Minister," he added.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
