Respect for Advani, Murli not dependent on giving LS ticket: Rajnath Singh

Home minister Rajnath Singh is fighting his second poll battle from the Lucknow parliamentary constituency.

Home minister Rajnath Singh is fighting his second poll battle from the Lucknow parliamentary constituency.

Talking exclusively with India Today TV's Kumar Abhishek, Rajnath Singh said that Sadhvi Pragya Thakur, the BJP candidate from Bhopal is within her rights to contest polls as she has not been convicted in the 2008 Malegaon blast case.

Here are some excerpts from the interview:

Q. What is your estimation of the first three phases of polling?

A. As far as Uttar Pradesh is concerned, we had won 73 seats last time with the help of our allies. This time our effort is to go from 73 to 74 but not to 72.

Q. How big of a challenge is the mahagathbandhan?

A. The SP-BSP-RLD alliance has no credibility before the public. If the public does not think you are credible, they will not support you.

Q. Poonam Sinha is standing against you but you have good relations with her husband Shatrughan Sinha.

A. Our ties with Shatrughan Sinha were good and will always remain good. I have always said that elections should be fought with decency and restraint. They should be free of personal attacks. This is what I have also told our party workers.

Q. But in this election, the sanctity of words has been broken.

A. Rahul Gandhi abused the prime minister. He had to eventually apologise for his remarks. In a healthy democracy, the limits of decency should not be crossed. There should control on one's language. And as far as the PM and the President are concerned, they are not individuals, they are institutions. Their sanctity should be maintained. This is not just the duty of political parties, everyone should keep this in mind. When the sanctity of such institutions is breached, democracy weakens.

Q.Do you think your party should also keep this in mind?

A. Everyone should be dignified while speaking.

Q. Sadhvi Pragya has not been acquitted of terror charges against her, do you think it was right to give her a party ticket?

A. According to my knowledge, Sadhvi Pragya has not been sentenced or convicted. Those who are not convicted can fight elections, this is the rule. Who am I to say anything on this.

Q. Congress may pit Priyanka Gandhi against PM Modi in Varanasi. She has also expressed her interest in standing against the prime minister. What do you have to say about this?

A. She is free to fight elections. She can stand for elections from wherever she wants, the BJP has no problem with that. This will be her party's decision. I have nothing to say about this.

Q.The BJP did not give tickets to senior leaders. Do you think their anger will prove costly for the party?

A. [Lal Krishna] Advani ji and [Murli Manohar] Joshi ji are not angry. They are both senior leaders of the party and we have the utmost respect for them. You cannot quantify respect for someone by whether they have been given a ticket or not.
