Bazi Top attack irks Pakistan, seeks Tehran's help to dismantle Baloch activists' safe havens in Iran

Pic courtesy: Wikimedia Commons

That India and Afghanistan are Pakistan's two 'distant' neighbours is well-known. Now, after problems with Tehran, Iran has joined the club. And Pakistan's help to terrorist organisations like the Lashkar-e-Toiba and the Jaish-e-Mohammed, its efforts to finance, train and arm them, is the cause.

In a note verbale to the Iranian Embassy, the Pakistan Foreign Ministry has stated that about "15-20 terrorists who camouflaged themselves in Frontier Corps uniform barricaded the road and stopped 3-4 buses travelling from Ormara to Gwadar on the coastal highway at Bazi Top.

"This was on April 18. When they found there were 14 Pakistani armed forces personnel on the buses, the "terrorists" as the Pakistan Foreign Office called them, shot them.

Pakistan has called the killing of 14 innocent individuals "a very serious incident" and has requested the Iran Embassy in Islamabad to urgently convey these concerns to the relevant authorities in Iran for prompt action."

The Pakistan Foreign Office claimed that BRAS, an alliance of three Baloch outfits, had taken responsibility for the attack. It "said that the Balochis had arrived from the border region returned to that area, the suggestion being that the Balochi outfits were operating from out of Iran.

Pakistan also said that it had repeated shared intelligence about these activities. And also, mentioned where the training camps and logistics bases were on the Iranian side. There is also regret that the Iranian government has taken no action as yet.

Which brings up an important question. What about all the terror training camps in Pakistan that India has repeatedly spoken about? India has mentioned the names and locations of the camps and also, the launch pads close to the line of control. This is where terrorists, about to enter Jammu and Kashmir, are housed and briefed before being infiltrated into Indian territory.

Equally important are the dossiers sent to the Pakistan government about the involvement of Pakistan based terrorists in major incidents like the 26/11 attack in Mumbai. It is a decade since the attack and the perpetrators, including Hafiz Sayeed and his associates remain free men after the minor inconvenience of house arrest.

The incident Pakistan is protesting about is no different from what happened in Pulwama. The Jaish-e-Mohammed had taken responsibility for it. Where then is Maulana Masood Azhar? And why is he being sheltered?

Also, weapons are freely available in Pakistan. And quite naturally, considering sections of the state are reportedly doling them out to the terrorists, it is the availability of weapons that is also responsible for the increase in violence levels. Those responsible have been riding a tiger; Bazi Top is the inevitable price for it.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
