High Court fines government for denying lecturer UGC scale salary

UGC scale

Bangalore University

Authorities will have to pay Rs 25,000 for making lecturer fight legal battle for a decadeA lecturer, who was eligible for UGC pay scale, had to fight a legal battle for over a decade to get his dues. The High Court which finally ruled in his favour was upset with the authorities for treating a teacher in this manner and imposed a fine of Rs 25,000 on the government.“After parents, the teachers find the third most reverential position in India as per mythology. It is regrettable that due to the callous and lackadaisical attitude of the State Government, a teacher who joined service in the year 1994 has been deprived of his eligible UGC pay scale throughout his career. He has been driven from pillar to post and compelled to knock the doors of this Court on several occasions,” the HC said, imposing the cost on the State and the Department of Collegiate Education.N Vijaya Dhwaja was appointed as a lecturer against a sanctioned post in Vijaya Teachers College on June 1, 1994.While the State Government extended UGC pay scale to lecturers working in aided institutions, Dhwaja was denied thebenefit without any reason. His representations in this regard were not considered and he was also denied promotion to the post of Reader.It was stated that he was under the ‘State Scale’ and was not eligible. He challenged this in the High Court in 2007. The case was disposed in 2012 with the court directing the Government to consider him for promotion. Dhwaja had retired on September 30, 2007.Dhwaja filed another petition seeking a direction to the government to comply with the 2012 judgement. A single judge bench dismissed the petition.It was challenged before a division bench. The division bench of Justice L Narayana Swamy and Justice PS Dinesh Kumar gave the judgement on April 12.The government advocate claimed that he was given the benefit ofin November 2015. But the benefit of career advancement could not be extended to him as he had not passed the orientation course.The HC said, “We note with regret that having denied the benefit of UGC payscale throughout his career, State have conceded before this Court that petitioner was indeed entitled for UGC pay scale.”About his alleged lack of orientation course, the HC said, “It is heartening to note that thehas certified that petitioner has delivered lecture on the topic ‘Teaching Skills’ as a Resource Person to participants of 58th Orientation Programme organised by UGC. We note with regret that there is a teacher who is invited as a Resource Person by the UGC to deliver lectures in Orientation programmes, whereas the State Government have treated him with scant respect compelling him to approach this Court repeatedly since 2007.”Allowing Dhwaja’s petition, the HC imposed the fine of Rs 25,000 on the Government. It set aside the single judge order of 2016.The authorities were directed to “grant notional promotions in furtherance of career advancement as per Government Order dated 15.11.1999 without insisting on the orientation course and to fix pay scale applicable to the promoted posts, calculate the complete financial benefit and pay the same to the petitioner with 8% simple interest. In view of long pendency of litigation, we direct strict compliance of this order within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.”
