‘Given the shrunken minds it is doubtful if even a regime change will return India to a free intellectual climate’

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

Malayalam writer Paul Zacharia’s novellas and short stories, which offer insights on individual behaviour and social norms, have earned him a Sahitya Akademi award. Now, he’s chosen to write fiction in English. In a conversation with Jiby J Kattakayam, he explains the switch in language, literature’s future and the ongoing social churn in Kerala:

Why this late switch to writing fiction in English?

I am a reader first and writer second. Like many Indians I’m a bi-lingual reader. A lot of my imagination comes out of the storehouse of memories created by my book-crawling in Malayalam and English. I feel that in writing this novel in English I did the same switch-over as in reading. And I was curious about how my writer’s craft would be re-assembled by English. After five decades in Malayalam I think I was seeking a different satisfaction and English was the natural choice because that’s a language I love and the only other language I know.

What is literature’s future in the age of low attention spans and unlimited digital content?

I think literature gets redefined from generation to generation. The digital generation is bound to create its own literature – it’s already doing it. I’m of course assuming that imagination will continue to function in the literary mode, which has been the historical experience hitherto. But it’s not impossible it may come to an end. Till then people may continue to enjoy literature but not necessarily in ways the 20th and early 21st centuries are used to.

What is ‘A Secret History of Compassion’ about?

It’s hard to put my finger on what it is about. Every novel is a world where many things happen to many people, as in real life. Perhaps, the ambient impression that the totality leaves in the mind of the reader is what a novel is about. The people in ‘A Secret History of Compassion’ enjoy, like most Indians, talking and arguing and like everyone else they have stories to tell and memories and experiences to share.

You have been critical of Left, Church, Hindutva and Islamic groups and faced the ire of some of them. What lies ahead for Kerala’s society?

Malayalis are essentially a progressive people who have hung on to sanity by the skin of their teeth despite monstrous politicians and a treacherous media. By mid-20th century they had reached a broad secular, egalitarian, modern, societal consensus underpinned by democratic and scientific impulses. This was a process of enlightenment set in motion in early 20th century by a number of forces that included modern education and communist thought. That mindset has been under heavy attack by vested interests representing crude religious and caste formations supported by political opportunism and media recklessness. Sabarimala is the most recent example. But I can see Malayalis haven’t surrendered. I predict that the values of enlightenment will return, despite the communal churning operated by political parties and despite the cunning media.

Is the space for public intellectuals and free speech shrinking despite new avenues like social media?

The space for free speech for any citizen, leave alone intellectuals, has shrunk to a minuscule niche in today’s India. Free speech is the proprietary privilege of politicians. The media, if it wishes, can still exercise free speech, but in general prefers not to. For the first time in India, intellectuals have been murdered for representing reason, sanity and truth. Social media’s failure to be a democratic and civilised space and the barbarism with which some use it to attack free speech is a tragedy of monumental proportions. And given the shrunken minds of India’s political class across parties it is doubtful if even a regime change will return India to a free intellectual climate.

How do you view the conservative Hindu assertion over the Sabarimala judgment?

This has been magnified many times over by the Malayalam media. It has been glorified as a grand Hindu awakening. Conservative elements – a minority – have always existed among Kerala’s Hindus in one form or the other. Instigated by the Sangh Parivar, they have now enacted a communal script, and media amplification bestowed on it a larger-than-life image. The simple fact is Kerala’s single largest Hindu party has always been the communist party and it remains so. Sabarimala may continue to be milked by a few people perhaps till the elections, but the day Malayalam media shifts its attention to the next profit centre, it will be as good as dead.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
