Where Pehlu Khan was lynched, gau raksha not hot topic

On a muggy Monday morning, a few elderly villagers sit around a hookah at Badhkali chowk in Mewat. They are sharing their troubles and discussing who they will vote for in the Lok Sabha polls as they take drags of the tobacco to “beat the heat”.Mewat district, known officially as Nuh, in southern Haryana lies just 75km from Delhi and is part of the Gurgaon constituency. It bore the unflattering distinction of being ranked India’s ‘most backward district’ by Niti Aayog last year, performing poorly on parameters like health and nutrition, education, agriculture and water resources.The region knows what it is like to be in the news for the wrong reasons — the most notorious of them being lynchings by cow vigilantes. While Pehlu Khan, a dairy farmer, was beaten to death by 200-odd vigilantes in 2017, Rakbar Khan was killed by a mob last year on suspicion of cow theft.Ahead of voting for the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, the issues that concern the locals, however, are of a very different nature. While for truck drivers — who are a big occupational group in Mewat — it is the non-renewal of licences, for most others, it’s unemployment and the lack of basic facilities like drinking water and electricity.With 5.3 lakh voters, or nearly a fourth of Gurgaon’s electorate of 20.34 lakh, this Muslim-dominated district can play a crucial role in deciding which way the seat goes. Mewat has never been a stronghold for BJP. In 2014, when Rao Inderjit Singh won the Gurgaon LS seat, only 54,000 of his 4.5 lakh votes came from Mewat. But at his nomination rally last week, Mewat found more mentions than Gurgaon.BJP is working to increase its vote share here. Haryana CM Manohar Lal Khattar has visited the seat 11 times in the last five years while BJP district chief Surender Arya lists development works, including a rainwater harvesting scheme and girls’ colleges, accomplished by the BJP government. But development alone may not tilt voters towards BJP. So, BJP has roped in influencers from the community to change the party’s ‘anti-Muslim’ image. Chaudhary Aurangzeb Meo, chairman of the Haryana Haj Committee and a BJP member, is one such. “There is a perception within the community that BJP is anti-Muslim, but the party has done a lot of work in the area,” he says.According to sources, the BJP has substantially increased the strength of its party workers in Mewat, and now counts 12,000 members within its ranks here.However, there is growing disenchantment against Rao Inderjit with a common grouse.“In the last five years, he hasn’t been here even once. If someone goes to him for help, he first checks how many people from that village voted for him,” said a 58-year-old farmer, Abdul.Rao Inderjit’s disconnect is being exploited by his Congress opponent, Captain Ajay Singh Yadav , who is a regular at weddings, funerals and other functions here. However, it remains to be seen if last-minute efforts by the ‘missing MP’ work for him or the party.
