Enough to script a soap-opera: Partha Bose

Spanning 50 years, Sitar maestro Partha Bose looks back at his dramatic musical journey

Arriving at the ‘Golden Milestone’ of one's musical journey, that too at 56, calls for celebrations. The fans and friends of sitar virtuoso Partha Bose have been doing just that. The grand finale of the year-long celebration, packed with several musical events, was organised by Nadd, a reputed Delhi-based organisation, in association with Sanskriti Sagar, at Kolkata’s GD Birla Sabhagar recently with a star-cast that saw Pandits Rajan and Sajan Mishra's soulful vocal recital, Ustad Sabir Khan's scintillating 'Forty fingers of Farukhabad' with his two sons and one disciple on four pairs of tabla and of course Partha Bose's sitar recital blessed by tabla legend Swapan Chaudhuri's edifying accompaniment.

‘Yes,’ said an articulate Bose, “there are numerous such instances treasured in my memory. I was destined to get opportunities to perform in the house-baithaks organised by musical greats like Pandit Bhimsen Joshi, Pandit Kishan Maharaj and the likes. On another occasion, pleased by my devotion, Maharaj ji himself declared, ‘Mai tumhare saath tumhare shahar mein bajaunga’ and accompanied me on the tabla. I knew I am blessed even as a little boy; ever since I came under the wings of my Guruji who continues to guide me till date. This ‘golden milestone’ is his gift to me albeit my musical journey, spanning 50 years, has seen some insurmountable rough and dramatic patches - enough to script a juicy soap-opera.”

This statement was intriguing, coming from someone who hails from a business family dealing with timber and steel for generations. With an emancipated elder sister as his protector, Bose is the only son of his parents, and, apparently, was born with a golden-spoon in his mouth! Under the circumstances one finds it difficult to imagine any problem; because money is a great leveller and even seers had admitted eons ago that dharma is governed by artha (money). In Bose's case, music was, and is, his dharma.

“Ironically, I was introduced to this melodious way of life, accidentally. Once, my father, a hardcore businessman, fell ill. Apart from medicines, his physician advised him to pursue some hobby to help combat his ailment. He decided to learn music from scratch, at home! A well-wisher approached his close friend Pandit Monoj Shankar, an aristocrat, erudite sitar maestro, belonging to Maihar gharana, who, as a music-obsessed zamindar, had patronised musicians and big soirées once before the fateful migration from the erstwhile East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) to Kolkata. Fortunately, he decided to entertain this bizarre request and teach; as he wished to try out a sort of music therapy.

Branded sitar

“The lessons began after procuring a branded sitar by the famed Hiren-babu which found a secure place on top of a chest of drawers after each lesson. But there was my uncle's grand piano which stood neglected in one of the rooms of our joint family’s sprawling house. One day the guru was waiting for his disciple; suddenly he heard a piano which rattled the subject matter of the entire sitar lessons he had imparted so far. The culprit was summoned.”

This was none but a six-year-old boy who was not allowed to do anything except eat, sleep and study. Mortally afraid of his father, Partha expected severe punishment; instead he was praised sky-high by a very fair, handsome gentleman who convinced an unwilling father to allow his son to learn music. A baby sitar was acquired; a few years later it was replaced by another bigger branded sitar. Finally his father's precious possession, which lay in its resting place once the owner recuperated, began to sing in the hands of the Guru-Shishya. Within a ‘quota system’, riyaz and listening to concerts was allowed. But this was a crucial period of the erring adolescent’s life who was supposed to devote most of his time to academics to procure engineering and MBA degrees because he was the heir apparent of the family business.

“By this time I was completely besotted by music and Esha Bandyopadhyay, a vocalist. Both were a great cause of concern in our conservative household where music as a full-time occupation and inter-caste marriages were unthinkable! I had a hunch that I will have to leave the cushy life. A friend narrated the inspiring life-story of Pandit Bhimsen Joshi to help take the plunge with this conviction that without the hurdles one cannot scale the peaks of melody! So, I left home in 1983; drifted from place to place before finding shelter with a loving couple as their paying guest, started giving music tuitions to survive and continue with my graduation.” All this while, Guruji kept trying for truce between the warring father and son; but in vain.

“Guruji remained as the Pole Star of my musical journey’s new-found sky that offered the vast expanses of listening, learning, practising, innovating, setting goals, teaching and, yes, performing – initially as my Guruji’s supporting artiste, then, with his blessings, going solo. The latter took me all over the globe, in the haloed company of almost all the legendary musicians; moreover validated me to win ‘Nikhil Banerjee Memorial Award.’ Much later, my dying father had conceded that he was proud of his ‘sitarist’ son! I cherish all these memories with humility,” Bose reiterated with satisfaction.
