How Apoorva killed her husband Rohit Tiwari

New Delhi: Delhi Police have arrested Apoorva Tiwari, the wife of ND Tiwari’s son Rohit Shekhar for murdering her husband. The police have cited a “turbulent and unhappy” marriage as the motive.

A Delhi court has remanded Apoorva in two-day police custody.

Rohit Shekhar, the son of the late veteran politician ND Tiwari, was smothered to death on the intervening night of April 15 and 16, an autopsy report said.

Additional Commissioner (Crime) Rajeev Ranjan said that Apoorva smothered her husband and choked him with a pillow after the couple got into a fight April 16. Apoorva had a heated argument with her husband over Rohit drinking alcohol with a woman relative. “On the night of the incident, the couple had a fight over a relative. Rohit had been drinking all the way from Uttarakhand to Delhi and was not in a condition to resist. During the fight she pounced on him and smothered him,” he told reporters.

She reportedly entered Rohit’s room April 16 and executed the crime. She later allegedly destroyed the evidence. All this happened within one-and-half hours,” said the officer.

Apoorva Tiwari has confessed to the crime. “She has confessed. As of now, from the fact and circumstances, it seems the killing was not planned. The background was there that they had a turbulent marriage and Rohit Shekhar and his family were planning to part ways. After interrogation, it was found that Apoorva Shukla Tiwari and Rohit had a turbulent marriage. All her hopes with the marriage were belied,” Ranjan said. Apoorva, a practising lawyer with the Supreme Court, was being questioned in connection with the killing since last Sunday.

Discrepancies were found in her statements which led police to suspect her involvement, the officer added.

Police has also claimed that a property dispute was behind the murder.

“Property was also one motive since Apoorva was not getting any portion of the property,” said Ranjan.

Rohit’s mother Ujjwala alleged Sunday that Apoorva and her family were money-minded and wanted to acquire the family property.

A servant found Rohit was bleeding from the nose April 16.

According to the postmortem report, the death occurred within two hours of his last meal around 11 pm.
