Justice for Bilkis Bano

harinder@tribunemail.com

The Supreme Court’s directions to the Gujarat Government to give Rs 50-lakh compensation, a job and accommodation of her choice to Bilkis Bano will help in bringing closure to the gang-rape survivor and her family. Bano was five-month pregnant when she had been sexually assaulted at Randhikpur village near Ahmedabad during the post-Godhra riots in March 2002. Seven members of her family had been killed in a mob attack, including her three-year-old daughter.

It is with dogged determination that Bano and her family members have taken the legal battle to its logical conclusion. A special court had on January 21, 2008, convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment 11 men for raping Bano and murdering her kin, while acquitting seven persons — five policemen and two doctors. Nine years later, the Bombay High Court had convicted these policemen and doctors under Sections 218 (not performing their duties) and 201 (tampering of evidence) of the IPC. Finally, three guilty officials have been stripped of pensionary benefits and an IPS officer has been demoted by two ranks.

The state government had cited its policy of granting Rs 5-lakh compensation in such cases, but Bano rejected the offer and approached the apex court for ‘exemplary’ relief. The court was told that she was living a nomadic life and surviving on charity. She has come up trumps on this front too as the government will have to loosen its purse strings to rehabilitate her. Clearly, no amount of compensation is enough to heal Bano’s wounds, inflicted during one of the darkest chapters in the history of Independent India. However, the monetary support and employment are expected to go a long way in securing her family’s future. Interestingly, hours after Tuesday’s judgment, Bano cast her vote in Gujarat’s Dahod district along with her husband and relatives, underlining her faith in democracy despite her horrifying ordeal. The wheels of justice should also move faster for the other survivors of the Gujarat riots so that they can overcome trauma and rebuild their lives.
