“My daughter will be a lawyer, fight for justice to women”

VADODARA: April 23 was a memorable day for Bilkis Bano, the woman from Dahod district who was gangraped in 2002 post-Godhra communal frenzy. Fourteen members of her family including her three-and-half-years old daughter were killed in front of her eyes.On Tuesday, not only did she exercise her franchise after 17 years, but also got a big relief from Supreme Court that ordered the Gujarat government to pay her Rs 50 lakh as compensation along with a government job and a house.After 17 years of painful struggle, Bilkis feels she has finally got justice. “Yes. I have got the justice and I now want to live peacefully with my family. I want the government to give my husband a job in their village in Devgadh Baria. I will look after the family,” Bilkis told TOI in a choked voice.“The government never did anything for us. The Supreme Court understood my pain, my suffering and struggle to regain the constitutional rights that were lost during the 2002 riots,”She plans to use a portion of the compensation money to make her elder daughter Hajra, 16, a lawyer. Bilkis was pregnant with Hajra when she was gangraped.“My daughter too wants to become a lawyer when she grows up. She will perhaps appear before the same court someday to argue for justice to others. I want her to fight for women’s rights as well,” she said“I will use a portion of the compensation money for funding education of my children. I also want to use part of the money to help other women survivors of hate and communal violence seek justice. I want to help educate their children in whose lives the spirit of my daughter Saleha, who was killed in the riots, will live on,” she said.On Tuesday, Bilkis Bano cast her vote in Devagadh Baria after 17 years. When asked why she didn’t vote for so many years, Bilkis said, “I was scared that I or my family may be harmed so I didn’t go to cast my ballot. This time I wasn’t scared.”The mother in her, however, is sad that she and her husband Yakub were unable to fulfil their duty as parents by giving a proper burial to their first-born daughter Saleha. “There is no grave for Saleha that I could visit and weep upon. That has always haunted me, in ways I can never express,” she said.Bilkis was just 19-years-old when she was gang-raped by a dozen men at Randhikpur village in the tribal district of Dahod on March 3, 2002. The very next day Bilkis filed an FIR in Limkheda police station and her struggle for justice began. The police initially didn’t include the names of the accused in the FIR and a year later the cops filed ‘Summary A’ report in the case. In April 2003, Bilkis approached the Supreme Court that handed over the case to the CBI.The central investigation agency arrested 12 persons apart from two policemen. But the SC transferred the case to Mumbai after Bilkis filed a petition requesting shifting her case outside Gujarat in 2004. In 2008, Mumbai sessions court convicted 12 persons (one died during the trial) for murder and rape. The Bombay High Court upheld conviction of 11 accused later.
