Eagleton resort brawl: Congress MLA Ganesh gets bail in attempt to murder case

Eagleton resort brawl: Congress MLA Ganesh gets bail in attempt to murder case

Ganesh was earlier rejected bail by a special court for MLAs and MPs in Bengaluru.

news Crime

More than two months after his arrest, the Karnataka High Court granted bail to JN Ganesh, the Congress MLA from Kampli constituency in Ballari district on Wednesday in connection with an attempt to murder case at Eagleton resort on the outskirts of Bengaluru. Ganesh was arrested for allegedly grievously assaulting his fellow MLA colleague Anand Singh who represents the Vijayanagar constituency in the same district.

The Hindu reported Justice BA Patil granted bail to Ganesh on condition of him executing a personal bond of Rs 2 lakh and sureties sought by the trial court. The court also directed Ganesh not to influence the investigation in any way or threaten witnesses during his bail.

The Hindu quoted the Court’s observation as, “This is an unfortunate case in which people’s representatives, who should be models to society and guide the people, had resorted to altercation resulting in this case, and such conduct would affect the image of the institution that they represent”.

He was earlier rejected bail by a special court for MLAs and MPs in Bengaluru.

Deccan Herald reported that HC observed that since the special public prosecutor has submitted that a limited bail can be granted shows there is no seriousness in the alleged crime. Ganesh has been asked to report to the nearest police station every 15 days till a chargesheet is filed. The HC also noted that the accused can’t leave the country without the permission of the trial court.

Ganesh was arrested by police on February 20, a month after he had managed to abscond after being booked by Bidadi Police for his alleged assault on Anand Singh that took place at Eagleton resort on January 19. The Congress legislators were holed up in the resort after a special legislature meeting was called by party leader Siddaramaiah during a time of threat to the coalition government.

He was booked under sections 323 (Voluntarily causing hurt), 324 (Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons), 307 (Attempt to murder), 504 (intentional insult to breach peace) and 506 (Criminal intimidation) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
