Belt And Road Forum: It doesn’t serve India’s interests to join this Chinese party

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

As the second Belt and Road Forum kicks off in China, the event is being attended by leaders and officials from 150 countries. However, India will stay away from the forum for the second time in a row. The forum, which seeks to serve as a branding exercise for China’s mega Belt and Road Initiative (BRI) of transnational connectivity, is actually being used by Beijing to project power. It wants to emerge as a countervailing force to the US, particularly in the Indo-Pacific.

The Chinese worldview directly clashes with India’s interests. China wants India to remain subservient to it in the region. Hence, India’s decision not to subscribe to the BRI is the right one. Besides, the BRI tramples on India’s sovereignty. The China-Pakistan Economic Corridor — a marquee BRI project — runs through Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir, overriding India’s protests. Add to this the opaque nature of BRI projects that has seen several participating countries being burdened by mammoth debts. The fate of the Hambantota port project in Sri Lanka exemplifies this point — it could soon be turned into a Chinese military base.

Taken together, the BRI is nothing more than an instrument for China to export its own massive debt while simultaneously increasing its influence in recipient nations. And with no indication that China is taking India’s concerns seriously — be it with the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor or the listing of terror mastermind Masood Azhar at the UN or intense military co-operation with Pakistan or a settlement of the border issue with India — there is no good reason for New Delhi to oblige Beijing.

Read also: China to hold 2nd BRF meet on Thursday; India to give it a miss

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
