Disha Patani talks about working with Salman Khan, breaking her knee before shooting Slow Motion song from the film

Disha Patani

Bharat

Salman Khan

Katrina Kaif

Slow Motion

A still from Slow Motion

In just a short span,has made her way to starring in the big-budget film, which hasandin lead roles. Disha plays a trapeze artist and the makers today dropped the first song titledon social media.Disha told Mirror in an exclusive conversation over the phone that she was bedridden a week before shooting the song. “I remember breaking my knee while rehearsing. I was also practising gymnastics simultaneously. You must have seen the front flip and other stunts in the song. I was actually over training and broke my knee a week prior to the shoot.”She added, “I couldn’t walk and was literally on the bed before the shoot started. It was really hard for me. After every take, I had to use a cold press, which hurt a lot. But I am happy to see the result and feel that everything was worth it.”We also asked Disha if she trained professionally, considering rumoured beau Tiger Shroff is a fitness freak. “I have been learning on my own honestly. When Ali sir saw I could do a few gymnastics moves, that's when I think he proposed the role," she stated.Further speaking about the song Slow Motion, Disha said, “It was amazing. One of the best experiences for sure. It was very hard because we were only shooting at night during the schedule. It was hard work for sure, I won’t deny it. But I enjoyed a lot. It’s a peppy massy number and I love these kind of songs.”The actress will be seen sharing screen space with Salman Khan and Disha narrated her experience. “Salman Khan is such a sweet person. I never felt intimidated because he makes everyone comfortable and is extremely helpful and co-operative. There’s so much to learn from him. At this stage also, he is so hard working and gives his 100 per cent to each take. I am fortunate to get this opportunity and be a part of such a big ensemble.”Disha calls Katrina an exemplary dancer but regrets not getting to work with her.According to Disha, social media is a great platform to showcase talent. “I handle my own Instagram and I feel it's a fantastic opportunity to connect with people. It's also a great way to keep followers updated on projects and get their feedback."But does trolling affect her? “I really don’t pay attention and not knowing these people certainly helps. There are so many frustrated people online who are not happy with their lives and are evil enough to say bad things about people who they don’t even know. I focus on positive things. I am a happy-go-lucky person," she said.
