Potential Cyclone Fani to revive Chennai rains

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

Chennai has been battling hot and humid days for the last many days. While interior parts of Tamil Nadu have seen some good amount of rainfall, but pre-Monsoon weather activities have been escaping Chennai. The maximum the city has seen is some handful thundershowers that too on outskirts.

However, potential Cyclone Fani brewing in Bay of Bengal has given some hopes to the state capital. According to Skymet Weather, for the next three days weather is likely to remain dry and humid across Tamil Nadu. Since, moisture would be now concentrating on the weather system in Bay of Bengal, the state would see warm easterly winds only.

At present, the system is seen as a low pressure are over Southeast Bay of Bengal and Equatorial Indian ocean. It is likely to continue to track west-northwestwards and intensify into a depression shortly. Thereafter also, it would continue to move in favourable weather conditions and as a result, we would see depression strengthening into a Cyclonic storm Fani by the evening of April 27 or by morning of April 28.

As the system would come closer to the Tamil Nadu coast, we would see rains returning to Coastal Tamil Nadu including Chennai. There has been lots of uncertainty hovering around the track of the likely tropical storm Fani.

Also read- Low pressure area forms in Bay, Cyclone Fani likely in next 48 hours

As reiterated, there can be two scenarios. First, Fani after reaching Southwest Bay of Bengal may re-curve, while the other one would be when Fani directly hits Tamil Nadu coast.

You might like reading- With Cyclone Fani brewing in Bay, pre-Monsoon rains in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka to seize

Going by the statistics, chance of the second one is quite bleak as no cyclonic storm formed in April has ever hit Tamil Nadu coast. Nonetheless, in both the cases Tamil Nadu as well as Chennai would see rains for sure but of varying intensity.

To begin with, Chennai is likely to see light to moderate rains by April 28 and increasing thereafter. Situation would be more clear in the next 24 to 48 hours.

Image Credits – Tamil Nadu Tourism

Any information taken from here should be credited to Skymet Weather
