Prince Philip’s ‘mysterious infection’ which caused chaos on royal tour with the Queen

The Queen and Prince Philip visit the poppies exhibit at Tower of London

FREE now and never miss the top royal stories again SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up fornow and never miss the top royal stories again We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

The Duke of Edinburgh was a constant presence by the side of his wife, the Queen, on a host of royal excursions across the globe prior to his retirement. Prince Philip called time on official overseas and national royal duties in 2017. Prior to that, he accompanied Queen Elizabeth II on a number of excursions to countries including India, Pakistan and Australia. Yet during one trip to the former, in the 1960s, his actions came under fire as an unexpected illness struck.

Prince Charles’ father was invited to a host of animal shoots, hunting excursions which caused outrage back in Britain. With the main event set to include the shooting of a tigress, royal biographer Robert Hardman wrote how anticipation was rife. Yet his role in the shoot was scuppered for one “mysterious” reason. In his book Queen of the World, Robert wrote: “Come the day of the shoot, however, there was a bizarre infortuitus development. “The Duke had mysteriously developed an infection in his trigger finger, which had been encased in a thick bandage.

Royal Travel: Prince Philip suffered a mysterious illness while on tour

“While a palace spokesman confirmed he had been responding well to penicillin there was no way the Duke could shoot anything.” Therefore he inadvertently swerved any criticism of his actions. Instead, it was Sir Christopher Bonham-Carter, the Duke’s treasurer, who shot the fatal bullet. Referring to the much-maligned shoot, Robert added: “Under the circumstances, cancellation was not an option, whatever the growing noise and fury back in Britain.” Meanwhile, the 97-year-old’s other shoots during the tour came under huge criticism, after he planted his foot on the body of a tiger whom he had claimed.

Royal Travel: Prince Philip could not shoot as he had an infection in his finger

Royal Travel: Prince Philip, 97, was heavily criticised for hunting during his India tour
