OLX’s India rival Quikr acquires refurbished products startup Zefo to boost pre-owned goods business

Online classifieds platform Quikr today announced its first acquisition deal in the refurbished goods category with used goods marketplace Zefo to boost its pre-owned goods business — Quikr Assured launched last year. Quikr competes with OLX India in the online classifieds category.

Online classifieds platform Quikr today announced its first acquisition deal in the refurbished goods category with used goods marketplace Zefo to boost its pre-owned goods business — Quikr Assured launched last year. Moreover, Quikr has also launched its franchised stores in Karnataka and Telangana to provide touch-and-feel experience to customers particularly in tier-II and tier-III cities. The company battles for the top spot with global player OLX in India. The market for pre-owned products in India is likely to hit $12-15-billion target in the year 2020, said Quikr.

Quikr Assured offers used goods buying and selling in categories such as furniture, electronics, and appliances with a full warranty, replacement guarantee and doorstep delivery option.

Quikr’s used goods business grew 230 per cent year-on-year in FY19 FY18-19. QuikrBazaar — offline stores — that houses Quikr Assured products also turned into company’s fourth vertical to turn cash flow positive.

“Generally, a pre-owned product’s price can be as low as 30-60 per cent of a new one. Now with Quikr and Zefo as a combined entity, we will be able to offer a broader selection of products at even more competitive prices along with as strong a focus on quality,” said Pranay Chulet, Founder & CEO, Quikr.

Zefo, in three and a half years, the company has expanded to four cities and offers over 10,000 products across four categories.

“With the best of Quikr and Zefo coming together, we will double our strength in the quality assurance process, logistics, marketing, and retail, thus raising the bar in the refurbished market for Furniture, Electronics & Appliances and Mobile space,” said Sarath Chandra Gudlavalleti, VP, QuikrBazaar.

Quikr’s operational revenue reportedly grew by 95 per cent to Rs 173.49 crore in FY18 vis-a-vis Rs 88.67 crore in the preceding year even as losses were cut by 28 per cent to Rs 233 crore in FY18 from Rs 324 crore in FY17. On the other hand, OLX India’s revenue for FY18 surged to Rs 179 crore from Rs 92 crore in FY17 even as net profit almost doubled from Rs 8 crore in FY17 to Rs 15.6 crore in last fiscal year.
