News of The Day, April 25, 2019: From PM Modi Varanasi roadshow to Salman Khan controversy; BIGGEST headlines

Earlier today, the Congress announced former MLA Ajay Rai’s candidature from Varanasi to challenge PM Modi. | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: It was a thunder Thursday of news as Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s roadshow in his constituency Varanasi brought the city to a standstill, Salman Khan courted another controversy after he allegedly snatched a fan’s phone and Dale Steyn was ruled out of IPL 2019. Here are the day’s biggest news headlines:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s roadshow in Varanasi

A day ahead of filing his nomination papers for the Varanasi seat, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday held a roadshow in the prestigious constituency. The roadshow covered Assi Ghat, Bhadaini, Sonarpura, Madanpura, Jangambadi, Godowlia before ending at the Dashashwamedh Ghat. The PM will participate in the Ganga Aarti. Earlier today, the Congress announced former MLA Ajay Rai’s candidature from Varanasi to challenge PM Modi, ending speculation that the party may field Priyanka Gandhi Vadra from the constituency.

Clean Ganga - A distant reality in Varanasi?

The 'Namami Gange Programme' has been one of the pet projects of the Modi government that endeavoured to clean up the highly polluted river Ganga. In fact, even in the recent manifesto, the BJP government has laid emphasis on the target of cleaning the Ganga, a target that was to be achieved by the end of 2022.

While reaching the very famous Assighat, where PM Narendra Modi had performed the aarti and addressed the nation in 2014 and 2018, shockingly, it was found that the big ghat has a big open drain. Waste is spewed into the river through Assi Nala. Next to the drain, a functional sewage water plant had also been set up.

Salman Khan had warned videographers, mobile phone was returned: Onlooker

Salman Khan, on Thursday afternoon, took to the road on his e-cycle to reach Yash Raj Studios in Mumbai, where he was supposed to shoot a few promotional videos for Bharat. Keeping in view the security parameters, the superstar was accompanied by his fleet of cars and bodyguards. Yet, an untoward incident happened on the way that put Salman in legal trouble. A complaint was filed against the actor at the DN Nagar Police station for snatching away the mobile phone of a man who was filming him. An onlooker, though, has a different story to tell. According to him, Salman had not only warned the videographers but the mobile phone, too, was returned to them by his bodyguards.

Reliance Jio pips Airtel to become India's second largest telecom company with 30 crore subscribers

Mukesh Ambani led Reliance Jio has overtaken Bharti Airtel in terms of subscriber base and emerges as India's second largest telecom company. Reliance Jio has a customer base of 30.6 crore, Airtel 28.4 crore while Vodafone-Idea has announced that it had 38.7 crore subscribers base in December 2018. The numbers of Airtel were confirmed by a spokesperson after ToI sent a query on Tuesday evening. A telecom industry analyst anticipates that soon Jio may overtake Vodafone-Idea soon.

IPL 2019: Dale Steyn ruled out of remaining season with shoulder inflammation

In what came as a huge blow for Royal Challengers Bangalore (RCB), South African pacer Dale Steyn – who is credited to have brought Virat Kohli & Co’s campaign back on track, has been ruled out of the remainder of season due to inflammation in his shoulder. Steyn was roped in as a replacement for injured Australian all-rounder Nathan Coulter-Nile and RCB won the two matches where Steyn featured in 12th edition. RCB haven’t named a replacement yet for the legendary seamer. After losing six matches in row, RCB have found some momentum having won four out of their last five matches.

Ayurvedic medicine for malaria

Malaria is a life-threatening disease caused by Plasmodium parasites. But with prompt action and proper treatment as well as appropriate measures, it can be cured and even eliminated. In fact, research has shown that several plants contain compounds that could help treat malaria. Herbs and spices such as cinnamon, ginger, and holy basil, have been used in Ayurvedic medicine to treat many diseases, including malaria, for many years.

OnePlus 7 Pro prices leaked ahead of May 14 launch

OnePlus has been tipped to launch two new devices this time - the vanilla OnePlus 7 and the OnePlus 7 Pro. The Pro model has been tipped to get a number of upgrades over the standard vanilla OnePlus 7 and will also be priced higher than normal OnePlus pricing standards.


