Lok Sabha Election 2019: Who is Congress' Varanasi candidate Ajay Rai?

Home >> Varanasi Lok Sabha Election 2019: Who is Congress' Varanasi candidate Ajay Rai?

Ajay Rai was born in Varanasi . He is known as a local bahubali (strongman) and a history-sheeter of the Chetganj police station whose brother Awadhesh Rai was shot dead in Lahurabir area, allegedly by Mukhtar Ansari in 1994.

Congress has once again fielded Ajay Rai against PM Modi from Varanasi Lok Sabha constituency despite being third in 2014 elections. This is the second time when Ajay Rai will take on PM Modi after 2014 Lok Sabha elections.

Who Is Ajay Rai?

Ajay Rai was born in Varanasi . He is known as a local bahubali (strongman) and a history-sheeter of the Chetganj police station whose brother Awadhesh Rai was shot dead in Lahurabir area, allegedly by Mukhtar Ansari in 1994. Earlier, he had been associated with Brijesh Singh and Tribhuvan Singh in several criminal cases since 1989.

He is a five-time MLA who began his political career as a member of BJP youth wing. Rai enjoys the support of Bhumihar and Brahmins and has a strong hold on the grassroots level in Varanasi. He won the UP assembly elections from Kolasala constituency thrice in a row on a BJP ticket between 1996 and 2007. Rai quit BJP and joined SP in 2009 after BJP refused to give ticket in LS elections and fielded Murli Manohar Joshi from Varanasi. Ajay lost the election and stood third after Murli Manohar Joshi and Mukhtar Ansari.

After losing the Lok Sabha elections, he contested the Kolasla by-elections as an independent and won the elections.

Rai was the Congress candidate in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections from Varanasi. He lost the election to BJP`s prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi, and came third after Arvind Kejriwal.

In 2015, Rai was arrested for causing violence and arson in Varanasi during a ban on idol immersion in Ganga. He was released 7 months later after Allahabad High Court granted him bail. In 2012 elections, Rai was an accused in 16 criminal cases and was booked under the Gangster Act and Goonda Act.

Ajay Rai will be once again Congress candidate from Varansi Lok Sabha constituency and will fight against BJP`s Narendra Modi and SP-BSP alliance candidate Shalini Yadav.
