Our democracy under stress

Senior bilingual journalist for the last 40 years. Retired as Editor of Vir Pratap, the oldest Hindi daily of Punjab. He has contributed articles for The Tribune, The Dawn and Huffington Post and can be reached at chandermohan.net or @cmvohra LESS ... MORE

‘I may be drunk, Miss’, said Winston Churchill to Lady Astor, ‘but in the morning I will be sober and you will still be ugly’. During the last election for the President of the United States, Donald Trump had infamously called his opponent ‘crooked Hillary‘, and Hillary Clinton had replied in kind by calling him a ‘creep’.

Such abuse during democratic elections is unfortunate but accepted or maybe even inevitable. PV Narasimha Rao had once observed that you need a thick skin to be in politics. The old fox should have known. It’s also said that in war you can be killed once but in politics, many times over so be prepared.

In our politics, however, our leaders are not only murdering each other’s reputation but they are also striking at the very ethos of the country by hitting hard at the plurality of our society. Someone as liberal as Maneka Gandhi has bluntly told Muslims that if they do not vote for her then she will not do their ‘kaam’. Mayawati and Navjot Singh Sidhu have asked Muslims to vote en bloc to defeat BJP.

Referring to Narendra Modi, Nirav Modi and Lalit Modi, Rahul Gandhi has ‘innocently’ asked ‘why do all ‘chor’ have Modi surname?’ With this one sentence, he has damned all people of the community who have a Modi surname. Rahul is now becoming a serial offender and facing the heat from the Supreme Court. Hectic political campaigning cannot be an excuse for the President of the oldest party to go berserk. He has also been needlessly damning every chowkidar as chor.

But the worst is from ‘Sadhvi’ Pragya Thakur who has said that the senior police officer Hemant Karkare was killed in the 26/11 attack on Mumbai as she had cursed him. Karkare was martyred in the initial moments of the attack when he received three bullets on his chest. He was given Ashok Chakra for bravery but Pragya claims that she had told him ‘tera sarvnash hoga’. After the uproar in the country that the BJP candidate from Bhopal is abusing the memory of a martyr, she issued some kind of an apology. Pragya, however, has made the position of her party very uncomfortable since after the Balakot strike the BJP was trying to ride a wave of nationalism. Now the Election Commission has issued her a notice. Is it time for issuing another curse, this time to the EC?

When our Parliament was attacked on December 13, 2001, both PM Vajpayee and Sonia Gandhi inquired if the other was safe. Where has this civility in politics gone? Recently when Nirmala Sitharaman called on injured Shashi Tharoor in the hospital it made the news, but this should be a normal practice. Today the opponent is considered an enemy, the fight has become very personal as there is no ideology involved. Even Hindutva has lost its sheen as the Congress has become BJP- lite. Rajasthan chief minister Ashok Gehlot has made an unsavoury remark that Ramnath Kovind was chosen President because of his caste, will even the Rashtrapati not be spared? And of course, we have another serial offender in Azam Khan, this time it’s his crass comment on Jaya Prada’s ’khaki underwear’.

This has been the most scurrilous and vituperative elections ever. Our politicians do not realise that they are damaging the very social fabric of the country. The country is much more divided than it was in 2014. The tragedy in Sri Lanka should be an eye-opener on how a divided society and a divided polity can leave a country vulnerable.

Can things change? The Supreme Court is discharging its responsibility well and keeping a hawk eye on the situation. One institution that needs to get back its mojo though is the Election Commission. Initially, the commission was very hesitant and let things get out of hand but after some pulling up by the Supreme Court it did ban a few candidates from electioneering for a few hours but that may not be sufficient. It needs to reduce the noise pollution during election time. Remember, the EC had banned someone as formidable as Bal Thackeray for six years from electioneering or fighting elections. Merely censoring a movie or transferring officials may not do much, EC has a reputation to live up to.

But in the end, the responsibility of keeping the country on track is of the leader of the country, the Prime Minister. The buck stops there. He is offended by the abuses of Rahul Gandhi and some other opposition leaders and has complained that even his caste has not been spared. This seems to have affected him as he has also become more abrasive and bitter. But he is not Rahul Gandhi. His responsibility is much more and he has to make the country less stressful and fractious. A country at the cross with itself cannot progress. Atal Bihari Vajpayee in one of his many memorable interventions in Parliament had wisely said that governments come and go but the country and its democracy need to stay forever.

This now is the historic responsibility of Narendra Modi to bring the country back on track. The temperature has to be brought down and attention diverted to ‘Vikas’. To do that he needs to become a statesman from a politician. He needs to ignore Rahul Gandhi and emulate his great grandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
