‘Narco parrot’ arrested in Brazil

A ‘narco parrot’ is under arrest after it alerted its owners that the police was raiding their drug house in northeastern Brazil.

The bird quickly shouted, ‘mom, the police,’ when the Military Police 17th Batallion busted into the home in Teresina, a city in the Brazilian state of Piauí, on the evening of Monday April 22nd.

Cops were making rounds in the neighborhood of Vila Irmã Dulce early Monday afternoon when they spotted a man outside a home from where he had recently bought drugs. After busting the suspect carryng a large amount of drugs, the police officers proceeded to raid the property, and when they entered the premises, a “funny voice” starting shouting “MOM THE POLICE” … it was a parrot.

The bird is now under arrest after it alerted its owners that the police was raiding their drug house in northeastern Brazil.

The bird quickly shouted, ‘mom, the police,’ when the Military Police 17th Batallion busted into the home in Teresina, a city in the state Piauí, on Monday night.

Cops were making rounds in the neighborhood of Vila Irmã Dulce early Monday afternoon when they spotted a man outside a home from where he had recently bought drugs.

The Military Police later raided the residence of a woman known as ‘India’, who in the past had been arrested twice for drug dealing, according to Brazilian news outlet.

‘He must have been trained for that,’ said Major Mello of the Military Police 17th Batallion.

‘He began to scream as soon as the police approached.’

The operation led to the arrest of her husband, identified as 30-year-old Edvan, who was in possession of four packages of crack.

The couple’s 16-year-old daughter, who was not named by law enforcement authorities, was also nabbed with marijuana hidden inside her underwear.

The teen was later released after appearing before a judge.

As for the parrot, the talkative bird will be transferred by the Environmental Police Batallion to the Teresina Zoo.

Source: https://www.dailymail.co.uk







Comments

comments
