Bengaluru Police direct religious institutions, malls to increase security measures

Bengaluru Police direct religious institutions, malls to increase security measures

Bengaluru City Commissioner T Suneel Kumar held a meeting on Thursday with in-charges of religious institutions, shopping malls, and star hotels in light of the terror attacks in Sri Lanka.

news Security

In light of the deadly terror attacks in Sri Lanka earlier this week, Bengaluru City Police Commissioner T Suneel Kumar held a meeting on Thursday with in-charges of religious institutions, shopping malls, and star hotels instructing them to increase security measures.

The terror attacks on Easter Sunday in Colombo killed more than 250 innocent people including six children. Among the dead were 10 Indians including seven JD(S) functionaries from Tumakuru in Karnataka.

In the meeting, all institutions which see a daily footfall of more than 500 people have been instructed to install CCTV cameras and increase security measures, including frisking of visitors.

Hotels and other such establishments have been advised to maintain records and verify address proofs of visitors.

When asked if the city was on high alert, the police chief denied. He also confirmed that there has been no communication from the central government either.

Speaking to TNM earlier in the day, the Police Commissioner said, “This is a security meeting with the in-charges of all religious places for awareness creation. We want to brief them and tell them to be aware and advise them in light of the Sri Lanka attacks.”

Inspectors of many police stations, especially those in the central business district area of the city and other senior police officers attended the meeting.

Sources in the police said that security has been heightened at all major railway stations, bus stops and other major spots which see high footfall.

A state intelligence department source said airports in the state were already put on high alert following the heightened tension in the aftermath of the Pulwama attacks.

Incidentally, the Bengaluru Airport has issued an advisory asking passengers departing from Bengaluru to start early and be prepared for longer wait times for security check on account of a high-security alert.
