Days of lantern in Bihar over, says Modi

Praises Nitish govt, says electricity has reached every corner of state.

Rashtriya Janta Dal parliamentary candidate from Patliputra Misa Bharti arrives to file her nomination papers for the Lok Sabha elections in Patna. (Photo: PTI)

Patna: Prime Minister Narendra Modi, while addressing a rally in Darbhanga on Thursday, raked up the issue of development and slammed Opposition parties for misleading the state by spreading rumours to gain in the Lok Sabha elections.

Launching a veiled attack on the RJD, he said that the days of lanterns (the party’s symbol) are over as electricity has reached every corner of the state under the leadership of chief minister Nitish Kumar.

“Those who keep showing the lantern today could have easily brought electricity to Bihar, but they were busy building shopping malls and fixing railway tenders. The situation has changed now and the lantern can never return because electricity has reached every corner of the state under the leadership of Nitish Kumar”. Mr Modi said.

Mr Modi was referring to the scenario in Bihar between 1990 and 2005 when the RJD was in power. He said that “In 2004, the party had promised to give electricity but it happened only after the NDA formed the government. They are only experts in scams”.

While addressing the masses, he slammed the Opposition parties for their “reluctance” to say ‘Vande Mataram’ and also launched a scathing attack on their stand on terrorism.

He also referred to the terror modules busted in Darbhanga a few years ago and said that the people in the region had been affected by terrorism.

Political analysts claim that caste and national security is one of the core issues during the Lok Sabha elections for political parties in Darbhanga. Abdul Bari Siddiqui of the RJD and BJP’s Gopalji Thakur are pitted against each other in this constituency.

A few days earlier, Abdul Bari Siddiqui had stoked a controversy by saying that he has no trouble in chanting ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’ but reciting ‘Vande Mataram’ was against his religious beliefs.

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analysis et al. Happy reading.
