The gangs of Gurugram get deadlier

When Gurugram Police recently caught two men, it seemed to be an innocuous operation. But their confessions have sent the cops into a tizzy. Chand and Vikas are sharpshooters of Kaushal, who is operating from Bangkok after fleeing from Gurugram's jail. The two have confessed to 10 killings in Gurugram and its surrounding pockets in the recent past. "There have been more such arrests and more such revelations. The guns are booming after a brief lull. But we're prepared to hunt these gangs down," said a senior police official. Chand (21) alone has committed eight murders in Gurugram, Rewari and Delhi. Age has also been a key factor.

He committed his first murder in 2013 when he was only 16. At 19, he played a key role in the murder of gangster Mahesh 'Attack' in Gurugram in 2016. 'Attack' was Kaushal's strong rival. During the killing, Chand was accompanied by Sanjeet Vidroh who was killed in an encounter with Delhi Police last year. Vidroh was 17 when he was involved in the 2017 murder of Manish Gujjar, a liquor baron of Gurugram and brother of gangster Bindar Gujjar who had rivalry with gangster Sandeep Gadoli. Gadoli was killed by Gurugram Police in a hotel in Mumbai's Andheri on July 6, 2016.

He was 15 when he committed his first murder. "The maximum punishment for juveniles is three years. Hence, gangs are catching them young and training them for contract killings," said a police official. Gurugram Crime Branch ACP Shamsher Singh has found during investigations that Chand was also one among four shooters who gunned down Nambardar Sumer Yadav at IMT Manesar in December. Vikas was also wanted in cases of extortion and kidnapping. He developed a rapport with Kaushal in the last few years, the police said.

FIRST KNOCKS

Real estate deals, extortion, gambling and other illegal means of income were reasons why guns started booming in Gurugram in the 1990s. It was in 1995 when advocate Bunty alias Fauji formed the first major gang. His and another gang led by Rajje, a local resident, were involved in shootouts. In 1996, Fauji shot Rajje dead. This, police sources said, led to the formation of new gangs unleashing battles to mark territories. "Despite a steady rise of criminals and organised gangs since the 1990s, there had been no one syndicate to control real estate. Most gangs had a short life, and the demise of one gang leader or his liquidation by the police led to the rise of the next boss," said a police official.

THE MUSHROOMING

In the years after 2000, many other gangs emerged. The notorious ones were led by Sunil Takla, Dharambeer Ullahwas, Sudesh alias Chailu and Raju Langda, among others. By 2006, when developers and corporate firms moved into the city, these powerful gangs started losing clout and disintegrated into splinter groups, said police sources. Many gangsters, they said, were killed, others were put behind bars and eventually their public presence lessened. After 2006, there were stray incidents of organised crimes including one in which gangster Neetu Gahlot was killed in 2008 by contract killers hired by Raj Bala Malik, mother of slain gangster Sunil Malik. Ullahwas was also killed in 2006 by contract killers. Seven years later in 2015, there were a couple of incidents involving gangsters again.

THE RE-EMERGENCE

The re-emergence, however, came in 2016. This time, police sources said, the gangs would fight over supremacy, especially after Gadoli's killing. It was followed by two high-profile murders with Kaushal having a role in them. "When wanted gangsters Gadoli died and Binder Gujjar was in jail, Kaushal wanted to take control of the criminals in Gurugram," said a police official.

The son of a property dealer in Gurugram's Naharpur Rupa village, Kaushal used to provide and fix submersible pumps before joining the criminal ranks in 2004 with a land dispute with then gangster Sudesh alias Chhelu. The fight between the two resulted in nine murders. The death of Chhelu in police custody at the hands of Kaushal's men in Gurugram in 2006 ended the series of murders. Police sources said after Gadoli's death, his gang members, 25-30 in number, merged with Kaushal's gang and started operating jointly. The primary motive, police said, is to establish a strong hold on extortion, land grab and kidnappings. In the meantime, Binder Gujjar came out on bail and started operating on his own. "Gadoli gang had close connections with Kaushal gang, while Mahesh 'Attack' had close links with Bindar Gujjar. After Gadoli and Mahesh have been eliminated, Gujjar and Kaushal have become active in Gurugram," ACP Singh said. Gujjar having close links with Delhi gangster Manjeet Mahal is currently on bail.
