Post Lanka attacks, police ramp up security in Bengaluru

Public and private institutions told to be vigilant

Security has been heightened in and around the city after terrorists targeted churches and luxury hotels on Easter Sunday in Colombo, Negombo and Batticaloa in Sri Lanka. Eight people from Karnataka were killed in the bomb explosions.

In the wake of the attacks, city police commissioner T. Suneel Kumar on Thursday convened a meeting with managements of places of worship, hotels, malls, transport corporations and civic agencies to take stock of safety measures. Over 300 stakeholders participated.

Mr. Kumar instructed them to install surveillance cameras and hold security checks in accordance with the Karnataka Public Safety (Measures) Enforcement Act, 2017, and urged the stakeholders to maintain vigil.

Apart from surveillance cameras, the management should also deploy baggage scanners and other security checks. “As the police cannot be present everywhere, people should be the eyes and ears of the force to help maintain law and order,” he said.

The management of private institutions should seek the help of jurisdictional police for deployment of adequate security measures, and they should inform the police about any suspicious activities. He underscored the importance of hotels and lodges to record details of guests with copies of government-approved ID cards.

Door frames and hand-held metal detectors should be put in place at strategic locations.

“The rule regarding deployment of security checks is applicable to all places, including private and public spaces, which see a minimum of 500 visitors every day,” Mr. Suneel Kumar said.

Earlier this week, jurisdictional deputy commissioners of police had convened a meeting with managements of private establishments and security agencies giving detailed instructions on how to carry out security checks.

Patrolling has been heightened and police are tapping into the criminal intelligence network as a part of the heightened security protocol.

Police personnel on patrol duty have been instructed to conduct security checks at sensitive places and keep an eye on entry and exit points in Bengaluru.

Representatives of various institutions who attended the meeting responded positively and agreed to install or upgrade security measures.

Anti-terror cell

The police are awaiting approval for a proposal to set up an anti-terrorist cell for Bengaluru — a dedicated force to investigate terrorist and subversive activities. “A proposal has been sent to the government for approval and will be implemented soon,” said Mr. Kumar.
