We must ensure safety of women first, talk of gender equality later, says Vaidehi

Mysuru: “Before we can talk of gender equality , safety for women has to be provided for, and guaranteed in our society,” said Kendriya Sahitya Akademi award-winning writer Vaidehi at Rangayana on Thursday.Vaidehi, inaugurating the national seminar on ‘Gender Equality’ organised as part of Rangayana’s annual theatre festival Bahuroopi , was at her mordant best as she reeled off one difficult question after another, which she said needed to be confronted before one could start talking about parity. “Why do women wish to live like women? Why should women ask for equality? Who are these people who will ensure equality? There has been a rise in the number of sexual harassment cases against women in the country. Men are exploiting women’s bodies. Women are living in fear of all men, including those they are related to – brother, cousins and even their fathers. Discrimination of women must be stopped, and stopped immediately. Differential treatment on the basis of body, and shape must cease. The soul has no gender,” Vaidehi said.Lamenting the persistence of stereotyping of women in popular culture, Vaidehi said that people were making money through the commodification of women. “Women are depicted in an unflattering light, and this is helping some make money. It is only in Theatre, where a woman’s identity is being taken seriously. Gender equality appears like a distant dream. It cannot be achieved. In the prevailing scenario, men come first when it comes to gender inequality,” she said.Calling on women to look beyond the vision of equality, Vaidehi rued the ignorance of what she called so-called educated people to the pressing issue. “It is not that there was no gender inequality earlier. But, it has assumed new forms off late. Every morning, when we read the newspapers, there are reports on sexual harassment, murder and crimes. It is deeply saddening,” said the author.Advocate and activist CS Dwarkanath, who spoke on ‘Gender Equality and Constitution’, said, “India is a country where women are worshipped, and yet, stands 101 in terms of gender equality. All religions have betrayed women. The Buddha was the first to speak about gender equality before the theme found expression in the Vachana literature in the 12th century. In the 20th century, BR Ambedkar extended the right to vote to women.”The advocate affirmed that gender equality could be achieved legally, with the Constitution. “Speeches will not work, but the Constitution will. Rangayana should stage plays that speak on the Constitution. The bill to give 10% Reservation to economically weaker sections among the upper castes was ratified in the Parliament, but the Women’s Reservation Bill is pending clearance for ages. No party is keen on passing it. It is sad that women are refused entry to the Sabarimala temple even in the 21st century,” said Dwarkanath.Rangayana director Bhagirathi Bai Kadam, the repertory’s joint director VN Mallikarjunaswamy, activists Revathi and Pa Mallesh were in attendance at the lecture.
