Panther prowls in Jaipur village, triggers panic

Late on Wednesday night, a panther from the Jhalana hills ventured into a village in Shivdaspura area of the city leading to panic among the villagers. Forest officials and local police were alerted on the movement of the panther after which the area was cordoned off and officials initiated a combing operation to trap the feline.

However even after twenty four hours, the forest officials’ efforts have not bore any fruits and the panther roams free. Although officials maintain the feline is still inside the village, the waiting game is on as the panther is not moving to other location where it can be trapped easily.

The incident occurred in Dantli village of Shivdaspura area. “Late in the night, some of the villagers spotted the panther walking towards one of the houses in the area. “They beamed torch lights in the area where they thought the feline was last seen. Immediately they sounded an alert and asked villagers to stay inside and not remain outside. Meanwhile, the local police was contacted and informed of the panther sighting,” officials said.

Immediately, a police team was dispatched while the forest officials were also alerted. “The police team cordoned off the area where the villagers saw the panther and soon the forest team also arrived. The forest officials also sighted the feline and then laid a trap. However, the panther did not come out of its hiding till reports last came in. Later, officials decided on putting up cages at various sections of the village so as to trap the cat. “Food was also kept to lure the feline out of the cage. However, officials kept waiting the entire night, but the feline did not come out of hiding,” officials said.

Meanwhile the cages are still there to make sure that the panther is caught. “No person has been harmed but we are on the alert still,” an official said.

Cages Put Up

Officials decided to put up cages at various sections of the village so as to trap the cat. Food was also kept to lure the feline out of the cage. But officials were waited the entire night without result.
