Parrot Taken Into Custody

A parrot has been taken into custody following a police raid targeting drug dealers in northeast Brazil.

The bird had been taught to warn its owners of police presence by shouting “Mamãe, polícia!” or “Mama, police!” according to a report from Globo, a major Brazilian television network.

The bird was seized in Vila Irma Dulce on April 22, and sent to the Flagrant Center of Teresina, the capital of Brazilian state Piauí. Police say the parrot has not said anything while in custody.

Major Mello of the 17th military police battalion told Globo that the animal impressed the police.

“He must have been trained for that. He began to scream as soon as the police approached,” he said.

According to the police, the parrot’s owner is a woman going by the name “India” who has been arrested twice for drug trafficking. Police say the woman was in bed due to an accident, and it was her husband who was using the parrot.

The man, identified as Edvan, 30, was arrested after police found crack in the house and the man’s teenage daughter was seized with marijuana hidden inside her underwear. Both of them were sent to the Flagrant Center, where police investigate flagrant crimes. The girl was later released.

It is not the first time parrots have been used by drug dealers to warn of nearby law enforcement.

In 2010, a parrot by the name of Lorenzo was seized after being caught warning drug traffickers of police presence in Columbia.

Lorenzo was reportedly trained to call out every time a police officer went near the traffickers’ headquarters. When presented to media after his capture, he said, “Run, run, the cat is going to eat you.”



When police caught on to the ruse, they were able to sneak past the avian lookout, where they discovered weapons, marijuana, and two more trained parrots, according to the Telegraph. Four men were also arrested in the raid.

Authorities claimed that Lorenzo was one of nearly 1,700 parrots trained by drug traffickers that police have seized, the Telegraph reports.

Other Guard Animals

Parrots are not the only exotic animals used to guard drugs.

Read More
