Lok Sabha elections 2019: PM Modi focuses on security, terror in Varanasi

Security is a pre-condition for economic prosperity, Prime Minister Narendra Modi told people in Varanasi on Thursday, and asserted that there had been no terror arrack on any temple or city in the last five years when he has been in power.

Speaking to a group of intellectuals in the temple city after a mega roadshow, Modi said, “Terrorism is now limited to a small region of Jammu and Kashmir.”

The prime minister, who files his nomination papers on Friday, raked up the issue of the recent terror attack in Sri Lanka, which killed at least 250 people, and said those who died had everything, but everything was taken away in one incident.

Modi said the past five years of his government had focused on honest efforts and that he would extend those efforts in the next term. The prime minister said he will not claim that whatever he wished for the constituency had come true during the last five years.

But the pace and the direction of its development are right, he said and outlined the work done by his government in the constituency. He said while the last five years of his government were about making sincere effort, the next five years will be about results.

Modi referred to terror attacks targeting temples, including the strike at Sankat Mochan temple in Varanasi, and accused previous governments of merely “holding dialogue”. “But the people of Kashi made me MP and 125 crore people gave me their blessings to become PM. Since then, terrorists have been replied to in a language they understand,” he said.

The Prime Minister also referred to Pakistan, without naming the neighbour, in recounting his action against terrorism. “We have isolated from the world those who nurtured terrorism. Action was taken against some organisations that acted as facilitators of terror.”

Modi said Kal Bhairav — the Kotwal (guard) of Kashi — has given him blessings and he will return after victory. He said every citizen of varanasi was like children of Baba Vishwanath.

Modi spoke about the change that he brought to Varanasi, and said he was pained to see the state of the affairs when he came to the city five years back.

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
