Denied money for booze, man kills grandmother, her sister

MADURAI: Madurai district police have arrested a 40-year-old man on charges of murdering his nonagenarian grandmother and her sister for not giving him money. The accused, identified as A Muruganandam, 40, who allegedly committed the crime under the influence of alcohol, was sleeping when police took him into custody after being alerted by his partner Muniammal.The victims have been identified as A Veerammal, 92, and her sister A Paripooranam, 90, of Sunnammbu Kalavasal on Theni Road in Usilampatti. According to police, Muruganandam murdered the women by hitting their head against a wall and strangulating them using sari. On being alerted, a police team from Usilampatti town police station rushed to the spot and arrested Muruganandam.Based on a complaint from Usilampatti village administrative officer Vasumuthu, Usilampatti town police registered a case under the IPC Section 302 - Punishment for murder.The accused and the victims were living in the same house. Muruganandam, a construction labourer, was taking care of them. The victims were receiving old age pension from the state government. He nursed a grudge against the duo for not sharing the money with him. He used to demand money from them to booze, which they denied. They also used to scold him, police said.Muruganandam, who came home after consuming liquor on Wednesday night, picked up a quarrel with them. He attacked Veerammal first and then Paripooranam. Muniammal, who was not present at the house, came home later to find them dead and alerted the police by dialing 100, police said.According to police, Muruganandam murdered a mason at a construction site under Sellur police limit in Madurai city in 1998. He was convicted in the case in 2001 and spent 14 years in prison and was released only a few years ago.He developed a relationship with Muniammal, a construction labouer, after his release and has been living together with her. Her two children are staying in a hostel.
