Alia Bhatt and Aditya Roy Kapur starrer Sadak 2 to be shot in Mumbai

Mahesh Bhatt is preparing hard for the sequel of his 1991 romantic thriller Sadak. The film, which features Alia Bhatt and Aditya Roy Kapur, also stars Sadak's original cast Pooja Bhatt and Sanjay Dutt. Director Mahesh Bhatt, who initially planned to shoot the film in Romania, has now decided to film Sadak 2 in Mumbai. Recently, Mahesh Bhatt along with daughter Pooja Bhatt flew to Romania to recce the locations.

According to a report in Mumbai Mirror, the director has finalised Mumbai for the shoot as the father-daughter duo didn't find the landscape of the European country suitable for the film. They wanted to recreate Mumbai in Romania.

Confirming the news, producer Mukesh Bhatt told the daily, "We didn’t find locations like Mumbai in Romania, so we would be shooting those portions here. The film will also be shot in other parts of India. The creative decision to not go ahead with Romania was taken by Mahesh, who is directing the film. We are putting up a set at Mehboob studio in Bandra where Sanjay and Alia will join us on the first day in mid-May."

Earlier, the team had also travelled to Kedarnath and Rishikesh for a recce.

Pooja Bhatt and Mahesh Bhatt have worked together in many films in the 90s like Daddy, Dil Hai Ki Manta Nahin, Sir, Zakhm and Sadak. However, the sequel to Sadak will mark the beginning of Alia's Bollywood journey with her father.

In September last year, Sadak actress Pooja Bhatt announced her father Mahesh Bhatt's comeback to the director's chair after a long gap. She shared a promo video on Twitter, in which Alia can be heard humming in the background.

And he’s back!To breathe new life into our souls & to breathe more soul into our lives.I thought b’days were about receiving presents Pops & there you go and turn that on it’s head by giving us a gift instead-the gift of Sadak2 & the privilege of being directed by you. Shukriya! pic.twitter.com/A3xZNTtvi8 Pooja Bhatt (@PoojaB1972) September 20, 2018

After helming films like Arth, Saaraansh, Naam, Chaahat among many others, Mahesh Bhatt left the director's chair in 1999 with his film Kartoos.

Sadak 2 will hit the screens on March 25, 2020.

Watch the promo of Sadak 2:

ALSO READ| Sadak 2: Alia Bhatt and Aditya Roy Kapur to recreate Sanjay Dutt- Pooja Bhatt song Tumhe Apna Banane Ki?

ALSO READ| Sadak 2: Alia announces Sanjay Dutt-starrer on dad Mahesh Bhatt's 70th birthday
