NYAY will be a ‘surgical strike’ on poverty: Rahul Gandhi

Samastipur (Bihar): Congress president Rahul Gandhi called the ‘NYAY’ scheme a ‘surgical strike’ on poverty and allayed fears that the salaried middle class would have to foot the bill which he said would be entirely funded with the money that thieves like Anil Ambani have plundered with Narendra Modi’s help.

Launching a fresh attack Friday on the NDA government at the Centre, Gandhi coined a slogan ‘Kuchh nahin sab jhootha hai, Narendra Modi ne loota hai, (all promises are proven false, Narendra Modi has robbed people of whatever they had).

Addressing a rally in this north Bihar town where he shared the stage, for the first time after general elections were announced, with RJD heir apparent Tejashwi Yadav, the Congress chief also deplored the insulting treatment meted out to the jailed supremo of his alliance partner and warned the BJP-led coalition of a backlash in the polls.

The Congress chief also mocked at the Prime Minister for making military operations carried out after terror attacks in Uri and Pulwama a poll plank. “He (Modi) carries teleprompter wherever he goes to deliver his speeches. He keeps getting orders like ‘don’t talk about rozgar (employment),’ ‘do not mention the Rs 15 lakh you had promised to remit into accounts of every poor Indian’, ‘keep harping on surgical strikes’, Rahul said taking a swipe at the PM.

Reiterating that if voted to power, the Congress would ensure that no farmer was sent to jail for defaulting on loans. You (Modi) are welcome to help people like Nirav Modi and Vijay Mallya flee the country after defaults, but we stand for the common people, farmers and the working class and we would share their burden,” asserted Rahul.

The meeting however, got delayed for three hours as en route to here, the aircraft in which Rahul was traveling developed engine snags and had to return to New Delhi.

It should also be stated here that the Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) has ordered a probe into the matter.
