Mumbai: Three men murder and rob senior citizen, hide in Tamil Nadu; arrested

An officer stated that an ex-employee of the deceased, Mahesh Gowda had been missing since his death (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: The police arrested three men after they allegedly robbed and murdered a senior citizen. The alleged incident took place in the Borivali apartment of the accused. The police are suspecting two people to be involved in the incident.

The accused allegedly checked the CCTV footage of cameras installed in the building and saw two people who were entering the building wearing caps.

The police probed the people who used to work at the deceased's residence. The police are trying to identify the people using the footage of the CCTV cameras. While talking to the Indian Express, an officer stated that an ex-employee of the deceased, Mahesh Gowda had been missing since his death.

Investigation revealed that Gawda was in Mandya, Karnataka. When the police reached there, they got to know that the accused had gone to Tamil Nadu with two of his allies. The allies were identified as Anilkumar Gawda and Kiran Kumar.

The three accused were arrested from Tamil Nadu. A police officer stated that the three confessed to killing the 70-year-old. Gawda had allegedly told his allies that the deceased had kept a lot of cash in his house. However, when they robbed the deceased's house, the accused found Rs 10,000.

On April 11, another incident surfaced from the national capital when a woman was murdered in her house. The deceased was allegedly murdered by her neighbour. The accused was allegedly under the impression that the deceased lived a lavish life and was financially well-equipped.

The deceased was alone when the alleged incident took place. The accused went to the victim's house when her husband was not home. The deceased then asked the neighbour to watch television while she went to finish her household chores. The accused allegedly called her associates and strangled her to death. The accused then ransacked the deceased's house and stole gold bangles and rings. The accused was caught after she narrated the entire incident to her friend who turned out to be a police informer.
