6 Dedicated Officers Who Went Beyond The Call Of Duty & Risked Their Lives To Save Others

You see, it's actually true when they say 'not all heroes wear capes'. Ask someone who has known a superhero in all flesh and blood, someone who came into their life when their every breath was hanging by a thread.

Call them whatever you choose - saviour, messiah or guardian angel, but the fact is, they indeed are heroes who have ditched the capes, and bear such courage in their hearts that's only second to a lion's.

So yes, not all heroes wear capes. Some wear khaki uniforms, Indian Navy hats and even regular clothes, but they all have one thing in common - all of them would put their own lives on the line to save the people around them.

Check out the inspiring stories of these 6 dedicated officers who went beyond the call of duty, and risked their lives to save others:

1. RPF Constable Jagbir Singh Rana

© Twitter

The RPF constable was most recently in the news for his bravery and ultimate sacrifice that saved five lives at the cost of his own. Constable Rana was patrolling the busy tracks between Adarsh Nagar and Azadpur railway stations when he was killed by a Shatabdi Express while saving a couple and some children from getting hit by trains. He managed to bring the couple arguing on the tracks to safety, but during a second round while trying to save a few kids, he couldn't get off the tracks on time and got hit by a train. Constable Rana died on the spot.

2. Lieutenant Rahul Dalal

© Facebook

While out on the beach with his wife at the Vypin beach in Kerala, Lieutenant Rahul Dalal noticed a gathering of curious onlookers along the beach. When he got closer he realised that someone was drowning and crying out for help. Strong evening currents didn't help the situation and stopped others from helping the poor guy. Lt. Dalal jumped right in and was almost crushed under the drowning man's frantic attempts to get to safety. However, despite the strong currents and the odds the lieutenant managed to bring the man to safety.

3. Constable Raj Kamal Meena

Brave constable Raj Kamal Meena of PS Khyala saved the life of a boy drowning in Bawana Canal. Rajkamal went to Bawana for a raid but when he saw the child drowning, he jumped in the canal to save him. Proud of Ct Rajkamal. @DelhiPolice @LtGovDelhi pic.twitter.com/FDcwJJz4Gc — DCP West Delhi (@DCPWestDelhi) February 4, 2019

Constable Meena who is posted at the Khyala Police Station in New Delhi, was going about his work as usual one day, when he noticed some children playing near the Bawana Canal located in West Delhi. Since it was known for being a dangerous spot where many unfortunate incidents of drowning had taken place, he went to warm them. But by the time he could reach, one of the boys jumped into the calm and began drowning. However, constable Meena's quick thinking and courage saved the boy's life who could have drowned in the deep waters.

4. Sub-Inspector Gagandeep Singh

© Twitter

Uttarakhand cop Gagandeep Singh became an internet sensation after he stopped a lynch mob from punishing and taking away a Muslim youth's life, based on foolish trepidations that had provoked a Hindu mob to take the matter in its own hands. Sun-Inspector Gagandeep Singh showed commendable courage when he single-handedly prevented the mob from harming the Muslim youth in a Hindu temple, where he had allegedly gone to meet his Hindu girlfriend.

5. Constable Sudarshan Shinde

© Twitter

When a dangerous fire broke out at a pub in Mumbai's Kamala Mills compound, constable Shinde had been patrolling in a nearby area. As soon as he heard about the fire, he rushed to the spot. Some people had gotten trapped inside due to the blaze and excessive smoke. However, constable Shinde was able to help some of them who had turned on their mobile torches. However, when he found some unconscious people inside, he ignored his own safety and rescued them by carrying outside on his own shoulders. He managed to save many lives that night when the fire claimed 14 lives.

6. Head Constable Abhishek Patel

© Twitter

Head constable Abhishek Patel posted in Madhya Pradesh's Sagar district became a hero for 400 young school children after he risked his own life to save theirs. It was reported that a bomb was found near a school in Chittora village, and upon finding it Patel picked up the 10kg bomb and ran for a kilometer carrying the bomb on his shoulder. A 12-second video of his sprint had also gone viral on social media.
