Rohit Shekhar Tiwari death: Apoorva regrets killing husband sometimes, appears cold other times, says police

Rohit Tiwari's wife showing confusing behavior, says police | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Rohit Shekhar Tiwari’s wife Apoorva Shukla, who has been arrested on the charges of her husband’s alleged murder, was showing confusing behavior, a police official has said.

The officer further said that Tiwari’s wife regrets her action sometimes and appears cold about the incident other times, reported news agency PTI.

Apoorva, who was arrested on Wednesday for allegedly smothering her husband, was sent to judicial custody on Friday.

Apoorva, who was rigorously interrogated by the Delhi police for consecutive four days, did not break down once during the questioning, the officer said, adding, she appears to be regretting smothering Tiwari on the night of April 15-16.

The officer further said that Apporva claimed that Tiwari’s mother was behind the strained relationship between the couple.

The day Tiwari was killed, he reportedly had a heated argument with Apporva for his alleged proximity with his sister-in-law. "She told him she did not like his proximity with his sister-in-law and that he used to drink with her. He teased her saying that when he was returning from Uttarakhand, he and his sister-in-law drank alcohol from the same glass. This angered Apoorva. She held on to his neck and when he tried to raise an alarm, she choked him with a pillow," PTI quoted the officer as saying.

On April 16, Tiwari, son of former Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand chief minister ND Tiwari was declared brought dead by Max hospital in Saket. He was found dead at his residence in south Delhi’s Defence Colony. Initial reports suggested that he had died of natural causes but after an autopsy, it was found he was "smothered" with a pillow.



Apoorva must have also tried to destroy the evidence as she entered the room a couple of times after allegedly killing Tiwari, the police officer said.

According to the officer, Apoorva strangulated Tiwari with bare hands before smothering him with the pillow.
