Mastermind behind murder series finally arrested

April 26, 2019

39-year-old evaded arrest for 10 years

Nabbed in Bengaluru as Police laid a trap

Known in criminal world for his brainy job

Wanted in Kyathamaranahalli Raju murder

Mysuru: A notorious law-breaker and murder accused, who was on the run for the last 10 years, has finally been arrested by the city Police. So far, he had successfully managed to hoodwink both Karnataka and Andhra Police and he is the mastermind behind several sensational murder cases in Mysuru and across the State border.

All his victims were right wing leaders. The Kuvempunagar Police had laid a trap for him in Bengaluru and arrested him on Wednesday night. He has been produced before a Magistrate last night and the Judge handed him over to judicial custody.

A professional killer

Thirty-nine-year-old Atheeq Ahmed Sharif alias Atheeq Ahmed alias ‘Timber’ Atheeq, a resident of Erekatte Street in Lashkar Mohalla, had gone underground ever since his name cropped in heinous crimes. It included that of sensational murder of RSS worker Raju at Kyathamaranahalli in Udayagiri in 2016. The murder fanned communal tension and the city was under Police siege for a couple of days.

Police said that Atheeq was a professional killer and he had built his own team. After the potential victim is identified, the team would meticulously study the movements of the victim before the killing. Their planning was so minute that the killers would escape from the crime scene within minutes leaving very less clues to the Police.

After the murders, when the Police launch a manhunt for him, he used to shift places. Atheeq was accused number nine in Kyathamaranahalli Raju’s murder case while he had played a key role in the murder of Shashikumar, who owned a gym and who was associated with a right wing forum at Udayagiri in 2008, he was involved in the murder of Ramesh alias ‘Vikrant’ Ramesh in Lashkar Police limits in 2009. Atheeq was also involved in the murder bid on Giridhar and Ashok Pai, both associated with right wing outfits.

Cases since 2008

The Police came to know of Atheeq after Shashikumar was murdered in 2008 and since then, the Police were on a hot chase to nab him but Atheeq successfully dodged arrest. Shashikumar was running a men’s parlour and a gym at Udayagiri and he was hacked to death when he was opening his gym early in the morning.

Tracking the killers, the city Police could not find a shred of evidence and the case was handed over to City Crime Branch (CCB) and later to Crime Investigation Department (CID). Even CID failed to solve the case. With Atheeq’s arrest now, the CID is expected to reopen the case.

Murder of college students

Police sources said that Atheeq was the mastermind behind the murder of two college students in Mysuru who were the sons of wealthy businessmen in Hunsur. A gang had kidnapped the students and had taken them to Doddaballapur and had murdered them there.

In 2009, on the second Ashada Friday, right wing activist and BJP leader Giridhar was attacked with lethal weapons in front of his house. Giridhar struggled for survival and later, the State Government financially aided his family and the best treatment was given to him. Fortunately, Giridhar survived. Later when the Police arrested Abid Pasha, Muzamil, Amin and others in the case, they revealed that Atheeq was the mastermind.

Murder mastermind

The same year, right wing activists Ashok Pai and Ramesh were brutally attacked in Mandi Mohalla. While Ashok Pai survived, Ramesh died. Later, brothers Satish and Harish were also attacked. While Satish died, Harish survived. Investigation and arrests revealed that Atheeq was the mastermind in the attack.

RSS Raju of Kyathamaranahalli was the prime witness in the case of kidnap and murder of the two students from Hunsur and Atheeq wanted to eliminate Raju. He hatched a plan and Raju was killed in front of a tea shop in 2016 at Udayagiri.

Known for his brainy job

Ever since Raju was murdered, Atheeq went underground and had even had applied for anticipatory bail in two cases but in vain. He was known in the world of crime for his brainy job, from hatching the plot to supplying required logistics to accomplish any given task. Investigation has revealed that his victims were not only men. He was also involved in the murder of a woman which he planned meticulously.

Hearing the news of Atheeq’s arrest, a team of Hyderabad Police has come to city seeking his custody. City Police Commissioner K.T. Balakrishna said that Atheeq is currently remanded in judicial custody and an application will be moved in the Court to take him to Police custody to collect more information about the murder cases.

The Kuvempunagar Police team led by Inspector G.C. Raju nabbed Atheeq along with Police personnel Niranjan and Rajendra.


