Shepherd in Tamil Nadu's Salem district poisons ten stray dogs to death as revenge

Twenty-two stray dogs poisoned to death in Nerul of Navi Mumbai in 2008 (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Salem: Shocking allegations have emerged against a shepherd from Salem in Tamil Nadu who has been accused of poisoning as many as 10 dogs to death at Singipuram near Vazhapadi on Thursday. Based on a complaint by other villagers, city police made inquiries and landed on the conclusion that Kumar poisoned the strays allegedly after one of his goats was bitten by a mongrel.

Going by reports, a goat owned by Kumar died after being bitten by a stray dog. Following the domestic animal's death, Kumar laced the goat's carcass with poison and left it near his residence. As a result, ten stray dogs, four pigs, along with some chicken and crows were found dead near the carcass on Thursday morning. The deaths shocked villagers who decided to approach the police and report the matter.

Following the registration of an official complaint in this regard, Salem police reached the village and sent the carcasses of all the dead animals to a veterinary hospital. Reports from the medical examination of the carcasses revealed that the animals had been poisoned to death. During the course of the inquiry, villagers told police personnel that it was local shepherd Kumar who laced the goat carcass with poison which led to the deaths. Based on this information, police officials have now arrested Kumar.

A much similar instance had come to light in June of 2016 from Kancheepuram district of Tamil Nadu where as many as 80 stray dogs were poisoned to death and their carcasses burnt. A police inquiry later revealed that two farmers carried out the killings after a stray dog attacked over a dozen of their sheep. A police officer investigating the case at the time had revealed that it was the stench of burning carcasses which led to the discovery of the crime. A case was then registered against the two farmers under Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act.
