Northeast Briefcase

Chennai couple killed in mishap near Kaziranga

GUWAHATI: A couple from Chennai were killed and their two children and the driver were left injured in a road mishap on National Highway (NH) 37 near Kaziranga National Park in Assam on Friday. The couple, identified as Sunit Garodia, a physician by profession, and his wife Nandini, were visiting Kaziranga along with their children namely Tanish and Tanay, along with the driver in a Hyundai Santro car, which collided head-on with a medium-sized passenger vehicle, which was also carrying tourists. The tourists inside the other vehicle also sustained grievous injuries in the mishap. (UNI)

TSR cops leave for Bengal polling

Agartala: Around 1,020 troopers of the counter-insurgency trained Tripura State Rifles (TSR) left for West Bengal on Friday to perform election-related duties in the Trinamool Congress ruled state, official said. He said the TSR troopers, who would be part of the central forces in West Bengal, would perform election related duties till the completion of the Lok Sabha elections in that state on May 19. Two commanding officers and few other middle rank officers are leading the TSR personnel. “The 12 companies of TSR were supposed to move to West Bengal on April 19, but due to the postponement of polling in the Tripura East Lok Sabha constituency from April 18 to April 23, the movement of the security personnel was delayed,” the official said. The official said that two TSR companies comprising 170 troopers had performed election-related duties in Nagaland, where polling in the lone Lok Sabha seat was held in the first phase on April 11. (IANS)

Bodies recovered in Tripura

Agartala: A few hours after the withdrawal of blockade on Gandacherra-Ambassa and Gandaherra-Raisyabari roads by BJP’s tribal based partner IPFT on Thursday evening, the police recovered two bodies from nearby locations on the next morning. According to report, the villagers found the body of local businessman Tapan Das (30) and another youth identified as Jaisha Tripura (26) at Taraban colony of Bhagirathpara area of Gandacherra in Dhalai district in a pile of blood. Police later recovered the bodies and seized a stick with blood stains nearby the bodies. Police, however, did not rule out the possibility of linkage of political rivalry between two partners – BJP and IPFT. Police launched investigation into the incident in different angles while steps have been taken to prevent any further escalation of violence, police said. It sparked off tension in the area and a large number of police has been mobilised to maintain peace. The IPFT had launched indefinite blockade in two locations on April 24 protesting alleged violence and atrocities on opposition supporters during second phase of election to East Tripura constituency on April 23. Besides, large scale violence on non-BJP supporters in two phases of Loksabha poll, they alleged that BJP cadres have forcefully ousted two IPFT and one Congress polling agent from a polling booth in Raima Valley of East Tripura constituency during second phase election. The agitation was withdrawn on Thursday evening after the district administration assured of taking action on their demands, including arrest of four BJP workers, identified for the unlawful acts and also to take strong action against all the accused persons who had perpetrated violence during Tripura elections. (UNI)
