INS Vikramaditya fire: Newly married Lieutenant Commander DS Chauhan dies while dousing blaze

A 30-year-old officer died battling a fire on board Indian Naval Ship Vikramaditya when the warship was entering the harbour at Karwar in Karnataka on Friday morning. Lieutenant Commander DS Chauhan had got married last month.

The Navy said a team led by Chauhan got into action after one of the compartments of India's only aircraft carrier caught fire. During firefighting, Chauhan fell unconscious after inhaling smoke and fumes.

"He was immediately evacuated to the Naval Hospital at Karwar but could not be revived," the Navy said in a statement.

The fire was brought under control by the ship's crew in a swift action preventing any serious damage affecting the ship's combat capability. "Lt Cdr DS Chauhan bravely led the firefighting efforts in the affected compartment," added the statement.

INS Vikramaditya, formerly named Admiral Gorshkov, was handed over to the Navy in November 2013. It weighs 40,000 tonnes and is the biggest and heaviest ship of the Navy. India purchased the $2.3-billion aircraft carrier from Russia.

The vessel is fitted with new engines, boilers, generators, electrical machinery, communication systems and distillation plants. A Board of Inquiry has been ordered to probe into the circumstances that led to the mishap, the Navy said.

The vessel was scheduled to go for a routine refit at the Cochin Shipyard this year. Friday's fire could see it going for the upgrade sooner than planned. The carrier could be equipped with the Barak–II missile system.

PAST TRAGEDIES ON NAVY SHIPS

March 2016 – INS Viraat reports steam leak and fire in one of the ship’s boilers while in Goa. Three injured, one dead.



– INS Viraat reports steam leak and fire in one of the ship’s boilers while in Goa. Three injured, one dead. February 26, 2014 – Fire in cables leads to smoke in the third compartment of INS Sindhuratna off the Mumbai coast. Two dead



– Fire in cables leads to smoke in the third compartment of INS Sindhuratna off the Mumbai coast. Two dead August 14, 2013 – A huge explosion on board the INS Sindhurakshak docked at Mumbai harbour claims 18

Compiled by DNA Research N Archives
