‘All political parties must ensure no person is spared’

Bombay High Court

Narendra Dabholkar

Govind Pansare

Gauri Lankesh

HC seeks ‘maturity’ from current and future govt, says no one should attempt to silence voice of dissent.Thehas sought “maturity” from political parties and their bosses to ensure there are no obstacles in the probe into the killings of rationalistsandA division bench of Justice SC Dharmadhikari and BP Colabawalla, on Friday, also observed that “no one should attempt to silence any voice of dissent”. “That should be our endeavour,” the bench observed while hearing cases filed by the family members of Dabholkar and Pansare, seeking court-monitored investigations. “All political parties, those who are in power now and in future, should ensure that no outfit or person involved in such attacks is spared,” the court added.The bench also expressed surprise on the fact that the government and the CBI were waiting for court orders to carry out the probe. “When a similar attack was carried out in Karnataka on writer, the police there immediately probed and arrested the accused without waiting for court orders or for any petitions to be filed,” the bench noted, adding that it does not expect the government to wait for court orders to investigate the murders.Narendra Dabholkar, a well-known anti-superstition activist, was shot dead on August 20, 2013, in Pune, and Govind Pansare, a communist leader and rationalist, was shot on February 16, 2015, near his house in Kolhapur in western Maharashtra. Pansare died four days later. While the CBI is investigating the Dabholkar murder case, Pansare’s killing is being probed by the Criminal Investigation Department (CID). Gauri Lankesh was shot dead in her house in Karnataka on September 5, 2017, and the case is being investigated by a Special Investigating Team.In Dabholkar’s case, the CBI last year claimed to have arrested two men who allegedly shot him. While in Pansare’s case, the CID has so far arrested seven accused. According to the CBI, some of the accused in the Dabholkar, Pansare and Lankesh murders were linked to each other.On Friday, the HC bench observed that the state government should provide all ground-level assistance for the investigation of the two murder cases. It directed the Additional Chief Secretary of the state’s Home Department and the Principal Secretaries of the state’s Finance and the Public Works Department to hold meetings with CBI and CID officials.“Bureaucrats at the helm of affairs have to show people how they deal with such attacks,” the court added, while adjourning the hearing to June 14.
