Lok Sabha Elections 2019: BJP to get mandate bigger than in 2014, claims Arun Jaitley

The BJP leader said that the "desperation reached a peak" when Gandhi, "without realising that Arvind Kejriwal was playing games with him", offered him four seats contrary to the advice of the party's state unit and "displayed the desperation of a loser".

Finance Minister Arun Jaitley on Friday said that the BJP would get a bigger mandate than in 2014 in the general elections and the "New India" is a positive India which does not accept the "negativism of Rahul, Arvind Kejriwal, Mamata Banerjee and TDP". In a blog post, "Has the Congress Thrown its Hands up?", Jaitley said voting for the first three rounds of the elections covering 303 parliamentary seats is over and electoral battle now enters the Hindi heartland. He said that in most of the states where elections are to be held in the coming rounds, it is a direct contest between the Congress and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the opposition party "is in no position to effectively take on the regional parties or the BJP". "Therefore, the only issue in the future rounds is the width of the margin of victory of the BJP. Will it be a repeat of 2014 in terms of votes, or will it be more? A euphoric reaction at the ground suggests a mandate larger than 2014. A 65 per cent to 70 per cent approval rating for an incumbent Prime Minister is unprecedented in India. It is reflecting in the groundswell," Jaitley said. He said the Congress has announced 424 seats, though the proposed grand alliance at the national level died before it was born. Jaitley said that Congress President Rahul Gandhi, in the last one year, built up "a fake narrative" on Rafale and loan waiver to business houses, which was contrary to the truth. "The fake issues evaporated and now strike no chord with the electorate. Having to apologise to the Supreme Court for false public narrative significantly diminishes the credibility of a political leader. Rahul became a victim of his own falsehood," Jaitley said.
