Assam CM Sarbananda Sonowal condemns attack on journalists

GUWAHATI: Chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal on Friday condemned the attack on two journalists on Thursday and asked the police to take immediate steps to nab the culprits. Assam Police chief Kuladhar Saikia has been asked to act fast so that no culprit goes unpunished.The incident took place on Thursday night when Nalbari-based scribe Rajen Deka, a senior correspondent in an Assamese vernacular, was returning home. It is being feared that Deka may have been attacked because of his ‘bold’ reporting in the Lok Sabha election, which is currently under way in the rest of the country. No one was arrested till the filing of this report.Amanjit Kaur, superintendent of police, Nalbari told TOI that Deka was attacked by an unidentified person with a bamboo. “He suffered injuries on his head and shoulder and has been sent to the Gauhati Medical College Hospital for treatment.” The SP added that they have got several leads and a manhunt in on.Though local sources said the attacker was a member of a political party, police denied the claim. The journalists’ fraternity across the state has demanded immediate action against the culprit. The Nalbari Press Club, Nalbari Journalists’ Association and the Assam Jatiyatabadi Yuba Chatra Parishad have condemned the attack and staged dharnas in protest.In another incident on Thursday, a woman journalist from Tinsukia, Upasana Barua Goswami, was attacked by a group of miscreants when she was out with her family members for dinner. Police in Tinsukia have arrested four people in this regard—Pramod Gogoi, Pragjyoti Das, Dhananjay Dutta and Dwipan Sonowal.The Journalists’ Forum Assam expressed serious concern over the assaults and urged the authority to take stringent action. “We reiterate our demand for a special protection law to safeguard scribes.Moreover, we urge the media fraternity to remain united and pursue quality journalism as it is the need of the hour,” said a statement by the forum’s president Rupam Barua.
