[INTERVIEW] India closer to Korea than you think in diplomatic and security policy

By Hwang Jae-ho





Vinod Anand, a Senior Fellow at the Vivekananda International Foundation.

One of the most notable traits of the current Moon administration in terms of diplomatic policy is the strengthening of relations with India. The sense of sympathy and active interaction between President Moon Jae-in and Prime Minister Narendra Modi make us feel that Korea and India are closer than ever. Indeed, India's support for Korea's plans and policies regarding peace building and stability on the Korean Peninsula is a source of great strength for Korea.



However, it is not widely known domestically how India is promoting its own diplomatic, security and defense policies. To seek an answer to our query, Professor Hwang Jae-ho of Hankuk University of Foreign Studies sat down with Vinod Anand, a Senior Fellow at the Vivekananda International Foundation (VIF), visiting Korea for the 2019 Korea Foundation Invitation Program for Distinguished Guests in Foreign Policies and Security, in the second week of April.



Q1) What is the purpose of your visit to Korea?



The aim of my visit to South Korea was to interact and engage with scholars and experts from think tanks and the strategic community and also government officials to better understand South Korea's foreign and security policies. The interactions at the Korea Foundation, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Korean National Diplomatic Academy and Korean Institute of Defense Analyses provided me with better insights into the South Korean perspective on a variety of strategic and security issues.



Q2) What is the priority of the Indian security policy?



The main objective of India's security policies is to support peace and stability efforts in the region and world at large in order to enhance prosperity and economic growth. In terms of security threats and challenges, dealing with terrorism remains the top priority. India has been facing the scourge of terrorism from across its borders since almost its inception in 1947. Further, India has a tough neighborhood wherein its borders with nuclearized China and Pakistan remain unsettled. While there is firing across the Line of Control between India and Pakistan almost on a daily basis, not a single shot has been fired on the Line of Actual Control between India and China since 1986.



Q3) How is the modernization of Indian defense forces progressing?



The modernization of Indian defense forces is progressing at a steady pace. Though there is a need to increase the defense budget, the government has to be judicious in allotting funds to other competing sectors, e.g. health, education and many other infrastructure and developmental plans. However, the government is paying particular attention to the development of the indigenous defense industry and transfer of technology from abroad. While India has been importing a variety of defense weapons and systems from abroad, it has also gone in a big way for the "Make in India" program. There are a number of areas where both India and South Korea can cooperate in defense manufacturing for mutual benefit. India has good capabilities in space, cyber and special forces operations; cooperation between both sides would result in exploiting the synergies. Over the year, Indian armed forces have modernized their doctrinal concepts and precepts and also added to their deterrent capabilities with a view to meeting the challenges from potential adversaries.



Q4) How would you evaluate India's Act East Policy?



Since the unveiling of India's Look East Policy in 1992 and now its transformation to the Act East Policy in November 2014, it has undergone many iterations. While the original objective of the policy was to reintegrate with the neighborhood and extended neighborhood through a variety of connectivity efforts and economic initiatives, the policy has now acquired a certain degree of strategic orientation. The Act East Policy also chimes very well with South Korea's New Southern Policy, which was ushered in by President Moon Jae-in. Thus, South Korea's efforts to reach out to ASEAN and beyond to India and South Asia complement New Delhi's objectives of strengthening relationships with ASEAN and East Asian nations. It can be easily said that India has been able to achieve a considerable degree of success in its engagement with ASEAN, South Korea and Japan. The Act East Policy also pre-dates many of the other connectivity and other initiatives in the region. Thus, it cannot be said that India's Act East Policy is counter to or in response to any other policy initiatives promoted by other countries in the region.





Vinod Anand and Hwang Jae-ho
