Son of dismissed BSF jawan, who complained about bad food, found dead

Son of Tej Bahadur Yadav, former Border Security Force (BSF) constable who triggered uproar after he uploaded videos on the "substandard food" served to soldiers on social media, was found dead on Friday (January 18) at his residence in Haryana.

According to ANI, the body of Yadav's son Rohit was found dead at his room with a pistol in his hand. His room was locked from inside. "We received a call that Rohit has committed suicide. At the crime spot, we discovered that the room was locked from inside. The body was lying on the bed. There was a pistol in his hands. His father has gone to attend Kumbh Mela. We have informed him," a police official told ANI.

Haryana: Rohit, 22-year-old son of Tej Bahadur Yadav (BSF constable who was dismissed from service after he had released a video last year on quality of food served to soldiers) found dead at his residence in Shanti Vihar, Rewari. pic.twitter.com/sVhY5ve6Ju ANI (@ANI) January 17, 2019

Tej Bahadur Yadav, the former BSF jawan, had posted four videos on Facebook in January, 2017, complaining about the unpalatable food at his camp along the Indo-Pakistan border in Jammu and Kashmir. Yadav had further alleged that the senior officials illegally sold off the food supplies meant for the troopers.

Yadav had also said that he was "mentally tortured" and had expressed apprehension that his seniors may take action against him for exposing the condition of soldiers on the border. The videos triggered outrage across the nation, but the BSF dismissed his allegations. He was later sacked after a three-month-long proceeding at a summary court-martial held in Jammu and Kashmir's Samba district.

Haryana: Police says, We received a call that Rohit has committed suicide. At the crime spot, we discovered that the room was locked from inside. The body was lying on the bed. There was a pistol in his hands. His father has gone to attend Kumbha Mela; we have informed him. pic.twitter.com/WuJeeeL8J9 ANI (@ANI) January 17, 2019

Speaking to India Today after his dismissal, Yadav claimed that he was asked to apply for retirement and the trail was pre-meditated. "I wasn't given a fair trial. I wanted to call colleagues as witnesses but they never allowed me to call them. The entire court martial proceeding was an eyewash," he had said.

READ | Tej Bahadur controversy: BSF has a robust system to redress grievances, says DG

WATCH | Whistleblower soldier Tej Bahadur Yadav dismissed from BSF


