Vicky Kaushal celebrates Uri success with girlfriend Harleen Sethi; makes relationship official on Instagram

Follow us on Vicky Kaushal celebrates Uri success with girlfriend Harleen Sethi

Vicky Kaushal is nation's hot favourite now. The Bollywood actor, who grabbed eyeballs with his debut film Masaan did several critically-acclaimed films before he shot to fame with Rajkumar Hirani's Sanju. Besides his work, the actor's relationship has been making quite a buzz for now. Vicky is dating actress Harleen Sethi and has spoken indirectly about her in several chat shows and interviews.

Their fans will be delighted to know that the duo has made their relationship 'sort of' official on Instagram. Harleen shared a photo on the social-networking site in which the couple can be seen celebrating the success of Vicky's recently-released movie, Uri. In the photo, both are wearing black sweatshirts that has 'Hows The Josh' (a viral dialogue from Uri) imprinted on them. ''High, sir," answered Harleen in the caption for the post. The picture seems to be from Uri's success bash, which was attended by Vicky's parents as well.

Vicky dropped a comment on Harleen's post saying, ''Team''. ''Waah,'' commented Ekta Kapoor. Harleen featured in Alt Balaji's web series Broken, along with Vikrant Massey.

Uri: The Surgical Strike Success Bash: Vicky Kaushal's parents attend, Paresh Rawal arrives with wife (PICS)

Vicky Kaushal celebrates Uri success

Earlier, in Neha Dhupia's chat show, Vicky dedicated Diljit Dosanjh's hit song, ''Do You Know Main Tenu Kinna Pyar Karda'' to Harleen. The actress also supported his boyfriend by attending the special screening of Uri. Vicky met Harleen at a party and they instantly hit it off

On a related note, Uri is riding high on success. The Aditya Dhar directorial has collected over Rs 60 crore in less than a week. If trade analysts' predictions are anything to go by, the movie might score a century. Uri: The Surgical Strike is based on 2016 surgical strikes carried out by Indian Armed Forces after Uri attack.

More stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
