'Dabangg 3' set for Dec 20, may clash with 'Brahmastra'

Mumbai, April 26 : Salman Khan-starrer "Dabangg 3" has been locked for release on December 20, and it may clash with the first part of Karan Johar's mega trilogy "Brahmastra".

Salman made the announcement via social media in style by sharing a cropped photograph in which he is seen sporting a police uniform, and a badge that reads 'Chulbul Pandey' -- the name of his popular character from the franchise.

"Chulbul is back.... 'Dabangg 3'," wrote Salman.

The action comedy has begun its shoot at various locations of Madhya Pradesh.

Being helmed by Prabhudheva, the film marks the second collaboration of Salman and the director. The two have previously worked together in "Wanted".

The film, being produced under the banner of Salman Khan Films and Arbaaz Khan Production, also stars Sonakshi Sinha, reprising her role of Rajjo.

While the makers of "Brahmastra" are yet to reveal a release date, producer Karan Joas saying.

Hafza, a Christian from predominantly Muslim Pakistan, moved to Sri Lanka to start a new life after suffering persecution there.

After the bombing of Negombo's St. Sebastian's Church, some devastated Sri Lankan Christian families started attacking the asylum seekers and forced them to leave the area.

"I was cooking when a group of people arrived and shouted at us to leave. Then, the house owner said if we don't leave, he would also be attacked by them. We just had to leave with our kids," Hafza recalled.

All the refugees had been living in Negombo, north of Colombo, with the assistance of UNHCR in rented houses for years, without facing any problems.

Once the Islamic State claimed responsibility for the Sri Lanka carnage, everything changed.

The Mirror said that amng the asylum seekers were those from the Ahmadiyya Muslim community, who face persecution in Pakistan.

After they vacated the houses, they were sent in a group to a mosque for safety. Another group of people was provided with security inside a police station, the daily said.

"When we visited them, infants were sleeping on a thin bed sheet on the floor while adults were sitting on some plastic chairs and dozing off," the report said.

Raja Kamran, a Pakistani who came to Sri Lanka in January 2018, said he had thought he would have had a great future ahead. "But now all our hopes are shattered."

"House owners have already closed the doors on us. There is no guarantee for life outside," he added. And the UNHCR, he says, does not seem to care.
