Cleaner molests engineer in bus

Bengaluru

sexually harassed

sexual assault

private engineering college

The alleged sexual harassment had happened in Shivamogga and we will transfer the case to take action against the cleaner –RMC Yard police

19-yr-old engineering student was returning from Shivamogga to her college in Hosakote; family members blocked the road the next night and thrashed the driverA 19-year-old engineering student who attends college inhas allegedly beenby the cleaner of a private bus. In retaliation, her kin blocked the bus’s route the next night, pulled the driver out and assaulted him. The girl was also part of this and is said to have beaten the driver with her shoes. The driver has lodged a complaint, following which the student had lodged a counter-complaint about theshe claims she endured.Muktha (name changed) is the student of ain Hosakote and lives in the college hostel in Bengaluru. She avails a particular private bus, Vijayalakshmi, whenever she has to travel between her Shivamogga home and Bengaluru. After a week’s holiday, Muktha boarded the bus from Shivamogga on Sunday night as she had an exam to sit for on Monday.“At around 1.15 am on Monday, while she was asleep in the bus, the cleaner of the bus is alleged to have touched her inappropriately. She immediately raised alarm and the cleaner is said to have walked away. She then called her father and reported about the incident. He advised her to write her exams first and then come back home so that they could go to the police station and file a complaint,” said an officer on part of investigations.Since she used to take this particular bus regularly, it is suspected that the cleaner had seen her and had planned the assault. When her extended family got to know about this, things took a violent turn. The next night, at around 11.45 pm, a few of them are alleged to have blocked the bus near Goragunttepalya bus stop on Tumakru Road. They were unable to find the cleaner in the bus and allegedly, pulled out the driver identified as H Manjunath, 45.“The driver said that he had no idea why he was being beaten. He has stated that even the girl hit him with her chappal. As the bus was stopped, with the help of his co-driver Manjunath called up the travel office who then informed the police control room. RMC Yard police took three people into custody for beating the driver. The driver was taken to KC General Hospital for treatment,” the officer added.Till then, the girl had not filed any complaint. After the arrested people were questioned, police came to know what had triggered the violence. “As the driver alleged that she beat him up with her chappal, the victim filed a counter-complaint against the cleaner of the bus. The alleged sexual harassment had happened at Sagara in Shivamogga and we will be transferring the case there to take action against the cleaner,” clarified the officer.Based on the complaint by the student, the police have registered a case of criminal force on woman with intent to outrage her modesty (IPC 354) and based on the complaint by the driver, a case of causing hurt by dangerous weapons (IPC 324), wrongful restraint (IPC 341), assault with intent to dishonour person, otherwise than on grave provocation (IPC 355) along with other sections has been registered.
