His name left out on daughter's wedding card, estranged father murders wife and stabs daughter

Police are on the lookout for the accused (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Mumbai: Police are on the lookout for a 52-year-old autorickshaw driver who murdered his wife and stabbed his daughter on Thursday before fleeing the scene of the crime. The incident took place in the Thankarpada area where the woman lived with her 24-year-old daughter. An official investigating the matter said that the accused stabbed his wife with a chopping knife in a fit of rage after he discovered that his name was missing from the invitation card of his daughter's upcoming wedding.

A case has been registered against the accused, Mohan Mahajan under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on charges of murder and attempt to murder by the Kalyan police. An official familiar with the incident said that several teams were formed to arrest the accused who was nabbed from Vasargaon in Thane district on Saturday.

The accused lived with his wife and daughter in Thankarpada until a couple of years ago when he decided to abandon his family and moved to a different home. Mahajan cam back home on Thursday after getting to know that his daughter was about to get married. However, he got into a heated argument with his wife when she told him that his name was not on the wedding invite. In a fit of rage, he ran to the kitchen and returned with a chopping knife which he then used to stab his wife and daughter.

While Mahajan fled the scene of the crime, neighbours rushed the two victims to a nearby hospital where the wife was declared dead on arrival but the daughter is still battling for her life. The latest reports suggest that the daughter suffered severe injuries and is being kept under medical observation for now.

A similar incident had come to light in March of this year where a 24-year-old man stabbed his wife to death in front of her mother at Nesapakkam. The accused, an electrician by profession, was arrested by Chennai police within hours of the incident. Investigating officials had told media outlets that differences between the couple led to the crime.
