Former IAF wing commander's wife found dead at Dwarka home, Delhi police suspect robbery bid gone wrong

The cause of death is yet to be confirmed, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The wife of a former wing-commander with the Indian Air Force (IAF) was found dead inside her apartment in south-west Delhi's Dwarka area on Friday night. Delhi police suspect that 52-year-old Neenu Jain, who was alone at home at the time, could have been killed for resisting a suspected robbery bid. However, the crime is still under active investigation and more details in this regard are awaited.

The matter came to light on Friday when the victim's brother went to visit her but found the door of her house locked from the outside. He then made his way to her house by jumping in through a neighbour's residence only to find her lying motionless. Police were alerted and reached the scene of the crime. Her body was then taken for a post-mortem which revealed that her death may have been caused due to strangulation or smothering.

An official investigating Jain's death said that no injury marks were found on her body which indicates that she may have been strangled or smothered while trying to resist a robbery bid. The house was also found to be ransacked, added the official. Meanwhile, the victim's brother told media outlets that he spoke to her over the phone on Thursday night and she told him that she was not feeling well.

Delhi: Body of a 52-year-old woman, wife of a former Wing Commander, was recovered from her residence in Dwarka yesterday. Murder case registered, investigation underway. — ANI (@ANI) April 27, 2019

A preliminary investigation has revealed that some cash, a mobile phone, and jewellery was found to be missing from the house which further strengthens the police's suspicion that Jain's death could be the result of a robbery bid gone wrong. Jain's husband now works with a private airline while her son works in a private company in Noida and her daughter is employed as a doctor in Goa.

Earlier this month, Delhi police arrested a 34-year-old man in connection with a robbery and attempt to murder case which occurred in Dwarka in 2012. The accused, Mohit Kapoor was a resident of Dwarka and was charged with robbing a taxi driver. Kapoor was also believed to be an accused in a case of attempt to murder case which was reported from Palam village.
