Illegal fuel tank found inside Delhi school with 2500 litres of diesel, Deputy CM calls it 'ticking bomb'

Visuals from the raid (Picture Courtesy: @saurabh_mlagk) | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: In a shocking matter which has come to light from the national capital, Delhi police officials raided a private school in the capital city and discovered an illegal underground fuel tank with 2,500 litres of diesel inside of it within the school premises. Reports assert that the raid was carried out on the basis of complaints received by Delhi government from parents whose children are students of the school in question.

Delhi Deputy Chief Minister Manish Sisodia told media outlets that the school endangered the lives of children by concealing an illegal fuel tank with over 2,000 litres of diesel in it inside the school campus. "The teachers were teaching on top of a ticking bomb which could go off any minute," added Sisodia.

While there has been no response in this regard by the private school in Greater Kailash where the tank was discovered, the Delhi government has assured parents that stringent action will be taken against the institution. Visuals from the raid show the illegal tank covered with sand on top. In a video which is being widely circulated on social media, Delhi police personnel can be seen uncovering the illegal tank only to find out that it was filled to the brim with diesel. As a result, officials of the district magistrate and the subdivisional magistrate apart from the Delhi Fire department have been ordered to look into the matter.

Parents of high profile KR Mangalam School are very concerned after Delhi Govt Inspection found illegal underground fuel tank of 2500 Lts inside school.



A ticking bomb



A disaster waiting to happen. Parents in Greater Kailash have been asking for meeting with @msisodia pic.twitter.com/hamdlBghsZ — Saurabh Bharadwaj (@Saurabh_MLAgk) April 26, 2019

Going by latest reports, the Delhi government has ordered the registration of a first information report (FIR) against the private school for illegally constructing a fuel tank and storing diesel in it apart from having a borewell on the school premises without relevant permissions. Sections of the media also reported that parents who complained about the school in the first place staged a protest against the fee hike and demanded to meet the principal over the issue but were refused.
