Pet dog fends off venomous snake to protect owner, dies of snakebite in Tamil Nadu

Puppy died before a veterinary doctor could arrive, said Natarajan (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chennai: A pet dog died in the Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu after it was bitten by a snake while trying to protect its owner, a local farmer. The tragic incident has come to light from Vengarayankudikadu where the owner lives along with his family. Reports suggest that the incident took place on Saturday morning when the owner was out on a morning walk to his agricultural fields.

A resident of Nadu Street in Vengarayankudikadu near Kumbakonam in Thanjavur district, 50-year-old Natarajan had been raising 'Puppy' for the last four years. The farmer said that his wife and two sons treated the dog as part of their family and Puppy accompanied him everywhere.

Puppy was with me during my morning walk on Saturday, Natarajan told Times of India adding that he noticed a five feet long cobra in the bunds crawling towards him. The farmer claims that he froze at the sight of the snake and his pet dog began barking at the reptile. I took a step back and the snake tried to attack me and Puppy pounced on it in order to protect me, said Natarajan. Despite being bitten several times by the venomous snake, the pet dog managed to kill the reptile.

The farmer further told the national daily that he carried Puppy all the way back home where the dog's condition worsened. A greiving Natarajan said that he called a veterinary doctor but his beloved dog died before the doctor could arrive.

A much similar instance had come to light from Bhubaneshwar in Odisha earlier this year where a one-and-a-half-year-old Dalmation fought a cobra who was trying to enter the home of his owners. The pet dog named Tyson managed to fend off the reptile but suffered several injuries on his tail and face in the process. Tyson's owner rushed him to the animal hospital for an anti-venom shot but the establishment was closed since it was night time. The brave dog eventually succumbed to his injuries but ended up becoming a hero for saving the lives of his owners.
