End of terror will help us save money for poor: Narendra Modi

DARBHANGA: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Thursday said if re-elected to power, his government would uproot terrorism from the county so that the money spent on security could be used for the well-being of the poor.Addressing an election rally at Raj Maidan here, the PM said terrorism was taking its toll on the poor across the country. “Gariobon ke utthan mein kharch hone wale paise pistol kharidne mein lag rahe hai (Money which could have been used for the uplift of the poor is being used for purchasing pistols),” he said.Modi said 40 years ago, there was no need to guard temples, mosques and gurdwaras in the country. “The scenario has changed now. We have to spend a lot on security these days. Else, the money could have been spent on improving the living condition of the poor,” he said.Reiterating the NDA government’s resolve to deal with terrorism sternly, Modi said the new India would not only crack down on terror outfits but also teach those involved in abetting or fanning such groups a lesson. “Atankion ke ghar mein ghus kar marenge (Terrorists will be chased and killed in their home),” the PM said.In an oblique reference to the erstwhile Darbhanga module of Indian Mujahideen, a terror outfit, Modi said the module had lowered the image of Darbhanga, which is known for its culture. “Darbhanga bhi iska shikar hua hai (Darbhanga too has fallen victim to it),” he said.In his 28-minute speech, the PM also mentioned about last week’s terror attack in Sri Lanka in which over 350 people were killed and scores of others injured.Taking a dig at the Congress and its allies, Modi said those seeking evidences of the IAF air strikes on terror camps in Pakistan have suddenly become silent after seeing the trends of the first three phases of Lok Sabha election.He said those contesting only a few seats in the general election were also in the queue and dreaming to become the Prime Minister. “The ‘Mahamilawati’ gang has now started blaming EVMs again and not seeking proofs of the action taken in the aftermath of the Balakot incident,” he added.Modi thanked CM Nitish Kumar and deputy CM Sushil Kumar Modi for providing electricity to every house and making lantern, the symbol of RJD, redundant in the state. Accusing the Congress of making false promises to the people, the PM said in its election manifesto in 2004, the party had promised to electrify all villages by 2009, which they didn’t do. “Kya Congress ne aapke saath dhokha nahi kiya?” the PM asked as the crowd replied in affirmative.The PM said if re-elected to power, his government would set up a separate department for water empowerment and fisheries to deal with the problems faced by farmers and fishermen. He said the Makhana Research Centre at Darbhanga would be strengthened and Mithilanchal connected with the Ramayana circuit. He reminded the people of the Centre’s initiative to enhance solar energy system. “Arrangements are being made so that the farmers can produce solar energy in their farmland,” he said.The PM’s announcement assumed significance in the wake of numerous complaints of the farmers of the region about substantial decrease in water level. Mallahs (fishermen) are in sizable number in Darbhanga from where the BJP has fielded Gopaljee Thakur as its nominee. Thakur will take on Abdul Bari Siddiqui of RJD. Darbhanga will go to the polls in the fourth phase of Lok Sabha election on April 29.CM Nitish Kumar, his deputy Sushil Kumar Modi, Union minister Ram Vilas Paswan, health minister Mangal Pandey and BJP state president Nityanand Rai also addressed the rally.The CM said development of Bihar was not possible without development of Mithilanchal. “PM Modi has taken a slew of measures to improve the condition of farmers. The Centre has sanctioned Rs 50,000 crore for construction of roads and bridges in the state,” Nitish said.Paswan said the NDA government has worked for all-round development of all sections of the society.To a question by Modi as to who among the aspirants for PM’s post was competent to eliminate terrorism, the youths replied ‘Only Modi’.Modi shouted ‘Desh Ki Janta’ and the audience replied with ‘chowkidar”, he said “Desh Ka Kisan’ and the crowd’s reply was ‘chowkidar’. This continued for five minutes. As Modi took name of different categories of the people, the audience shouted ‘chowkidar’.Modi said if a candidate refuses to say ‘Vande Mataram’, his deposit in the election should be forfeited. Modi was obliquely referring RJD candidate from Darbhanga Abdul Bari Siddiqui who had declared that he will not recite Vande Mataram as it is against his beliefs.For the first time since filing of nomination by BJP candidate Gopaljee Thakur, JD(U) senior leader Sanjay Jha came to Darbhanga and addressed the meeting from dais urging people to vote for Thakur. Sanjay has sizable number of youths as his supporter in Darbhanga.
