Delhi: Former IAF officer's wife found dead at Dwarka residence, police suspect robbery

The couple has a son and a daughter. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: In a case reported from the national capital, a former Indian Air Force wing commander's wife was found dead at her residence in Dwarka's Sector-7 area on Friday. The police suspect it to be a case of robbery and murder. The deceased was identified as 52-year-old Meenu Jain, a resident of Air Force Naval Officers' Enclave.

According to news agency PTI, a police officer said that 76-year-old Meenu's father, HP Garg, a retired IIT Delhi professor said his son Darpan called him on Thursday evening to inform that Meenu was not keeping well. While leaving office he called his daughter and she responded that she was fine, the officer added.

The deceased also told her father that she had eaten cashew nuts, which had led to some reaction. reportedly, Garg still went to her daughter's house. Meanwhile, at around 7 pm he again called her and found out that her phone was not reachable. After which he decided to visit her and they went to his house. The PTI report mentioned that the main door of the house was open while another wooden door was closed.

When her father knocked on the door, there was no response, so Darpan entered the house from the neighbour's balcony. The officials told PTI that Darpan then broke the glass and entered the house. Upon entering he saw Jain lying unconscious in her room. Reportedly, Jain's maid, who had a pair of keys to the house, came there at around 8.30 am. She tried to open the door but it was jammed.

Later, the police broke the door and Jain was immediately rushed to Ayushman Hospital in Dwarka Sector-10, where she was declared brought dead on arrival. Reportedly, the police were informed about the incident at around 9 am and a case under sections 302 (murder) and 392 (robbery) of the Indian Penal Code has been registered.

The Delhi police suspect that the accused entered the house with an intention to rob the house as the family members mentioned that two mobile phones, the jewellery that the deceased was wearing, Rs 5 lakh in Indian currency and Rs 2 lakh in foreign currency were missing from the house.

However, the police added that the post-mortem had been conducted and the exact cause of death would be known once the report is out. The husband of the deceased, VK Jain, a retired Indian Air Force (IAF) wing commander and currently working as a commercial pilot with IndiGo, was on duty at the time of the incident.

The couple has a son and a daughter. While son Ajay Jain, who works in an MNC in Noida, visits his parents on weekends, daughter Shiwani Jain is a doctor and lives in Goa with her husband, the police added.
