Three friends die as speeding car hits truck on Eastern Peripheral Expressway

NOIDA: Three persons were killed and two, including a five-year-old boy, were injured after the Swift Dzire they were travelling in hit a heavy vehicle from behind on the Eastern Peripheral Expressway (EPE) on the wee hours of Saturday.The victims were family friends and returning after offering prayers at Ajmer Sharif. They were on their way to Bulandshahr when the accident happened in Dankaur area around 1am. Police said the portion of the expressway where the car crashed into the heavy vehicle, possibly a truck, does not have cameras.The injured child and a 24-year-old man who was driving the Dzire, too, have been admitted to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital in Delhi. Sources said the driver had suffered minor injuries, but the 5-year-old boy had sustained severe damage to the head and was on ventilator support. The three persons who died were identified as Pankaj Verma (36), a jeweller in Shikarpur town of Bulandshahr, Khalil Ahmed (57), who owned a furniture shop, and contractor Iqbal Alvi (40).It was Iqbal who wanted to visit Ajmer Sharif to seek blessings for his son Ishaan. “It was the first time that they were travelling to Ajmer. Iqbal wanted the seek blessings for his son and his friends Pankaj and Khalil had decided to join him. While Pankaj was seated in the front, Khalil, Iqbal and the child were in the back seat,” said Furqaan, Iqbal’s brother-in-law.Pankaj, who owned the Dzire (UP13A-Y0100), had hired a driver, Ankit Chaudhary (24), for the trip. Ankit survived with minor injuries. Police said the car was cruising at 120kmph when it crashed into the truck ahead of it. Samresh Singh, the SHO of Dankaur police station, said it was possible that the truck was parked along the expressway when the Dzire hit it on the left side. “The heavy vehicle fled. A part of it was recovered from the spot,” he said.While the driver survived the impact as he was on the right, Pankaj, who was seated in the left at the front, and Iqbal, who was behind him on the same side, died on the spot. Police said they came to know about the accident around 2am.“Two of the bodies could be brought out with much difficulty,” a police officer said. While Khalil, Iqbal and Pankaj were declared dead on arrival, the child Ishaan and the driver were admitted to the ICU. Dr DR Kapoor, medical superintendent of the hospital, said the two were referred to Delhi when the condition of the child deteriorated.Police said Iqbal is survived by his wife and a five-year-old daughter. Khalil has five children and Pankaj four, aged between three and ten. An FIR has been registered on a complaint by the families under IPC sections 279 (rash driving), 338 (causing grievous hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) and 304 A (death by negligence) at Dankaur police station. “There are no CCTV cameras on that stretch of the EPE. Had there been a CCTV, it could have been found whether the vehicle into which the car crashed was stationary or travelling. How can we now expect that culprits would be caught in cases of accidents if there are no cameras?” asked Sonu, Iqbal’s brother.
