Not just Bengal, CPI(M) flounders across country

Soviet Union

Lok Sabha polls

Bengal Marxists

Struggling to come up with ideas to rejuvenate shrinking cadre base.A dusty, old world map from an era that disappeared from maps elsewhere with the collapse of thein 1991 adorned the wall at the CPI (M)’s West Bengal headquarters’ conference room in Alimuddin Street, Kolkata, till some years back.The map was taken down in 2015 ahead of the party plenum held in Kolkata, apparently following a prodding from the former chief minister, Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee.A blank wall with a seemingly fresh coat of paint now stares down at visitors. A replacement map has not been found; and the party itself is struggling to come up with a fresh set of ideas to rejuvenate the shrinking cadre base and anew strategy to get back on the electoral map.After the Left Front was voted out of power from West Bengal eight years ago, the CPI(M) also lost its northeast bastion of Tripura and is now staring at the possibility of imminent defeat in the only citadel of Kerala, which has now been adopted by the Congress president, Rahul Gandhi.“Never has an alternate government been formed at the Centre without the support of the Left. No one knows it better than the Congress,” said Sitaram Yechury, the CPI(M) general secretary, during a visit to Kolkata on Friday.The possibility of this never-before event happening post-2019is what is bothering Yechury and his comrades in Bengal.In the decades since 1991, political analysts have often scoffed at the Marxists for their moribund politics and drawn comparisons with dinosaurs. The CPI(M)’s vote share in West Bengal, from a formidable 50.8 per cent in 2004 to 22.71per cent in 2014, will likely fall further in the ongoing polls. In the Cooch Behar Lok Sabha by-election held in 2016, the Forward Bloc (a Left Front constituent) nominee had to forfeit the deposit. The Left’s rally at the Brigade Parade Ground in Kolkata had more footfall than the ones by Mamata Banerjee and Narendra Modi, yet translating that ground support to votes is proving a Herculean task. Reason? The repeated attacks on Left Front candidates across West Bengal during the campaign.On Saturday, Fuad Halim, CPI(M) nominee for Diamond Harbour, who is pitted against Mamata’s nephew, Abhishek Banerjee, was assaulted, the second such attack on him this poll season. Gouranga Chatterjee, the CPI (M) MLA and candidate for the Asansol Lok Sabha seat, had a similar experience on April 9 when he was attacked in one of the villages. “They are trying to create fear psychosis among villagers. A heavy turnout of Left voters will hurt them,” he said.Two factors that are hurting the CPI(M) big in this election are the absence of leaders such as Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee and the falling out with the Congress on the seat-sharing arrangement. It is true that even when Jyoti Basu, the tallest of the, was around votes were not sought in his name. But then Basu headed the government at a time when CPI(M)’s writ ran large in Bengal. The times now are entirely different.“Alliance is a compulsion. Both the Congress and the CPI(M) have to come together. Still, there is time before the next assembly polls. We will keep on trying,” Somen Mitra, the Bengal Congress president, said recently during an informal discussion.
