Chambal's bandit king Malkhan Singh to fight again, with ballots

The handlebar moustache, the red tilak sword-like on his wide forehead, bandit fatigues with patched pockets and buttoned flaps, the unchallenged king of Chambal in the seventies, Thakur Malkhan Singh, seems to have walked out of the ravines into the wilderness of Lakhimpur Kheri — 85km from the Nepal border.At 76, the over six-foot tall Singh is still the baaghi (rebel), but he’s no longer flashing the American selfloading rifle that he surrendered at the feet of then Madhya Pradesh chief minister Arjun Singh in 1982.After dropping that gun, Singh has now picked up the gauntlet, making his electoral debut from Dhaurahra in UP on a ticket by Shivpal Singh Yadav ’s newly floated Pragtisheel Samajwadi Party-Lohia. And he’s campaigning with all guns blazing, kicking up dust in the villages with his cry to battle injustice and protect women’s dignity.Fondly called ‘Dadda’, Singh hates being called a dacoit and still evokes the Robin Hood image even outside the badlands of Chambal. “I ruled Chambal for 15 years. I was on the run. I was under siege, but not a single police bullet ever grazed my body.”But why did he leave his native Madhya Pradesh and choose Dhaurahra in northern UP to fight the elections? “If Modi can leave Gujarat to contest from Varanasi, why can’t I contest from Dhaurahra,” he says in his baritone voice as he hits the ground on a modest van.Remind him of his bloody past when he carried a bounty on his head with 94 cases against him, including 17 of murder, he stiffens with anger. “Don’t call me a dacoit, I am a baaghi (rebel). The biggest dacoits are netas and bureaucrats. People like Vijay Mallya and Nirav Modi are the real dacoits,” he said.Despite his past, Singh’s poll affidavit says he has no criminal charges against his name. “I have served my sentence and have been acquitted by courts,” he said.Dhaurahra is no unchartered territory for Singh. He had campaigned for the current Congress nominee Jitin Prasada in 2009 and helped him win. “I wanted a ticket from Banda from Congress. I met Jyotiraditya Scindia and Raj Babbar. Jitin Prasada told me my candidature was final. Then he betrayed me. I will prove to be his nemesis and avenge the betrayal,” he said.
