Pollachi sexual assault case: CBI takes over investigation, speedy action demanded

hey were booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code, Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act and the Goondas Act. | Photo Credit: ANI

Chennai: In a recent development of the controversial Pollachi sexual assault case, the Central Bureau Investigation has taken over the probe into alleged sexual harassment of a woman in Pollachi town of Tamil Nadu's Coimbatore district. The survivor was allegedly harassed by a gang of men who had shot a video of her and they later blackmailed her demanding money.

The CBI began the probe on the request of the Tamil Nadu government. Preliminary investigation has revealed that the gang is sexually harassed and blackmailed a large number of women in Tamil Nadu which has triggered an outrage in the state.

According to news agency PTI, the agency has registered two FIRs in the matter so far. One of these FIRs pertain to sexual harassment of the woman and second is related to the assault on her brother.

The government has transferred the harassment and a related assault case to CBI, as the probe demands specialised attention, dedicated investigation with technical expertise and the nature of crime is extremely serious. Earlier the investigation of the case was under the state's CB-CID.

CBI has registered two cases and started investigation in Pollachi sexual harassment case. Earlier, the case was registered with Tamil Nadu police, now, CBI has taken over the investigation in the case. pic.twitter.com/0MdkQ7Q9lE — ANI (@ANI) April 27, 2019 CBI has registered two cases and started investigation in Pollachi sexual harassment case. Earlier, the case was registered with Tamil Nadu police, now, CBI has taken over the investigation in the case. pic.twitter.com/0MdkQ7Q9lE — ANI (@ANI) April 27, 2019

Reportedly, the case came to light after a gang of four men had allegedly tried to strip the woman inside a car near Pollachi and had shot a video of the act and blackmailed her using the visuals, the incident happened on February 12.

The survivor lodged a complaint with police on February 24. The case took a political turn after a local functionary of the ruling AIADMK allegedly attacked the victim's brother. The attack by the functionary, who was later expelled from the AIADMK, coupled with reports in a section of media that the gang had sexually harassed several other women. The news since then has led to an outrage in the city.

The issue eventually took political side after the main opposition DMK targeted the AIADMK asking if it was protecting the accused persons. The allegations were followed by a slew of protests, demonstrations by political parties including the DMK, students and the youth outfits. This brought more pressure on the government and police for speedy action in the case.

REportedly, the four accused in the case were identified as Sabarirajan, Thirunavakkarasu, Sathish and Vasanthkumar, who are currently under judicial custody.



They were booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code, Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act and the Goondas Act.


