Telangana Inter results: Re-evaluation begins as students continue protest

Telangana Inter results: Re-evaluation begins as students continue protest

More than 50,000 students who cleared the examinations have also applied for re-verification.

news Controversy

The Board of Intermediate Education in Telangana is under fire for numerous discrepancies in this year’s results, and following the fiasco, it has now begun the process of re-evaluating answer sheets of students who failed, and of those who cleared the exam but have applied for re-evaluation. The process is underway at 12 centres in the state, of which five are in Hyderabad.

A total of 9.74 lakh students appeared for the Intermediate examinations held in February-March, out of which as many 3.28 lakh failed to secure pass marks. Fifty thousand students who cleared the examinations have applied for re-verification. Twenty students have taken their lives ever since the results were released, and there have been widespread protests by the parents, student groups, and political parties.

Higher Education Secretary Janardhan Reddy and BIE Secretary A Ashok held a video conference on Thursday with district collectors regarding the arrangements so that the process goes on smoothly. Janardhan Reddy said that they were still receiving applications, and assured students that the entire process would be completed before the Advanced Supplementary examinations begin on May 16.

Ashok said that each centre was handling 70,000 to 1,20,000 answer sheets, and that the Board would release a daily bulletin on the status of re-verification. Manpower and material are in place at all centres for smooth conduct of the process, he added.

However, protests by students, parents and student bodies continued at the BIE office on Saturday. Students and parents found fault with the attitude of the police, who were not allowing them to enter the Board office. They complained about the lack of information about the re-verification process, leading to confusion.

The students also demanded transparency in the entire process to clear their doubts and sought free re-verification for all the students.

“Why should we pay the fee for blunders committed by them?” asked a student, who cleared the test but was unhappy with the marks given to him.

Student groups and the opposition parties have demanded Rs 25 lakh as compensation for the families of each student who died by suicide.

On Friday, the National Human Rights Commission issued a notice to the Telangana government, seeking a detailed report on the goof-ups by the Board.

Taking suo motu cognisance of the media reports on student suicides, the Commission sought a detailed report in the matter within four weeks, including action taken against the guilty and relief, if any, provided to the aggrieved families.

On Thursday, Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao ordered free recounting and re-verification of the answer sheets of all the students who failed in the examinations.

With IANS inputs
