Married at 19, Shubhangi Atre credits husband for her acting career

Many female actors put their acting career on hold after getting married. And perhaps that’s why many consider it as a roadblock in their career and put plans of settling down at the back burner. However, for TV actor Shubhangi Atre, this was never a thing to worry about. She got married in 2000, at the age of 19, and later pursued her acting dream. And she doesn’t hesitate a bit in giving all the credit to her husband Piyush Poorey for “giving wings to my passion”. In fact, Shubhangi feels that starting her career post marriage worked best in her favour.

“When I was taking the baby steps in this industry, I wasn’t alone. My husband was there by my side. Moreover, I was a mother to two-year-old daughter Ashi, and leaving her at home to start my career left me in dilemma. The initial couple of years [of my career] were full of ups and downs, but my family became my strength,” says Shubhangi, who made her debut in TV with Kasautii Zindagii Kay (2007) and went on to do lead roles in Kasturi, Do Hanson Ka Jodaa and Chidiya Ghar.

The actor shares how with a support system back home, shooting outdoor was never an issue. “If I was going for an outdoor shoot for 15 days, I never had to worry about what will happen to my daughter. Rather, it was Piyush, who used to bring her to the sets, so I could spend time with her,” she adds.

Hailing from Indore, Shubhangi shifted base to Mumbai to pursue her dreams and she admits that it’s not easy to leave your family behind and one often gets directionless, too. “There are actors who start getting name, fame, money and don’t know how to handle it. Some even get in a wrong company and get influenced by wrong things,” says the actor, remembering late actor Pratyusha Banerjee aka Anandi of Balika Vadhu, who committed suicide in 2016.

“I felt she [Pratyusha] was such a lovely girl and a wonderful actor. I used to love her screen presence; whatever happened with her was really sad. During her pursuit of acting in this city, she was alone and vulnerable. So, I feel one always needs to have someone by your side, be it your parents, good friends or your spouse with whom you can share everything and never feel any kind of void,” asserts Shubhangi.

Follow more stories on Facebook and Twitter
