Letters to the Editor - April 29, 2019

Terror in Sri Lanka

Even days after the carnage on Easter Day, the situation in Sri Lanka appears to be unsettled (Page 1, “15 dead after gun battle with bombing suspects in Sri Lanka”, April 28). The most disturbing factor is the apparent lack of communication between the Sri Lankan President and the elected government. The fact that some of the leaders there talk about not having received intelligence information in advance shows the sorry state of affairs.

D. Sethuraman,

Chennai

With the Islamic State perceived to be behind the carnage in Sri Lanka, India should be doubly careful, especially with campaigning in full swing for the remaining phases of the general election. There could be a larger conspiracy to carry out more terror attacks to affect regional instability.

R. Sampath,

Chennai

The presence of a few more terrorists with a large cache of arms and ammunition even after the Easter Day carnage does not augur well for the people of Sri Lanka. Considering the inefficient intelligence network, it appears to be a safe place for planning, perpetrating and executing clandestine activities. The overall scenario is disquieting. Sri Lanka has its task cut out and should devise plans to eliminate terrorism which is not an easy job.

V. Lakshmanan,

Tirupur, Tamil Nadu

An open secret

The report, “Cash for votes: TN’s best kept secret” (Tamil Nadu, April 28), was painful to read.

It is appalling that the money power during the elections only seems to grow in strength with each election. It is agonising that Tamil Nadu tops the list of States where large sums of money was seized during the 2019 Lok Sabha election.

Gone are the days when those who were service minded entered politics. It is a pity that constitutional bodies such as the Election Commission of India are not seen to be exercising their powers either to investigate and prosecute offenders.

Sravana Ramachandran,

Chennai

Down memory lane

Children in urban areas need to read the article, “Where are the street charmers gone?” (Open Page, April 28). How fortunate children were those days unlike children today who have to retreat to flats and apartments, go into a sulk and think of ways to occupy themselves. I still remember children out in the streets playing games until their parents herded them back home, chiding them about homework. Nowadays, children spend evenings/holidays poring over mobile phones and laptops with absolutely no physical exercise. In the past, mothers could cajole fussy children to eat by pointing to the moon and telling them stories. Today, one has to use the Internet on one’s mobile phone. My year-old grandson is fed this way.

K. Jayanthi,

Chennai

A festival to choose

The festival of polls, in India, cannot be matched anywhere in the world (‘Magazine’ – ‘Framed’ page, p.16). How each step in the exercise is carried out, whether it is carrying election material in boats, scaling hills, using the help of animals like donkeys, the dedication of polling staff drawn from different departments, the monitoring of campaigning and then voting is a marvel. Above all, one has our security forces keeping constant vigil to ensure a peaceful atmosphere for people to exercise their franchise. This festival is also unique as it draws in every section in India.

J.P. Reddy,

Nalgonda, Telangana

IPL campaign

Andre Russell is a senior player who has been around in the IPL for some time now. It would have been better had he advised his captain on the field, as and when required, of corrective measures rather than rant to the media (‘Sport’ page, “Russell slams KKR’s ‘bad decisions’,” April 28). While his anguish is understandable, his methods seem doubtful. All the same, KKR does seem to be a rare combination of poor bowling, horrific fielding and poor captaincy as well.

Bhooma Ramanarayanan,

Chennai
