All intruders will be thrown out: Shah

Hitting out at opposition leaders, Bharatiya Janata Party national president Amit Shah said the Narendra Modi government would throw out intruders even though many political parties were shedding crocodile tears in the name of human rights.

Addressing a series of election meetings in Barabanki and Mohanlalganj on Sunday, Shah said that when the government introduced the citizenship bill, leaders like Rahul Gandhi, Mayawati, Akhilesh Yadav, Mamata Banerjee and Chandrababu Naidu opposed it in the name of human rights.

“BJP is going to form the next government and Narendra Modi will be the prime minister once again. We will throw out any intruder because we do not want outsiders to enjoy the fruits of hard work of our people,” Shah said.

The Vijay Sankalp rally in Barabanki was held in Nindura village where Shah asked people to vote for Upendra Rawat.

“We have a Prime Minister who thinks about people and formulates the policies which talk about development. This is reflected in our election manifesto which talks about national security. We are committed to ensuring that no infiltration takes place in the country any more,” he said.

The BJP president said that during the last five years, Modiji had made it clear that no one could take India for granted any more.

“What happened in Balakot is now history. When Indian Air Force carried out an air strike, gloom descended on two places – one in Pakistan and two in the offices of the Congress, Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party.

“I do not know why they looked sad? Was it because their relatives were killed in that air strike?” he said and added that the opposition could play coy to terrorists but Modi had made it clear that if Pakistan fired a bullet India would fire a bomb.

Shah said that there were some leaders who wanted a separate prime minister for Kashmir. “They belong to that party whose leaders have chanted Pakistan zindabad. Congress is silent on these leaders. Not even Bua and Bhatija are talking about it. This clearly shows that these leaders have pro-Pakistan leaning,” the BJP president said.

Shah said Modi had not taken a leave in the last five years while Rahul Gandhi goes for vacation to foreign country every year. “This is the commitment of Modi towards his work and I do not know what will you say about Rahul Gandhi,” he said.

Shah in all his speeches talked about achievements of the Modi government and how people stood benefited by them. The response of the people made it clear that people again wanted to see Modi as the next prime minister of the country.
