HRDA files contempt of court against government

Hyderabad: Delay in the appointment of TVVP (Telangana Vaidya Vidhana Parishad) chief as directed by the High Court is likely to land the State government in trouble.

Healthcare Reforms Doctors Association (HRDA) has filed a contempt of court petition over the issue and the High Court is set to hear the case shortly.

The association a few days ago gave a representation to the Principal Secretary (Medical and Health) to immediately appoint a Commissioner for TVVP (Telangana Vaidya Vidhana Parishad) from the medical profession as directed by the High Court in its order on February 21. The court directed the government to make the appointment within two weeks.

According to HRDA members, more than eight weeks passed since the directions from the court, but no steps were taken to appoint a full-time commissioner for TVVP.

It may be noted that K Manicka Raj, holding the FAC (Full Additional Charge) of Commissioner of TVVP, till recently raked up a row with the medical fraternity opposing it strongly.

HRDA (Healthcare Reforms Doctors Association) has approached High Court early this year seeking cancellation of this appointment citing a violation of rules.

According to doctors, Vaidya Vidhana Parishad was formed by a special Act of the Assembly and as per Section 3 (3) (a) of the said Act, the Commissioner shall be a reputed member of the medical profession with proven administrative ability appointed by the government.

However, this rule was ignored by the government as it issued G.O numbered- 604 on October 31, 2018, appointing K Manicka Raj, who was also discharging duties CEO, Arogyasri Health Care Trust at that time as TVVP Commissioner (FAC).

Earlier to the IAS officer's appointment, Dr B Shiva Prasad was at the helm of affairs as TVVP Commissioner from February 10, 2018 till his retirement in October same year.

HRDA said that the State government had appointed three commissioners since 2014 and all were from medical profession background. However, rules were ignored with the IAS officer's appointment.

In its earlier judgment on February 21, 2018, the High Court struck down the earlier G.O and directed government to appoint a new commissioner in two weeks.
