LankaWeb – Sri Lanka Islamist headquarters raided

Sri Lanka Islamist headquarters raided

By Alasdair Pal and A. Ananthalakshmi Courtesy The Sydney Morning Herald

Colombo/Kattankudy: Sri Lankan police have raided the headquarters of a hardline Islamist group founded by the suspected ringleader behind the Easter suicide bombings of churches and hotels.

The moment a bomb planted inside a van in Colombo was detonated, has been caught on camera.CREDIT:NINEVMS

It came as Sunday mass was cancelled across the island because of fears of further attacks.

Armed police in the town of Kattankudy searched the headquarters of the National Thowheeth Jamaath and detained one man at the premises, a Reuters reporter at the scene said. Police did not comment.

On Saturday, the government banned the NTJ under new emergency laws. The authorities believe Zahran Hashim, the founder of NTJ, masterminded and was one of the nine suicide bombers in the attacks on Easter Sunday that killed 253 people.Advertisement

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks.

A Sri Lankan Catholic holds her rosary as she prays on a road during a brief mass held outside St. Anthony’s Church, one of the targets of the Easter Sunday attacks in Colombo.CREDIT:AP

Police suspect the bombings were carried out by two local Islamist groups, including the one established by Zahran. Around 10,000 soldiers have been deployed around the island as the authorities hunt for more suspects.

Police sources told Reuters on Sunday that Zahran’s father and two brothers had been killed two days earlier in a gun battle with security forces.

A relative identified the three men in a video circulating on social media calling for war against non-Muslims.

The Archbishop of Colombo Malcolm Ranjith, who had asked churches to suspend Sunday mass over security fears, delivered a televised special sermon from a chapel at his home.

Relatives of Sri Lankan couple Rohan Marselas Wimanna and Mary Noman Shanthi, who were killed in Easter Sunday bomb blasts pray at their residence on the seventh day of mourning in Negombo, north of Colombo, Sri Lanka.CREDIT:AP

The service was attended by President Maithripala Sirisena, Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe and former president Mahinda Rajapaksa.

The archbishop said earlier this week that he had seen an internal security document warning of further attacks on churches.

“We cannot kill someone in the name of God … It is a great tragedy that happened,” the archbishop said in his sermon.

“We extend our hand of friendship and fraternity to all our brothers and sisters of whatever class, society or religion that differentiates us.”

RELATED ARTICLE

Add to shortlist

The archbishop and political leaders then lit candles to commemorate the victims.

Most of those killed in the Easter Sunday attacks were Sri Lankans. The dead also included 40 foreigners, including Australian, British, US, Turkish, Indian, Chinese, Danish, Dutch and Portuguese nationals.

Police believe that radical Muslim preacher Zahran led the NTJ – or a splinter faction – to mount the attacks in Colombo as well as on a church in Batticaloa in the east.

The authorities have named the other group suspected of involvement as Jammiyathul Millathu Ibrahim.

Neither group was well known before the attacks but the government has come under heavy criticism for not heeding intelligence warnings of the bombings, including one from India’s spy service hours before the attacks.

On Friday, Sirisena said the government led by premier Wickremesinghe should take responsibility for the attacks and that prior information warning of attacks was not shared with him.

More than 100 people, including foreigners from Syria and Egypt, have been detained for questioning for questioning over the Easter attacks.
