Gandhis have been practicing politics of misinformation: Smriti Irani

Political temperatures soared in the battleground of Amethi as Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra accused BJP candidate Smriti Irani of insulting voters by offering them sarees, shoes and money. Union minister Smriti Irani shot back by saying that misinformation was a part of the kind of politics the Gandhis have practiced.

"We do our work and move on... I don't want to say anything." Priyanka, who has been handling the Gandhi stronghold for her brother since 2004, said that she knew the people of Amethi and this kind of bribery politics would not work as the people felt disrespected.

"The way they contest polls by distributing money, sarees and shoes in front of media is very wrong. People of Amethi have never begged in front of anyone. They don't like it. I have been coming here since I was 12. People of Amethi and Raebareli have a lot of pride, it's insulting them," Priyanka said in Amethi. She also stressed the issue of development saying it was the final issue that BJP didn't want to talk about.

"Issues are clear: employment, education and health. Nationalism is to solve the problems of people. Here they don't listen to people. When they raise their issues, they suppress them. It's neither democracy nor nationalism," she replied.

Responding to the caste controversy revolving Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra said: "I am unaware of the caste that Modi belongs to. The Congress party has never raised this issue. We are raising issues like unemployment, farmer distress, women safety, health and development that concerns common people."

Priyanka questioned the BJP and Modi over the issue of nationalism. "What type of nationalism is there in 'main hoon Modi' (I am Modi)? What is the meaning of nationalism?" Vadra asked. "It means patriotism and love for the country. Who is the country? Its people and their love. If you have affinity only towards yourself, then what type of nationalism is this?"

The Congress general secretary in charge of east Uttar Pradesh told reporters: "Arranging a crowd using the power of money and addressing them or sending a message to them is very easy. But, the real thing is to resolve the problems of the people."

The ground reality is absolutely different. When you speak to the people, a different message emanates and I have never seen the prime minister or the BJP leaders accepting that message, the Congress leader said.

Vadra accused Modi of not visiting even a single village in his Varanasi constituency and not asking anyone about their problems. She described the policies of the BJP as antipeople, anti-youth and antifarmers. The menace of stray animals is very much here and the farmers are forced to keep a watch on their crops during night. There are still some places where electricity supply is absent, Vadra added.

(India Today TV)
