India slips further behind China during first 5 years of Modi

NEW DELHI (BLOOMBERG) - Prime Minister Narendra Modi made a rare national address on live television last month to boast that India had destroyed a satellite in low orbit, establishing itself as a "space power" alongside the United States, Russia and China.

For a leader who lambasted his predecessor for failing to counter long-term geopolitical foe China, the missile test was a moment of "utmost pride".

Yet, China conducted a similar test more than a decade ago, in 2007, prompting critics to note that India's show of strength was merely highlighting the wide strategic gap between the world's two most populous countries.

Mr Modi's ruling party is making his record on national security a key part of its campaign in an election that will conclude on May 23, with boasts of air strikes against Pakistan and more than 80 trips abroad to cement India's reputation as a rising economic power. His government refused to attend Chinese President Xi Jinping's Belt and Road infrastructure forum that kicked off last Friday (April 26).

Yet for all that, India has only fallen further behind China over the past five years. Beijing has continued to outspend India on defence, implemented sweeping reforms in its military and diplomatic structures, and built strategic infrastructure in India's backyard - not to mention providing arch-rival Pakistan with defence technology.

"It's impossible to keep pace with China," said Mr Vishnu Prakash, a former Indian ambassador to South Korea and consul general in Shanghai. "We cannot get into checkbook diplomacy with China. We don't have that kind of economic muscle."

Whether Mr Modi returns to power or not, India's next government will still be saddled with ageing equipment like Soviet-era MiG warplanes, a bureaucracy that hinders military upgrades and an undersized diplomatic corps.

To fend off China, it's likely to continue shifting toward the US and other like-minded countries in Asia while seeking to protect its periphery.
