Over 10,000 students to appear for CET in 21 centres across Mysuru

Seven bells to keep candidates informed

MYSURU: Over 10,000 students from across the district will appear for the Common Entrance Test CET ) for admission to various professional courses, except medical, on Monday and Tuesday.CET will be held in 21 centres across the city and there are no examination centres in any other town of the district. Students from across the district need to write the examination in the city.DDPU Dayananda said the question papers will be dispatched through four routes on Monday and Tuesday mornings to the examination centres. “The examination will be conducted under the supervision of the DC,” he said.“Each examination centre will have one observer, two custodians and other staff to monitor the process. Route officers also have been appointed,” he said.According to authorities, those who have failed in II PUC final examination and are preparing for supplementary examination can also appear for the test as CET results of these candidates will be decided based on the supplementary examination results.According to KEA authorities, the seven bell system will be followed to keep the students informed about the timings. “To ensure transparency, students will not be allowed to carry wrist watches. Instead the students can follow the seven bells to know the timings,” said an officer.“The examination will start with the first bell at 10.20am in the morning session and 2.20pm in the afternoon session. The examination will end with seventh bell. Before five minutes, the sixth bell will alert students,” he said."Students will not be allowed to enter or leave the examination hall after 3rd bell (10.40 am and 2.40 pm). All the students need to wait till the end of the examination session," he concluded.Meanwhile, the students are busy in giving a final touch to the preparations. Shridevi Rao, a student from the TK layout said this examination is like a best preparation for the upcoming national level admission tests including NEET UG. "Hopefully, the examination will be error free like always," she said.
