Acid attack survivors give ‘dicey’ statements

Ludhiana: With victims giving dicey statements, cops are finding it hard to solve the acid attack case wherein two 19-year-old women were targeted on Saturday.The two girls on Saturday evening, one of whom claimed to be married, reached civil hospital after they were allegedly attacked with acid by two bike-borne miscreants. The one who claimed to be married told police that her husband rushed them to the hospital as they called him for help after the attack. However, later the police clarified that the man being referred to as the husband was a live-in partner of the woman, and went absconding soon after dropping the women.The assistant commissioner of police (ACP- Industrial Area B) Sandeep Vadhera said after the man went absconding, he switched off his mobile. The women have refused to give any further statement.“According to the two women, the incident took place in Kot Mangal Singh area which is crowded. But there were still no witnesses to the incident. One of the women’s mother worked in an office nearby and yet the two chose to call the man. Contrary to their statement, the call details have revealed that the girls made no phone call shortly after they were attacked,” added ACP Vadhera.The girls in their statement have said that they are Facebook friends and had met on the social networking site a month ago. On Saturday, one of them went to met the other in Kot Mangal Singh area for the first time. The incident took place when the latter went to accompany the former to find an autorickshaw.“The case remains dicey as of now. Police also came to know that the woman who was in a live-in relation had strain relations with her partner. She accused that the man had been ignoring her since the past one month. The police are investigating the case from all angles. Further, the police are also trying to trace the man who brought the two women to the hospital on his scooter,” added ACP.So far, no FIR or complaint has been lodged into the matter.
