Peddler booked three days after ‘drug overdose death’

Ludhiana: Three days after a 22-year-old man died of suspected drug overdose, the police on Saturday booked a drug peddler on the charge of culpable homicide not amounting to murder. The peddler, Suchha Singh of Chaunta village, had allegedly injected drugs into Shera Singh that led to his death.

Shera’s father Gurnam Singh said in his police complaint, “My son was a drug addict. On April 24, he left home in the morning and in the afternoon I came to know that he had fallen unconscious at a filling station in Salempur village. I did not approach the police, thinking he must have injected drugs himself which snuffed out his life. But on Saturday, his friend — Lakhwinder Singh of Mangli Tanda village in Meharban — told me that on the day, Shera was with him and that a peddler had injected drugs into him.”

That day, Shera, a resident of Sasrali Colony in Meharban, had asked Lakhwinder to take him to Chaunta village on his bike. When they were going to Chaunta village, Suchha called up Shera. He asked Shera to reach Dholanwal village as he had received the drug consignment.

“Lakhwinder told that when they reached Dholanwal village, Suchha took Shera towards the forest area. Lakhwinder surreptitiously followed them and saw Suchha injecting drugs into Shera. Thereafter, Suchha left,” he added.

Lakhwinder and Shera were on way home when the latter complained of uneasiness. The two stopped at a filling station in Salempur village where Shera fell unconscious. “Lakhwinder rushed back home and apprised us of the incident. We took Shera to hospital, where he succumbed,” Gurnam, a disc jockey, added.

Meharban police station SHO sub-inspector Davinder Pal Singh said a case has been registered under Section 304 (culpable homicide not amounting to murder) of the IPC against Suchha. “A manhunt has been launched to arrest the accused. His village, Chaunta, is infamous for drug peddling. Even as it seems to be a case of suspected drug overdose, the viscera of Shera has been sent to a Kharar laboratory to establish the cause of death,” the cop added.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
