Sri Lanka blasts: IS expansion in South Asia

S D Pradhan has served as chairman of India's Joint Intelligence Committee. He has also been the country's deputy national security adviser. He was chairman of the Task Force on Intelligence Mechanism (2008-2010), which was constituted to review the functioning of the intelligence agencies. He has taught at the departments of defence studies and history at the Punjabi University, Patiala. He was also a visiting professor at the University of Illinois, US, in the department of arms control and disarmament studies. The ministry of defence had utilized his services for the preparation of official accounts of the 1971 war and the counterinsurgency operations in the northeast. In the JIC/National Security Council secretariat, he was closely involved with the preparation of the reports of the Kargil Review Committee and the Group of Ministers on national security as also with the implementation of their recommendations. His publications include two books and several articles. LESS ... MORE

The devastating Sri Lankan blasts on Easter Sunday (21st April 2019) that resulted in the death of more than 350 persons and left more than 500 persons injured indicate that the Islamic State (IS) international terror outfit is now focusing on South Asia.

The modus operandi, sophisticated planning and well-coordinated execution suggested the involvement of IS which had carried out similar attacks elsewhere including in Bangladesh and France. Two days later, this group claimed the responsibility and released a photograph showing seven-man suicide bomber squad. While the other two members of the suicide squad were not shown, there is no doubt about the involvement of the Islamic State as has also been revealed by the post-event investigations.

The objective of these attacks was to create a long term strategic impact. Broadly this can be seen in the context of what is happening in the Syria-Iraq region. After the defeat of this group in that region, it evolved into a covert network and moved into the phase of adaption and consolidation. It began to work through different local groups to project its capabilities.

The South Asia region had begun to receive its attention because of proximity from Pak –Afghan region which remains the epicentre of international terrorism. The radical groups like ISIS and Al Qaida had been showing interests in the Indian States hoping to get support from the Muslim population. They had been targeting the Indian population for radicalisation. India had been getting reports of Indian youth joining the IS outfit since 2013. However, the Indian establishment considered this to be mainly a West Asian problem with only a minuscule number of youth getting attracted due to propaganda. The arrested youth were let off after a short de-radicalisation programme.

The Indian Security Establishment failed to see the larger game plan of the IS terror outfit. A survey of their maps and statements put together reveal their intentions to expand their influence in India. Several Indian states were on their radar. In the case of India, the Pakistani deep state is always willing to support any group that can hurt India. Hence it is not surprising to see their hand in the spread of the ideology of IS in India.

The southern states have received this group’s attention more than the northern states. Geographical features of this region help in penetration into the population. It is significant to note that about 90% of the Indians who went to join IS were from the southern states. The majority of those arrested in connection with IS activities were also from the southern states.

The emergence of evidence of linkages of those who carried out attacks with an Indian group and IS presents a grim picture of the growing threat. One of the suicide bombers is reported to have stayed in India for a considerable time before the attack. While the Sri Lankan outfit National Thowheeth Jama’ath (NTJ) is held responsible for the attacks, the media reports suggest that the Tamil Nadu group and the Jammat-ul-Mujahideen India (JMI) have links with NTJ. This needs further probe as it has serious security implications.

In view of the foregoing, there is a distinct possibility of the rise of Islamic radicals in South Asia and particularly in southern India. The Pak diplomatic mission in Sri Lanka had been used in the past to create problems in India. The Pak ISI has been acting as the facilitator of terrorism. The Pak diplomats posted in Sri Lanka had come to notice for their nefarious activities against India.

The immediate lesson that the Sri Lankan blasts provide is that we need to gear up our mechanism to deal with such activities in India. Our experience shows that while intelligence reports were usually available, the pre-emptive or preventive action was not taken prior to the terrorist attacks. We have to ensure that the terrorist attacks are neutralised before they knock at our doors. The linkage between the intelligence warning and planned pre-emptive action has to be strengthened. This can be done by establishing the National Counter Terrorism Centre- a proposal which under consideration since long. In addition, the countering of terrorist propaganda demands a well-planned programme. For this help from Islamic scholars and foreign countries like the UK, US and Israel would be useful. Israel has a programme to counter the threat of suicide bombers and in the present context that is an essential prerequisite.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
