Police break up clashes as India votes in fourth phase of massive poll

More than 127 million people are eligible to vote in this round of the seven-phase election held across 71 seats in nine states. Modi's coalition won more than 75 per cent of the seats in the previous election in 2014.

In the first three phases, voter turnout was around 66.4 per cent, the same as in 2014, when Modi's party came into power with 282 seats. This may not be good news for the BJP, which launched a campaign two years ago seeking to increase voter turnout in the 2019 election.

"The BJP hasn't been able to enthuse people and overcome the voters' apathy," said Nilanjan Mukhopadhyay, a political analyst who has written a biography of Modi.

Many of the constituencies are in Uttar Pradesh state in the north and western India's Maharashtra, where the financial capital Mumbai is located. Uttar Pradesh elects the most lawmakers, with Maharashtra next. Both states are ruled by the BJP and its allies.

However, political analysts say the BJP may struggle to repeat its strong showing this time due mainly to a jobs shortage and weak farm prices, issues upon which the main opposition Congress party has seized.

First-time voter Ankita Bhavke, a college student in Mumbai, said she voted for economic development.

Advertisement

"I want the country to be at par with the best in the world," she said. "There's been some progress in the last five years."

India's financial markets were closed on Monday for the election.

Mumbai is home to the massive Hindi film industry, as well as Asia's wealthiest man, Mukesh Ambani, and India's richest banker, Uday Kotak.

Ambani, who heads Reliance Industries, and Kotak, managing director of Kotak Mahindra Bank, created a stir this month by publicly endorsing an opposition Congress party candidate from their upscale South Mumbai constituency.

Mumbai, which has six seats, is India's wealthiest city but ageing and insufficient infrastructure is a major concern.

Six people were killed last month when part of a pedestrian bridge collapsed, recalling memories of a 2017 rush-hour stampede that killed at least 22 people on a narrow pedestrian bridge.

Advertisement

The election, the world's biggest democratic exercise with about 900 million voters, started on April 11 with Modi in the lead amid heightened tension with long-time enemy Pakistan.

The last phase of voting is on May 19, with results released four days later.

There are a total of 545 seats in parliament's lower house.

Modi sent warplanes into Pakistan in late February in response to a suicide attack by an Islamist militant group based there that killed 40 Indian police in the disputed Kashmir region.

Modi has sought votes on his tough response towards militancy and in recent days has evoked the deadly Easter Sunday bombings in nearby Sri Lanka.

Maidul Islam, a professor of political science at Kolkata's Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, said long queues outside polling stations would indicate whether Modi's national security pitch was working.

"Whenever there is a BJP kind of a wave, you see a higher voter turnout," he said.

Reuters
