Pakistan open to Azhar's listing as terrorist, but conditions apply

World

Pakistan open to Azhar's listing as terrorist, but conditions apply

Pakistan open to Azhar's listing as terrorist, but conditions apply

Written by Shalini Ojha Twitter Apr 29, 2019, 04:52 pm 2 min read

On Sunday, Pakistan Foreign Ministry spokesperson Mohammad Faisal said his country is fine with Masood Azhar's listing in UN as a terrorist, as long as the development is not related to Pulwama attack. Speaking to Islamabad Views, a Pakistani TV show, Faisal said the blacklisting is not a "big issue". India has been trying to get Azhar blacklisted for years now. Here's more.

Terrorist Azhar's outfit executed worst terror attack on forces since Uri

Azhar's Jaish-e-Mohammed has been waging war against India since it was formed, the latest being Pulwama attack. JeM recruited a local to execute the attack on Srinagar-Jammu Highway in which 40 CRPF soldiers were martyred. Post the attack, India threw its weight to get Azhar listed but China, Pakistan's all-weather ally, put a technical hold. India had the support of UK, US, and France.

Statement Pulwama is a separate issue: Faisal

Faisal said, "India shoul give evidence that Azhar had anything to do with the attack in Pulwama. If that is not the case, then we can discuss the listing. It is not a big issue." Calling Pulwama a "separate issue", Faisal said Pakistan has repeatedly maintained that India is "suppressing an indigenous uprising in Jammu and Kashmir". Notably, India had shared proofs with Pakistan.

Information When India shared evidence, Pakistan said 'no terror camps found'

Interestingly, India has already handed over a dossier to Pakistan detailing the path taken by terrorists. Replying to the document, Pakistan said it didn't find terror camps at 22 locations India "pinpointed". Pakistan also said Indian officials were "free to visit".

China's stand China may lift the hold soon, suggested reports

As far as Azhar's listing is concerned, reports claim China may lift the technical hold. Last week, UK said it was confident Azhar would be blacklisted soon. "We are strong supporters of listing of Masood Azhar for a decade. So that we will get to that conclusion shortly. I do remain optimistic that it will be resolved," British envoy Sir Dominic Asquith said.

Details Meanwhile, UN Secretary-General discussed the issue with Chinese officials

Last week, Foreign Secretary Vijay Gokhale was in China where he gave proof of JeM's notorious actions against India. Gokhale said it was now up to 1267 Sanctions Committee and other authorized bodies to take action. Separately, it is learned that UN Secretary-General António Guterres met Chinese leaders on sidelines of Second Belt and Road Forum in Beijing seeking a settlement in the matter.
