New Delhi: Municipal sanitation worker held for murdering his colleague with a broom

Municipal sanitation worker was arrested for murdering his colleague with a broom(Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A 23-year-old municipal sanitation worker was arrested on Saturday after he allegedly murdered his colleague with a broom during a drinking session in north Delhi’s Bharat Nagar.

The accused was identified as Sudhir Bunty, who is a sanitation worker with the same civic body in which the victim also used to work. He was unaware of the fact that he has killed his colleague until he was arrested from the nearby Ashok Vihar. The victim was identified as 50-year-old Sanjay Kumar who used to live in Nimri Colony in Ashok Vihar with his wife and a son.

As per the reports in the Times of India, the incident took place on Friday evening at Delhi's Bharat Nagar when the victim, Kumar refused to share the bench with Bunty while he was having drinks with his friends outside a tea stall.

Soon after which, in a fit of rage, the accused then picked up Kumar’s broom lying nearby and repeatedly struck him on the head. Meanwhile, Kumar's friend intervened and rushed him to a local hospital after which he was referred to the Safdarjung Hospital.

Vijayanta Arya, the deputy commissioner of police (north-west), told TOI that even the people who were present during the incident did not think that Kumar will die.

He further mentioned that it was Kumar who alerted the police after the attack when he was able to talk at the hospital. Moreover, the victim died a few hours after Bunty attacked him. He was suffering from several ailments, including jaundice.

However, once Kumar was declared dead at the hospital, a case of murder was registered at the Bharat Nagar police station after which the police started tracing Bunty, who was found in his neighbourhood in Ashok Vihar. Bunty did not know that he had killed Kumar. Also, standard-issue broom belonging to the civic body as the weapon of the offence was seized by the police.
