No pre-release event for Mahesh Babu's 'Maharshi' due to elections?

No pre-release event for Mahesh Babu's 'Maharshi' due to elections?

The film is all set to hit screens on May 9.

Flix Tollywood

Top film stars in the Telugu film industry have been conducting various public events regularly as a part of promoting their films but all that will have to wait until May 23. Apparently, the makers of Mahesh Babu starrer Maharshi wanted to conduct a mega event in Vizag but looks like it will happen only after May 23.

Sources in the know say that it would be impossible for the police to offer protection for massive public gatherings due to the elections. With the police forces deployed in various counting centers across the state, it would not be possible for arranging personnel for security for such events, we hear from sources.

Directed by Vamsi Paidapally, Maharshi is a high budget project with a major portion of it being shot in the United States. Reports from the trade circles are that the Tollywood star will be appearing in five totally different get-ups in the movie. Apparently, his role will be a journey from a college student to a businessman and this transition would be shown through his looks. The film is about three friends played by Mahesh Babu, Allari Naresh and Pooja Hegde. It also has veteran actor Jayapradha playing a pivotal role.

It is produced jointly by Dil Raju, C. Ashwini Dutt and Prasad V. Potluri under the banners Sri Venkateswara Creations, Vyjayanthi Movies and PVP Cinema. The technical crew of this film includes Devi Sri Prasad as its music composer, K. U. Mohanan as the cinematographer and Praveen KL as the editor. Two songs from the album have been released already and have gone viral among fans. The film is scheduled to hit the marquee on May 9.

With the release planned before May 23, there may be no pre-release event scheduled for Maharshi, which would certainly be a big disappointment for the star’s fans out there.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
