Fund Spotlight: Suffering Wives and Children

Fund Spotlight: Suffering Wives and Children

04/29/2019 Washington D.C. (International Christian Concern) – In cases of persecution, one of the most common effects is a loss of income. When a family’s breadwinner is injured, imprisoned, or killed, the family is forced to deal with the real­ity of finding a new source of income. Worse still, the families in these situa­tions often live in countries that make it difficult for Christians to obtain jobs. ICC developed the Suffering Wives and Children fund to assist families that have been devas­tated by persecution by supporting them in tangible ways, while preserving their dignity.

In Egypt, a Christian woman named Nawal was widowed after her husband was killed when his bus, headed toward the Monastery of St. Samuel, was attacked. With three young children, including one with medical concerns, Nawal was left to care for the family on her own.

ICC stepped in to help this young family get back on their feet financially. ICC provided Nawal with seven sheep for her to raise and sell to support her family. The money that she earns will enable her to buy more sheep, and continue the livestock business as a sustain­able source of income. Although we cannot erase the pain of loss, these efforts will lift the financial burden from the shoulders of this grieving family.

In addition to business assistance, ICC also helps persecuted families by providing imme­diate relief. In India, a Christian father named Samuel was accused and imprisoned on false charges of burning a Hindu home. As Samuel was also his family’s breadwinner, they have had to adjust to their new circumstances and seek a new source of income while he is in jail.

During this season of transition, ICC joined hands with the family to provide for their immediate needs. We delivered one month’s supply of basic necessities such as rice, wheat powder, spices, and toiletries. Samuel’s wife shared, “We had faced so many troubles for following Jesus in the last couple of years, but in every trouble God helped us to overcome… I am so thankful for ICC and all those who are standing with me during this troubling time.”

ICC has partnered with Christian communi­ties all over the world to support families that have been affected by the sting of persecution. However, this work would not be possible without the generous support of donors. If you would like to donate to support persecuted families or learn more about ICC’s Suffering Wives & Children fund, please visit https://persecution.kindful.com/ or give us a call at 1-800-ICC-5441.

For interviews, please contact Olivia Miller, Communications Coordinator: press@persecution.org
