'Time is over', DG ISPR warns PTM leadership

Tell us how much money did you get from NDS, RAW to run your campaign

RAWALPINDI (Dunya News) – Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) Director General (DG) on Monday said that Indian and Afghan spy agencies provided financial assistance to Pashtun Tahafuz Movement (PTM) to stage protest in Pakistan and provoke people against the country’s armed forces.

Addressing a press conference on Monday, he raised a few questions briefly to PTM leadership, pinpointing dates and location where they were provided the funds, adding that no one can fight with the state. He also questioned the PTM if they were part of Pakistan or Afghanistan.

While giving a message to the people of the tribal areas, the DG ISPR said, “Pakistan is yours and Pakistan Army is also yours, adding that the State stands by the people of tribal areas and wouldn’t rest until issues are resolved.”

Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor said: “The PTM’s time is over now, adding that they have enjoyed the liberty they wanted to but now their time is up.” "We want to do everything for the people of tribal areas, but those who are playing in the hands of people, their time is up. Their time is up," Maj Gen Ghafoor said.

He asked the PTM to tell why only those who speak in favour of Pakistan Army are killed, and asked why do you meet the people who speak against the army.

He further questioned which relative of PTM chief Manzoor Pushteen visited the Indian embassy in Afghanistan and how much money did RAW (India s Research and Analysis Wing) give you for Torkhum rally? “Why don’t the Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) give statement in your favour and why do you meet all anti-Pakistan people abroad,” he asked.

“Tell us how much money did you get from the NDS (Afghan National Directorate of Security) to run your campaign? How much money did RAW (India s Research and Analysis Wing) give you for the first dharna in Islamabad?”

ISPR DG warns India of testing Pakistan’s resolve



Major General Asif Ghafoor while warning India to not test Pakistan’s resolve said the time has come India should stop telling lies and speak the truth. Pakistan is a responsible state and India should also act like one.

“India violated Pakistan’s airspace on February 26 and failed to inflict any damage. Pakistan gave a befitting response on February 27 and shot down two fighter jets of India.”

“Pakistan captured an Indian pilot and no infrastructure damage was done inside our territory. We invited international media, including the Indians, and showed them the claims made by New Delhi were nothing but lies.

“India told countless lies regarding the incident but failed to prove any of its claims. India downed its own Mi17 chopper thinking it was Pakistan’s. “We have to honor our pilots for their brilliant response, but we are still waiting for the right time.

“India invaded Pakistan’s airspace at night but we responded in broad daylight. Indian lies were once again exposed when the US count confirmed that no F-16 was missing from Pakistan’s fleet.”

The DG ISPR said: “Nuclear power is a weapon of deterrence; however, if aggression is carried out, Pakistan has the right to use any weapon in its defence.”

Resolution of outstanding issues between Pak-India



Major General Asif Ghafoor stressed on resolution of outstanding issues between Pakistan and India, including Kashmir and invited New Dehli to dialogue. He said only peace can guarantee development in the region.

The ISPR DG said Kashmir issue is linked with the ideology of Pakistan and every Pakistani is perturbed over Indian atrocities in occupied Kashmir, adding that it is moral responsibility of Pakistan to continue supporting Kashmiris struggle to achieve their birth right to self-determination.

Afghan peace and reconciliation process

Major General Asif Ghafoor said Pakistan will continue playing its role for peace and development in the region, including the Afghan peace and reconciliation process.

He said fencing being carried out on the border with Afghanistan in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and Balochistan has significantly decreased the cross border firing and incidents of terrorism.

He said fencing is being made along the border with Iran as well under bilateral cooperation so that terrorists from Afghanistan do not use this border.

Raddul Fasaad and Menace of terrorism



About menace of terrorism, the Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor said the security forces have dismantled terrorist network and now there exists no organized infrastructure of terrorism in Pakistan.

He said Pakistan also cooperated with the international community to defeat terrorism and intelligence sharing is being carried out with seventy countries.

Giving update about the actions being carried out under Operation Raddul Fasaad, Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor said that Pakistan has devised a National Action Plan against terrorism, adding that there is no organized network of any terrorist organization. More than 100,000 intelligence-based operations have been conducted against terrorists.

He said 64235 weapons were also recovered from terrorists. The DG ISPR said as the country is close to elimination of terrorism, now extremism needs to be handled effectively.

Madaris to be to the mainstreamed



He said there are over 30,000 Madaris across Pakistan and about 2.5 million students are getting Islamic education there, adding that the government and the stakeholders have decided to bring Madaris to the mainstream in three phases.

Appreciating the responsible role played by the media of Pakistan, the DG ISPR said the media is the most powerful pillar of the state at present.
