Noida: 30-year-old sales manager found dead in his car

A 30-year-old sales manager was found dead in his car on Sunday. (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Greater Noida: Yet another case from Delhi-NCR's Greater Noida region has been reported where a 30-year-old sales manager was found dead in his car on Sunday.

The deceased was identified as Roopendra Singh Chandel who is a resident of Mahoba district and recently moved to a rented flat in 14th avenue of Gaur City housing society.

The incident came into light late on Sunday evening, when a passerby spotted Chandel who was bleeding from the ear inside his car. He then informed the police who rushed on the spot and took him to a local hospital where the Chandel was declared dead on arrival.

Main Pathak, the SHO of Bisrakh police station told TOI that the body of the deceased was sent for post mortem. Meanwhile, during the investigation, the family of the deceased told cops that he had left his house in the afternoon for some official work and since then there was no trace of him.

However, the investigation is underway and the cause of death is yet to be ascertained.

In a similar incident, recently, a former Indian Air Force wing commander's wife was found dead at her residence in Dwarka's Sector-7 area. The police suspect it to be a case of robbery and murder. The deceased was identified as 52-year-old Meenu Jain, a resident of Air Force Naval Officers' Enclave.

The Delhi police suspect that the accused entered the house with an intention to rob the house as family members mentioned that two mobile phones, the jewellery that the deceased was wearing, Rs 5 lakh in Indian currency and Rs 2 lakh in foreign currency was missing from the house.

However, the police added that the post-mortem had been conducted and the exact cause of death would be known once the report is out. The husband of the deceased, VK Jain, a retired Indian Air Force (IAF) wing commander and currently working as a commercial pilot with IndiGo, was on duty at the time of the incident.
