Fourth phase of LS polls: Here’re the voting percentages in various states

New Delhi: In the fourth of the mega seven-phase electoral exercise, voting held across 72 Lok Sabha constituencies spread over nine states, mostly in the Hindi heartland.

This phase covered the remaining 17 constituencies in Maharashtra, including Mumbai’s six seats, and the six in Odisha, as well as 13 in Uttar Pradesh, five in Bihar, and eight in West Bengal.

In Rajasthan, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh, the first phase of polling held in 13, 3 and 6 constituencies respectively.

58.92% voters brave heat to vote in Bihar

Ignoring heat wave-like conditions, 58.92 percent voters turned out to cast their votes in Bihar’s five Lok Sabha constituencies that went to polls on Monday, till 5 p.m, said an official.

Polling was held in Begusarai, Ujiarpur, Darbhanga, Munger and Samastipur seats.

Maharashtra records 52.07% voting till 5 p.m.

A moderate voter turnout of 52.07 percent was recorded in the fourth phase of polling for 17 Lok Sabha seats in Maharashtra till 5 p.m. on Monday, an Election Commission (EC) official said.

The tribal Nandurbar (ST) constituency recorded the highest 62.44 percent voter turnout, while Kalyan in Thane district saw the lowest 41.64 percent turnout.

Odisha records 66% polling in fourth phase

Odisha recorded 66 percent polling by 5 p.m in the fourth and final phase for six Lok Sabha and 41 Assembly seats in the state on Monday, said Chief Electoral Officer (CEO) Surendra Kumar.

Barring stray incidents of violence, the polling has been smooth and peaceful across the constituencies, said the CEO.

64% polling in Jharkhand’s Maoist belt

Despite soaring temperatures, Jharkhand recorded more than 64 percent polling on Monday for the three Lok Sabha seats in the state’s Maoist-affected areas, according to the Election Commission (EC) data.

Rajasthan witnesses 62% polling till 5 p.m.

Rajasthan witnessed 62.06 percent polling till 5 p.m. on Monday in the fourth phase of the Lok Sabha elections with the highest polling recorded in Barmer at 67.92 percent while the lowest voting took place in Tonk Sawai Madhopur at 55.35 percent.

Amid violence, 66% turnout in Bengal

Amid violence including clashes outside polling booths, attempted intimidation and EVMs snags, 66 percent of the electorate voted in the first eight hours of polling in the fourth phase of Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal on Monday.

Over 66% voting in Madhya Pradesh till 6 p.m.

Around 66.09 percent turnout was recorded in the fourth phase of polling for the six Lok Sabha seats in Madhya Pradesh till 6 p.m. on Monday, Indian Express reported.

57.58% voting recorded in UP

Braving the afternoon heat, people came out enthusiastically to vote in 13 constituencies of Uttar Pradesh which went to polls on Monday in the fourth phase.

Indian Express reported that 57.58 percent turnout was recorded in the State.

With inputs from IANS
