9 Fan Theories & Predictions About 'Avengers: Endgame' That Actually Came True

Before I begin, there are spoilers, please click away if you don't want them and move on with your life instead of commenting 'unfollowing this page' or 'at least give a warning about spoilers'. I mean it, I'm tired of explaining this to some people who apparently can't read.

As for everyone who's seen 'Avengers: Endgame' and is interested in reading more about it, carry on.

So, the movie of the decade is here and it was better than our expectations. While it felt like it was totally unexpected - everything from Nat dying to Tony dying (or maybe we were just in denial about the deaths) - it turns out, a lot of it had already been predicted by the fans.

Every Marvel fan has spent the entire year watching and rewatching all the movies in the Marvel Cinematic Universe and spent so much time coming up with theories and predictions ever since the release of 'Avengers: Infinity War'. Obviously, all of that didn't go to waste; so many theories actually came true in the movie, thanks to everyone's vast knowledge of Marvel comics and just by observing everything properly.

While we didn't know this is exactly what would happen before, we still heard about theories at least once before.

1. Professor Hulk

Everyone was almost 100% sure we'll get Professor Hulk in 'Endgame' and the Russo Brothers did not disappoint. After seeing the constant disagreement and fighting between the Hulk and Bruce Banner all throughout 'Infinity War', we finally got to see that they had put aside all their differences and come to an understanding. Which means that we got Professor with the body and strength of the Hulk and the brilliant mind of Bruce altogether in one giant green Avenger.

2. Time Travel

No one knew for sure but everyone knew that the movie will deal with time travel in some way or the other. Actually, this theory was or less proved with leaked pictures of Chris Evans and Robert Downey Jr at a set that looked like the final battle scene from the first Avengers movie. Now, we know for sure that all of them travelled back in time to retrieve the infinity stones from the past so they could undo Thanos' snap. The time travel actually ended up giving us some of the best moments from the movie - Cap fighting Cap, 'Hail Hydra', Thor and Rocket sneaking around in Asgard while Loki is lying in a cell, Howard Stark & Peggy Carter in 1970. Well, it also gave us one of the worst moments as well, but I guess it was inevitable.

3. Time Jump

A not that important or big theory but still a theory that came true. A lot of people predicted that there would be a time jump in the movie just like a desi soap show our mom watches and it became canon as soon as the trailers came out since we could make a timeline just with Nat's hair.

4. Tony Stark Dying

It was something I don't think anyone was ready for but was prepared for at the same time, if that makes any sense. We knew there would be some permanent deaths of some of the OG Avengers and throughout the year, Marvel and Chris Evans were subtly hinting at Cap's death in the movie. I'm pretty sure that it was a strategy to keep Tony Stark's death even more shocking in the movie. Well, it worked, everyone knew this was probably Robert Downey Jr's last movie as Iron Man but we all were rooting for him to retire and have a long and happy life with Pepper and Morgan. Well, at least he got his perfect life for five years and Dad Tony is honestly one of the best parts of the movie.

5. Steve Rogers' Fate

Again, we were all prepared, but not really, for his death with all the emotional goodbyes and the jokes by Chris himself. But, he got one of the best endings in the movie and it wraps up his storyline perfectly. He has been ready to sacrifice himself for greater good since he first appeared in the MCU, and he did that in 'Captain America: The First Avenger'. But, after everything was wrapped up in 'Endgame' and Thanos was gone, it was time for him to have his date with Peggy and finally, finally have that dance. While old man Steve was a little shocking at first, it was still a heartwarming moment since he got to live out his life not fighting but being with the love of his life.

6. Cap Passes On The Captain America Mantle To Falcon

It felt like Marvel had been hinting at Bucky Barnes to become the new Captain America ever since he held the shield back in 'Captain America: The First Avenger' but turns out, it was passed on over to Sam Wilson aka Falcon. Well, it was going to happen sooner or later and the choice was always between Bucky and Sam.

7. Captain America Wielding Thor's Hammer

The electric Captain America was everything we ever wanted, and more. It was hands down the best moment of the movie for me. Thanos is about to kill Thor, but no Cap and Mjölnir to the rescue. What a moment, I would watch the movie like five more times in the theatres just to experience that scene again and again.

8. Thanos Dies In The First Twenty Minutes

Last time, it was Loki dying in the first 15-20 minutes, this time it was none other than Thanos. He's alone, without his shield or armour, just cooking and chilling alone after murdering trillions of people. Well, the Avengers obviously avenged everyone but that did not bring back anyone, of course. While it was ultimately a pretty useless thing, since he had already destroyed all the stones and the chance of undoing the snap with it, he was pretty harmless now, considering everything. But, he did see Thor finally aiming for the head and delivering that line perfectly.

9. Pepper Potts Suits Up

This was also a theory that had been floating around for a while and yes, it came true in 'Endgame'. Literally everyone fought, so obviously the woman who has killed more Marvel villains than any other character wouldn't sit out the final battle. And, of course, the badass moment of all the powerful women of Marvel together would have been incomplete without her.
