AIFD WAT 2019: Admit card released and sent to students by post

AIFD WAT 2019: Army Institute of Fashion and Design (AIFD) has released the admit card for the candidates. The admit card has not been released on the official website of the institute. These days, most of the admit cards are released online by the exam conducting body. However, the AIFD has released it offline and has sent it to the address of the candidates.

The candidates who have registered themselves for the exam should not visit the official website for getting the admit card as they will not find it on the website. The institute has sent AIFD WAT admit card to the address of the students by post. The admit card has been sent on 29 April. The students need to wait till their admit card arrives at the address. They need to be in touch with the local postman so that they can get the admit card.

It is also important to note that the students need to carry their admit cards with them to the centre of the exam. Without admit card, the students will not be allowed to enter the exam hall. The instructions are given on the admit card and the candidates should read all the instructions before they leave for the exam. The exam is going to be conducted on 18 May across various centres in six cities.

Since, the admit card has been sent by the post, there may be a case that an applicant does not receive it on time. In case, the applicants do not get their admit card by 5 May then they should contact the Principal of the institute with the details like full name, address and application number. If the candidates do so, they will get a duplicate admit card that will be dispatched to the postal address.

If the postal glitch is still with the candidates, they should meet the officer-in-charge of AIFD WAT 2019 exam centre. In this case, the candidates may be allowed to appear in the test provisionally. The students, who appear in the exam and pass it, will get admission in AIFD Bangalore. The result will be declared on 27 May.
