Fact Check: Rahul Gandhi jumps the gun, says Modi govt approves shooting of tribals

Has the Modi government passed a law which legitimises shooting tribals?

Unbelievable as it may sound, but that is exactly what Rahul Gandhi can be heard saying in a video clip being widely shared on social media, along with angry comments from netizens.

Hundreds of people, such as BJP IT cell head Amit Malviya, are calling him a "congenital LIAR" for "speaking such lies".

Rahul Gandhi is a congenital LIAR! Can you imagine anyone else speaking such lies and getting away with it? No fact check on Rahul Gandhi’s speeches, no outrage either... This subservience to the family is frankly worrying. But trust the people of India to reject such bigotry. pic.twitter.com/W9sRj9wH9P Chowkidar Amit Malviya (@amitmalviya) April 27, 2019





On Facebook page India Unravelled, the post was already shared more than 3,200 times at the time of filing this story.

AFWA examined the complete speech of Rahul Gandhi, available on the official YouTube channel of the Indian National Congress. We found the claim to be misleading and oversimplifying facts.

However, his claim can't be called a blatant lie as the provisions of the law he is referring to are indeed under consideration which allows forest officers to use firearms against offenders.

Rahul Gandhi was delivering a speech at Shahdol in Madhya Pradesh on April 23. Shahdol has a considerable population of tribals and voting here took place on April 29.

Towards the end of the speech, Rahul talks about the rights of tribals and goes on to say, which, translated into English, means, "Narendra Modi has made a new law for tribals in which there is a line that says tribals can be shot at. It is there in the law that tribals will be attacked. They snatch your land, take away your jungle and water and then say that tribals can be shot at." (Ab Narendra Modi ne naya kanoon banaya hai, adivasiyon ke liye ek naya kanoon banaya hai jisme ek line likhe hai ki adivasiyon ko goli se maara ja sakega. Kanoon mein likha hai ki adivasiyon par akraman hoga. Aapki zameen chheen kar jungle lete hain, jal lete hain aur phir kehte hain ki adivasiyon ko goli maar di ja sakti hai).

The law Rahul is referring to is "Amendments to the Indian Forest Act 1927". Earlier this year, the ministry of environment, forest and climate change finalised the first draft of comprehensive amendments to the Indian Forest Act, 1927.

On March 7, this draft was sent to all the states asking for wider consultation with stakeholders about the proposed amendments in the Indian Forest Act and send their feedback by June 7, 2019. This 123-page draft proposes several major changes to the law and give more stringent power to forest officers.

According to a Business Standard report, certain offences that were bailable earlier have been proposed to be made non-bailable. The onus of proving innocence in several cases has been left on the accused who are to be presumed guilty till proven otherwise.

On Page 84 (point number 66) of the draft, there indeed is a new insertion which gives details about powers granted to forest officers about using firearms. The provision reads, "Any forest officer, may if necessary, to prevent the commission of any offence under this Act or under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, or to apprehend any person engaged in the commission of an offence under the said Acts, or who has committed such offence, use as little force including firearms and do as little injury to person and property, as may be consistent with the prevention of the offence."

The draft also provides for indemnity to the forest officer. "No prosecution against any officer for any act purporting to be done under the preceding sub-sections shall be instituted in any criminal court except with the prior sanction of the state government."

However, the proposed amendments, at this stage, are only a draft for wider consultations. It a long journey ahead to get them passed in both the Houses of parliament, going through the scrutiny of the Standing Committee and getting a stamp of approval from the President .

So for Rahul Gandhi to say that the Modi government has already made a law which allows the shooting of tribals, is misleading.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Modi government has made a law which allows shooting of tribals. Conclusion The proposed changes in the forest law are just at the consultation level at present. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
