Easter Sunday Attacks Targeted the West, Not Sri Lanka – Scholars

Professor Boris Volkhonsky, associate professor at the Institute of Asian and African Studies at Moscow State University, said, "Sri Lanka is like a second homeland to me. I am really invested in that country. No one expected the Easter Sunday blasts. The Muslim community in Sri Lanka cannot be entirely blamed for the incident. As for the involvement of ISIS (Daesh), it is a new development in terms of its operations, its target etc. Sri Lanka has been peaceful and has just about recovered from a civil war that lasted nearly 20 years".

"I do believe that both external and internal factors were involved, but external factors were more prominent. These blasts in Sri Lanka were not a coincidence. They were designed for a propaganda effect and impact. What we have seen in Sri Lanka is different from what has happened in Iraq and Syria. There is quite a perverse logic behind this tragedy. The involvement of decent and affluent people is a surprising change", Professor Volkhonsky added.

READ MORE: Elder Brother of Sri Lankan Attacker Arrested With 2 Blades — Reports

Major General Dhruv Katoch (Retd.), director of the India Foundation, a Delhi-based security and strategic think tank, listed five key reasons for Daesh to select Sri Lanka as a place to attack. "ISIS (Daesh) has lost territory, not its ideology. Its ideology has not been defeated. The church was one target; in addition, the target was the West. On the one hand, these blasts reflect a battle of religion — Christians versus Muslims — and on the other, this incident has a civilizational context of West versus Islamic", Major General Katoch (Retd.) noted.

"This was simply a criminal and murderous attack. Attempts are being made to rationalise it, which I feel is wrong. The fourth point I want to make is on the issue of warning. We must understand that that Sri Lanka has enjoyed total peace for 10 years. The country and its government had become complacent and were saying, 'It cannot happen here'; well, it is when you think nothing is going to happen, that's when something does happen. Warnings were given, but were discarded", he said.

"The fifth and last point is that this is an ideological war, a clash of civilisations", Major General Katoch stressed further.
