Girl’s murder: West Godavari police verify call data

Police suspect accused stabbed her after she ignored his calls

The Elamamchili police, who are investigating Mahita’s murder case, are verifying the call data records of the victim as well as the suspect in the case.

The accused, Kurella Mahesh, a native of Krishna district, allegedly attacked Penumalla Mahita (19) with a knife killing her on the spot at Kajuguppa village, under Narsapuram police sub-division limits, in West Godavari district on Sunday.

The girl, an Intermediate dropout, was staying at her uncle's house at Kajuguppa.

Mahesh (26), who was working in a film shooting company at Hyderabad, reportedly met Mahita when the movie crew visited Palakol, Razole and other places a few months ago.

The couple was reportedly in contact over phone and the girl reportedly went to Hyderabad recently and stayed for a few days. Following a complaint, a “woman missing” case was registered in Elamanchili police station then.

On Sunday, Mahesh, along with two of his friends came to Mahita's house at Kajuguppa and they both went out. After some heated argument, the accused allegedly attacked her with a knife and she collapsed.

The residents caught Mahesh, thrashed him and handed him over to the Elamanchili police, while his friends fled from the spot. The accused was married and his wife filed a dowry harassment (Section. 498 (a) case) against him in Ibrahimpatnam police station, at Hyderabad.

Andhra Pradesh Women’s Commission Chairperson Nananpaneni Rajakumari condemned the murder and said she would visit Kajuguppa village and inquire about the incident.

Meanwhile, police handed over the girl's body to her family members after conducting post-mortem on Monday.

“Mahesh told Mahita that he was facing trial in Section 498 (a) case in the court and would marry her once he is out of the case. After knowing his family history, Mahita started maintaining distance from him and was not responding to his calls since a few days. Upset over this, the accused might have killed her,” said West Godavari district Superintendent of Police M. Ravi Prakash.

However, we are probing deep into the case and, Mahesh and his two friends, who accompanied him, were also booked in the murder case, the SP added.
