We are all Leftists now: More socialism cannot be a cure for the ills of India’s pervasive socialism

Once upon a time, there were two demon brothers – Atapi and Vatapi. They were fond of devouring Brahmins. Vatapi knew the art of transforming himself into non-human forms as also the art of resurrecting from the dead. After ensnaring an unsuspecting Brahmin, Vatapi would transform himself into a goat which Atapi would slaughter and feed to the guest. Then he would call his brother, “O Vatapi, please come.” And Vatapi, tearing apart the victim’s body, would emerge. Then they would eat the victim.

They tried the trick on Agastya Rishi, but he was insightful enough to see the trap. After he finished his meal, Atapi as usual beckoned him. But that didn’t happen. Agastya, rubbing his belly, said, “Vatapi has been digested.” Then he also killed Atapi with his superhuman powers.

The myth ignores the impact of digesting a cannibal, of internalising evil. Vatapi was slain but was his killing without consequences?

There is another myth: the Left is dead. It also ignores an important fact: while technically communism is dead, and pinkish intellectuals are mercilessly trolled by the Right, its ideas and ideals are very much alive and kicking. In fact, they have been digested and assimilated. The Left is dead, long live the Left.

Communists as a political force may be on the verge of extinction, but some kind of evil Eucharist has ensured that their ideas run through the veins of the body-economic. They have dangerously infected its every vital organ, every limb, muscles and sinews, the marrow of bones – everything.

All political parties have unquestioningly and unthinkingly – indeed almost reflexively – adopted communist precepts and principles; whether it’s the centrist Congress or the supposedly rightwing Bharatiya Janata Party, the most important doctrines of communists and socialists have been accepted. We are all Leftists now.

Familiarity with O’Sullivan’s First Law, named after British conservative commentator and journalist John O’Sullivan, would help us understand how the grand old party fell prey to Leftist ideas. It says: “All organisations that are not actually rightwing will over time become leftwing.”

Congress has followed O’Sullivan’s Law. It has been said about the GOP that it is a big tent; at any rate, it once was, accommodating various ideologies, interest groups, etc. After Independence, however, its eclecticism made way for socialism, which debilitated the economy, undermined foreign policy and corrupted politics.

It’s not just the absence of political philosophy that makes political parties vulnerable to the meretricious charms of Leftist doctrines; even BJP, with its pronounced Hindutva, has not been immune to such charms. Consider the class war doctrine. “The history of all hitherto existing society,” wrote Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in the Communist Manifesto, “is the history of class struggles.” The entire edifice of Marxian historiography and philosophy stands on such erroneous and misleading notions. For, while conflict is an important factor, there are also other factors that have played equally important roles.

Conservatives don’t usually subscribe to conflict theories, so it is not surprising that BJP’s chief ideologue, Deendayal Upadhyaya, disapproved of socialism. He said, “Here [In India] too, there were castes, but we had never accepted conflict between one caste and another as a fundamental concept behind it.”

Well, that is theory. In practice, the saffron party seems to have tacitly accepted the class struggle doctrine. Its politicians, policy makers, and technocrats continue to regard prosperity as a zero sum game: if somebody gets wealthy, it has to be at the expense of others.

They regard the rich and poor, industry and agriculture, big industry and MSMEs, consumers and businesses, etc as mutually conflicting groups or entities whose interests ought to be harmonised. Well, that’s what they say, but that’s not what they do all the time. For instance, post-demonetisation schadenfreude (pleasure derived from another person’s misfortune) was politically sold in the spirit of class war. They know it too well that ressentiment (suppressed envy and hatred) is an emotion far stronger than hope.

The zero sum game is the product and function of class struggle, a deeply flawed theory. The truth is that a rising tide raises all boats. Our politicians, however, don’t know, or even want to know, this truth.

In an interaction with industrialists six years ago, Congress president Rahul Gandhi said, “President Kennedy said a rising tide raises all boats. I oversee a women’s self-help group in my constituency whom I told about Kennedy’s remark. They said a rising tide doesn’t raise people who don’t have a boat. We’ve to help build the boat for them. It’s not enough to raise the tide, we’ve to give them the infrastructure to rise with the tide.”

This is a classic misreading of the feedback from the bottom of the pyramid. In this day and age, the poor are poor because of the perpetuation of poverty, and this is because of the continuation of socialism despite the 1991 liberalisation. Instead of deciding to expedite the removal of the vestiges of socialism, Rahul decided to do the opposite. The implicit assumption is that more socialism is the cure for socialism.

He has been true to his word, as evident from the Congress’s proposed minimum income guarantee scheme (NYAY). But NYAY, just like BJP government’s PM-Kisan, is an eruption occasioned by the evil that India’s body-economic has absorbed over the decades – the evil of leftwing ideologies.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
