Hyderabad: Girl found dead in well, second in 2 days

During questioning, police came across another case of sexual assault and murder of an 18-year-old girl who had gone missing around 45 days ago. (Representational Image)

Hyderabad: Even as residents of Hazipur are yet to recover from the alleged rape and murder of a 14-year-old girl, the body of another girl student, who had been missing for 45 days, was found in the same abandoned well on Monday where the first victim was found.

Bommalaramaram police suspects that the offender is a psychotic sexual offender who could be involved in more offences.

Two days ago, the police recovered the body of the 14-year-old girl from the abandoned well. The girl, a Hazipur local, went missing on Thursday while returning from school at Keesara after attending a special class.

While investigating the case, police reportedly picked up a suspect hailing from Keesara.

During questioning, police came across another case of sexual assault and murder of an 18-year-old girl who had gone missing around 45 days ago.

Police teams along with a dog squad and Clues team rushed to the same well and exhumed the body of T. Manisha, 18. The body was in a decomposed state and her college bag was found beside the body.

Manisha, a graduate student in a private college in Keesara, went missing from March 15. She had told her parents that she would be visiting a relative’s house, but did not return. Her parents who thought that she had left the house did not lodge a complaint.

Scores of villagers gathered at the spot on learning about Manisha’s body being found. Police exhumed the body and identified it as that of Manisha with the help of the ID card, Aadhar card and other documents that were present in her college bag, that was buried right beside her body.

Locals demanded immediate execution of the suspect who is believed to have committed sexual assaults and serial murders of minor girls in the village.

Speaking to the media, Bhongir DCP K. Narayana Reddy said, “Manisha was missing for the last 45 to 50 days. Her parents did not lodge a complaint with police. During investigation, her body was found today in the well. It has been exhumed. The girl was identified based on the documents recovered from her bag.”

He said the accused appeared to be a psychotic sexual offender. “We suspect that the girl was sexually assaulted by the suspect. Her bones and viscera are being sent for analysis to the Forensic Science Laboratory and a DNA test will also also be performed,” he said.

Meanwhile, reports emerged that the police picked up a suspect from the same village. The suspect works as a lift mechanic and is a resident of Keesara. Police is tight-lipped about the reports and said that they have not arrested any person in connection with the case and investigation is still on.

The investigation of the serial murder cases has been handed over to Bhongir assistant commissioner of police N. Bhujanga Rao on Monday.

Rachakonda police commissioner Mahesh Bhagwat said, “The investigation of both murder cases of the 14-year-old and Manisha are going in the right direction. The investigation has been given to ACP Bhongir Bhujanga Rao. Bommalaramaram SI Venkatesh has been placed under suspension for his neglect of duties.”
