Lok Sabha elections: Bengal sees some clashes, but tops Phase-4 with 77% turnout

Clash erupts after Babul Supriyo visited polling booth in Asansol

NEW DELHI: The trend of voting nearly matching the 2014 turnout continued on Monday, with nearly 64% of the electorate across nine states casting their ballots in the fourth phase of the Lok Sabha polls amid some incidents of violence in West Bengal Reports of clashes in West Bengal, however, coincided with the state notching the highest turnout at 76.7%. This is in keeping with high turnout in the state in the previous phases as well. Polling was held for 72 parliamentary seats, including a part of Anantnag constituency in J&K. The overall turnout was slightly higher than the 63.05% corresponding figure recorded in 2014.Phase 4 also saw the end of assembly polls being conducted across four states. Polling for nearly 373 (69%) of the 543 Lok Sabha constituencies across 24 states and Union territories has been concluded.While voting was largely peaceful, a few incidents of violence in West Bengal and EVM glitches were reported. In Asansol constituency in West Bengal, BJP candidate and Union minister Babul Supriyo is alleged to have entered a polling station with his armed security guards in violation of rules and misbehaved with security personnel who tried to stop him. An FIR was registered against him and also against unknown persons for breaking the glass of his car.Sources said Supriyo’s allegation that his agent was not allowed to enter the polling station was not found to be correct, with the observers reporting that the agent arrived only after Supriyo.The EC said a complaint by Congress leader Sanjay Jha that he could erase the ink on his finger soon after voting was being verified, even though the chief electoral officer informed that the ink was duly tested at the CSIR laboratory and no issue was reported.Another complaint by Congress candidate in Dhaurahra, Jitin Prasada, that someone had cast votes against the names of his sisters was found valid and attributed to the mistake by a polling officer. An EC official said a “tender” vote could still be cast in such cases.In Bardhaman, BJP candidate P C Das entered the polling station with BJP flags. Stones were pelted at his car later and an FIR registered on Das’s complaint. In Ranaghat, a bomb exploded 350 metres from the polling station in which three people sustained simple injuries. The bomber was nabbed.In Birbhum, 10-15 young men entered the polling station with mobile phones and started making videos. When the security personnel stopped them, around 150 people came and tried to capture EVMs. A jawan fired in the air to disperse the crowd. Polling, which had stopped for sometime, resumed thereafter.In heartland states, where BJP had won 30 out of 32 seats in 2014, nearly 68% turnout was recorded in Rajasthan for the 13 seats where polling was held on Monday. The turnout was nearly 59% per cent in Uttar Pradesh where the luck of candidates for 13 seats were sealed in EVMs. In Madhya Pradesh , the turnout was nearly 71.6% for the six parliamentary seats.The voter turnout was the lowest at 9.8% in J&K’s Anantnag constituency, where polling was held only in Kulgam. In 2014, Kulgam had recorded 37.3% turnout. In Bihar , about 59% voters exercised their franchise while in neighbouring Jharkhand, the turnout was 64.4%. In an incident in Chhatra, Jharkhand, a ballot unit was damaged by the last voter just 10 minutes prior to conclusion of polling. However, no voter came after that. Since the control unit and VVPAT were intact, the polled votes were not affected.In Maharashtra and Odisha, where polling for all Lok Sabha seats ended on Monday, turnouts were nearly 56% and 64.5%, respectively. Billionaires and Bollywood stars lined up outside polling stations along with the common folks in Mumbai, which recorded 55.1% voting, an improvement over the 2014 elections figure of 51.6%.With fresh voter registration frozen for the current polls, there are now 91.1 crore voters on the rolls. This includes nearly 1.91 crore first-time voters aged 18-19 years.Phase 4 saw replacement of 0.4% ballot units, 0.5% control units and 1.9% VVPATs. Around 1.3% VVPATs had to be replaced as they went into non-operational mode.As per the progressive seizure report till March 29, total seizures stood at Rs 3,274 crore, including Rs 785 crore in cash, liquor worth Rs 249 crore, drugs worth Rs 1,214 crore, gold and precious metals worth Rs 972 crore and other freebies worth Rs 53 crore.
