Lok Sabha Election 2019: Uttar Pradesh sees marginal dip in turnout in 13 constituencies

In the fourth phase of the general elections 13 crucial Lok Sabha seats in Uttar Pradesh-the Hindutava bastion, went to polls on Monday. The final stats showed that 57.58 per cent votes were recorded which was 58.39 % in 2014.

The seats which went to the polls in phase four are Shahjahanpur, Kheri, Hardoi, Misrikh, Unnao, Farrukhabad, Etawah, Kannauj, Kanpur, Akbarpur, Jalaun, Jhansi and Hamirpur.

According to the state's Chief Electoral Officer, 57.88 per cent votes were cast when polling closed at 6 pm.

The final percentage in the fourth phase of polling is expected to go up as there were still people in queues at polling booths after closing time, and they will be allowed to cast their vote.

From Dimple Yadav in Kannauj to Sakshi Maharaj in Unnao, all popular leaders of the region are in the fray for the upcoming elections. The other key candidates in the state include- Jitin Prasada in Dharuhera, Zafar Ali Naqvi (Lakhimpur Kheri), Congress' Sri Prakash Jaiswal (Kanpur) and Salman Khurshid (Farrukhabad).

The 13 seats where elections were held in Uttar Pradesh, saw a direct contest between the BJP and SP-BSP alliance. In 2014, the BJP had won 12 of the 13 seats. Kannauj was won by Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav's wife Dimple Yadav, who is seeking re-election.

During the polls, the Samajwadi Party workers alleged that many EVMs were malfunctioned and had filed a complained to the election observers that the district administration had stopped some party leaders and workers to move out of their homes. In Kanpur, BJP workers allegedly tried to barge into a polling booth and clashed with the police.



A case has been registered against BJP leader Suresh Awasthi and six others in this connection, Kanpur District Magistrate Vijay Vishwas Pant said.



Meanwhile, a 50-year-old man died while awaiting for his turn to cast his vote at a polling booth in Umrapur village in Hardoi constituency. According to the police, the deceased has been identified as Ompal Singh who was standing in the queue at booth 302 of the village under Baghauli police station area. He suddenly collapsed and became unconscious. He died while being rushed to hospital in an ambulance.

Uttar Pradesh
