Insider’s hand suspected in daring robbery at finance co

Coimbatore: Two days after a masked man decamped with 803 sovereigns of jewellery worth nearly Rs 2crore and Rs 1.34 lakh cash from the branch of Muthoottu Mini Financiers Limited on the busy Trichy Road near Ramanathapuram Junction, the city police are collecting the details of the firm’s former employees.

Preliminary inquiry revealed that the robber left the place in an autorickshaw and reached Podanur Railway Junction.

Police suspect that he might have escaped to Kerala by train.

Police conducted inquiry with more than 40 people, including former employees of the firm, autorickshaw drivers and shopkeepers. A special team visited Walayar in Kerala.

The robber, suspected to be between the age of 25 and 30, had entered the office on Saturday around 3.05pm and attacked women employees Renugadevi, 28, of Podanur and Divya of Selvapuram before stealing the valuables.

Police grilled Divya at the Ramanathapuram police station till Sunday evening. Renugadevi is undergoing treatment in a private hospital after she was attacked by the robber.

“We plan to interrogate Renugadevi on Tuesday and hope to get some leads,” a police officer said.

“The gold jewellery were kept in a steel bureau inside a strongroom. The strongroom has two doors. But the staff used to keep the first door open for easy access. The robber opened the second door and the steel bureau using the original keys snatched from the staff,” the officer told TOI.

“The women staff had given contradictory statements. We plan to grill them again,” the officer added.

As per the the complaint lodged by the firm’s area manager Selvarani, the man had stolen 803 sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs 1,34,450 in cash.

Police have registered a case against the unidentified man under section 392 (robbery) of the Indian Penal Code. Deputy commissioner of police (crime) P Perumal has formed four special teams to nab the culprit.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
