Shoojit Sircar: Vicky Kaushal's intensity and anger convinced me he was Udham Singh

SHOOJIT SIRCAR

Jallianwala Bagh

Indian National Congress

Vicky Kaushal

revolutionary

Raj Kapoor

Shashi Kapoor

Amitabh Bachchan

April 13, 1919, is a black day in Indian history. Under the orders of the acting Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer, Michael O’Dwyer, the lieutenant governor of Punjab, instructed his troops to fire at a crowd which had peacefully assembled in Amritsar’son Baisakhi to condemn the arrest and deportation of two leaders, Satya Pal and Saifuddin Kitchlew. According to the, more than 1,500 were injured and over 1,000 people died. Many see this episode as the trigger for the Non-Co-operation Movement of 1920–22, the first step towards the end of British rule. Commemorating the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre in its centenary year, Shoojit Sircar has quietly kicked off his Udham Singh biopic within the titular role.The nationalist as part of the Ghadar Party, had mobilised Indians abroad to overthrow colonial rule. On his return, he was arrested for possession of unlicensed arms. Upon his release from prison, he escaped to Germany and then travelled to London. On March 13, 1940, he shot O’Dwyer dead. He was convicted of murder and hanged at Pentonville Prison on July 31, 1940.The film showcases a significant contribution to the freedom struggle which has largely gone unnoticed. Shoojit started shooting in London, before moving to Russia. Speaking to Mirror from St Petersburg, the director reiterated that Udham Singh’s sacrifice is an important story for today’s audience. Excerpts:I heard the inspiring story when I was just out of college, doing theatre in Delhi. I came to Mumbai with the idea of making a film on it. I didn’t have the money or the courage or even a script. Now, with my writers Ritesh Shah and Shubhendu Bhattacharya, my friends Ronnie Lahiri and Sheel Kumar, and Vicky Kaushal, one of the most dynamic young actors today, and my years of experience, I want to bring this largely unknownalive on screen. I’m both nervous and emotional.He was recognised by the Indians there. The others liked his commitment. (Chuckles) I like that too, along with his dynamism and continued attempts to experiment with different roles like Masaan, a beautiful character and film. There’s a burning intensity and anger that I saw in his eyes during our first meeting itself, that convinced me he was the right man to play Udham.No, it didn’t affect us at all.None. The film is based on Udham Singh’s life, particularly one event which we had already researched. Since Vicky is from Punjab, a Sikh family, it’s a huge responsibility for him too.Well, a lot of people today know who Bhagat Singh is but not Udham Singh. Many have not even heard his name. But it’s thanks to people like him, that we live in independent India today. What they had to go through for us to enjoy this freedom is shocking and traumatic.That’s a subjective opinion and differs from individual to individual. It’s a huge country, and along with the good things, there are some problems too that we must deal with every day. It’s the same in a family too. No family is perfect and if we can hold a family together, why not a nation?I am, I love my India and tell my children that during vacations we should travel through the country and not abroad. Our history and traditions are among the oldest in the world. And despite so much diversity — different regions and languages, caste and creed, food and customs — we remain one. Any other country would have broken into parts by now.Very difficult even during research as there’re few records available and those there are were speculative. This is my first period film and it’s hard to create that environment and these characters that are a part of our history.Wonderful, the Russians love India... They loveandand Mithun da (Chakraborty). If you want something you only sing “ Jimmy Jimmy” from Disco Dancer.The outskirts of London, parts of Ireland and Germany, and of course, India. We will be shooting for six-seven months, all through the year during different seasons. The film is scheduled for a 2020 release.Irrfan is a friend, I was constantly in touch with him through the last year and a half when he was undergoing treatment. And I remember, the first thing I did when he was leaving for London after learning that he had been diagnosed with neuroendocrine tumour was to assure him that he would back soon and do many more films. I was always optimistic and today, when I see him shooting, it feels so good, almost spiritual. I talk to him and his family every other day. We’ve bonded for life.We will definitely do a film together. We have already started scripting one with him in mind.
