Bride shot at during wedding, returns injured, completes rit...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Bride shot at during wedding, returns injured, completes rituals

18 Jan 2019

After a bride got shot at her own wedding in Delhi yesterday, her spirit wasn't dampened at all, as she returned with injuries from the hospital just to get married.

Someone fired a bullet during the ceremony which hit the bride's legs and she was rushed to a nearby hospital for treatment.

The wedding was then done in a quiet ceremony.

Here's what happened.

Unknown person shot at bride, police was called later

Details

The marriage was being held in Shakarpur.

During the ceremony, when the bride was about to climb the dais, an unknown person shot a bullet, which brushed past her leg.

The woman collapsed immediately, following which she was rushed to a hospital.

The bridegroom, narrating the incident, said, "Don't know who the person was. Bullet brushed past her legs. Police was later called here."

Police trying to determine whether shot was accidental or intentional

Investigation

Thereafter, police arrived at the spot for investigation.

People present at the wedding told them that the perpetrator may have fled while the woman was being taken to the hospital.

Police are now trying to track down the culprit but have not made any arrests.

They are also trying to determine whether the shot was accidentally fired or intentionally fired to harm someone.

Bride decided to return from hospital to finish wedding ceremony

Fact

Meanwhile, when the atmosphere had turned dull after the bride got shot, she decided to return and complete the wedding ceremony. Initially, the doctors refused to let her go but she was later given permission. The couple then got married in a quiet manner.

Previously, injured groom returned after surgery just to get married

Past cases

A similar incident happened last year.

In November 2018, a bridegroom was shot by two gunmen as he rode a chariot to his wedding in New Delhi.

He, however, returned to his bride, all bandaged up, three hours after surgery and completed the wedding rituals.

Notably, the bullet was still stuck on the groom's shoulder bones when he had returned.
