Our worker’s death a political murder: Congress

KENDRAPADA: Violence was reported in Kendrapada, Jajpur and Jagatsinghpur districts on Monday.A Congress supporter — Laxman Behera (40) — was stabbed to death with a broken bottle by a BJD supporter, Kuna Behera, in Gadakujangnoliasahi village under Abhayachandapur police station in Jagatsinghpur district. The deceased was killed while he was returning to his village after casting vote.When contacted, ASP (Paradip) Bishnu Charana Mishra said, “We visited Gadakujangnoliasahi after learning of the murder . The accused was drunk. After committing the crime, he fled.”Congress’s MLA candidate for Balikuda-Erasama Lalatendu Mohapatra said the crime was a political one. “Laxman was getting threats after he joined our party,” he said.Miscreants damaged an EVM in booth number 177 in Chahare village under Sukinda assembly seat in Jajpur district and assaulted BJP’s polling agent, Jagabandhu Sethi. An injured Jagabandhu was admitted in the government hospital at Dharamasala and later moved to SCB Medical College and Hospital in Cuttack Two polling agents of BJP and Congress sustained injuries when they were allegedly attacked by some BJD supporters in booth number 181 under the Sukinda seat. Both are undergoing treatment at a hospital in Jakhapura.The dalit villagers of Baragadia under the same seat boycotted the polls. “We protested against the lack of basic amenities in our village,” said Nabaghan Mallick, a resident of Baragadia. “We have been neglected by successive governments since Independence. There are no approach roads to the village or drinking water facilities,” said Mahadev Mallick, another resident.In a polling booth in Singiri village under Aul assembly seat in Kendrapada district, some miscreants prevented people from voting. In Firikidandi village under Rajnagar assembly seat in the district, supporters of Congress and BJD clashed with each other.Alleging rigging, Congress’s candidate for the Aul seat, Debendra Sharma, sought repolls in nine booths. He alleged that the party’s agents were thrown out by BJD supporters.
