Bride among 4 of marriage party killed in SUV-combine collision

Times News Network

Ludhiana: Four members of a marriage party, including the bride, were killed and three others, including the groom, injured when the SUV they were travelling in collided with a combine harvester at Ludhiana-Delhi National Highway, near Dhandari, on Monday morning.

While the bride, Heena Ansari, 22, her relatives Husna Banu, 34, and Jamshed Alam, 25 — all residents of Gulabi Bagh, Tibba Road — died on the spot, Zareena Jamal, 32, succumbed during treatment. The groom, Anjum Ansari, 25, his sister-in-law Ruksana, 21, and the combine harvester driver are admitted to a hospital.

Heena and Anjum had got married in Jagadhri, Haryana, on Sunday night.

After the wedding, the newly-weds, along with their relatives, were on way home when the crash took place around 7.30am.

Parents of Anjum, who runs an embroidery business, along with some kin had reached home early in cars and buses. They were making arrangements to welcome the bride and the groom when they received the news of the accident.

Mohammad Abbas, a relative, said, “The bride and four others were travelling in the SUV that Anjum was driving. Our car was a few kilometers behind theirs. When their SUV collided with the combine harvester, we called up an ambulance and took them to a hospital near Sherpur Chowk. Husna, Heena and Jamshed died on the spot. Zareena succumbed at the hospital. Husna and Zareena are wives of Anjum’s brothers.”

Sahnewal police station SHO inspector Iqbal Singh said, “It was found during preliminary investigation that the SUV was on high speed. It was trying to overtake the combine harvester when the latter moved towards the right and the SUV rammed into it. The combine harvester driver, Avtar Singh, has also sustained injuries as the collision threw him down. He is admitted to civil hospital. The condition of the groom is stated to be critical. He is on a ventilator.”

The police have registered a case against the combine harvester driver.

A pall of gloom descended on Gulabi Bagh as they received the news. Grief took over Anjum’s house that a few minutes before was buzzing with activities to welcome the couple.

Malkeet Alam, the groom’s kin, said, “Husna Banu and Zafar Aalam, and Zareena Jamal and Jamal Ansari have three children each. All six children were insisting to sit in the SUV of the bride and the groom. With much difficulty, we had convinced them to sit in another car.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
