From Bay Area to Bengaluru: How Abhijit Bose, WhatsApp CEO, changed his 'worst decision' to the best

Speaking Out A culture revolution doesn’t always begin on the outside. Sometimes, accountability comes from the inside, as these powerful tech giants discovered.

Tiptoeing The Line Earlier this year, Microsoft came under scrutiny when over a hundred employees published an open letter calling on the company to cancel its contracts with the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency. “We believe that Microsoft must take an ethical stand, and put children and families above profits,” the letter said. CEO Satya Nadella (in pic) defended the contract stating, “Microsoft is not working with the US government on any project related to separating children from their families at the border.” Nadella did not commit to more transparency.

Technology For Good Earlier this year, hundreds of Amazon employees signed an internal letter demanding that the company stop selling its facial recognition surveillance software — Rekognition — to law enforcement agencies. “As ethically concerned Amazonians, we demand a choice in what we build and a say in how it is used,” they wrote. Despite the outcry, Amazon executives have skirted around the issue saying that it is the responsibility of the US government to specify the regulations needed around facial recognition.



In pic: Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos

Personal Vs. Company Last month, Facebook executives came under fire when the company’s VP of global public policy — Joel Kaplan (left) — was spotted publicly supporting Judge Brett Kavanaugh as he testified before the Senate. Kaplan’s appearance raised eyebrows and resulted in a strong backlash among employees with some viewing Kaplan’s show of support as an endorsement from the company itself. Following the outrage, Kaplan apologised and defended his actions, claiming that he had attended the hearing as a close friend of Kavanaugh. “I’ve talked to Joel about why I think it was a mistake for him to attend given his role in the company. We support people’s right to do what they want in their personal time but this was by no means a straight-forward case,” Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg (right) wrote in an internal post.
