Lok Sabha elections 2019: We will introduce NRC across country: Shah

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) chief Amit Shah held a series of public meetings in Uttar Pradesh where he pitched party as ‘one of nationalists’ under whom the nation was secure and praised Prime Minister Narendra Modi while describing former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh as ‘mauni baba’ (the silent one).

In his public meetings in Chitrakoot, Pratapgarh, Prayagraj and Jaunpur, Shah spoke of the National Register for Citizens (NRC) that the BJP government had introduced in Assam to identify outsiders. The NRC of 1951 is being updated in Assam under the supervision of the Supreme Court. “We identified outsiders, but our political opponents united in their support. These politicians aren’t worried about the security of our people but are concerned about the human rights of intruders. When the Modi government is re-elected, we would introduce NRC across the country,” Shah said in his meetings.

He also reiterated that if re-elected, the BJP would scraps Articles 370 and 35 (A), granting special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Union home minister Rajnath Singh, too, had supported Shah’s statement.

Shah also referred to the Pulwama terror attack and the Indian response to it. “During the 10-year rule of UPA, Sonia Gandhi and ‘Mauni Baba’ (Manmohan Singh), the then government could not do anything when terrorists from Pakistan crossed the border and beheaded soldier Hemraj. In contrast, when 40 soldiers were killed in the Pulwama attack the Modi government ensured a befitting response on the ‘tehrvi’ (Hindu religious ceremony on 13th day of death) of martyrs by carrying out aerial strikes on terror camps in Pakistan. That’s because Modiji has a 56-inch chest and that is the reason why Pakistan is scared,” he said. In Jaunpur, too, Shah mentioned the Pulwama attack while lashing out at the Congress, the SP and the BSP leaders.

“After aerial strike, the country rejoiced. But at two places, mourning was witnessed. First, in Pakistan where it was genuine but the second was back home in the offices of Rahul Baba, Mayawati and Akhilesh Yadav, for reasons better known to them,” he said. “The five-year rule of the Modi government is better than the 55-year rule of the Congress or the 25 years of SP and BSP governments in Uttar Pradesh. Rahul Baba (Congress chief Rahul Gandhi) keeps asking what the BJP has done in the last five years? I challenge him to visit the nearest crossing in Prayagraj and even our BJP youth activists will easily tell you about it,” he said.

Shah had addressed rallies in Uttar Pradesh on Sunday too and on Monday again he said while PM Modi hasn’t taken a single day off, Rahul Baba, bua (Mayawati) and bhatija (Akhilesh Yadav) take off to foreign countries as the heat rises in the state.

In Prayagraj, Shah lauded the Yogi Adityanath government for organising the best managed Kumbh since 1980.

“I have never missed a Kumbh Mela since 1980 but the one organised by Yogi Adityanath government was memorable, mishap free and one where a record 24 crore devotees took a dip,” he said.

Announcing that Akshaywat would soon be opened 24x7 on all 365 days every year, the BJP chief said, “After years of calling this holy pilgrimage place of Sangam as Allahabad, the name given by Akbar, now finally we can call it Prayagraj”.

“One more term for PM Modi will make India become all the more powerful and a world leader,” he added.
