Mardaani 2: Rani Mukerji dons the look of a fierce cop on a mission- See Pic

Mardaani 2: Rani Mukerji dons the look of a fierce cop on a mission-

Rani Mukherji's iconic role of a fearless cop Shivani Shivaji Roy in Mardaani in 2014 left everyone in awe of her. The actress is all set to create the same impact in her upcoming film Mardaani 2, this is visible from the latest still of Rani in the look of a fierce cop. Donning a police uniform the actress looks strong and powerful and with a no-nonsense expression, she looks ready to take down anything that gets in her way.

The still was shared but the official Instagram account of Yash Raj Films. Check out how powerful Rani Mukherji looks in the role of a defiant cop in Mardaani 2:

A few days ago another still of Rani Mukherji came out in which she was seen in a white shirt and in a fierce pose. Check out that still:

#Mardaani2 begins... Stars Rani Mukerji... Gopi Puthran directs... Produced by Aditya Chopra... 2019 release. pic.twitter.com/09rxsmzf11 — taran adarsh (@taran_adarsh) March 27, 2019

The first part of the film was based on the gruesome word of human trafficking where Shivani Shivaji Roy played by Rani Mukherji sets up to destroy the whole racket against all odd. Actor Tahir Raj Bhasin played the antagonist opposite the actress in it.

The film is being produced by Aditya Chopra. It will be Rani’s next venture after the Hichki. The film also marks the directorial debut of Gopi Puthran who was the writer of the first Mardaani film.

In the sequel, Rani's character has received a promotion and she will be seen as a Superintendent of Police. She will be locked in a vicious battle with a 21-year old merciless villain.



Speaking about the villain of Mardaani 2, Rani said in an earlier statement that her character will face a cold, merciless villain who has no empathy, no fear of God and is pure evil.

Recently, Rani Mukherjee wrapped up the Mumbai's shoot of the film and she has headed to Rajasthan to shoot for the film. It will be an intense one-month long schedule in Rajasthan. The shoot will be held in Jaipur and Kota and it will be the backdrop for her investigation.
