Politics | Has the Congress changed ideologically while in opposition?

Subir Roy

Election manifestos are seldom implemented in any significant way by those who eventually come to power. Hence manifestoes of key opposing parties are often marked by competitive promises of goodies without bothering much about costs, such as financial support for poor farmers in the present instance.

But those looking for a choice will not be disappointed by the strong promises contained in the Congress manifesto under the section “Review of laws, rules and regulations”, aimed at repealing or amending laws that do not reflect constitutional values and unjustly restrict the freedoms of people. By way of contrast, the section coming upfront in the BJP manifesto, “Nation first”, sets the tone for its agenda. Tellingly, the word “sedition” makes it to the Congress manifesto but not that of the BJP.

The promises

To look at the Congress pledge to ensure freedom in a democratic republic, it is useful to list some of the changes promised. Prominent among them is the promise to remove the relevant legal provision so that the colonial era offence of sedition, widely misused,ceases to exist.

Perhaps equally important, though the brunt of it is felt by only a few states (Jammu and Kashmir and those in the northeast), is the promise to amend the Armed Forces Special Powers Act so as to strike a balance between the powers of the armed force fighting separatist movements and the need to protect human rights. Particularly significant is the promise to remove immunity for those responsible for enforced disappearance, sexual violence and torture.

A series of changes have been proposed so as to rein in detention without trial, make it easier to get bail if detained and bring about prison reforms so that prisoners’ human rights are protected. Critically, a promise is made to pass a Prevention of Torture Act to prohibit the use of third degree methods during interrogation under custody and punish cases of torture, brutality or other excesses.

Two more important changes are promised. Broadly, it is proposed that laws directed against civil violations will be decriminalized and be subjected to civil penalties. Specifically, the offence of defamation, will be decriminalized. This will strengthen the hands of those in the media seeking to hold the powerful accountable when now they are sought to be intimidated with the threat of being sent to jail.

These changes have been proposed in a particular political context. In five years of NDA rule, protecting the nation or national security has been given the utmost importance and any attempt to question the government’s conduct in this regard has been sought to be projected as playing into the hands of the enemy. Thus asking questions about whether a particular military action has been properly conducted and achieved positive results, as in the case of Balakot, has been described as unpatriotic.

A critical correction

If we are to take the Congress at its word, it promises a critical correction of emphasis. It is arguing that national security needs will be addressed but in the process civil liberties will not be undermined. We thus have an ideological choice. The BJP is a conservative right wing party for which national security needs override the need to protect civil liberties and the Congress is a liberal social democratic party which values civil liberties and security equally.

A key issue in this regard is that the legal enablers that currently allow civil liberties to be set aside have not been enacted by the NDA. Decades of Congress rule and a short span under NDA-I have created a legal machinery which has over time given more and more powers to the security and law enforcement setup. NDA-II under Narendra Modi has simply been more forthright and aggressive in not hesitating to disregard the rights of dissenters while seeking to address “national” concerns.

Take the draconian Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act which the Congress manifesto does not address and therefore presumably will remain on the statute books. It was passed in 1967, after an enabling constitutional amendment which sought to place restrictions on the freedom of speech, right to assembly and right to form associations in order to deal with activities against the integrity and sovereignty of India. Thereafter there have been several amendments to the Act. A notable arrest under it was of Binayak Sen in 2007, a doctor and human rights activist who worked among the tribals of Chhattisgarh where Naxalites were active.

The BJP’s targets



Surendra Gadling, an advocate for 25 years, is known for defending political prisoners accused of being Maoists or extremists, among them a wheelchair bound Delhi University teacher jailed for Maoist links.



Sudhir Dhawale is a poet, writer and political commentator best known for publishing Virodhi, a left leaning Marathi magazine.



Mahesh Raut, who passed out of the Tata Institute of Social Sciences, has been a prime minister rural development fellow. He is a prominent activist working for Adivasis and displaced marginal communities.



Rona Wilson has worked for the release of political prisoners including Kashmiris alleged to be terrorists.



Shoma Sen, a professor of English at Nagpur University, has worked for women’s rights and been associated with several prominent feminist organizations.



Where the BJP-led NDA-II took things to a new level was the arrest in 2018 under the Unlawful Activities Act by the Pune police of five social activists working with Dalits, Adivasis and political prisoners for having links with Maoists. A brief description of who the five arrested are gives an idea of what sort of people the present dispensation is targeting.

An opportunity

Thus, if the Congress has the opportunity to carry out what it has promised in its agenda, it will have to undo what the party itself had done earlier over decades while in power. In that sense the manifesto signals that the Congress has critically changed while being in opposition.
