12 Images Show How This Shop In Delhi Keeps Alive The Age-Old Taste Of Kashmiri Spices

Food from one’s city or town has a distinct flavour. At a new place, craving and nostalgia take place of the real taste that once was the part of daily cuisine.

But sometimes, one gets really lucky to find some places, where they can get authentic home food ingredients that satiates their palette and makes possible the preparation of their cuisine.

Durga Masala store at INA market is one such spot for the Kashmiri population living in Delhi.

The store has every possible variety of authentic Kashmiri spices available. The air around the store is filled with a balming scent of herbs.

It is also a spot for Kashmiri Pandits, Muslims and NRIs to meet and make friends, while they come to the store to stack up the masaala (spices) from the valley.

The following images capture a few moments of aromatic homecoming for the Kashmiris away from their roots.

1. Masaala being ground in stone grinder. One can customise the spices ratios to get the desired flavours.

2. Fennel seed or Saunf being powdered. Kashmiris use it instead of coriander or dhaniya powder in their dishes.

3. Kashmiri tikki masala. It used in preparation of vegetables and meat dishes.

4. Atooroo or female earrings that are worn by Kashmiri brides-to-be.

5. Ginger powder, popularly known in the region as Sauth, is another staple spice for Kashmiri dishes.

6. These special Kashmiri peas are considered a great remedy for joint pain.

7. Sikha Kaul, is a Kashmiri Pandit who lives in Cambodia with her family. Whenever, she visits Delhi she buys her stock of Kashmiri masalas to be used in her food preparations, away from home.

8. Shikha’s list of items to be bought from the store, before she leaves the country.

9. Munir Malik, is a Kashmiri Muslim who has been living in Delhi for more than a decade. He is a regular at the store. He comes here as he gets all the spices that he needs.

10. List of items bought by Malik.

11. Ms. Bitta, is Kashmiri Pandit who has been living in Delhi for a long time. Her trips at the store has allowed her to make acquaintances with other Kashmiris living in Delhi.

12. Ms. Bitta buying masala tikki from the store.

All images are from the authors, who are New Delhi-based freelance contributors.
