Chhattisgarh: ‘Insult’ over petty dispute at wedding prompts brutal murder; accused arrested

The accused, angry over Sahu who had insulted them at the wedding, hit him in the head with a rock. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Raipur: A murder mystery of 25-year-old man was finally solved by Chhattisgarh police after his body was found at Gangrel dam on Sunday, nearly a week after he was killed. The incident came into light when tourists at Gangrel dam noticed foul smell emnating from a sack and were shocked upon finding a dead body of a man in it.

The deceased was tied in a bag full of rocks but the decomposition led to the body bloating and was floating on the water surface. Soon after, locals alerted Dhamtari police and his body was sent for autopsy.

The police probing into the matter found that the man had been killed five days ago after he was brutally murdered by strangulation. The police have arrested three accused in the case.

As per the reports in the Times of India, the deceased was identified as 25-year-old Ved Prakash Sahu and the incident took place on April 26, when Sahu who had come to a wedding in Dhamtari. He had claimed that sufficient food was not served to the groom's family and had raised his concern with three members from the bride's side. He made a complaint to the bride's brother Hitesh and his two friends Khomesh and Deepak.

Subsequently, they had a heated argument but the issue was solved after some elder family members intervened. However, the next day, the four of them met again and confronted each other. This time as well, an altercation occured and when Sahu walked out to talk over phone and went towards Gangrel dam, the trio followed him.

The accused, angry over Sahu who had insulted them at the wedding, hit him in the head with a rock. After Sahu fell, unconsciousness on the ground, the trio strangulated him to death. Meanwhile, the body of the deceased was recovered four days later, following the investigation, all the three accused was arrested from Raipur.
