‘A little violence always happens’, TMC’s Moon Moon Sen says after ‘bed tea’ comment

Moon Moon Sen (PTI)

After confessing that she had no idea about the violence that had ensued in Bengal’s Asansol because she was served her “bed tea” late, Trinamool Congress candidate Moon Moon Sen said: “A little violence always happens.”

She made these comments while speaking to the media about reports on clashes between TMC and BJP workers at multiple polling booths in Asansol during the fourth phase of voting on Monday, reported NDTV.

Six people sustained injuries in the clashes, and over 100 were arrested.

Speaking further on the incidence, the actor-turned-politician said she was yet to speak to her seniors in the party to understand exactly where and why the violence broke out.

She added: “Thoda toh hoga hi, har jagah hota hai (A little violence during polls is a common occurrence everywhere). Violence is much less now as compared to before.”

Earlier, the 65-year-old had said she had no idea about the violent clashes that had broken out in Asansol because she had woken up late. Moon Moon Sen said: “They gave me my bed tea very late, so I woke up very late. What can I say? I really don't know.”

The constituency’s incumbent parliamentarian Babul Supriyo has alleged that TMC cadres were not letting people cast their votes. The Bharatiya Janata Party candidate even alleged that his car was vandalized.

Commenting on these allegations, Moon Moon Sen asked the reporters not to take his name and said she would stop talking if they did.

Retorting to reports of frequent poll clashes in Bengal this election season, she said: “You were too young to see when the communists were in power. It is all over India, not just Bengal.”

After Moon Moon Sen’s “bed tea” comment went viral, she explained to the media that she was allowed to take a day off after long, hard days of campaigning. And, because it was her off day, she chose to wake up late before going about her daily routine. However, she said she did not imply that she was ignorant of what was going on, or she was relaxing with her cuppa while people were clashing outside.
