West Bengal: Post-poll violence in Birbhum between BJP, TMC supporters; PM says 'people angry at TMC'

BJP supporters gheraoed house of the accused TMC leader in protest. Police force has reportedly reached the spot. PM says"West Bengal’s anger with TMC is visible" Meanwhile, Prime Minister Narendra Modi shared footages of his rallies in the state and tweeted that West Bengal’s anger with TMC is visible all over. “Eastern India is strongly supporting NDA! Previous governments ignored this region for decades. Now, the fruits of development are reaching people. West Bengal’s anger with TMC is visible all over!” PM tweeted. Eastern India is strongly supporting NDA! Previous governments ignored this region for decades. Now, the fruits of development are reaching people. West Bengal’s anger with TMC is visible all over! Here are highlights from rallies in Jharkhand and Bengal. pic.twitter.com/R5zLDUjxV6 — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) April 30, 2019 Clashes during polling: During the polling process on Monday, BJP candidate Babul Supriyo's car was vandalized by Trinamool Congress workers. Visuals showed Babul Supriyo sitting in a car with the rear windows smashed. "Voters are not being allowed to vote," alleged Babul Supriyo. "Our fight is to establish democracy. It is shameful that I am saying this in a democratic country," he told reporters. He said he would be on the road and visit every polling station where trouble was reported. "I will take central forces with me. People are saying give us central forces, let us vote," he alleged. Also on Monday clash erupted between TMC workers and QRF and security personnel outside polling booth in Asansol, after disagreement between BJP and CPI(M) workers, after TMC workers insisted on polling, despite absence of central forces.

Poll related violence does not seem to cease in West Bengal, as supporters of Bharatiya Janata Party and Trinamool Congress clashed again in Birbhum on Tuesday. In a post-poll violence BJP and TMC supported got into a violent clash in Birbhum allegedly involving attack by sword. As per initial inputs, it was alleged that a TMC leader attacked BJP men with sword and cut off two fingers, and injured another BJP worker at Mallarpur.
