Telangana: 25 commit suicide after 33% students wrongly decl...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Telangana: 25 commit suicide after 33% students wrongly declared failed

30 Apr 2019

A wave of outrage took over Telangana as 25 students committed suicide in the last 10 days, following the state board result fiasco. A whopping 33% students were wrongly declared failed.

The results for the intermediate exam, which were declared on April 18, recorded many such irregularities.

Meanwhile, no action has been taken against the Telangana State Board of Intermediate Education yet.

00 marks turned out to be 99 after recount

Context

Out of 9.7 lakh students who appeared for the exam, around 3.28 lakh students were declared failed.

In a series of extreme mistakes, a student was marked 00 in Telugu paper, which turned out to be 99 after a recount.

Among the many suicides registered, the latest one was in Sircilla, the constituency of the Telangana CM K Chandrashekar Rao's son KT Rama Rao.

Opposition parties accuse Telangana CM for inaction in the case

Details

Globarena Technologies Pvt. Ltd., which was given the contract for technical support by the state government, was accused of extreme irregularities by the students.

Moreover, the company allegedly didn't have any experience in handling such a large scale exam, clearly not fulfilling the tender criterion.

Meanwhile, the Opposition parties have accused the ruling KCR-led Telangana Rashtra Samithi, for inaction in the alleged scam.

We demand judicial probe into this, says Telangana BJP chief

Judicial probe

Telangana's BJP chief, K Laxman, who is sitting on an indefinite hunger strike to build pressure for judicial action, said, "We are demanding a judicial probe into this. Even by the CBI. This is not just mismanagement. This is a huge scam."

"The company that was given the contact for end-to-end technical support was simply not qualified to handle 9.7L children's future," he added.

Free recounting for all failed students, declares CM

Information

Moreover, many activists are working to expose the alleged scam and said that evaluators should not have handled more than 30 papers per day. They were given 100 papers a day instead.

Professor Jyothsna, who is working with the activists, said, "Globarena has no experience in handling such exams."

Amid allegations, KCR has declared free recounting for the students who were declared failed.

Two girls set themselves on fire after result announcement

Incident

Moreover, a supplementary exam has been delayed from May 16 amid the alleged scam.

DK Aruna, a former minister, who has now joined the BJP, while talking about one of the many suicide cases, said two girls set themselves on fire after pouring kerosene on their bodies in Mahbubnagar. The place is located 100 km from Telangana's capital Hyderabad.

Rs. 50 lakh compensation to the families, demanded Aruna

Compensation

Aruna asked, "KTR has tweeted. Why should he tweet? Why cannot the chief minister or his ministers or KTR meet the families of students and reassure them that their future is safe?"

"They should also pay Rs. 50 lakh compensation to the families of the children who died," she added.

The Jana Sena Party has also demanded resignation of G Jagadish Reddy, Education Minister.

Protests outside TSBIE office to remove Reddy intensified yesterday

Protest

Yesterday, protest to remove Reddy gained momentum outside the TSBIE office.

However, the police blocked the roads to keep the crowd away from the vicinity.

Moreover, a three-member committee has submitted a report suggesting both TSBIE and Globarena were at fault.

It stated, "There have been some errors. However, its magnitude, scale and nature does not vitiate the results as a whole."
