Wear your politics: How Narendra Modi sarees, T-shirts are flavour of this election season

Sarees, T-shirts and other apparel in Surat are sold with Prime Minister Modi’s picture printed on them.

On a yellow saree draped on a woman, the end is a melange of orange and green with Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s face digitally printed on it. Markets have been flooded with such apparel, including T-shirts, kurtas, jackets among others.

At first, it was PM Modi. Now, there are others, too. But they are not so popular given the fact that saree manufacturers in Surat had first started this vowing support to PM Modi and said this was their initiative.

While one can see others making their presence on sarees, T-shirts and kurtas, there is no beating the Modi print, which is now being packaged and marketed in the most fashionable way with models flaunting the neatly cut kurtas and shirts on their being on online portals.

The Modi print sarees in Surat.

No more are people discreet about their political choices. They are literally wearing them on their sleeves. While the trend has caught on this election with a fervour not witnessed before, the Modi sarees were first unveiled in Surat in 2014.

On e-commerce platforms such as Snapdeal and Amazon one can buy multi-coloured sarees with pictures of PM Modi for anything between Rs 1,000 and Rs 3,500.

And now there is Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi, too. And while it was Surat where it all began, the trend has caught on in other places.

Election paraphernalia has been in vogue for more than two decades now but it hadn’t become so visible or rampant ever and the stuff had been limited to caps and shirts.

Rahul Gandhi was too in the picture, apart from PM Modi.

This year, it started with 40 Central Reserve Police Force personnel being killed in an attack carried out by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed in South Kashmir's Pulwama on February 14.

India responded with an air strike at a JeM training camp in Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and claimed to have eliminated a "large number" of terrorists sending a wave of nationalist fervour down the entire country.

With elections under swing, such clothing has become a rage. At first the sarees were printed and sold in Surat. Then they became a rage on social media and other towns and cities started stocking them.

There is PM Modi against a backdrop of flowers. Or there is a demonetised Rs 1,000 note with his face on it.

These were sarees with PM Modi’s face on them back in 2013 but they didn’t fly off the shelves like they are doing now, which contributes to this bizarre trend.

And while in the beginning, there was only PM Modi, now there are other politicians like Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and Rahul Gandhi who are being celebrated in what their fans are wearing.

Shirts printed with the photo of Congress president Rahul Gandhi.

There are also suave campaigns by companies that have models posing in tailored shirts and jackets with the Modi prints on them taking this frenzy a step further.

In 2015, the Janata Dal (United) has alleged that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) spent around Rs 200 crore on these sarees and that the party is distributing 20 lakh sarees in Bihar to lure the voters.

Back then, the BJP hadn’t denied the claims and the saree producers said this was their own initiative.

And now the Election Commission is on the lookout for these sarees and earlier in the month raided Jayalaxmi Silks in Udyavara, Udupi, where women were reportedly exchanging tokens given by a political party, for the prized sarees.

In another raid, the commission seized 480 sarees with the Modi photos being transported from Mathura to Haldwani.

The BJP is also selling its own branded merchandise on Narendra Modi’s official app NaMo, which was launched four years ago. Perhaps this is what is called wearing your chosen political party on your being.

One of the Modi sarees has "How's the Josh", the catchphrase from film "Uri: The Surgical Strike", written along with PM Modi's image in army fatigues.

The fact that it is being sold at Amazon, the retailers are claiming that the Modi sarees are selling like hotcakes, the josh seems at its peak.
