Mohali: 600 more buyers defrauded by online cheats posing as armymen

The people were duped from the same fake accounts of fraudsters, who were arrested earlier. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chandigarh: The Cyber cell of Mohali police has received 600 more cases of online fraud by people posing as armymen. The victims were defrauded on e-commerce site OLX and Paytm wallet. The Mohali police say they had arrested three members of a gang on March 21, but there is no let up in the fraud cases.

According to a report in Times of India, the people were duped from the same fake accounts of fraudsters, who were arrested earlier. “Out of all complaints, 30 cases have been reported from Mohali and rest from other areas of Punjab. Around 25 cases have been reported from every district. The police of other districts have approached us for help in the cases as we have already busted the gangs,” the report quotes Rupinder Kaur Sohi, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Cyber Cell.

The modus operani of the fraudsters, who pose as armymen, include an offer to sale their household items on OLX. The gullible buyers deposited money in fraudsters Paytm account in advance, but they never got the items purchased by them.

According to police, they have got no help from OLX and Paytm during the course of investigation.

DSP Sohi alleges that the two online portal haven't properly verified the credentials of their customers when they allow them to create an account on their platforms. However, an OLX spokesman has rejected the allegations saying they take utmost care in combating fraudsters on their platform.

Few days ago, two businessmen filed a complaint with the Delhi Police after they were duped by conmen posing as Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF). The cheats offered the businessmen to sell their car and a bike on a Olex.com by sending them forged CRPF identity card and CSD canteen pass. The accused also demanded that victims transfer money into their bank accounts even before delivering the vehicles.
