Congress did not give assent to OROP despite soldiers' demand: Amit Shah

Dausa (Rajasthan) [India], Apr 30 (ANI): Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Amit Shah on Tuesday lambasted the erstwhile Congress-led United Progressive Alliance (UPA) government for not giving assent to the One Rank, One Pension (OROP) scheme during its tenure.

Addressing an election rally here, he said: "Army soldiers demanded One Rank, One Pension for years during Congress’ tenure, but they did not accept this demand. When the PM Modi government came to the fore in 2014, the scheme was implemented."

Continuing his tirade against the opposition party, BJP president said: "For 10 years ‘aaliya maaliya’ used to enter Indian soils without ‘mauni baba’ (Manmohan Singh) doing anything about it, but when we responded to the Pulwama terror attack, the face of the Congress leaders turned pale.”

He further said his government has secured the borders of the country and made national security as its “foremost priority”. “If Pakistan fires a bullet at us, we will bomb them in retaliation. Our government would never compromise on the nation’s security,” Shah said.

He also came down heavily on the leaders of the National Conference (NC) for demanding a second Prime Minister for the state of Jammu and Kashmir. He said: “Kashmir is the crown of India. Any effort to separate it from its nation will be frowned upon. Even if our party is voted out of power in the ongoing elections, we would still not let Kashmir go out of the hands of India.”

In tune BJP's promise in the elections manifesto, Shah said his party, if voted to power again, will evict all the illegal immigrants from the country. “From Jammu and Kashmir to Kanyakumari, Assam to Gujarat, not even a single illegal immigrant will be allowed to reside in the country,” he added.

Stepping up the campaign for BJP in the state, he said: "Modi government has given more than Rs 3,78,000 crore to Rajasthan in five years, while the Congress party gave mere Rs 1.9 lakh crore.”

He also lauded Vasundhara Raje for doing extraordinary work and turning Rajasthan into a developed state.

Dausa Parliamentary constituency will go to polls in the fifth phase of the Lok Sabha election on May 6. The counting of votes will take place on May 23. (ANI)
