Stolen ATM cards lead police to murderers of 84-year-old, former executive director of leading bank

Ganesh Jategaonkar was found dead at his apartment in Blossoms Society in Aundh on April 17 (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Pune: Police in Pune city of Maharashtra have cracked the murder case of 84-year-old Ganesh Jategaonkar who was found dead at his apartment in Blossoms Society in Aundh on April 17. Four people arrested for the crime on Friday have been identified as 22-year-old Saif Shaikh, 24-year-old Nadeem Pathan and Krishna Badekar along with 30-year-old Mohsin Sayyed. Reports indicate that debit cards stolen from the victim's home led police to the murderers.

Officials familiar with the investigation said that one of the accused, Krishna, frequently visited the victim's apartment since his mother worked as a domestic aid there. On the day of the crime, Krishna used a duplicate key to enter Jategaonkar's apartment and demanded money to allegedly pay a huge debt he had incurred as a result of gambling. When the victim refused, the other accused arrived at the scene and took away his ATM cards. They then managed to coerce Jategaonkar to reveal the ATM PINs after which one of the accused smothered the victim by smothering him with a pillow.

In the wake of the brutal crime, a case of murder was registered against unidentified accused at the Chatuhshrungi police station. A team led by senior inspector Bhaskar Jadhav, inspector Vaishali Galande, assistant inspector Sandesh Kenjale and sub-inspector Tukaram Fad launched an investigation into the murder. Following their arrests on Friday, the accused confessed to murdering the 84-year-old former executive director of Bank of India. Reports indicate that a case of theft has also been lodged against the accused under section 380 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). They were produced before a court which remanded them to police custody.

Investigators reportedly tracked expenditures incurred on Jategaonkar's ATM cards which were stolen from the scene of the crime which led them to the accused, nine days after the victim's body was discovered at his flat in Aundh area of Pune. Footage retrieved from closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras alerted police that Rs 45,000 was withdrawn by the accused using the stolen ATM cards from ATMs at Lonavala, Mumbai and Panvel.
