Gurpreet Singh 'paid man to disguise himself as postman or construction worker to murder wife'

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest Black Country news straight to your inbox

A wealthy businessman paid a man to disguise himself as a postman or a construction worker to murder his first wife, a court has heard.

Gurpreet Singh is alleged to have paid Heera Singh Uppal £2,000 as an advance payment, which the 27-year-old spent on "an iPhone and some clothes".

Birmingham Crown Court also heard that 43-year-old Singh transferred 46,000 rupees (about £500) to Uppal after he threatened to tell police about Singh's plans to murder his first wife, Amandeep Kaur, who is now dead.

The two men allegedly met in a barbershop to discuss ways to get away with killing Ms Kaur, which included staging a robbery.

Mr Uppal told the court Singh wanted her dead so he could marry his student girlfriend instead.

Singh, who has two children from his first marriage, denies soliciting the murder of Ms Kaur by offering money to Mr Uppal between July and December 2013.

The concrete company boss is also alleged to have killed his second wife, Sarbjit Kaur, on February 16 last year, with the assistance of an "unknown accomplice".

She was found strangled in a sewing room at the couple's home in Rookery Lane, Wolverhampton.

Speaking about his first meeting with Singh, Mr Uppal told the court: "He said he wanted to talk to me about something very important.

"He said, 'Don't tell anybody, I want this conversation to remain between us two'.

"He paused for a couple of seconds and he said, 'Whatever I'm going to ask you, will you definitely do it?'

"I said, 'Yes, just tell me what it is about'.

"He said... 'I want to have my wife done'."

Mr Uppal told the jury Singh offered him £20,000 in instalments to kill his wife.

Being questioned by prosecutor David Mason QC, he said of the first instalment: "He took it out of the glove compartment and gave me the £2,000."

Mr Mason asked him: "You said £20,000 was mentioned, what was it for?"

Mr Uppal replied: "To murder his wife.

"He was supposed to pay me £10,000 once his wife was murdered and £10,000 he would arrange to send to India.

The witness told the court he agreed to murder Singh's first wife but, when asked if he intended to carry out the murder, he replied: "No. There was no intention to carry out any murder.

"My thought was whatever the maximum money I can get out of him, I will."

Asked if he had spent the £2,000 he was allegedly given by Singh, Mr Uppal said: "I spent it all. I bought an iPhone and I bought some clothes."

Addressing why Singh might want his wife dead, Mr Uppal said: "I asked him what the reason was and he said, 'I want to marry again, she's not good for me'.

"He did say he wanted to marry again and he said that he had found someone. He said, 'She's my girlfriend and she's a student'."

Answering questions about the plans they made, Mr Uppal said: "The first plan was that we would go to his house and I would open the door and say that I have come to collect some construction equipment and then I would carry out the instructions."

Mr Uppal said the plan had been to kill Ms Kaur with "a big knife, like a sword".

Explaining the second alleged plan, Mr Uppal claimed Singh said he needed to "become a parcel man and go and deliver a parcel".

"The plan was that I bought the gear, I would have the cap and a red bag like a proper parcel delivery guy.

"The plan was I would ask for a glass of water and then when her back was turned I would carry out the instructions. I would murder her."

On a third plan, Mr Uppal said: "He told me where the money would be and where the jewellery would be and told me to make it look like a robbery.

"He said, 'When you get out just get changed and the police wouldn't be able to recognise you'."

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

Mr Uppal told the jury Singh sent him 46,000 rupees after he had returned to India.

He said: "My friends basically told me I could get more money out of him.

"I told him I would go to a local police station out here and tell them what you have done. He said he would give me the money."

The trial continues.
