PhD scholar among two dozen arrested in IOK

SRINAGAR (APP): In occupied Kashmir, Indian police in a massive crackdown arrested more than two dozen people including a PhD scholar in overnight raids in different areas of South Kashmir.

The forces surrounded a cluster of houses in Murran area of Pulwama and detained twenty-one people. The youth were arrested on the charge of stone pelting. Five persons were arrested in Tral and other areas of South Kashmir on the fake charge of an attack on a Central Reserve Police Force convoy on Jammu-Srinagar highway, last month.

The detained PhD scholar was identified as, Hilal Ahmad. Police also submitted a charge-sheet against nine youth in connection with a fake case registered in July last year. The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, in a statement in Srinagar, today, condemned the nocturnal raids and arrest of over two dozen youth by Indian forces in South Kashmir.

The Indian authorities, today, shifted as many as 22 detainees from Srinagar central jail to jails in Baramulla and Kupwara.

Meanwhile, the Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani, was admitted to Soura Institute of Medical Sciences in Srinagar after he complained of abdominal pain, today.

The doctors at the hospital conducted several tests, which confirmed intestinal infection. The APHC has appealed to the people to pray for speedy recovery of the ailing octogenarian leader.

The APHC in a statement issued in Srinagar, today, strongly condemned the dastardly acts of the Indian authorities to strangulate the already ailing economy of Jammu and Kashmir by blocking Srinagar-Jammu highway for civilian traffic. The APHC said the long queues of trucks loaded with fresh fruits, vegetables and livestock as a result of highway blockade had left the Kashmiri business fraternity, high and dry. An APHC team visited the Parimpore Fruit Mandi, Srinagar, to express solidarity with the affected traders and fruit growers.

A delegation of Hurriyat leaders led by the Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Muslim Conference, Shabbir Ahmad Dar, visited the residence of illegally detained Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front Chief, Muhammad Yasin Malik, in Srinagar, today. The delegation expressed solidarity with the family members of the freedom leader.

On the other hand, in utter frustration to New Delhi, no one voted in, at least, 60 villages in the poll-bound areas of Kulgam district during the fourth phase of sham Indian parliamentary elections on Islamabad’s Lok Sabha seat, the other day.

Traders associated with the business across the Line of Control in Kashmir submitted a memorandum to the UN Observer Office in Muzaffarabad demanding of the world body to play its role for resumption of the suspended trade across the LoC.
