IPL 2019: Ganguly impressed with fearless attitude of Delhi ...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





IPL 2019: Ganguly impressed with fearless attitude of Delhi Capitals

30 Apr 2019

As Delhi Capitals (DC) ended a seven-year-long wait to earn a play-offs berth, batting consultant Sourav Ganguly was all praise for the side's bold and fearless approach in the ongoing 12th edition of the Indian Premier League (IPL).

Dada feels that the team has the right balance, which was missing for all these years.

Here is what Ganguly said about DC.

Youngsters have come together for DC this season

Young guns

DC have a strong squad at their disposal and the presence of several promising youngsters has aided the team.

Players like Rishabh Pant, Shreyas Iyer and Prithvi Shaw have played their roles to help Delhi perform this season.

Although most of the Indian young players in the side lack enough international experience, Ganguly feels that it is not an issue for them.

'We have the right mix of youth and experience'

Fact

"There is no such word called inexperience in this team. We have the right mix of youth and experience. It is also a huge boost to get an experienced player like Shikhar coming out and batting with so much confidence," Ganguly told Times of India.

Ganguly backs the core team

Core team

Ganguly further stated that deciding to stick with the core team has really helped the side.

He also said that players like Iyer, Pant and Shaw have gained enough experience.

"Right after losing the Kings XI Punjab match, Capitals didn't react in panic by chopping and changing the team. They persisted with the players and this team is really making us proud," he stated.

Ganguly heaps praise on Rabada and Axar

Praise

Ganguly also went on to praise consistent performers Kagiso Rabada and Axar Patel.

Purple Cap holder Rabada has revolutionized Delhi's pace department with his sheer consistency.

Axar has stood tall as an all-rounder.

"The bowlers are doing excellent work. Rabada has been outstanding, so too the other fast bowlers. Axar Patel too has contributed in all departments," he concluded.

Delhi need to play in the same vein: Our take

What's next?

Now that Delhi have sealed the play-offs spot, they will be eager to continue in the same vein and eye the top two positions on the table.

Following the league stage, things would get even tougher for Delhi.

It's key for DC to play with the same consistency and intensity to make it to the final for the first time ever.
