Akshay Kumar, Twinkle Khanna, Bobby Deol and more show up at Blank special screening - see pics

Karan Kapadia's Blank get screened in Mumbai today | Photo Credit: Instagram

Actor turned author Twinkle Khanna's brother Karan Kapadia is all set to step into the film industry with the upcoming film Blank. The movie will also star Sunny Deol in a pivotal role and fans have been waiting with bated breath to witness the actor's on-screen performance. Today the screening of the upcoming film was held in Mumbai and several celebrities including Twinkle, Akshay Kumar, Dimple Kapadia, Tusshar Kapoor, Bobby Deol, and Jackie Shroff were amongst some who were spotted at the red carpet.

In the photos that surfaced on the internet, while Karan was seen wearing a black T-Shirt and pants, his aunt Dimple was spotted in an off-white and golden saree. Twinkle wore a monochrome printed shirt and high waist midi skirt. On the other hand, Akshay was seen wearing an all-black shirt-pant outfit. Take a look at the photos from the screening below:

Meanwhile, Akshay and Twinkle promoted their cousin's film by sharing a hilarious video on their social media account. Urging fans to watch Karan's film, Akshay shared the video with a caption that read, "Wishing the best of the best wishes to my dear @karankapadiaofficial for @blankthefilm, break a leg, And you guys don’t forget to catch it in cinemas this 3rd of May. Go #Blank!" Take a look at the videos below:

The makers of the film dropped the track Ali Ali from Blank recently and in it, both Akshay and his cousin are seen sporting intense look. Composed by Arko, the song is sung by B Praak and Arko, while the lyrics are penned down by Arko and Adeip Singh. Akshay shared the video along with a caption that read, "The message is loud, and clear to the supreme being who will save us from all evil in the end. #AliAliFromBlank Song OUT NOW!"

Previously, the Gold actor opened up about Karan's debut film and about the high energy number that the actor shot for. Talking about the same, Akshay was quoted as saying, "Karan has chosen an unconventional route for his debut and I am extremely proud of him. Doing this song is my way of wishing him all the best." Appreciating the newbie, Akshay further added, "The boy had genuine acting skills. I first saw the spark in a short film that he did, which even went to the Cannes Film Festival. With Blank, Karan has gone several notches up in terms of acting and performance."

Directed by Behzad Khambata, the film is slated for a May 3 release this year.

Stay tuned for further updates.


