Accused in killing of Dwarka woman a dog breeder who got into heavy debt

According to police, Meenu Jain (52), wife of a former IAF wing commander who was found murdered at her Dwarka flat on Friday, first met Dixit on an app. (File)

As a dog breeder from Jaipur, Dinesh Dixit (56) found a decent clientele in Delhi, with many willing to pay good money. On the side, he began betting with the same clients, but soon fell into debt.

According to police, Meenu Jain (52), wife of a former IAF wing commander who was found murdered at her Dwarka flat on Friday, first met Dixit on an app. “The two came in touch four months ago… He was after her money,” said a police officer.

On Monday, Dixit was arrested from Jaipur for Jain’s murder, and jewellery and money worth Rs 50 lakh was recovered. During questioning, Dixit told police he first met Jain when he visited Delhi for business around two months ago. “During questioning, Dixit said that on Thursday, he came to Delhi to meet Jain and both went for lunch. Later, at her home, he got her intoxicated. Once she lost consciousness, he gathered all the money and jewellery as well as mobile phones from the house and smothered her with a pillow before fleeing the house,” DCP (Dwarka) Anto Alphonse said.

Dixit hails from Ramgarh in Sikar district, but has been living in Jaipur for a few years. According to locals in Ramgarh, his father is a retired doctor who now runs a private clinic along with Dixit’s son. “The accused has another son who lives with him in Jaipur. He has a few other cases against him as well, including one of forgery and another of attempt to murder. Dixit is known to have spent around four years in jail too,” said Himat Singh, station house officer, Ramgarh police station.

When The Indian Express contacted the accused’s son, he said, “We don’t know anything about the incident but we know my father is innocent.” Dixit got married twice and has five children. “Initially, he worked in the real estate business but soon moved to dog breeding,” said a police officer.

Alphonse said the entry into Jain’s house was “friendly”, and a team led by ACP Rajinder Singh searched various social media accounts of the victim for leads. “We also found that the accused’s vehicle had a fake number plate. The Google map data from the victim’s phone, which the accused had stolen, provided crucial leads and showed him going towards Rajasthan,” an officer said.

According to police, he first crossed Gurgaon, and CCTV footage from toll gates of Kherki Daula was analysed. The suspect’s vehicle was then seen crossing the toll towards Jaipur in the morning. Alphonse said call detail records (CDR) of the victim’s phone were also analysed. Officers eventually conducted a raid in Sikar, where the suspect’s vehicle was registered, but it could not be traced.

Later, using CDR details, police reached Jaipur and arrested Dixit.
