India expects China to yield on Azhar today

India's fingers are crossed as it expects China to finally lift its “Technical Hold” on the process at the United Nations Security Council on Wednesday to sanction terrorist leader Masood Azhar, who is based in Pakistan and has been masterminding attacks in India.

A breakthrough in India's negotiations with China seems imminent and New Delhi expects that Azhar, the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) leader, may come under the full spectrum United Nations' sanctions — asset freeze, travel ban and arms embargo — soon, maybe as early as on Wednesday, sources told the DH.

A spokesperson of the Chinese government's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Geng Shuang, told journalists in Beijing on Tuesday that "positive progress" had been made in the consultations at a committee of the UNSC on the issue of designating Masood Azhar as a terrorist linked to Al Qaeda, Taliban and Islamic State and thus placing him under UN sanctions.

"On the listing of the 1267 Committee, we have stated our position many times. I won’t go into details here. I just want to emphasise that, first, China supports the issue of listing, which should be resolved through political consultation within the framework of the 1267 Committee,” PTI quoted the spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Chinese Government saying in Beijing. “At present, the relevant consultations are under way in the 1267 Committee. And positive progress has been made. Thirdly, we believe in the joint efforts of all parties. This problem can be properly solved.”

The Narendra Modi-led BJP government is likely to get a shot in the arm ahead of the last three of the seven phases of the Lok Sabha elections, if India could finally make China help impose UN sanctions on the JeM chief. Modi has been harping on his government's “achievement” on national security front — particularly in combating cross-border terrorism coming from Pakistan to India — in his speeches at the election rallies across the country.

The opposition Congress, however, has been targeting the government over its "failure" to make Beijing change its policy of shielding terrorists based in Pakistan from UN sanctions — despite the thaw in India-China relations in 2018 and the personal bonhomie between Modi and Chinese President Xi Jinping.

The 1267 committee is a panel set up by the UNSC pursuant to its resolutions numbered 1267 (adopted in 1999), 1989 (adopted in 2011) and 2253 (adopted in 2015). The commttee is mandated to designate individuals, groups, undertakings and entities as the ones linked to the Al Qaeda, Taliban and Islamic State in Iraq and Libya (Da'esh) and impose sanctions on them.

China has been routinely shielding Azhar and other terrorist leaders based in Pakistan from United Nations sanctions, ostensibly to save its “all-weather friend” from embarrassment.

The latest move to bring Azhar under UN sanctions was initiated by three of the five permanent members of the Security Council — United States, United Kingdom and France — after his organisation carried out an attack on the Central Reserve Police Force of India. Over 40 CRPF soldiers were killed in the February 14 attack at Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir, escalating tensions between India and Pakistan.

China, however, blocked the move on March 13 by putting the proposal on “technical hold” — for the fourth time since 2009.

The US, the UK and France, however, of late initiated a fresh move to sanction the JeM chief by circulating a new draft resolution at the UN Security Council itself.
