JRL calls for shutdown on January 21, 25, and 27 in Kashmir parts

Srinagar

Joint Resistance Leadership comprising of Syed Ali Shah Geelani, Mirwaiz Umer Farooq and Muhammad Yasin Malik on Friday has called for a complete shutdown in Lal Chowk, Srinagar, Handwara and Kupwara towns on January 21, 25 and 27 respectively.

The spokesman said that shutdown will be observed at Gaw-Kadal and its adjacent areas on January 21, Handwara town on January 25 and Kupwara on January 27.

“The nation of Kashmir is indebted to martyrs who laid down their lives for freedom and resistance leadership pledges to continue this struggle till the achievement of the sacred goal,” said the spokesman.

“The JRL said that congregational prayers meetings will be also held on January 21 at Gaw-Kadal, and on January 25 and January 27 at Handwara and Kupwara towns respectively,” the spokesman said.

The JRL spokesman said that force on January 21, 1990, opened their guns on peaceful protesters and killed more than 50 innocents within an hour in Gawakadal Srinagar.

“On that fatal day, a crackdown was held at Chota-bazaar, Kani-kadal areas where thousands of men women, children and elderly were subjected to severe torture, torment and humiliation,” they added.

“People from Kursoo Rajbagh to Rawalpora and Kani-kadal to Lal chowk came out on streets against this military crackdown and this people’s protest was showered with bullets near Gaw-Kadal killing many innocents instantly,” said the spokesman.

JRL said that united India during its struggle for freedom against British witnessed only one Jalianwala Bagh massacre but Kashmiris have witnessed dozens of such massacres carried out by Indian forces from 1990.

JRL said that the sole aim of India is to terrorize people of Kashmir through these brutal massacres and put an end to the resistance movement but India failed to do so in past and will fail to do so in future too.

JRL said that in 1990, people of Jammu Kashmir started a people’s revolt against Indian and to crush this people’s resistance, at the orders of Indian political leadership, Indian army and forces started its killing machine and massacred thousands of people in cold blood and this carnage is still going unabated.

JRL said the nation of Kashmir is indebted to martyrs who laid down their lives for freedom and resistance leadership pledges to continue this struggle till the achievement of the sacred goal.

“Days like 21st, 25th and 27th January 1990 remind us of the sacrifices rendered by our dear ones. These are the days for reiteration of our commitment towards the sacred mission and today while recalling these great sacrifices we reiterate our pledge to take forward the task of martyrs till the achievement of the desired goal,” said JRL spokesman in a statement.

“Moreover to honor Gaw-Kadal, Handwara and Kupwara Martyrs, public meetings on local level will also be held at Gaw-Kadal, Handwara and Kupwara in which JRL leaders and activists along with common people will participate and pay homage to great martyrs,” said JRL spokesman in a statement.
