Online App, Friendship, Murder! IPL gambler kills ex-IAF pilot's wife

The murder was discovered by Jain's father and brother at around 7:45 am, after which the police was informed. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: In a recent development in the probe into the death of a former IAF officer's wife in Dwarka has thrown up a shocking revelation. Investigating police team discovered that the victim was murdered by a debt-ridden man from Jaipur whom she befriended on a social media website, police said on Tuesday. The accused was identified as 56-year-old Dinesh Dixit. A 20-member police team was investigating the case and outwitted the accused by tracking his electronic trail.

The victim -- 52-year-old Meenu Jain, was found dead last Thursday in the national capital's Dwarka area. According to a report in the Times of India (TOI), police said that Dixit, a real estate businessman, had met Jain six months ago and had been often driving to Delhi from Jaipur to meet her at the latter's residence. Dixit had created multiple accounts on social media apps to befriend women by posing as a rich businessman.

Reportedly, Deputy Commissioner Police Anto Alphonse told TOI that Dixit was in heavy debt after losing a huge amount in IPL betting. Under pressure to return the amount, he planned to murder and rob Jain.

Reportedly, two weeks ago, Dixit came to know that Jain had kept her jewellery and a lot of cash in her house and he began shaping his plan. During the investigation, he revealed, that he procured a fake number plate from a car accessory shop for his Maruti Swift Dzire. He got it changed before heading to Delhi on Thursday.

He switched off his phone in Jaipur and switched a newly procured number to communicate with Jain. The police added that on Jain's instructions, the security guard of the society let Dixit into the society without noting down his details.

Dixit and Jain went out of the society at around 8:45 pm, as captured on the CCTV footage at around 9:15 pm they returned after buying some snacks from the local market. Later in the night, Dixit got the woman intoxicated and then tried to take the cash and jewellery kept in the house.

At around 2:30 am, the accused smothered the victim and he stayed there in the house till 5:21 am- as per the CCTV footage. The TOI report further mentioned that apart from cash and valuables worth Rs 50 lakh other valuables were also stolen.

The murder was discovered by Jain's father and brother at around 7:45 am, after which the police was informed.
