PA to NCP MLA thrashed by gang led by Sena man

Manchar incident followed spat over Facebook post



The personal assistant of Ambegaon’s Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) MLA, Dilip Walse Patil, was allegedly thrashed at Manchar in Pune district early on Tuesday. The Ambegaon assembly constituency, which falls under Shirur Lok Sabha, witnessed elections on Monday and the post-poll aftermath led to chaos and unrest in Manchar.



The victim, Kaludas Dangat, was thrashed by a group of persons around 1.30 am outside his residence at Mangewadi in Manchar. His wife, who tried to save him, also received minor injuries. Manchar police said Dangat was attacked by a Shiv Sena member who allegedly had a spat with him over a social media post.



Manchar inspector AK Kharade said, “The Shiv Sena member Ravi Varse had shared a post on Facebook on which Dangat’s nephew commented and even abused it. This led to a spat between them. On the face of it, the issue was resolved, but then Varse gathered a few others, formed a group and attacked Dangat leaving him injured.”



After initial treatment at Manchar Hospital, Dangat was shifted to Sassoon General Hospitals, in Pune on Tuesday.



According to the police, the accused and his group allegedly thrashed Dangat with sticks. Dangat tried to escape but the assailants surrounded and gagged him. According to the police, villagers who witnessed the incident said that the accused had arrived with sticks and pipes and pulled Dangat out of his home before beating him up.



Following the incident, Walse Patil tweeted on his official Twitter handle condemning the incident and stated, “…a Shiv Sena member made a life-threatening attack on my PA and his wife. I condemn this act of violence and hatred”.



Patil while speaking to Mirror said, “Dangat’s sister lives in a village close to Manchar. They first went there to attack his nephew and then came to Dangat’s residence. They asked him to come out and started thrashing him severely. The attacker is from Shiv Sena. We got Dangat admitted to Sassoon General Hospitals for necessary tests and treatment.”



When contacted, the Shiv Sena office in Manchar confirmed that Ravi Varse works for the party.



The Manchar police have registered a case of rioting and assault under Section 148 and 323 of the Indian Penal Code.



Superintendent of police (Pune rural) Sandip Patil said, “We are waiting for the injury report after which more sections will be added against the accused. The accused have been identified and will be arrested soon.”


