Dating app, affair, fake number plate: How debt-ridden Jaipur man killed ex-wing commander's wife in Dwarka



Meenu Jain, the 52-year-old wife of a retired Air Force wing commander who was found dead at her Dwarka home last Thursday, had befriended her killer -- a debt-ridden man from Jaipur -- through a social media application, police said on Tuesday after they nabbed the alleged killer and brought him to Delhi.

The police caught the accused, Dinesh Dixit, aged 56, on Monday afternoon. A 20-member police team tracked his electronic trail in order to catch him.

On Friday morning, Meenu Jain, 52, the wife of a former IAF Wing Commander, was found lying unconscious at her house in Dwarka Sector-7.

According to police, Dinesh Dixit, a real estate agent, posed as a rich businessman on his multiple social media accounts to befriend women. He met Meenu Jain six months ago via a dating app and frequently visited Delhi to meet her at her house

DCP Dwarka Anto Alphonse said, "The accused revealed to the police that he met the victim through an app and both of them kept in touch through WhatsApp calls. He revealed that on the day of the murder, he reached the woman's house in the afternoon, both of them had lunch together, after this he got liquor for the woman and got her intoxicated. After the woman was drunk, the accused stole her jewellery and smothered the woman."

Murder planned in advance

DCP Anto Alphonse said the accused was under heavy debt after losing a huge amount of money on IPL betting. He allegedly hatched a plot to rob Jain in order to return money to bookies.

Police further said that Dixit knew that Jain cash and diamond jewellery in her house and started planning to rob her.

During interrogation, he revealed that he had procured a fake number plate from a car accessory shop for his Maruti Swift Dzire. The car, which is registered under his son's name, had a registration number RJ-14YC-2774. He got it changed to DL-07AW-8973 before heading to Delhi on Thursday noon, as reported by the Times of India.

What happened on April 26

On reaching Delhi, Dixit switched off his phone and took a new phone to communicate with Jain. When he reached the Air Force Naval Officer Enclave in Dwarka's sector 7 at 2.20pm, he avoided getting his details noted down at the main gate by calling up Jain.

Police said that the security guard let Dixit into the society without noting down his details, on Jain's instructions.

According to the details fetched, Dixit and Jain went out of the society at 8.45 pm as and the movement was recorded in the CCTV camera. The duo returned at 9.15pm after buying some snacks from the local market.

Later in the night, Dixit got Jain intoxicated and tried to take the cash and jewellery kept in the house.

When Jain resisted, Dixit allegedly smothered her with towels and pillow in her bedroom around 2.30am. Dixit left the house at 5:21 am, CCTV footage showed. He took away cash and valuables worth Rs 50 lakh, along with Jain's two mobile phones with him after switching them off.

Jain's father and brother discovered the alleged murder around 7.45am when they came to check on her.

"The victim was shifted to Ayushman Hospital situated in Sector-10 of Dwarka where she was declared brought dead," said Anto Alphonse, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka).

How the killer was caught

A special team was formed under ACP Rajender Singh to probe the case. After the team spotted the Dixit's car in the CCTV footage, they found out that the number was fake.

They then checked footage of the adjoining roads and toll plazas, after which an electronic route was prepared and the police spotted the car at tolls at Kherki Daula and Shahjahanpur which indicated that the suspect headed towards Jaipur.

"Through the location of the Google Maps and the CCTV located in the society, it was found that the accused's car had gone to Jaipur," DCP Dwarka said.

The police investigated the social media accounts of Dixit and his phone details to nab him.

The police then reached Sikar where Dixit's family lived, which led them to his house. On reaching his house, the police spotted the same car.

"The robbed money has been recovered and Dixit is being interrogated in police remand," DCP Dwarka added.

(With inputs from Arvind Kumar Ojha)

ALSO READ: Teen raped, dumped in well, body leads to series of chilling murders in Telangana village

ALSO WATCH: List of horrific incidents that prove how unsafe schools are for your children in India
