Saand Ki Aankh: Taapsee Pannu, Bhumi Pednekar get emotional as they wrap shoot, Chandro Tomar showers blessings

Bollywood actors Taapsee Pannu and Bhumi Pednekar, who play the roles of elderly shooters in the film, got emotional as they wrapped up the shooting of Anurag Kashyap’s production Saand Ki Aankh. The duo also shared pictures from their last day on the sets in Uttar Pradesh. Directed by Tushar Hiranandani, the film is based on the lives of India’s oldest woman shooters and sisters-in-law, Chandro Tomar and Prakashi Tomar.

Also read: Mahesh Bhatt refuses to comment on Kangana Ranaut-Alia Bhatt row, calls Manikarnika actor a ‘bachchi’

Bhumi got quite emotional as she shared pictures from her last day on sets. “Some goodbyes are so tough #saandkiaankh,” she wrote alongside a pic where she and Taapsee are hugging a crew member. The post attracted comment from Chandro Tomar, the character Bhumi essays onscreen. “Really, really tough, thara sab bhala ho (May you be blessed),” she commented.

She also shared a video of the entire crew. “It’s a wrap #saandkiaankh Thank you all for making this journey so special,am going to miss each and everyone one of you so much,my #saandkiaankh family,” she wrote.

Taapsee shared a group photo of the crew and wrote, “I firmly believe it was the magical energies of so many and more that made this nearly impossible goal hit the ‘bulls-eye’. 50 days of holding hands and walking through, they truly helped the ‘Saand’ to navigate in the right direction. Cheers to these rockstars of #SaandKiAankh We are coming to celebrate DIWALI with you all ”

Taapsee and Bhumi shot for the film in Baghpat, Uttar Pradesh and constantly shared candid pictures from the sets of the film. They can be seen making a heart symbol with their hands while wielding pistols in their other hand in one of the pictures. They are riding a tractor and making cowdung cakes in other pics.

Saand Ki Aankh also stars Prakash Jha and Vineet Kumar Singh in important roles.

Follow @htshowbiz for more
