Fortune-teller crushes infant girl's head with stone, rapes and murders her gypsy mother

Police officials claim that the accused was drunk at the time of the incident (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Chennai: In a bone-chilling incident which has come to light from Avadi in Tamil Nadu where a 19-year-old man reportedly murdered a woman and her infant daughter by crushing their heads with a stone. Officials with the Chennai police told media outlets that the brutal murders took place at a Narikurava settlement at Avadi on Tuesday night.

Identified as 19-year-old Veerakumar, the accused is a soothsayer who made a living by predicting the future of his customers. According to a report by Times of India, the accused entered the woman's tent while drunk and killed her three-year-old daughter. He then raped the woman, who was a gypsy, and crushed her head with a stone as he did with her daughter.

The murders came to light on Wednesday morning following which police officials made inquiries and managed to nab the accused on the very same day. The woman was living at her mother's place after her husband left for Puducherry to sell beads on Monday, law enforcement personnel familiar with the matter told the national daily.

One of the victim's neighbours remembers seeing the accused soothsayer near her tent at 2 am on the night of the murder. In fact, the neighbour told police officials that he asked the accused to go home since he seemed drunk, however, the accused did not pay heed to his advice and slept in front of the victim's tent. Veerakumar is currently in police custody awaiting trial on charges of rape and murder. He has been charged with relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Covered with ants, newborn baby girl found abandoned in the bushes in Bengaluru
