The week in social media | Chatter

Damned If You Do...

After domestic airline Vistara tweeted a picture, with a suitably sycophantic accompanying message, of two of its staff beaming alongside retired Indian army officer G.D. Bakshi, it was inundated with complaints about its celebration of a bigot’. Bakshi, a major-general, had a decorated army career, which he has followed with a career of bellicose and, yes, often bigoted opining in television news studios.

Vistara took the offending picture down, provoking even greater outrage. Spineless, howled right-wing users. We do not want our platform to be disrespectful or hurtful to anyone, explained the airline, rather missing the point of Twitter. But it has since posted another picture of executives paying Bakshi a grovelling personal visit. Clearly, more right-wingers buy airplane tickets than, as one erudite example of the Twitterati put it, the tukde tukde gang.

Dog Whistle

Politics

Supporters of Sadhvi Pragya, including the PM, insist she has been wronged

. They say she was tortured in custody, no matter that both the Supreme Court and the National Human Rights Commission said her allegations were unsubstantiated. They say she was acquitted of involvement in the Malegaon blasts, no matter that she hasn’t been.

They say she, like any other free citizen, has the right to stand for elections, no matter that she is not an Independent but has the vocal and financial backing of the BJP. Is it the BJP’s position, then, that accused terrorists, whatever their religious background, should be allowed to sit in Parliament, so long as their guilt hasn’t been proven? Sadhvi Pragya’s contribution to this election has been to claim that she cursed an investigating police officer, a national martyr, and was thus responsible’ for his death.

She apologised after the Election Commission sent her a notice. Bhopal, where the BJP is fielding her in a seat it has retained since 1989, goes to polls on May 12. Over a quarter of Sadhvi Pragya’s constituents, should she win, will be Muslim.

On social media, her supporters say the Congress has done the same with those, including Digvijaya Singh, Pragya’s opponent in Bhopal, accused of participating in the organised murders of Sikhs in 1984 as revenge for the assassination of Indira Gandhi. It’s such a morally vacuous argument. When will alleged adults stop resorting to they did it first and tit for tat?
