Mumbai: Married woman confronts cheating lover; found dead at her residence

The deceased was allegedly having an extra-marital affair with one of her co-workers (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A man who was suspected of murdering his lover was detained by the police two days after the incident. The deceased was found dead at her residence in Virar. The throat of the 27-year-old was slit when she was found.

The body of the deceased was discovered by her husband. The incident took place at Vaishnavi Apartments situated in Sainath Nagar. Investigation revealed that the accused did not forcefully enter the house of the deceased. The deceased was allegedly having an extra-marital affair with one of her co-workers. The accused allegedly confessed to his crime.

The accused and the deceased used to work at a jewellery factory in Borivli. The deceased had recently found out that the accused was having an affair with another woman. The other woman allegedly works at the same jewellery factory.

According to the Times of India's report, the deceased allegedly asked her lover to come to her house and confronted him while her husband was away at work. The accused allegedly confessed to having an affair.

Following this, the deceased allegedly slapped the accused. In a fit of rage, the accused allegedly slit the throat of the deceased with a knife. The accused then left the flat and took the knife with him. The accused has not been arrested yet.

In a similar incident, a woman was allegedly murdered by her lover in Hyderabad. The woman who had gone missing a week ago was found stuffed in a suitcase. The suitcase was recovered from a drain. The accused and the deceased were classmates in college.

The accused allegedly murdered the deceased because she constantly used to ask him to marry her. The accused allegedly convinced the deceased's parents into believing that the two of them were going to Muscat for an interview, the accused took the deceased to a lodge from the airport. The accused was booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).
