15 security personnel killed in IED blast in Gadchiroli

Home >> Mumbai 15 security personnel killed in IED blast in Gadchiroli

The blast took place when the jawans were out on an operation. Just when the two vehicles of the security forces were passing through the Dadapur Road towards Korchi, located about 250 km from Nagpur, the Maoists triggered the blast.

Nagpur: At least 15 security personnel of C-60, an anti-Maoist squad of Gadchiroli police, were killed in an improvised explosive device (IED) explosion in Maharashtra`s Gadchiroli district on Wednesday.



The blast took place when the jawans were out on an operation. Just when the two vehicles of the security forces were passing through the Dadapur Road towards Korchi, located about 250 km from Nagpur, the Maoists triggered the blast.



Earlier in the day, Maoists torched at least 25 vehicles of a road construction company in Gadchiroli police, police officials said.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi condemned the attack on security personnel. “Strongly condemn the despicable attack on our security personnel in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra. I salute all the brave personnel. Their sacrifices will never be forgotten. My thoughts & solidarity are with the bereaved families. The perpetrators of such violence will not be spared,” PM Modi tweeted.

Strongly condemn the despicable attack on our security personnel in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra. I salute all the brave personnel. Their sacrifices will never be forgotten. My thoughts & solidarity are with the bereaved families. The perpetrators of such violence will not be spared. — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 1, 2019



"Anguished to know that our 16 police personnel from Gadchiroli C-60 force got martyred in a cowardly attack by naxals today. My thoughts and prayers are with the martyrs’ families. I’m in touch with DGP and Gadchiroli SP", Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis tweeted.

Anguished to know that our 16 police personnel from Gadchiroli C-60 force got martyred in a cowardly attack by naxals today.

My thoughts and prayers are with the martyrs families.

Im in touch with DGP and Gadchiroli SP.#Gadchiroli — Chowkidar Devendra Fadnavis (@Dev_Fadnavis) May 1, 2019
