Maharashtra: 15 commandos, one civilian dead as naxals blow up police vehicle in Gadchiroli

Strongly condemn the despicable attack on our security personnel in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra. I salute all the brave personnel. Their sacrifices will never be forgotten. My thoughts & solidarity are with the bereaved families. The perpetrators of such violence will not be spared. — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 1, 2019

Anguished to know that our 16 police personnel from Gadchiroli C-60 force got martyred in a cowardly attack by naxals today. My thoughts and prayers are with the martyrs’ families. I’m in touch with DGP and Gadchiroli SP.#Gadchiroli — Chowkidar Devendra Fadnavis (@Dev_Fadnavis) May 1, 2019

Attack on Maharashtra Police personnel in Gadchiroli is an act of cowardice and desperation. We are extremely proud of the valour of our police personnel. Their supreme sacrifice while serving the nation will not go in vain. My deepest condolences to their families. 1/2 — Chowkidar Rajnath Singh (@rajnathsingh) May 1, 2019

In Maharashtra's Gadchiroli, 15 security personnel from C-60 force and a civilian lost their lives in an improvised explosive device (IED) blast triggered by Naxals on their vehicle on Wednesday. Those killed were members of the Quick Response Team (QRT) of Gadchiroli police, which was on way to inspect a fleet of torched vehicles belonging to a road construction contractor. As per initial reports, Maharashtra police van attacked when the state police personnel were on their way to a road construction site. The Naxals had burnt two dozen bulldozer vehicles that were deployed for construction works. The blast took place between Jamborkheda and Lendhari, according to local police. Gadchiroli district is an administrative district in Maharashtra, India. The town of Gadchiroli is the administrative headquarters of the district. On April 11, an encounter broke out between CRPF personnel and Naxals in the Naxal affected district of Gadchiroli. In January this year, Naxals set ablaze vehicles in the villages of Kurkheda, Korchi and Potegaon here.Condemning the attack in strong words, Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted: "Strongly condemn the despicable attack on our security personnel in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra. I salute all the brave personnel. Their sacrifices will never be forgotten. My thoughts & solidarity are with the bereaved families. The perpetrators of such violence will not be spared."Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis condemned the attack in a tweet.Maharashtra Finance Minister Sudhir Mungantiwar told the media that it is "a massive tragedy" coming on the day when the entire state is celebrating Maharashtra Day.(This is a developing story. More details are awaited)
