'He will be behind bars till his last breath', says slain journalist's daughter about Dera chief Ram Rahim

Convicted DSS chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Panchkula: A day after self-styled godman, Dera Sacha Sauda chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of a journalist, the victim's family told media outlets that they are satisfied with the quantum of punishment awarded by the court. The 51-year-old sect leader was convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment by a special CBI court along with three of Dera's followers who are the co-accused in the case.

Shreyasi Chhatrapati, the daughter of deceased journalist Ram Chander Chhatrapati who was shot dead by the accused outside his home in Haryana's Sirsa in 2002, told news agency PTI that her family is content with the verdict. She adds that the family was demanding capital punishment but a lifetime in prison is no less than a death sentence. "He will be behind bars till his last breath," said Shreyasi.

(CBI Advocate HPS Verma interacting with media after quantum of punishment was awarded in the Chhatrapati murder case)

In its chargesheet against Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh, Kuldeep Singh, Nirmal Singh, and Krishan Lal, the CBI claimed that the sect chief gave the order to kill Chhatrapati which was executed by Nirmal and Kuldeep who were carpenters with the Dera. They were handed a walkie-talkie and a gun which belonged to Krishan Lal and directed to shoot the journalist. After he was shot at on October 22, 2002, Chhatrapati was shifted to Apollo hospital in Delhi where he breathed his last on November 22, 2002.

(Anshul Chhatrapati, the slain journalist's son walks out of the Panchkula court after the quantum of punishment was awarded)

According to reports, Chhatrapati was shot because he published an anonymous letter in his regional evening daily 'Poora Sach'. The letter highlighted the plight of sadhvis who accused the Dera chief of sexual exploitation. The Punjab and Haryana High Court took cognizance of Chhatrapati's publication and launched an inquiry into the matter a month before he was shot. The main accused, Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh was convicted of raping two of his female disciples and sentenced to 20 years in prison by a court in August of 2017.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: CBI lodges FIRs against eight children's homes across Bihar over allegations of harassment, assault
