Naxal attack not due to intelligence failure: Maharashtra DGP

Mumbai: Maharashtra DGP Police Subodh Kumar Jaiswal said Wednesday that the Naxal attack in Gadchiroli in which 15 police personnel were killed was not a result of intelligence failure. Terming it a ‘big loss’ for the force Jaiswal said that police ‘were ready to give a befitting reply to the Naxals’.

“I cannot call this an intelligence failure… The Maharashtra police will take whatever action needed against such activities. It is a big loss for Maharashtra police,” Jaiswal told reporters.

Meanwhile Prime Minister Narendra Modi as well as Congress chief Rahul strongly condemned the Naxal attack. Modi asserted that perpetrators of such violence will not be spared. “Strongly condemn the despicable attack on our security personnel in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra. I salute all the brave personnel. Their sacrifices will never be forgotten,” Modi tweeted.

Rahul also expressed his deepest condolences with the families of those killed in the attack. “I am saddened to hear about the attack on security personnel in Gadchiroli district in Maharashtra,” Rahul said on Twitter. “I express my deepest condolences to the families of those who have lost their lives,” he added.

The Congress however, blame the BJP-led government for the attack stating that it had not learnt from the Pulwama incident.

“Once again terrorists have targeted the convoys of our jawans. Clearly despite their tall talk no lessons from Pulwama have been learnt. It is a wake-up call for state and central governments,” senior Congress leader Ahmed Patel said

Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis meanwhile condemned the attack in Gadchiroli. He asserted that the Naxal menace will be fought with stronger efforts.

“Anguished to know that our 16 police personnel from Gadchiroli C-60 force got martyred in a cowardly attack by Naxals today. My thoughts and prayers are with the martyrs’ families. I am in touch with the DGP and the Gadchiroli SP,” Fadnavis said in a statement. “I strongly condemn this attack and we will fight this menace with even stronger efforts,” the Chief Minister added.
