Central India to witness relief from heat wave for next three to four days, courtesy Cyclone Fani

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

Severe heat wave conditions were seen over parts of Vidarbha and heat wave over Marathwada, Madhya Pradesh and isolated pockets of Rajasthan. These heat wave conditions occurred due to continuous flow of hot and dry winds blowing from the west/northwest direction. These winds were travelling from Sindh province of Pakistan and desert of Rajasthan, which are already battling with extremely hot weather conditions. Thus, the temperatures over Central India kept rising.

Moreover, April 18 onward, the weather over entire northwest and Central India has remained dry. Earlier, the parts of Gujarat were also reeling under the heat wave conditions but due to commencement of westerly winds from the Arabian Sea, heat wave abated from Gujarat. Now in the past 24 hours, these westerly winds are covering the parts of West Madhya Pradesh as well as of Madhya Maharashtra, Vidarbha and Marathwada. Thus, leading to drop in temperatures over these areas.

The experts have to say that there are chances that heatwave might abate from many parts of Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and as well as from Rajasthan. While, the isolated pockets of Madhya Pradesh and Vidarbha might continue to witness heat wave conditions. Despite drop in temperature, weather would still be very hot as temperatures are not expected to drop below 40 degrees over many parts.

Due to change in wind direction to westerlies/north westerlies, heat wave is expected to make a comeback around May 6 or 7. The effect of Extremely Severe Cyclone Fani would also be felt over many parts of Central India, particularly in Marathwada, Madhya Pradesh, Vidarbha and Chhattisgarh from May 2 onwards.

According to weathermen, such strong systems govern the wind pattern of the areas spanning hundreds of kilometers away. Similarly, as the cyclonic storm Fani comes closer to North Andhra Pradesh coast by May 2, we would see clouds covering parts of Maharashtra and adjoining parts of Madhya Pradesh as well.

Whereas parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and West Madhya Pradesh would be under the impact of south-westerlies. Thus, we can say that the temperatures would be somewhere near normal or a degree or two above normal for the coming three to four days. Till May 5, the impact of heat wave would be minimal.

Image Credit: Christian Today

Please Note: Any information picked from here must be attributed to skymetweather.com
