5 Pak soldiers killed in retaliatory action: Gen Ranbir

5 Pak soldiers killed in retaliatory action: Gen Ranbir

POONCH, Jan 17: Northern Commander Lt Gen Ranbir Singh Thursday stated that the army killed five Pakistani soldiers in the last few days in a retaliatory action, thus displaying its resolve to give a “befitting reply”, if compelled by the enemy.

He also described ‘2018’ as “a remarkable year for the army” as over 250 militants were killed and 54 others were caught alive.

“India did not initiate fire as it believed in peace yet once compelled it would always give befitting reply and it does every time,” Lt Gen Ranbir Singh stated while addressing the media after inaugurating the Kalai bridge in Poonch district. He stated that the army retaliation led to infrastructure damage on the other side of the border.

With regard to ceasefire violations by Pakistan and plantation of IEDs along LoC, he said, “Army gives the toughest message to Pakistan. Since last night, five Pakistani soldiers have been killed and a large number of infrastructure has been damaged in the retaliation by the Indian army in Rajouri and Poonch sector. As per wireless and other intercepts, Pakistani army and militants suffered huge losses in our retaliatory actions.”

He said that security forces met considerable success in anti-militancy operations in Jammu and Kashmir in 2018 by eliminating several top ultras who were targetting security forces and civilians. He said the number of terrorists killed last year in the valley was highest in the past 10 years.

Replying to questions regarding the security situation in the valley in the backdrop of the ‘Operation All Out’,. He said, “From the security point of view, 2018 has been a best year for the forces. More than 250 terrorists were killed, nearly 54 arrested and four surrendered. According to the records available for the past 10 years, army along with other armed forces have killed highest number of militants and captured many of them alive, while a number of them surrendered under pressure.” This projected the capability of the Indian security forces and their effective operations, he added.

Northern Commander even gave a stern warning to neighbouring country to stop the ceasefire violations and cross-border terrorism or that it would continue to face losses. “The adversary is abetting infiltration taking advantage of dense fog and dark nights, violating ceasefire to facilitate infiltration. But our troops are well trained and equipped to take on adversaries and they are foiling infiltration bids,” he said.

He claimed the Indian army was a step ahead of its adversary. “The Indian army is a step ahead of Pakistan army, if they commit wrong acts, we will give it back to them in the same way,” he said.

He said, “In last few years Pak army is planting IED in our area to inflict damages to our side yet we’ve prepared a strategy to counter its move and we’ve equipped all units with latest gadgets and equipments to handle this situation. Sometime the IEDs explode and cause casualties but our endeavour is to remain vigilant along the border.”
