Bhavnagar Election Results 2019: BJP's Dhirubhai Shiyal wins, turns Bhavnagar MP defeating Congress

Representative Image | Photo Credit: Facebook

Vote counting in the constituency of Bhavnagar has stopped and Bhartiya Janata Party's candidate Dr Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal emerges as the winner against Congress' candidate Patel Manharbhai Nagjibhai. Till now, the winning candidate is winning by a margin of 3,26,031 votes.

Bhavnagar election result 2019 as it happened:

Bhavnagar election result@ 02:55 pm: With the counting still in progress, the winning party seems to be in favour of Bhartiya Janata Party. The leading candidate is Dr Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal who is winning by a hefty margin of 3,16,689 votes. Shiyal is contesting against Patel Manharbhai Nagjibhai of Congress. If this streak continues, this will be Shiyal's yet another win after the 2014 general elections.

Bhavnagar election result@ 12:30 pm: Dr Bharatiben Dhirubhai Shiyal from Bhartiya Janata Party is leading the constituency by a margin of 1,51,326 votes. If the BJP candidate continues his winning streak, the politician will win yet again after the last 2014 elections. In the trailing streak is Congress' Patel Manharbhai Nagjibhai. In 2014, Shiyal was the winning candidate too with 2,95,488 votes.

The Bhavnagar Lok Sabha constituency is one of the 26 parliamentary constituencies of Gujarat. The constituency went to the polls in the third phase of the Lok Sabha elections on April 23. Manharbhai Nagjibhai Patel of the Congress is fielding against Bharatiben Shiyal of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Ramabhai Makadiya of the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP).

The Bhavnagar Lok Sabha constituency is divided into seven Vidhan Sabha segments, of which one is reserved for the Scheduled Caste category candidates.

Bharti Shiyal, who was the sitting member of Parliament, had been the member of Gujarat Legislative Assembly in 2012 from Talaja in Bhavnagar district. Shiyal is an Ayurvedic practitioner.

In the 2014 Lok Sabha elections, Bhartiben Shiyal of the BJP contested against Rathod Pravinbhai Jinabhai of the Congress by a margin of 2,95,488 or 32.2 per cent. The constituency witnessed a voter turnout of 57.5 per cent.

The economy of the constituency is largely dependent on salt production. It is the largest salt producer with over 35k tons of salt produced annually. Several small scale industries, as well as agricultural practices, also contribute a lot in economic development.

Gujarat has always been a prestige battle for the BJP. The Saurashtra has always been an important electoral battleground for the BJP. After being cut down the size in the assembly elections in 2017, the BJP aims to regain control of the region whereas the Congress would be the talk of the town to repeat its performance. A lot is dependent on Amit Shah as PM Narendra Modi had stepped down from the Vadodara seat.
