Masood Azhar now a 'global terrorist': Syed Akbaruddin says 'efforts paid off'

India's Ambassador to the UN Syed Akbaruddin | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Moments after the United Nations designated Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist after China lifted its hold on a proposal to blacklist him, India's Ambassador to the UN Syed Akbaruddin on Wednesday said the efforts finally paid off.

Talking to Times Now regarding India's big diplomatic victory, Akbaruddin thanked the US, the UK and France.

"Initial efforts started in 2009, we did not achieve success then. In the last few years, we had been persistent, we had been diligent in pursuant to this goal. And today, our efforts paid the dividend and Masood Azhar stands designated as a global terrorist."

When asked if a lot of pressure had been put by the Modi government on some of the P5 nations, Akbaruddin said that it is correct that India has made a lot of efforts....They were diligent, coordinated through our capital."

EXCLUSIVE: India's Envoy at UNSC Syed Akbaruddin confirms Masood Azhar to be blacklisted as global terrorist. Listen in. | #ModiCornersMasood pic.twitter.com/F6UEkKqzce — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) May 1, 2019

Syed Akbaruddin,India’s Ambassador to UN on Masood Azhar designated as global terrorist: Grateful to many countries who supported us i.e. the USA, UK and France and also several others in the council & outside the council;Would like to thank permanent representative of Indonesia pic.twitter.com/wIug0Hf779 — ANI (@ANI) May 1, 2019

With hashtag 'zero tolerance for terrorism', Akbaruddin, tweeted: "Big,small, all join together. Masood Azhar designated as a terrorist in @UN Sanctions list. Grateful to all for their support."

Big,small, all join together.



Masood Azhar designated as a terrorist in @UN Sanctions list



Grateful to all for their support. #Zerotolerance4Terrorism — Syed Akbaruddin (@AkbaruddinIndia) May 1, 2019

Azhar will now face a travel ban, an assets freeze, and an arms embargo.

France, the UK and the US had in February moved the proposal in the UNSC's 1267 Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee, just days after the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama carried out by Pakistan-based terror outfit JeM. China had removed its hold on the proposal at that time.
