CRPF touched by beautiful cards sent by Mumbai students

CRPF personnel posted in Jammu and Kashmir have received a special gift. And they are touched.

The students of a Mumbai school have sent the Central Reserve Police Force personnel beautiful cards made by them, expressing solidarity and sincere gratitude to the jawans.

A letter from the principal of Friends Academy in Mulund (West) highlighted the confidence of the nation in the world's largest paramilitary force in the aftermath of the Pulwama terrorist attack, CRPF Public Relations Officer in Jammu Ashish Kumar Jha said.

Forty CRPF personnel died in the February 14 attack by a Pakistan-based group.

The principal said tragic incidents such as Mumbai in 2008 and Pulwama this year disturbed them and they are worried about the troops' safety.

"They (the students) admire and aspire for virtues like commitment, resilience and courage," she wrote in the letter, adding that the troops' families, too, have been their inspiration, who stand tall and unperturbed during all times.

"A soldier who leaves his family behind to safeguard our nation is the true example of selfless service and excellence," the principal said.

Some of the messages on the cards, which also carry the images of the tricolour and the map of the nation, read, "And we know that you will protest us", "They aim to save", "Thank you soldiers" and "You make the world a better place".

"The letter of the principal and the beautiful cards have touched the hearts of all personnel in the CRPF. The zonal headquarters of CRPF at Jammu has shared the letter and the frame with the Army in Kashmir," Jha said.

Quoting the contents of the letter, he said, "The courage of CRPF men has been a point of discussion among students. The students of the Academy brainstormed and came up with the idea of organizing a fair and giving a part of the proceeds to the families of martyrs.

"The pupils expressed their emotions and gratitude to the CRPF by painting cards. These cards were sent to the Special DG, CRPF, along with the letter, with a request to convey their emotions up to the last man of the force."



Jha said the CRPF's people-friendly approach and humane touch, coupled with professionalism, have made it a force loved and admired across the nation.

"The support of the nation is the strength of this great force that will always keep up its tradition of valour and sacrifice," he said.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
