Rahul promises 33 pc women quota in jobs, Parliament, state

Congress chief Rahul Gandhi Wednesday promised 33 per cent reservation to women in central government jobs, in both houses of Parliament and in state assemblies if his party came to power.

Talking about his party's proposed Nyay minimum income scheme, he also said the money for it will come from people like "Anil, Nirav, Vijay, Mehul...Narendra".

He also slammed Prime Minister Narendra Modi over the national security plank, referring to Wednesday's Naxal attack in Maharashtra which has a BJP-led government.

Addressing a campaign rally at Pipariya in Madhya Pradesh's Hoshangabad Lok Saha seat, he reiterated the promise of minimum income under Nyay (Nyuntam Aay Yojna).

"Don't be angry," he said, addressing the men in the gathering. "(But) The money under Nyay is going to be deposited in the bank accounts of women...Rs 72,000 a year.

"Congress will give 33 per cent reservation to women in jobs of national government. We are also going to introduce 33 per cent quota for women in Lok Sabha, Vidhan Sabha and Rajya Sabha," he added.

The Nyay scheme will remonetise the country's economy which has got "demonetized" because no money is left with people, the Congress president said.

"When people have money in their accounts they will spend it in the market to buy necessary things and that will revive economy. Note-ban demonetised the country's economy...Nyay will remonetise it...people will start buying goods... engine (of economy) will jump-start," Gandhi said.

"Narendra Modi took out its (economy's) diesel and is now showing the keys to start it... how will it start when you have taken out diesel?" he said.

Demontisation rendered lakhs of youths jobless as people have no money to spend and factories stopped production, he said.

The Congress chief also accused the prime minister of spreading lies about funding of the Nyay. "Modi is saying that the middle class would be taxed to arrange money for Nyay. Narendra Modi-ji, you again spoke a lie...Not a single paisa would come from the middle class," he said.

"The money will come instead from the pockets of people like Anil (Ambani), Nirav (Modi), Vijay (Mallya), Mehul (Choksi), Narendra....," he said. As he spoke first names, people chanted last names. When he said Narendra, people said Modi.

"Modi talks about national security, whose government was there when Pulwama attack took place? CRPF jawans were martyred today in Maharashtra, whose government is there?" he asked.

Sixteen persons including 15 policemen were killed in an IED blast carried out by Naxals in Maharashtra Wednesday.

"There are BJP governments in Maharashtra and in Delhi. Why PM does not speak on this?" he asked.

"Prime minister said at Red Fort (during an Independence Day speech) that the elephant was sleeping earlier. He means nothing happened before he became PM.... People have to listen to his Man Ki Baat every ten days. Nobody is interested in listening to your Man Ki Baat. You should listen to Man Ki Baat of people, farmers, labourers, youths, and work on it," he said.

Continuing his 'Chowkidar jibe', he said, "This slogan has now become unstoppable. Whichever way, wherever you say Chowkidar, people reply 'Chor hai, chor hai'."



When Congress government comes to power, no farmer will be sent to jail for not repaying bank loans and no permission will be needed for the youth while running a business in the first three years, he said.

Congress has fielded Diwan Shailendra Singh from Hoshangabad against the BJP's Rao Uday Pratap Singh. Hoshangabad will go to polls on May 6.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
