Indian Police Arrest Afghan Official For Hiring Sex Worker

The Indian police claimed to have arrested two Afghan nationals, including a senior government official, on charges of hiring sex worker in Goa, India, Indian media reported on Wednesday.

According to the reports, the two Afghan nationals were arrested following a raid on a prostitution racket in the beach village of Calangute in Goa.

Times of India reported quoted the Police Inspector Nolasco Raposo, head of police station in Calangute area, as saying that in the police raid on Monday night, two women from Uzbekistan were rescued.

“The two accused from Afghanistan have been arrested under sections 370 (prostitution), 370(iii) of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 4, 5 and 7 of the Immoral Traffic Prevention Act, 1956,” Inspector Raposo said.

One of the arrested men is Mohammad Omar Arian, Director of Internal Audit at Ministry of Communications and Information Technology and the other is Mohammad Ajmal Hodman, a lawyer.

Indian police, however, has failed to arrest the one who had solicited the services of the two Uzbek women for the two Afghan nationals.

“If they are in India for an official visit and have diplomatic passports, then the issue will be treated differently. But I think they are not on an official visit and India’s law will be implemented on them,” said Rohullah Sakhizad, a lawyer.

“Our demand is that this issue should be investigated and if they were found guilty, they should be punished,” said Aziza, a Kabul resident.

An official of Afghanistan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, meanwhile, told TOLOnews that the issue will be followed by the ministry.

“If a person commits a crime while he is in a personal tour, it possibly will cause the host community to have a negative view about the origin country of the criminal and in such a case, there will be no diplomatic issues involved. But if a person commits a crime while on an official visit, the crime will affect diplomatic ties of the two countries,” said Mohammad Rahimi, an international relations analyst.

An official of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology, meanwhile, said the ministry has not received any official letter in this regard, but added that Arian has traveled to India for a vacation, not an official visit.

Despite consecutive efforts, TOLOnews could not obtain the two suspects’ comments on this report.
