4 Odia bravehearts to get National Bravery Awards

New Delhi: Ranjita Majhi, 12, of Kalahandi district, who fought against her marriage to an elderly alcoholic man, along with three other children from the state will receive national bravery award January 22 and 23 from President and Prime Minister respectively.

As many as 21 children, eight girls and 13 boys, have been selected for the Indian Council for Child Welfare National Bravery Award 2018.

Ranjita studies at Manikeshwar High School in Kalahandi district. In 2017, her father wanted to fix her marriage with an elderly alcoholic man from the neighboring district. During the Pooja vacations, Ranjita refused to go home as she knew her parents would force her to get married.

She requested her headmistress to allow her to stay back in the hostel. Later, an inquiry was ordered by the Collector into the matter and she along with her two sisters were rescued by the officials of the child protection unit and child welfare committee. All three of them were placed in a children’s home to enable them to continue their studies. Ranjita said that she wanted to become a teacher. She also said that she would request Prime Minister to support her in completing her studies.

Similarly, Situ Malik, 14, of Kendrapara will be honoured with Bapu Gaidhani Award for his bravery in saving his uncle from a crocodile attack in February 2018. Situ Malik studies in Class X at Vasudev Vidyapeeth Mandir in Kendrapara district. Jhili Bagh, 8, who studies in Class IV at a government primary school in Kandhamal, will get award for her exemplary courage in saving the life of her three- year old sister from a 25-ft deep well. Another boy from the state, Biswajit Puhan, 10, of Jagatsighpur district saved the life of a five-year old girl from a seven-ft deep canal. He will be awarded for his spontaneous and selfless act.

The National Bravery Award scheme was initiated by the ICCW in 1957 to give due recognition to the children who perform outstanding deeds of bravery. Since 1957, ICCW has awarded 984 boys and 291 girls.
