Army commander’s statement extremely unfortunate & inhuman

Srinagar: Hurriyat(M) chairman Umar Farooq on Friday termed the statement of army commander that 2018 was a remarkable year for them in Kashmir as they killed over 250 militants as extremely unfortunate and inhuman.

Addressing devotees in Srinagar’s grand mosque Mirwaiz said it is strange that a well trained armed force meant to fight another well trained armed force is celebrating and patting its back on killing young men and boys , some as young as 14 ,while some budding intellectuals and academics ,and calling it remarkable!

He said that those the army is boasting of killing are not some hard core armed gurellias and terror mongers, but sentiment driven youth forced to take to arms as a consequence of severe repression due to forcible control and what they ( youth)feel ,failure of political means to express what is essentially a political demand for self determination.

“It is simply the intensity of their passion that drives these young boys, who are poorly trained and starved of ammunition to be able to give a real fight , in this greatly unequal battle to an armed force of a country.” He said.

Adding that the pain and loss that all of Kashmir feels at their ‘martyrdom’ only adds to people’s resolve and pushes more young to join in.

“Instead of admitting this, the armed force of a country that prides itself in the history of its freedom struggle by honouring the likes of Subhas Chander Bose who raised Indian National Army to fight the British colonial rule , sells the killing of these armed youth as a great achievement to people of India.” Mirwaiz lamented.

Mirwaiz further said that many in Indian army have in their write ups and lectures admitted that J&K is a political problem that has to be resolved as such .

Mirwaiz said the whole world reiterates that their can be no military solution to the dispute. Mirwaiz said those who are using militirasation to prolong the status quo should understand that it comes with a cost and keeps increasing complexities.
