Top news of the day: UN designates JeM chief Masood Azhar as global terrorist, sacked BSF jawan Tej Bahadur Yadav’s nomination rejected in Varanasi, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day.

In a huge diplomatic win for India, the United Nations on Wednesday designated Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a global terrorist after China lifted its hold on a proposal to blacklist him under the Security Council’s Sanctions Committee.

“Congress has so much hatred for me that it even dreams of killing me, but entire nation is batting for me,” says Prime Minister Narendra Modi at an election rally at Hoshangabad in Madhya Pradesh. “Congress govt invited Zakir Naik to address cops on terrorism, while Sri Lanka has now ordered closure of his TV channel.”

Mr. Modi mocks Congress’ promise of farm loan waiver within 10 days of govt. formation in Madhya Pardesh saying that it was yet to happen.

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange was sentenced on Wednesday to 50 weeks in jail for breaching a British court order seven years ago, when he took refuge in Ecuador's London embassy to avoid extradition to Sweden.

Sacked BSF jawan Tej Bahadur Yadav’s nomination as SP candidate has been rejected in Varanasi.

Mr. Yadav’s counsel said that they will approach the Supreme Court over the rejection of his client’s nomination.

At least 16 persons, including 15 security personnel, were killed in an improvised explosive device (IED) blast triggered by Maoists in Maharashtra’s Gadchiroli district on May 1, police said.

With the extremely severe cyclonic storm Fani expected to bring heavy rainfall to Andhra Pradesh, particularly the north coastal districts, the Real-Time Governance Society (RTGS) has warned fishermen against venturing into the sea, which is expected to be very rough.

The Delhi High Court on May 1 issued notice to Jet Airways on a plea seeking refund or alternative mode of travel to passengers who had booked tickets with the airways which has shut all domestic and international flights.

India’s much-delayed second lunar mission, Chandrayaan-2, has got yet another launch window. The mission is now set to be launched any time between July 5 and July 16 this year.
