Fact Check: How actor Saurabh Shukla's picture was used on misleading post on Balakot

Did actor Saurabh Shukla comment on the Balakot air strikes? A social media page uploaded a picture of the popular actor, claiming: "The entire world saw when our 42 jawans were martyred. Everyone saw when 150 people died in Sri Lanka. Only BJP saw 350 terrorists were killed in Pakistan."

India Today Anti Fake News Room (AFWA) couldn't find any such statement made by Shukla publicly, and the actor has also denied making this claim.

Facebook page 'Priyanka Gandhi' (@PriyankaGandhiZindabad), which has more than 38,000 followers, uploaded the post on April 23. Many Facebook users commented on the post against the BJP.

AFWA spoke to Shukla and he said, "I don't understand why people do not ask me before putting up such post. I have never said anything like this. This is 10-year-old photograph of mine."

Going through Shukla's social media posts, one can see they are apolitical. Shukla has even posted a disclaimer on his Twitter handle saying: "It's been brought to my notice that a post shared on social media carries my photograph with a comment which is against a political party. I would like to officially announce that I have made no such comment and nobody obtained my consent to carry my photograph on any such post." The disclaimer can be seen here.

AFWA also looked scanned through many interviews of Shukla available on the Internet. In most of the interviews, Shukla has spoken about films and art. In one of the interviews, when he was questioned about politics, he answered that he is like a common voter who does not know who to vote for. He even went on saying, "What could be funnier than you asking political questions to me." This also establishes his least political bent. This interview can be seen here.

The Indian Air Force had carried out air strikes on a terrorist camp in Balakot on February 26, 12 days after the Pulwama terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were killed.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim Actor Saurabh Shukla made remarks on Balakot air strikes. Conclusion The actor has made no such comment about Balakot publicly. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
