SIX women are shot - and two of them killed - in celebratory gunfire at a wedding in India

Two women were killed and four others injured when they were caught in a salvo of celebratory gunfire during a wedding in India on Friday.

Rusum, 43, and Kusum, 50, died on the spot after members of the wedding party began firing shots into the sky around midnight, police said.

Four other women were injured at the ceremony in the Moradabad district of Uttar Pradesh.

Two women were killed and four others injured during celebratory gunfire at a wedding in Uttar Pradesh on Friday, while a 19-year-old bride was shot in the ankle at her wedding in New Delhi the same evening

The Station House Officer of Mudhapande village police station said it was strange and unusual for six people to be shot during a celebration, and confirmed an investigation is underway in to how it could have happened.

Deputy Commissioner of Police Pankaj Singh added that authorities had begun a manhunt to trace the culprits.

Meanwhile a young bride in India's capital New Delhi was injured in a similar but separate incident, also on Friday.

The 19-year-old bride was struck on the ankle by a stray bullet during celebratory gunfire at about 12.45am on Friday at the Shakarpur Community Centre.

Several people have been killed over the last few years in accidents involving gunfire during weddings or parties.

Gunshots are often fired during celebrations in India, but in recent years there have been numerous fatal accidents related to the practice

Last year, a man reportedly shot dead his neighbour by accident when he fired a gun into the air to celebrate his daughter's engagement.

A bullet hit the 22-year-old woman, who was standing on her terrace, in the forehead, killing her instantly.

In December 2016, a 25-year-old dancer was killed while performing at a wedding after she was shot by a drunk man - one of many who were firing into the air during the festivities.

In November 2017, a eight-year-old boy died in similar circumstances at a wedding party.
