4 key Maoist leaders under lens for the ghastly Gadchiroli attack

Whenever top cadres are around, militia members are strategically positioned around to pick up any movement of troops and that is exactly what happened two days ago. Greyhounds often carry out operations in Gadchiroli in Maharashtra and Chattisgarh.

Hyderabad: More than 48 hours ago, inputs trickled in about the presence of four top Maoist cadres in the thick forests in Gadchiroli. As commandos of Telangana’s anti-naxal force Greyhounds were proceeding to the site, two militia members including a woman of the Maoists, who were positioned at a distance from where the Maoist leaders were camping, spotted the approaching Grey-hounds Commandos. Soon, there was an exchange of fire and the two members died. But the exchange of fire alerted the four top Maoists who then vanished into the thick jungles.

These four key Maoist leaders are said to be the masterminds of today’s deadly IED attack at Gadchiroli which killed 15 Maharashtra policemen.

Sources in Maharashtra police told this newspaper that there was a specific input about the presence of four Maoists — Hari Bhushan, state committee secretary, Chandran-na who is a central committee member, Malla Raji Reddy, and Damodar, both state committee members — in the forest area in Gadchiroli.

“The input was specific and their presence was confirmed and we were very close to neutralising them but due to the exchange of fire with the militia, the operation was not successful. We believe that they masterminded today’s IED blast at Gadchiroli,” the officials said.

Whenever top cadres are around, militia members are strategically positioned around to pick up any movement of troops and that is exactly what happened two days ago. Greyhounds often carry out operations in Gadchiroli in Maharashtra and Chattisgarh.

MAHARASHTRA AND TELANGANA JOINT OPS:

Hours after the IED blast at Gadchiroli, the Maharashtra and Telangana police have begun working together on the leads to hunt down the rebels who executed the ghastly attack. Sources said that there were about 150 Maoists who participated in the entire operation, right from setting 57 vehicles on fire last night to triggering the IED blast this afternoon. “It is a combined operation between the police of Maharashtra and TS and even Chattisgarh police will do its bit. Those who carried out the blast were staying put about four kilometres from the blast site and obviously, they moved out of there into the thick jungles,” the officials said.

According to them, the rebels may have moved their hideout 10 to 15 km deep inside the forests. “We will know their pin pointed location in the next few days and the deaths of 15 policemen will be avenged. Expect action from our side in a few days,” the officials said adding that the sleuths had already activated their network, beginning from Charla right up to Gadchiroli. “We are in constant touch with the Telangana police,” they added.

With Prime Minister Narendra Modi saying that the perpetrators of today's attack would not be spared, Maharashtra DGP Subodh Jaiswal also announced that they were ready to retaliate with full force.
