‘Techie didn’t have intention to kill shopkeeper’

road rage case

murder

shopkeeper

HC grants accused bail inAkashmann, a techie who is accused in theof a shopkeeper, has been released on bail by the High Court. The bizarre fight took place on December 16 in Kurubarahalli. Manjunath, awas cleaning his shopfront when the water he splashed fell on Akashmann who was driving a two-wheeler. It led to a fight which was settled. But Akashmann returned a while later searching for his helmet leading to another fight. Akashmann is accused of attacking Manjunath, his wife and son Manoj with a knife. Manjunath died of injuries while his son and wife were injured. Akashmann was also wounded in the fight.Hearing his plea for bail, the High Court in its judgement last week said, “It is admitted fact that the petitioner/accused has also sustained grievous injuries and the deceased, complainant and her son have also sustained the injuries. The only point which remains for consideration of the trial court is that who are aggressors and that is the crucial point which has to be considered only at the time of the trial.”The prosecution objected to the bail with the contention that Akashmann returned to the spot after the first incident armed with a knife with the intention to murder the shopkeeper. He had assaulted Manjunath with the knife who sustained grevious injuries and died because of them.The High Court however felt that Akashmann had no intention of murdering Manjunath. It said, “If really, the petitioner was having intention to cause the death of the deceased Manjunath he could have brought knife along with him, definitely he could not have asked about his helmet, he could not have altercated in this behalf. Immediately, he could have assaulted the deceased Manjunath with knife. Under the said facts and circumstances, I feel that there was no intention on his behalf to take away the life of the deceased by the petitioner.”Akashmann’s father, M Trimoorti, had filed a counter complaint against Manjunath’s wife and son for attacking and trying to kill his son. The injuries he sustained came to his help in the bail plea. “Be that as it may, even as could be seen from the record, the petitioner has also sustained grievous injuries and when he was produced before the Magistrate he was unable to stand and his head was also covered with bandage and the learned Magistrate has also directed the police to provide proper treatment. Under all these facts, though the charge shaeet has not been filed, the materials produced clearly goes to show that it was not the intention of the petitioner/accused to cause the death of the deceased,” the HC said. The bail was granted on a personal bond of Rs 2 lakh and two sureties for the likesum.
