Lok Sabha Election 2019: BJP carpet bombs Didi citadel

With fifth phase of LS elections scheduled on May 6, Bengal is witnessing intense electioneering for seven seats, with BJP national president Amit Shah alone addressing four rallies on Wednesday. The BJP, it seems, is determined to carpet bomb the state with PM Modi-Shah rallies to maximise its electoral gains.

Together with PM Modi, his trusted 'Panchari' Shah has so far held 19 rallies in the state since the election was announced on March 10. While Modi addressed eight rallies in five visits, Shah held 11 in four visits. Shah had addressed four rallies in his last visit on April 22 too. He is likely to visit Bengal again before campaigning ends for phase-5 polls. Other star campaigners such as Hema Malini and Pawan Singh too have lined up Bengal rallies on May 3 & 4.

What has rattled other parties is that the rallies of PM-Shah duo are witnessing steady rise in turnout. This has also lifted the spirits of BJP's both leaders and cadre alike. The discomfort in TMC camp is evident when Mamata, in rally after rally, mentioning that the BJP was spending crores of rupees on their meetings and has roped in outside agencies to take care of everything from putting up flags and hoardings to ensuring a handsome turnout.

On Wednesday, Shah came down heavily on both Congress and TMC. He said while PM Modi worked 18 out of 24 hours, 365 days a year, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi needed a vacation frequently. "As soon as the temperature rises a bit, Rahul Baba goes on a vacation to an unknown destination. Even his mother isn't aware sometimes where he goes on vacation," he said.

In all four rallies on Wednesday — at Kalyani, Panchla, Arambagh and Chinsurah — Shah tore into Mamata government on issues such as Pulwama and NRC. "Mamata didi is supporting those who wish to divide India. We want to know what she has to say on Omar Abdullah's demand for two prime ministers in the country," he said

"When India launched a counter attack on Pakistan in reply to Pulwama terror attack, which killed 40 Indian jawans, there were scenes of mourning at Rahul Gandhi's and Mamata's party offices. They were more concerned about their vote bank," he said.

On NRC implementation in Bengal, he said Mamata was misleading people. "She is going around saying the BJP will drive everyone out of the country. I want to make it clear that once we return to power, the Citizen Amendment Bill will be first passed and all Hindu, Buddhist, Christian and Jain refugees from neighbouring countries will be given citizenship. Later NRC will be implemented and infiltrators thrown out," Shah said.

He also mentions to multi-crore chit fund scam, and promises: "Once we come to power, within 90 days offenders will be brought to books."

Shah also make it a point to list welfare schemes of the Modi govt in his speeches.

PM-SHAH RALLY BLITZKRIEG

50% – Half of PM's rallies & roadshows so far have been held in just 5 states, including west Bengal



– Half of PM's rallies & roadshows so far have been held in just 5 states, including west Bengal 15 – Total number of rallies planned for PM Modi in west Bengal



– Total number of rallies planned for PM Modi in west Bengal 23 – Rallies planned for BJP president Amit Shah in state



– Rallies planned for BJP president Amit Shah in state 11 – Rallies Shah has addressed in four visits this elections



– Rallies Shah has addressed in four visits this elections 08 – Number of rallies PM addressed in five visits to state since poll notification on March 10

Star campaigners such as Hema Malini will also campaign on May 3-4 and Pawan Singh on May 3
