From teacher’s son to ISI’s blue-eyed boy

laxmi@tribune.com

United Nations/New Delhi, May 1

Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, designated as a global terrorist by the United Nations, is a blue-eyed boy of Pakistan’s spy agency ISI which masterminded several audacious attacks on India, including the 2001 Parliament strike and the recent Pulwama carnage in February that pushed the two countries to the brink of war.

A known fugitive, 50-year-old Azhar, who formed the JeM in 2000, was branded the brain behind various suicide strikes in India and known to have finetuned terror tactics which included survey of potential targets before carrying out the attack.

For two decades after his release in exchange for passengers of a hijacked Indian Airlines plane in 1999, Azhar has since been the darling of Pakistan’s external snooping agency Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI). After the release of Azhar by India on December 31, 1999, his newly acquired stature in jehadi circles in Pakistan came in handy for the ISI who convinced clerics at the Binori mosque in Karachi to accept Azhar's leadership and thus, on January 31, 2000, the JeM was born.

Azhar was arrested in Anantnag in South Kashmir in February 1994 after he had entered into India on a Portuguese passport through Bangladesh. The son of a retired school headmaster from Bhawalpur in Pakistan, Azhar always felt his custody in India was going to be short-lived and that attempts would be made for his release.

Attempts were indeed made — the first one within 10 months of his arrest when some foreigners were kidnapped from Delhi and the captors demanded his release. The plot, however, failed.

Another attempt to release him was made by a shadow group of Harkat-ul-Ansar, Al-Faran, which demanded his release in exchange of five foreigners kidnapped in Kashmir in July 1995.

A tunnel was dug in Kot Balwal jail in 1999 for his escape but Azhar could not move out. Finally, he was released by the NDA government in 1999, along with Omar Sheikh and Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar, in exchange of passengers of the hijacked flight IC-814. — PTI

The Mastermind
