Amit Shah attacks Rahul and Kejriwal over Balakot comments, says ‘they cried as if their cousins were killed’

BJP chief Amit Shah at a rally in South Delhi's Vasant Kunj on Wednesday. | @AmitShah | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: The momentum is building for the fifth, sixth and seventh phases of the ongoing Lok Sabha elections and politicians continue to engage in mudslinging tactics, with Bharatiya Janata Party president and Gandhinagar Lok Sabha candidate Amit Shah taking potshots at Congress president Rahul Gandhi and Delhi Chief Minister and Aam Aadmi Party convenor Arvind Kejriwal over the questions they raised on the Balakot air strikes.

Launching a direct attack at both the leaders, Amit Shah said they were “crying” as if their “cousins” were killed in the neighbouring country.

“On the 13th day since the Pulwama attack, (Prime Minister) Narendra Modi instructed the Indian Air Force to conduct an operation. Our jawans entered Pakistan and returned after attacking terrorists in Balakot... But there was mourning in two places – one in Rahul Gandhi’s office and the other at Kejriwal’s office in Delhi. They were crying profusely. Were they (Balakot terrorists) your cousins?” Shah asked during a campaign rally in South Delhi’s Vasant Kunj area on Wednesday.

Challenging the Congress and Aam Aadmi Party in Delhi, the BJP chief said under PM Modi, there won’t be any tolerance for terrorism. “This is Modi government. This is BJP’s government. If Pakistan fires bullets, we will reply with cannon balls.”

Shah also accused Rahul and Kejriwal for supporting youth leaders from Jawaharlal Nehru University in 2016 when they allegedly raised anti-national slogans in the campus.

“BJP said we want to do away with Article 370 and Article 35A and make Jammu and Kashmir an integral part of India and Rahul Gandhi said abolish sedition law. What will we do if someone is found spying for Pakistan? Rahul and Kejriwal should answer,” he said.

Ramesh Bidhuri is the sitting Member of Parliament and the Lok Sabha candidate from South Delhi constituency. Voting in Delhi will be conducted on May 12 in the sixth phase of polling and counting will be done on May 23.
