PM Modi needs to open his ears and listen to the sounds of blasts: Rahul Gandhi

Guwahati: The Congress President Rahul Gandhi said in a tweet that Prime Minister Narendra Modi should open his ears and listen to the sounds of bomb blasts.

The Congress Chief has tweeted hours after 16 security personnel of anti-Maoists squad were killed in a blast triggered by the Maoists in Maharashtra on Wednesday. Gandhi said that according to the Prime Minister the sounds of blasts can't be heard in India since 2014.

Rahul Gandhi tweeted, "The PM says since 2014 the sounds of blasts can't be heard in India. Pulwama, Pathankot, Uri, Gadchiroli and 942 other major bombings since 2014. The prime minister needs to open his ears and listen."

PM Modi has also been targeted last week over his claims that there were no blasts during his tenure by senior Congress leader and former finance minister P Chidambaram. In a tweet, Chidambaram while recalling the list of blasts in Mohra, Dantewada, Palamu, Aurangabad, Koraput, Sukma, Awapalli and Chhattisgarh asked Modi, "Is it due to memory loss or due to a compulsive habit, will someone please read to the PM?"

The deadly attack on the security personnel in Gadchiroli was also condemned by the Congress. Congress chief Rahul Gandhi in a tweet expressed his condolences to the security personnel killed in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli and said that he was deeply saddened on the death of the jawans.

The Maharashtra police chief visited the spot today at Gadchiroli along with senior officials and the collector.

Meanwhile, the Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav also alleged that the BJP-led government has failed on the national security issues adding that, "Our soldiers are dying on the border and in the Naxal-affected areas. BJP talks about soldiers but what type of national security is it when one soldier die every day."

Fifteen jawans of C-60, an anti-Maoist squad of Gadchiroli police and a driver were killed in a powerful landmine blast at Dadapur Road in Gadchiroli district, Maharashtra on Wednesday.

Also Read: NATIONAL NEWS
