Coimbatore medical sham: Mother and son run fake hospital, pregnant woman dead after wrong medication

The accused had been operating the ayurvedic clinic since the past 15 years (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Coimbatore: After the sudden death of a pregnant woman, the police arrested a woman who had been posing as a doctor. The woman is being suspected to have caused the death of the pregnant woman. The deceased passed away while she was receiving treatment at Negamam Mettuvavi.

The accused was identified as Muthulaxmi. The accused allegedly administered the wrong injection to the deceased. The accused was being aided by her son. Two days after the wrong injection was administered to her, she passed away. The deceased was a daily wage labourer. The deceased approached the accused after learning that she was five-months pregnant. The deceased allegedly wanted to abort the child.

After the wrong injection was administered to her, the deceased was taken to the Pollachi Hospital where she died. In order to investigate into the incident, a joint raid of teams comprising of the Deputy Director of Health Department. Banumathi, Family Welfare department joint director Krishna and Medical officer district Sidha, Dhanam were launched.

According to the Deccan Chronicle's report, the teams confiscated syringes and needles from the hospital run by thhe accused. The accused had been operating the ayurvedic clinic since the past 15 years. In 2018, the accused had escaped a health department raid by locking her clinic and absconding. The clinic was reopened a few months ago.

The accused was arrested from the Nagapattinam area. The accused was allegedly seeking shelter at her friend's residence. While the accused was arrested, another team was formed to look nab her absconding son.

Earlier this year, a doctor from Mumbai was accused of disagnosing patients and administering medicines to them. An NGO called Human Riights Parishad informed the Virar Municipal Corporation about the incident. The accused allegedly used the identity of another doctor to run his clinic.
