15 Commandos And Driver Killed After An IED Explosive Goes Off in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra

16 people, which includes 15 Commandos and one Driver, were killed after an improved explosive device went off near a truck that was carrying C-60 Commandos near Gadchiroli, Maharashtra.

Officials believed that the attack was a “revenge attack” for the encounters that were done by the commandos in the regions in 2018, the encounters killed nearly 40 Maoists.

The IED went off by 12:30 PM just hours after Maoists burned down more than 30 private vehicles that are owned by private contractors in Kurkheda, Gadchiroli.

The impact of the IED left a crated on the area where it went off.

The C-60 Commandos were part of the QRT (Quick Response Team) of the Gadchiroli Police, they were sent out in a private vehicle for patrolling after Maoists burned down the private vehicles.

Subodh Kumar Jaiswal, the Director General of The Police confirmed the death poll and added that the Commandos were ambushed by the Maoists.

DGP Jaiswal added, “A probe is underway. We hope this does not happen again.”

Narendra Modi, the Prime Minister of India tweeted about the incident, he wrote, “Strongly condemn the despicable attack on our security personnel in Gadchiroli, Maharashtra. I salute all the brave personnel. Their sacrifices will never be forgotten. My thoughts & solidarity are with the bereaved families.”

Many are asking why the commandos were sent on patrol in a private vehicle even after knowing that the Maoists were planning an attack.

Before targeting the Commandos, the Maoists targeted private vehicles that mostly belonged to a private company called Amar Infrastructures LTD.

On April 22, 2018, 40 Maoists were killed by security forces, officials believe that they are currently carrying out revenge attacks.

8 Districts in Chhattisgarh are currently considered as Naxal-affected, a high alert has also been issued to all superintendents of the police in the state.

Directed General of Police DM Awasthi said, “Very soon I will convene a meeting of senior police officials in Bastar to discuss what new anti-Naxal strategy could be adopted in the wake of this attack (in Maharashtra’s Gadchiroli) and other (recent) incidents (in Chhattisgarh).”
