Riding on Dadua's Robinhood legacy: Brother, son contesting polls

CHITRAKOOT/BANDA: It has been over a decade since dreaded dacoit Dadua was killed in an encounter by UP police, but the dread of shadow of brigand looks large on Bundelkhand this poll season.Riding on the legacy of his brother, Bal Kumar Patel is contesting from the Banda seat on Congress ticket while is son Veer Singh Patel is SP-BSP combine’s candidate from Khajraho seat across the border in MP.With his close relatives in the fray, Dadua’s influence is very much visible. Talk to any voter about Bal Kumar in the Banda or Chitrakoot, and the reference veers back to Dadua.“Bal kumar?? Ko?? Dadua ke bhai… (Which Bal Kumar? Dadua’s brother)” is one common reply TOI got in villages of Manikpur – the fag end of Banda Lok Sabha . But Bal Kumar doesn’t show any sign of the overarching influcne of his brother on his campaign.“He was my brother and this is an undeniable fact. But we don’t use relationships… we value them…,” reasoned Bal Kumar though he admitted that he was a beneficiary of Dadua’s Robinhood image.“Wo baghi thay… daku nahi… wo aur mai dono jansewa karna chahte thay … bas unka rasta kanoon se alag tha (He was a rebel not a dacoit… Both of us wanted to serve people but his way came in conflict with law).”Stating that the respect and blessings of his father were there with him, Veer Singh said: “Mere pita baghi isliye bane kyonki unho ne soshit, pichda, garib, dalit ki ladai ladi hai.. wahi ladai aaj bhi jari hai… mai pitaji ki ladai agey le jaa raha hoon. (My father became a rebel to take up the fight of exploited, backward, poor and dalit… In Bundelkhand, the battle is still underway and I am taking the fight further)”Almost ten years younger to Dadua, his brother Bal Kumar left his native village – Shivkali – in Chitrakoot to catch up with education in Rae Bareli. “While villagers in Chitrakoot loved him, there was no dearth of enemies which made us an easy target. So, we left and got settled in Rae Bareli.”“Dadua was known to support poor families, marry off their daughters. As an MP in Mirzapur , Bal Kumar ji also did the same. Likewise, Dadua always paid the family for eating at their place and Sansad ji (Bal Kumar) never takes anything for free,” boasted an elderly member in Bal Kumar’s campaign team.He, however, added that there was a great temperamental divide between the two brothers. “Bal Kumar is calm and composed whereas Dadua would lose cool easily,” he added. Veer Singh’s act of bashing up an electricity department staff for an aide is also quoted as a specimen of his Dadua-like aggression.A contractor-turned-businessman, Bal Kumar had been associated with Samajwadi Party of over 14 years and won from Mirzapur Lok Sabha seat as its candidate in 2009. “I left SP because it did not recognise my hard work and commitment,” he said, adding had the SP-BSP combine fielded someone else (apart from BJP turncoat Shyamacharan Gupta), he may not have taken the extreme step. He added that after the Congress formed the government in three states and announced farm loan waiver, he approached Rahul and Priyanka Gandhi.Veer Singh joined politics in 2005 when he was elected unopposed as Zila Panchyat chairman in Chitrakoot. Stating that the life of people in Bundelkhand had not changed, he said: “Aaj desh mein janta ke vote se raja paida hota hai na ki rani ke pet se… lekin Bundelkhand mein samantwadi mansikta itni havi hai 15% bade hi raaj kar rahe hain aur 85% aaj bhi kasht jhel rahe hain… jab tak ye badlega nahi, log mere pitaji ko bhoolenge nahi. (While in the rest of India, people’s vote makes leaders, feudalism rules the roost in Bundelkhand. Unless the scenario changes, people will not be able to forget my father).Dadua's reign of terror continued in Bundelkhand for over 30 years. He was a member of the Sitaram gang since 1975. His first crime was an act of revenge when he killed a local strongma in Manikpur area in May 1978. Dadua’s confilct with law continued till his death in 2007. But all this while, he enjoyed the support of the locals for they considered him to be a benefactor. It is believed that Dadua's gang included headmen in as many as 500 villages and he swayed poll preferences of the people in as many as 10 assembly segments of the region.
