Hours after Gadchiroli attack, Maoists kill 2 villagers in Chhattisgarh's Sukma district

New Delhi:

In yet another untoward incident, two villagers were killed in a Maoist attack at Kistaram area of Chhattisgarh's Sukma district late Wednesday night. Four vehicles engaged in road construction work were also torched by rebels in Barachatti near Bihar's Gaya in early Thursday morning. The incidents comes hours after, six Maoists, four of them carrying rewards on their heads, were arrested from Sukma on Wednesday.

They were held near Kindrelpad village under Konta police station limits when a team of district police force was out on a search operation. The team had launched the operation from Konta and was proceeding towards interior forests. Near Kindrelapad, 500 km from Raipur, they spotted a group of suspected Naxals. All of them were involved in attacks on security personnel, police teams an torching of vehicles in and around the district.

Chhattisgarh: Two villagers were killed by Naxals in Kistaram area of Sukma district last night. — ANI (@ANI) May 2, 2019

Bihar: Naxals torch four vehicles engaged in road construction work in Barachatti, Gaya. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/jFnblAQgsA — ANI (@ANI) May 2, 2019

On Wednesday, in one of the deadliest IED blasts by Maoists, 16 persons, inclduing 15 security personnel, lost their lives in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli district. All the policemen killed were members of the Quick Response Team (QRT) of Gadchiroli police, which was on way to inspect the 27 torched vehicles, which were set ablaze earlier in the day. The driver of the vehicle was among those killed in the blast which took place as the vehicle reached Lendhari nallah in Kurkheda area.

In Mumbai, Maharashtra Director General of Police Subodh Kumar Jaiswal told reporters that the attack was not a result of intelligence failure. Terming it a big loss for the police force, Jaiswal said police were ready to give a befitting reply to the Maoists.

In what was then termed as the biggest success in the anti-Maoist operations, 37 Maoists, including 19 women, were killed in Gadchiroli district in April last year.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
