Gadchiroli Naxal attack: 13 inputs received in 40 days about attack

Maoists torched at least three dozen vehicles belonging to private contractors in Kurkheda sub-district of Maharashtra's Gadchiroli on May 1, 2019. (Photo: IANS)

There were 13 alerts in the last month giving specific locations in Gadchiroli about a possible Naxal attack on security forces to avenge the killings of 40 Naxals last year.

The first input was shared on March 21 and since then there were a dozen intelligence alerts about an impending attack.

On April 27, a Naxal leader Ramko was killed in an encounter with the Maharashtra Police's C-60 in Gundurwahi forest area of Gadchiroli. This killing became a trigger for the Wednesday attack, sources said.

A report accessed by India Today TV, states that there were many inputs, mostly about plans to avenge the 2018 Kasanasur incident where 40 Naxals were killed. The inputs indicated that a possible attack could take place in south Gadchiroli.

According to the report, that came two days prior to the deadly attack that killed 15 jawans, Bhaskar Huchami, a Naxal leader had called a meeting in the area of the Laheri Police Station to avenge the Kasanasur incident.

The location of the blast that killed the security personnel on May 1, falls between two police stations. Inputs about the possibility of an attack also mentioned a plot to target security forces within the limits of these two police stations-- Kukheda and Purada.

Sources said the first anniversary of last year's killings of 40 Naxals, followed by the killing of a big Naxal leader on April 27 and Labour Day provided a fertile ground for the Naxals to strike and motivate its cadres.

A team of 40 Naxal were chosen to carry out the attack, sources said.

Similar incidents took place in 2009 when Maoists burnt vehicles to target police personnel as they visited the site for investigation. In one such incident, 17 personnel were killed in Gadchiroli.

The same modus operandi was used on May 1 to ambush the security personnel. Maoists set ablaze 27 vehicles engaged in road construction work about 5 km from Purad.

As the police reached the spot in a civil vehicle they were ambushed. An Improvised Explosive Device was triggered that killed 15 policemen and the driver of the vehicle on spot.
