Lok Sabha election: Will Modi Sarkar return? This tribal seat might have already decided

Pulwama terrorist attack and India's response to it in the form of air strikes at Balakot, reports suggest, have repaired the prospects of the Modi government in the ongoing Lok Sabha election. Pulwama attack, killing 40 CRPF jawans by a suicide bomber, took place on February 14, Valentine's Day.

Minutes before the report of Pulwama attack, TV screens were flashing a woman kissing Congress president Rahul Gandhi on stage during his election rally in Gujarat's Valsad. The Congress was upbeat that claiming history will bring the party back to power.

One woman pulled Rahul Gandhi down and gave him a peck on the cheek. (Photo: IANS)

Rahul Gandhi was addressing a public rally at the Lal Dungri ground in Valsad. Every time a Gandhi has addressed an election rally at this ground the Congress has been voted to power. Indira Gandhi, following crushing defeat in 1977 Lok Sabha election, addressed a public rally in this Valsad ground for 1980 parliamentary polls and stormed back to power.

The Lok Sabha constituency of Valsad, formerly known as Bulsar, has been the most consistent bellwether seat for country's national elections since 1957, when this parliamentary segment was first demarcated. After delimitation in 2008, the constituency was renamed Valsad, which also includes Dang district of Gujarat and parts of Navsari.

The Valsad Lok Sabha seat voted for the Congress till 1967 and the party ruled from the Centre. In 1971 election, Valsad voted for the splinter group of the Congress, called the Congress (O) led by Morarji Desai, who was born in the district. This was the only time that Valsad elected a party that did not form government at the Centre. Indira Gandhi-led Congress (R) won 1971 polls.

But Valsad was not wrong in sensing the mood of the nation as next Lok Sabha election held in 1977 in post-Emergency period saw Morarji Desai take oath as the prime minister. Janata Party, formed by merger of several anti-Congress parties, had won the Valsad Lok Sabha seat. The Janata experiment did not last long and Indira Gandhi came back to power.

In 1984 Lok Sabha election held in the shadow of the assassination of Indira Gandhi, her son and current Congress president's father Rajiv Gandhi addressed a rally at Lal Dungri. The Congress won the biggest ever mandate in terms of seats, winning 415 of 543 in the Lok Sabha.

In 1989, Valsad voted for Janata Dal, another political group splintered from the Congress and led by VP Singh, the defence minister in the Rajiv Gandhi government. Singh turned the Bofors scandal heat on the Congress government. Rajiv Gandhi's Congress lost and VP Singh was sworn in as the prime minister. His government was also short-lived.

Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated in the run up to 1991 Lok Sabha election in Tamil Nadu by LTTE terrorists. Valsad, in Gujarat, elected Uttam Patel of the Congress to the Lok Sabha. PV Narasimha Rao led a short-of-majority government for its full term.

In 1996, 1998 and 1999 Lok Sabha election, Valsad voted for the BJP. Atal Bihari Vajpayee led three governments for 13 days, 13 months and five years following the national elections.

Sonia Gandhi, then Congress president, came back to Lal Dungri, for election campaign in 2004. Valsad voted for the Congress candidate and the party went on to form a coalition government at the Centre for two consecutive terms.

In 2014, Valsad was swept by the Modi wave and voted for the BJP like the other 25 Lok Sabha constituencies of Gujarat. The BJP won majority for the first time in a Lok Sabha election.

So, when Rahul Gandhi addressed a rally at Lal Dungri in Valsad, the Congress was in a euphoric mood. The woman, a Congress worker, kissing Rahul Gandhi on the stage was just a reflection of the party's enthusiasm for the Lok Sabha election.

By that evening, Pulwama terrorist attack was the dominant topic in public discourse. Twelve days later, on February 26, the Indian Air Force conducted cross-LoC strikes at a terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot.

An aerial dogfight ensued the next morning when IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman downed an F-16 fighter plane of the Pakistan Air Force. Abhinandan's MiG plane was also shot down. He fell in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and was captured by the Pakistan Army. Pakistan announced unconditional release of Abhinandan. The entire episode has been at the centre of the BJP's election campaign for the Lok Sabha election.

Valsad went to polls nearly a month later on April 23. Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed a flurry of poll rallies in Gujarat in the last lap of election campaign in the state.

At his final rally in Gujarat's Patan, PM Modi said he had "warned Pakistan that if anything happened to our pilot, you will keep telling the world that Modi did this to you."

Valsad is primarily a tribal Lok Sabha constituency. About 11 lakh of 16 lakh voters are from the scheduled tribes. Out of seven assembly segments under the Valsad Lok Sabha constituency, five are reserved for members of the scheduled tribes.

The BJP fielded sitting MP KC Patel while the Congress gave ticket to Jitu Chaudhari, the party MLA from Kaprada. Going by the historical trend, Patel versus Chaudhari battle could decide if PM Modi forms the next government or Rahul Gandhi will repeat the success achieved by his mother, father and grandmother.

ALSO READ: Lok Sabha Election 2019: All dates, full schedule, constituency-wise details, all you need to know

ALSO WATCH: Decoding Phase 4 of 2019 Lok Sabha elections
