Police crack junk dealer’s murder mystery

The city police on Friday said it has cracked the murder mystery of junk dealer Mohammed Siraj, a resident of Maudhapara locality coming under Maudhapara Police Station Jurisdiction.

Superintendent of Police (SP), Raipur, Neethu Kamal, Additional SP (City), Prafull Thakur and other senior police officials in a press conference informed that police nabbed two accused from Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh, who were on way to Amritsar in Punjab.

Both of them have executed the crime with an intention of loot, they said.

The arrested accused are Mujahid Raza and Nitu Sardar. A Nano Car used in the crime and Rs 72,000 cash has been recovered from them, the police said.

Notably, family members of Siraj had lodged a missing complaint before Maudhapara Police on January 14 and the body of Siraj was recovered from Village Tendua on outskirts of capital city coming under Amanaka Police Station jurisdiction.

A joint team of Maudhapara and Amanaka police started investigation after receiving directives from SP, Raipur. They, after scanning CCTV cameras and also interrogating the family members of Siraj, came to know that Mujahid Raja and Majinder Singh alias Nitu were last seen with him.

When the police searched the duo, it was informed to the police team that both of them were last seen at the Raipur Railway Station. CCTV footage was also scanned and after confirming a team was sent to Gwalior. The Raipur SP herself contacted Gwalior SP and requested to help nab the accused.

Gwalior police arrested the two accused from Chhattisgarh Express and later the team of Raipur police brought them back to capital.

Police informed that the accused during the interrogation had admitted that they have killed Siraj due to need of money. They called Siraj with cash amounting to Rs 3 Lakh while saying that they will execute a deal of a truck. In car they took Siraj to Tendua village while telling him that the truck was parked there. Later they killed Siraj with a hammer and dumped his body near a culvert. In a bid to mislead police they threw his mobile phone at Gondwara locality, police said.

Meanwhile police has taken the accused into custody and is further investigating into the matter.
