Rahul Gandhi slams PM Modi's statement, says 942 blasts have occurred since 2014 including Pulwama, Gadchiroli

Congress president Rahul Gandhi I Photo credit: ANI | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Shortly after 15 policemen and a civilian were killed in a dastardly Naxal attack in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli district, Congress president took a dig at PM Narendra Modi’s statement that no major blasts have occurred since 2014.

Rahul Gandhi said 942 blasts have occurred since 2014 including the major ones such as Pulwama, Pathankot, Uri and the latest one in Gadchiroli.

“The PM says since 2014 the sounds of blasts can't be heard in India. Phulwama, Pathankot, Uri, Gadchiroli, and 942 other major bombings since 2014,” Rahul Gandhi said in a statement on Twitter.

The PM says since 2014 the sounds of blasts can't be heard in India.



Phulwama...

Pathankot..

Uri...

Gadchiroli....

and 942 other major bombings since 2014.



The PM needs to open his ears and listen. https://t.co/gj1ngrZm5i — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) May 1, 2019

On May 1, as many as 16 people were killed including 15 State Reserve Police Force (SRPF) jawans and one civilian when Naxals targeted a vehicle in Gadchiroli district of Maharashtra. The blast occurred between Jamborkheda and Lendhari in the Naxal-affected belt. Earlier in the day, Naxals set ablaze 27 machines and vehicles on a road construction site, the news agency ANI reported. The attack comes on the occasion of Maharashtra Day (Labour Day), which commemorates the formation of the state on May 1, 1960.

Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar has demanded Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis' resignation after the Naxal attack 15 security personnel. Pawar demanded that Fadnavis should take responsibility for the attack and resign on moral grounds.

"Anguished to know that our 16 police personnel from Gadchiroli C-60 force got martyred in a cowardly attack by Naxals today. My thoughts and prayers are with the martyrs’ families. I’m in touch with DGP and Gadchiroli SP," Fadnavis was quoted as saying by ANI.

PM has said once again that there were no bomb blasts during his 5-year tenure.



Is it due to memory loss or due to a compulsive habit? — P. Chidambaram (@PChidambaram_IN) April 22, 2019

The Congress president’s claims come after veteran Congress leader P Chidambaram’s attack on PM for his statement that there were no blasts during his government.

“PM has said once again that there were no bomb blasts during his 5-year tenure. Is it due to memory loss or due to a compulsive habit?” Chidambaram asked. Chidambaram then listed the major blasts that occurred in the last five years.


