Die-hard Salman Khan fan in Argentina names restaurant Gran Dabbang, decorates it with film’s posters. See pics

Actor Salman Khan’s upcoming film Dabangg 3 will hit the screens on December 2019 and audience will get to meet cop Chulbul Pandey all over again. Looks like fans of the film and its central character aren’t restricted only to India. According to a report in Mumbai Mirror, there is a restaurant in Argentina called Gran Dabbang (Great Dabbang), which has its walls decorated with Dabangg posters.

The report adds that the restaurant specialises in Argentine and South Asian cuisine. On a Facebook page, which appears to be the official page of the restaurant, there are pictures and posters from the film; in one, Salman has his favourite sunglasses on, only these are heart-shaped. Another poster is the one featuring Salman in a police uniform with a sari-clad Sonakshi Sinha next to him.

Also read: Sophie Turner, Joe Jonas marry in Vegas, pull off most anti-Priyanka Chopra-Nick Jonas wedding ever. See pics, videos

Also read: Sophie Turner, Joe Jonas marry in Vegas, pull off most anti-Priyanka Chopra-Nick Jonas wedding ever. See pics, videos

Salman had shared the news of Dabangg 3’s release date with his fans on Friday. Taking to Twitter and sharing an image with the release date of December 20, 2019 mentioned on it, he wrote, “Chulbul is back.”

Earlier, the actor shared a still of his character Chulbul Pandey after he wrapped up shooting for the Maheshwar schedule of the film. Dabangg 3, which is the third film in the Dabangg franchise, is being helmed by Prabhudeva and produced under the banner of Salman Khan Films and Arbaaz Khan Production.

The upcoming film also stars Sonakshi Sinha reprising her role of Rajjo from Dabangg; she had made her debut with the franchise’s first iteration in 2010. According to media reports, Arbaaz Khan will once again be seen playing Makkhi in the film. Salman’s next film Bharat is all set for a June 5 release on Eid. The film stars Katrina Kaif, Jackie Shroff, Disha Patani, Sunil Grover and Tabu in pivotal roles.

(With ANI inputs)

Follow @htshowbiz for more
