Blacklisted Azhar comes as a poll bonus for ‘Chowkidar’ Modi

A former associate editor with the Times of India, Jug Suraiya writes two regular columns for the print edition, Jugular Vein, which appears every Friday, and Second Opinion, which appears on Wednesdays. His blog takes a contrarian view of topical and timeless issues, political, social, economic and speculative. LESS ... MORE

The UN Sanction Committee’s official naming of Jaish-e-Muhammed chief, Masood Azhar, as a ‘global terrorist’ – a move long blocked by Pakistan’s `all-weather friend’, China – couldn’t have come at a more opportune time for PM Narendra Modi, who has already started using it as part of his electioneering rhetoric which projects him as the `chowkidar’ of national security.

Indeed, Pakistan, which has been harbouring Azhar for years, has proved to be Modi’s best ally by unwittingly helping the Indian prime minister showcase himself as the redoubtable champion safeguarding the country against Islamabad-sponsored terrorism.

The Balakot air strike, coming as a swift reprisal to the Pulwama terrorist attack, buttressed Modi’s strongman stature.

The UN blacklisting of Azhar – even though Pulwama and Kashmir were left out of the official declaration as a face-saver for Pakistan at China’s insistence – will further boost Modi’s vote-catching image as a strong and resolute leader who can effectively defend the country against its enemies.

“This is only the beginning, watch what happens in future,” Modi has pronounced, in effect taking sole credit for Azhar’s blacklisting.

The truth of the matter is that, over the years, there have been many diplomatic behind-the-scenes players on the Indian side who have been quietly working towards this end.

Moreover, despite possible setbacks like demonetisation and a too-hasty GST rollout, India’s clout as the world’s fastest-growing major economy has given it greater leverage on the international stage than ever before.

True to type, Modi has taken India’s collective victory and arrogated it as a personal achievement.

And in doing so Modi has shown himself to be a true PM: Propaganda Master.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
