Oppn downplaying Azhar's listing as global terrorist fearing political consequences: Jaitley

Union Minister Arun Jaitley on Thursday slammed Congress for downplaying the listing of chief of terrorist organisation JeM, Masood Azhar.

Jaitley while addressing a press conference here, said that the Congress is abstaining from joining win fearing political consequences.

"This is a matter of pride for every Indian. Government and Prime Minister should be applauded. When the country wins, every Indian wins. It is unfortunate that some friends in the opposition think that if they join in this victory they might have to pay a political price for it", Jaitley said.

He also said that Congress's reaction of calling it no big deal is very sad and unfortunate.

"They claim that they had also done invisible air strikes when they were in government. However when we are successful in Balakot airstrike, they raise doubts over it and when yesterday we achieved success in this effort (of listing Masood Azhar as a global terrorist) which was going on for decades, this is very sad that they are giving trivial reaction such as what is big deal," he added.

Jaitley further underlined that it was an old tradition of the country that on security and foreign policy issues, the country should speak in one voice.

"However, attempts have been made in the last few days to break this tradition. We hope that the opposition should also play a positive role in this big success that the government has achieved", he added.

The statement by Jaitley comes a day after senior Congress leader Digvijaya Singh had asked as to how designating Masood Azhar as a global terrorist would help when Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan flaunts his friendship with Narendra Modi.

While addressing media today, Jaitley reiterated that this UN Sanction is a big win for India and its diplomatic efforts.

"Since many decades India has been seeking ban on target of Masood Azhar. A lot of terrorist attacks were done by him and his terrorist organisation. This UN Sanction is a big win for India and its diplomatic effort. Since many decades India has been on target of Masood Azhar. A lot of terrorist attacks were done by him and his terrorist organisation. It took some time as the process had started in 2009 and including 2016, 2017, there were three such instances when technical objections were put and India's effort could not be fulfilled," said Jaitley.

Jaitley also asserted that Azhar and the country where he is staying will have to face the consequences of this listing now.

"The listing and the decision are not a biodata of Masod Azhar. They don't have to give his entire background or mention about each and every activity. The core issue is that he has been declared a terrorist and he and his country have to face consequences of that, he said.

"The global community has been persuaded by all the material that India has put forward and circulated and even persons with an elementary understanding of international diplomacy will tell that the aggression and the aggressive stance of some global power in getting him and change in the attitude of China has certainly been impacted by the recent developments, which include both Pulwama and the expose of Pakistan post-Balakot because it was Masood Azhar's camp which were destroyed in Pakistan," he added.

The media briefing was also addressed by Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman who hailed the move and called it a victory of the central government under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

"We all know the reasons behind UN announcement's delay. But it is necessary to point out that in every opportunity that the Prime Minister has in bilateral talks with countries and multilateral engagements, he has focused on the need to recognise Pakistan as the land which as per publically available data is home to more than 35 declared terrorist organisations. It is the persistent effort of this government under the leadership of Prime Minister which has brought this result" said Sitharaman.

India's representative to the United Nations UN Syed Akburuddin on Wednesday announced that Masood Azhar was declared a global terrorist by the UN.

Azhar is the head of the terrorist group responsible, notably, for the Pulwama attack on February 14, which killed 40 CRPF personnel in South Kashmir.

A global terrorist tag under the UN's 1267 committee would lead to a freeze on Azhar's assets and a ban on his travel and constraints on possessing weapons, similarly to the Al Qaida and ISIL (the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant).

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
