No One Can Grow This One: The PepsiCo vs Kisan battle over Lays aloo, explained

It's starchy, tastes great with ketchup, and is the unlikely fountainhead for a David vs Goliath battle pitching Indian farmers against PepsiCo. But why so much ado about good old aloo?

You'll find the answer in a familiar supermarket aisle -- the one with the Lays bags. PepsiCo says the FC5 potatoes it uses to make the crisps are proprietary; the US firm is claiming damages from nine Gujarat farmers who allegedly grew the exclusive variety. And though it has offered four of them a conditional settlement, it has received plenty of flak for dragging the growers to court.

The ongoing legal battle has received international attention. Let's now break down some specific questions surrounding the face-off, starting with why PepsiCo sued in the first place.

PO-TAYTO, PO-TAHTO? NOT SO FOR PEPSICO

PepsiCo claims Plant Variety Protection rights to the FC5 potato variety under a 2001 law; it says the farmers are violating them. It has sued four of them for Rs 1 crore each, and the five others for Rs 20 lakh each. Many have rallied behind the growers and asked that the cases against them be withdrawn.

"Pepsi’s decision to take Gujarat’s potato grower farmers to court is ill-advised and brazenly wrong." - Ahmed Patel, Congress

PepsiCo says it developed the FC5-type. It supplies these tubers, which have lower moisture content, to a group of farmers who in turn sell it their produce at a fixed price.

THE SETTLEMENT OFFER

PepsiCo offered to settle with four of the growers last week, and gave them two options: they had to either sell it their produce or stop growing FC5 potatoes. The firm said it would withdraw the suit in return; it explained that it had been "compelled to take the judicial recourse as a last resort to safeguard the larger interest of thousands of farmers engaged with its collaborative potato farming programme".

The farmers' lawyer said he would discuss the offer with them and inform the court about the outcome at the next hearing on June 12. They cannot grow the patented potatoes until then.

Now, Nitin Patel, Gujarat's deputy chief minister, has said the state administration is working to get cases against the nine farmers settled out of court.

THE BACKLASH

Criticism of PepsiCo's decision to take legal action against the Indian growers is widespread. Angry Twitter comments abound. Close to 200 activists requested the Indian government last week to ask PepsiCo to withdraw its "false" cases.

Speaking to Reuters, the head of RSS economic wing Swadeshi Jagran Manch accused the firm of "coercing" four of the growers, and called it "a clear case of a large MNC arm-twisting India's poor farmers". Farmer groups have threatened an agitation and a boycott of PepsiCo products.

Inputs from agencies
