Young Alvaston mum dies of rare cancer and leaves behind her six-year-old son

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Guarantee you'll never miss another big story by signing up for our free email updates

A young mum from Alvaston has died of a rare cancer - leaving behind her six-year-old son.

Naomi Knighton died in hospital with her sister, mother and brother at her bedside at 5.10pm on April 11.

The trainee nurse had battled an aggressive form of leukaemia since her teens but, despite two bone marrow transplants, chemotherapy and steroids, she died at just 26 years old.

The community rallied around Naomi and her family when news broke of her terminal illness in January. Her story spread as far as India and Poland while well-wishers raised more than £10,000 for her funeral, and for her son J'varn.

Her sister Kirsty, from Pear Tree, said Naomi pushed on despite doctors telling her - a month before her death - that she had between 24 hours and a week left to live.

The 32-year-old said: "She really fought it all the way.

"She began to deteriorate in the last week or so. I did have a few good times with her, and we had some good conversations.

"All the way through she remained so strong. She didn't get upset. She just dealt with whatever came her way - right to the end."

Naomi's family, including her mother Jean, and her son's father, will look after J'varn.

Kirsty and her brother Joel received a call from doctors on the morning of April 11 to say Naomi had taken a turn for the worse. They rushed to Nottingham City Hospital to join Jean and be by Naomi's side.

She recalled the last words she said to her sister: "I told her that it's OK, that my dad will be waiting for her, because he passed away a few years ago.

"And I told her we would look after her son."

Kirsty said her nephew was coping "really well" with the loss of his mother.

She said: "It's helped that we've been honest with him all along. He's been part of the process.

"He's become used to the fact that his mum was in hospital so it wasn't a great, sudden loss - it built up over time.

"I'm not sure how to explain it - he seems to be OK. Time will tell."

Naomi, a former Merrill College pupil, was a popular woman. The story of her devastating illness spread across Derby, and the world, at lightning speed. Her family has been inundated with non-stop messages of support since the start of the year.

World-champion boxer Tyson Fury, Radio DJ Tim Westwood, and rapper Big Narstie all recorded video messages for the Alvaston mum.

Kirsty, a mum-of-two, said: "We're all going to miss her being a part of our lives.

"We've had a lot of her friends dropping in and wanting to see the family. People have been sharing memories and things they've done together.

"A lot of people have said that they didn't know her but they have been touched by her story. Obviously, she was a popular girl anyway.

"We have just been overwhelmed by the kindness and generosity of strangers."

Listen to My Letter to You, a song written for Naomi by her close friend Lee Licence:

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

The family have organised a funeral according to specific requests made by Naomi before she died - however, her relatives are keen to keep the details under wraps.

J'varn had some input in the funeral by choosing one of the colours which would feature as part of the decor on the day.

Kirsty said: "She planned everything that she wanted before she passed and she made a few requests.

"I don't want to say too much but it will be a grand affair. It will be more of a celebration of her life. She really wanted everyone to be part of that."

Naomi's funeral service will take place at St Osmund's Church in London Road, Derby, at 12.30pm on Thursday, May 2. The burial will take place afterwards at Nottingham Road Cemetery in Chaddesden. Anyone who wishes to attend the service is welcome.

This will be followed by a celebration of Naomi's life at the Rolls-Royce Pavillion in Moor Lane from 3pm. The dress code is traditional funeral attire in dark colours.

Kirsty said: "We all want to pay our respects to someone who was beautiful, brave and strong, and who will always be remembered."
