3 surgical strikes when Manmohan Singh was PM, never politicised it: Rahul Gandhi

When Manmohan Singh was India's prime minister, he carried out three surgical strikes, said Congress president Rahul Gandhi in an exclusive interview to India Today. Rahul Gandhi said the Narendra Modi government is trying to politicise the work done by the defence forces.

He asked if Prime Minister Narendra Modi is not responsible for protecting Indian soldiers. "I want PM Modi to answer how CRPF men died [in the Pulwama attack on February 14]. I understand that Pakistan wants to carry out terror attacks, but is the PM not responsible for protecting Indian soldiers? Why doesn't he come on national TV and say, I failed to protect our CRPF men?" Rahul Gandhi said.

When India Today magazine asked him that the Modi government has carried out two surgical strikes, Rahul Gandhi said, "Very good. Manmohan Singhji carried out three surgical strikes but we didn't tell the world."

Rahul Gandhi said the reason why the UPA government did not disclose the surgical strike was because "we did not want to politicise the armed forces".

"We did not want to take advantage of what our soldiers did. It's their doing, we respect them, salute them and honour them. We don't dishonour them by politicising them," Rahul Gandhi said.

Under the prime ministership of Narendra Modi, Indian security forces carried out surgical strikes in 2016 (after the Uri terror attack) and airstrikes in 2019 (after the Pulwama terror attack).

When asked about what was achieved by the surgical strikes carried out during Manmohan Singh's tenure, Rahul Gandhi said, "I won't talk about what happened. But the targets that were supposed to be hit were hit successfully."

Completely neutralised Pakistan after 26/11: Rahul Gandhi

On the allegations levelled by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) that the UPA government failed to retaliate against Pakistan after the 26/11 Mumbai terror attack in Mumbai, Rahul Gandhi said, "The truth is we completely neutralised Pakistan and did it strategically."

"We carried out an international campaign to isolate Pakistan on the Jammu and Kashmir issue. We did what we had to do, without politicising it," Rahul Gandhi said.

ALSO READ | Pulwama terror attack: Suicide bomber drives SUV packed with 300 kg explosives into CRPF bus

ALSO READ | Pulwama terror attack: In last 5 years, J&K saw 93% rise in death of security personnel in terror attacks
