TS ECET 2019: Admit card to be released tomorrow, exams to be conducted on 11 May

TS ECET 2019: Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad will release the TS ECET 2019 admit card online tomorrow. Candidates who have submitted the application forms can download the admit card from the official website of TS ECET 2019. The admit card can be downloaded by entering the login details on the admit card download link.

The admit card of TS ECET 2019 will be released tomorrow and can be downloaded until May 10, 2019. The admit card link will be deactivated after the deadline. Therefore, all the candidates are advised to get their admit card by the time interval mentioned earlier. The admit card will not be sent via post and all the candidates need to download it from the official website only.

Candidates will not be permitted to enter the examination hall without the downloaded admit card. The admit card contains all the important information regarding the exam and the candidates need to read them very carefully.

How to Download TS ECET Admit Card

All the students need to visit the official website of the university to get their admit cards. Here are some steps that will help the students get their admit card:

Step 1: The candidates should visit the official website first and then click on the link provided.

Step 2: Then the candidates need to enter their login details and click on download admit card button.

Step 3: The login details of the candidates' registration number, class 12th Roll Number and Date of Birth of the candidates.

Step 4: The candidates can view the admit card after they submit the login details.

Details given on the Admit Card

The admit card of TS ECET 2019 will contain details like candidates name, date of birth, gender, category, examination centre name and address, reporting time, duration of exam, candidates photograph and signature and the instructions to be followed on the day of the exam.

The students should check if there is any discrepancy in their admit card. If there is any, they should contact the authorities immediately. The students should also carry a valid Id proof along with them while they go to the exam centre.
