After 29 years, Kashmiri Pandit trader returns to Valley, re-opens shop; says no place like Kashmir

Roshan Lal Mawa, a Kashmiri Pandit, had to leave the Valley in 1990 | Photo Credit: ANI

Srinagar: Roshan Lal Mawa is finally home! Mawa, a Kashmiri Pandit, had to leave the Valley in 1990 after he was shot at four times by unknown gunmen at his shop.

There is no place like Kashmir, said Mawa as he returned to his homeland after 29 years and resumed his wholesale dry fruits store in Srinagar on Wednesday.

As he arrived at Zainakadal, which is a commercial hub, Mawa got a welcome by Kashmiri Muslim traders. The traders even honoured him with 'dastarbandi' (tying of a white headgear).

"This is the highest honour I have received in my life. I have travelled across the country but there is no place like Kashmir. Kashmiriyat is alive and kicking," Mawa told the media.

"The brotherhood between Kashmiri Muslims and Pandits is intact."

Recounting what led him to leave Kashmir, Mawa said that he was shot at four times at his shop on October 13, 1990. In the wake of the attack, Mawa left for Delhi and eventually got settled in the national capital.

"The main reason for me to migrate to Delhi from this place was the attack which took place at my father's shop. My father owned a famous shop here. On 13 October 1990, one man shot three bullets at me and tried to shot at my head too but somehow I got escaped from there."

"I survived from that massive attack and stayed at the hospital for four months. After that, I got shifted to Delhi. I had a big business in Delhi but still, I used to miss my city and used to dream about Hari Parbat. I said this many times that my God lives in Kashmir and that is the only place where I belong to. This is my home," Mawa told news agency ANI.

“But the longing to be back among my people made me spend these 29 years in sighs and sobs," news agency PTI also mentioned Mawa as saying.

When asked if other Kashmiri Pandits should also come back to the Valley, Mawa said they should seek opportunities.

"Ninety-nine per cent Kashmiris are humane. There could be one per cent who might have a different idea but I am at peace that I have come back. I am happy."

It was a great sight when a number of local businessmen, Kashmiri Muslims, gathered at Mawa's shop and welcomed him.

Notably, Mawa’s son, Sandeep Mawa, is running an organisation - J&K Reconciliation Front - which has begun the process of reconciliation between communities in Kashmir.

"We have started this initiative to bring back the migrants so that all people of Kashmir - Pandits, Muslims, Sikhs - live in harmony. They say charity begins at home. I convinced my father to return to Kashmir despite him being shot at four times and our three building set afire in 1990," said Sandeep.
