She-Merchants, Buccaneers and Gentlewomen: by Katie Hickman - review

B eing widowed in one’s teens is unusual; being three times widowed before one’s 30th birthday, all of them on a foreign shore and mostly in sanguinary circumstances, must be almost unheard of. Such, though, was the lot of young Katherine Gyfford, née Cooke.

Described in 1709 as “a most beautiful lady not exceeding 13 or 14 years of age”, Miss Cooke had sailed for India aboard the Loyal Bliss with her father, a gunner in the East India Company’s army. Landfall was made at Karwar, a company settlement south of Bombay. Fresh provisions were brought aboard and passengers allowed ashore. Twelve days later, when the Loyal Bliss sailed, it left without Katherine. “To oblige her family”, it was said, the teenager had acquired a husband and become Mrs Katherine Harvey.

John Harvey sounds a poor match. He is said to have been “in years” — so probably old enough to be his child-bride’s grandfather — and “deformed”. But he was chief of the Karwar establishment and thus a man of means. Such sudden and suspicious pairings were not uncommon. In fact, Gunner Cooke had almost certainly brought his daughter east in the hopes of just such a liaison, so anticipating the official consignment of English brides for company batchelors later known as “the fishing fleet”.

Happily, Katherine’s reservations about Harvey were soon forgotten, as indeed was Harvey. He died within a couple of years, leaving her still only 16 but now well provided for and free to marry a man of her choice. She opted for another Karwar merchant, the more youthful Thomas Chown. But sailing north to Bombay to claim Harvey’s estate, the newlyweds were attacked by pirates. Chown took a cannonball in the shoulder and bled to death in his wife’s arms.

She, already “heavy with child”, was then carried off into captivity as the first female European prisoner of a corsair chief. This Kanhoji Angrey, who would contest the sea-lanes with the company for the next 20 years, belied his ill-repute by respecting his captive’s privacy and offering to ransom her. For 30,000 rupees Katherine was handed over to an emissary from Bombay and there, in due course, gave birth.

By 1719 Katherine, now in her early twenties, had married again, this time to William Gyfford, the just appointed supervisor of the company’s establishment at Anjengo. Little more than an estuary on the Kerala coast, Anjengo had been leased from the local queen as a godown for the company’s pepper purchases. Gyfford sought a more secure tenure and, to that end, paddled upriver at the head of an escort — and straight into a well-laid ambush.

Disarmed and hopelessly outnumbered, he somehow found time to dash off a note to Anjengo — “Take care and don’t frighten the women; we are in no great danger” — before the massacre began. Of his companions, only 20 survived. He himself, with his severed tongue pinned to his chest, was lashed to a log and sent floating downstream never to be seen again.

A long siege of Anjengo ensued, but without the now thrice-widowed Katherine. She and two other Englishwomen had been hastily packed off down the coast in a native longboat. Four weeks later they reached Madras, dishevelled but not entirely destitute. Katherine had by now learned how to deal with bereavement. She had come away with a tidy sum said to be owed to her late husband, plus the ledgers to prove it. Defending her action and enjoying the proceeds, she would live for another 20 years.

Why no one has made a film about such an extraordinary life is a mystery. But then one could say that about most of the fearless females featured in Katie Hickman’s book. There have been other studies of the British memsahibs but none so focused on the adventurous and unconventional, and none more conscientiously researched, historically sound and compellingly written. An excellent book, then, despite its unmanageable title.

She-Merchants, Buccaneers and Gentlewomen: British Women in India by Katie Hickman (Virago, £20)
