Man arrested in Madhya Pradesh for shooting deputy superintendent of police dead

The accused was arrested from Vidisha (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bhopal: Police in the state capital of Madhya Pradesh have arrested a man for barging into the home of a deputy superintendent of police (DSP) and shooting him dead. The horrific incident has come to light from Awadhpuri village in Bhopal where the victim lived with his family.

Officials told media outlets that DSP Gorelal Ahirwar was on leave for one month after he underwent a bypass surgery earlier this year.

The accused, who has been identified as Himanshu Pratap Singh, reached Ahirwar's residence around 7.15 pm on Wednesday. Reports suggest that an argument ensued between the two which led to Singh screaming at the victim. The victim's daughter, Dr Anita Chaudhary told police officials that she asked Singh to leave her father alone when the former began yelling at him.

#UPDATE A person named Himanshu Pratap Singh has been arrested by Bhopal Police from Vidisha for killing Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP) GL Aharwal in Avadhpuri police station area of Bhopal. #MadhyaPradesh https://t.co/q1xh1yczrm — ANI (@ANI) May 1, 2019

He went out and came back almost instantly only to shoot Ahirwar in the stomach. At the time, the DSP's daughter and daughter-in-law were present at the scene of the crime, said police. They rushed the DSP to Narmada hospital where he was declared dead on arrival. An investigation was launched and led to the arrest of Singh from Vidisha late Wednesday night.

Reports have suggested that Singh lived with his mother, who is also a police constable, at the Nehru nagar police line. He was friends with Ahirwar's daughter on Facebook, reported sections of the media. However, the dispute which drove Singh to kill Ahirwar is still unclear. Deceased DSP Gorelal Ahirwar was posted at the CID branch of the Police Headquarters in Bhopal. He had also served as station in-charge at several police stations across thew state of Uttar Pradesh. More details in this regard are awaited pending an extensive police inquriy.
