BSF arrests Pakistani national in Gujarat

A day after officials seized identity cards of Pakistani origin in Kutch district, the Border Security Force (BSF), on Friday, said it had arrested a Pakistani national near the India-Pakistan border in Gujarat.

In a rare press release of its kind, the Headquarters of Gujarat Frontier BSF, Gandhinagar, said the 35 to 40-year-old Pakistani national, Mohammed Shaan, son of Mohammed Sadiq, is a resident of Multan district in the neighboring country.

He was apprehended at about 10.30 pm on Wednesday.

The BSF conducted a thorough search of the entire area but nothing suspicious was recovered so far. Further investigation is being carried out.

The incident is being examined in view of the ongoing Lok Sabha elections whose seventh and last phase of polling is on May 19.

Gujarat shares a 512-km-long land border with Pakistan.

Patan, Banaskantha and Kutch districts, which share land border with Pakistan, have been put on high alert. Gujarat also shares sea border with Pakistan.

According to reports, in what is seen as a possible ‘warming Gujarat up’ exercise by Islamabad, following fishermen’s clues, the Kutch police had recovered an unclaimed Pakistani bag containing two identity cards, biscuits and other items manufactured in Pakistan from the coastline near Jakhau, a fishing port.

On high alert

This led to a massive search operation in the nearby Sindhori area, where the bag was found. After the February 14 terror attack at Pulwama in Jammu and Kashmir, Gujarat has been put on high alert, especially in the border areas.

The entire coastline is also on high alert as it was through this route that terrorists had entered Indian waters and attacked Mumbai on 26/11/2008.

At least three other similar attempts to intrude into India have been reported in Kutch last year.

Earlier, Gujarat ATS had arrested a man from Delhi who confessed that a drug consignment from Pakistan had landed on the Kutch coast on March 19.

Gujarat Marine Police, Coast Guard and the Indian Navy had been alerted in the matter.
