Jawan kills colleague, injures 2 in West Bengal

An Assam Rifles jawan was killed and two others were injured in West Bengal's Howrah when another jawan opened fire after a heated argument among them on Thursday.

The incident happened at Bangalpur Jyotirmoyee Girls High School at Bagnan in Howrah district. The Seventh Battalion Jawans of Assam Rifles had camped at that school ahead of the fifth phase of polls on May 6. The place falls under Uluberia Parliamentary constituency, which goes to poll in the fifth phase.

The deceased jawan has been identified as Bholanath Das and the assailant accused of firing 18 rounds of bullets from a self-loading rifle (SLR) is Lakshmikant Burman, who has been arrested. The two injured are Rantumoni Bodhak and Anil Rajbangshi. They have been admitted to a private hospital in Kolkata. The SLR used has been seized.

ADG (Law and Order) Siddhinath Gupta said, "Burman has been arrested. Prima facie inquiry shows he was not in a stable mental condition. The matter is being investigated."

Sources said that at 11.30 am on Thursday, sounds of gunshots were heard from the school and a team of senior officers rushed to the place along with members of the Rapid Action Force (RAF). The place was soon cordoned off.

The District Police have sent a preliminary report to Nabanna and to the office of the Chief Electoral Officer (CEO), West Bengal.

Although there has been no official statement as to why the killing took place, sources said that there had been an argument among the jawans. "Burman was depressed for a while after his leave application had been turned down," said a source.

The incident happened after the CEO WB said that 580 companies of Central forces had been deployed to ensure 100 per cent coverage in the fifth phase of polling process.

Polling began on April 11 with over 50 per cent security coverage being provided by Central forces, which increased steadily with every phase. While in the second phase there was 80 per cent coverage, the third and fourth phases saw 90 and 98.8 per cent Central forces deployment, respectively.

Issue Over Leave
