Pakistan issues order to freeze assets of Masood Azhar, impose travel ban

New Delhi:

Pakistan has issued an official order to freeze the assets and impose travel ban on Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar after the United Nations declared him a “global terrorism”. In a notification issued Wednesday, the foreign ministry said, “the Federal Government is pleased to order that the Resolution 2368 (2017) be fully implemented” against Azhar. He is also banned from selling or purchasing arms and ammunition. Pakistan foreign office spokesman Mohammad Faisal on Wednesday said that Pakistan would “immediately enforce the sanctions” imposed on Azhar.

The government directed officials to take actions “as appropriate for the implementation of sanctions” against the JeM chief, according to the notification.

In what came as major diplomatic victory for India, Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar was on Wednesday listed as a 'global terrorist' by the UN Security Council. The development comes after China, after blocking New Delhi's efforts four times, finally backed the latter's bid at the UN.



China removed its hold on the proposal, which was moved by France, UK and the US in the Security Council's 1267 Al Qaeda Sanctions Committee in February just days after the horrific terror attack against Indians security forces in Pulwama carried out by Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish.

China had put a technical hold in March on a fresh proposal to impose a ban on the head of Pakistan-based JeM which claimed responsibility for the deadly Pulwama terror attack. It was for the fourth time, China blocked Azhar's listing as a global terrorist by the UN.

The efforts to resolve Azhar's listing issue gathered momentum last week with the visit of Imran Khan to Beijing to attend China's 2nd Belt and Road Forum (BRF) which was held here from April 25-27. During the visit, Khan held talks with Xi, besides meeting Premier Li Keqiang and Vice President Wang Qishan during which India-Pakistan tension following the Pulwama terror attack as well as listing of Azhar reportedly figured.

China, which is one of the five veto-wielding members of the Security Council, blocked India's efforts in the past to list Azhar as a global terrorist, saying there is not enough evidence against him.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
