Babulal Marandi, Jharkhand's first CM, fights to stay relevant

RANCHI: In the sub-plot of Jharkhand’s main political battle between BJP and the grand alliance is an intriguing fight for survival featuring Babulal Marandi , the state’s first chief minister.The 61-year-old has returned to contest from Koderma constituency — which he won thrice — after the drubbing he faced in Dumka in 2014, where he came third, behind JMM leader Shibu Soren and BJP’s Sunil Soren.The defeat in Dumka had a demoralising effect on both Marandi, who was looking to establish himself as the state’s tallest tribal leader after Soren, and his party Jharkhand Vikas Morcha-Prajatantrik, which failed to win a single seat in the Lok Sabha. In the assembly polls later that year, JVM-P managed to get eight seats in the 81-member House.But soon after the assembly polls, six JVM-P legislators defected to BJP, plunging the party into an existential crisis. The assembly speaker’s court recently ruled defections were legitimate and the party had merged with BJP. JVM-P has challenged the decision in the high court, which is still hearing the case.Marandi has since been fighting to stay relevant. In the run-up to government formation after the assembly polls, he is believed to have met BJP chief Amit Shah to strike a deal and become CM. He also explored a pre-poll alliance with JD(U) chief and Bihar CM Nitish Kumar but it did not materialise. He finally aligned with the grand alliance.During seat-sharing negotiations, sources said Marandi had to accept JVM-P general secretary Pradeep Yadav’s claim over the Godda seat. “Being the party chief, he should have restrained him, but he couldn’t. We had to sacrifice the seat for the sake of the alliance,” a Congress leader said, adding, “If Babulal loses and Yadav wins, we could see a fight for supremacy over the party. There is already a buzz that Yadav has more clout.”Marandi is drawing confidence from the odds he has battled. “I have been fighting all through my life. I fought with BJP and launched a party to make a mark. And this time too, we will survive,” he said. On his political future, he added, “Let people think about it. I am seeing a historic win in Koderma this time.”Marandi first won from Koderma on a BJP ticket in 2004. In 2006, he resigned as MP but won the seat as an independent in the bypoll. In the 2009 general elections, JVM-P fought on all 14 seats, but only Marandi won from Koderma.He is up against BJP’s Annapurna Devi, who resigned from the post of RJD’s state president and joined the saffron party on March 25. Devi was close to Marandi till recently and even addressed a JVM-P rally organised by him in Koderma in January.
