Pakistan has third highest number in UN proscribed list

NEW DELHI: With the United Nation Security Council designating Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar as global terrorist, the number of Pakistani citizens in the UNSC’s proscribed list has gone up to 146. Pakistan has most citizens and entities after Iraq and Afghanistan in the ISIL (Da’esh) & Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee list.UNSC updated its list of individuals and entities on Wednesday after making amendments in 80 entries on its sanctions list, according to a press statement. The individuals and entities from Pakistan include 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed, Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi of Lashkar-e-Taiba and the Haqqanis, apart from Azhar. Dawood, an accused in the 1993 Mumbai blast, is also named in the list with details of his Pakistani passport.Pakistan has tried to distance itself from the militant groups and individuals and has claimed itself to be the victim of terrorism . However, the UN list highlights the names of terrorists who live in Pakistan, used Pakistani soil for their operations or collaborated with terrorist groups operating in Pakistan.Hafiz Saeed is listed as a person wanted by Interpol for his involvement in terrorist activities. The LeT was responsible for the 26/11 Mumbai attack that killed 166 people, including six Americans. LeT’s media contact Haji Mohammed Yahya Mujahid and Saeed’s deputies Abdul Salaam and Zafar Iqbal are listed under him. They are also wanted by Interpol. The LeT is listed with its various aliases, such as al-Paasban-i-Kashmir, Paasban-i-Ahle Hadith, Mansoorian, Falah-i-Insaniat Foundation and Jamaat-ud Dawa.Some of the terror entities mentioned in the list are based near the Afghanistan-Pakistan border. It also provides locations of entities based in Pakistan, operated from there or had links to Pakistani individuals that includes Jaish-e-Mohammad, Rabita Trust, Al Rasheed Trust, Harkatul Mujahideen, Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, Lashkar-i-Jhangvi, Al-Harmain, Islamic Jihad group, Al Akhtar Trust International, Harkatul Jihad Islami and Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan, among others.The list, reviewed by ET, contains names of over 850 individuals or entities designated as global terrorist and come under travel ban, assets freeze and arms embargo, as per the UN resolution. On Wednesday, the name of JeM chief was added to the list after China removed its technical hold within the 1267 Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee.
