Over 1,300 Rohingyas flee India for Bangladesh

bluesky said: I thought India is full of Sadhus and Sannyasis with great minds. But, seeing what they do to the hapless and destitute people called Rohingya I can say India is full of Demons and Shaitans who are void of even normal human quality. Could it be that the GoI is following the discreet advises forwarded by @Nilgiri , a leader of the Shaitans? Click to expand...

They have engaged in much bad behaviour and crime. If they want to stay as refugees, they better be on best behaviour, otherwise people will naturally force them to leave back to most appropriate country for them (Bangladesh). I don't need to give advise to Indian govt at all, it is a functioning democracy (that has to respond to will/desire of its citizens or bear consequences), quite unlike your Haseena-theocracy BAL-desh...and its use of BCL on streets as needed (police and army only as last resorts for wrong thinking and wrong expression as BAL decides).As you can see, this will be the precedent used for NRC exercise in the end too. Make life intolerable for the illegals (who have no claim to being refugee and are purely here for economic reasons) and they will naturally go back to BD. No need to get govts involved face to face at all....why you think we did pilkhana and then have BGB in our pocket (so much so that we have outposts of BSF on BD side of border to help with border security)?This will all happen while we maintain overall good relations with BD people and its govt....they are too dependent on Indian culture, Indian goods import, Indian masala, Indian TV, Indian hospitals, Indian elite managers/professionals etc etc. Just look at your shameless shourov member here....screams against India so much...yet has Indian motorcycle he brags about lol.This is your liberation tax, remember that, its paid back when we say its paid back....we decide, you don't. Don't get it in your head ever that this is a partnership of equals, that is your people's first big mistake and they should understand that...so there doesn't need to be friction and trouble.
