World Television Premiere of Uri on Zee Cinema on May 5

Following the roguish terrorist attacks at Uri Army Base camp in Kashmir, Uri the Surgical Strike is a movie based on India’s most successful covert operation till date. Encapsulating the Naya India ka Josh, the movie features an ensemble cast comprising of Yami Gautam, Paresh Rawal, Kirti Kulhari in crucial roles. Mohit Raina making his big screen debut plays the role of Major Karan Kashyap and leading them all is Major Vihaan Singh Shergill played by none other than Vicky Kaushal. With the sole objective of avenging the brutal deaths of their fallen heroes, the war drama is set to premiere on Zee Cinema for the first time on Sunday, 5th May 2019 at 12 noon.

Vicky Kaushal who plays the character of Major Vihaan Singh Shergill in the film said, “Uri is a very special film for me and our idea was to give tribute to the Indian Armed Forces. The soldiers give up their today for our tomorrow and no words can signify or repay the sacrifices they make for our country. The way audiences have resonated with the emotion of patriotism, valour and sacrifices of our armed forces has been amazing. As artists, that is the biggest takeaway for us. Fans who missed watching the movie in the theatres can catch the World Television Premiere of Uri on Zee Cinema and I hope they will enjoy it.”

Seen for the first time on the big screen, Mohit Raina said, “When it comes to the Army and undying love for the country, we citizens can in no way match their level of dedication. But the raw emotion and passion to live in a free India moved us. It was this, that drove me to portray the role of Major Karan Kashyap in the film.”

URI - The Surgical Strike is based on the 2016 Indian Army's surgical strikes on Pakistan Administered Kashmir as retaliation for the Uri attack. Directed by debutant Aditya Dhar, the movie is a harrowing adventure behind the headlines that is at once a riveting procedural and, at the same time, a bracing political statement on the war based on terror.

On 18 September 2016, four heavily armed militants attacked on Indian security forces near the town of Uri in Jammu and Kashmir. Film URI chronicles the events of the surgical strike. The fictional story based on this true event recounts the fatal operation which was carried out in 2016. The movie is divided into five chapters that lead to the finale of surgical strike. Major Vihaan Singh Shergill (Vicky Kaushal), a brave and determined officer, is grappling with personal tragedy. Govind (Paresh Rawal), an Indian intelligence & law enforcement officer, appoints Vihaan for the highly secretive operation of surgical strike that’s planned under the guidance of the Prime Minister of India (Rajit Kapur). It's up to Vihaan and his special team force to accomplish this daredevil mission. Will they succeed?

Watch the World Television Premiere of Uri: The Surgical Strike on Sunday 5th May at 12 noon only on Zee Cinema
