MC officer’s assault case: Cops start process to issue lookout circular against realtor

Image used for representational purpose

LUDHIANA: After looking out for developer Gurnam Singh, who had abused and slapped the woman building inspector of Ludhiana municipal corporation, at all possible places, the police officials have started the process to issue a lookout circular (LOC) against him.

The MC employees had also given 15 days to the police to nab the accused, failing which they would go on a strike.

The police officials claimed that they had checked all his addresses, but have got no trace of the developer. The police officials claimed that it was getting even more difficult as he had fled with his entire family.

However, the MC officials claimed that Gurnam had citizenship of the US and Canada and there is every chance that he had fled India.

ACP Davinder Chaudhary said they have searched him at all possible locations, but could not trace him. He said they checked him at his house, his brother’ house and even at his father’ house, but all these houses were found locked.

He said, “We have come to know that his two daughters are settled in Canada and America, so there are chances he might have slipped out of India. We have started the process to issue LOC against him. The file has been sent to Punjab Police headquarters in Chandigarh for final issuance.”

On April 24, a team comprising MC building branch officials from zone B had gone to demolish an illegal colony on Tibba Road near the MC garbage dump. Private developer Gurnam Singh first rammed his car into an MC vehicle from the rear and later abused and slapped building inspector Kashish Garg.

In her complaint, she mentioned that the developer did not listen to anybody and tore her clothes during manhandling. The police had registered an FIR against the developer on the charges of attempt to murder and a few other sections of the IPC.

The Punjab State Women Commission has also taken suo moto cognisance of this incident and police officials have been asked to bring the accused before the commission as soon as possible.


