Probing role of Muzaffarpur shelter home owner in murder of 11 minor girls, CBI tells Supreme Court

The shelter home in Muzaffarpur, Bihar owned by Brajesh Thakur (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has filed a fresh affidavit in the Supreme Court, stating that it will now probe the main accused of the Muzaffarpur Shelter Home abuse case for the murder of 11 minor girls. While delivering its seventh status report to the apex court, India's highest investigative agency told Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi that new evidence has emerged which has led them to believe that the owner of the shelter home, Brajesh Thakur might have murdered as many as 11 inmates.

In its affidavit, the CBI claimed that it discovered a bundle of bones from a burial site where they were led by one of the accused, Guddu Patel. In the preliminary stages of the probe, minor girls rescued from the shelter home 'Balika Grah' in Bihar's Muzaffarpur had told investigators that Thakur was responsible for the mysterious disappearance of inmates. The apex agency also told the CJI that it is currently in the process of tracking down all of the girls whose name feature in the shelter home records.

Thakur was arrested last year after a study conducted by the Tata Institute of Social Sciences at shelter homes owned by him revealed widespread sexual abuse of minor boys and girls. As many as 40 girls rescued from the home in Muzaffarpur had claimed that they were harassed, and sexually abused by the owner and his acquaintances. The appalling scale of crimes had triggered waves of shock across the length and breadth of the country, prompting the highest court of the land to take cognizance and instruct the CBI to probe the allegations.

In its latest report to the Supreme Court, CBI also argued against claims that its probe into the case has been a "hogwash". The apex investigative agency claimed that it was conducting a thorough probe and that it will now probe shelter home owner Brajesh Thakur on charges of murder. In their defence, investigators also said that they had chargesheeted "outsiders" who visited the shelter home, three of whom have been named by the rescued children, including the Muzaffarpur child protection officer and a member of the child welfare committee.

(Prime accused Brajesh Thakur)

Taking note of the CBI's latest submission, the apex court has decided to hear the matter in full detail on May 6. Meanwhile, the central investigative agency has stated that the trial court had framed charges against 20 accused of offences recorded under relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.
