IPL Match Weather: Mighty Kings Face the Purple Army amid Wet Weather

Kings XI Punjab's Mayank Agarwal gets dismissed during the sixth IPL 2019 match between Kolkata Knight Riders and Kings XI Punjab at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on March 27, 2019. (Kuntal Chakrabarty/IANS)

Kings XI Punjab and Kolkata Knight Riders (KKR) will lock horns on Friday clash at the Mohali stadium in Punjab. The KKR team won the last encounter against Mumbai Indians after scoring 232 runs in the first innings. However, six consecutive defeats before that have been a serious drag on their IPL standings. Similarly, Kings XI Punjab, too, has won only one match in the last five. Both the teams share equal points, however, KKR takes the lead in the Net Run Rate (NRR). Let’s take a look at how the weather will favour both the teams tonight.

The Weather Channel met team has also forecast cloudy conditions over Punjab on Friday. According to the met team, “under the influence of the persisting western disturbance (WD) and its induced cyclonic circulation, Punjab and Haryana may possibly experience isolated rainfall.’’ However, the probability of rainfall during the match is very low and therefore, spectators can hope for an uninterrupted game on Friday.

Kolkata Knight Riders' Andre Russell celebrates fall of a wicket during the sixth IPL 2019 match between Kolkata Knight Riders and Kings XI Punjab at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on March 27, 2019. (Kuntal Chakrabarty/IANS)

According to the India Meteorological Department, the weather in Punjab is likely to remain wet on Friday. Chandigarh will experience generally cloudy sky with the possibility of rain and thunderstorms over the region. The IMD has also highlighted the possibility of dust storms. The change in weather pattern can be attributed to the wet weather conditions brought in by the western disturbance. The IMD also expects, thunderstorms accompanied by lightning and gusty winds (30-40kmph) over Chandigarh and parts of Haryana and Delhi on Friday. These weather anomalies are likely to continue until the weekend after which dry weather with mainly clear skies will be restored over much of north India.

Advertisement Temperatures over much of north India are also likely to be above normal. Maximum temperatures in Chandigarh may rise to almost 40°C on Friday, whereas nighttime temperatures may drop to a low of 24°C. Match-time temperatures are also likely to be around 24°C. This coupled with a lower relative humidity of 24% is likely to make it a comfortable game for the players, provided rain does not play a spoilsport. Meanwhile, wind speed blowing from east-northeast will be at 11km/h. Dew point in Mohali will be at 13.3°C and the chances of dew affecting the playing conditions are high especially during the second innings.

Stay tuned to The Weather Channel for constant weather updates from IPL venues across the nation!

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel app (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
