Coimbatore: Lottery King’s aide found dead

COIMBATORE: An accountant of a college owned by ‘ Lottery King Santiago Martin was found dead at Velliankadu Kuttai on the outskirts of the city on Friday evening.The accountant, T Palanisamy, 45, of Urumandampalayam near GN Mills at Thudiyalur, was interrogated by the income tax department for two days in connection with searches conducted at 70 places belonging to Santiago Martin, his family members and benamis in the last four days. Palanisamy was working as an accountant at the Martin Homeopathy Medical College and Hospital in the city. He was working in the college for the past 25 years. The college was among the 22 places searched in the city.Palanisamy’s family members suspect foul play in his death The body of Palanisamy was found floating in a pond and the locals informed the Karamadai police. The body was sent to the Mettupalayam government hospital for postmortem. Police said Palanisamy had come to Velliankadu Kuttai by his scooter. The scooter was found near the pond. Palanisamy’s son Rohin Kumar said income tax sleuths conducted searches at the homeopathy medical college on Tuesday.“My father was also questioned by the officials on Tuesday around 4pm at my residence. After 6pm, my father was beaten up by the IT sleuths and they abused my father using caste name. Later, he was taken to the college where he was again severely beaten. On Wednesday morning, he came home and didn’t speak to anyone. Around midnight on Thursday he came home alone and told us that he was beaten by IT officials,” he Rohin Kumar.Rohin Kumar said he noticed cut injuries on his father’s right arm. When asked, Palanisamy had told them that he had attempted to commit suicide.“My father told me that he was beaten by young officials and he was abused with bad words. So, my father went into depression,” he said.He said his father left the house around 7am on Friday and didn’t go to office. Around 3pm, the family members got a phone call from the Karamadai police informing about his death. “I can identify the IT officials who assaulted my father at my residence during the interrogation. My father is not a coward to commit suicide. I suspect foul play in my father’s death. He might have been murdered by unidentified people. Postmortem should be conducted in the presence of a judicial officer,” Rohin Kumar added.The Karamadai police have registered a case under section 174 CrPC (unnatural death) and further investigation is on.When contacted, IT sources said Palanisamy was interrogated for two days. He tried to kill himself and inflicted injuries on his right arm. So, he was admitted in a private hospital at Thudiyalur and he was let off.
