Art exhibit shows lingering pain from Punjab disappearances

Abhishek Madhukar's haunting "Lapata. And the Left Behind" is at the The Space, An Art Gallery in Vancouver until Tuesday.

Decades have passed since thousands of Sikh families lost loved ones to disappearances and extrajudicial killings in India’s Punjab region, but for many the pain remains raw.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

A new international photo exhibit, launched Friday in Vancouver, seeks to remind people that those families are still grieving, yearning for answers and justice.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Art exhibit shows lingering pain from Punjab disappearances Back to video

Abhishek Madhukar’s haunting “ Lapata. And the Left Behind ” documents, in black and white, some of their stories. It runs at the The Space, An Art Gallery in Yaletown until Tuesday.

In 1995, human-rights activist Jaswant Singh Khalra uncovered how thousands of Sikh women, children and men had been abducted or executed by Punjab police since violence erupted against Sikhs after the 1984 assassination of prime minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguards.

Khalra disappeared in 1995 — human rights groups say he was abducted, tortured and murdered by police — but various humanitarian organizations continue his work.

One of them is Khalsa Aid International, which provides aid in disaster areas and civil conflict zones around the globe, and commissioned Lapata. Vancouver was chosen for its debut because of the large Sikh population in Metro Vancouver.

Photo by Submitted: Abhishek Madhukar / PNG

Madhukar, 43, is a journalist with the BBC based in Delhi. The self-taught photographer took the dozens of the images for Lapata during several trips to the Punjab between 2016 and 2018.

He would travel to remote areas and villages to meet the families and interview them at their homes, where they would show him photos of their long-lost loved ones, and share stories of trauma and heartache.

“It was quite intense just meeting the mothers and relatives of the people, and speaking with them and photographing them,” Madhukar said in an email. “The stories and lives were right before me, wide open, and I was familiar with it, and it was important that I did not forget or made an effort to remind others of what happened with us, and who we are or what we become by our acts and deeds.”
