Sharad Mohol granted bail in case of Kishor Marne murder

Bombay HC took cognisance of fact that the key witness in the case failed to point him out in identification parade, nor mentioned his role at the time



Notorious gangster Sharad Mohol has been granted bail by the Bombay High Court (HC) in the case he was awarded life imprisonment for by the Pune sessions court, for the 2010 murder of another criminal, Kishor Marne. Mohol, however, was not released as he also faces trial as an accused in the 2012 murder of terror suspect Qateel Siddiqui inside the highly secure Anda Cell of Yerwada Central Jail.



Mohol had challenged the sessions court sentence in the HC. His advocates Harshad Ponda and Shamsher Garud had submitted that Mohol’s conviction was based on the testimony of Vijay Marne, who had made no mention of Mohol while recounting the criminal episode. He also did not ascribe any role played by Mohol in the January 11, 2010, incident; same was the case with the identification parade.



Mohol, they contended, found a mention only in the supplementary statement recorded in March 2010, wherein the names of accused persons were disclosed based on hearsay knowledge. They argued that though Mohol’s name did appear in the FIR, his specific role was not prescribed and Marne pointed to only three other people during the identification parade. The other point brought to the notice of the court by the defence was that already one other accused in the case has been granted bail.



The public prosecutor opposed this submission, underscoring that Vijay Marne was an eye witness in the case and has named Mohol as an accused. But, granting bail, the HC pointed out that the eyewitness did point to only three in the identification parade and at that juncture, made no mention of a fourth person’s involvement. It also noted that Hemant Dabhekar, one of the other accused in the case, was out on bail and held that Mohol was entitled to the same relief. Mohol was granted bail on the condition that he marks his attendance at the office of the superintendent of police and additional sessions court, Pune.



Kishor Marne was murdered during a gang shootout on the fateful day in January 2010. This was preceded by the murder of Sandeep Mohol (who was in Sharad Mohol’s gang) by members of Ganesh Marne’s gang. After Ganesh was jailed for this, Kishor was running the Marne gang. Mohol and six of his accomplices were sentenced to life imprisonment in 2016.



In fact, 27-year-old Mohol made his entry into the police books with the murder of Kishor Marne. But, over the next two years, Mohol notched up five other cases of serious crime, forcing the cops to slap him with the stringent Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA). In June 2012, Mohol made headlines for strangling Siddiqui, for which he had Alok Bhalerao as his accomplice. The list of crimes against Mohol included two murders, extortion, theft and a case under the Arms Act, 1959.



At present, the trial of the Siddiqui murder case is going on at the sessions court. Interestingly, all six strong witnesses in the case have turned hostile, weakening the prosecution’s position.


