Cyclone Fani ‘kills 3’ in India with 1.2 million fleeing terrifying 127mph storm as it tears into east coast

CYCLONE Fani has struck the east coast of India killing at least three people as winds reached 127mph.

The grade five storm, which the Indian Meterological Department described as “extremely severe,” hit the Bay of Bengal at around 8am local time today.

15 A roadside shop near Puri was destroyed as the cyclone hit Credit: AP:Associated Press

15 A row of shops were destroyed by the powerful cyclone Credit: AP:Associated Press

15 The cyclone hit the state of Odisha at around 8am local time Credit: AP:Associated Press

A teenager was reported killed by a falling tree in Puri, a woman was struck by flying debris in the Nayagarh district when she had gone to get some water and a 65-year-old woman suffered a suspected heart attack while she was in a cyclone shelter.

India's National Disaster Response Force said around 1.2million people have been evacuated from low-lying areas of Odisha and moved to nearly 4,000 shelters.

Police spokesman Sanjeev Panda said two people had been killed by falling trees in Odisha.

Odisha Special Relief Commissioner Bishnupada Sethi says communications have been disrupted in some areas, but no deaths or injuries have been reported.

The main road to Puri, a popular tourist beach city, was littered with fallen trees and electricity poles, making it impassable. A special train ran Thursday to evacuate tourists from the city.

The airport in Kolkata, the capital of West Bengal, closed from 3 p.m. Friday to Saturday morning.

At least 200 trains were cancelled across India.

Cyclone Fani is forecast to drop as much as eight inches of rain in parts of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha.

The National Disaster Response Force dispatched 54 rescue and relief teams of doctors, engineers and deep-sea divers to flood-prone areas along the coast and as far afield as Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a group of islands that comprise a state located about 840 miles east of mainland India in the Bay of Bengal.

'PANIC SITUATION'

Fani is the fiercest storm since 1999, when a cyclone killed around 10,000 people and devastated large parts of Odisha as wind speeds topped 173mph.

The state had evacuated more than a million people from the most vulnerable communities along the low-lying coast during the past 24 hours, Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik said on Twitter.

In the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh just south of Odisha, Fani topped electricity poles and uprooted others, leaving them in sharp angles. In the Srikakulam district, where around 20,000 people had been evacuated, thatched-roof houses collapsed and fishing boats left unmoored on beaches had been sliced into shards.

Close to 37 miles inland, high winds uprooted trees and electricity poles in the state capital, Bhubaneshwar, where authorities had ordered the airport to stay closed. Schools and colleges in Odisha were also shut.

A major hospital in the city suffered extensive structural damage but all patients and staff were safe, authorities said.

Anuradha Mohanty said: "It was a massive cyclone, like many others our house is flooded. Boundary walls of houses around us have collapsed, trees have been uprooted. It is a panic situation."

Hundreds of disaster management personnel were deployed in the state, and doctors and other medical staff were told to defer any leave until May 15.

Neighbouring West Bengal also decided to close an airport at Kolkata, its state capital.

India's cyclone season can last from April to December, when severe storms batter coastal cities and cause widespread deaths and damage to crops and property in both India and neighbouring Bangladesh.

Technological advancements have helped meteorologists to predict weather patterns well in advance, and authorities have become far better at preparing for the ferocious storms and reducing casualties.

15

A super-cyclone battered the coast of Odisha for 30 hours in 1999, killing 10,000 people. While in 2013, a mass evacuation of nearly a million people likely saved thousands of lives.

Cyclones typically quickly lose power as they move inland.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has asked his officials to stay in touch with the states at risk from cyclone Fani.

15 Wind speeds have reached 127mph Credit: AP:Associated Press

15 Cyclone Fani was described as being 'very severe' Credit: EPA

15 A brave motorcyclist ventures out as the storm hits Credit: AP:Associated Press

15 People wait for transport to take them to safety Credit: AFP or licensors

15 More than one million people have fled the area Credit: AFP or licensors

15 Around 4,000 temporary shelters have been set up Credit: Reuters

15 Passengers were left stranded after trains were cancelled due to the cyclone Credit: Reuters

15 India's cyclone season can last from April until December Credit: AP:Associated Press

15 A man lies in the street as winds came close to 130mph Credit: AP:Associated Press

15 This cyclist pretty much had the road to himself Credit: AFP or licensors

15 A family try to get some rest in one of the temporary shelter set up Credit: AFP or licensors
