Lucky to have you in my life: Shahid Kapoor's comment on Mira Rajput's latest post will make you go aww

Check out Sasha's comment on Mira's Instagram post

Shahid Kapoor and Mira Rajput have undeniably won the internet over by being one of the cutest Bollywood couples. From their airport pics to dinner dates to family photos, ShaMira have become the internet's favourite. Whether it's Mira promoting Sasha's film on her social media handle or the dapper star standing up for his wife against trolls, these cuties are adorable. Earlier yesterday, Mira shared a stunning picture on Instagram and Sasha's comment will definitely make you go aww.

Dressed in a military green layer over a white tee, Mira looked chic with side-swept curls and minimalistic dewy make-up. Reacting to this stunning post, Bollywood's Maharawal Ratan Singh reacted, "Look at that beauty. Lucky to have you in my life."

Check the comment out:

While we can't get enough of the cuties, Shahid arrived on Koffee With Karan along with his brother, Ishaan Khatter. During the show, he goes on to reveal that he has no social life since his wedding. When quizzed about his relationship with Ranveer Singh, Deepika Padukone and Sanjay Leela Bhansali post-Padmaavat, he revealed, "my relationship status with most of the industry is zilch. Ever since I got married, I have literally not had a social life. I don’t know if that’s a good thing I probably think that’s a really bad thing because I was a bit of recluse anyways and now I’m so into my kids that every time I finish shooting I’m only with them. I’m not in touch with most people.” (Also Read: One actress Shahid Kapoor finds ‘very attractive’ when she dances! Hint: He’s not worked with her yet)

On the work front, Sasha is currently in New Delhi shooting for his next film, Kabir Singh opposite Kiara Advani. Over the last few days, stills from their shoot were leaked online that have only been leaving the audience wanting for more. The film is the official remake of Telugu hit film,

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month. Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
