It’s Time to Nab Masood

At long last, the notorious terrorist Masood Azhar, who was freed in exchange for the 166 hostages of an Indian Airlines plane hijacked to Kandahar in Afghanistan during a flight from Kathmandu to New Delhi, has been declared a global terrorist by the UN Security Council. It was China that was coming in the way all along in India’s bid at the UNSC to get the dastardly terrorist branded so. On Wednesday, the UNSC’s Sanctions Committee 1267 made the declaration after China, which had blocked the proposal four times earlier, lifted its so-called technical hold amid intense pressure from other permanent members of the council such as the US, the UK, and France – all partners in India’s war on terror perpetrated by the likes of Masood. These terrorists, ensconced in Pakistan, thanks to the umbrella provided by the rogue ISI, have just one motive – to bleed India by a ‘thousand cuts’ as they proudly espouse at their rallies in Pakistan under the very nose of the Pakistani military establishment.

It is time to call a spade a spade. The so-called jihadi breed of Masood Azhar and the Lashkar-e-Toiba founder Hafeez Saeed (the mastermind of the 26/11 Mumbai attacks) find safe haven in Pakistan only because the deep State of Pakistan, as it is known worldwide, called the ISI – a part of the Pakistani military establishment – is bent on bleeding India via the route of proxy wars in the Kashmir valley as well as its nefarious designs extending up to the Northeast, especially Assam, via the terror route of the likes of Jamaat-ul Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB). In fact, in the medieval-era worldview of such self-styled jihadis, India is a ‘Hindu’ nation and so the so-called infidels here must face persecution. The West, perceived by such ‘jihadis’ – fighting a ‘holy war’ – such as the Islamic State in Syria and Iraq (ISIS) in the global context is also one of the worst victims just because these cowardly champions of a terrorist cause – all butchery of innocent men, women, and children – believe that the West is a Christian world contesting the idea of Islam, which is absolutely untrue. Nations in the West, such as France, are hailed the world over for their espousal of secular causes, unlike nations in the Arab world, or, for that matter, Pakistan which is an Islamic state, and not a secular state, where faiths such as Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism, and Christianity are assaulted without there being any deterrence at all.

Terror species such as Masood Azhar must now be nabbed and punished for their crime – chosen crime – against the innocent humanity. This terrorist, who is the chief of Jaish-e-Mohammed, which has claimed responsibility for the Pulwama savagery on our gallant CRPF personnel, cannot be allowed to roam freely in Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir (which is a legitimate Indian territory snatched away from us by Pakistani marauders in 1948) and spew venom against Indian citizens. In the wake of the UNSC declaring Masood a global terrorist, it is now incumbent on the international community, especially countries like the US, the UK, and France, to mount pressure on Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan (who seems to be interested in peace with India) to simply arrest the terrorist and make him face the music he deserves for his dastardly designs and acts against humanity.
