Cyclone Fani batters Odisha, Bengal, Bangladesh evacuates 5 lakh people | Updates

The cyclone left a trail of devastation in large parts of coastal Odisha, with the seaside areas being the worst hit. (Photo: PTI)

The severe cyclonic storm Fani which hit coastal areas of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh on Friday has weakened and passed over Kolkata and gangetic West Bengal without causing much of havoc.

The weather department has confirmed that severe Cyclone Fani has weakened into a cyclonic storm and lay centered at 60 km NW of Kolkata at 5:30 am. It is likely to weaken into a deep depression and move into Bangladesh by noon.

IMD: Severe #CycloneFani weakened into a cyclonic storm and lay centered at 60 km NW of Kolkata at 0530 IST of 4th May. To weaken into Deep Depression and move into Bangladesh by noon. pic.twitter.com/8BjSXQvyza ANI (@ANI) May 4, 2019

Bangladesh on Friday evacuated over five lakh people from its southwestern districts as cyclonic storm 'Fani', was brewing over the Bay of Bengal.

Met office spokesman Omar Faruque said the cyclone is likely to "enter Bangladesh through Khulna coastlines and will take the entire night to cross the country, ravaging southwestern" coastline districts.

According to administrative officials, nearly two-third of people from vulnerable areas like Koira and Dakop in Khulna district, through where the cyclone was likely to penetrate Bangladesh, have been evacuated.

In a news briefing, disaster management minister Enamur Rahman said the government was fully prepared to face the cyclone.

Weather experts said the wrath of 'Fani' is likely to be lesser in Bangladesh coasts as compared to that of Odisha since the cyclone would lose its strength on its land routes, minimising risks of high number of casualties. However, it could damage standing crops and infrastructure on a vast landmass.

Heavy rains and gusty winds of about 90 kmph was witnessed at midnight when Cyclone Fani passed Bengal, mostly Kharagpur, East Midnapore, parts of Nadia, Murshidabad, South and North 24 Pargana and Digha.

ALSO READ | Explained: What makes Cyclone Fani unique, all you need to know about deadliest cyclones in India

Overcast conditions will continue all through the day today on Kolkata and the airport operations have been suspended till 8 am.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday tweeted in solidarity with those affected by Cyclone Fani. In a tweet, PM Modi said, "Spoke to Odisha CM Naveen Patnaik Ji and discussed the situation prevailing due to Cyclone Fani. Assured continuous support from the Central Government in the wake of the cyclone. The entire nation stands in solidarity with all those affected by the cyclone in different parts."

Spoke to Odisha CM Naveen Patnaik Ji and discussed the situation prevailing due to Cyclone Fani. Assured continuous support from the Central Government in the wake of the cyclone.



The entire nation stands in solidarity with all those affected by the cyclone in different parts. Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 4, 2019

Cyclone Fani unleashed heavy rain and windstorm with wind speeds up to 175 kmph, killing at least eight people, blowing away thatched houses, and swamping towns and villages, officials said.

Cyclone Fani in photos: Furious skies, fallen trees, folded hands

The extremely severe cyclonic storm 'Fani' or the 'Hood of Snake' made landfall around 8 am in Puri, Odisha, with roaring winds flattening huts, enveloping the pilgrim town in sheets of rain, and submerging homes. The cyclone left a trail of devastation in large parts of coastal Odisha, with the seaside areas being the worst hit.

#CycloneFani Strong winds pull a crane down, devastation in Bhubaneswar pic.twitter.com/GHMici9k49 DNA (@dna) May 3, 2019

Telecommunication lines got snapped in several parts of state capital Bhubaneswar and several other areas. Mobile towers were damaged and power supply was disconnected in many places. A Bhubaneswar report said scores of trees collapsed, blocking roads.

Video clip of a roof being blown off at the undergraduate hostel in AIIMS Bhubaneshwar due to #CycloneFani #Fani #FaniCyclone #FaniUpdates pic.twitter.com/97c5ELQJ46 May 3, 2019

While three people, including a teenage boy, were reported killed in Puri district, three perished in Bhubaneswar and nearby areas. Flying debris from a concrete structure fatally struck a woman in Nayagarh. An elderly woman died of heart attack at a relief shelter in Kendrapara district, official sources said.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee cancelled her political rallies for 48 hours in view of Cyclone Fani. She stationed herself in Kharagpur, near the coastal belt to monitor the situation closely.

National TV channels showed videos claimed to have been shot by residents of Bhubaneswar where a bus was seen bobbing under the impact of the windstorm before flipping on its side.

A police booth was dragged some 200 ft on a highway by furious winds, while a massive crane alongside a multi-storeyed under-construction building collapsed on a row of empty huts, jolted by the howling storm.

More than 220 trains on the Kolkata-Chennai route have been cancelled until Saturday. Here is a full list of the trains cancelled.

Power utility company Calcutta Electric Supply Corporation (CESC), on Friday said it has deployed 200 mobile vans around the city to tackle any likely disruption caused by cyclonic storm 'Fani', which is headed to West Bengal from neighbouring Odisha.

The Jharkhand government has issued an advisory, asking all district deputy commissioners to set up control rooms to meet any exigency in the wake of the cyclonic storm Fani.

ALSO READ | 20 years before Cyclone Fani, Super Cyclone killed 10,000 in Odisha

An official release, quoting the regional meteorological department, said from the afternoon of May 3 to May 4, widespread rains accompanied by strong winds will occur in all the 24 districts of the state.

All educational institutions in Palamau district will remain closed on Saturday, the release said.
