Man who killed his friend 3 years ago confesses due to ‘haunting image’

murder

Abhishek Gowda

committed suicide

Bangalore

You can’t get away with. Either the police will catch you, or your conscience could eat you from inside. The latter happened in the case of 24-year-old Kwho ‘confessed’ about murdering one of his best friends by pushing him in front of a train nearly three years ago.The story starts on March 16, 2016, when N Dinesh, a resident of Vinayaka Layout in Nayandahalli was found dead on the Bengaluru-Mysuru railway track. Dinesh, 25, was said to be in bad company and was an alcoholic too. The city railway police registered a case of unnatural death suspecting that he could haveor could have accidentally come under the moving train as he was under the influence of alcohol.Cut to Sunday. Gowda was chatting with his friends over drinks. His tongue loosened by alcohol, he confessed to them how the image of Dinesh getting crushed by the train were still haunting him. He said that they had had a fight that day and he pushed Dinesh. The friends went to Dinesh’s father and told him what they had just heard. The father then immediately approached the police who arrested Gowda, a driver by profession.“We initially suspected foul play behind my son’s death but had no evidence or suspicion on anybody. But almost three years later after my son’s death, some of his friends came to me and said that my son is the victim of murder and the accused was Gowda. They brought him to me and when I questioned him, he started blaming somebody else. The police were informed and they picked up Gowda. During interrogation he has confessed to having killed my son,” M Nagaraju, the victim’s father, toldMirror.Gowda, who lives near Sollapuradamma Temple in Nayandahalli, then told the police that Dinesh used would always force him to give money to buy alcohol and would also beat him up without any reason which angered him resulting in the murder.Recalling the incident, he said that they had had drinks at Amrutha Wine store located near Nayandahalli railway tracks on March 3, 2016. They then went to one of their friend’s house in the locality to sleep. He said that Dinesh had been mentally harassing him by forcibly taking money from him. He did the same during the night. Dinesh then polished off the parcel which they had bought from the wine store and started asking Gowda to buy him more alcohol.“In the wee hours, when the two were walking by the side of the railway track, the victim is alleged to have started beating Gowda again. Gowda pushed him in front of the train going towards Mysuru. After seeing the victim profusely bleeding, Gowda escaped from the spot,” said an officer who is part of the investigations.The city railway police have registered a case of murder under section 302 of the IPC.
