I killed mother, daughter over property dispute: Accused

MADIKERI: Somwarpet police have arrested a man accused in the murder a woman and her daughter at Doddamalthe village on April 30.The accused, Dileep , has confessed to the crime, which he said was committed to end a property dispute. Kavitha and her daughter Jayashree, residents of Doddamalthe village, were found brutally murdered at the entrance to their estate on Tuesday. Kavitha was the second wife of late Veeraraju, who had committed suicide 10 years ago. Before his death, Veeraraju had bought a 40 cent plot from Ganesh, who is the uncle of Dileep.Dileep had to cross the sold 40cent plot to reach his 60cent site, where he is building a new house. While things were fine between Dileep and Kavitha, a rift broke out recently over the approach road leading to the latter’s under-construction house. After Kavitha filed a complaint against Dileep over the approach road, police brokered peace between them through talks.Nevertheless, the fights continued and there have been instances wherein Kavitha had damaged the windows and doors of Dileep’s house, much to the chagrin of the latter. The fights continued with Dileep’s wife too joining him. Kavitha later locked the gates blocking the approach road, prompting Dileep to file a court case over the same.Meanwhile, Dileep was named as one of the accused in rosewood tree theft case. His name was put up on a Kannada bill at Doddamalthe bus stand. Dileep thought this was the handiwork of Kavitha.When Kavitha and her daughter were entering the gate of their estate on a moped on April 30, Dileep is said to have confronted the two and brutally murdered them with a machete. Dileep left the spot and cleaned the weapon and kept it in the chicken shop — where he works — at Doddamalthe. He later received a call from Somwarpet police to come sign the chargesheet for the complaint filed by him against Kavitha. With no idea of being caught for the committed crime, Dileep visited the station and waited for the station inspector. Meanwhile, police were tipped off about the double murder , and they subjected Dileep for a thorough interrogation, after which he spilled the beans.He was produced before the court. Under the guidance of SP Suman Pannekar, the investigation was carried out DSP Dinakar Shetty, CI Nanjegowda and others.
