Exclusive: Inside details of how six Naxal units coordinated, carried out ghastly attack in Gadchiroli

Naxal attack in Gadchiroli killed 15 police personnel and a civilian driver | Photo Credit: ANI

In a major development, the investigators probing the ghastly Naxal terror attack that took place on the Kurkheda–Korchi road in north Gadchiroli (Maharashtra), have found some rather shocking leads. It may be recalled that the horrible attack on Wednesday (1 May, also Maharashtra Day and Labour Day) claimed 16 lives - 15 Quick Response Team (QRT) personnel and a civilian driver - when an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) plugged with 30-40 kg RDX was remotely detonated by the Naxals.

According to the highly placed sources, there were six Naxal units of Gadchiroli that were involved in the attack. The sources revealed the names of these Naxal units as Tippagadh Dalam, Devri Dalam, Permili Dalam, Aheri Dalam, Kekadi Dalam, and Etapalli Dalam. Here Dalam or Dal means Naxal units. These units were controlled by 'Company 4' of the Communist Party of India (Maoist) or CPI(Maoist).

Highly placed sources in the probing agency have confirmed to Times Now that 44-year-old Girdhar alias Nagsu alias Mansu alias Tumreti is behind the entire conspiracy of setting vehicles ablaze at a construction site and then triggering the IED devices when the QRT forces were going to the spot for reinforcement purpose. Girdhar has been active since last the 20 years. He is the chief commander of the north Gadchiroli-based Company number 4. Girdhar reports to another Naxal, Bhaskar who is divisional commander head of the Dandakaranya area.

An officer in security apparatus said that 'the Dalam are the smallest units of (Naxal) armed forces which contain 10 to 15 Naxals. The department in Maharashtra police that focuses on Naxal related cases has a dossier on these units which contains the details of the people part of Dalam, the names of those in charge and other details."

There are two types of Dalams: the LOS and LGS. The LOS is a local organisational squad which is more involved in recce and organisations whereas the LGS is involved in local guerrilla warfare. The six Dalams that the police have inputs on are - Tippagadh Dalam, Devri Dalam, Permili Dalam, Aheri Dalam, Kekadi Dalam, and Etapalli Dalam - sources said.

Hierarchy of Maoists

According to the sources, Dalam is the smallest unit of Naxals which contains 10 to 12 people. One step above them is the Platoon which contains 30 people, then a Company which contains 100 people and then the top force which is called the Battalion which contains 1000 people, which means almost 6-7 Dalams to form a Company.

They are said to work very strategically here. In this case, they joined 6 Dalams (which is equivalent to two platoons) which fall under the fourth company of Naxals. Sources also claimed that there are over 60 people may have been involved in the Naxal attack.

Subodh Jaiswal, DGP Maharashtra said, "We have inspected the spot and initially we came to know that they have used a huge quantity of explosives. But the exact amount can be calculated only after the forensic and BDDS report are collated. Once we are able to coordinate and understand the entire chain of events, then we can come to a conclusion as to what went wrong, whether there were any errors in the assessment or if there were any challenges in tactical deployments etc. This will help us understand, appreciate the factors involved and then help us come to a further conclusion on this."



It has been said that there were three major reasons behind the Naxal attack on the security forces which claimed 16 lives on Labour Day. The first reason is said to be Naxals seeking revenge. According to the police sources, in the last 12 months (since April 22, 2018), the Maharashtra security forces have killed 40 Naxals in their operations. Since then, the Naxal units had given enough hints that they had not forgotten the deaths of their colleagues and that they will fulfil the dreams of their so-called 'martyrs' anyway. That is why they are said to have attacked the QRT team on Wednesday at around 12:30 pm in an IED blast. A poster which the Naxals had posted last month, mentions that they were celebrating Kasnur incident for their martyrs from 22 to 28 April and that they will fulfil their martyrs' dream.

Sources have also confirmed to us that it was a trap by the Maoist mostly this trap is called TCOC -(Tactical Counter-Offensive Campaign), which is used by Naxals. The Naxal cadres are well aware that during March and June the dry leaves start falling down, thereby increasing their visibility to the security forces in an otherwise green and thickly foliaged jungle where they operate within the safety of the camouflage cover around them. So, as a part of TCOC, first vehicles are burnt and knowing that the security forces will close in to check on the spot, they plant an IED device beforehand and in a such a strategic manner that it can be detonated with maximum damage to the security people. In the recent attack in Gadchiroli, many in the security apparatus say that the landmines were planned almost a week back.

What went wrong for the security forces?

The police said that the 15 QRT personnel had left from Kurkheda police station at 11.23 am on Wednesday in a private vehicle and were to report to Purada police station, where Kurkheda Sub-Divisional Police Officer (SDPO) Shailesh Kale had summoned them, to investigate the torching of 36 vehicles of a road construction crew in the nearby Dadapur village. SDPO Shailesh Kale himself used that road a few hours before the attack. Police sources also say that a hired car was used as a cover to avoid the attack. Usually, two-three cars are used in such an exercise and the jawans are divided in those cars, so that if one car gets trapped, at least the others can remain safe.

The nearby Bastar area (connected through the jungles) had two consecutive elections: earlier, the Chhattisgarh Vidhan Sabha and now the nation's Lok Sabha. Heavy forces were deployed in the region and therefore many Naxal companies had moved their cadres to what they assumed as the safety of Maharashtra's Gadchiroli. As per intelligence sources, more than 200 Naxals are currently present in the Gadchiroli area.

Subodh Jaiswal DGP Maharashtra Police says, "Once we will come to a factual understanding of the entire chain of events, we will take a considerate view on that. We have conducted polls peacefully, forces and election parties were inducted and de-inducted during elections. There were several inputs we received, but we handled the situation peacefully during elections."

Jaiswal also adds: "As far as Gadchiroli Police is concerned, operations are still on and we will carry out meaningful and successful operations. We are capable of carrying out these operations."

Last year, in November, Nambala Keshava Rao alias Basavaraju, 61, became the new general secretary of the CPI (Maoist) outfit. After this change of guard, the state intelligence officials assessed that the banned outfit was likely to become more militant in the future. Basavaraju took over from Muppala Lakshmana Rao alias Ganapathy, 71.

According to sources from the intelligence department, Basavaraju has served as the chief of the outfit's Central Military Commission (CMC) for over 30 years. He is known for being an expert in explosives and military tactics. The new general secretary, however, has been underground for the last 28 years.

Top sources from security forces from ground revealed that since the time Basavaraju took over the charge of the cadres, he has issued several pamphlets and posters to avenge the killings of 40 Naxals last year in a security forces operation in which a senior member of the party cadre was killed. Maharashtra police has been on the Naxals' target since then. Basavaraju, the explosives expert, seems to have issued orders to his cadres to use IED blasts as a regular modus operandi. Initially, IED blasts were used in only around 12% of the attacks by Naxals. That percentage seems to have steeply climbed in recent times. Basavaraju seems to prefer the IED blasts technique over gunfights as it saves the Naxals the possibility of collateral damage - lowering the chances of a few of their own dying in direct combat.

MCC Cadres - the Urban Naxals

If numbers are to be believed, then Gadhchiroli has been peaceful in comparison to Bastar and other areas of Chattisgarh. Villagers have stopped supporting the Naxals because of their diminishing strength and the lesser number of acts of violence that inturn intimidate people. The Special MMC zone was also formed in 2015 to look after these areas. Naxals have been facing a serious existential threat due to lesser support from villagers, especially after the Naxal killings last year. Since then, the morale of Naxals is said to have dipped as senior members of the Naxal cadres were killed in those attacks.

To regain the lost territory and reassert their domination through fear in a territory that is is mostly peaceful, the Naxals chose the Gadchiroli region to carry out this attack.

This Naxals call this the MMC (Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Chattisgarh) zone. The MMC zonal committee of the Naxals was allegedly formed with a Naxal named Deepak Teltumbde as its head. Top officers in the security forces have told us that the urban leadership (called Urban Naxals by many) also uses this route to go and meet the underground cadres on the quiet. The Naxals, in an act of desperation, and to regain a foothold in the area,, carried out the heinous attack in Gadchiroli on last Wednesday.

The jungle areas of Telangana that the Naxals were given to operate within until a few years ago, have been mostly peaceful as the number of Maoist activities in that region has drastically fallen and villagers have stopped cooperating with the Maoist cadres. Agonised over that loss, Naxals now did not want to lose this (the MMC) territory that Gadchiroli falls in. The Naxals have come understand that the villagers of the northern part of Gadchiroli are in favour of security forces and it is only the south Gadchiroli region that still has some soft corner for the violent Naxals. Since 1994, the maximum numbers of encounters between the security forces and the Naxals have taken place in north Gadchiroli.

An officer who has handled the operations (to tackle the terror threats of Naxals) for the longest time, told Times Now on conditions of anonymity, "The MCC Zone is so important to the Naxals that they will try every means possible to never let it go. It is a route for the urban cadres to go into the jungles and meet the underground cadre." Many from the underground cadre in Gadchiroli are under the lens of the police officers in Pune who are currently probing an alleged case involving these so-called Urban Naxals. In 2016, a number of trucks were burnt in Surjagadh by the Naxals and subsequently, the Gadchiroli police had taken into custody a number of so-called social activists such as Varavara Rao, Surendra Gadling etc as a part of their investigation.

Gadchiroli



Number of security forces personnel killed in last 5 years

2015- 2

2016- 3

2017- 3

2018- Nil

2019-15

Number of Naxals killed in last 5 years

2015- 2

2016-11

2017-19

2018-50

2019-3

Number of civilians killed by Naxals in last 5 years

2015- 18

2016-21

2017-13

2018-9

2019-10
