Delhi doctor's murder: Accused says killed her after she rejected marriage proposal

Verma told police that he met Garima Sharma in November 2018 when they both worked as junior doctors at a hospital in Karol Bagh. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: Doctor Chandra Prakash Verma, who is accused of killing his flatmate Dr Garima Sharma, has allegedly told Delhi Police that he killed the lady doctor after she rejected his marriage proposal. The revelations come after he was arrested by the police near Gang Nahar.

According to a report in Times of India, the police arrested the accused Chandra Prakash while he allegedly tried to commit suicide in the canal. He was caught when he was asking some passerby about the depth of the canal.

“When Verma was confronted, he confessed to the murder. He claimed that after the murder, he had taken a bus to Haridwar and stayed at a temple posing as a devotee. He claimed to be on his way to commit suicide when we caught him,” the report quotes Deputy Commissioner of Police (Crime), Ram Gopal Naik as saying.

According to police, Verma told them that he met Garima Sharma in November 2018 when they both worked as junior doctors at a hospital in Karol Bagh. Verma fell in one-sided love with the victim and used to help her in all her assignments.

The accused also helped the victim in finding an accommodation when she was looking for one. Later, Garima checked into an apartment with Verma, his friend Rakesh, in central Delhi’s Ranjit Nagar area.

The accused felt that Garima was also attracted towards him and he approached the victim with a marriage proposal. But Garmia spurned Verma's proposal despite repeated insistence. Verma was further infuriated when the victim became friendly with Verma's friend Rakesh.

The report further suggested that Garima also refused to accompany the accused for a movie a day before the murder. And she accused Verma of harassing her after she quit her job at the hospital.

According to police, Verma decided to kill Garima after she decided to leave Delhi for her home town Gorakhpur without informing the accused. Verma attempted to convince Garima to stay, but when she refused, Verma first smothered her and slit her throat with a knife when she became unconscious.
