Janz: Old age has taught me to pay attention only to important things

Bill Janz

Special to the Journal Sentinel

I just turned 82. Dirt doesn't look as old.

I'm at an age, where if you told me something yesterday, I might not remember it today. My short term memory keeps getting shorter. Despite this, despite my proliferation of wrinkles and my white hair and my legs don't always go where I tell them to and I need to hold on to walls sometimes when I walk, I'm not depressed. Oh, I'm not as happy as I would be if I'd won the lottery, but not many people are that happy.

I've spent a lifetime writing about inspirational people, some of them so small they couldn't make much of a shadow:

Years ago, I was lucky to meet a heart-rending, 5-year-old boy; he had leukemia, and his mother talked to him about death.

"Deaf is when you can't hear," he said.

No, she said, emphasizing the word – death – and his little hands traced the falling of leaves, as if it were autumn, and leaves were dying on the trees, and dropping.

I remember a teacher, a Vietnam veteran, who was battered in combat, and lost nearly everything but his spirit. Which kept him alive through 23 surgeries. He was legally blind in one eye, and the other eye had been removed. One finger had been removed. A large portion of one lung was gone. One-third of his stomach had been removed. His spleen had been taken out. A large portion of his intestines had been removed, but still he taught kids every day. Every day.

He taught them life. Grammar, too.

A man on the south side decided to clean his rain gutters, which were full of leaves. He didn't have legs. His daughters asked him not to do it. I asked him not to do it.

"If you don't do anything, you can't accomplish anything," he said.

And he went up the ladder, as if he had legs.

These people show us how to live, while some of our leaders show us how not to live, hurling insults at each other as if they were a dime a dozen and not even worth those pennies. Old age has taught me to pay attention only to important things, and politicians flailing away, tweeting fire and brimstone, are not important enough to listen to.

Maybe I'm lucky that I'm old because even if I read that trash, in a day or two I wouldn't remember much of it.

I'm fighting age, and age, of course, is winning. I stumble, sometimes my hands shake. But I'm very lucky to still be here, which is a small miracle because I've had diabetes for 72 years. It hasn't killed me, as it should have, but diabetic shocks have destroyed a lot of brain cells. And once in a great while fog fills the room and I forget where I am.

I hope I'm writing this for people who can't. Please don't see them as they are, remember them as they were. Same with me. Remember me as the skinny kid, with the skinny tie, running after stories, and, as a young father, stopping to interview a public official, reaching into my coat for pen and paper and pulling out a pacifier.

I love life, love it very much, despite old age tripping me once in a while. Sometimes I look in the mirror and wonder who's looking back. I also wonder if I would remember my head, if it weren't attached.

Sure, occasionally, I become afraid, so I try to remember all the good that life has given me, my wonderful family, and the courageous people I've known: a boy, without legs, who crawled across the floor to answer my telephone call; a top local executive, who took a B-17 to war five times and four times the war took his plane and the last time it also took him.

Wounded during World War II, he ended up in a German hospital. As a prisoner, this gentleman who later became one of the top businessmen in Milwaukee knitted socks that helped him keep warm when the Germans marched prisoners to another camp, in 25-below zero weather.

When I wonder how much life I have left, I recall that this man in a suit, who looked as if he couldn't break a sweat in his office in downtown Milwaukee, ditched one plane in the North Sea, crash landed another on the English coast, crashed another in some trees and bailed out of another over Germany.

Yes, I'm afraid of losing myself in the darkness of age, unable to stop what's happening, but the WWII flyer knew what to do when danger approached: knit socks, and don't give up or give in.

I've been lucky enough to travel the world on assignment, and I've seen a lot, sure, and I remember much of it, as long as it didn't happen yesterday. I saw a camel herder in India place his hands on the sides of the face of a newborn camel, and blow air into its mouth. Puppies have licked my face. I've seen leopards in trees in Africa. I've seen three children grow into beautiful people.

But sometimes I can't remember what I ate for lunch. I remember, though, where I can find a hug, which is the best medicine I know. I get strength from those hugs from family and friends, and strength from all those people I've written about, who showed me what courage was, and what champions were, even if they were only 5 years old, hands fluttering like leaves falling between his little feet.

The mother of the boy with leukemia said they shouldn't be sad because the boy was going to be with God soon.

"And you don't need food," he said cheerfully.

The people I've written about taught me that life was a combination of climbing ladders when you don't have legs, and teaching without being able to see.

So I write this for the people who no longer have enough words to tell you how they feel. I write this for myself, because I'm forgetting words, forgetting names, that made my world what it was; I'm writing this for all the enemies of the people, the journalists who've written about these people who should be written about; I write this for my hundreds of friends, and for my family, especially my family, Scott, Jennifer and Jacqueline. For their spouses. For our grandchildren, Jasper William and Alexandra Bernadette.

And I write this for Bernie, especially for Bernie, my wife.

If I keep forgetting words, I hope these are the last words I forget:

I love you.

Bill Janz is a retired reporter and columnist of the Milwaukee Sentinel and Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. His email is wjanz@wi.rr.com,

MORE:This bird-watcher avoids danger, and finds drunken birds, in his own backyard
