I-T Dept seizes Rs 5.8 cr unaccounted cash in raids on ‘Lottery’ Martin’s properties

I-T Dept seizes Rs 5.8 cr unaccounted cash in raids on ‘Lottery’ Martin’s properties

Meanwhile, a long-standing employee in Martin Homeopathy Medical College was found dead in a pond near Karamadai on Friday.

news IT Raids

A day after a massive search was conducted by the Income Tax Department on the properties of Coimbatore-based lottery tycoon Martin Santiago, I-T officials said that they seized unaccounted cash amounting to Rs 5.8 crore and jewellery worth Rs 24 crore from the operation.

The searches on Martin’s properties, including a homeopathy college, began on April 30. More than 70 locations across India, including 22 locations in Coimbatore, were searched by the I-T officials till May 3.

Martin Santiago was a lottery tycoon in Tamil Nadu before the state government banned the sale of lotteries in Tamil Nadu. He then expanded his business to the north and north-east, where he reportedly holds a monopoly over lottery trade. He had donated Rs 5 crore in December 2018 towards relief works after cyclone Gaja in the delta regions of Tamil Nadu.

Martin Homeopathy College accountant found dead

Days after he was summoned by the I-T department for questioning in connection with the searches on Martin’s properties, Palanisamy, a long-time employee in Martin Homeopathy Medical College was found dead in a pond in Karamadai on Friday. Palanisamy was working as a cashier in the college for at least 20 years.

On Wednesday, sleuths from the I-T department had picked Palanisamy up for interrogation during which he allegedly slit his wrist. After spending a day at a private hospital near GN Mills, Palanisamy was discharged on Friday morning, only to be found dead later that day.

Palanisamy’s family alleged that he had killed himself due to the pressure exerted on him by the I-T officials and has filed a formal complaint with the Karamadai police in Coimbatore. Based on the complaint, the police are conducting investigation in the case.

Speaking to TNM, a policeman at the Karamadai station said that the body is being kept at the morgue in Mettupalayam Government hospital. “Autopsy will be conducted tomorrow at the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital and then the body will be handed over to his family. As of now, we have registered an FIR under section 174 CrPC [Unnatural death] and are investigating,” he said.

(With inputs from Sudhakar Balasundaram)
