Gurugram shocker! Father's friend attempts to strip and rape four-year-old

Another rap case surfaced as a four-year-old was allegedly molested by a 25 year-old who was also a friend of the victim's father (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gurugram: Humanity lost its meaning yet again when an alleged attempt to strip and rape a four-year-old girl was made by her father's friend. On Thursday night in Dundahera, a 25-year-old man tried to rape a four-year-old girl while her parents were at work. The 25-year-old man who has been accused in the case is currently absconding and has been booked under Section 8 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO). The incident took place at around 9:30 pm on Thursday night.

The police stated that the father's friend entered their house where the minor was with her elder brother, according to a report in Hindustan Times. He tempted the girl by offering her a chocolate and led her to the bedroom where he allegedly molested her. The police also added that the minor girl accused him of touching her inappropriately and then stripping her.

Also Read: Delhi air pollution today: AQI at 'very poor' 381, sufficient amount of rain may improve air quality to 'poor'

A regular visitor at the survivor's house, the accused belongs to Uttar Pradesh and resides in Delhi. He works with a private company in Udyog Vihar. The girl used to stay at home with her seven-year-old brother while the parents went to work. On the night of the incident, the brother had slept early while the girl was watching television.

The police said that the man had allegedly made an attempt to strip and rape the girl in response to which, she had started crying. The neighbours heard the sound and ran to rescue the minor. The girl's mother came to know of the incident when she returned from work at 10 pm and found her house crowded with neighbours.

According to the complaint filed by the girls mother, the neighbours made an attempt to chase the accused, however, he managed to flee the spot. The police are constantly conducting raids to catch a hold of the accused.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
