Akshay Kumar’s Canadian clarification: Zor ka jhatka has everyone talking

No Hera Pheri over citizenship, clarifies Akshay. Fans say Welcome, critics go Oh My God! as debate descends into Bhul BhulaiyaaOn April 30, when Bollywood celebs stepped out to vote in Mumbai, there was one face missing in all the pictures that kept pouring in throughout the day. The poster boy of nationalism, Akshay Kumar , was nowhere to be seen. While many other celebs might not have voted in the General Elections, the reason why Khiladi Kumar’s voting status caught the public attention was his recent ‘non-political’ interview of the PM and his very vocal thoughts (and films) on patriotism. Since election day in Mumbai, everywhere Akshay went, there was only one question waiting - ‘Did you vote?’ One video showed the actor walking away from a journalist who asked him why he skipped voting.Now, Akshay has finally answered all questions about his citizenship. In a tweet on Friday, he said, “I really don’t understand the unwarranted interest and negativity about my citizenship. I have never hidden or denied that I hold a Canadian passport. It is also equally true that I have not visited Canada in the last seven years. I work in India, and pay all my taxes in India. While all these years, I have never needed to prove my love for India to anyone, I find it disappointing that my citizenship issue is constantly dragged into needless controversy, a matter that is personal, legal, non-political, and of no consequence to others.”While Akshay claims that he has “never hidden” the fact that he holds a Canadian passport, in 2017, while appearing for the Times Now Newshour, the actor stated, “About the Canadian thing, I am an honorary citizen. I’ve been given an honorary thing. I think it’s a thing that people should be proud about. I have an honorary doctorate also but I am not a Doctor. So this is what people have to understand.” In the same year, while promoting 'Jolly LLB 2', he had said at a public event that his Canadian citizenship is honorary.However, according to the Canadian PM’s website, only six people have ever received honorary Canadian citizenship - Malala Yousafzai, Raoul Wallenberg, Nelson Mandela, the 14th Dalai Lama, Aung San Suu Kyi, and the Aga Khan. Honorary citizens of Canada do not hold a passport and citizenship is only symbolic without any rights or privileges. A 2012 Vancouver Observer report states that Akshay was given Canadian citizenship within weeks of him applying for it.Akshay’s admission that he does not hold Indian citizenship has got mixed reactions from his fans and the Twitterati. While some pointed out that the actor continues to donate money for the Army and is one of the highest taxpayers in the country, others asked why he gave up the Indian passport if he was so proud of the country.Vivek Anand Oberoi was not off the mark when he said that the film fraternity never comments on issues concerning its members. This time also, Bollywood, true to form, has maintained its distance from the controversy, with only two people making any comment on it.While Paresh Rawal came to Akshay’s defence and wrote, “One of the most honest and straightforward human being I have ever come across in my film career and life. Every word spoken here is a TRUTH and we are all with you @akshaykumar. Let the irrelevants boo and bark”, Siddharth had a more cheeky response. The actor tweeted, “Hey @realDonaldTrump since you’re getting ready to be re-elected soon, might I suggest an interview with me during your elections? I have crucial questions about how you eat fruit, your sleep and work habits and also your cute personality. I have an Indian passport. DM me please.”While most of Bollywood had nothing to say on the issue, Apurva Asrani had a different question in his mind. Regarding the citizenship of Akshay, who has also won the National Award, he tweeted, “Are Canadian citizens eligible for India’s National Awards? The year (2016) Akshay Kumar won ‘Best Actor’, we were expecting Manoj Bajpayee to win for 'Aligarh'. If the jury/ministry has made an error in Kumar’s case, will there be a revote??”However, as per the eligibility criteria of the National Film Awards , “Film professionals & technicians of foreign origin can also be considered for Awards.” There appears to be no grounds for the award to be questioned.Akshay has been quite vocal this elections about the importance of votingThe ‘non-political’ interviewIn 'Kesari', Akshay plays Havildar Ishar Singh who led 21 Sikh soldiers against 10,000 Afghans in 1897, in what is called the ‘greatest battle ever fought by Indian soldiersAkshay has been a consistent contributor to, and part of activities involving financial support for the families of soldiers killed in the line of dutyIn 'Gold', Akshay’s character is instrumental in winning independent India’s first Olympic gold medalIn 'Airlift', Akshay plays a businessman who helps evacuate more than 170,000 Indians from Kuwait after Iraq’s invasion in August 1990In 'Baby', Akshay is the lead official in the top-secret counter-espionage team ‘Baby’, created after 26/11In 'Holiday', Akshay plays an Army man who hunts down a terroristAkshay’s 'Padman' and 'Toilet: Ek Prem Katha' were all about sending a social message. While in 'Padman' he plays a social activist who revolutionises the concept of menstrual hygiene in rural India, in 'Toilet...' he endorses the Swachh Bharat Abhiyaan and the importance of sanitationAkshay is not the only Bollywood actor who does not have an Indian passport. However, unlike Akshay, the citizenship of these celebs have always been out in the open-- Sharmila.Bhowmik@timesgroup.com
