Rave party busted, 14 held, 98 youths booked

Coimbatore rural police busted a rave party at a resort at Sethumadai near Pollachi in the wee hours of Saturday and picked up 163 youths, mostly IT employees and college students hailing from Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. Police said the youths were using cocaine, hash, MDMA or Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (a psychoactive drug also called ‘ecstasy’), marijuana (ganja) and weed. After detailed investigations, Anaimalai police later arrested 14 people including resort owner Jayaganesh, manager Varun Pradeep and a 28-year-old Russian national, Eliy Jeron.

In all, 98 of the students and IT employees were booked under sections 143 and 290 of IPC read with 4 (1) (a) and 4 (1) (k) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act and later released on station bail. The arrested people were booked under sections 8C, 20B, 22A, 25A, 27 of the NDPS Act.

Sources said that a team of youths from Goa had been organizing rave parties once or twice a month across the country by mobilizing youths through social media. They had chosen ‘Agri Nest’, a resort located inside a coconut farm at Sethumadai, for one such party from Friday 6 pm to Saturday 6 am. The youths arrived at the resort on their cars and two-wheelers and started the party as scheduled on Friday evening. Police said they were using banned drugs even as they played songs and performed dances at the event. Sujit Kumar, superintendent of police, Coimbatore district, got a tip about the party early Saturday morning following which he rushed to Sethumadai along with a strike force. The police team conducted a secret raid without the knowledge of Anaimalai police, under whose jurisdiction the resort falls, and exposed the party in the unauthorized resort.

The police found packets of the drugs in tablet form used by the students. All the youths were detained and taken to a marriage hall at Sethumadai. Meanwhile, police personnel from Valparai and Pollachi sub-divisions were also called in and asked to conduct inquiry with the youths. Police suspect that Vishnu from Palakkad and four of his accomplices organized the party. “We have questioned the youths to know about the suppliers of cocaine and marijuana. We booked 98 youths and arrested the organizers and drug suppliers,” said a senior police officer.

Police said that the resort had been functioning for the last few years without permission. The party organizers told resort manager Varun Pradeep that they would pay for the accommodation and arrange food and alcohol themselves. Following the detention of the youths, K Periaiah, inspector general of police (west zone), held a meeting with DIG (Coimbatore range) G Karthikeyan and Coimbatore SP Sujit Kumar on further course of action. The Narcotics Intelligence Bureau-CID police also visited Sethumadai and started investigations with the youths. The arrested people were sent to judicial custody while the Russian national will be lodged at Puzhal prison in Chennai. The revenue department officials sealed the seven-room property on district collector K Rajamani’s orders.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
