I always try to give her priority: Ranveer Singh on moving into wife Deepika Padukone's house post marriage

Ranveer Singh and Deepika Padukone | Photo Credit: Instagram

That Ranveer Singh and Deepika Padukone make for an adorable couple is a fact. After dating each other for six years, Ranveer and Deepika finally sealed the deal and tied the knot on November 14-15. Their wedding festivities took place at Italy's Lake Como and were attended by their family and close friends. Post their fairytale wedding, Ranveer shifted into Deepika's Prabhadevi apartment.

In a recent interview with India Today magazine, the 33-year-old actor opened up about his decision of moving into Deepika's house. He said, "I've grown up seeing a marriage where the attitude is to make it work regardless of anything. A marriage is a commitment, out is not an option. So whatever you have to work through, you do."

Ranveer added, "The most sensible and convenient thing was for me to move into her set-up. She is comfortable there and I don't want to displace her. I always try to give her priority."

Further gushing about his lady love, the Befikre star said that he believes that Deepika is far more evolved and wholesome person than he is, adding that she is more responsible, mature and independent.

Meanwhile, Ranveer and Deepika's love story started when they were shooting for Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Goliyon Ki Rasleela Ram-Leela. The film not only turned out to be a massive hit but the DeepVeer's chemistry was appreciated a lot by the audience.

On the professional front, Ranveer has a lot of projects lined up in his kitty for this year. He will be seen sharing the screen space with Alia Bhatt in Zoya Akhtar's Gully Boy. Ranveer will also be starring in Kabir Khan's '83 and Karan Johar's Takht. (Also Read: Ranveer Singh REVEALS the only aspect of his wedding with Deepika Padukone that he controlled – details inside)

Deepika, on the other hand, is all geared up for her first collaboration with filmmaker Meghna Gulzar. The duo has teamed up for the upcoming film Chhapaak. Based on the life of acid attack survivor Laxmi Aggarwal, the biographical drama also stars Vikrant Massey in the lead role.

Stay tuned for more updates!

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month. Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
