FB live, street dances and die-ins: How Extinction Rebellion is taking root in Young India

LONDON/NEW DELHI: What do the Indian Independence movement and Extinction Rebellion (XR) have in common? At first glance, probably nothing. The former helped free a country from colonial rule and the latter catapulted climate change into the spotlight. A deeper look, though, shows that both have their roots in non-violent civil disobedience movements.

“The XR protest in London is largely inspired by Mahatma Gandhi’s non-violent civil disobedience movement and the Civil rights movement in the US. It stands on the shoulders of such movements,” says Chittranjan Dubey, India representative for XR.

It is no surprise then that XR, which calls for action against climate change, is increasingly finding resonance with the Indian youth. Eco-warriors associated with XR are now present in Delhi, Bhopal, Gujarat and Gurgaon. Youth groups in these regions have held several protests throughout the past few months to show solidarity with the rebellion in the West. On April 12, a bunch of them showed up outside the ministry of environment, forest and climate change in Delhi to urge the government to take steps to combat climate change while a group of students in Dhanera, Gujarat, shot off a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the chief minister of Gujarat, Vijay Rupani, on April 15 urging them to work towards clean air, water supply and to stop massive industrialisation.

Borrowing from Swedish schoolgirl Greta Thunberg’s ‘climate strikes’, XR India also organised a similar event which witnessed 400 schoolchildren in Delhi bunking school and gathering at Central Park in Connaught Place on March 15 to register their protest. The same day 500 primary and high school students from Gurgaon staged a protest in Sector 53.

Dubey says that interest in the movement in India has gone up four-fold, with people contacting him on social media and expressing their desire to be a part of it.

“I’m getting at least two new inquiries a day from people across India who want to get involved. Many hail from small towns as well. A young boy contacted me from Jalore district in Rajasthan after he read about the protests in London. In fact, our first protest was held on December 9, 2018 in Sheoganj, a small village in Sirohi district, Rajasthan, and it was organised by people living in rural areas,” Dubey told TOI over phone from his residence in Munich, Germany.

Queries seem to be pouring in from college students to professionals in Mumbai, Bengaluru, Thiruvananthapuram and Hyderabad. And they are likely to open chapters in all these cities soon.

The widespread interest also prompted them to organise Facebook Live sessions by climate change experts.

The Facebook Live on April 29 was popular and had over 1,000 views. It was hosted by climate change expert Sagar Dhara, founder of the Hyderabad based Cerana Foundation. They plan to rope in more experts. They are also planning mass die-ins (a form of protest in which participants simulate being dead) in shopping malls.

XR supporters across the world have held a series of mass die-ins to highlight the risk to human race from climate change. XR India activists are hopeful that with the UK becoming the first country to declare a “climate emergency” on May 1, it would be a boost to the movement in India. While activists in London glued themselves to trains and pavements, courted arrest and blocked roads last month, the Indian activists are adopting a "softer" approach. On April 15, just as protesters were gathering at Parliament Square in London, over 7,000 km away a motley crowd of 35 gathered at Bhojtal in Bhopal and danced to musical beats to the surprise of passers-by.

Sarthak Tomar, co-founder of Bhopal chapter of XR, says that they decided to protest with songs as it would grab attention instantly. The 26-year-old law student from Bhopal started his fight against climate change with a team of just four in October 2018. Within six months, 15 people, mostly youngsters, were on board.

“When four of us formed the group, it was not under the banner of Extinction Rebellion. Our focus was on ending coal use so we named ourselves ‘Citizens Campaigning for Energy Transition’. Later we heard of XR and realised that the battle was much bigger,” he says.

Tomar adds, “India is running out of underground water. Temperatures are rising and there will be droughts which will affect food security.” His group is also pushing for an alternative green energy plan for Bhopal to reduce levels of emissions in the city and for a citizens’ council to monitor how decarbonisation is implemented. The members are now not only going to schools to teach students about climate change, but also planning documentary screenings, door-to-door visits, talks and flash mobs.

Awareness is key to any such initiative, adds Dubey. “Pollution awareness is increasing each day. India is now home to the world’s top 10 cities with the worst air quality. But a lot of people see pollution as a separate issue. They don’t relate it with climate change. Climate change will hit India harder than it does the UK. A Niti Aayog report in 2018 warned that 21 cities, including Delhi and Bengaluru, could run out of groundwater as early as 2020. We will witness increased temperatures, more floods and droughts, and glacier melting,” says Dubey.

Indian protesters have also been a part of the rebellion in London. In mid-April in Oxford Circus, Delhi-born Jahan Jhala, 27-year-old son of Indian advertising tycoon Ajai Jhala, was one of the protesters who had chained themselves to others. “Look at how bad the smog is in Delhi. There are many Indian cities where one can’t breathe properly. We want the government to subsidise things that are good for the planet and tax those that are not. Right now it is the reverse.”

Talks are afoot to tap into the farmer community to garner more support for the rebellion. “I’m joining hands with environment activist Girish Raut, who was instrumental in stopping land acquisition for Nanar refinery in Ratnagiri district, to get farmers involved," says Dubey. "Tribals and farmers have been agitating for decades in India but they have not been able to connect the issues they face such as floods and droughts with climate change.”

What is Extinction Rebellion?

The Extinction Rebellion movement was born in spring 2018 out of a two-year process of a group of activists, academics and researchers convinced that we are on the cusp of human extinction owing to climate change.

It emerged from another social movement called Rising Up! which has been around since 2016. The founders include Roger Hallam, an organic farmer and a PhD researcher on effective radical campaign design at King’s College London, and British scientist Dr Gail Bradbrook. They, along with other founders, decided that non-violent civil disobedience was the only way to bring about change. Lots of small groups have sprung up across the country and the world, including in India, supporting it.

A trigger for the current rebellion was a landmark report by the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released on October 8, 2018 which states that humans only have 12 years to stop catastrophic climate change. Extinction Rebellion was publicly launched on October 31, 2018.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
