Devastated grandad 'never got over' being accused of Glasgow sex worker's murder before he died

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest top news stories sent straight to your inbox with our daily newsletter

Megan Smith has revealed how her grandfather went to his grave under a cloud of suspicion having been wrongly accused of killing her mother Tracey Wylde.

Thomas Wylde was interviewed by police in connection with her death several times but was released without charge.

Megan, 25, said he struggled to come to terms with the speculation – which stayed with him until he died two years before the real killer Zhi Min Chen was caught.

Thomas adopted Tracey when she was three years old and the pair formed a close bond.

A complicated family background saw Tracey brought up by him and her gran Margaret.

The relationship with his daughter was investigated by Strathclyde Police detectives who worked on the original inquiry.

Tracey’s mum Sophia McCash – also known as Fay – made an emotional public appeal for information which would help police find her killer days after her body was discovered.

Tracey was one of six sex workers murdered in Glasgow in as many years, sparking fears a serial killer was responsible – a theory officers wanted to rule out.

Megan claimed Thomas – who died from dementia aged 84 in 2016 – was left devastated by her death and angry at his treatment by officers.

(Image: UGC)

Thomas revealed how police interviewed him over Tracey’s murder when he appeared on the Discovery Channel documentary Unsolved in 2006.

Megan said: “My papa went through a terrible time when my mum died.

“The police were desperate to find her killer and he was a suspect.

“He and my gran Margaret took care of my mum from when she was a baby and adopted her when she was three. He was very close to her.

“But the police thought that made him a suspect and he was questioned about her murder more than once.

“The police suspected him and people in the community also thought he was responsible because he was interviewed about it.

(Image: UGC)

“The Unsolved programme can be watched on YouTube and people left comments on the page about my papa saying ‘he definitely done it’.

“I know it hurt him and it affected everyone else who knew it was a load of rubbish.

“He was very bitter about mum’s murder and the handling of the case. It left him devastated.

“But he died from dementia several years ago and in the end he didn’t recognise anyone.

“I wish he was still alive to see Chen being jailed.”

Thomas told the documentary makers how his relationship with Tracey had been volatile when he discovered she was pregnant but the pair had grown close again.

He said he saw her frequently after they mended their rift and took her to the supermarket.

However, he was angry when officers asked him if he had a sexual relationship with her – and said he would kill her murderer if he ever met them.

(Image: Daily Record)

He said on camera: “I saw her (Tracey) every day and took her to the shopping centre. That’s what the police gave me a hell of time for. They tried to think it was me that done it.

“They wanted to know if I was going with her sex-wise – my own daughter. They’re not good people, as far as I’m concerned.”

When asked about the person responsible for Tracey’s death, he said: “I’d kill him, I’m very bitter that way.”

Megan added: “Chen finally being caught is justice for my papa too.

“It will put an end to the unfair suspicion that surrounded him over the years.

“I so wish he was still alive to see Chen in the dock. He would have been delighted.”

Megan revealed that Chen’s arrest came just a few months after her dad Scott Smith died. He and Tracey split up soon after Megan was born but the couple kept in touch.

(Image: Handout)

She said her mum’s death cast a shadow over his life but he was given hope that police made a breakthrough when Sougat Mukherjee was arrested in India in 2015.

However, Scott died from liver failure last year, aged 44, not knowing that police had identified the wrong suspect.

Chen was charged with Tracey’s murder when his DNA matched traces of evidence that was found in Tracey’s flat.

Megan said her dad found it difficult to speak about Tracey’s murder.

She added: “How she died really affected my dad.

“It took years for him to come to terms with it, if he ever really did. Not knowing who was responsible for her murder left a big gap in his life. He knew her killer was out there and always hoped he’d be caught.

“With every passing year, I think a little bit of hope died. He was delighted when police reopened the investigation. And when they made an arrest in India, it made us think something was happening.

(Image: Sunday Mail)

“My dad died without knowing about Chen but I know no one would’ve been happier to see him convicted.

“He never spoke to me about how my mum died. I don’t think he knew how to. It was too hard for him but he protected me. I saw my dad all the time. He gave me a lot of support along with the rest of my family.

“They’re now both at peace and hopefully they’ve been reunited.”

Megan said that once Chen is convicted, she hopes knowing who killed her mum will be a “new beginning”.

She said: “My mum’s murder and taking so long for the killer to be found had a huge impact. My family and my mum’s friends have all been affected by it. Now justice has been done, a huge weight has been lifted off everyone’s shoulders.

“I had a good upbringing but I was always aware that my mum was missing and that was difficult. But I believe Chen’s conviction will give me a fresh start in life and I can now move on.”
