West Bengal: Couple found dead in University campus; police suspect suicide, post-mortem reports awaited

The post-mortem reports are awaited for any further investigation. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Kolkata: In a case reported from West Bengal, a newly-married couple was found dead at Visva-Bharati University campus located in Birbhum district. The police confirmed the incident on Saturday.

On Friday night, the bodies of were found near Cheena Bhavana which is located within the campus, police said. The Department of Chinese Language & Culture of Visva-Bharati University is commonly known as Cheena Bhavana.

According to news agency PTI, the deceased were identified as 18-year-old Somnath Mahato and 19-year-old Abantika. The police officials added that the both the deceased were students of Srinanda High School at Bolpur and the duo recently got married.

Reportedly, Somnath had appeared for Higher Secondary Examinations this year and Abantika had appeared for class 10 board examinations. A senior officer of Bolpur police station told PTI that it appears to be a case of suicide but it can be confirmed only after the post-mortem examination report arrives.

Meanwhile, the Public Relations Officer (PRO) of Visva-Bharati, Anirban Sarkar, told PTI that their security personnel informed them about the matter after they spotted the bodies near Cheena Bhavana. They will look into the matter and the authority may issue an order to find out how they had entered the campus at late night.

However, further investigation in the case is underway and the post-mortem reports are awaited for any further investigation.

In another case reported from Pilibit city of Uttar Pradesh, a man and a woman hanged themselves at the man's residence from a single saree in Jaitpur village. The local police officials said that as per interrogation it was learnt that the two were involved in an extra-marital affair since the past three years.

Reportedly, the man had married five years ago and the woman was married on March 8, this year. A former village pradhan, Ramautar informed the police about the incident.

Reportedly, he is survived by a wife and his two-year-old daughter. However, the local police have registered a case in the matter and further action will be taken only after the autopsy report comes.
