Cyclone Fani, India: nine dead as storm hits Puri in Odisha

Cyclone Fani has ravaged India’s east coast, killing at least eight people in India and one in Bangladesh before heading for Kolkata

Don't miss out on the headlines from Technology. Followed categories will be added to My News.

Tropical Cyclone Fani has barrelled into eastern India, killing at least nine people.

The storm has reportedly killed at least eight people in India and one person in Bangladesh — some hit by flying trees and lumps of concrete carried by ferocious winds.

Eight people were killed in Odisha, the Press Trust of India (PTI) news agency reported, including a teenage boy crushed under a tree and a woman hit by concrete debris.

Authorities in Bangladesh, next in Fani’s path, said a woman was killed by a tree, and that 14 villages were inundated as a tidal surge breached flood dams even before the storm arrived.

An abandoned house and trees bend in 200km/h winds on the outskirts of Puri, in the Indian state of Odisha, as Cyclone Fani approaches land. Picture: AP Photo

Collapsed street stores on the outskirts of Puri, where buildings, electricity poles and trees were torn down. Picture: AP Photo

Tearing down homes, trees and power lines, the cyclone has caused massive damage in the tourist town of Puri.

A million people were evacuated before it made landfall. Howling winds gusting up to 200km/h uprooted scores of trees, while torrential rain obscured the deserted streets in Puri and the state capital Bhubaneswar.

Fani spent days building up power in the northern reaches of the Bay of Bengal before it struck the coast of the state of Odisha, the state-run India Meteorological Department said.

“Damage in Puri is extensive, power supply, telephone lines disrupted,” Odisha’s Special Relief Commissioner Bishnupada Sethi told Reuters of the seaside Hindu temple town that is popular with pilgrims and was directly in the storm’s path.

In the Srikakulam district, where around 20,000 people had been evacuated, thatched-roof houses collapsed and fishing boats left unmoored on beaches were sliced into shards in 140km/h winds and lashing rain.

Cyclone tracker Tropical Storm Risk put Fani as a powerful category four storm on a scale of one to five. Close to 60km inland, winds brought down electricity poles in Bhubaneswar, where authorities had ordered the airport to stay closed.

Puri has already endured ‘extensive’ damage in torrential rain and fierce winds, as Indian authorities evacuated a million people along the country's eastern coast. Picture: AP Photo

Residents took cover in temporary cyclone relief shelters as the cyclone approached the coastline. Picture: Dibyangshu Sarkar / AFP

Schools and colleges in Odisha were shut. A major hospital in the city suffered extensive structural damage but all patients and staff were safe, authorities said. People packed into shelters, spreading mats to wait out the storm, television and social media showed.

More than 600 pregnant women were shifted into safe locations, with nearly 500 ambulances on standby. Some 242 medical institutions had been provided with power back-up, government authorities said.

In neighbouring Bangladesh to the north, authorities have begun moving 500,000 people from seven coastal districts, a government minister said. The storm is due to hit late on Saturday.

This photo provided by NASA shows a satellite view of Cyclone Fani. Picture: NASA

Cyclone Fani approaches the coast of India.

In this satellite image acquired from the Indian Metrological Department, shows Cyclone Fani in the Bay of Bengal on Thursday, May 2. Picture: Indian Metrological Department via AP

Aid agencies warned that the more than a million Rohingya from Myanmar living at refugee camps near the coastal district of Cox’s Bazar were at threat. Hillol Sobhan, local communications director for the aid group Care, said it had emergency supplies for the refugees in Cox’s Bazar.

Odisha had evacuated more than a million people from the most vulnerable communities along the low-lying coast, Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik said on Twitter.

Hundreds of disaster management personnel were deployed in the state, and doctors and other medical staff were told to defer any leave until May 15. Neighbouring West Bengal also planned to shut down the airport at Kolkata, its state capital.

India’s cyclone season can last from April to December, when severe storms batter coastal cities and cause widespread deaths and damage to crops and property in both India and neighbouring Bangladesh.

But recent technological advances have helped meteorologists predict weather patterns more accurately and prepare.

Some of the deadliest tropical cyclones on record have occurred in the Bay of Bengal.

A super-cyclone battered the coast of Odisha for 30 hours in 1999, killing 10,000 people. In 2013, a mass evacuation of nearly a million people was thought to have saved thousands of lives, with less than 50 people killed.

Cyclones typically quickly lose power as they move inland.

Originally published as Death toll rising as Cyclone Fani ravages the east coast of India
