PM Modi condemns Ghulam Mohammed Mir’s killing in Anantnag, says ‘no place for such violence in our country'

PM Narendra Modi condemned BJP leader Ghulam Mohammad Mir's killing on Sunday | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday condemned the murder of BJP leader Ghulam Mohammad Mir in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag, and expressed condolences to his family and well-wishers for the party leader’s demise. PM Modi added in his tweet that there was “no place for such violence in our country.”

In his tweet on Tuesday, Modi said, “Strongly condemn the killing of @BJP4JnK leader Shri Ghulam Mohammed Mir. His contribution towards strengthening the party in J&K will always be remembered. There is no place for such violence in our country. Condolences to his family and well-wishers.”

Militants gunned down 55-year-old Mir, district vice president of BJP, in Anantnag late on Saturday night. Mir, who was popularly known as 'Atal' in his neighbourhood, had contested assembly elections as the BJP's candidate from Anantnag. Party leaders said that Mir's security had been withdrawn by the government in February.

Strongly condemn the killing of @BJP4JnK leader Shri Ghulam Mohammed Mir. His contribution towards strengthening the party in J&K will always be remembered. There is no place for such violence in our country. Condolences to his family and well-wishers. — Chowkidar Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) May 5, 2019

As per initial probe by the police, three militants had come to Mir's house in Nowgam Verinag area and asked for his car keys. While driving the car away, the militants shot bullets into the BJP leader. The murder took place ahead of the final phase of polling in Anantnag Lok Sabha elections.

"He received several bullets and died on way to hospital," BJP state spokesman Altaf Thakur said. Condemning Mir's murder as "barbaric", Thakur said that the government had withdrawn his security even though he faced threats from the militants. "“He was under constant threat from militants, yet his security was taken back.”

Meanwhile, PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti on Saturday also expressed condolences on the death of the BJP leader and strongly condemned his killing. She said, "I strongly condemn the killing of @BJP4India leader Gul Muhammad Mir in Verinag, South Kashmir. My condolences to the bereaved family and prayers for the departed soul."

Earlier in the day, she had requested the Centre to announce ceasefire in Kashmir Valley during Ramzan in order to ensure that people can observe the holy month in peace.

In a tweet, the former J&K CM stated that last year's ceasefire played an instrumental role in providing a huge sense of relief and said that she hoped that electoral compulsions will be put aside.


