Missing Cash: SIT recovers another Rs 2.10cr

PATIALA: Following intensive questioning of two Punjab police assistant sub-inspectors Joginder Singh and Rajpreet in the Rs 6.65 crore missing cash case, the special investigating team (SIT) on Saturday seized another Rs 2.10 crore, taking the total recovered amount to around Rs 4.49 crore.The first recovery was made on Saturday afternoon from a vacant plot near the house of ASI Joginder Singh in Balbeer Khan Colony of Patiala where the cops found Rs 1.10 crore neatly wrapped in plastic sheets, then put in urea bags and buried in the ground. The second recovery was made from the house owned by ASI Rajpreet Singh in New Mahindra Colony. The ASI, however, no longer stays there. Here the money had been kept in an empty box of paint in one of the three rooms that were locked.It is to be mentioned that a police team raided the New Mahindra Colony house of Rajpreet Singh on April 18, but could not find any cash. They were met by two migrant labourers, who had told the cops that they were staying there on rent. Rajpreet lived in this house about five years ago, but then he shifted to police quarters at Division Number 2 and later he got his own house constructed on Sanour Road. Harkesh, one of the migrant labourers had told ToI on April 19 that the ASI or someone from his family used to visit them every month to collect rent, but no one had come ever since Rajpreet’s name had cropped up in the missing cash case.Confirming the development, PK Sinha, who is heading SIT, said during continuous interrogation the two ASIs had revealed the two places where they had hidden the money. “We also trying to trace the remaining cash and it is expected that within the next 2-3 days the SIT will be able to recover the entire amount.”The SIT brought along the two ASIs to Patiala, who accompanied them to the spots from where the cash was recovered. The team also took along a duty magistrate in whose presence the recovery was made. The money was found in the denominations of Rs 500 and Rs 2,000. Given the large number of notes, the SIT had to call in a cash counting machine.The two ASIs had been sent to 5-day police custody by a Mohali court. “We still have four days to question the accused and from the progress that has been made so far, we are confident that the entire amount will be recovered,” Sinha said. He, however, maintained that the SIT was also scrutinising details of the financial transactions and collections made from the sale of the stationery items and books by the priest.Patiala senior superintendent of police (SSP) MS Sidhu, who is also a SIT member, said they were yet to ascertain as to what the two ASIs planned to do with the cash. “One thing is for sure that the two believed the cash recovered from of the priest’s house was unaccounted and that they will be able to siphon it off without any repercussions,” Sidhu added.The SIT has so far arrested eight persons other than the two ASIs, who are accused of either holding up portions of the missing cash or helping the two in siphoning it off. These include ASI Dilbagh Singh, police informer Surinder Singh, head constable Amrik Singh, Nirmal Singh of Raipur village in Mansa, who is the maternal uncle of ASI Rajpreet, Surinderpal alias Chiri of Patran, Mohammad Shakeel neighbour of ASI Joginder Singh, and Devinder Kumar of Moonak and Sanjeev Kumar son of Karnail Singh.In addition, Rs 1.5 lakh has also been recovered from Gurpreet Singh a resident of Sitarganj in Rudrapur district of Uttarakhand on Friday.
