Case filed against I-T sleuths for abetting suicide of 'Lottery King' Martin's cashier

Case filed against I-T sleuths for abetting suicide of 'Lottery King' Martin's cashier

The son of the deceased employee lodged a complaint with the Karamadai police that his father was harassed and beaten up by the I-T sleuths.

news Crime

Just days after a massive search was conducted by the Income Tax Department on the properties of 'Lottery King' Martin Santiago, a case has now been registered against Income Tax department sleuths for reportedly abetting the suicide of one of Martin’s employees. Santiago Martin’s cashier T Palanisamy, a long-time employee, was found dead in a pond in Karamadai. Rohin Kumar, his 19-year-old son, lodged a complaint with the Karamadai police that his father was harassed and beaten up by the I-T sleuths.

The searches on Martin’s properties, including a homeopathy college, began on April 30. More than 70 locations across India, including 22 locations in Coimbatore, were searched by the I-T officials till May 3. On Wednesday, sleuths from the I-T department had picked Palanisamy up for interrogation during which he allegedly slit his wrist. After spending a day at a private hospital near GN Mills, Palanisamy was discharged on Friday morning, only to be found dead later that day.

In his complaint, Rohin has also alleged that he saw his father being beaten up by one of the I-T sleuths at their residence, and demanded that action be taken against the officials. While the officials are yet to be identified, Karamadai police have registered a case under Section 306 (abetment to suicide) of the Indian Penal Code.

According to the New Indian Express, Rohin has also lodged a petition with Coimbatore Chief Judicial Magistrate Court and the Collector on Saturday, seeking a fair investigation into his father’s death.

According to the Times of India, Palanisamy was working as a cashier at Future Gaming and Hotel service private limited at GN Mills in Coimbatore.

A day after I-T investigations began, unaccounted cash amounting to Rs 5.8 crore and jewellery worth Rs 24 crore was seized from the operation. While Martin’s main business is the operation of lotteries run by state governments in which he functions as a marketing agent, he is also in the real estate business.
