'Kejriwal government has failed Delhi', says ex-Delhi CM Sheila Dikshit

She further mentioned that whatever Kejriwal has done was initiated by our government

In a conversation with Mirror Now, former Chief Minister of the national capital, Sheila Dikshit mentioned that the December 2012 gangrape case was "blown out of proportion" by the media. Senior Congress party leader, Sheila Dikshit has been the longest Chief Minister of the national capital from 1998-2013. In 2012 when the horrific Nirbhaya Gang-rape took place, the United Progress Alliance led by the Congress party was in power at the Centre.

On asking why she wanted to be a candidate for the Lok Sabha elections, Dikshit replied that she was asked to contest these elections although she was not very keen but the party demanded from her. "It's a matter of approach, If you are of use to a party or to an organisation, it is human nature that you do the job which is asked."

Talking about the alliance with the Aam Aadmi Party that did not happen, Dikshit said that there were members who asked it should have, whereas some members said it should not happen, there was a difference of opinion. "I did not want the alliance to happen, I never spoke to Kejriwal but the number of seats they were offering was not acceptable to me," she added.

Upon asking about Kejriwal's fight for demanding full state status for the national capital, Dikshit said, it is not about asking for full status, it is about what the constitution says. For fulfilling this demand we have to change the constitution, which can happen only through Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, she added.

She further mentioned that whatever Kejriwal has done was initiated by our government, Congress party never fought with governors, this no one's personal fight.

In the interview, while talking about women safety and law and order situation in the capital, Dikshit said, "If there is rape, sometimes you ignore rape and put a small column in a newspaper comes, little children being raped and one was put into a political scandal which we suffered." She added, that there needs to be a uniformity in media coverage.

When asked about highest per capital crime rate against women, CCTV installations and ensuring proper street lighting, Dikshit mentioned that Delhi police are responsible for this and it was under the Central government in her tenure.

She further claimed that the Delhi government has no role to ensure women safety in the national capital, especially where the police is concerned. Upon asking about solutions to the issue of women safety, Dikshit replied, "I have no solution which will be under my purview. Solutions are with the government of India, the parliament of India and they have to find solutions."

Dikshit is contesting Lok Sabha Elections 2019 from the North East Delhi. All seven seats in Delhi will vote on May 12.
