An Indian Company Makes Watches From Wood & Here's The Secret To Their Success Story

Starting up a business in a field that is already dominated by big shots is not an easy task. You need to have a unique strategy and products in order to stand out from the crowd. Big companies generally tend to be the number one barrier for new entrants but a wristwatch company from India is giving competition to big shots like Titan, Citizen and even international brands like Casio.

© Tsar Watches

Ever since e-commerce websites emerged in India, it has opened up doors for other small companies like Tsar Watches to get noticed. You could have a unique product but you still need to compete, especially since everything is now online. You sometimes have to resort to tactics that your competition may not be using, and that's exactly what Tsar Watches had in mind.

© Tsar Watches

Abdul Kadir Bhandari and friends Haider Ali Lashkar and Abbas Akbari founded Tsar Watches in September 2015. Being ardent watch collectors, they came up with the idea and concept of wooden watches, which nobody else was doing at the time in India.

Your first thought would be that wooden watches are detrimental to the environment, however, the founders wanted to serve fashion and luxury with a sustainable and an eco-friendly product. Since the watches are made out of wood, the founders already made a conscious effort to contribute towards the environment.

For each watch the company sells, the founders plant a tree. So far, the company has been responsible for planting 1500 trees and plan to keep contributing. If you want to know more about their initiative, you can read more about it here.

So What's The Secret to Tsar Watches' Success?

In order to stand out from the crowd, Tsar Watches had to implement a strategy that would get the company the eyeballs it needed. Being an online-only company, Tsar Watches had to break through the crowded space with smart online marketing strategy. Tsar Watches today sell their products to a worldwide audience, which did not happen by accident. Speaking to Abdul about it he said, “We extensively used Google Primer to get noticed by customers in India and all over the world and create the demand we needed”

© Google

Google Primer is a tool by the search engine giant that enables businesses to digitise and grow without being location agnostic. The company was also able to expose their online ads for the intended target audience. Being a Google tool, the tool used by Tsar Watches didn't only work exclusively on Google platforms, the exposure of the brand extended to social media platforms and e-commerce websites as well. Abdul spends at least an hour every day to learn something new and enhance his marketing approach to get the desired outcome.

The beauty of Google Primer is that it is absolutely free. You can find it on Google Play Store and it even works offline. The app offers lessons on business planning, sales, digital advertising, social media marketing, SEO tactics, branding and analytics. The app also enables its users to learn and apply strategies for online businesses in under five minutes, but one can always spend more time to learn new tactics.

Google Primer is available in Hindi, Telugu, English, Bahasa and other languages. It's probably one of the most essential apps any new business owner needs to create brand awareness and learn new strategies to make a mark in a crowded market.
