Realme X vs Xiaomi Redmi X aka Poco F2: The battle for ‘X’ factor

Realme X will take on Xiaomi Redmi X which is expected to launch in India as Poco F2. Here’s a comparison between the two phones.

If Xiaomi has Redmi Note 7 Pro, Realme offers Realme 3 Pro. Xiaomi and Realme are in a close race in the budget smartphone segment in India. Now, the two companies are set to battle it out in China.

Realme is planning to launch its Realme X in China this month, making it the first phone outside in India. Redmi, now a sub-brand of Xiaomi, is launching a 'Redmi X' phone on May 14.

Both Realme X and Redmi X are said to come with premium set of features. Realme has already confirmed that Realme X will come to India soon whereas Redmi X is rumoured to launch in India as Poco F2. Let's take a closer look at the two upcoming smartphones from Realme and Redmi.

Realme X

Realme X is going to be the first smartphone from Realme to offer a pop-up selfie camera. As seen in the official teaser, Realme X will come with an edge-to-edge screen with minimum bezels on the side. According to reports, it will have a 6.5-inch full HD+ screen. It's powered by a 3,080mAh battery. The pop-up selfie camera will sport 16-megapixel resolution. On the back it will have dual rear cameras with 48-megapixel and 5-megapixel sensors. According to reports, the phone will run on Snapdragon 730 processor with VOOC 3.0 fast charging technology.

Redmi X

Redmi X is said to launch in India and globally as Xiaomi Poco F2. Based on reports thus far, Redmi X looks like the most powerful Redmi phone ever. It will run on Qualcomm's top-end Snapdragon 855 processor with up to 8GB of RAM and 128GB storage. The smartphone could sport a 6.39-inch full HD+ display, and run on MIUI 10 based Android Pie. Redmi X is said to house a triple-camera module featuring 48-megapixel, 8-megapixel and 13-megapixel sensors. On the front it has a 32-megapixel selfie camera, same as the recently launched Redmi Y3. It will also retain 3.5mm headphone jack.
