Lok Sabha Election 2019: Weather Update for Phase 5 on Monday, May 6

File photo: Voters stand in queue at a polling booth in Turbhe, Navi Mumbai. (K.K Choudhary/BCCL/Mumbai.)

Phase Five of Lok Sabha Election will be held in 51 different constituencies across seven states in India on Monday, May 6, 2019. Key political battles are being fought at constituencies like Amethi and Rae Bareli in this phase. The seven states going for polls on May 6 are Uttar Pradesh (14 constituencies), Rajasthan (12), Madhya Pradesh (7), West Bengal (7), Bihar (5), Jharkhand (4) and Jammu and Kashmir (2).

Despite the blazing heat in many parts of the country since polling began on April 11 this year, the voter turnout in the first four phases has been an impressive 67%, which makes it one of the best elections ever in terms of voter numbers.

However, there's still time left in this election, with the seventh and final phase being on May 19th. During this time, our recommendations to voters at large still stand: choose the right time to vote (before 11 am or after 4 pm), drink enough water, wear light and loose clothes, and cover your head to limit exposure to sunlight.

Uttar Pradesh

According to the Weather Channel’s (TWC) Met team, the maximum temperature in Uttar Pradesh (UP) will be around 41-42°C on Monday. The dominant weather system in the region is a western disturbance (WD) moving eastward across India. The WD brought isolated snow and rain across the north in the past few days. Eight people were killed by thunderstorm and lightning caused by the WD on Thursday.

The good news is that the WD is weakening and won’t have much impact in Uttar Pradesh on Monday. The fourteen constituencies voting from Uttar Pradesh are Dhaurahra, Sitapur, Mohanlalganj, Lucknow, Rae Bareli, Amethi, Banda, Fatehpur, Kaushambi, Barabanki, Faizabad, Bahraich, Kaiserganj, Gonda.

Clear, bright, and sunny conditions are forecast in these fourteen constituencies. With high daytime temperatures, voters in this region should be prepared for hot and dry weather on Monday.

Rajasthan

The constituencies voting in Rajasthan are Ganganagar, Bikaner, Churu, Jhunjhunu, Sikar, Jaipur Rural, Jaipur, Alwar, Bharatpur, Karauli-Dholpur, Dausa, Nagaur. TWC’s team expects the temperature in Rajasthan to touch an average maximum of 41°C.

The maximum temperatures in a few constituencies like Bikaner, Churu and Alwar is likely to shoot up to 43°C. The Rajasthan skies will mainly remain clear to sunny with low relative humidity. Conditions in some key constituencies like Jaipur and Alwar may turn hazy on Monday.

File photo: people wait in long queues to cast their votes at a polling station in Bhandup, Mumbai (Sanjay Hadkar/BCCL/Mumbai)

Madhya Pradesh

Heatwave conditions have prevailed in central India for over three weeks now, with brief respite in between. The seven constituencies voting on Monday in Madhya Pradesh are Tikamgarh, Damoh, Khajuraho, Satna, Rewa, Hoshangabad and Betul. Both TWC and IMD forecasts suggest that the maximum temperatures in Madhya Pradesh will range from 41°C to 43°C, accompanied by clear sunny skies and low relative humidity.

Advertisement West Bengal

While other states are getting bucketfuls of sunshine during the fifth phase of the election, the situation was a little different in West Bengal this week because of Cyclone Fani. Now that the storm has passed for Bengal, summer heat may creep in.

The seven constituencies voting in West Bengal are Bangaon, Barrackpore, Howrah, Uleberia, Sreerampur, Hooghly and Arambagh. The maximum temperatures in the region is slightly lower than normal at around 39°C. The relative humidity will be around 50%, but will increase after the sunset. The sky will remain partly cloudy throughout Monday. Isolated rain and thunderstorms are possible in the region.

Bihar and Jharkhand

Conditions are clear for the most part of Monday in Bihar and Jharkhand. Cyclone Fani has induced heavy rains in many parts of this region during the last five days. Now, the conditions will be stable again since Fani has dissipated.

The constituencies voting in Bihar include Sitamarhi, Madhubani, Muzaffarpur, Saran and Hajipur. Temperatures in these regions will range from 24°C and 41°C on Monday.

The four constituencies voting from Jharkhand are Kodarma, Ranchi, Khunti, Hazaribagh. According to TWC, Ranchi will experience a maximum temperature of 36°C with a relative humidity of 21%. Chances of rain are negligible in both the states, while clear skies will remain for most part of the day.

Jammu and Kashmir

Two out of six J&K Lok Sabha constituencies are headed for polls in this phase: Anantnag and Ladakh. The situation is quite different in these Himalayan regions. According to TWC, Ladkah will witness a maximum temperature of 5°C and a minimum temperature of -5°C. The relative humidity will range is expected to be 46% and skies will remain sunny throughout the day.

As India votes for its future, we've got our eyes on the skies to ensure you're always prepared for the weather in your state. Stay tuned to The Weather Channel for weather updates across India!

**

For more weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
