Killer dance moves to those brooding looks, here's why the world loves Mahesh Babu

Here's why the world loves Mahesh Babu

Words don't do justice to how phenomenal a performer Mahesh Babu is. Apart from every aspiring actor's dream to work with the superstar, Mahesh has carved a niche for himself with films Murari, Arjun, and Srimanthudu. His last release, Bharat Ane Nenu wasn't just a phenomenal hit but also went on to become Telugu cinema's third highest grossing films of all times. Post the success of Bharat Ane Nenu, fans have eagerly been waiting for Prince's next big release, Maharshi.

While the film is all set to release, the world can't get enough of how fabulous the superstar is. Taking this day forward, here's listing down why the world loves Mahesh.

He’s an absolute family man. Whether it’s his social media PDA with his wife, Namrata or his awwdorable posts with his little daughter, Sitara that he writes as #MySitaPappa, Mahesh leaves no stone unturned to spend quality time with his family that is only constantly shelling out some serious goals for us.

Apart from his brilliant ability to romance his heroine and showcase fight like no one else, it’s those dreamy looks that continue to sweep women off their feet. From the way he looks at his heroine to the way he smiles on-screen, Mahesh is one of the best looking men in showbiz.

Lastly, no one can act as well as Mahesh. Apart from the obvious on-screen versatility, the actor can easily get into the skin of the character and portray a lover boy to an action hero with grace and panache.

On the work front, Mahesh has been busy with his next project, Maharshi that is slotted to hit silver screens on May 9. Ahead of the film's release, the makers released the first single from the film, Choti Choti Baatein starring Pooja Hegde and Allari Naresh. The journey song instantly became a hit with the audience and cine-goers who can't stop humming the song. The team has been working hard to finish the schedule. After a long schedule in the United States of America, the team has also shot in Pollachi and as per a report in Indian Express, the film has been shot in Abu Dhabi and Hyderabad.

Stay tuned for all the updates on Mahesh Babu.
