Marakkar – The Lion Of The Arabian Sea: Suniel Shetty to feature as a warrior in this period drama starring Mohanlal and Prabhu Dheva : Bollywood News

Suniel Shetty, who hasn’t been quite active on the film front, is all set to return to the big screen in a different avatar. The actor, who has been a part of many successful films in Bollywood, is all set to make his South debut and will feature alongside Malayalam superstar Mohanlal and dancing superstar Prabhu Dheva. The actor is expected to play a warrior in the multi-lingual period drama Marakkar – The Lion Of The Arabian Sea.

A picture of Suniel Shetty as the warrior was released recently. Going by the picture and recent reports, it seems that the actor trained quite rigorously for the film and has also beefed up for the role. Long hair and beard comprises of his warrior look from Marakkar. Set against the backdrop of the 16th Century, the title of Kunjali Marakkar was given to the naval chief of Samoothiri of Kozhikode or rather the Zamorin Of Calicut by the Hindu king of Calicut after they fought wars against the Portuguese. They played a key role in protecting the Indian coast from foreign attacks and are credited to be the first naval defense of our country.

The story is adapted to the big screen by none other than Priyadarshan. The latter is expected to make the film on an extensive scale with an ensemble cast. Reports suggest that Suniel’s look is inspired from the Brad Pitt starrer Troy and that the film will see him indulge in a lot of action and sword sequences. Keeping the era in mind, vintage ships will be created suiting the 16th century period.

Recent reports have it that Marakkar – The Lion Of The Arabian Sea will be shot extensively in Ramoji Film City in Hyderabad. It seems that the trio of Mohanlal, Prabhu Dheva and Suniel Shetty will be shooting with each other for a schedule of approximately 80-90 days.

Also Read: Suniel Shetty and Zaheer Khan join hands to launch Ferit Cricket Bash

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES

Catch us for latest Bollywood News, New Bollywood Movies update, Box office collection, New Movies Release , Bollywood News Hindi, Entertainment News, Bollywood Live News Today & upcoming movies 2021 and stay updated with latest hindi movies only on Bollywood Hungama.
