TVS to launch new model co-developed with BMW Motorrad - Report

TVS Motor Company will reportedly introduce a new product under its alliance with BMW Motorrad, reports Autocar Professional. The publication has not revealed many details about the upcoming product although it mentioned that the bike would arrive in the current financial year. TVS Motors currently manufactures BMW Motorrad's G 310 R and the G 310 GS at its Hosur plant.

Also Read: TVS Motor Company launches four new models in Bangladesh

The upcoming motorcycle will be a TVS product that will be sold alongside the Apache RR310, which is a mechanical cousin of the BMW G 310 series. While the details are scarce, we expect to see a naked roadster or an adventure tourer version of the Apache RR310.

The upcoming model will likely share its underpinnings and engine with the TVS Apache RR310. Thus a 313 cc, single-cylinder, liquid-cooled, DOHC, four-valves, reverse inclined engine that generates 34 PS at 9,700 rpm and 27.3 Nm at 7,700 rpm should perform the propelling tasks. The motor will be updated to meet the new BS-VI/Euro-V emission norms. The gear ratio may get a revision to match the character of the upcoming motorcycle.

Hardware specifications may also match those of the Apache RR310, 41 mm upside-down telescopic front forks and a monoshock rear suspension. The suspension travel will depend on the category in which TVS will introduce the product. If it will be a naked roadster, it will feature the same rating as that of the RR310, but if it will be an adventure model, it will have a more extended travel. Stopping power should come from a 300 mm disc at the front and a 240 mm disc at the rear. The safety net will include dual-channel ABS as standard. A similar vertically mounted, fully-digital display with Bluetooth connectivity can be expected.

Also Read: BMW G 310 GS delivered to 'Dada' Sourav Ganguly

Like the TVS Apache RR310, the second TVS model co-developed with BMW Motorrad should feature full-LED lighting. It may compete with the KTM 390 Duke and the Bajaj Dominar 400 among others. The Apache RR310 retails at INR 2,24,348 (ex-showroom Delhi). The new model will likely be priced in the same ballpark.

[Source: AutocarPro.in]
