Can air pollution kill you? Environment and health ministries have contradictory opinion

ICMR in its report stated that 1.24 million deaths in 2017 were caused by exposure to air pollution. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A difference of opinion was observed between two ministries of the Union government when they were asked questions about the relationship between deaths and the constant decline in the air quality. The environment ministry denied any relation between air pollution and deaths.

The opinion of environment ministry was contrary to a report published by Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) which estimated that one in eight deaths in India have been due to the constantly deteriorating air quality, according to a report in Hindustan Times.

The environment ministry indicated the absence of data which would prove the link between deaths and the quality of air pollution. However, the ministry stated that air pollution is one of the most performative catalysts in causing respiratory diseases.

Also Read: Do you know what is AQI? 93 per cent Delhiites failed to tell the meaning of Air Quality Index

The opinion of the environment ministry clashed directly with that of ICMR which was published in Lancet Planetary Health in December 2017. ICMR clearly stated that 1.24 million deaths in 2017 were caused by exposure to air pollution. ICMR also observed that life expectancy in India is reduced by 1.7 years on an average due to bad air quality.

Before the ICMR report was published, the health ministry had released a report in 2015 saying that air pollution causes impacts similar to that of tobacco smoking. The health ministry report said that there was evidence of adverse pregnancy outcomes, tuberculosis, asthma exacerbation, cancer and thus, air pollution needs to be addressed during public health programmes talking about non-communicable and communicable diseases.

Challenging the findings of the ICMR and the health ministry, Harsh Vardhan, environment minister, stated that no death certificates had pollution listed as the reason of death, thus declining any correlation between air quality and deaths due to the same.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
