Modi govt most traumatic rule for India’s youth, farmers; will be voted out: Manmohan Singh’s sharp attack

Manmohan Singh, former Prime Minister of India | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on Sunday launched a blistering attack on PM Narendra Modi, stating that Modi's rule had been the "most traumatic” for India's youth, farmers, traders. The veteran Congress leader claimed that the five-year tenure of the Modi government was a "sad story of governance and accountability failure.”

“In the year 2014, Modiji came to power on the promise of 'acche din'. His five years rule has ended up being the most traumatic and devastating for India's youth, farmers, traders, businesses and every democratic institution,” the former Prime Minister said in an interview with news agency PTI.

In a pointed attack on the NDA, Singh asserted that PM Modi considered his government inscrutable and unaccountable, whereas the UPA government had been open to scrutiny. He said, “I welcomed scrutiny, PM Modi considers his govt inscrutable and unaccountable to a litany of corruption charges.”

In one of his fiercest attack against PM Modi, Singh declared that there is no wave in favour of Modi and claimed that the people had decided to show the exit door to the government that "does not believe in inclusive growth and is only worried about its political existence at the altar of disharmony".

The Congress leader also slammed the saffron party for nationalism as its main poll narrative in the ongoing Lok Sabha elections. "BJP is searching for new narratives every day. This reflects bankruptcy of national security vision," Singh told news agency PTI.

Mincing no words, the former PM alleged that the last five years under the Modi regime had only witnessed "stench" of corruption reaching "unimaginable proportions" and asserted that demonetisation was perhaps the "biggest scam" of independent India, PTI reported.

He also attacked the Modi government of having a "slipshod" policy pertaining to Pakistan and claimed that the Modi government's record on national security was "dismal" because the incidents of terrorism had seen a "quantum leap."

He said, "Let's not forget that Narendra Modi's slipshod policy on Pakistan has been marred by a series of flip-flops- from going to Pakistan uninvited to inviting the rogue ISI to investigate the Pathankot Air Base terror attack. Does it not speak volumes about the strategic failures of Modi Government on the national security front."

Singh also criticised the government over its handling of the Pulwama attack and said that the "gross intelligence failure" in Pulwama speaks volumes about this government's preparedness to tackle terror, the news agency reported. He said that the terror attacks in Jammu and Kashmir had increased by 176 per cent and ceasefire violations at the border had gone up 1,000 per cent in the last five years.

This comes on a day when the BJP and the Congress are locked in a bitter war of words after PM Modi made a “corrupt no.1” jibe at former PM Rajiv Gandhi, while targeting Congress chief Rahul Gandhi at a press conference. Rahul retaliated with a tweet saying that his (Modi’s) ‘karma awaits (him)’.

At a rally in Uttar Pradesh on Saturday, PM Modi had said that the life of Rahul Gandhi’s father, former PM Rahul Gandhi, had ended as “Corrupt No. 1”. He had said, “Your father was termed 'Mr Clean' by his courtiers, but his life ended as 'Bhrashtachari no.1' (corrupt number 1).” Modi’s statement was an apparent reference to the Bofors scam, which had plagued the Rajiv Gandhi government.

In response, Gandhi tweeted on Sunday, “Modi Ji, The battle is over. Your Karma awaits you. Projecting your inner beliefs about yourself onto my father won’t protect you. All my love and a huge hug.”
