Bhondsi school murder: CBI seeks transfer of accused to Karnal as he turns 18

The Juvenile Justice Board (JJB) had earlier ordered the shifting of the boy to a facility in Karnal meant for boys accused of heinous crimes. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gurugram: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) probing the murder of a 8-year-old boy in a private school in Bhondsi, Gurugram, has sought the transfer of the accused from a juvenile observation to Karnal.

The CBI's plea in a court comes after the accused has turned 18. The probe agency has argued that the accused should not be given special treatment at the Faridabad facility.

According to a report in Hindustan Times, the court has fixed May 7 as the next date of hearing in the case.

The Juvenile Justice Board (JJB) had earlier ordered the shifting of the boy to a facility in Karnal meant for boys accused of heinous crimes. The father of the accused had challenged the board's order saying the boy should be allowed to stay in Faridabad.

“The safety and security of inmates at the place of safety cannot be questioned by a juvenile without visiting the place. It is the duty of the state to provide all facilities to inmates under the act wherever he or she is kept, whether it is the observation home or the place of safety. Not only the appellant, but several other juveniles in conflict with the law have been shifted to the same place of safety without any prejudice, hence the submission of appellant is not maintainable. All the apprehension is based on surmise and conjecture,” the report quoted CBI's reply in the court.

Last year, the father of the deceased boy had approached the Punjab and Haryana High Court seeking de-affiliation of the school from the Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE).

The investigation agency's prosecutor, Amit Jindal, argued that the juvenile has now become adult and according to Juvenile Justice Act, an adult can not be kept with minors.

On April 11, the principal magistrate of the Juvenile Justice Board (JJB), Manglesh Kumar Choubey, passed an order to shift the accused inmate at Madhuban in Karnal.
