The Villagers In This MP Village Are Living Without Water And They Have Threatened Not To Vote

Madhya Pradesh will once again vote tomorrow in the fifth of the seven-phase general elections. Amid slew of political promises Samdai village in Damoh region of the state have decided not the cast their votes unless their problem isn’t only heard, but a solution is also given.

BCCL/Representational Image

Samdai villagers have threatened to boycott the elections if their village, which faces a situation similar to a drought gets water supply.

Not only Samdai, 18 villages of Damoh district handed over a letter to District Collector demanding ponds in every village along with other things.

Village held placards before the office of the Collector which read, "Talaab nahi to vote nahi (no pond, no vote)" to show their anger.

BCCl/Representational Image

Speaking to ANI, one of the demonstrators Savitri Devi said: "We have to walk for hours to fetch water. There is no alternative since we do not have a pond in our village."

Another person who had come to demonstrate his anger over water scarcity in his village added, "We had earlier put our demands before Damoh MP Prahlad Singh Patel but to no avail. Officials do not pay heed to our demands. We will not vote in this election if our demands are not met this time."

BCCL/Representational Image

Speaking to ANI, Ananda Kopriya, Additional Collector, said that demands of the villagers will be met.

"We have forwarded the letter. We will also talk to the villagers regarding the matter."

Inadequate rainfall and drought hitting the state one year after another, groundwater level is drastically affected.

The state went to polls in the fourth phase and the people in various parts of the state will vote in all remaining three phases on May 6, 12, 19 as well. The counting will take place on May 23.

#ITCounts is an Indiatimes initiative to move beyond the noise and the name-calling and focus on issues that really matter to our generation. We aim to be more about migration, pollution, LGBTQ rights, women's issues, and healthcare than about Pakistan, political posturing and trolling.

If you have any suggestions/inputs/feedback or advice please hit us up at kabeer.sharma@timesinternet.in
