Will revoke Article 370 if voted to power: Shah

Image credit: UNI

Pathankot, May 5 (UNI): BJP national president Amit Shah said that the top priority of the Modi government would be to revoke Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir, if voted back to power.

During a political rally organised to canvass for the BJP-SAD candidate Ajay Singh Deol, aka Sunny Deol, Shah said that in last five years the national security has became stronger under the Modi government.

“Pakistan now clearly understands the importance of national security for India. The Prime Minister’s political will power has given a new boost to our forces and the enemies of India now know how to remain in their limits. We can go to any extent to save our nation and it’s proud countrymen,” said Shah while addressing thousands of supporters here.

He also questioned on the policies of the Congress government and blamed the entire party to put national security at risk for saving their vote bank.

"The silence of Rahul Gandhi on National Conference Party’s demand for having a separate Prime Minister of the J&K state puts him under dark clouds of uncertainty. They are yet to clear their mind on the status of J&K, which is an important part of the India," he said.

He said: "On the other hand, the BJP government is clear that no power in this world could separate J&K from us. The moment when the Indian Air Force took revenge of the Pulwama attack on our soldiers, there was a wave of grief not only in Pakistan but also in cadre of the Congress party. At the time, when the nation was proud of the national forces, these people were asking for proofs, this is the care and love they have for this nation.”

While addressing the gathering, he did not forget to mention about Punjab cabinet minister Navjot Singh Sidhu.

“He (Sidhu) was happy to hug Pakistan’s army chief. Was he not aware about the atrocities they made on our soldiers and on the people living on the border areas?” asked Shah.

On the soil of Punjab, Shah further added: "The BJP lead government has done every possible thing to punish the culprits of 1984 Sikh massacre. Why the Punjab CM Amarinder Singh is still attached to a party which has hands in direct killing of thousands of Sikhs here? He should come forward and justify his stand on this."

Talking about the welfare of poor, Shah said that the BJP lead government has given them a respectable position in the nation.

“The poor and the farmers have been given a new identity by the BJP government. The Congress government had never done a single thing to improve their status. They have been given financial benefits for meeting their medical expenses," he said.

While speaking on the occasion, Sunny Deol promised the local residents to solve the long pending demand of removal of the railways barrier.

“It will be my priority to solve this problem. I will give 100 per cent to complete this project, which was started by the former MP, the late Vinod Khanna. Except this, I will be focusing on improving day to day problems faced by the people of Gurdaspur, the day I resume the chair with your support,” said Deol.

SAD president and former deputy chief minister Punjab, Sukhbir Singh Badal also lashed out the state government for supporting anti national elements. He said: “The state government is promoting anti-national elements to disturb the peace of Punjab. The nation has got a new identity among international countries after Prime Minister Modi came to the power.”

Major (Retd) Suresh Khujria, who recently joined BJP government after snubbing AAP, brought in more than 12 army veterans to the BJP. Former minister and MLA from Fatehgarh Sahib, Harbans Lal also joined the party in the presence of Amit Sharma, Sunny Deol, Union minister Vijay Sampla, Captain Abhimanyu, general secretary Praveen Bansal, former President Ashwani Sharma, Kamal Sharma, Master Mohan Lal, MLA Lakhbir Singh Lodhi Nangal, Swaran Salaria, Kavita Khanna, Seema Devi and Narender Parmar.

Sujanpur MLA Dinesh Singh Babbu, BD Dhuppar, Maj Gen (Retd) Suresh Khjuria, District President Rakesh Bhatia, Jagdish Sahni and Ravi Kahlon were also present in the political rally.

Image credit: UNI


