Round 5 of Lok Sabha elections on May 6

The gloves were off this weekend as elections moved closer to the home stretch, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s “Bhrashtachari (corrupt)” jibe at the late Rajiv Gandhi provoking his son and Congress President Rahul Gandhi to quip that “the battle is over, your karma awaits you”.

In the fifth phase of polling, the fate of high-profile candidates such as Rahul and Sonia Gandhi, Rajnath Singh, Rajiv Pratap Rudy and Smriti Irani will be sealed on Monday, when voting will be held for 51 seats across seven States.

Polling will be held in 14 seats in Uttar Pradesh, five in Bihar, one in Jammu and Kashmir, seven seats in Madhya Pradesh, 12 in Rajasthan, seven in West Bengal and four in Jharkhand.

In battleground Uttar Pradesh, the BJP hopes to improve over its slow start, especially in the first three phases, by leaning on the tested formula of breaking the non-Yadav lower OBCs such as the Kahar, Kashyaps, Prajapatis, Patels, Nishads and non-Jatav Scheduled Castes such as Pasis, Valmikis and Khatigs from the formidable caste fortress of the Gathbandhan between the SP, the BSP and the RLD.

Banking on Awadh

Besides the Modi factor, this is the most crucial weight that the BJP hopes would tilt the scales in its favour in the 14 seats in the Awadh region that go to polls on Monday.

“We are very hopeful of retaining the Barabanki seat. I have been here for over 10 days and I sense that the lower OBCs, especially the Pasis whose numbers are quite substantial in this seat, will remain with us,” said Ritesh Gupa, a BJP worker and MLA from Moradabad who has been assigned different duties in various regions.

In Lucknow, a seat won by Home Minister Rajnath Singh by a margin of close to 3 lakh votes in 2014, the Opposition seems to have decided to give him a walkover. The Samajwadi Party has fielded a lightweight albeit celebrity candidate in film star Shatrughan Sinha’s wife Poonam Sinha. The Congress has fielded a self-styled spiritual guru ‘Acharya’ Pramod Krishnan.

In Amethi and Rae Bareli, the Gandhis are more or less comfortable despite Union Minister Smriti Irani’s spirited campaign in Congress President Rahul Gandhi’s seat. His sister and Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi has more or less held the fort in Amethi and Rae Bareli. She was sharp in her criticism of the Prime Minister for insulting her slain father: “The Prime Minister, who is seeking votes in the name of martyrs, yesterday disrespected the martyrdom of a noble man. People in Amethi will give a befitting response.” In neighbouring Bihar, where votes would be cast for five seats, BJP’s Rajiv Pratap Rudy is locked in a tough fight with the RJD’s Chandrika Rai in Saran. In Hajipur bordering the capital Patna, a seat won eight times by NDA ally and Lok Janshakti Party chief Ramvilas Paswan, his brother Pashupati Kumar Paras is fighting to retain the family seat.
