World Press Freedom Day in Niskayuna: experts talk fake news and First Amendment

NISKAYUNA - When President Donald Trump calls journalists the "enemy of people", fake news about child abuse in a pizza shop led to an armed break-in, and an attacker with a grudge against the Capital Gazette newspaper killed five people last June, press freedom is a topic of the times.

Sixty-three journalists were killed around the world last year. The U.S. is now the top fifth deadliest place to be a journalist - after Afghanistan, Syria, Mexico, Yemen and on par with India.

Last Thursday before World Press Freedom Day, a dozen progressive political groups in Niskayuna organized a panel of experts to grapple with tough questions: Can the First Amendment really protect us? How to stop fake news? What are journalistic standards?

Most of the audience filling Niskayuna Town Hall were on the political left - one organizer mentioned "10,000 lies and counting", referencing a report about Trump's alleged falsehoods without mentioning his name. One audience member, though, critiqued whether the press could be independent when beholden to advertisers.

"It seems to me that the independence you speak of is not really credible because there is a dependence of mainstream media on mass consumption and government support...how can you claim independence of journalism is a good thing? Shouldn't people be able to say, your reporters are not performing the service they claim to be performing?" said Mark Swiencicky.

Journalists on the panel said they welcomed criticism but contradicted Swiencicky's statement that news outlets like the Times Union were dependent on political advertising.

One of the event's organizers Mary Panzetta questioned whether it was okay for a news outlet to run an ad for Trump memorabilia - referencing a screenshot she took last week from the website of Sinclair-owned CBS6. Panzetta is part of grassroots group Sinclair Stoppers that protested outside the local TV station against corporate ownership after a viral video last year showed broadcasters reading a mandated message about fake news being dangerous to democracy.

Another rally planned after Thursday's panel was cancelled, but Panzetta said she will keep protesting.

A Sinclair spokesman told the Times Union: "We support fully the First Amendment and the peaceful exercise of it. Here at CBS 6, our team of journalists is focused on fact-based reporting and we pride ourselves on doing so day in and day out."

During the panelists' talks, Albany Law School associate professor Robert Heverly said the First Amendment protects the press from Congress but not from social media.

"One of our problems is falsities, fake news, propaganda spread online. Websites and services play a significant though not complete role in the spread of disinformation. One person writes it, another likes it, another spreads it, and it's viral," Heverly said.

What the First Amendment doesn't prohibit is lying, Heverly said. And he said the now obsolete "fairness doctrine" that required balanced perspectives on public broadcasters, and media monopolies are not addressed by the First Amendment, he said.

"We must insist on a free press that is a robust press with many voices from disparate corners of society," Heverly said. "We must insist that the free press is there to serve us, the people, not money, not greed, not control, not power."

Retired Times Union editor Rob Brill said the "news is under assault like never before in my experience". People don't believe reputed news sources, much of what's published on social media is not verified and some is deliberately deceitful, he said.

But Brill said journalistic standards still hold true.

"Journalism is a work in progress. It's a goal and it's something we strive for," he said. "We share a commitment to get it right and to be truthful and honest."

Journalists hold to a basic code of ethics: seek truth and report it, minimize harm, act independently and be accountable and transparent, explained Judy Patrick, former editor and senior vice president at The Daily Gazette who is now vice president for editorial development at the New York Press Association. Journalists need to be trustworthy in order to be believed and independent from government interference, Patrick said.

Journalists also "must work harder and better" to move past "pack journalism", said Cailin Brown, a former Times Union reporter who is chair of the communications department at The College of St. Rose. She mentioned a Harvard Kennedy School report that found how serious news coverage - or lack thereof - influenced the outcome of the 2016 presidential election.

Brown emphasized the role of the public in journalistic integrity. "Tweet only what you know is true, share only what you know is accurate, post only the real, and demand good work from your local news outlets," she said.

Libby Post, president of advocacy firm Communication Services, put the onus not only on citizens but on social media platforms. Late last week, Facebook banned some far-right conservatives, who Trump defended on Twitter.

"In order for us to end fake news, we have the responsibility to post what we know is true but the platforms need to choose quality over quantity in terms of content," Post said.
