Imran Khan pays tribute to Tipu Sultan

editorial@tribune.com

Islamabad, May 5

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has paid tribute to Tipu Sultan, praising the 18th century ruler of Mysore for preferring to die for freedom rather than “live a life of enslavement”.

Khan took to Twitter to express his admiration for the 18th century ruler of the erstwhile Mysore Kingdom, also known as the Tiger of Mysore.

In February, the PM, at a joint sitting of Parliament convened in the wake of the heightened India-Pakistan tensions following the Pulwama terror attack, lauded Sultan’s gallantry.

Sultan valiantly fought in the fourth Anglo-Mysore War but was killed in the siege of Srirangapatna after the French military advisers told him to escape via secret passages, but he famously replied: “It is better to live one day as a tiger than a thousand years as a sheep.”

Sultan is famous in history for introducing a number of administrative innovations during his rule, including his coinage and a new land revenue system which initiated the growth of Mysore’s silk industry.

He is considered a pioneer in the use of rocket artillery.

Former President APJ Abdul Kalam, in his Tipu Sultan Shaheed Memorial Lecture in Bangalore in 1991, called Sultan the innovator of the world’s first war rocket. — PTI

War of words in Karnataka

Dear Siddaramaiah, time for you to hug Imranji and Bajwaji - @sherryontopp! That’s quickest way to become Rahul Gandhi and Priyanka Gandhi’s favourite! Just Do It. —Rajeev Chandrasekhar, BJP MP

His jibe was aimed at Siddaramaiah’s reverence for Tipu. Siddaramaiah had started the tradition of celebrating Tipu Jayanti as then CM three years ago.

Rajeev, Think before you tweet. I am not like your Narendra Modi to eat biryani with the PM of our enemy country & also not like you to compromise on ethics to please your bosses. —Siddaramaiah former CM

The Congress leader’s attack was in reference to PM Narendra Modi’s surprise visit to Nawaz Sharif, the then Prime Minister of Pakistan, in Lahore in 2017.
