Two elephants electrocuted in India by 'dangerously low' hanging wires

Two wild elephants have died after being electrocuted by 'dangerously low' hanging wires in India.

The mammals were found lying in a paddy field in Nepura village in Gurguripal in West Bengal, eastern India.

A herd of at least 80 elephants had been roaming around the village for two weeks before the elephants came into contact with the wires, which were lying only two feet above the ground, on Saturday morning.

Experts have criticised the state electricity board WBSEC, with one claiming they had been warned about the wire previously.

Two elephants were electrocuted in Gurguripal in West Bengal, eastern India, this morning

The animals had wandered into 'dangerously low' hanging electricity wires in Nepura village

Picutred: local villagers gather to watch the elephants be taken away by a JCB machine

Dr Pradeep Vyas, principal chief conservator of the forest chief wildlife warden, said: 'The animals were there for almost three weeks and were vandalising the shops and houses of local people and even stealing rice.

'They even destroyed the paddy field and other food grains. Two of them were electrified by the high tension wire, which was lying low.

'We told WBSEC they should fix the wire because it was an elephant zone on several occasions.

'But because of their negligence it happened again and again - last year another incident of this kind happened.'

The animals were found dead by local villagers who informed the forest department - with experts criticising the state electricity board WBSEC.

Rabindranath Saha, Divisional Forest Officer, said: 'The bodies of two full-seized elephants were found lying in the paddy field at Nepura village under Gurguripal police station area on Saturday morning.

'It seems they died from electrocution. Some of the high-voltage cables are sagging dangerously low in the area.

'These can cause death and damage to people working out in the field as well. We have informed the power department.'

Experts have criticised the state electricity board WBSEC, with one claiming they had been warned about the wire previously, and that it had happened before
