After rap from Uddhav, Raut clarifies burqa ban demand not Sena’s

Uddhav Thackeray

Sanjay Raut

Narendra Modi

Maithripala Sirisena

Neelam Gorhe

After a rap on the knuckles from party president, Shiv Sena’s Rajya Sabha MP and Saamana editoron Sunday clarified that the demand for burqa ban made in an editorial in the party mouthpiece was not that of the Sena or its chief.In his weekly column, Rok Thok published in Saamana’s Sunday edition, Raut, who is the Marathi daily’s executive editor, said, “The burqa ban was discussed more in our country than in Sri Lanka. I just want to make it clear that the burqa ban was not the demand of Shiv Sena or Uddhav Thackeray. Saamana just published an analysis of the developments in Sri Lanka.”According to a senior Sena functionary, Raut was told that Uddhav and Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray were so upset that they warned him that another such editorial that was ‘outside the party line’ could mean stern action against him. “He was served a warning to not start creating policies on his own. Otherwise action would be due. This was clearly out of line. He was given the sternest possible warning,” the party functionary told Mumbai Mirror.While both Uddhav and Aaditya, who were outside the country when the controversial editorial appeared, did not speak to Raut, the functionary said that the message given to Raut was loud and clear.“This message of the leadership has been conveyed to him,” the functionary said.With pressure mounting, Raut had to clarify his stand. “This is not the first time when the party has had to distance itself from his editorials, but this is the first time that he has clarified on his own in black and white. This shows how upset Uddhavji was. But the damage has been done, and it’s too late,” the functionary said.Last week, a Saamana editorial asked Prime Ministerto follow Sri Lankan President’s footsteps and ban burqas and other face-veils in India considering the ‘threat’ they pose to the nation’s security. Sri Lanka’s decision came in the wake of the Easter Sunday terror attacks that killed over 250 people.An embarrassed Shiv Sena distanced itself from the editorial and claimed that it wasn’t the party’s view but the ‘personal opinion’ of the Saamana editor.“Every policy decision is discussed in the leader’s meeting or announced by Uddhav Thackeray ji. Today’s editorial has neither been discussed nor been announced by Uddhav ji, and thus it may be a personal opinion of the editor on the current affairs in Sri Lanka but is not endorsed by the party president or the party,”, Sena’s official spokesperson, had said in a statement.
