No more F for frightened females!

Catherine Meheque Khan

(Catherine is a student of Class X, Marian School, Barpeta Road)

‘Congrats!! It’s a girl.’ This sentence is a life-changing one for a girl. If we take it positively the life of the girl will be a shining one and if not then she may not live even for a day of her life. Yes, it’s true. Don’t be shocked for what I am saying.

It was in 2015 Haryana, a girl was born to a couple after many years of their marriage. The mother was happy because she was the one who bore the pain of being pregnant for several times and being aborted for four times, as each time the foetus was a girl. But the last time she had requested the doctor to say her husband that it was a boy, and the doctor responded to her request. When the baby was born, the father took her and was pampering her. As soon as everyone’s attention was diverted from him, he fed the baby a handful of tobacco. And she died in the spot moment. The small creature less than an hour old was killed mercilessly by her own father. In this way, thousands of girls have been killed since long.

Again, in most of the cases, if the baby is a girl, it is the mother only who is blamed always. But scientifically the father is the one who is responsible for the birth of a girl or a boy. Thus it is due to lack of knowledge that the elders blame women. And this humility can be fought with only one weapon – education.

If I talk about feminism, let me mention that in India where Maa Durga is regarded as the Goddess of Power, Maa Kali is known for her power and strong will, Maa Saraswati is regarded as the Goddesses of Knowledge and Maa Laxmi is known for her wealth of wisdom, but surprisingly every 22 minutes a day one girl is raped. And out of these incidents only 12 per cent cases are registered in police stations, and astonishingly only 25 per cent get convicted. The irony is that there is no justice for girls in India where women are regarded as goddesses. The courts at different levels are delaying conviction for their own causes.

Disgusting! The situation is unbelievable and frightening when I remember the 8-year-old Kashmiri girl Asifa Bano was raped and killed by the priest and some locals in a temple (OMG), and shamefully some politicians supported the priest and the incident. Why people become so terrible? What was the fault of this little girl whose life was nipped in the bud? After the incident campaigns and rallies were taken out by various groups all over the country; even our school rallied for two hours. But after a week everything was as usual and back to normal. Asifa’s case is also rolling among the 3.3 crore cases that are pending in India.

In Bihar, there is a village where Dalits known as Musahars live. The men of this caste do farming but do not earn much profit as the climate of the village often does not favour them. So the women make country liquor and sell in their own home. The rich zamindars (landlords) or the people of the upper caste drink liquor and they usually rape girls or women in addition. The women even do not know that it is a crime. They think it as a medium of exchange.

Again, the most disastrous case of Nirbhaya which occurred in 2012 is still not executed the verdict of the honorable Supreme Court. Surprising, they get sometimes bail to roam freely. Shame on the Judiciary! The rapists usually emerge from a background which is surrounded by sprawling slums and poverty. Because of lack of education and good values these people get frustrated and mix up with gangs, use drugs and nurture desperate carnal desires. This kind of brutal and barbaric crime can be sorted out only through proper education.

‘One child, one teacher, one book and one pen’—these are the famous words from the girls’ right activist Malala Yousafzai, the youngest ever Nobel Prize recipient. Even she faced the threat not to study by the inhuman Taliban, but with her family support she fought against it. So we should follow the footsteps of Malala’s parents to educate our girls.

In India, a huge percentage of girls are even not aware that there is a thing called school where they can study. Instead they are pressurized by their illiterate parents from childhood onwards to be at home and learn household chores. The governments only announce mere schemes but have not done anything to enforce these schemes in the proper sense. Due to lack of education crores of girls are forced to get married at tender age, assaulted by their husbands as well as in-laws, thrown out of the house, and finally even their own parents are not interested to give them shelter. This leads to suicides in many cases.

In my opinion, more and more schools should be built not only for girls, but for boys too so that they can have knowledge for standing against injustice in society. People should be aware of what’s happening with women and should support them in every aspect. Women too need to be aware of their vulnerability and trained not to fall prey to predators.

These are not only my words, but of each and every girl who is facing discrimination in India. Let us stand together and pledge that no other Nirbhaya or Asifa has to face this barbaric fate. Expecting people’s support, irrespective of caste, creed and religion, to make this country a better place for WOMEN to live in!
