SHOCKING! Husband smashes wife's skull and burns her body over dowry

Another crime was committed in the name of dowry by a 25-year-old in Bareilly as he buried his wife's body after crushing her skull and burning her body (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bareilly: A newly-wed man allegedly crushed his wife's skull and burned her body in a village in the Badaun district of Uttar Pradesh. The 25-year-old accused has been arrested by the police. The accused allegedly burnt the body of his wife after crushing her head near Sahaswan's Kotalnagla village in the Badaun district.

According to the police, the accused confessed to crushing his wife's head and said that the fact that his family and guests were not respected at his wedding propelled him towards committing the heinous crime. Abhinandan Singh, Superintendent of Police (City) told the Times Of India that the deceased victim belonged to Jogi Navada which falls under Baradari police station. She was married to the accused, Rohit Kumar who is a resident of Kasganj and is employed with a courier company in the national capital.

A missing complaint was filed by the woman's parents on Tuesday while the accused was allegedly missing. According to Singh, the police tried contacting Kumar but his mobile phone was switched off. On tracing the call records of the deceased, the police also discovered that the last call was from her husband.

Also Read: Aurangabad civic body discontinues waste segregation contract of 2 NGOs

The woman's father, Chandra Pal told the police that his daughter had visited them on Tuesday but had left after receiving a phone call, which was from her husband. The SP added that the police successfully tracked the accused and arrested him on Thursday evening. The accused, who made attempts to escape was injured and is currently undergoing treatment.

Reportedly, Kumar confessed to his crime and said that he was not amply satisfied with the treatment meted out to his family members on his wedding and was also not happy with the dowry that he had received. He elaborated that he had contacted his wife and had asked her to meet him near the Satellite bus stand where he switched off her mobile phone after which, he took her to a secluded area and buried his wife's body after crushing her skull and burning her body.

The Superintendent added that the police have filed an FIR against Kumar under Section 302 for murder and Section 201 for causing disappearance of evidence of offence, or giving false information to screen offender of the IPC.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
