General Elections Phase 5: Key developments

The Electronic Voting Machine (EVM) malfunction has been reported from Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: In the ongoing Lok Sabha Elections, Phase 5 began on Monday at 7 AM. As many as 8.75 crore voters in the 51 seats across the seven states are exercising their franchaise. The seven states voting are- Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Jammu and Kashmir. Braving the summer heat, the voter turn out in Rajasthan and Jharkhand has been recorded over 29 percent.

Here are the key developments in Lok Sabha elections 2019.

1. PM Narendra Modi said during a rally in West Bengal's Tamluk that 'speedbreaker didi' was trying to play politics even over Cyclone Fani. Hitting back, Mamata Banerjee said the expired prime minister was doing politics. "I won't share the dias with you during the elections. I don't consider you as our prime minister. When the next PM comes, I will tell him," Mamata Banerjee said.

2. Union Minister Rajnath Singh exuded confidence on Monday during the Phase 5 of Lok Sabha polls and said that the Mahagathbandhan was no challenge for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Earlier in the morning, Singh had cast his vote at a polling booth in Lucknow.

3. Bharatiya Janata Party leader Smriti Irani, who is contesting against Congress chief Rahul Gandhi in Amethi has alleged that the in the constituency voters are being forced to vote for the Congress leader. News agency ANI Tweeted, "I tweeted an alert to administration and EC(alleging booth capturing in Amethi), hope they take action. People of the country have to decide whether this kind of politics of Rahul Gandhi should be punished or not."

Smriti Irani: I tweeted an alert to administration and EC(alleging booth capturing in Amethi), hope they take action. People of the country have to decide whether this kind of politics of Rahul Gandhi should be punished or not pic.twitter.com/v0hkw3HA6u — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 6, 2019

4. Violence was reported in West Bengal and Jammu and Kashmir. Reportedly, militants hurled a grenade towards a polling station in Pulwama district of Kashmir, while, the polling process is underway for the Anantnag Lok Sabha constituency. The police officials have confirmed that there were no reports of any casualties in the blast but the security forces have cordoned off the area. In West Bengal, the BJP candidate from Barrackpore alleged that he was attacked by Trinamool Congress workers after he voted.

Grenade hurled towards polling booth in #Pulwama, J&K; explodes outside the booth's gate. Security beefed up. Stone pelting reported at Tral & Murran@MirFareed2 gets the latest from #Pulwama, where only one person has voted so far#IndiaVotes #LokSabhaElections2019 #Phase5 pic.twitter.com/bARSvpKRHF — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 6, 2019

5. The voter turnout of 27.11 per cent has been recorded till 11 pm while the polling is underway in seven states in the fifth phase. Here is the voter turnout in Bihar 20.74%, Jammu and Kashmir 6.09%, Madhya Pradesh 29.71%, Rajasthan 29.38%, Uttar Pradesh 22.96%, West Bengal 33.57% and Jharkhand 29.49%. Till 9 am, Jharkhand saw the highest voter turnout of 12.22% while Jammu and Kashmir witnessed the lowest turnout of 0.80%.

Bihar: One Ranjit Paswan arrested on charges of vandalizing an EVM machine at polling booth number 131 in Chhapra. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/0mqrXc4mjT — ANI (@ANI) May 6, 2019

6. Phase 5 of the ongoing election will decide the fate of 674 candidates contesting elections from various political parties. As many as 149 candidates are fielded by national parties.
