Tracing Hindu mythology - 7 places you need to visit in India

Prayagraj





India is home to many wonders and tales that have hooked the world for some centuries now. If tales, folklore, and mythology is what you are interested in, a trip to places that have a connection with Hindu mythology is imperative. You will find this handpicked guide to places mentioned in Hindu mythology all the more interesting if you fancy treading the blurred line between real and mythology.Prayagraj (previously Allahabad) is a place that is steeped in Hindu mythology. It is believed that Sangam (confluence of River Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati) is where Hindu deities Rama, Sita and Laxmana crossed over the river. As per the legends, Prayagraj is also the place, where the trio spent some days during their days in exile.Chitrakoot lies between the two Indian states of Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh, and is home to some much-revered Hindu temples. If you wish to delve more into Hindu mythology, this place is a must-visit. As believed, this is the site of Bharat Milaap, where Ramayana’s Bharat met Rama, and persuaded him to come back to Ayodhya, their kingdom after King Dashratha’s demise.One of the most ancient cities in the country, Dwarka is as mythical as it gets. It is also prominent as one of the Char Dhams, the four major pilgrimage sites for the Hindus. It is believed to be the capital of Hindu deity Krishna, and its meaning translates to ‘Gateway to Heaven’. It is also said that Krishna, with his godly powers, claimed 12 acres from the ocean to build Dwarka.Now in Chattisgarh, Dandkaranya is believed to be the forest where Ravana abducted Sita in Hindu epic Ramayana. Hindus believe it to be a site of penance owing to its connection with Ramayana. The area is spread over 92200 sq km, and includes parts of Andhra Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Telangana and Odisha as well.Haridwar, though quite touristy now, has its roots deep in Hindu mythology. Apart from the fact that this is where River Ganga touches the plains for the first time, coming down from the Himalayas, this city has stories, and many of them are unheard of. Other than the more famous places, Haridwar is home to the Daksha Mahadeva Temple, which is believed to be home to Sati, Shiva’s first wife. The evening aarti at the temple is a spectacle; not to be missed.Uttarakhand’s Devprayag is another major pilgrimage site for the followers of Hinduism. This is where River Alaknanda meets Bhagirathi and comes to being as River Ganga. Those interested in a more insightful time can head to the two libraries at Devprayag; both are home to some very rare, ancient manuscripts, written primarily in Hindi and Garhwali. The place lies at some 70 km from Rishikesh and is quite well-connected via a national highway.This one again has a connect with the epic of Ramayana. It is believed to have been Kishkindha, the capital of monkey king Sugriva, as mentioned in the epic. Thus, for the believers, Hampi is where the epic battle between Rama and Ravana was also planned. Other than the mythological connect, Hampi is also a UNESCO World Heritage Site and has some of the most stunning architectural marvels in the world.
