After PM’s ‘Bhrashtachari No 1’, Akali Dal leader calls Rajiv Gandhi ‘India’s biggest mob lyncher’

The recent debate on Rajiv Gandhi triggered after Modi in a rally said that the former prime minister died as the corrupt number one even though his courtiers kept calling him Mr clean. He was responding to Rahul Gandhi who has been calling the Prime Minister a thief.

Days after Prime Minister Narendra Modi called Rajiv Gandhi corrupt, Shiromani Akali Dal leader Manjinder Singh Sirsa on Monday termed the former Prime Minister as the ‘biggest mob lyncher’. He also endorsed Prime Minister Modi’s ‘bhrashtachari no. 1’ statement and said that late premier held the distinction of being the “only prime minister in the world who organised mob lynching against a particular community”.

In a statement, Sirsa said: “Prime minister Modi is right in saying that Rajiv Gandhi was corrupt number one, but he was also India’s biggest mob lyncher.” The Akali Dal leader alleged that the former prime minister not only encouraged genocide of Sikhs but also protected and rewarded those who committed this.

Sirsa asked Congress President Rahul Gandhi to explain why he has not accepted that his party was guilty in the mass murder. Back in 2014, Rahul Gandhi in an interview had admitted that ‘some Congressmen were probably involved’ in the riots but he never apologised for it. Last year, the Delhi High Court convicted senior Congress leader Sajjan Kumar for his role in the 1984 anti-Sikh riots.

The Nanavati Commission set up to look into the worst riot had indicted another senior Congress leader Jagdish Tytler. It said that Tytler ‘very probably’ had a hand in organising the riots.

The recent debate on Rajiv Gandhi triggered after Modi in a rally said that the former prime minister died as the corrupt number one even though his courtiers kept calling him Mr clean. He was responding to Rahul Gandhi who has been calling the Prime Minister a thief.

Modi’s statement did not go down well with many Congress leaders who said that the prime minister did not even know that no religion teaches us to speak of the ill of the dead. Senior Congress leader P Chidambaram said that Modi was speaking such language because he was desperate and fearing defeat in the ongoing polls.
