Bombs, blows and broken EVMs: Voters get plenty to ponder on polling days

FROM LEFT: Unidentified men hurling a bomb near a polling booth in Raninagar, West Bengal, on April 23; TDP, YSRCP workers clashing in Srinivasapuram, Andhra Pradesh, on April 11; A damaged EVM in Chhapra, Bihar, on May 6, 2019. (Photos: ANI)

A broken car window. A raging brawl pierced by the strident and insistent cry of a policeman's whistle. The soaring arc of a flying bomb.

These are not scenes from a battle zone, but from India's ongoing national election.

With some 900 million eligible voters, this staggered election is taking place on seven polling days, five of which will have ended on the evening of Monday, May 6. They have been rich in controversy.

Take the violence, for example. A worker each from the Telugu Desam Party and its arch-rival, the YSRCP, were killed in clashes on April 11. Less than two weeks later, on the third polling day, a Congress worker died of injuries he suffered when activists from his party and the Trinamool Congress (TMC) fought outside a polling booth in West Bengal. There were other reports of violence in Bengal, including the throwing of bombs outside polling stations.

#WATCH West Bengal: Unidentified men hurled a bomb near polling booth no-27,28 in Murshidabad's Raninagar area. #LokSabhaElection2019 pic.twitter.com/9qUkhxBJ8Q ANI (@ANI) April 23, 2019

On April 29, Union Minister Babul Supriyo's car was allegedly vandalised by TMC activists in Asansol; he was allegedly attacked several times and heckled by agitators backed by the ruling party. IANS reported that when a reporter asked Supriyo's TMC rival, Moon Moon Sen, about the violence against him, she said, "If you repeat that name here, you will see what happens to your camera".

West Bengal: BJP MP candidate from Asansol, Babul Supriyo's car vandalised in Asansol. A TMC polling agent says, there is no BJP polling agent here. pic.twitter.com/kBNmpXCvPD ANI (@ANI) April 29, 2019

Violence has been directed at electronic voting machines (EVMs), too. During the election in Andhra Pradesh, an angry Jana Sena candidate flung one disdainfully at the floor; he was arrested (see tweet below). In subsequent election phases, more EVMs would be reported destroyed -- one of them during a clash in a Darjeeling polling booth. On May 6, ANI reported that a man had been arrested in Chhapra, Bihar, on charges of vandalising an EVM.

Jana Sena candidate smashes EVM in Ananthpur district in Andhra Pradesh. #LokSabhaElections2019 pic.twitter.com/mFwwBYh0UF Nagarjun Dwarakanath (@nagarjund) April 11, 2019

Polling day controversies aren't limited to punch-ups and pulverised machines. There's plenty else going on that is liable to occupy voters' thoughts as they head to the polls. EVM glitches have been in the news, for example: Chandrababu Naidu, Andhra Pradesh's chief minister, even wrote to the Election Commission on April 11 to ask for repolls in 150 stations. And the war of words between election rivals is never-ending -- even though election rules require public meetings to end well before polling, politicians can campaign in regions scheduled to vote in later phases.

Two more polling days remain before votes are counted on May 23: Phase Six is due on May 12, and Phase Seven on May 19. Will they unfold without incident? We can only wait and watch. And hope.

Inputs from agencies

Check out IndiaToday.in's comprehensive guide to the Lok Sabha election schedule. Scroll down to track your MP's performance.
