Heat wave to grip Vidarbha, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan again, relief by May 10

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

In Central India, many parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Vidarbha, Marathwada and North Madhya Maharashtra were battling heat wave conditions in April. In fact, isolated pockets of these states were even under severe heat wave.

Thereafter, due to two occasions of distinct weather activities, temperature started dropping over most of these places. This is also resulted in abatement of heat wave conditions from entire Central India.

The commencement of humid southwesterly winds from Arabian Sea, led to further drop in the temperatures over Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Maharashtra and West Madhya Pradesh. Whereas, Vidarbha and Marathwada got affected by humid winds from Bay of Bengal in the wake of cyclone Fani.

Now the Cyclone Fani has dissipated and dry and hot winds from northwest direction have once again commenced over the states in central parts of India. These winds were blowing from Pakistan and Rajasthan, which are already struggling with extremely hot weather conditions.

Heat wave conditions have already made a comeback over parts of Vidarbha. Along with this, temperatures are rising gradually in Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and remaining parts of Maharashtra and Gujarat. Heat wave conditions are declared when the normal day temperatures are above 40-degree mark and are above normal by 4-5 degrees. Temperatures across the above mentioned areas are already well above 40 degree Celsius but are around normal.

Now due to these hot and dry winds, we expect many parts of Rajasthan, west and south Madhya Pradesh, Vidarbha, Marathwada and some parts of Madhya Maharashtra to come under heat wave condition soon. Isolated pockets of South Madhya Pradesh may even witness severe heat wave.

The only relief is that the upcoming spell of these heat wave conditions will not last for long as pre-Monsoon weather activities are likely to commence over Central India from May 10 or 11. During that time, again temperatures will drop, and heat wave conditions will abate.

Image Credit: Pinterest
