Indian Man jailed for killing Wife with Hammer over Dowry

He then put her body into a water drum

Indian man Marishetty Shiva Rama Krishna has been jailed for life after being convicted of murdering his wife over dowry.

The Chinthal, Hyderabad resident was sentenced at a local court on Friday, May 3, 2019.

It was heard that Krishna had subjected his wife Laxmi Ganga Bhavani to domestic violence due to his demands for more dowry.

After harassing her for dowry, with no success, the suspect took extreme action and killed his wife at their home. He took a hammer and beat her with it.

Krishna hit Laxmi in the chest and head numerous times, leaving her seriously injured. He subsequently strangled her to death.

He then put her body into a water drum and drove to Jinnaram in Telangana where he dumped it in a forest area.

After her body was found, a case was initially registered at Jinnaram Police Station but it was later transferred to Jeedimetla Police Station Hyderabad.

Krishna, who worked as an electrician, was arrested and sent to judicial custody while further investigations into the murder were underway.

Following the investigation, the case was filed on a charge sheet and Krishna appeared before the Additional District Judge Court in LB Nagar.

The judge convicted the accused of his wife’s murder and sentenced to life in prison. In addition, Krishna was also ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 1,500 (£16).

Committing violence as a means of demanding more dowry is a common sight in India and there have been several horrific cases which have come to light.

One case involved a woman who was beaten by her husband and in-laws over dowry demands. The incident took place near Jalandhar.

Since the woman got married in 2012, she was harassed for more dowry, however, she could not fulfil the demands as she came from a poor family.

They later turned to domestic violence which escalated until the victim was beaten with a metal rod.

The victim’s parents took their daughter to the hospital and reported the issue to the police, however, the husband and in-laws said that the charges were baseless.

The victim’s mother revealed that her daughter had been pregnant twice in the past but both unborn children died before giving birth.

This was due to the physical abuse that she endured due to bringing a lack of dowry.

A police statement was taken at the police station and an investigation was underway. Police chief, Mukhi, said that based on the information provided, legal action would follow.
