Tamil Nadu: Four months after the ban, plastic bags make a comeback

he corporation has so far seized about 198 tonnes of banned plastic products from over thousands of shops. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chennai: Four months after Tamil Nadu went plastic-free, at least on paper, single-use plastics have staged a comeback. Though the Greater Chennai Corporation claims to have conducted regular raids and seized banned plastic products, visits to the markets shows that small shops and street vendors have gone back to using plastic products in an unrestricted manner.

The Tamil Nadu Government imposed the ban on single-use plastics starting Jan.1, 2019. The announcement was made by Chief Minister Edapaddi K. Palanisamy in June 2018 in the assembly. The government listed a total of 14 plastic items that are to be banned in the state and including plastic plates, spoons, plastic bags and the likes. “Let us gift a plastic-free state to our future generation,” he said.

Despite the ban, plastic straws, cups and bags have silently reappeared in the market. As it continues to flood wholesale markets, questions arises about the availability of plastic despite a ban imposed on manufacturing units. Import of products from neighbouring states including Karnataka and Kerala where manufacture of plastic is still allowed is cited as one of the main reasons for the ban to lose its charm.

The Tamil Nadu Plastics Manufacturers' Association (TAPMA) President, Virendra Kumar Bhayani, while speaking to Times Now, said that the government can ban plastic, but it cannot seal the borders of Tamil Nadu.“We get materials from Pondicherry, Karnataka, Kerala and plastics enter our states from these areas and are dumped into our markets. Tamil Nadu is not a separate country and is one part of a Union. Therefore, you cannot seal its borders and prevent plastic materials from being smuggled into the state,” he said.

Lack of cost-effective alternatives?

One of the main reasons cited by retailers to continue to use plastic products is the lack of alternatives. While restaurants, hotels, grocery stores have switched to alternatives like cloth bags/jute bags, aluminium foil sheets, paper-based products, small hotel and street vendors are struggling to find cost-effective alternatives.

S Palanisamy, a fruit seller in Mylapore admits to using plastic covers despite the ban. When asked where he got the plastic bags, he said, “I have not bought any plastic covers after the ban. The covers which I use are the ones I bought 6 months back. The government did not give us enough time before they imposed the ban.”

Palanisamy, whose sales took a big hit after the ban came into effect, says that the consumers are partly to be blamed. “Rarely customers bring their own bags to buy fruits and vegetables. If we don’t give our customers carry bags, they will automatically go to another shop which will give them bags,” he said.

When asked if he opted for alternatives for plastic, he said that cloth bags cost around 5-10 rupees and with his business making minimal profits, he could not afford to buy cloth bags. “Before we used to spend only 50 paise to 1 rupee for one plastic bag, but now to spend around 10 rupees for one cloth bag will be a huge loss for me. So I just either wrap the fruits in paper or I give it to them in plastic bags,” Palanisamy said while showing us the alternatives he uses.

Consumers, who are quite satisfied with the ban felt that small vendors cannot be entirely blamed for continuing to use plastic covers and bags. Keerthana, a college student said, “we cannot blame them without providing an alternative that doesn’t cost them extra. Spending on cloth bags and paper bags will cost them a meal,” she said. She expects the government to help with managing plastic alternative expenses.

Despite the ban being announced 6 months in advance, retailers feel that it was too short a time for people to get rid of plastic products which has been in use for decades now.

Yasararasath, owner of Fathima Plastic Centre in George Town, Parrys said that the time given by the government to dispose plastic was very short. “All of us here have been in the plastic business for over 20-30 years. Suddenly to ask us to dispose plastic and find an alternative to do business with is not right,” he said. Yasararasath’s business loss had amounted to 60% and he was forced to relieve 10 employees from his shop. He now manages to run his business with left-over alternatives like areca nut Plates, bamboo products, paper straws, plates.

Shop owners and vendors in the market in George Town agreed that the alternatives provided to them were very costly. One of them said that plastic covers were sold for 50 paise and now the alternatives range between 2.50 to 10 rupees and people will go for the cheaper option.

When TAPMA president was asked about the alternatives provided by the government, he said, “Even though the government has made available of few alternatives, it has miserably failed in the implementation of Solid Waste Management that leads to the same position. When there is no proper way of managing waste the alternatives also lead to the same problem of Landfilling.” He also pointed out that because of these alternatives, the price of the goods have also been increased in many shops.

While most of them are struggling to find an alternative to plastic, a few vendors have accepted the ban and have begun to adopted eco-friendly alternatives. “We have stopped using plastic products as soon as the ban was announced. We are quite happy with the government’s decision to ban plastic covers. We have now adopted method used in olden days by wrapping the flowers in lotus and plantain leafs,” says sekar, who owns a flower shop in the Mylapore market.

Lax implementation of the ban

Sourcing of plastic products from other states and lack of alternatives provided to the people shows the lax implementation of the ban by the government. Many blame the government for not implementing the ban effectively.

Since Jan.1, the civic body had limited to seizing banned plastic items from shops, hotels. Despite conducting regular raids and surprise checks, it did not deter the selling of plastics.

The Greater Chennai Corporation’s attempt to bring down the use of single-use plastic had lost its momentum after the announcement of the Lok Sabha elections. The civic body claims that lack of provisions to penalise violators and the model code of conduct slowed down the process to eliminate single-use plastic products.

“While civic officials claim that lack of provisions to penalise violators of the ban on single-use plastics has slowed down effective implementation, we have discredited the ban terming it an appeasement of unauthorised or other states goods. We believe that this ban was only brought to destroy our trade and to provide easy access of goods supplied from neighbour states of Tamil Nadu,” says TAPMA President.

The corporation has so far seized about 198 tonnes of banned plastic products from over thousands of shops. The GCC plans to issue notices to people who violate the ban and record each violation and impose penalties on repeat offenders. The corporations also announced that the officials will cancel trade licenses of those who violate the ban.

The good intent behind the move may have lost its charm partly due to the lack of alternatives and growing lethargy in government operations. Though a plastic-free environment is the need of the hour, the authorities must step-up and take an active stand to implement the law instead of looking the other way.
