Ahead of SOTY 2 release, Ananya Pandey misses 'Mussoorie ki Sardi' with this throwback photo - see post

Ananya Pandey misses 'Musoorie ki Sardi' with this photo

Punit Malhotra's upcoming film Student Of The Year 2 is undoubtedly one of the most anticipated releases of the year. The college drama is bankrolled by Karan Johar's Dharma Productions and will feature Tiger Shroff as the main lead alongside Ananya Pandey and Tara Sutaria who will make their Bollywood debut with this movie. While the makers of the film treated audiences with three amazing songs, fans have been waiting with bated breath to receive updates from the Punit directorial.

Recently, Ananya shared a throwback photo in which she is seen covered with a white thick blanket, during the chilly shoot schedule of SOTY 2 in Mussoorie. The gorgeous looking Ananya shared the picture along with a caption that read, "Delhi ki garmi making me miss Mussoorie ki Sardi! #throwback #4daystosoty2." Take a look at the photo below:

After releasing three tracks from SOTY 2, the makers of the film dropped another track titled Fakira a couple of days back. Featuring Ananya and the Baaghi actor, the song has been shot across 32 locations between Mussoorie and Rishikesh. Composed by Vishal-Shekhar and crooned by Neeti Mohan and Sanam Puri, the song is choreographed by Adil Sheikh.

Talking about the same, filmmaker Punit told Time of India, "Student Of The Year had Ishqwala Love, which was a romantic ballad. We have come up with Fakira, which I am very proud of. It’s my most precious number. Although I love all the songs in the album, I am somewhat partial to this one. It has an Indian sound and beautiful lyrics, which everyone can relate to and enjoy."

He further added, "When you see the number, you will know why it has been shot this way. Tiger and Ananya’s chemistry is brilliant. It’s an advantage to have Tiger in the song; there’s no dance form that he can’t do. Also, he’s so much at ease while doing it."

For those who haven't heard Fakira yet, take a look at the song below:

Even before Student Of The Year 2 releases, Ananya has already bagged her second project with Mudassar Aziz. The actress will be seen starring in the remake of the 1978 hit Pati, Patni Aur Woh, alongside Kartik Aaryan and Bhumi Pednekar. The film is being co-produced by Bhushan Kumar and Juno Chopra.

Student Of The Year 2 will hit theatres on May 10 this year.
