Throwback: When double murder rocked just-retired navy warship INS Ranjit

At sunset today, the Indian naval ensign was lowered on the INS Ranjit for the last time as the warship was decommissioned at the naval base Visakhapatnam.

Among the many memories of the warship’s 36 glorious years of service, recalled by her commissioning crew, was one of a deadly Sunday morning in 1985 when a midshipman shot and killed two ship’s crew after an altercation. The incident is believed to be the only fratricide on board an Indian warship.

On November 24, 1985, the Ranjit, then the newest of the three Kashin class destroyers multirole warships bristling with guns, missiles, torpedoes and rockets acquired from the former Soviet Union in 1983 was berthed at the naval dockyard. The Ranjit was part of an exercise called Barracuda’, a lookout for waterborne saboteurs.

What unfolded was a bizarre double murder. Reconstructed here from a 2009 Bombay High Court judgement are the precise sequence of events that morning.

The ship’s commanding officer Captain (later Admiral) Vishnu Bhagwat was not on board, possibly since it was a Sunday. Lt Commander Dhamdhere, the duty officer was in the officers’ wardroom sipping tea with Lt Nikule and Lt Cdr Palsule, Midshipman Om Prakash Dubey. Hanuman Singh Rathod was a sentry posted on the gangway leading to the ship.

There were eight midshipmen on board the warship that day, including Kanwardeep Singh Bedi, Ravi Shankaran and Om Prakash Dubey. The midshipmen the navy’s juniormost officer rank had joined the naval academy at Cochin in 1984 and had been posted on board the Ranjit earlier that year.

Around 11.15 am, Lt Cdr Dhamdhere received a message that the exercise had been terminated, so he asked Om Prakash Dubey to call the six armed sentries so he could muster them for an inspection.

As Dhamdhere walked out of the wardroom on the ship’s forward deck with Lt Nikula, midshipman Ravi Shankaran ran past him back into the ship’s wardroom. Dhamdhere saw Midshipman Bedi standing on the deck with a 9 mm carbine, fire a burst of three rounds at Midshipman Dubey. One of the bullets also hit the duty sentry Rathod. Both crewmen fell down on the deck, grieviously injured leaving Bedi standing with the carbine in his hand.

In the melee, Dhamdhere stepped towards Bedi, shouting at him. The midshipman dropped his weapon and ran out of the ship onto the jetty with his senior officer in pursuit yelling at naval personnel to capture him. Bedi dived into the water off the jetty and was apprehended by crewmen from the INS Udaygiri who leaped overboard after him. Bedi was arrested by Colaba police and charged with the double murder.

In January 1988, a sessions court in Mumbai rejected Bedi’s plea of insanity and sentenced him to life imprisonment. He spent 11 months in jail and was subsequently released on bail while his case went into appeal. The sensational case was set for another twist.

In May 2009, 24 years after the twin murders, the Bombay High Court quashed Bedi’s sentence on the grounds of violation of procedure. The court held that the midshipman should have first been tried by a military court martial instead of a criminal trial. That year, the Supreme Court dismissed Bedi’s appeal in the case and sent it back to the High Court for retrial. The apex court set a deadline of December 2009 to complete the trial. The trial was completed and the Bedi was once again convicted by the high court. The midshipman appealed the sentence and a decade later, continues to be on bail.

Mumbai-based advocate Niteen Pradhan who appeared on behalf of Bedi in his earlier trial calls it one of the most unique cases he had handled. Bedi’s case could come up for hearing anytime this year or the next because the high court is currently hearing conviction appeals for 2007 and 2008, he says.

The one prime witness in the case who is unlikely to show up anytime soon is Lt Ravi Shankaran, the midshipman who had escaped Bedi’s bullets and who quit the navy in the early 1990s to begin a private firm. In 2005, Ravi Shankaran was one of the prime accused in the leakage of naval secrets from the navy war room in Delhi. The CBI tried and failed to obtain his extradition from the UK where he currently resides.
