Chief Minister predicts downfall of AIADMK government in T.N.

Byelection results will prove disastrous for the ruling party, says Narayanasamy

Chief Minister V. Narayanasamy has predicted the downfall of All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam government in Tamil Nadu after the byelection results.

Speaking to reporters after receiving a memorandum from political parties on 10 per cent reservation for Economically Weaker Sections among general category candidates, the Chief Minister said the byelection results in Tamil Nadu would prove to be disastrous for the AIADMK.

“DMK president Stalin will become the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu after the byelection,” he said.

The Chief Minister also criticised Prime Minister Narendra Modi for his comments on former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. Mr Modi had no respect for a martyred Prime Minister who was loved by all, Mr. Narayanasamy said.

‘Capital not safe’

On the attack on Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal during a road show, he said even a Chief Minister was not safe in the national capital.

The Chief Minister later tweeted that “the attack was an insult to democracy. BJP leaders were targeting him and his government which they couldn't to succeed. Now out of frustration they have engaged in this inhuman act. I am sure people of Delhi will teach BJP a lesson.”

Even though AAP and Congress were fighting the Lok Sabha polls separately, both parties are together in their demand for getting Statehood for Delhi and Puducherry, the Chief Minister said.

Mr. Narayanasamy also assured a delegation comprising leaders from Communist Party of India, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi to look into their demand not to implement 10 per cent reservation for Economically Weaker Upper caste people in admission to professional colleges.

The delegation urged the Chief Minister in a memorandum not to implement the new reservation policy in admissions carried out by Centac.

Former Speaker V. Vaithilingam and Education Minister R. Kamalakannan were present with the Chief Minister when he received the memorandum.
