Border residents take pride in Balakot, but ‘no politics please’

editorial@tribune.com

Ruchika M Khanna & Anirudh Gupta

Tribune News Service

Along the Hussainiwala border (Ferozepur), May 6

How’s the josh? High.... that’s what villagers along the border tell you, when asked about the nationalism agenda being propagated by a national party in the ongoing Lok Sabha polls.

With the border state of Punjab set to go to the polls on May 19, people here are showing a complete U-turn this time as compared to the last Lok Sabha elections when they had refused to be swept by the Modi wave.

This time round, nationalism propaganda of the BJP is finding resonance among the people here. But this may not necessarily translate into votes as people are also unhappy with the politicisation of the national security agenda.

“He (Prime Minister Narendra Modi) dared to show Pakistanis their place by barging into their area and attacking them. To any Punjabi, who has grown up listening to the stories of valour, this act of air strikes at Balakot is heroic,” says Jaswant Singh of Gatti Rajoke village here.

His friend Prem Singh, who runs a small shop, too, joins in the discussion. “Our village has a lot of men in the armed forces. Jo appan Pakistan ton badla leya, uh tan jayaz si (our revenge on Pakistan is justified),” he says. As the discussion goes on, the issue of the success of air strikes being denied by many came up. The villagers, to our surprise, know that many international agencies have denied any major impact of the strikes. “But that’s not important. What is important is that finally India used its might to show Pakistan its place,” they say.

At Gatti Rahimeke village, Balwinder Singh and Jagmeet Singh say for villages located right at the border, national security is of prime concern. “In Ferozepur, because of the Sutlej meandering its way through the International Border, we are at the receiving end. For us, it is a big thing that India dared to take on Pakistan and tell them that enough is enough. To top it all, Masood Azhar being designated as a terrorist and China being forced to support India on this, is a big achievement. However, it is not a political achievement, but that of India. No political party should be taking credit for it to win an election. Why demean our armed forces and our diplomats, who worked tirelessly to achieve this?” they say.

As the sun begins to set, we head to witness the retreat ceremony at Hussainiwala, where the thunderous tapping of feet by BSF jawans, who match every step, every motion with their Pakistani counterparts, catches the fancy of hundreds of Indians. The feeling of patriotism juxtaposed with the recent developments engulfs the hearts of one and all, who visit the Indo-Pak joint check post at Hussainiwala.

Ramesh Kumar, who has come to watch the ceremony with his wife Maya Devi from Nawalgarh in Rajasthan, says, “We wanted to watch the retreat ceremony for long. But now when the political narrative is so strong, we decided to take a few days off and come here. The retreat ceremony made my chest swell with pride, just as the air strikes in Pakistan did.”

Chander Singh of Ferozepur says ever since the air strikes, the visitor inflow to Hussainiwala has increased. “Even from the city, many are thronging the border just to shout slogans against Pakistan. It gives us a sense of pride when we shout slogans and wave the Tricolour,” he chuckles. However, only time will tell if this growing sentiment of nationalism will turn into a political mandate for any party.
