vCloudx enters into a strategic partnership with Vion Consul...

(MENAFN- PRLog) Interactive Video-enabled Visual Response (IV2R), leading the next wave of customer experience

IV2R reduces average time of resolution, increases call containment while lowering the overall cost

SINGAPORE & NOIDA, India - May 6, 2019 - PRLog -- vCloudx Pte Ltd ( www.enablex.io ), the next generation communication platform provider, today announced its strategic partnership with Vion Consulting (www.vion-consulting.com), a leading provider of customer experience management solutions. The new partnership will allow businesses to revolutionise their contact centre by moving away from the traditional IVR into an engaging and customisable Interactive Video-enabled Visual Response (IV2R) system.



"As more and more consumers move online, businesses are finding new ways to engage customers and provide immediate advice, support, and resolution without losing the personal touch. Embedding high-quality video calls into customer engagement workflow provides an enhanced user experience when compared to the traditional contact centres or Interactive Voice Response (IVR) systems that lack face-to-face engagement," said Pankaj, CEO and founder of vCloudx Pte Ltd.



The next-generation IV2R is an omnichannel solution that allows customers to enjoy cutting-edge web, mobile, and rich self-service solutions without having to wait in the queue for an agent or go through the frustration of dealing with an IVR. Instead, customers have the option of seamlessly connecting to IV2R sessions from their mobile device and navigate instantly - through visually guided, user-friendly menus – to help with their transactions. With IV2R, customers can at any time switch to a video call with a live agent if they need any additional help. The "See-What-I-See" experience allows the agent to get a full view of the customer's problem, allowing him/her to quickly and accurately assess and address the customer's needs. The agent could even provide remote repair and installation advice and conduct product demonstration on the spot.



"We are delighted with this partnership as it helps to differentiate ourselves from the rest of the contact centre software providers by offering a more interactive and contextual customer engagement using vCloudx's real-time video communication platform. The visual display of a more granular self-service option and personalised video calls to the call centre at any point during the interaction drastically improves customer experience," said Sumit Dhar, CEO and founder of Vion Consulting.



To experience vCloudx, try it for free now! (https://portal.enablex.io/trial-sign-up/)





ContactAmelia Fong***@vcloudx.com
