‘BJP may need NDA allies to form next government’

Ram Madhav

Arun Jaitley

United Nations Security Council

Masood Azhar

The BJP may require support of allies to form the next government, party’s national general secretary Ram Madhav said on Monday, raising the prospect of a coalition probably for the first time.Madhav’s conservative prediction, however, is minutely shy of a clear majority in the 543-seat parliament and is far below what other party leaders including finance ministerand party president Amit Shah have publicly claimed.“If we get 271 seats on our own, we will be very happy,” Madhav said in an interview to Bloomberg. “With NDA we will have a comfortable majority,” he said referring to the National Democratic Alliance.The party will make up expected losses in the north Indian states it swept in 2014 with new gains in the country’s remote northeast, as well as in the eastern states of West Bengal and Odisha, Madhav said. It will pursue pro-growth policies if it returns to power, he added and has not shifted from a focus on economic reforms to one based on populist cash handouts.“We have expanded in eastern India very well — if the similar effort had been put into south India also, probably we would have been more comfortable,” Madhav said. “As politicians, we must remem-ber that what we achieved last time, we may not repeat because of anti-incumbency.”On Pakistan, Madhav was hopeful about India’s relations with its nuclear-armed neighbour following a tense military clash in February. The recentdesignation of Jaish chief— mastermind of the Mumbai terror attack — as a global terrorist offers the chance for Islamabad to prove it’s cracking down on militant groups, he said. “They should show their sincerity towards the fight against terror,” Madhav said.“Why I’m saying this is, three weeks after the results, we have the SCO. At the SCO, Prime Minister Imran Khan and Prime Minister Modi will be face to face. It’s an opportunity for Pakistan. If something credible comes out in the next month or so, before the SCO happens, I’m sure the relationship will have some improvement.But the onus is on them now.” Azhar’s listing came after China dropped its objection at the UN. “My understanding is that China has finally calculated the gains and losses of taking a position on Masood Azhar this time around,” Madhav said.
