NIV scientists conduct pioneering study on spread and nature of Zika

Paper based on survey points to lack of mutatitive strain that leads to microcephaly in samples from Rajasthan that suffered an attack in 2018



Zika virus (ZIKV) has evolved into a global health threat because of its unexpected causal link to microcephaly. Afirst-of-its kind study conducted by a scientist at National Institute of Virology (NIV), Pune, states that the mutation leading to cause microcephaly (birth defects) to Zika positive women was not found in Rajasthan. The study performed was to identify the circulating clade and presence of the proposed mutation that is linked to transmission and microcephaly. The sequences retrieved during the study did not have the proposed mutation that is linked to transmission and microcephaly as available in the literature though this data does not deny that mutation will not happen, say the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) officials.



The study was conducted on strains of Zika virus (ZIKV) that led to an outbreak in Rajasthan (2018), Gujarat (2016) and Tamil Nadu (2017) respectively. Based on the study, scientists Pragya D Yadav, Bharati Malhotra, Gajanan Sakpal, Dimple A Nyayanti and seven others have published a paper ‘Infection, Genetics and Evolution’ in Elsevier journal. The experimental studies pertaining to the transmission of the ZIKV isolate from India and its role in causing microcephaly has not yet been looked into said Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) experts.



The paper states that the complete genome phylogenetic analysis of Jaipur city sequences with known Gen-Bank ZIKV sequences revealed that the outbreak in Jaipur city was caused by ZIKV belonging to Asian lineage. In Gujarat, the partial genome sequencing revealed the presence of a pre-outbreak strain of ZIKV and current outbreak strain of Asian lineage in Tamil Nadu the study states. The paper mentions, “Whether this strain can cause birth defects and cause large outbreaks is not known at present, but they should be treated as such until more is known. With the identification of ZIKV in Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and recent outbreaks of ZIKV in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh there is alarm in India to enhance surveillance in other states and monitor the mutation and evolutionary changes in circulating Zika strains.”



The mutation (S139N) leading to microcephaly was not found. ICMR experts said, “Zika virus (ZIKV) is a positive-sense RNA virus and also proven that the mutation rate for ZIKV is 12-25 bases /year with a genome length of 10,272 bases. Viruses mutate to makes their survival best in the host cells. Once it is established in the ecosystem and with high mutation rate the chances of the ZIKV mutation in any other cannot be commented,” said ICMR experts.



ZIKV outbreak was declared with the three positive cases detected from Gujarat in November 2016 followed by one more Zika positive case detected from Tamil Nadu in June 2017. Jaipur in Rajasthan reported a total of 159 cases between September and October 2018. Madhya Pradesh has reported 130 cases in October 2018.



Balram Bhargava, director general, ICMR, in an email stated, “ICMR-NIV, Pune is training new VRDLs also for diagnosis of Zika virus disease thus strengthening the laboratory network throughout the country. ICMR-National Institute of Epidemiology, Chennai and ICMR-NIV, Pune is conducting a follow-up study on the Zika positive pregnant women to see the outcome of the pregnancy including the microcephaly or any other foetal abnormalities or pregnancy loss.”



Dr Pradeep Awte, Mahrashtra state surveillance officer, said, “Vector control measures that are adopted for dengue and chikungunya need to be strengthened including fogging activities as well as integrated mosquito control measures. The fever and entomological surveillance is going on in the state. In major cities like Pune, Nagpur, Mumbai the health officers are giving visits to keep surveillance in the airport areas.


