EXCLUSIVE | Bharat director Ali Abbas Zafar reveals one good and bad thing about working with Salman Khan

Ali on one good & bad thing about working with Salman

After the blockbuster success of Sultan (2015) and Tiger Zinda Hai (2017), Salman Khan is back with director Ali Abbas Zafar for the third time hoping to complete a hattrick of blockbusters with Bharat. The movie is slated for an Eid release and is an ensemble featuring Katrina Kaif, Disha Patani, Jackie Shroff, Sunil Grover, Tabu, Sonali Kulkarni and Shashank Arora, among others.

We recently got in touch with filmmaker Ali Abbas Zafar, who is busy promoting the film and asked him because this is his third film with Salman Khan, what is the one good thing and one bad thing about working with the superstar. Ali revealed that the good thing is that Salman amps up any scene with his sheer presence and is a delight to work with and the bad thing about working with him is that he is not punctual and often makes them wait.

Read his full response below:

The good thing about working with him is that whatever you have visualised for a scene when he comes in everything multiplies. For example that scene in Sultan where he takes his shirt off. In my mind, I was like, "How are we gonna pull it through?" What actually happened on the set was multiplied many times. So, that's a great thing.

Further talking about the one bad thing about working with Salman Khan, Ali said,

The bad with him is at times you will have to wait for him because his timings can throw you off (laughs). But, I don't care about that. That comes with the stardom. And that's the only thing. So my whatever little chik chik happens with him it's because of the time. During the shoot, I'll go to him in the evening and he'll confidently say, "Sir, I'll be there before you" (laughs).

He further added,

But he has a wicked sense of humour which I enjoy. I think I also have a similar sense of humour, so we kind of match and play along. So, there are always laughs on sets. He never makes a situation heavy. He'll come on sets, before some of the most emotional scenes he'll be laughing and as soon as the camera is on, he switches drastically. He doesn't trouble anyone in the crew, you know. There are actors who would say, "Sir, when I give this shot, put up black marking here". He is not like that. He is just like water. He just flows through everything. On sets, if we say, "Sir, do you need some private space?" He says, "Sir, it's my job to be here, you do your job." He is funny, I like that.

Produced by Atul Agnihotri, Bharat releases on June 5.
