Peenya’s toxic neighborhoods: Dodging the Flames of fury

Being an Engineer by qualification and an Analyst by profession, I am a dreamer at heart who believes that "A pen is mightier than a sword".

Peenya, an area in the city of Bangalore, majorly famous for its chemical, heavy metal, oil and gas industries has seen its worst in the recent years. A major portion of Peenya is popularly known as the ‘Peenya Industrial Area’ due to the bulk of industries which are located in this area. It is also known to be one of the biggest industrial areas in Asia.

However, despite its high productivity, Peenya has a reputation of being one of the most toxic areas in Bangalore due to the numerous fatal accidents which have occurred in and around these factories in the past as well as the high levels of environmental pollution recorded in this area. In addition to this, Peenya also has a bulk of neighborhoods located within dangerously close proximity to these toxic industries.

The most recent incident of an intense fire which broke at a chemical factory in MEI Colony, Laggere has left residents in a state of shock. The incident took place on a breezy Wednesday evening on the 24 th of April 2019 when the residents of the peaceful neighborhood of MEI colony started hearing loud sounds emanating from Sri Ganesh Chemicals, a laboratory chemical Distribution Company located in Laggere’s MEI Colony. Initially ignoring these loud noises, residents proceeded with their daily chores.

It was around 10pm when the noises intensified and screams were heard from within the factory. As people curiously peered out of their houses, they noticed large bouts of thick black smoke emanating from one of the windows of the building accompanied by an extremely pungent odor. No more than a few seconds later, an intense fire broke out causing the window to shatter, thus littering the street with shards of glass and fiber.

It is a well known fact that neighborhoods such as MEI Colony have a large number of elderly citizens residing within them and incidents such as these may cause them to feel increasingly insecure. Toxic fumes from burning chemicals may also result in respiratory problems among the young and elderly alike. According to reports, the residents of MEI Colony spent the entire night stranded on the streets, covering their mouths with handkerchiefs and watching the firemen battle the raging flames.

Industries and neighborhoods never go hand in hand. In my opinion, the government must mandatorily have these chemical industries relocated to the outskirts of the city. If not, they at least need to be located at a safe distance from neighborhoods and other densely populated areas. Reports state that several barrels of chemicals were destroyed in the fire. This incident clearly brings into picture the dangers of chemical industries being located in residential areas. In fact, such accidents are not only a threat to life and health but also result in major losses to the economy.

Although this incident caused widespread unease among the residents of Peenya, it was a minor one compared to those which had occurred in the past. In the year 2015, the toxic gas leak from a factory located in Dasarahalli in Peenya led to mass hospitalization of its residents who suffered immensely after inhaling the toxic fumes. In the year 2016, the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) carried out a survey by drilling 72 bore wells in Peenya, among which 20 of were found to be heavily contaminated with Chromium, a heavy metal which is directly associated with cancer.

It is also important that factories and industries dealing with toxic chemicals and heavy metals are located at safe distances from each other, so as to avoid potential risks to the neighboring factories during the unfortunate scenario of a particular industry catching fire. However, apart from the inappropriate location, lack of suitable materials used in the construction of buildings also happens to be one of the main causes of fire.

It is highly advisable that the walls of such industries be insulated either externally or internally with cellulose or mineral wool insulation. So far, the only measures of fire safety that I have personally come across in any and almost every building is the presence of either a number of fire extinguishers or fire sprinklers or both. While these may obviously come in handy during minor fires, they may have little or no effect during major fires which may lead to the so called “burning building”.

Materials such as cellulose and mineral wool are cheap, durable and biodegradable and can be used both on walls as well as floors. Mineral wool boards are most commonly used in between two floors so as to slow down the spread of fire. Most of these materials being readily available in all markets often make me wonder as to why these industries haven’t yet put these materials into full use.

As a matter of fact, improper electrical architecture is also to blame. Faulty wiring and poor electrical insulation are a cause of some of the most major fires ever recorded. I have also observed numerous buildings including houses being located dangerously close to high voltage lines, such that any mishap may directly turn the house into a burning building. Moreover, the electromagnetic radiations from these high tension wires are harmful to biological systems in general. Hence, even a small human error can destroy several innocent lives.

It is surprising to know that even the most urbanized cities in India have poor fire safety. The problem here isn’t a lack of awareness; rather it is an obvious lack of implementation. Some reports also state that poor fire safety measures are due to a lack of manpower and firefighting equipments.

Of course there are several government bodies dedicated towards regulating fire safety norms. However, poor coordination among these bodies makes implementation a lot more challenging. It is high time that people start understanding the gravity of the situation and start taking matters into their hands.

The key towards building a healthier society lies in the way we think and largely depends upon our capability of putting these thoughts into actions. In other words, our mindset should never be about seeking the best solution, rather we should focus on how to not become a victim of the problem in the first place! After all, as the saying goes, ‘Prevention is better than Cure’!

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
