Katrina Kaif to tease Salman Khan in a gender-bending wedding song in Bharat

In the upcoming Salman Khan film, Bharat, Katrina Kaif will be seen performing Didi Tera Devar Deewana act in reverse on the actor in a wedding song. In a peppy dance number Aithey Aa, Katrina Kaif and Salman Khan will be seen recreating the scene picturised on Salman Khan and Madhuri Dixit in Hum Aap Ke Hain Kaun but with reversed gender roles.

Director of the film, Ali Abbas Zafar informed Mumbai Mirror that the song is a celebratory track set in the 1980s. He said, "Usually, in such a set-up in Hindi films, you see the boy teasing the girl, but because Katrina’s character (Kumud) here is as strong as Salman’s character (Bharat), the whole song was written from the point of view of women teasing the men."

The song is composed by Vishal-Shekhar and sung by Akasa Singh, Neeti Mohan and Kamaal Khan. Ali said, "Irshad Kamil has beautifully captured the flavour in his words. Just imagine, if Didi Tera Devar Deewana was reversed with Madhuri (Dixit) and Salman switching places that’s what our song is. The brief was to create a peppy dance number with the entire family shaking a leg."

Choreographed by Vaibhavi Merchant, the dance number was shot at Filmcity in Mumbai in January on a massive set with flowers and over a hundred background dancers.

In the recently released song Slow Motion Main, Salman Khan was seen grooving with Disha Patani. Like any other Salman Khan song, Slow Motion also is owned by the actor, where he can be seen in his jovial best. Disha Patani's sexy moves are also one of the highlights of the song. The entire song is shot in a circus setup and the actors are seen jumping, hanging and performing aerial stunts.

Salman Khan will be seen in five different looks in the Ali Abbas Zafar directorial. Bharat is an adaptation of the Korean film An Ode To My Father. Apart from Salman and Katrina Kaif, it stars Disha Patani, Tabu and Sunil Grover as well.

Watch the trailer here:

ALSO READ | Salman Khan and Disha Patani in Bharat song Slow Motion teaser is just Sultan's 440 Volt

ALSO READ | Bharat director Ali Abbas Zafar: Salman Khan is a deep, mature and beautiful actor

Also Read | Bharat new poster: Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif take you 30 years back in time

ALSO READ | Katrina Kaif looks as fresh as ever in the latest still from Salman Khan's Bharat
