Couple Burned Alive For Inter-Caste Marriage, When Will The Buck Stop?

Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra saw the most gory end to an innocent love story recently. A father set his young daughter and her husband on fire for marrying against his wish. What was worse was that the 19-year-old daughter, Rukmini Ransing, was two months pregnant when the incident took place. While Rukmini succumbed to her injuries, her 23-year-old husband Mangesh Ransing is in critical condition. What was their fault? An inter-caste marriage.

Rukmini and Mangesh were not blind to the hate they faced for their marriage. The boy’s side of the family claim that he had approached the police twice since the couple got married six months ago. But the police, reportedly, chose not to intervene in “family matters”. While Rukmini’s mother attended their wedding along with Mangesh’s family, her father and other relatives did not show up, registering their disapproval.

Mangesh belongs to a classified nomadic tribe in Maharashtra known as the Lohar community. Rukmini, on the other hand, belonged to a scheduled caste called Pashi and hails from Uttar Pradesh.

Honour killing has been the go-to solution of families in India whose children marry against their wishes or opt for marriages with partners who are outside their caste or religion. More often than not, these heinous patriarchal crimes are justified in the name of caste disputes, honour, and cultural differences; families cite shame to the family name as one of the biggest reasons for love-jihad. It is seemingly easier for such people to kill someone than accept an emotion as innocent as love. A 2018 survey showed how over 300 plus honour killing crimes had taken place in the last three years in India, and these were just the ones that came to light. Several other such incidents might have never been reported due to various reasons, such as fear.

On April 30th, according to the police, the girl went to her father’s house after a petty argument with her husband. A day later she called him to come take her back. It was suppose to go as any other couple would expect it to--he was supposed to get her back home. However, the girls family had other plans for the couple. The boy was thrashed by his father-in-law and the girl’s uncles refused to let the girl leave. This soon turned into a fatal attack when they poured kerosene on the couple and set them on fire. The neighbours intervened, rushing the couple to a nearby hospital.

The couple was shifted to Pune’s Sassoon General Hospital where Rukmini breathed her last after sustaining 70% burns. Her husband, unaware of his wife’s death, battles for his life after sustaining 50% burns. The family of the boy claims that it was the police’s ignorant attitude which resulted in this incident. Had they taken heed of Mangesh’s complaints, the two would have happily been living their lives, waiting for the arrival of their child.

On February 21st, 2018, a 17-year-old boy was murdered by his girlfriend’s brothers. On February 22nd, 2018, BA final year student was killed and silently buried by her father. On March 15th, 2018, a 19-year-old boy was beaten to death by the family of his ‘forward caste’ girlfriend. On August 26th, 2018, an eloped couple was found hanging from ceiling fans. On September 15th, 2018, a class XI girl’s cremation was stopped by police on reports that she was killed for ‘honour’. On the same day a man was hacked to death in front of his pregnant wife by a killer hired by her father. The list can go on, and this is not even 10% of the entire list. This is a grave insight into the mindset of those who put honour above their own children and their happiness. Such cases are not just appalling, but shameful. Strict laws and awareness have done little or absolutely nothing for those who wish to marry on their own accord. The future is a grey space with little help to offer to those coming from orthodox backgrounds looking to live life on their own terms.
