Unusual Friendship: A Leopard Hangs Out With A Horse At Vadodara Farmhouse In Style

In the four days, a farmhouse in Virod village on the city’s outskirts has been witnessing an unusual bond blossom in its backyard. As the sun sets, a young leopard sneaks inside the farmhouse and walks up to a horse. Instead of attacking the horse, leopard makes purring sound sits just a few feet away.

After a couple of hours, the leopard disappears in darkness.

The friendship between the wild cat and the horse is fast spreading among the nearby villages and curious locals are turning up at the farmhouse owned by Jagdish Patel, a businessman, to catch a glimpse of the leopard.

reuters/representational image

“The leopard was first seen four days ago by some men who work at the farmhouse. At first, they were not sure if it was a leopard as it’s very dark. After two days, their suspicion grew stronger and they contacted me,” said Arvind Pawar, who runs Wildlife Rescue Trust.

Pawar went to the farmhouse on the night of May 4 to confirm if a leopard was camping there. “The leopard came at around 8pm and sat a some distance from the horse.

It just looked at the horse but did nothing except roll over in the grass. At about midnight, the leopard disappeared from the spot,” Pawar told TOI.

A video taken by Pawar shows the leopard sitting just few feet away from the horse. “I sneaked in a bit close and managed to take the video from my mobile phone,” Pawar added.

afp/representational image

Talking to TOI, Patel said, “What surprised us is that the horse also didn’t panic or try to flee from there. It stood there calmly all the time and didn’t mind the leopard resting just a few feet away.”

The leopard, though, killed one of the dogs at the farmhouse two days ago.

Pawar said that the leopard might have been driven away by its mother so that it hunts for food independently. “So, it must be cozying up with the horse for some company. I will be installing night vision cameras on Monday night to capture better images of the leopard. We have taken help of the forest department and set a trap to capture it,” Pawar added.
