Second rave party busted in Tamil Nadu in less than a week, police arrest over 160 attendees

The attendees were later let off by police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chennai: Less than a week after police officials busted a rave party near Pollachi in Coimbatore, reports of another major bust have come to light from Mahabalipuram in the state. Personnel with the Tiruvallur police on Monday arrested over 160 youngsters, including seven women, from a resort in the area. The operation was carried out under the leadership of district superintendent of police (SP) R Ponni, who along with assistant superintendents of police (ASPs) and deputy superintendents of police (DCPs) raided the spot a little after midnight.

Those familiar with the arrests claim that as many as a hundred policemen surrounded the Odour Resort off the East Coast Road around 12.30 am. During the three-hour-long operation which took place about 50 kilometres from the state capital Chennai, law enforcement personnel arrested 165 youngsters. It has also come to light that 12 organisers of the event have been arrested and booked under relevant sections of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act and Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act. They have been sent to judicial custody for now.

During the course of interrogation, those detained by police said that they received the invitation through social media platforms Facebook and WhatsApp. It was advertised as an event with a DJ with Rs 1,000 as an entry charge per person. Those arrested are between 18 and 28 years of age, the SP told The Hindu. However, the youngsters were later let off by police after being issued a warning. The role of the resort owner is also being probed. As per the latest reports, the premises have been sealed for now on the basis of the district collector's orders.

Earlier this month, Tamil Nadu police arrested as many as 163 youngsters from a private resort near Sethumadai in Pollachi. Officials booked 112 of the revellers for use of cocaine, hashish, and MDMA among other substances. Reports in sections of the media also claimed that a man of Russian origin was among those arrested. It was advertised as a 24-hour-long weekend celebration and each guest was charged Rs 1,500.
