Lok Sabha polls | How allies and alliances are crucial for BJP and Congress this election

The focus this election has been around grand alliances and federal fronts, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi having pitched his campaign as one man's battle against many parties.

These parties, the Prime Minister has been saying in his campaign rallies, want to get rid of him by coming together.

Firming up the NDA

While that is partially true, observers have pointed out that PM Modi and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) are not without their fair share of alliances. In fact, the BJP had been at the forefront of stitching alliances and mending fences with disgruntled allies months before the start of campaigning for Lok Sabha polls. These allies are a part of the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA).

In Uttar Pradesh, the BJP has tied up with relatively small parties, most of them bickering. The Suheldev Bharatiya Samaj Party, Nishad Party and Apna Dal are parties controlled by single leaders and have only pockets of influence. But, according to observers in UP, the BJP faces a tough challenge from the Samajwadi Party (SP)-Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP)-Rashtriya Lok Dal (RLD) alliance. Which is why the saffron party had tried placating its sulking allies by providing its leaders positions on autonomous boards.

Experts believe that the BJP bowing down to the demands of its smaller partners is a telling indication of how important even small pockets are to the party this election. BJP had won 71 out of UP's 80 Lok Sabha seats in the last election, and had continued its performance in the 2017 assembly polls in the state, winning 312 of the state's 403 assembly seats.

Also Read: Know Your Leader | Chandrashekhar Azad: A revolutionary standing up for Dalit rights and taking on Modi in Varanasi

"We need every seat that we can get," admitted a UP BJP leader, adding that it had always been the party's approach to accommodate its partners.

Apna Dal and SBSP have influence on the OBC vote in important sections of the state like Varanasi and Mirzapur, while the Nishad Party wields influence in Gorakhpur.

Notably, SBSP chief OP Rajbhar resigned from the Yogi Adityanath cabinet on May 6, stating that his party's name and flags were being used by BJP. Rajbhar was a Minister for Backward Classes Development in the state.

The same logic applies to BJP's strategy in Maharashtra. The western state has 48 Lok Sabha seats, the second highest in the country. It also has Shiv Sena, one of NDA's oldest partners and a sulking ally until recently.

BJP and Sena had fought separately during the BMC elections in 2017, but came together for Lok Sabha polls. The two parties announced a 25-23 seat-sharing arrangement, with BJP having the slightly greater share. However, as Sena leaders pointed out repeatedly, it was BJP that had to step down.

Also Read: Know Your Leader | Uddhav Thackeray: With strong legacy to shoulder, astute Sena chief balances ideology with realpolitik

Similarly, in Bihar, the BJP had announced that it would be contesting half of the state's 40 Lok Sabha seats, leaving the other half for its partner, the Janata Dal (United). This had reportedly shocked the state BJP unit, which had hoped that the saffron party would get the upper hand.

The other key states where the BJP has struck alliances include Tamil Nadu and Punjab, where it is in alliance with the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) and the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) respectively.

UPA's faded rainbow?

Even as the BJP went about securing alliances, the Congress seemed confused and slighted in Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh respectively.

Congress' alliance with the Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) was announced after a lot of back-and-forth. According to party leaders, the delay was over who should and should not be included in the alliance.

As for Uttar Pradesh, with the announcement of the SP-BSP alliance, almost no room was left open for Congress. The Grand Old Party decided to go it alone in the all-important heartland state, even though it was hoping for space within the gathbandhan.

Also Read: Neta Priyanka Gandhi: A masterstroke for Congress or a case of too little, too late?

The state where the Congress has managed to stitch a rainbow coalition is in Bihar. It is contesting on nine seats in the state. The Grand Alliance, made up of the Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) and smaller parties such as the Rashtriya Lok Samata Party (RLSP) and the Hindustani Awam Morcha (HAM), is hoping to attract newer social base.

In Tamil Nadu, according to experts, the Congress-DMK alliance is on a better wicket. Issues such as farmers' distress, NEET and caste arithmetic will benefit the UPA.

Also Read: Opinion | DMK-Congress combine is decisively ahead in Tamil Nadu

These alliances are important for the Congress, which cannot hope to come to power going it alone in states like Tamil Nadu or Bihar. Similarly, for the BJP, in a state like Maharashtra, going alone would have meant allowing votes to be divided, ditto for Congress without the NCP.

Notwithstanding the narrative around one man versus many this election, experts have argued that both the BJP and Congress are relying heavily on their allies to deliver them particular states.
