Shah calls Modi 'Arjuna' to counter Priyanka's 'Duryodhana' remark on PM

Kolkata: Dismissing Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's comparison of Prime Minister Narendra Modi with "Duryodhana," the villain of Mahabharata BJP president Amit Shah on Tuesday hailed Modi as "Arjuna," the hero of the great epic, who would once again emerge as winner on May 23 when the Lok Sabha Election results would be declared.

He also defended the PM for his attacking comments on former PM Rajiv Gandhi which has triggered a massive controversy in the political theatre. In an oblique reference to Mr Modi's salvo to Congress president Rahul Gandhi: "Your father’s life ended as ‘Corrupt No.1’," the BJP chief wondered what "wrong" he said. To justify his defence Shah argued that the Congress and its allies also insulted Modi more than 50 times.

Addressing a BJP Lok Sabha Election campaign rally at Belda in West Midnapore Shah said, "Just now Priyanka Gandhi compared Modiji with Duryodhana. Priyankaji, the people of the country will decide on May 23 who is Duryodhana and who is Arjuna. You do not need to be restless. Let the result on May 23 come. The people of the country will say then whether Modiji is Duryodhana or Arjuna."

Rallying support behind Modi who has been in the eye of storm for his comments on the late PM the BJP chief observed, "Modiji recently said that Bofors scam took place during the tenure of Rajiv Gandhi as the PM. What wrong did he say? Rahul Gandhi should tell the people whether Bofors scam, Bhopal Gas Tragedy, Santi Sena Blunder and the Kashmiri Pandits' slaughter indeed happened during his father's rule or not."

He alleged, "Don't the citizens of the country know it? Rahul Baba claims that his father was insulted. Is reminding the truth really an insult? The Congress and its allies hurled abuses on Modiji at least 51 times. Pawan Kheda of Congress compared him with Osama. Vijaya Shanti called him a terrorist. Raj Babbar claimed that Rupee's value against Dollar has fallen to the age of Modi's mother."

Shah claimed, "Mallikarjun Kharge branded him as Hitler while Sanjay Nirupam described him as Gawar. When anything is said against an Old and Late PM, it becomes an insult. But when anything is spoken against the serving PM, no one says anything."

Keep yourself updated on Lok Sabha Elections 2019 with our round-the-clock coverage -- breaking news, updates, analyses et all. Happy reading.
