Cars of Dilip Ghosh, Himanta Biswa Sarma attacked in Bengal allegedly by TMC supporters

The convoy of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Bengal unit president Dilip Ghosh and Assam minister Himanta Biswa Sarma was attacked in Bengal’s East Midnapore district on Tuesday evening allegedly by supporters of ruling Trinamool Congress (TMC).

The two leaders escaped unhurt, but their vehicles were vandalised.

“The attack on us shows clearly that there is no law and order as well as democracy in the state,” said Dilip Ghosh.

The incident took place around 7 pm at a place about 125 km away from Kolkata.

Soon after the attack, Himanta Biswa Sarma, finance minister of Assam, tweeted: “TMC goons have blocked the roads on both sides, even as West Bengal Police personnel standing like mute spectator. I am appalled at such brazen use of power by @MamataOfficial whose people have thrown all democratic norms to gutter.”

TMC supporters damaged more than 20 motorcycles, said BJP leaders.

The incident happened at Khejuri in Contai Lok Sabha constituency where the BJP leaders had gone to campaign in favour of the party’s candidate Debasish Samanta.

“While reinforcement from @crpfindia has arrived, the violent #TMC goons are not allowing the forces to rescue us. @AITCofficial cadres shouting and abusing everyone. Scene here is scary,” the Assam minister also tweeted.

Union defence minister Nirmala Sitharaman, who came to Bengal for campaigning on Tuesday also said that the incident was another example of the anarchy in the state.

However, Suvendu Adhikari, minister in Mamata Banerjee’s cabinet and Trinamool Congres leader of East Midnapore district, denied the hand of their party workers behind the incident.

“We do not believe in such dirty politics. Goons backed by the Communist Party of India (Marxist) might have been behind the incident,” claimed Adhikari.

Incidentally, over the past few years, the convoy of Dilip Ghosh was attacked several times in Bengal. Last year, his car was vandalised near Contai, which is near the place where the attack took place on Tuesday.

The TMC and BJP are locked in a bitter electoral battle with the latter targeting to win at least 22-23 seats in the state that has 42 constituencies.
