Amidst question over patriotism, Akshay Kumar assures his commitment to Indian armed forces will remain steady

Akshay assures his commitment to armed forces will be steady

For years now there were a lot of media reports that questioned Akshay Kumar's Indian citizenship and claimed that he is actually a citizen of Canada. Back in 2017, Akshay had stated that he had received honorary citizenship from the Canadian government, which was debunked later by many as Canada has so far conferred honorary citizenship to only 6 personalities and Akshay isn't one of them.

Last month, when Akshay Kumar was not seen anywhere casting his vote whereas his wife Twinkle Khanna was spotted, the question about his citizenship again started arising. Many trolled Twinkle on social media asking where Akshay was. In a hope to put all the speculations and rumours to rest, Akshay took to Twitter and admitted that he holds a Canadian passport. As soon as Akshay admitted it for the first time, many started questioning his patriotism.

There were some celebs who came out in support of him, one among them was Minister of State for Home Affairs, Kiren Rijiju. He wrote to Akshay, "Dear @akshaykumar ji, no one can question your patriotism. Your motivation to our Armed Forces personnel and the way you generated funds for our martyrs through #BharatKeVeer programme will remain an example for every patriotic Indian."

In response to Kiren Rijiju's tweet, Akshay replied, "Thank you so much @KirenRijiju Sir, and I apologise for the delayed response. I am grateful for your kind words. Please be assured, my commitment to #BharatKeVeer and to the Indian armed forces would remain steady, no matter what".

Check out their tweets below:

Thank you so much @KirenRijiju Sir, and I apologise for the delayed response. I am grateful for your kind words. Please be assured, my commitment to #BharatKeVeer and to the Indian armed forces would remain steady, no matter what https://t.co/W1298prsEQ — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) May 7, 2019

Earlier, Anupam Kher too had come out in support of Akshay Kumar, he had tweeted, "Dear @akshaykumar! Have been reading about you explaining to certain people about your loyalty to our country. Stop it! Their real profession is to make people like you & me feel defensive for talking in favour of India. You are a doer. You don’t need to explain to anybody".

Dear @akshaykumar! Have been reading about you explaining to certain people about your loyalty to our country. Stop it! Their real profession is to make people like you & me feel defensive for talking in favour of India. You are a doer. You don’t need to explain to anybody. — Anupam Kher (@AnupamPKher) May 5, 2019

Also, check out Akshay Kumar's tweet admitting he holds a Canadian passport below:

On the work front, Akshay Kumar is currently busy shooting for Sooryavanshi and will next be seen in Mission Mangal.
