18 students from Mumbai top in ICSE, three in ISC

Girls outperform boys in Maharashtra; rise in number of those crossing 95%; teachers complain of delays

Eighteen students from Mumbai made it to the all-India toppers’ list in the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education (ICSE) exam while three figured among the toppers in the Indian School Certificate (ISC) exam, the results of which were declared by the Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE) on Tuesday.

This year, girls have outshone boys in both exams in Maharashtra. While the pass percentage of girls is 99.92% against 99.80% of boys in ICSE (Class X), the pass rate of girls in ISC (Class XII) stands at 99.30%, as opposed to 99.24% of boys.

Juhi Kajaria from Jamnabai Narsee School in Juhu secured the first position in the ICSE exam nationally with 99.60%, along with another student from Muktsar in Punjab. While four students secured the second position, nine have got the third slot.

Ms. Kajaria told The Hindu that neither she nor her parents had expected an excellent score, let alone being the ICSE topper. “I am overwhelmed. I had done everything possible to study and secure good grades. Test and mock series helped me the most,” she said. Foram Sanjanwala, who shared her all-India second rank with four students from the city and 10 from the country, said she was both shocked and happy after seeing her results. “I have always believed that more than sitting with books, studying with practical and reasonable goals is beneficial. That is precisely what has helped me,” Foram, who is also a student of Jamnabai Narsee School, said.

In the ISC, Mihika Samant from humanities stream at St. Gregorious High School, Chembur, topped in Maharashtra and was ranked second in the country. Shreya Raj, a commerce student from Sulochanadevi Singhania School, Thane, came second in the State with 99.75%, while Nimish Wadekar, a science student from the school, stood third in the State with 99.5%.

However, on Tuesday afternoon, principals of several city schools complained of technical glitches in accessing the ICSE results. Though the CISCE had promised to provide the details, some schools were yet to receive them by evening.

Gerry Arathoon, chief executive and secretary, CISCE, said only the total results that the schools were to get were delayed due to heavy load on the web portal. “We made alternative arrangements for the results to be delivered on email. Overall, the western region has performed very well this academic year,” Mr. Arathoon said.

Teachers and principals also saw an increase in the number of students scoring 95% and above, and those getting 100% in several subjects.

“It is definitely their hard work. ISC syllabus is known to be rigorous. We have a student who has scored 100 out of 100 in English, which is a first,” Rashmi Ambavane, principal, St. Gregorious High School, said.
