Consequences of politicization of Indian Armed forces could be serious

Consequences of politicization of Indian Armed forces could be serious

Series of statements from some union ministers and top BJP leaders on country's security forces including the Armed forces have brought a serious issue of increasing politicization of the country's armed forces under sharp focus. Ruling party's decision to drag armed forces into the election rhetoric has obviously resulted in retaliatory responses from the opposition particularly from the Congress. Responsibility to keen the level of electoral discourse balanced lies with those in power while the opposition also has a constructive role in the process.

While an obvious tilt or a strong affinity towards the uniformed forces in general and Armed forces in particular of the RSS-BJP was known all along but developments during the five years of the Modi government are a clear indication that country is facing a danger. In an election rally in early April in Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath called Indian Army "Modi ji ki sena" and was also served first a show cause notice and was then banned to campaign for two days by the Election Commission of India.

Another Union Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi also repeated the same that of Adityanath saying "Modi ke sena" for which he was reprimanded by the Election Commission (EC) saying "parties/ candidates are advised that their campaigners/candidates should desist , as part of their election campaigning, from indulging in political propaganda involving activities of the defence forces".

During his election campaign, Union Minister Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore claimed that the entire army is standing with the BJP and Prime Minister Narendra Modi while mocking at the claim of the Congress that the UPA government had also conducted surgical strikes.

In West Bengal during an election rally, even BJP chief Amit Shah said "Modi ki vayu sena (Mode's Air Force)" and was not even issued a notice what to talk of reprimanding him.

It is clear that EC's writ does not run large as it seems to be stopping at the very doors of Prime Minister Narendra Modi who is chief architect of the strategy for making use of the Armed forces for political benefit. Even while campaigning in 2014 Lok Sabha elections, Modi has raised the issue or Armed forces several times with the objective of mobilizing votes of the security forces personnel and their families for the BJP.

Admitting former Chief of the Army Staff General V K Singh, who had been issued a contempt notice by the Supreme Court for his comments that the apex court had been pressurised in his 'age row case', into the BJP was no ordinary decision. It was taken after intensive deliberations between the top leadership of the RSS and the saffron party. The RSS, that was trying to build a new narrative of Sangh-BJP were the sole representative of nationalism and not the Congress, was trying to tap the support of security forces by exploiting their real and perceived grievances for this objective.

General Singh was also fielded from Ghaziabad and then he was made a minister in the Modi government. Neither the BJP not the Sangh leadership tried to restrain General Singh when he called media "pressititutes" as it suited the long-term strategy of undermining established institutions. A free media is the cornerstone of any democratic society and political system but combined leadership of Sangh-BJP was least bothered rather it wanted that to happen fast.

Modi left no opportunity to use security forces to achieve the political objective. It was evident when a surgical strike by the armed forces after a terrorist attack on the Indian Army camp at Uri in Jammu and Kashmir in 2016 was sought to be publicized by the Modi government. For the first time in the history of the country's armed forces, a government had openly sought to take credit for an action of the Indian Army. It is a well-known that similar surgical strikes had been conducted several times by the country's armed forces inside Pakistan and other neighbours but they were never publicized before.

The BJP, realizing that 2019 electoral battle cannot be won on the development issues, got an excellent opportunity when terrorists from across the border attacked a convoy killing 44 CRPF personnel died in a terrorist attack at Pulwama in J&K on February 14 this year. Immediately, the Sangh-BJP leadership swung into action and began to build the national security narrative. When the Indian Air Force was ordered by the government to launch a counter attack at Balakot inside Pakistan on February 27 just few days before the electoral process for the general elections was set in motion, it was clear that the BJP was going to use role of the Armed forces in the election campaigns.

Consequently, Indian Armed forces have become an election issue in the current Lok Sabha polls. Making security forces a partisan issue has had dangerous consequences all over the world. Recent history offers enough evidence of nations undergoing irreparable damages to society. Our next-door neighbor-Pakistan-is a classic example of the politicization of the security forces.

Constitution makers were very categorical about the role and place of Armed Forces in the national scheme of things and therefore had devotedArticle 33 to detail the civilian control of the security forces of independent India.

Armed Forces, according to the Constitution, are meant for the defence of country's borders and to effectively counter both the external as well as internal threats to national sovereignty and integrity. Beyond the defined role, Armed forces are under complete command of an elected government.

Use of the security forces for electoral gainshas set very ominous precedent as it has opened doors for next governments to make the armed forces partners in their political gains.

If the political parties fail to evolve a consensus to decisively reverse the trend, then India is slowly but surely moving the Pakistan way where a military coup took place in 1958 that ousted the civilian government and established a military government of Marshal Ayub Khan.

Do we really want that to happen? We have to collectively stand up to defend our democratic gains that have been acquired after considerable sacrifices of the people and parties.

Dr. Satish Misra is a Veteran Journalist & Research Associate with Observer Research Foundation.

—[IFS]
