Girl found dead in sump

Bengaluru

By Y Maheswara ReddyTension prevailed in Rajgopal Nagar on Tuesday morning after the body of a 12-year-old girl was recovered from the water sump of a residential building in the locality. The victim was identified as Jyothi, hailing from Raichur. Her mother works as a domestic help at the home where her body was found.The victim’s family and some of the local residents alleged foul play in the incident as the house owner refused to open the padlocked lid of the sump initially. The body was found only after the lock was broken and police officials reached the spot. The girl’s mother alleged that the house owner used to dabble with black magic and was even reportedly discussing recently about performing a ritual to ensure mental peace and prosperity.However, police are yet to confirm whether the girl had an accidental fall or whether she was murdered and stashed inside the sump. The house owner was taken into custody and is being questioned in connection with the incident.“We are waiting for the autopsy report to ascertain the cause of death. We are investigating the matter as of now ,”said Shashikumar, Deputy Commissioner (NOrth) ,city police.According to the police, Parvathamma, the victim’s mother used to take her daughter to the residence of Alpanath, a scrap dealer where she used to work. She has told the police that they both arrived at the house for work as usual and after sometime she could not find her daughter. When she raised an alarm and started searching for her daughter, the house owner went and locked up the sump’s outer lid. He also refused to open it despite her pleas that her daughter could have fallen inside. Alpanath allegedly refused to open the sump until police arrived at the spot. Once the body was found, police had taken him to the local station for further questioning. Police sources said that the houseowner had asked the victim to clean the floor near the sump in the morning when it was not locked. The girl could have lost her balance and fallen inside. “ Once they started searching for the girl and realised that she had fallen inside, Alpanath panicked and could have locked up the sump,” said a police officer.A minor girl was found dead at her home in Mallasandra near Bagalgunte. The 11-year-old girl Pooja, was a Class 5 student at a private school. Her parents Gowda and Sharadamma run a fast food trolley near their house. The incident took place on Monday night, when Pooja was alone in home. She was last seen by neighbours around 8 pm.Police officials said they do not suspect any foul play in the death “There is no other injury on the body, no forcible act was found,” said a official.
