PM has an understanding with Pakistan and terrorists: Kejriwal

Imran Khan seeking votes for Modi, says CM at rally for Hisar’s AAP-JJP candidate

Launching a scathing attack on Prime Minister Narendra Modi at poll rally in Haryana’s Hisar on Tuesday, Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) convener Arvind Kejriwal said Mr. Modi had an “understanding with the terrorists and Pakistan”, and had not done any work over the past five years based on which he could seek votes.

The Delhi Chief Minister urged the gathering to vote for AAP and Jannayak Janta Party’s joint candidate and sitting Hisar MP Dushyant Chautala.

Tearing into the BJP’s rhetoric of nationalism, Mr. Kejriwal said that there had never been an instance in the history of independent India when the Prime Minister of Pakistan had sought votes for the Prime Minister of India.

Mr. Kejriwal said that Mr. Modi had claimed he entered Pakistan to kill terrorists, “but Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan said a few days ago that Mr. Modi should be the PM of India”. “PM Modi said he killed terrorists, but the terrorists say that he should again become India’s PM. Mr. Modi seems to have some understanding with the terrorists. He seems to have an understanding with Pakistan. We need to expose him,” said Mr. Kejriwal.

Pulwama timing

The Chief Minister also questioned the timing of the Pulwama. “What was the need for Pakistan to carry out an attack just two months before the election? And 10 days later, Mr. Khan said that Mr. Modi should be made the PM again”.

“We do not even go to our relatives without an invitation, but Mr. Modi went to wish happy birthday to former Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif without being invited. What is going on between Pakistan and Modi?” said Mr. Kejriwal. He then asked the crowd if he had said anything wrong.

The AAP chief said that many people think Mr. Modi is a nationalist and are in a “dilemma” as to whom to vote for, “but they should be told that Mr. Modi’s nationalism is fake”.

‘Double blow to traders’

Mr. Kejriwal, who belongs to the Baniya community, said that he knew how hard traders work to earn their livelihood and that Mr. Modi had left “no stone unturned to destroy them”.

He said the traders’ community had always supported the BJP with money and votes but Mr. Modi had dealt businesses a “double blow” with demonetisation and the “poorly implemented” Goods and Services Tax.

He added that people had lost their livelihood, and factories were shut down due to demonetisation. Seeking support of the traders, Mr. Kejriwal told them that he and Mr. Chautala would remain faithful to the community till their last breath.
