8 months on, robber held for killing factory worker

Ludhiana: The police on Tuesday claimed to have solved the September 2018 murder of a factory worker, with the arrest of a robber.

Rakesh Kumar, 48, a resident of Jugiyana village, was walking back home from his workplace when four men waylaid him near Sua Road in Kanganwal around 10.30pm on September 13, 2018. The four stabbed Rakesh, who worked at a factory in Kanganwal, before robbing him. The murder was captured on a CCTV camera installed in the area. A few days after the murder, the police had released grabs of the CCTV footage and announced a cash prize to trace the accused, who were booked under Section 302 (murder) of the IPC, but to no avail.

Almost eight months later, one of the accused — Santosh Kumar, a resident of Giaspura — was arrested on Tuesday after the police busted a gang of robbers in Sahnewal a day before. “Four of the five members of the gang were arrested on Monday evening. A country-made pistol and sharp-edged weapons were recovered from Sonu Pushpakar, Rakesh Pandey, Naveen Bajaj and Kuldeep Singh, who admitted to have committed 19 robberies in the past couple of years in Sahnewal and Focal Point. During interrogation, they revealed that there was another gang of robbers active in Sahnewal that had even committed a murder in September 2018,” said additional deputy commissioner of police (ADCP-2) Jaskiranjit Singh.

When the police showed the four the footage of the Kanganwal murder, they identified one of the murderers as Santosh, a native of Uttar Pradesh. “Based on their inputs, Santosh was nabbed from his house in Giaspura. Santosh has confessed to have killed Rakesh along with three of his associates. The trio is yet to be arrested,” the ADCP added.

“Santosh told during interrogation that his was a nine-member gang that looted factory workers at knife-point in Sahnewal at night. He told that on the night of September 13, 2018, he along with his three accomplices was trying to rob Rakesh when he resisted and fought back. During the scrap, his aide Pintu stabbed Rakesh and they escaped from there,” the ADCP said. The cops are on the lookout for Santosh’s three aides — Pintu, Vicky Maurya and Ravi Pandey, all residents of Giaspura. Their gang has committed about 22 snatchings and robberies in the past two years.

The case diary

September 13, 2018: Four robbers stabbed Rakesh Kumar, a factory worker. The incident captured on a CCTV camera installed in the area

September 14, 2018: A case registered against unidentified accused on the statement of Rakesh’s brother Pawan Kumar

September 20, 2018: The police released grabs of CCTV footage and announced cash prize for information leading to the accused

May 6, 2019: The police busted a gang of robbers. They told cops about another gang that had killed a factory worker in September 2018

May 7, 2019: Santosh arrested on the charge of murder



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
