Massive fire destroys 3 buildings in Focal Point

Ludhiana: Three buildings were gutted after a major fire broke out at a chemical godown in Focal Point, Phase 5, on Tuesday evening. Nobody was injured as the flames spread from the godown to a neighbouring office and a factory.The massive blaze sent firemen into a tizzy who rushed fire tenders from across the district to the spot.The fire started at Parkash Chemicals in Focal Point’s Durga Colony around 5.45pm when a tanker loaded with an inflammable liquid was entering its premises. “The tanker was a few metres from the godown when sparks from a roadside electricity pole set it on fire. Its driver abandoned the vehicle and rushed to safety. Soon, the flames engulfed the single-storey godown,” said Vicky Kalyan, a fireman.About 20 workers were inside the godown. They ran out and called up the fire department.“There were over 100 drums (each of 210 litre capacity) full of chemicals in the godown. They triggered many a blast. As the explosions tossed the drums in the air, some fell on an nearby office, which too went up in flames,” Kalyan added.There were a few employees at the office, which is located opposite the godown. They had a narrow escape. It was the office of neighbouring Dashmesh Bag Factory.Fauza Ram Singh, an employee of Dashmesh Bag Factory, said, “Rs 2.5 lakh were kept in the office to make a payment. The currency notes have been reduced to ashes.”Within minutes, the inferno spread to an adjoining cardboard factory that had stored thinner drums.Station fire officer SN Sharma said, “It is a massive fire which is spreading fast. It is difficult to bring it under control. Even as we are trying to douse it with water, blasts are intensifying it further.”“When we reached the spot, we were not informed that chemicals were stored in the godown. We lifted the drums full of inflammable liquid and brought them out,” Kalyan said.Assistant divisional fire officer Bhupinder Sandhu said, “We will check on Wednesday morning if the three premises had obtained no objection certificates from the fire department. Had the firemen not brought out some of the drums, the fire would have been bigger.”The vast fire and billows of thick, dark smoke spread panic in the area. As crowds swelled, police had to cordon off the area. People were evacuated from the nearby shanties and houses as a precautionary measure. Central Reserve Police Force personnel were also deputed at the spot. Many onlookers were busy clicking pictures and making videos on the phones to share those on social media.The firemen were on the job till the filing of the report.
