Will Salman Khan and Deepika Padukone finally come together for Kick 2? Find Out

While all superstars of Bollywood get a chance to work with a number of leading ladies, it seems Salman Khan and Deepika Padukone’s stars have never conspired to bring them together on the big screen. However, all that might be about to change and Salman and Deepika may be soon be seen together in an upcoming sequel to the former’s film Kick. Going by reports, Kick 2 is expected to be going on the floors soon and makers are now keen on casting Deepika Padukone as the leading lady.

Earlier, reports had stated that the makers of Salman Khan’s Kick 2 are deliberating over bringing forth a fresh pairing. Also, as per reports, Jacqueline wasn’t the first choice for Kick and it was Deepika Padukone who was in the mind. However, things didn’t work out and the role was done by Jacqueline Fernandez. However, this time, the makers of Kick 2 are trying to bring Salman and Deepika in one frame.

As per Bollywood Hungama, “Deepika can’t play just a typical Salman heroine. Her role has to be as powerful as Salman’s. Sajid is working on it, injecting heft into the female lead.” The audiences hope to see two superstars together on the big screen as there have been numerous times earlier that Deepika and Salman have almost consented to be cast in the same film. However, nothing concrete turned out. If these reports are to be believed, then Kick 2 surely will be a treat for Salman Khan and Deepika Padukone’s fans.

A while back, Salman had also joked about working with Deepika Padukone in an interview with DNA and had said, “Actually even I’m wondering when will I work with Deepika?” Well, it might just be the chance in Kick 2. Meanwhile, Deepika had gone for the MET Gala in New York and will be coming back to resume shoot of Chhapaak in Mumbai. On the other hand, Salman Khan is busy with the promotions of his upcoming film Bharat with Katrina Kaif. Bharat is slated to hit the screens on June 5, 2019.

Also Read: Bharat song Aithey Aa: Katrina Kaif & Salman Khan will pull off the Didi Tera Devar Deewana act but in reverse
