Train Journeys Were Fun Until I Saw A Man On The Nearby Berth Watching Porn & Touching Himself

Trains bring back a lot of memories. Every year summer religiously tries to pump up the heat, quite literally, and the 90s kid inside me just gets lost in the sweet taste of nostalgia when dad used to plan family trips. Reservations were made in advance because Indian railways and middle class families work like that. You miss the ticket, you miss the vacation. My excitement levels were off the charts much to the chagrin of my mom. The antakshari sessions and the bonding between strangers, families in same compartment getting along were, to be honest, the real OG co-travellers.

So, when I was recently travelling in the train with my family in a much reclusive time where phone screens have swallowed the socialness of passengers, an abysmal and gross incident shattered each and every train memory that was safely tucked away in a corner of my heart.

I was on the middle berth and my sister was on the upper berth of a third AC compartment. We were settling down when my sister asked to switch seats with me. Turned out, it was not just a random sisterly order. She had a direct view of a middle-aged man openly watching porn on his smartphone. His was on the diagonally located upper berth. Post switching the seats, it was my view.

The porn clips were enough to make me extremely uncomfortable, let alone my sister whose disgust I’m afraid to even imagine. I started comprehending how that guy was fearlessly watching such explicit content in a public space despite the lights being on.

All that information is enough to make anyone think, “Well, that escalated quickly.” But, in the next couple of minutes things really escalated to a different level as this guy started touching himself right there in a (freakin’) train compartment.

And that was it for me. You see, there were three families with women and kids that were travelling in the same space exposed to a man who mistook a train compartment to be his personal washroom. I approached the TTE (Travelling Ticket Examiner) to help me out and he exactly did what I expected him to do - he ducked. Instead, he asked me to snatch that man’s phone and question him.

I asked some fellow passengers to at least stand up, instead of just being mute spectators watching a man touch himself in a compartment full of people. Thankfully, the TTE finally arrived and interrupted him, saving us from reaching our breakdown voltage. He lectured him on how his behaviour was disappointing and he did not expect such a thing from a well-educated man like himself. He said, and I quote, “If there would have been a minor or a mentally unstable man, then it was understandable. But from him it’s not expected.” And that’s where I thought we need to have a dialogue on nuance.

It’s not okay to touch yourself in public while watching pornography for anyone. Also, attributing an act like this to mental instability shows our lack of understanding of mental disorders, and ignorance towards those suffering from them.

The man said sorry a couple of times and the TTE moved on with his list of passengers, like it was no big deal. Meanwhile, the TTE suggested I quote a complaint which can further deal with the heinous act this man pulled off in a public space. I took to Twitter where I narrated the entire incident in detail and tweeted it to @upgrp (Uttar Pradesh Government Railway Police) and @Indianrailways.

The UPGRP were quick to respond and reached out to me. They carefully listened as I narrated the entire thing to them, and followed it up by giving a strong warning to the guy who was now watching a Game Of Thrones episode. Strange how he chose to watch a series famous for its nudity even after the warning. Or maybe he was just standing by his explanation of how some explicit scenes popped-up suddenly while he was enjoying his series.

AFP/Representational Image

If there was anything more disturbing and concerning than the incident itself, it was the indifference of the people around me. Nobody - male or female passenger - spoke up or stood up against him, everyone chose to ignore the entire scene. For some of them, when they went back home, I might have been ‘the guy who took it too far’ and ‘over reacted’. After all, he wasn’t saying anything to me - he was just a regular guy who just randomly had this urge to masturbate right there in a public space while watching porn on his 6-inch smartphone. What’s offensive about that?

Calling out something like this is not always easy - especially in a society where victim-shaming is the norm. It’s heartbreaking to imagine that someone more impressionable would have had to sit through the entire thing, had I not actually seen what was happening and spoken up. I am not trying to play the lifesaver here - what I did counts normal human behaviour, it’s not a heroic feat. The only problem is, what should count as normal often becomes a lone voice in a crowd that seems too busy to care.
