Kurtas and mud roshogollas: Narendra Modi vs Mamata Banerjee and the Battle for Bengal

Not even Bengal's beloved roshogollas, a mouthwatering dessert of spongy dumplings that ooze sugar syrup, could sweeten a recent exchange between Mamata Banerjee and Narendra Modi.

It all started with an interview. A couple of weeks ago, the prime minister revealed to Akshay Kumar, the Bollywood star, that Banerjee sent him kurtas and sweets. West Bengal's leader reacted sharply: she retorted that she would send her BJP rival teeth-breaking roshogollas made of mud and pebbles. But Modi had the last word; he said Bengal's "holy" soil had the essence of great men. The sweets, he said, would be a "prasad".

Mamata Banerjee's All India Trinamool Congress (or TMC) has governed West Bengal since the former railways minister ended decades of communist rule there in a 2011 vote. It is the fourth largest party in the Lok Sabha, owing to its excellent showing in the last general election in West Bengal, home to a sizeable chunk of 42 seats. This time the BJP is eyeing the lion's share.

Mamata Banerjee in Chandrakona, West Bengal, on May 4, 2019. (Photo: Twitter/All India Trinamool Congress)

On the campaign trail, neither side has pulled punches. When Prime Minister Narendra Modi recently said 40 Trinamool state lawmakers were in touch with him and would abandon Mamata Banerjee once election results were announced, Derek O' Brien, the TMC's leader in the Rajya Sabha, called him an "Expiry Babu PM" -- a term Banerjee herself had previously used. The TMC complained to the Election Commission, and Banerjee said Modi's candidature should be cancelled.

Expiry Babu PM , let’s get this straight. Nobody will go with you. Not even one councillor. Are you election campaigning or horse trading! Your expiry date is near. Today, we are complaining to the Election Commission. Charging you with horse trading #LokSabhaElection2019 Derek O'Brien | ’ (@derekobrienmp) April 29, 2019

Later, Modi would accuse Banerjee of failing to respond to his calls about Cyclone Fani, the tropical storm that made landfall in Odisha last week before moving into West Bengal. The chief minister said she had been in Kharagpur to monitor the cyclone when her Kolkata office was contacted. When Modi said she had denied him a review meeting with the West Bengal government, she said she didn't consider him to be the prime minister.

More controversy would follow. Here is what Mamata Banerjee said on May 7 in response to Narendra Modi's accusation that her government was run by extortionist syndicates: "I feel he should get a tight slap of democracy [be defeated in the election]."

"These pictures from Siliguri will give sleepless nights to the TMC!" Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted on April 3, 2019. (Twitter/Narendra Modi)

If the campaigning in West Bengal seems bitter, polling days have been worse -- they have been bedeviled by reports of violence and other misconduct, including incidents involving the TMC and the BJP.

Last week, for example, Union Minister Babul Supriyo's car was allegedly vandalised by Trinamool supporters; the TMC's workers claimed, on their part, that Supriyo and his men had manhandled them. FIRs were filed against Supriyo for entering a polling booth with armed security, and against unidentified people who attacked his car.

On April 23, a Congress worker was killed in the district of Murshidabad, when members of his party clashed with those of the TMC. Voters outside a booth said they had attacked each other with bamboo sticks and sickles.

An enormous Kolkata rally held by Mamata Banerjee and attended by top Opposition leaders on January 19, 2019. (Photo: PTI)

On January 19, long before the polls opened in West Bengal, Mamata Banerjee brought opposition leaders together at Kolkata's Brigade Ground. She said the message of that mammoth rally was "Remove the BJP, save the country". But will she hold on to the TMC's seats in Parliament?

Her rivals do not seem to think so. Amit Shah, the BJP president, has said his party will win more than 23 seats. And what about the TMC? "Their numbers won't even touch double digits this time," Prime Minister Narendra Modi said on Monday.

But Mamata Banerjee, too, sounded confident last month when she predicted the BJP's seat share -- again, with a mithai metaphor.

Her forecast: "A big roshogolla."

Inputs from agencies
