Pair who shot man in buttocks at farm are jailed for 20 years

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest Scottish crime and courts news sent straight to your inbox with our daily Criminal Record newsletter

Two men were jailed for a total of 20 years this morning for the attempted murder of a 42-year-old man with a shotgun.

Convicted murderer John Docherty, 47, and Don Templeton, 38, from Johnstone, were found guilty of repeatedly discharging a shotgun at James McGurk on around 2.30pm on October 31, 2017, at Crosslee Poultry Farm, Bridge of Weir.

PAISLEY DAILY EXPRESS: Live news as it happens

Mr McGurk was shot from behind and pellets hit his right buttock.

The High Court in Glasgow heard that Docherty, who murdered a pensioner in 1995, and was out on licence, fired the weapon. He was jailed for 12 years.

His co-accused Templeton, who was the getaway driver, was sentenced to eight years.

Judge Lord Armstrong told the pair: “This was an unprovoked and concerted attack, a brutally and excessively violent attack with a shotgun. The injuries inflicted were life-threatening and without medical intervention Mr McGurk would have died.

“John Docherty you were out on licence when you committed this murderous attack. It was you you fired the shotgun and Don Templeton, you were not the attacker who wielded the shotgun, but you provided the transport.”

Defence counsel for both men said that they continued to protest their innocence.

The court heard that carrying out the attack the pair stopped at the Tesco petrol station in Linwood to buy fuel.

They were caught on CCTV at the filling station just minutes before the distinctive Mercedes estate they were driving was again seen on camera driving into the farm and then driving away quickly.

(Image: PDE)

In evidence, Mr McGurk, 42, who buys and sells cars, said he did not know who shot him. At the time he was working on a car at the farm.

He told prosecutor Paul Nelson: “I can’t remember much. It is all a blur to me. I got shot from behind.

“I heard a bang and I was propelled forward.”

The juror was shown dramatic CCTV footage of an injured Mr McGurk staggering to the nearby farmhouse for help.

Mr McGurk told the court he did not think Templeton had anything to do with the shooting.

He said: “I personally don’t see him doing that to me because the two of us were pals. I told the police I didn’t know who done it.”

Mr Nelson asked Mr McGurk: “Were you involved in anything that might make someone shoot you,” and he replied: “No.”

Although he told the court that Templeton had been angry about tools which were stolen from him.

Mr McGurk was asked by Mr Nelson: “Were you asked by Mr Templeton if you knew anyone that was stealing tools,” and he replied: “Yes.”

He gave a name that he passed on to Templeton and when asked why said: “Because he he is a thief.”

Pathologist Dr Marjorie Turner was asked about the potential danger of firing a shotgun at someone.

She said: “If you hit the head or neck there is a serious risk someone could die.”

Mr Nelson asked her: “Is there danger to that person’s life,” and she said: “Yes.”

Docherty was jailed for life for murder in 1995 for killing pensioner John Boyd, 69, in his isolated cottage near Patna, Ayrshire.

He murdered Mr Boyd with a pair of pruning shears and stabbed him in the chest with a screwdriver to get his cashcard.

He was out on licence at the time of the shooting and returned to custody in November 5, 2017.
