Crime Roundup: May 8, 2019

Four killed as car falls into gorge in Pauri

Pauri (UKD): Four people, including a father and his two children, were killed when their car fell into a deep gorge in Uttarakhand's Pauri district, police said on Wednesday.

The incident occurred late on Tuesday night when the vehicle fell into a 150 feet deep gorge near Badethkhal on Lakshman Jhula-Silogi Dwarikhal motor road, Lakshman Jhula police station incharge Rakendra Kathait said.

He said, all the four occupants of the car, Deshbandhu Singh Negi (60), his daughter Komal (11), son Abhinav (7) and a relative Kuldip Singh Rawat (42), died on the spot.

The family was en route to Dehradun to attend a wedding when the accident occurred, the officer added.

Police learnt about the accident on Wednesday morning when villagers spotted the car's wreckage in the gorge and reported it to the authorities, he said. (PTI)

6-month-old baby boy kidnapped, sold for Rs 10,000 rescued

Hyderabad: A six-month-old baby boy, who was allegedly kidnapped by a person and sold it to another for Rs 10,000 here last week was rescued Wednesday with the arrest of two people, police said.

The boy was allegedly abducted from the house of the prime accused Shaik Ahmed from Balapur here in the wee hours of May 3, where the boys mother and grandmother had gone to as the accused was acquainted with them, the police said.

Shaiktook the boy away while his mother and grandmother were asleep and after locking the house from the outside, he fled to Nanded in Maharashtra before selling the baby to Mir Fayaz Ali for Rs 10,000, they said.

Based on a complaint by the boys mother, a case was registered and special police teams were formed to nab Ahmed, the police said.

During course of investigation, Ahmed was apprehended from Nanded and on interrogation he confessed to have abducted the boy and had sold him to Ali for Rs 10,000.

The police rescued the boy from Alis possession here and handed him over to his parents, police added.(PTI)

Power cut leaves 5 dead at Madurai hospital: Police

Madurai: Disruption in power supply allegedly left five patients on life support dead at Government Rajaji Hospital here, police said Wednesday.

However, Dean Vanitha said the patients, who were in the ICU, died of natural causes. The dean said it was a sheer coincidence that the electricity supply was disrupted at that time.

On the other hand, relatives of the deceased alleged the ventilators were not working properly.

Refuting the charges, Director (Medical Education) Dr A Edwin Joe said the ventilators were alright as these had built-in batteries.

Among the five who died were Malliga (58), Palaniammal (60) and Ravindran (52).

Relatives of the patients also staged a dharna.

Deputy Commissioner of Police Sasimohan, dean Vanitha and medical superintendent Raja held talks with the bereaved families. (PTI)

Two killed as car falls into ditch

Amethi: Two members of a marriage party were killed and nine others seriously injured when their car fell into ditch at Pandit Ka Purwa village here, police said Wednesday.

The accident took place on Tuesday night after the car driver lost control over the vehicle. "Two persons died on the spot while nine sustained serious injuries," Jagdishpur SHO, Ramakant Prajapati, said.

The injured have been admitted to the local community health centre.(PTI)

Body of 28-yr-old woman found near UP highway

Muzaffarnagar: A body of a 28-year-old woman with bullet wounds was found near a highway in Satheri village here, police said Wednesday.

The body was recovered by a team of the Ratenpuri police station and sent for post mortem on Tuesday, Circle Officer Vijay Kumar Singh said.

There were bullet wounds on the head of the woman, he said.

The matter is being investigated and it seems, she was killed somewhere else, the circle officer said. (PTI)

Also Read: Crime Roundup: May 7, 2019
