PM Oli likely to be unseated; India linked to Colombo attack; Veteran diplomat Akram simplifies China’s BRI

By NP Upadhyaya

And the Sri Lankan Army perhaps thought that it was the “opportune moment” to expose the inner details of the April 21 deadly Easter Sunday bombings in Colombo.

India stands exposed to what it should have been made decades and decades earlier.

This hair raising revelation has once again stamped the general perception which prevails in the entire South Asian region that India is a nation that manufactures terrorists and exports to its smaller neighbors in order to tame the countries that unfortunately border with the South Asian goliath. India is a big shelter provider for terrorists mostly from Nepal.

Needless to say, Nepal is one among the unfortunate countries perpetually being tortured by the Indian regime beginning the very first day of the birth of the Indian Republic 1947.

The Hindu terror machine, incumbent PM Modi has crossed all the limits in damaging Nepal yet some Indo-pendent agents love to hate their own mother land for some grand known reasons. But such helps being extended to the Indian regime must not have been a free exercise, hopefully.

People feel terrified even when they think as to what would happen if this disgusting Feku terror machine bounces back to power per chance?

India has once again targeted the island nation so that Colombo under coercion distances itself with the emerging super power China.

India feels threatened that the countries that were under its grip have now all gone to the fold of the Chinese regime – the declared arch rival of India. And this is a fact but by default.

Baby Bhutan, the Indian protectorate by all means too wants to get out from the clutches of the Indian regime but as of now has failed to assert its independence and maintain its territorial integrity. The Doklam incident exhibited the Bhutanese weaknesses in 2017. Nothing remains to be told of Bhutan now.

The fact is that since the Nepal born Bhutanese King is a weak political personality and thus prefers to prolong his rule by remaining subservient to the Indian regime. However, the younger generation in Bhutan prefers their nation to keep India at a distance for some understandable reasons.

To recall, India tortured Sri Lanka for almost three decades and finally when President Mahinda Rajpaksha came to power, he wiped out the Tamil Tigers which was clearly and a certified creation of the Indian regime.

This LTTE had terrified the entire nation demanding a separate state well within Sri Lanka. The rest is history now.

Sri Lankan media sources now claim that the suicide bombers engaged in the said attack on the Church had travelled to India first for some sort of what is presumed as “training purposes” or to establish more extended links with some other militant organizations outside the country.

The Islamic State terror group had claimed responsibility for the attack, but the government had blamed local Islamist extremist group National Thowheeth Jamaath (NTJ). Sri Lanka banned the NTJ and has arrested over 100 people so far in connection with the blasts.

The exact story is yet to come to light but the attack had Indian connections for sure.

To recall, Nepal Maoists who had declared a people’s war on Nepal in the mid-nineties by residing in New Delhi as the Indian government’s guests too were trained in Dehradun, and in Kerala, India. Presumably while being in a training, the Maoists leader C. P Gajurel was arrested in Chennai, India, to recall.

Analyst Bharat Dahal openly claims that the Nepal Maoist leaders- Prachanda and Dr. BR Bhattarai were provided with State security while being inside the Indian territory through the kind courtesy of Shyam Saran who was the Indian Ambassador to Nepal and later who assumed the post of the Indian Foreign Secretary.

And Dr. BR Bhattarai now has merged his party with that of the party of Upendra Yadav just the other day which coincides with the secret trip of Shyam Saran – the man who damaged Nepal completely. This must have meaning underneath.

High placed sources claim that this Bhattarai-Yadav merger must have been the design of Mr. Saran who could have brought the two former Maoists closer.

Nepal hater Indian Professor S. D Muni has now reasons to smile as his disciple Dr. Bhattarai is in a “big mission” now with Upendra Yadav combine.

Mr. Saran is also learnt to have enjoyed “quiet dinner” with the former NOIDA man-Comrade Prachanda. This should then mean that Nepal’s Sikkimisation has now begun in earnest. It should be in this light the fresh union of Dr. BR Bhattarai and Upendra Yadav should be seen.

Nepal Maoists established their connections with the BJP regime first in India when the country had Atal Bihari Bajpayee as the Prime Minister and later Dr. Man Mohan Singh gave continuity in providing both overt and covert support to Nepal’s heroes and builders then in Delhi’s firm grip.

And thus it could fairly be said that India is a terrorist country which has damaged the very social fabric of this ancient nation through the men who apparently possess Nepali nationality but in essence serving the core interests of India.

India has some more dangerous designs for Nepal which could be inferred from the mysterious presence of Mr. Shyam Saran in Kathmandu. Other RAW men too could have been traveling in Kathmandu with some ulterior motives as usual.

And India has finally been nailed none other than by the Sri Lankan Army for the first time since the deadly Easter Sunday bombings, confirmed that the suicide bombers involved in the attacks had travelled to India “for some sort of training or to make some more linkages with other organizations outside the country”.

Media sources have claimed that “they (those involved in the attack) travelled to India to the Indian-occupied Kashmir…next they went to Bangaluru…and they then made the way to the Indian State of Kerala.

“That is the information available with us as of now,” said Sri Lankan army Chief Lt Gen Mahesh Senanayake during an interview with the BBC May 4, 2019.

Look what the Sri Lankan Army Chief Lt. Gen. Senanayake says while making public the attack details “that negligence in security matters was the reason Sri Lanka was attacked.” Too much of freedom, too much of peace for the last 10 years. People forget what happened for 30 years. People [were] enjoying peace and neglected security,” he said.

This explains that the Army has some reservations with the way the Sri Lankan politics had been handled for the past ten years more so after the Prabhakaran led Civil War was brought to an end once and for all in the Island nation during the Presidency of Mahinda Rajpakshe.

A day earlier, the Sri Lanka’s Army Commander Lieutenant General Mahesh Senanayake had admitted that his country had suffered a lot due to the communication lapses in sharing the security information and intelligence but concurrently urged the citizens to repose trust on the national Armed Forces.

Sri Lanka Army in a blunt manner admitted, as stated earlier, that the country was targeted in the Easter Sunday bombings because it had neglected its security in the 10 years since the end of the civil war.

It is now an established fact that the Colombo attack had an India link. It remains now to be seen as to which country is the next target in South Asia after Sri Lanka? South Asia is for sure but which country? Nepal is likely the next target for multiple reasons and once again the mastermind shall be New Delhi as usual.

Obviously the target is Nepal once again but this time there is some difference in that this attack is aimed on how to increase (or even treble from the current strength) India’s stooges in Nepal who would soon align and realign themselves “under instructions” in order to further weaken Nepal as one top RAW spy reportedly had been spotted in Kathmandu who is presumed to have met Prachanda at a Hotel for a dinner. He must have also then met with his posted secret agents in the media sector.

Nepal, it is believed, to have bagged substantial gains much to the discomfort of the Indian regime which has not only ignored President Xi Jinping’s brilliant initiative but also rejected the BRI scheme under some flimsy pretexts or the other.

No wonder that after the visit of this “direct threat to Nepal” man, a sizeable section of the Nepali media together with a section of tilted intellectuals have begun questioning the importance of the projects that the second BRI meet has awarded to Nepal.

The ill motive could well be understood.

Some even talk of whether Nepal needed such mega projects from China as proposed by Nepal?

To tell very frankly, in order to block the very entrance of China in Nepal through any projects a rumor is being spread that Nepal will soon be under the Chinese “debt trap” and for failing to pay the Chinese debts, Nepal shall lose its unique identity and shall afterwards be tentatively a slave of the Chinese nation a la Tibet.

The way Pakistan is being deliberately harassed by the Western and the Indian media over the CPEC (China Pakistan Economic Corridor), the same is being practiced in Nepal by the same set practically Nepal who feel uncomfortable with the China’s Himalayan entrance in Nepal with a few mega projects.

Gyanendra Karki, a veteran congressman who was in the Nepal President’s China team upon return to Kathmandu in an interview with one newspaper said that China wants to make Nepal an economic hub for approaching the entire South Asian region.

If this news is true, and it is true, then he must have said so, as much as could be presumed, in order to bring in Indian regime in a massive manner to abort the Chinese mega projects as stated above.

The general belief in Nepal is that a political man who is a member of the Nepali Congress must have immense love for India and concurrently untold hatred for China.

However, in this case this perception may not be true but yet what is for sure is that the anti-China lobby which is already active in Kathmandu has stepped up its efforts aimed at damaging Chinese credentials for known reasons.

Some even claim that this lobby shall do all it can to frustrate China to the extent that China itself may drop the scheme of connecting Kathmandu through the rail network.

The usually tilted Nepali media is here to help support the Indian design which is tentatively guaranteed much the same way as it supported the last India sponsored upheaval in 2006, if one were to recall. China too had supported this political change that time, if China recalls. And now China must pay the dividends of its own investments made in 2006.

This RAW man, read Shyam Saran, as he is generally taken in Nepal, recently landed in Kathmandu when Nepal President Mrs. Bhandari was in China and is learnt to have encouraged Prachanda to assert his role in the Nepal Communist party by buying Oli’s loyal(s) into his fold so that he could finally and legally replace Oli from the current post.

It was this Shyam Saran who lured China in 2006 that catapulted Nepali politics for which China now is paying heavy price. China has to pay more for its past follies.

In fact Mr. Saran prefers Prachanda as next Nepal Prime Minister so that the next Indian regime could tame Nepal as usual. Needless to say, Prachanda has a special distaste for China.

The main reason for Mr. Saran’s visit to Kathmandu was to convince the Nepali political animals, both ruling and in opposition, that China was a bad boy and that Nepal would do well if keeps itself associated with India and the Indo-Pacific strategy by ignoring China to the extent that was possible.

The rouge Delhi man, talked earlier, was secretly here in Kathmandu to blunt Mrs. Bhandari’s achievements that she accidentally bagged during her fresh trip to China to attend the second BR forum. Mr. Saran accomplished his assigned job well and now Nepali intellectuals have begun saying that “we are afraid of the Chinese debt trap”.

This means that hatred for China has suddenly increased.

The fact is that the debt trap theory is totally a baseless rumor. Look what the Chinese Ambassador to El Salvador has to say. She says May 5, 2019, “ Cooperation with China will not in any way be a debt trap, but a cake for the benefit of the two peoples (China and El Salvador). It will not be a geo-political tool in any way, but a development opportunity”.

And exactly this is what had been stated by Chinese envoy in Nepal prior to President Bhandari’s Bejing trip. She had rebuked the debt trap theory as being disseminated by China haters near and far.

But critics, led by the Western countries to be more precise, says a top diplomat who was the former Pakistan Ambassador to Nepal Zamir Akram May 4, 2019 in the Express Tribune “have been castigating the BRI as a manifestation of China’s “geo-political ambitions” that would force developing countries into a “debt trap”.

At the heart of this controversy, adds Ambassador Akram in his fresh article that “whether the BRI is a benign Chinese endeavor to promote greater international connectivity for shared economic development or a tool to dominate Asian, African and Latin American countries”.

This issue is of paramount importance for his country, Pakistan, since CPEC is the flagship project of the BRI and an example to be emulated by other developing countries. “Therefore, the BRI needs to be placed in its true context” opines the veteran diplomat now perhaps retired.

This means that Ambassador Akram dismisses the theory of debt trap summarily.

He further goes on to say in defense of the CPEC that “apart from the debt burden disgusting argument, the western nations have resorted to a massive disinformation and destabilization campaign within Pakistan through its proxies and touts to mislead Pakistanis about CPEC.

It has also enlisted its Indian acolytes to oppose CPEC, says the author of the article “by promoting terrorism through the BLA and the TTP, such as attacks on Chinese workers and the Chinese Consulate in Karachi. In this effort, the Gwadar port has also been projected as a Chinese naval base rather than what it actually is — a commercial port for trading and trans-shipment purposes.

Guided by China’s policy of “harmonious rise” to superpower status and “win-win cooperation” with partnering countries, President Xi has all along been maintaining that that “exchanges will replace estrangement”; “mutual learning will replace clashes” and “coexistence will replace a sense of superiority”. More pointedly Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi stated that “the BRI is not a geo-political tool but a platform for cooperation”, so write Ambassador Akram in his article entitled Geo-politics and the BRI dated May 4, 2019.

Ambassador Akram has in a way tried his best to clear the misleading information deliberately being disseminated by some interested quarters.

(The distorted versions of CPEC being fed to the Nepali population must be checked if Pakistani diplomats are present in Nepal).

All said and done, the China Pakistan Economic corridor is perhaps in the near future may include one more influential member in its projects. There are chances that Islamic state of Iran may also join the CPEC projects adding the needed strength to the already durable economic corridor. This has come to the fore after Khan’s fresh visit to Iran last month.

China too appears excited in having Iran as a new partner in this mega project. However, the details are yet to come.

During the recent visit of Imran Khan to Iran, the President of Iran expressed to link between Gwadar and Chahbhar ports in order to strengthen the bilateral trade relations. Iran and Pakistan’s leaders have already agreed to increase the volume of bilateral trade over the next five years to $ 5 billion. Iran also expressed its willingness to join the project of the China – Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC). It is said that Iran can play a major role in making the CPEC a success with its vast energy resources. The two countries have already declared Chabahar and Gwadar ports as sister ports complementing each other to enhance their trade ties.

It must be told in advance that with the changing regional and international dimensions, Pakistan is opening its options to rebuild alliance and revive old friendships, like every other country in the international global system. To build those long-lasting edifice, Prime Minister Imran Khan was on a historic and landmark visit to Tehran from 21-22 April 2019 on the invitation of President Hassan Rouhani, so wrote Muhammad Asif Noor April April 26, 2019 in the Daily Times.

So this means that Iran joining the CPEC engine of growth, the countries housed in the CPEC shall not only reap befits from the mega projects but their State to State relations at the bilateral level too would touch newer heights. But how Pakistan balances its relations with Iran and Saudi Arabia in the CPRC organizations shall have to be watched. This shall test Pakistan’s diplomatic acumen.

For the Road: Violence disrupted the Indian election in the disputed Kashmir region on Monday, as militants have attacked two polling stations and the police responded with what residents called “excessive force”.

Militants in the Pulwama district hurled grenades at the polling stations, the police said, and protesters threw stones at security forces. The police fired pellet guns in response, injuring at least a dozen people, according to residents.

That’s all.
