Black Travel Vibes: The Beauty of India Will Blow You Away

Photo Credit: @limitless.voyage

It may seem cheesy, but there’s nothing like traveling the world to take in some of its most amazing structures.

A goal for many avid globetrotters is to step foot on every continent and see all seven wonders of the world, one of which is the stunningly beautiful Taj Mahal located in Agra, India. Not only is the Taj Mahal an amazing architectural gem, but it is also a symbol of love.

If you’re considering visiting India and the Taj Mahal, the best time to go is from October through March when the weather is pleasant, summer can be brutal for first-timers. Tour companies like Friendly Planet can help you arrange top-notch transportation and accommodations on your journey, so be sure to check them out.

Loading the player...

Not that you need any additional inspiration, but these photos from travelista Melody Silva’s recent journey through India are too good not to share. Use them as guide to motivate your future travel plans. Bon voyage!

01 Temple of Love Commissioned by emperor Shah Jahan to house the tomb of his favorite wife, Mumtaz Mahal, the Taj Mahal is a UNESCO World Heritage site and one of the Seven Wonders of the World. Millions of visitors flock to the Indian mausoleum each year, so expect to compete with droves of tourists for a great shot in front of the masterpiece. However, if you can get to the Taj Mahal complex in Agra before sunrise, you might be able to score a few moments of solitude to capture the perfect shot. Good luck. Photo Credit: @limitless.voyage 02 Peace Be With You While other visitors struggle to get shots of the Taj Mahal from within the complex, often times the best shots come from the outside. Grab your guide and a bike, then ride around the surrounding area to discover peaceful views like this one. Photo Credit: @limitless.voyage 03 Pink City Princess When you’re finished marveling at the wonder of the Taj Mahal, take a four-hour drive to the city of Jaipur, known as the Pink City because of its distinctive pink buildings. Head to Wind View coffee shop directly across from the Hawa Mahal for a quick bite and the best backdrop for photos. Photo Credit: @limitless.voyage 04 Holi-lot of Fun For a unique experience in India, be sure to visit in March during Holi aka The Festival of Colors. Friendly Planet offers affordable packages so don’t pas up an opportunity to enjoy the festival with a few new friends. Photo Credit: @limitless.voyage
