As 192 partygoers await bail, Noida Police say ‘we never said rave party’, but fail to explain mass arrest

We never said that it was a rave party: Noida Police

A story by Delhi Times in January 2019 about how Noida’s farmhouses were turning into popular party spots

Partygoers should know about licenses first: Investigating Officer

Alcohol procured from other states reason for arrests: District Excise Officer

Police told us to not come here for the party: Friends of arrested partygoers

It was the usual pool party: A promoter of Saturday’s party

No party in Noida farmhouses, all bookings cancelled

As 192 partygoers await bail, Noida Police say ‘we never said rave party’, but fail to explain mass arrest

On May 4, the Noida Police arrested nearly 200 partygoers from Eco Farms in Noida’s Sector 135. The police officers who raided the farmhouse claim that they were acting on a tip-off about illegal drugs being circulated in the party. While no drugs were found at the party, the police arrested all the partygoers. The five alleged organisers – Kapil Singh Bhati, Adnan, Pankaj Sharma , Balesh Kohli and Amit Tyagi, have also been arrested. At a press conference on Sunday, Vaibhav Krishna, SSP Gautam Buddh Nagar said that those arrested have been booked under sections 60/63/72 of the Excise Act along with sections 268 (public nuisance), 278 (making atmosphere noxious to health) and 188 (disobedience to order duly promulgated by public servant) of the IPC.While the raid was prompted by a tip-off, arresting such a large number of people at a party where no drugs were found is unheard of. The Investigating Officer of the case justified the action by saying, “Joint recovery mein sab ko pakda jata hai.” When we asked the District Excise Officer, Noida if they always arrest everyone present at a party for a liquor license offense, he simply responded that everyone was arrested because nobody owned up to bringing the alcohol, adding, “They were arrested because they were consuming alcohol procured from other states.” On Sunday, the Noida Police objected bail and the 192 partygoers were sent to judicial custody. On Tuesday, the district court sanctioned police remand for the five alleged organisers of the party, and the rest 187 were still trying for bail (by the time of going to press).The charges pressed against the 192 partygoers arrested at Eco FarmsThe Noida Police seized 31 hookahs, 112 beer bottles, 30 bottles of wine which were meant for sale only in Delhi, five packets of smoker coal, 11 packets of tobacco and some “suspicious powder” which is yet to be identified. On Sunday, the Noida Police issued a press release in which they referred to the party as a ‘rave’. Rave parties are often perceived as parties where drugs/narcotics are involved.When we asked why the party was called a ‘rave party’ when no drugs were found, Sudha Singh, SP City, Noida answered, “Media walo ne rave party banaya hai. Humne kab kaha?” After being reminded of the press release, she said, “We had received the information that it was a rave party, but after we conducted the raid, we passed all the information we gathered to the Press. Now it is up to the Press to call it as they see fit.”Vaibhav Krishna, Noida SSP who helmed the operation, was in a meeting when we tried to contact him. But the Noida Police PRO answered on his behalf and said, “We've already pressed charges in the rave party case. Now it's up to the District Court to decide when to grant bail to the partygoers."A story by Delhi Times in January 2019 about how Noida’s farmhouses were turning into popular party spotsAjay Kumar Aggarwal, Investigating Officer, said, “The venue didn’t have a bar license. We applied for a remand for the party organisers, and we got it. The bail applications of the rest will be heard by the court. Joint recovery mein sab ko pakda jata hai.”RK Singh, District Excise Officer, Noida, said, “Not only alcohol, but hookah and tobacco were also being consumed at the party. These partygoers were arrested because they were consuming alcohol procured from other states and not because they were simply consuming alcohol. At the venue, we could not ascertain who brought the liquor from neighbouring states, so everyone was arrested.”Most of the partygoers are from Delhi, some from Haryana and only few from Noida. Worried parents who lined up at the District Court in Surajpur with their lawyers refused to talk about the issue, but questioned how the police made a regular party into a rave party? Kasil Ansari, a businessman, whose friends were arrested, says, “All my friends went for the pool party, this “rave” allegation isn't true. The organisers should be the responsible party, but they've booked everyone who was there. I also attended a party at the same venue 20 days ago. That day, the police arrived and told us not to attend these parties, as the venues didn’t have the permission to organise them.”One of the party’s social media promoter, says, “There was no rave, it was a just a pool party. They are invoking laws and rules about public nuisance, but how can a private farmhouse party be a public nuisance?”The farmhouse raid has led to mass party cancellations in Greater Noida and party organisers are now looking at other venues. When we called the party organisers who advertised for upcoming pool parties in Noida, most of them told us that they have cancelled the parties.
