Roll out the red carpet: Shrinking of global value chains provides India a big opportunity – if we do the right things

Recently released trade data brought cheer with goods and services exports crossing $535 billion in FY2019. India’s highest so far. But, India can do far better by focussing on a big opportunity that appears tailor-made for it.

It is the large global firms’ need to relocate manufacturing from multiple countries to just one. From shared production in global value chains (GVCs) to most production at one place. The GVC model relied on quick and tariff-free entry and exit of intermediate goods like parts and components through partner countries. But trade tensions and rising protectionism have increased trade policy and tariff hassles making this model less appealing.

Relocating production from many to just one country would mean less hassle. Better collaboration between the lead firm and component suppliers and savings on shipping cost are additional advantages.

Apple and many others now prefer to keep all suppliers near the central operations. It could be China, India or any other country. Earlier, more than 10 countries used to participate in the manufacturing of a mobile phone. The relocation challenge affects firms in machinery, electrical and electronics, aircraft parts, complex chemicals, and many more sectors. Relocation has already started. Trade data confirms a reduction in trade of intermediate goods among the GVC partners. Hundreds of large firms will take the relocation call in the next few years.

As GVCs account for about 75% trade in manufactured goods, the relocation of production would be a significant structural shift in world trade and a big opportunity for India. Relocation of just a few top firms will energise India’s manufacturing, jobs and export story.

For many, who do not want to put all eggs in one basket, India is the best choice after China. Economies of scale considerations favour countries with a large consumer base. India with large markets, a skilled workforce, and a sizeable R&D network fits most requirements. But we need a clear strategy for this to happen. It has four essential elements.

First, have a welcoming mindset about the large global firms. We need them. We do not have smart large Indian firms except in petroleum refining, steel, pharmaceuticals and automobiles. Export to turnover ratio is less than 10% for the top 50 public limited companies in the food, beverages, mining, paper products, chemicals, textiles, electrical machinery, and electronics sectors.

World over, it is large firms that carry out most production and export. Most of the Manufacturing Value Add of $10 trillion of China, the US, Germany, Japan and Korea, comes from the large firms. Yearly revenue of the top 100 manufacturing firms headquartered in these countries exceeded $7 trillion in 2018. Firms with more than 500 employees account for 65% of US and 80% of German exports. China increased its share in world trade from 2% to 17% between 1992 and 2018 by creating the most extensive production facilities. 50% of world trade is intra large firm trade.

Also, contrary to popular belief, the presence of large firms supports the growth of SMEs. They depend on SMEs for the supply of specialised components, parts or machinery. SMEs in turn gain through the flow of people, skills, technology and best practices from large firms. In fact, the absence of smart large firms in most sectors is the reason why most Indian SMEs are stuck with low productivity operations.

Second, offer a robust incentive package to firms relocating to India. We need to invite top global firms to become anchor manufacturers in select sectors. Anchor firms kick-start operations and achieve high growth using their money and global network. They also persuade others to join. India should have an active programme to identify such firms and invite them to relocate.

The incentives may include low corporate tax at 10% (better than no manufacturing no tax now), tariff concessions on select imports and a 30-year land lease in coastal areas near major ports. Incentives may be firm-specific. We should not publicise them. A group of ministers formed for this purpose may take decisions on such investments.

Third, make the Nokia story required reading for all bureaucrats. Nokia had to wind up operation in 2013 because of tax battles with Tamil Nadu sales tax and income tax department. It had to face the wrath of local politicians as well. After lengthy court battles, all demands except one turned out to be frivolous. Shutting of Nokia operations killed India’s mobile phone story as exports came down from $2 billion to almost zero levels. China, from where we started importing mobile phones in large numbers was the only beneficiary. Was this overzealousness of few or a setup? We need a mechanism where firms can escalate such issues to the highest level. Without this few large firms will set up operations here.

Finally, adopt an ambitious reform agenda. We are the fifth largest economy in GDP and third largest in GDP on a PPP basis. We are ahead of Germany and Japan and just behind China and the US on a PPP basis. Let that sink in. Time we should move from protecting large and almost monopolistic firms in most sectors to encourage joint ventures with the world’s leading firms. This will bring technology, skills and investment and change India’s economic landscape in a few years. Reforms in trade policy, investment facilitation, direct tax and tariffs by the new government will be a good idea.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
