GI Janes get first taste of war in Red zone

RAIPUR/KORAPUT: Seven Maoists, including four women, were killed in two separate encounters in Chhattisgarh 's Dantewada and Odisha's Koraput district on Wednesday. In Dantewada, two Maoists were gunned down early in the morning by security forces who had received a tip-off on about 60-70 rebels in Gonderas village, on the border of Dantewada and Sukma districts.The joint team comprised about 250 personnel from the district reserve guard (DRG), STF and the newly-formed women commando force Danteshwari Ladake.Dantewada SP Abhishek Pallava said the team came under rebel fire while crossing Gonderas village, which led to an intense gunfight.The Maoists engaged the forces for over an hour before they were forced to retreat.The SP said there was "confirmed information" from the jawans that two Maoists, including one woman, were killed. However, only the woman's body was found and she is yet to be identified. Police suspect her to be a senior leader of Maoist battalion Number 1 since she was in possession of an Insas rifle . Dragmarks at site hint that at least one body was carried away. A 12-bore gun and some Maoist literature were also seized from the spot.In Koraput, five armed Maoists, including three women, were killed in an encounter in the forests along the Odisha-Andhra Pradesh border. Police said they had received a tip-off about the presence of Maoists in the forests of Kituba and launched an operation with the personnel from Special Operation Group (SOG) and a team of district voluntary force (DVF).The Maoists fired on our men and forced us to retaliate. The operation was meticulously executed. There are no injury or casualty on our side," said DGP R P Sharma, adding that the encounter lasted about 30 minutes.There were over 20 armed cadres at the time of the gunbattle, police said. "Five bodies were found from the encounter site. The remaining rebels fled the spot," said SP (Koraput) Kanwar Vishal Singh.Police believe the deceased rebels belonged to the Nandapur Area Committee of the proscribed CPI (Maoist), which works under the Malkangiri-Koraput-Visakhapatnam Border Division (MKVBD) led by top Maoist leader Ramachandra Reddy, alias Chalapathi.Two Insas rifles and an equal number of self-loading rifles, kit bags, battery chargers were also found at the site.
