Kamal Haasan to return as host of Bigg Boss 3

Reality show is expected to begin in the second week of June

Makkal Needhi Maiam founder Kamal Haasan will return to small screen as the host of the popular reality television show, Bigg Boss, for the third season on Star Vijay. The hit reality show featuring a group of contestants living together in an isolated house for 100 days is expected to begin in the second week of June.

Actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan shot for the promotional video in a studio outside Chennai on Wednesday. The actor will reportedly be seen with a ‘long and sharp’ moustache in the video.

With the final phase of the State Assembly bypolls getting over on May 18, sources close to Kamal Haasan say that he will finish his film and television commitments. Kamal Haasan’s production house Raaj Kamal Film International will also remain ‘active’ and continue to tell great stories across film, television and digital mediums.

Speaking to The Hindu, Narayanan Valliappan, CEO, RKFI, said that though Kamal Haasan is completely focussed on politics, he hopes to continue the legacy of RKFI which has produced remarkable films.

“Kamal Haasan wants this legacy to continue. RKFI will continue to tell great stories and we hope to work with young, interesting talent. That is the vision. We are now in the process of putting a young, talented team in place,” he said.

Asked if Kamal Haasan will be involved in the process, Narayanan said that getting his time to discuss movies might be difficult. “Around 90-95% of his time is now dedicated to politics, but I am going to try and see how much time we can get from him. The vision is to tell remarkable stories as we always have. We want to attract the best of young talent and our doors are open,” he said. RKFI's Kadaram Kondaan, starring actor Vikram in the lead and directed by Rajesh M. Selva, will release in June.

Asked about the status of Indian 2, directed by Shankar and produced by Lyca Productions, which appears to have hit a roadblock, Mr. Narayanan said, “Kamal Haasan is committed to honouring his commitment. As far as Indian 2 is concerned, it will be better for the production house to speak about the film.”
