Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor gear up to shoot the last dance battles for Street Dancer 3D

Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor are among the stars of the Generation Y who have shown the magic of their dancing in their last outing together in ABCD 2. Now, they both are back together for Remo D’souza’s Street Dancer 3D and fans can’t wait to see it. Street Dancer 3D is the third film the ABCD franchise and it will up the level of dance for everyone. From the past few months, Varun and Shraddha have been shooting for the film in parts of Amritsar and London.

Also, Varun and Shraddha are back to training now and are prepping hard for another schedule of Street Dancer 3D. Amidst all the buzz, the latest report by Mumbai Mirror has claimed that Shraddha and Varun are prepping hard for the final showdown of Street Dancer 3D. Yes, as per the report, Varun and Shraddha will be shooting for the climax of Street Dancer 3D in Dubai and Mumbai. While a portion will be shot in the underground streets of Dubai, the final schedule of Street Dancer 3D will take place in Mumbai.

As per the report, Remo confirmed and said, “Yes, we will be shooting in Dubai for a fortnight. It is the second last schedule of our film. The final one is in Mumbai. We are shooting a big song in the city for which rehearsals have begun. It will mostly be shot at indoor locations.” The report also added that Prabhudheva and Nora Fatehi along with many other dance crews will be heading for the shoot in Dubai and will join in the last battle.

Street Dancer 3D kicked off in January in Amritsar where Varun also performed with a dance crew at the Wagah Attari Border. Post this, the film crew moved to London where major chunks of the film were shot. Over the last few days, Varun, Shraddha and dance crews have been gearing up for the biggest dance film. Street Dancer 3D is slated to release on November 8, 2019.

Also Read: Varun Dhawan adds coolness to being devilish as he steps out of Street Dancer 3D rehearsals; See Pics
