From burning the midnight oil to dreams of making it big

Ludhiana: Neha Verma from Teja Singh Sutantar Memorial public School, Shimlapuri, secured top position in Punjab state under academic category after getting 99.54% in Punjab School Education Board (PSEB) class X result declared on Wednesday.

Neha, a resident of Quality Chowk (Shimlapuri), who scored 647 marks out of 650 has made city proud to become the state topper in class 10 results.

Daughter of a truck driver, Neha resides in a rental accommodation near her school. Talking about her achievement, she said, “I have finally achieved my target of emerging as a topper in Punjab state results of class X after a year of hard work.”

As of her success mantra, she said she mostly studied in early morning hours, relied on self studying and followed a strict schedule without a fail. She wishes to improve the financial condition of the household. “We are four siblings. My father works really hard to make ends meet. My dream is to become an IPS officer some day.”

The second position under the category was bagged by two students— Ankita Sachdeva of RS Model Public School, Shastri Nagar, and Anjali Garg of BCM, Jamalpur Road— with a score of 99.23%, respectively. Both of them have secured 645 marks out of 650 in the finals of Class X exams with their continuous hard work efforts towards education field.

Ankita, a daughter of factory worker, studied till late night on a daily basis. She said, “I stayed away from social networking sites, and devoted myself entirely to studies.”

Recalling her pre-board marks, she said, “When I scored only 93%, I felt quit embarrassed and nervous, but did not lose hope as my parents and school staff supported me in every possible way. I dream to become a software engineer.”

Anjali, who shared the second position with Ankita said she kept on revising the syllabus as much as possible. “I studied for seven to eight hours on a regular basis, not forgetting to take small intervals in between.”

She considers her father who is a businessman as her inspiration. “I would like to become a doctor in the next few years, and help the poor.”

A total of three students from the city have secured the third position in the state by scoring 99.08% and grabbing 644 marks out of 650.

Soni Kaur, a student of Government Senior Secondary School, Dholewal, dreams to become an IAS officer or be part of Indian Judiciary system. Daughter of a labourer, Soni said, “I spent my days studying. Her success mantra, she said, was to revise as much as possible.”

Anish Chopra of Nankana Sahib Public School, Gill, and Abigyan Kumar of BCM School, Jamalpur, are the two others who also stood third.

Anisha chopra said while talking to TOI said, “I would like to be an IAS officer and eradicate corruption prevalant in the government departments. I studied for eight to nine hours regularly while preparing for my exams.

Abhigyan, on the other hand, said he spent most of the time seeking guidance from his school teachers. He too aspires to join administrative services.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
