Firing between Para Special Forces and suspected militants along the Assam-Arunachal border in Tinsukia district

Our Correspondent

DIGBOI: Tinsukia Lekhapani-based Para Special Forces (SF) and suspected militants exchanged fire on Wednesday morning in Nagadubi village -geographically an inaccessible tract along the Assam-Arunachal border, around 2 km ahead of Wara village under Jagun outpost in Tinsukia district of Upper Assam.

According to Wara villagers, fierce gun battle took place at dawn which woke up the villagers of the nearby areas from their sleep. According to inputs available, the incident took place when the suspected militants sighted the security forces at a distance and resorted to unwarranted firing to make way for a safe escape in the thick bushes. The forces were carrying out an anti-insurgency operation in the area.

Assam Police sources, while confirming the firing incident, told The Sentinel that two of the suspected armed militants of an unidentified organization were taking shelter in a deserted and isolated hut in Nagadubi village. They suddenly resorted to open firing at the security forces wherein the special forces acted swiftly in retaliation. “However, there is no report of casualty on either side,” said Biju Das, IC Jagun outpost, when contacted over phone.

Meanwhile, Tinsukia district unit of Assam Police launched a cordoned operation in the nearby area but the task remained ineffective due to the unfavourable topography, incessant rainfall and bridges being washed off by the nearby flooding water body.

The area covering Nagadubi and Wara villages almost share the Myanmar border with India and have often been frequented by various militant organizations, including the ULFA, NSCN and NDFB. The said area, characterized by thick reserve forest, perennial water bodies and inaccessible hilly tracts, had always proved a haven for the rebel groups to sneak into the neighbouring States of Assam and Arunachal Pradesh.

According to recent inputs from the officials of the Assam Police, a group of four hardcore armed ULFA militants have been reportedly moving along the Assam-Arunachal border after a faction of the same group joined the mainstream earlier last month in Tinsukia. Meanwhile, a column of special security forces has been pressed into operation in the vulnerable pockets after the shootout incident.

Also read: Assam news
