Irrfan Khan opens up about his road to recovery in a heartfelt note of gratitude – full statement inside

Irrfan Khan opens up about his road to recovery

Fans were left in tears last year after Irrfan Khan announced that he was diagnosed with NeuroEndocrine Tumour, following which, he headed to London for treatment and was there for months. Finally, earlier this year, the actor returned to Mumbai and we learned about his recovery. Soon after, Irrfan took to his Twitter account to thank his fans for their prayers and also dropped the first look of his upcoming film, English Medium, follow up of his immensely successful film, Hindi Medium.

Now, the actor has released another statement of gratitude, in which he has opened up about his road to recovery and the toll that it took on the actor while he was battling cancer. “Last few months have been on a road to recovery a period to heal to fight the fatigue and face the reel and real world. I am aware of your concern and request to talk to you, share my journey, but I am fathoming it myself inhaling and internalising, taking baby steps to merge my healing with work and trying to experiment the amalgamation of both,” Irrfan says in his statement.

The Hindi Medium actor went on to thank fans and everyone else who prayed for him and emphasised on the fact that he really appreciated the part where people gave him the space he needed and didn’t leave him overwhelmed despite their love and affection for him.

“I am deeply touched by your wishes, your prayers and it means a lot for me and my family. I truly respect the way you respected my journey giving me time and space to heal. Thank you for your patience and the warmth and the love all through this overwhelming journey ,” Irrfan adds.

As mentioned earlier, this isn’t Irrfan’s first note of gratitude since his return. The actor had taken to his Twitter account on April 3 and shared a heartfelt note. “Maybe somewhere in the pursuit of winning, we forget how much it means to be loved. In our vulnerability, we are reminded. As I leave my footprints onto these steps of my life, I want to pause to be grateful for receiving your immense love and support, it soothed me in my process of healing. So I travel back to you, thanking you from the bottom of my heart,” Irrfan had wrote in his Tweet.

GMB serving since 1900s It’s going to be fun to tell another story #AngreziMedium.



Coming soon, with Mr Champakji...



Aa Raha Hu phir entertain Karne Sabko #ItsTimeToKnowChampakJi #AngreziMedium pic.twitter.com/mC3IL2UMpf — Irrfan (@irrfank) April 8, 2019

Meanwhile, English Medium is the second Instalment and the sequel to Hindi Medium. Actress Radhika Madan, will be seen playing Irrfan’s daughter in the film, while Kareena Kapoor Khan will be seen starring as a London cop in the Irrfan Khan-starrer.
