Kamal Haasan back to hosting ‘Bigg Boss Tamil’

Kamal Haasan back to hosting ‘Bigg Boss Tamil’

Season 3 of the show is likely to be telecast from the first or second week of June.

Flix Entertainment

Kamal Haasan had hosted the first two seasons of the Tamil television reality show Bigg Boss, which aired on Vijay TV and went on to become a big hit. With the successful completion of season 1 and 2, there were huge expectations for the third season. Also, there were speculations that Kamal may not do the show again as he is busy with his political assignments.

Earlier, there were reports that Nayanthara, Suriya or Simbu might host the show, but it has been revealed now that Kamal is getting back on the show. The makers of Bigg Boss season 3 have begun promo shooting with Kamal at a location in Chennai. Like the first two seasons, the third season too will have 16 contestants, including one commoner, like in the previous seasons. The show is likely to be telecast from the first or second week of June. The contestants are being finalised now and an official word about them is expected soon.

While the first season was immensely popular, the second season had a dip in the ratings as there were many controversies. While the first season was won by Arav, Riythvika emerged victorious in Bigg Boss Tamil 2.

Meanwhile, Kamal, who is busy with his political assignments, has two films – Indian 2 and Sabash Naidu – in different stages of production. Indian 2, the sequel of his 1996 blockbuster Indian directed by Shankar, went on the floors earlier this year, but due to undisclosed reasons the film’s shooting came to a halt in a few days. The film took a backseat as Kamal got busy with the Lok Sabha elections and though there are rumours that the project is shelved, it is said that shooting will resume by the end of May or early June.

Kamal’s Raaj Kamal Films International’s CEO Narayanan Valliappan told The Hindu, “Kamal Haasan is committed to honouring his commitment. As far as Indian 2 is concerned, it will be better for the production house to speak about the film.”

There is no update on the long-delayed Sabash Naidu, the spin-off based on the character Balram Naidu from Dasavatharam. The project went on the floors a couple of years ago and the team even shot a schedule in the US. Following an unfortunate accident when Kamal fell from his office stairs and sprained his leg, the project was put on the backburner.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
