High-stake Chandni Chowk

Known to be a bellwether seat of Delhi, Chandini Chowk, which has 10 segments under it, has mainly been a contest between the Congress and the BJP since independence.

The Chandini Chowk constituency, which is considered to be Delhi's 'gold' is also one of the most historically rich constituencies of India.

With nearly 15 lakh registered voters, Chandini Chowk has witnessed many Independence Day speeches from the Red Fort. From Congress' Radha Raman as its first MP in 1957 to BJP's Dr Harsh Vardhan in 2014, the area has coincidentally chosen the winning side every single time.

But even after being the tourist attraction of the Capital, voters of the area are still battling with local issues. Known to be a bellwether seat of Delhi, Chandini Chowk, which has 10 segments under it, has mainly been a contest between the Congress and the BJP since independence but with a triangular contest between BJP's sitting MP Dr Harsh Vardhan, Congress's JP Agarwal and AAP's Pankaj Gupta this time, voters think tables can turn.

One of the oldest voters in Chandini Chowk, Hamid Khizer told India Today, "The constituency has always chosen the winning side coincidentally but looks like this time the picture can change due to the division of votes. Local issues of his the place have never been solved."

Stuck in time, the area is plagued with civic issues like poor infrastructure, roads, schools, scarcity of drinking water, ill-managed electric wires and illegal encroachment even after 63 years of its existence.

Voters of the area have lost all hopes with their MPs. Speaking to India Today, voters of Jama Masjid area said, "We did not even know how Dr Harsh Vardhan looked like before he came in our area to rally for 2019 Lok Sabha elections. He never came to our area in the past five years."

Women voters said, "We have very limited access to water from the last 10-20 years. There's no water to drink, no water to cook all we can do is get some groundwater from the nearby masjid. Our children frequently fall ill but nobody listens to us. We have seen times when we had to drink water from the masjid's toilet."

But despite all the odds, Muslims, Dalits, and Vaish communities have lived in harmony in the area. However, they "feel the heat of Hindu-Muslim polarisation for the first time in 2019".

Muslim voters from Turkman Gate said, "Divide on religious basis has always been there but Chandini Chowk was never been impacted."


