It's Didi vs people, says PM Modi

Speaking exclusively to Manogya Loiwal in Purulia, during his 13th campaign in the state, the highest by any Prime Minister during an election season, PM Modi lashed out at the Trinamool Congress.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi hit out at Mamata Banerjee for her 'anti-people style of operation' in the state of West Bengal.

Speaking exclusively to Manogya Loiwal in Purulia, during his 13th campaign in the state, the highest by any Prime Minister during an election season, PM Modi lashed out at the Trinamool Congress.

PM Modi said, "It is unfortunate for the country. Didi is working illegally, torturing the people. In Purulia, they (TMC) have pushed our people to the pool of death. They were hanged and addressed the people that 'this is how people are being killed'. In spite of this, the one who are sitting in Delhi are not willing to take note of such cases. When they were torturing the people, killing them alive, no importance was given to the matter. Here, the citizens are not allowed to use the drinking water. If the people of Bengal are suffering from this kind of torture then the allegations on me is nothing. I only care about the ordinary people."

In her every public address, Mamata has referred him (PM Modi) as an anti-people policy implementer and even termed him Hitler, a dangabaaz and a dictator.

Responding to whether it is a battle between Modi and Mamata, the PM said, "This is the election of Bharat, election of Lok Sabha, all the citizens including the Indians working for Bengal and Modi. In Bengal, the fight is Didi vs people. It is the fight of the people of Bengal. Modi is far away. She (Mamata) tortures the people. The fight is being fought by the people of Bengal for their right, against Didi. For this, in Bengal, nothing is against Modi, it is the anger of Didi on Modi. But she is doing injustice to the people of Bengal."

Responding to the Jai Shri Ram controversy, the PM said, "I'm surprised to see that the leaders of the Mahagathbandhan are afraid after every phase of the elections. They had thought that they could form a government with 30 to 40 MPs. But the people have ruined their dream and that is why they are angry over Modi, or Lord Ram or Ma Kali or Ma Durga. She can show her anger on anyone anytime."

About Rajiv Gandhi, you said that the family used the aircraft carrier (INS Viraat) for picnic, posting pictures of the same. What do you have to comment about this? Does this mean that they are hampering the national security?

I have already said this yesterday (on Wednesday) that in 1984 the Congress poorly justified the Sikh genocide where the party cadres murdered several Sikhs during this time. Moreover, they (Congress) made a riot accused the chief minister of Madhya Pradesh.

They did a big injustice to the Sikh community and the people are still waiting for justice. After our party (BJP) came to power in this country, for the first time in 30 to 40 years something was done for those Sikh people who lost their family members during the riots.

Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has claimed that the time has come to remove your party from power - 'Modi Hatao'. The opposition parties are taking the same stand.

Those people (I do not want to name someone individually), the only work they have had from day 1 was to say 'Modi Hatao'. I have way too many works to do unlike them - such as to remove terrorism, corruption, poverty among others.

Rahul Gandhi has asked for forgiveness in the SC for saying that 'Chowkidar Chor Hai', but he is still saying such things in all his rallies!

The people believe in the SC and in the CAG system. I was a chief minister of a prosperous state and as a Prime Minister I have seen the country function for the last five years. I have left all these matters in the hand of the people, they will bring in justice.

It is being said that the EVMs are being 'managed' by the PM. What do you have to say about this?

When a child appears for an exam and is not able to write his answers properly, he thinks of excuses. These parties are doing the same thing. They have been only blaming Modi and the EVMs, and now they have started blaming the EC. They have accepted their defeat. It was through these EVMs that they had once come to power.

In Uttar Pradesh, the mahagathbandhan is getting stronger. Are you afraid of this alliance?

The BJP is getting support from people all over the country. The people understand the importance of a stable government, they understand that it is important to have a strong government that represents India in the international circle. This is not the case just in one state but across the country. This is why when on May 23 the results will be declared it will be Modi Sarkar once again.


