Suspension of 11 cops’ jail term ‘violated norms’

Chhota Rajan

Amit Shah

Despite being sentenced to life in the 2006 fake encounter of gangster Lakhanbhaiya, 11 convicts were freed by the state government in 2015 allegedly in contravention of several norms. Not only was the sessions judge based on whose opinion the government cleared their release not meant to handle the case, but the request for suspension of the prison term was also pushed by the jail superintendent, instead of the state government.These explosive revelations were made before the Bombay High Court on Friday.Ramnarayan Gupta alias Lakhanbhaiya, an alleged member of gangster's gang, was killed in a fake police encounter in November 2006 in Andheri. Twenty-two policemen were charged with his murder and after a trial, 21 were convicted and sentenced to a life term. Only one-encounter specialist Pradeep Sharma-was acquitted in July 2013. Two years later, the state government released 11 policemen based on an opinion by a sessions judge favouring suspension of their sentence. The release was stayed by the HC. Admitting the case for a detailed hearing in December 2015, the court directed the 11 convicts to surrender.During a hearing into this case on January 18, it came to light that the plea for the convicts' released was submitted by the then Thane jail superintendent, and not the state government, as has been provisioned in Section 432 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC). In his release order, the judge noted that the jail officer met him personally and "requested to give opinion as proposal is to be put to the appropriate Government on priority basis. (sic)"Besides, the CrPC mandates that either the same judge who had passed the conviction and sentence order can hear requests for an opinion on suspension of sentence, or another judge holding the same assignment can do so. The then sessions judge, MB Gosavi, who favoured the 11 policemen's term suspension, did not meet this criterion, said Advocate Yug Chaudhry-appearing for Ramprasad Gupta, brother of Lakhanbhaiya, who is appealing the release-in court.At that time, Gosavi was the special CBI judge hearing the Sohrabuddin Sheikh, Tulsiram Prajapati and Kauser Bi murder cases, who discharged various accused. Of these, BJP Presidentwas the first one to be discharged, within a month of Gosavi taking charge of the case.This revelation prompted Chaudhry to question the way the order suspending the sentence of certain convicts was passed, and to ask if the judge who expressed such an opinion had "respected the independence of the judiciary."At the hearing, there were more questions raised. When Chaudhry sought to bring the attention of Justices BP Dharmadhikari and Revati Mohite-Dere to Gosavi's order, it came to light that the report provided to Chaudhry by the government, as a reply-affidavit to Gupta's petition, was different from what was provided to the court. While the copy with the HC bench was error-free, the one with Chaudhry was riddled with many grammatical and typographical errors. This revelation gains significance as the error-free copy was dated October 5, 2015, while the error-ridden copy was of October 21, 2015. The reason given for the two differing copies was that the name of one convict who was to be released was left out from the first copy of the order.Chaudhry refused to comment about the developments when asked after the hearing.An appeal by the convicts against the judgment and an appeal by the state government as well as Gupta against Pradeep Sharma's acquittal is pending before the HC.
