Women ex-Maoists join war against reds as commandos in Chhattisgarh

RAIPUR: A few years ago they were the hunted, but today they are the hunters. A bunch of surrendered women Maoists and Salwa Judum victims, who after surrender would mostly be busy with "housework" in their camps, are blazing away with AK-47s in the frontlines of the war against Maoist insurgency.Taking their name from Chhattisgarh 's guardian deity, the "Danteshwari Ladake" (fighters) have already been bloodied in combat. They took part in the operation that killed two Maoists on Wednesday. Fighting shoulder to shoulder with men, this small action team has gunned down five Maoist commanders in a month, say police sources.In camouflage fatigues when fighting in the jungle or clad in saris - their guns cleverly concealed in the folds - while undercover, the Ladake are a potent force against the Maoists.The experiment is the brainchild of Dantewada SP Abhishek Pallava. He says he got the idea when he visited a camp for surrendered Maoists four months ago."While most Maoist men are trained and recruited in the district reserve guards, women sit back at home making rotis. This frustrates them as they had marched as equals with men in jungles and were now serving them, feeling less powerful," Pallava said. He then asked district SP Dineshwari Nand to form a "unified combat force of women commandos".Thirty women were selected and sent to the Kanker Jungle Warfare College - run by Brig B K Ponwar (retd), former commandant of the Army's elite jungle warfare school in Wairangte - for six weeks of intensive combat training in December, followed by in-house training till March. "They started going for short operations for field training and are now ready for big operations," Pallava said.The initiative has restored the self-esteem of the women, said Pallava. "When a Maoist couple surrenders after slogging together in forest, they look forward to continue working in sync. The Danteshwari Ladake is an inclusive group of men and women commandos who are well-versed in traversing forest terrain and close-quarter fighting in the jungles, and are habituated to surviving in the forest," Pallava said.This could encourage more women Maoists to surrender. Currently, the male-female ratio of surrendered rebels is 90:10. "Moreover, women commandos are perfect to blend in. Carrying weapons hidden in their saris, they can keep an eye on Maoists without arousing suspicion. They merge with crowds easily," said the SP.
