Anonymous letter helps bust major sex determination racket in Surat

SURAT: Officials of health department of the state government on receiving specific information about unauthorized sex determination and termination racket, raided a hospital run by homeopathic doctors on L H Road in Varachha area of the city on Thursday.The officials seized a sonography machine and later approached local court to register a complaint in the matter. As per new rules, the case is now registered in the court first and then investigation is carried out.Health department sources said an alert citizen had sent a letter to several senior government officials with exact details about the illegal activities being carried out at the hospital. The letter of the anonymous person gave registration numbers of 23 autorickshaws, whose drivers used to bring patients working as agents of the hospital. The letter writer has alleged that not only sex determination tests, but terminations of foetus were also being done illegally in the hospital.A team from health department along with a team of crime branch officials raided Jivan Jyot Hospital. Preliminary investigation by the health department officials revealed that the hospital was being run by Dr Sagar Patel and Dr Dinesh Patel, both homeopathic doctors. The health department officials have approached the court to register a complaint under Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse) Act.“They are not authorized to use sonography machine to conduct sex determination tests. It is a clear case of violation of the PNDT Act. We have seized one sonography machine,” said Ketan Nakum, district programme officer of the health department.The health department officials are yet to investigate since how long the racket has been going on. Police sources said a large number of patients from the city, South Gujarat and Maharashtra used to come to the clinic. Some hospitals were connected to Jivan Jyot Hospital through the autorickshaw drivers.“We had also received the letter and joined the raid by the health department officials. Its further process is being taken care of by the health officials,” city police commissioner Satish Sharma said.
