Tiger, Tiger Burning Slight

Tiger, Tiger Burning Slight The year has been a poor start for wildlife, but hope floats

| Published 19.01.19, 08:46 PM

New Year’s Day was quite eventful at Bengal Safari near Siliguri. Its leopard enclosure has four occupants and of the two males, Sachin and Sourav, the former decided to start 2019 with a dash of adventure. He bolted. The next few days witnessed a flurry of activity to get the prodigal home. More than a hundred forest personnel, wildlife squads, four trained elephants and vehicles joined the search operations along with drones, cages and cameras.

Advertisement

Their efforts were futile; finally, hunger pangs forced Sachin to return after a three-day wander! But animals in the wild, unlike the ones in safari parks, have to fend for themselves and the advent of a new year has been far from kind to felines elsewhere in the country. A tiger was found dead in Maharashtra’s Melghat reserve in Amravati district on January 5, taking the toll to four tiger deaths in six days. One male tiger’s body was found after 10 days, a tell-tale sign of poor patrolling. Two of the other males had fed on the same wild boar, a convenient prey in the wild, possibly poisoned. Pench Tiger Reserve, stretching across Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra, is just a couple of hours’ drive from Nagpur, which makes it a convenient destination. Its field director, Ravikiran Govekar, said they had found a semi-eaten carcass of a wild pig, indicating that recent killings may have been a case of revenge killing by villagers from within the sanctuary. “There are farmlands in the vicinity and revenge killing is not new here,” he said. Vendetta by humans is a fallout of encroachment in forests and it is commonplace for the insecure villagers to poison the bait and kill “predators”, leaving endangered species at the receiving end, like the tigress Avni (T1) in Maharashtra, who was believed to be a maneater and killed in November. Last month, a tiger mauled a fisherman to death in the Sunderbans in Bengal and would have met Avni’s fate if spotted.
