Brothers-in-law held for shooting at man near Chandni Chowk

A day after a 30-year-old man was shot at, Pune police have arrested three people. It has been found that the attackers were brothers of the victim’s wife. According to police, the girl’s family was unhappy with the marriage as she had decided to marry out of caste.The incident took place around 7.30 pm on Wednesday when Tushar Pisal, 30, was shot at. He sustained four bullet injuries but survived the attack. He was riding pillion with two of his friends, when attackers came from behind on a bike and shot five rounds at him. He was hit by four rounds. Immediately after the attack, Tushar was rushed to Sahyadri Hospital. His condition is said to be stable.After Hinjawadi police registered a case under the charge attempted murder and under Arms Act, several police teams started working on it. Pune crime branch got a breakthrough when they were able to find out that the attackers were none other than those related to Tushar’s wife Varsha.Bhanupratap Barge, assistant commissioner of police, Pune crime branch, told Mirror that havaldar Sunil Pawar from his team got a tip-off about the accused attempting to leave Pune and that they were going to meet at Sambhaji Garden on Jangali Maharaj Road.“We laid a trap and arrested the three accused. They have been handed over to officers at Hinjawadi police station,” said Barge.The trio was identified as Akash Lahu Taware, 22, Sagar Lahu Taware, 24, and Sagar Ramchandra Palve, 21. The main accused Raju Taware is still absconding. While Akash and Sagar Taware are Varsha’s brothers, Raju is her cousin. Palve is their friend, who accompanied them during the attack.According to police, Tushar and Varsha used to study together in SBB alias Appasaheb Jedhe Arts, Commerce and Science College. A year ago they got married, which was not accepted by Varsha’s family.Tushar, while recuperating from his bullet injuries, told cops on Wednesday that this was not the first time that he had been attacked. He said that there was a similar attack on him days after his marriage a year ago. He, however, did not report it back then as he did not suffer any injuries.
