The Grim Reapers

The Grim Reapers A book by Revati Laul on the 2002 Gujarat horrors puts out some hate stories

| Published 19.01.19, 08:55 PM

The Karni Bharni paintings from 18th and 19th century Jain manuscripts illustrate hell with its mindboggling variety of sufferings. Karni in Hindi means deed and bharni would translate as returns. The paintings depict stakes driven through human bodies; men with shikhas drowning in what looks like a small waterbody with eddies; dogs chasing men, feeding on their flesh. Journalist-turned-author Revati Laul used a couple of these for the online crowdfunding campaign for the recently published The Anatomy of Hate — her book on the 2002 Gujarat mayhem. Contrary to what Laul’s “invisible” detractors might have imagined, this book is a telling of the riots from the point of view of the perpetrators. The three main characters, Suresh Jadeja, Dungar and Pranav, represent the Rioter, the Leader and the Voyeur, respectively.

Advertisement

But why lend the haters voice? Laul, who is back in Delhi after three years of being based in Ahmedabad, makes an impassioned case for the liberal reaching out to the illiberal. “The Sangh Parivar,” she argues, “draws its power from the collective guilt of the haters, whom they assuage, saying, ‘We understand what you felt then, what you feel now’.” All the while a large section of Indians, the so-called liberal section, continues to be in shock about the riots, even 16 years after it all happened. Laul tells The Telegraph, “The way forward is to allow the mob to articulate its guilt and uncertainties. The book and the [confessionary] process it involved create that space. It is almost a Gandhian process.” For all the demonic crimes it carefully indexes and describes, The Anatomy of Hate has a flowing, easy non-fiction narrative. It makes it difficult to remember the dogged research that has gone into it. The book has been in the making these 14 years. The research, Laul says, entailed poring over gazettes, news reports, census figures, itinerant travels to each of the 18 districts of Gujarat that was acutely affected by the violence and meeting the accused from these places. There were 100 plus interviews, background checks, rejections, selections and eight drafts. Laul does not claim her protagonist trio to be representative of the mob. She repeatedly says that these were the three stories she had intimate access to. They contain the kind of intimate detailing of hatred and vitriol she knows might unsettle but also provide a different way of seeing. She met Pranav by accident, at a harmony show, soon after the riots. Upper caste, educated, English-speaking, he used to watch his friends loot shops under the pretext of religious angst. What about Suresh and Dungar, did she seek them out too? Suresh had been part of the crazed mob at Naroda Patiya, where 97 Muslims were killed on February 28, 2002. Laul, who was looking for someone through whom she could tell the Naroda story, had read media reports about him. She was curious about the matter-of-fact references to the Muslim wife of this man who had ripped open a pregnant Muslim woman and hoisted triumphantly the foetus. Laul says, “I was bewildered. No one had thought of asking her what it felt like to be married to such a man.” While Pranav agreed to tell his story 10 years after their first meeting, Laul got most of Suresh’s story from his wife Farzana, and also the people of Chharanagar and Naroda Patiya he grew up with. He was in jail post riots but used his parole time to abuse and violate her till she was nearly broken. Did Laul interview Suresh too?
