Pakistan urges India to de-escalate border tension, India says act against terror first

Pakistan has violated ceasefire around 982 times this year till May. (Photo:File)

Pakistan has urged India to de-escalate border tension between security forces of the two countries.

Pakistan requested a military de-escalation along the Line of Control (LoC) through a message sent via diplomatic channels, government sources have told India Today.

The request of de-escalation by Pakistan has come in the wake of increased border skirmishes after the February terror attack in Pulwama that killed over 45 CRPF personnel. The communication for "de-escalation" was sent in mid-April, sources said.

India, meanwhile, remains firm on its stand that de-escalation will happen only when Pakistan takes strong measures to stop terror activities from its soil.

Pakistan to continue with requests after it faced damages: Army

As per a review by the Army in the aftermath of Pulwama attack and airstrikes by the Indian Air Force, based on recent activities on the Pakistani side, it was assessed that Islamabad would put in efforts to ensure skirmishes are controlled.

"Pakistan will continue with proposals of de-escalation both through military and diplomatic channels," the assessment said.

Meanwhile, the report also acknowledged that Pakistan took steps to close terror infrastructure across the LoC, but added that the real situation would be clear once the snow melts in the higher reaches. "Pakistan is forced to maintain a high level of alertness and exercise restraint on LoC," the assessment report said.

Over 900 ceasefire violations in 2019

Frequent exchange of heavy gunfire, including artillery, has taken place along the border in the last few months. In 2019, 982 ceasefire violations have taken place. May, however, has been peaceful with only nine ceasefire violations reported till now.

In January, there were 203 ceasefire violations, 215 in February, 267 in March and 234 in April.

The report added that there were no infiltration attempts since the Balakot airstrike on February 26. Even in April, which sees an increase in infiltration attempts with the summer setting in, no attempts of infiltration from across the border were made.

Post Pulwama, 31 terrorists belonging to the Jaish-e-Mohammed have been gunned down by security forces in Kashmir. In 2019, a total of 75 terrorists have been killed in Kashmir till now.

In 2018, 209 fresh recruits joined different terror outfits. This year, however, the number is restricted to 17.

READ | Pakistan summons Indian envoy over ceasefire violations

WATCH | IAF shoots down Pakistan's F-16 jet: What should India do next?
