Cyclone Fani: 'No damage to EVM strongrooms'

top cop DGP Rajendra Prasad Sharma shares his experiences with TOI's Ashok Pradhan

What was police's role in tackling the disaster?

What about police's duty after the cyclone?

There have been many incidents of people resorting to protests after delay in getting relief. How are you handling them?

Are the strong-rooms housing the EVMs intact?

How are you managing the security of the strong-rooms without electricity? Are the CCTV cameras working?

Amid tackling a cyclone and guarding EVMs, how did you manage an encounter in which five Maoists were killed?

From the time it was forecast that Fani may make landfall in Odisha, the government had decided to ensure zero casualty. We worked shoulder-to-shoulder with the civil administration to move the people from the predicted path of the cyclone. It was very difficult in some areas because they were reluctant to leave their homes. Our role was to persuade them to do so. Our men and women helped carry the elderly, the infirm and children to safety. Once they were moved to cyclone shelters, we provided them security there.After the cyclone struck, we played a role in moving the injured to hospitals. We were in the community and the people's first point of contact with the government. We helped clear important roads, besides ensuring that communication lines were kept opened. The Reserve Police Line, where 250 families of police personnel live, was badly damaged but all the policemen reported to duty. We started a common kitchen for the affected families. Realising that others in the affected areas also needed cooked food, we opened four centres - Karuna camps - in Puri where cooked food is being served to the people. Fifteen more such centres will be opened this week at police stations. Police personnel from the unaffected districts have volunteered to help run the centres.We cannot stop the people with grievances from resorting to democratic protests. On Sunday, two days after the cyclone made landfall, there were instances of people blocking roads between Puri and Bhubaneswar. We reached out to them and convinced them to end their agitation. Only the protest at Malatipatpur lasted for hours but the others were lifted within 30 minutes. There have been no major protests since then. Police parties are accompanying relief trucks to prevent any incident.Thankfully, there has been no damage to the strongrooms. Only the boundary wall of a strong-room in Puri has collapsed. We have increased security there. During the cyclone, security personnel were guarding the strong-rooms while also ensuring their own safety.Security is fool proof. The CCTV cameras are being run by diesel generators. The central armed police forces make up the inner ring of security. In Puri, the BSF makes up the inner layer. Odisha Police is providing peripheral security.After rebels killed a worker on election duty in Kandhamal, we had intensified surveillance. We had specific intelligence about a group of Maoist cadres having food at a place. We formed five teams, four of Special Operation Group personnel and another of district voluntary force. When such an operation is planned, we wait till night before taking action. On Wednesday, we took a calculated risk and reached the spot during the day, within four hours of receiving the inputs. The rebels were caught unawares but they reacted by firing at our personnel. In the exchange, a rebel was killed at one spot and four others were killed while trying to escape.
