Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt are a happy couple as they return post Brahmastra's London schedule - see photos

Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt

Bollywood actors Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt, who are undoubtedly one of the most adored couples in the tinsel town, returned to Mumbai earlier today. The duo was in London shooting for their upcoming film Brahmastra. It was reported that Ranbir and Alia also sneaked out some time for a romantic getaway to Lake Como during their trip. Recently, the actors were snapped at the airport.

During their spotting, Ranbir was seen donning a white t-shirt, blue denim and an orange and blue jacket that he teamed up with a pair of white sneakers and a black cap. Alia, on the other hand, looked stunning in a peach polka dot satin top and pants of the same colour with a light-hued long shrug.

The stunner accessorised her outfit with peach sneakers, white-rimmed sunnies and a Saint Laurent Rive Gauche tote bag which comes with a price tag of $1,455 (approximately Rs 1 Lakh). Alia kept her long locks open and minimal make-up made her look even more radiant. Check out the duo's latest photos and videos below.

Meanwhile, Alia and Ranbir have been hogging the limelight ever since they made their relationship public last year. The Raazi star even celebrated the New Year's Eve with the Kapoor family. Alia also made headlines when at the Filmfare awards she gave a shout-out to Ranbir in her acceptance speech. She said, "Tonight’s all about love there my special one, I love you."

The power couple's wedding rumours have also been going around the tinsel town for a while now. While the fans are eagerly waiting for the duo to tie the knot, Alia had earlier said, "There's no roka happening for me."

On the work front, Alia and Ranbir's upcoming film, Brahmastra is being directed by Ayan Mukerji and produced by Karan Johar's Dharma Productions. The fantasy film also features Amitabh Bachchan, Mouni Roy and Akkineni Nagarjuna in vital roles. It will hit the screens in Summer 2020.

Stay tuned to this space for more updates!
