Salman Khan to welcome new member in family; Bharat star to become father via surrogacy?

Salman Khan, the most eligible bachelor of Bollywood, has often been asked about his marriage plans. And now, looks like the superstar is all set to welcome a new member in his family.

According to a Times of India report, Salman is not getting married but is planning to go the Shah Rukh Khan and Karan Johar way by becoming a father through surrogacy.

"Since Salman Khan is yet not ready for marriage, our sources have told us that the actor is opting for surrogacy instead. Many stars from Bollywood like Shah Rukh Khan, Aamir Khan, Karan Johar, Ekta Kapoor have opted for surrogacy in recent times. And now, Salman Khan is also ready to follow this route since he has no plans to get married. The actor has always shared a close bonding with his nieces and nephews, and finally he is ready to welcome his own kid to the Khan family through surrogacy," the report stated.

It is a known fact that Salman is fond of children. In fact, the Dabangg actor had gone on records in the past saying that if he ever decides to marry, it will be for kids only.

If the report turns out to be true, then Salman will join the likes of Shah Rukh Khan, Karan Johar, Aamir Khan, Ekta Kapoor, Tusshar Kapoor and other Bollywood celebs, who had their babies via surrogacy.

Earlier in 2017 in an interview to Filmfare, when asked about his marriage plans, Salman had said, "No I don't feel that time is running out... but I am sure when I am 70 and my child is about 20, then I'd feel it. The only reasons I'd want to have a child right now or in the near future, say in two or three years, is because I'd want mom and dad to see my child."

On the work front, Salman will next be seen in Bharat, which also features Katrina Kaif as the female lead. The Ali Abbas Zafar directorial is slated for an Eid release (June 5). The actor has also started shooting for the third instalment in the Dabangg franchise, which is going to hit the theatres on December 20.
