Delhi: Robbers attack 101-year-old at his Mayur Vihar residence

The thieves allegedly broke the front door of the house and threatened the elderly couple (representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: In a shocking incident reported from East Delhi, four thieves allegedly attacked and robbed the house of an elderly couple who are the residents of Mayur Vihar Phase 1. The incident took place on Thursday when the old couple, Vishin, a-101-year-old man and his wife Poonam Dhanrajani (96) were allegedly attacked when they were asleep.

It was reported that the thieves allegedly broke the front door of their house and attack Vishin with an iron rod.A case has been filed under IPC sections 394 (voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery), 397 (robbery with attempt to cause hurt), 458 (house-breaking by night after preparation for hurt) and 380 (committing theft in the house) at Mayur Vihar police station.

As per reports in the Indian Express, the couple lives alone while their two sons live in the US. Jasmeet Singh, DCP of East Delhi, said that they recieved the call around 2:00 am. An investigation has been started and CCTV footages are being scanned to identify the accused.

He further mentioned that the couple was not able to tell that what was stolen from the house. However, the elderly wife claimed that the thief took the gold necklace which she was wearing.

Vishin said that the accused vandalised the house and even threatened to take his eyes out if he refused to tell where the money was. The men attacked Vishin with an iron rod when he went to the hallway to check on the noise.

Poonam, who has been bedridden for a few years, alleged the men entered the bedroom and demanded money and jewellery from her. When she told them that they are retired people, the accused then threatened the old lady with a knife and took away the gold necklace which she was wearing.

Meanwhile, the robbers locked the main door of the house when they left, hence Vishin screamed through the window and managed to call a relative. The neighbours then took the old man to Jeevan Anmol Hospital and later he was transferred to Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital, where he is undergoing treatment.

No arrest has been made in the case and an investigation is underway.
