Mallika Sherawat’s biggest controversies over the years

Mumbai: Actress Mallika Sherawat is no stranger to controversy. The extremely ‘bold’ actress has raised many eyebrows over the years either through her sultry dance numbers or through her comments off the cameras.

Being away from the Hindi film industry for quite some time, Sherawat will reportedly try her luck in the web series business and is expected to pair with Tusshar Kapoor in a horror comedy soon.

Meanwhile, let’s take a look at some of her controversies over the years.

Condom controversy

Sherawat was the lead actress in the film ‘ Khwahish’ (2003) who buys condom for Hero in a scene. One scene in the movie shows her buying condoms for the lead actor. This created uproar among movie watchers but Mallika stood her ground saying that India’s population would not be so high if girls had the same mindset as her character in the film.

Drape in tricolor

In the film Dirty Politics (2015) Mallika set the internet on fire by draping India’s national flag over her bare body. A case was registered again her for ‘disrespecting the tri-colour’ which was later dropped.

Intimate scenes controversy

In the same film, Dirty Politics (2015), which is based on politics in Rajasthan, Mallika shot a lot of intimate scenes with her co-star, the much older Om Puri. A lot of fans found this ‘very distatesful’.

Offensive comment on India

Mallika incurred the wrath of a lot of Indians for her comments at the Cannes Film Festival. The actress claimed that Indian people could not see women progressing in their respective careers. She said that Indians harboured a very conservative mindset and that she was abused for speaking up for women. She also added that this was the reason why she lived half her days away from the country.

Pornographic dance video

In 2006, Mallika courted controversy yet again for dancing without an underwear at a New Year’s Eve party at a five star hotel in Mumbai. This caused widespread condemnation which was followed by a court order.

PNN/Agencies
