Another Week of Global Warming News, April 6, 2014

It is evident that the Fukushima disaster is going to persist for some time. TEPCO says 6 to 9 months. The previous Japanese Prime Minister, Naoto Kan, said decades. Now the Japanese government is talking about 30 years. [Whoops, that has now been updated to 40 years.] And the IAEA is now saying 40 years too. [Now some people are talking about a century or more. Sealing it in concrete for 500 years.] We'll see. At any rate this situation is not going to be resolved any time soon and deserves its own section. Meanwhile... It is very difficult to know for sure what is really going on at Fukushima. Between the company [TEPCO], the Japanese government, the Japanese regulator [NISA], the international monitor [IAEA], as well as independent analysts and commentators, there is a confusing mish-mash of information. One has to evaluate both the content and the source of propagated information. How knowledgeable are they [about nuclear power and about Japan]? Do they have an agenda? Are they pro-nuclear or anti-nuclear? Do they want to write a good news story? Do they want to write a bad news story? Where do they rate on a scale of sensationalism? Where do they rate on a scale of play-it-down-ness? One fundamental question I would like to see answered: If the reactors are in meltdown, how can they be in cold shutdown?

Jeez! It's getting hard to keep all the spills and leaks straight. You need a map. Let's see...:

Note: You may notice my denialist coverage flagging. I am finding it increasingly difficult to give any attention to these people.

So why is nothing getting done?

As for climate miscellanea:

And here are a couple of sites you may find interesting and/or useful:

Low Key Plug

My first novel _Water_ was published in May 2007. An Introduction is available.

My most recent novel _The Bottleneck Years_ is being serialized online atmy siteand on AFTIC at Table of Contents

If you want further information, see A Gentle Introduction. If you want a copy, see The Deal.

An overview of my writing is available here.

A Simple Plea

Webmasters, web coders and content providers have mercy on your low bandwidth brethren. Because I am on dial-up, I am a text surfer -- no images, no javascript and no flash. When you post a graphic, will you please use the alt text field ... and when you embed a youtube/vimeo/flash video, please add some minimal description. Thank you.

<regards>

-het

P.S. Recent postings can be found in the week archive and the ancient postings can be accessed here, which should open to this.

I notice moyhu has set up a monster index to old AWoGWN on AFTIC.

"I'd put my money on the sun and solar energy. What a source of power! I hope we don't have to wait until oil and coal run out before we tackle that." -Thomas Edison

Last modified April 6, 2014
