Is this why PM Modi is referring to Rajiv Gandhi to target Rahul, Congress?

Over the past one week, Prime Minister Narendra Modi has launched frontal attack on the Congress by referring to allegations against former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, the late father Rahul Gandhi.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s attack on Rajiv Gandhi, the former prime minister, has intensified over the past one week as the 39-day national exercise heads to its last lap. A rattled Congress approached the Election Commission hoping the poll body would censure PM Modi for his remarks, which the opposition party thinks were uncharitable.

A clean chit came from the Election Commission and then PM Modi rubbed it in through the week in his election rallies. The stinging remarks on Rajiv Gandhi to assail the Congress seem to be part of the BJP’s counter-offensive strategy in this Lok Sabha election, which, many observers say, is being fought on the personality of PM Modi.

Response to Rahul Gandhi’s Rafale charge

Congress president Rahul Gandhi has relentlessly targeted PM Modi over the Rafale jet deal with France. Rahul Gandhi claimed malfeasance in the Rafale deal and accused PM Modi of personal involvement in the alleged irregularities.

Rahul Gandhi built his campaign against PM Modi on chowkidar chor hai (watchman is a thief) slogan in his public rallies and social media. Incidentally, a similar slogan had been used to target Rajiv Gandhi in the wake of Bofors pay-off scandal during his tenure as prime minister.

Recently, Rahul Gandhi said in an interview to India Today why he targeted PM Modi over corruption. Everyone told me Mr Narendra Modi can’t be defeated. I said, Yeah, you really think so?’ I asked them, 'Tell me what Mr Narendra Modi’s strength is.’ They said, 'His strength is his [incorruptible] image.’ I said, 'Okay, I’m going to rip that strength to pieces. I’m going to take it and shred it.’ And I’ve done it, he said.

PM Modi countered Rahul Gandhi at an election rally in Uttar Pradesh’s Pratapgarh saying, By tarnishing my image and by making me small, these people want to make an unstable and a weak government in the country.

It is in this rally that PM Modi launched frontal attack on Rajiv Gandhi. Your father was termed Mr Clean by his courtiers, but his life ended as Bhrashtachari No. 1 [Corrupt No. 1], said PM Modi taking on Rahul Gandhi directly.

By hurling abuses, you cannot dissolve the 50-long year of Modi's tapasya [struggle] in dust, he said boosting his claim to be a non-corruptible politician.

Whose sena is it?

Pulwama terror attack and the subsequent Balakot air strike dominated the early phases of the Lok Sabha election. At one of the election rallies, BJP’s star campaigner Yogi Adityanath, the Uttar Pradesh chief minister referred to Modi ki sena (the army of Modi) to describe the air strike by the Indian Air Force at a terror training centre in Pakistan’s Balakot.

The Congress took the matter to the Election Commission, which cautioned Yogi Adityanath over the matter. The Congress leaders ran a campaign alleging that PM Modi was trying to destroy the neutrality of the armed forces and attempting to patronise them.

What appeared as an attempt to corner the Congress, PM Modi used a 31-year-old news report to allege that Rajiv Gandhi used INS Viraat, the naval warship as personal taxi while he was holidaying on 1988 New Year at an uninhabited island of Lakshadweep.

Former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in Lakshadweep on a holiday that PM Modi recently referred to in a bid to attack the Congress. (File photo: India Today)

PM Modi said, Ever imagined that a premier warship of the Indian armed forces could be used as a taxi for a personal holiday? One dynasty did it.

The news report said that besides the Gandhi family, close friends and relatives of Sonia Gandhi, the UPA chairperson and Rahul Gandhi’s mother, were part of the Rajiv Gandhi party. This appeared as an attempt by PM Modi to discredit Rahul Gandhi’s claim of doing honest politics with the projection that the Congress president grew up believing in having entitlement to public and national assets.

Raising the ghost of 1984

In his election rallies and press interactions, Rahul Gandhi has said many times that PM Modi harbours hatred in his heart and works to create a wedge between communities. This sustained campaign by Rahul Gandhi is aimed at tearing apart PM Modi’s sabka saath, sabka vikas (collective efforts, inclusive growth) slogan of governance.

The BJP and PM Modi shot a blast from the past by raising 1984 anti-Sikh riots in election speeches and social media campaigns. Around 3,000 people, most of them Sikhs, were killed in 1984 riots that broke out in the aftermath of the assassination of then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi. Her son, Rajiv Gandhi became the next prime minister.

In one of his public speeches, Rajiv Gandhi said, When a big tree falls, the ground shakes a bit. PM Modi and the BJP have used this remark repeatedly to accuse Rajiv Gandhi of instigating the anti-Sikh riots.

On the campaign trail in West Bengal on Thursday, PM Modi, in an impromptu interview to India Today TV, referred to 1984 anti-Sikh riots and alleged that Rajiv Gandhi emboldened the rioters.

He said the Congress, under Rahul Gandhi, has made a person, who is facing charges in this case the chief minister of Madhya Pradesh. Kamal Nath was made the chief minister after the Congress defeated the BJP in 2018 assembly election in the state.

On Friday -- the last day of campaign for sixth phase of the Lok Sabha polls for 59 seats across seven states, the BJP put out a video package on social media showing the clippings of Rajiv Gandhi’s big tree remark and Congress leaders made accused in the anti-Sikh riot cases.

Protesters demanding punishment for those involved in 1984 anti-Sikh riots. The issue has been an emotive poll plank in Delhi and Punjab in the last 35 years.

Eyes on Delhi, Punjab vote

The timing of the release of video is tactical. Delhi and Punjab, where Sikh voters are significant, are scheduled to vote in the next two phases of the Lok Sabha polls. The BJP had won all the seven seats in Delhi in 2014 but the Aam Aadmi Party has emerged as big challenger since then in the national capital, which was worst affected during the anti-Sikh riots. Voting will take place in Delhi on Sunday.

In Punjab, election to all 13 Lok Sabha constituencies will take place in the final phase of the Lok Sabha polls on May 19. The BJP and its ally Shiromani Akali Dal had won six Lok Sabha seats in 2014. The Congress had won three and debutant Aam Aadmi Party four.

With the BJP facing a tough challenge from the grand-alliance of the Samajwadi Party, the Bahujan Samaj Party and the Rashtriya Lok Dal, the prospect of repeating its 2014 performance looks slim.

The BJP with its ally had won 73 of 80 Lok Sabha seats in Uttar Pradesh in 2014. The party needs to make up for the loss it might suffer in a big state like Uttar Pradesh from smaller states. Delhi and Punjab could help the BJP in maintaining its lead in 2019 Lok Sabha election.
