Bhupesh Baghel says Centre stalling probe into Jeeram Ghati massacre

Bhupesh Baghel was in Bhopal to campaign for Digvijaya Singh who is contesting as the Congress candidate from the city. (Photo: Twitter/@INCChhattisgarh)

Chhattisgarh Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel ruled out talks with Maoists in the state unless they accepted allegiance to the Constitution of India. He also said that laying down arms was a precursor to talks.

Bhupesh Baghel said contrary to claims by the previous government that the Maoist movement had weakened under them, the movement had in fact spread. He said BJP MLA from Dantewada Bhima Mandavi's killing was a result of this weakening control by the state.

Describing the Jeeram Ghati incident of May 2013 in Chhattisgarh as a conspiracy, where senior Congress leaders Mahendra Karma, VC Shukla and Nand Kumar Patel were among 27 people killed by Maoists, Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel said agencies under the union government were not cooperating with the state government to unearth the truth.

"I have constituted a Special Investigation Team because the NIA has been unable to make any headway in the case but the NIA has refused to share details with the state government," Baghel said. He made the sensational claim that the killing of former Chhattisgarh Home Minister Nand Kumar Patel and his son Dinesh was in fact a supari (contract) killing.

He said it was imeprative that the SIT got to the bottom of the conspiracy.

Bhupesh Baghel was in Bhopal on his second trip in the last one week to campaign for his political guru Digvijaya Singh who is contesting as the Congress candidate from the city.

"Digvijaya Singh is a keen strategist and his victories, be it in the 1993 assembly elections or his completion of the Narmada Parikrama, are a result of his tenacity. There is no substitute for hard work, which he is putting in and will win," Baghel said.

Baghel claimed that the BJP will not form the government at the Centre because the people of the country can see through the claims made by it in every election.

He said the 2019 and 2014 elections were very different from each other and stuck to his claim that the Congress will win all 11 Lok Sabha seats in the state.
