Around temple of Lord of Universe, tarpaulins & generators help to get by

All roads in this coastal town of Odisha lead to the Jagannath temple , the abode of the powerful trinity of Jagannath, Balabhadra and Subhadra, who, according to local lore, prevent the city and its residents from any catastrophe. But not so this time, as cyclone Fani reached the doors of the temple amid murmurs in the city that the deity was upset with the natives.Whatever the cause, the cyclone made landfall at Puri, causing the deaths of 30 people in the city alone, as per the records of the district headquarters hospital. “We conducted 30 post-mortems and treated over 300 injured after the cyclone. It’s been a week since the power cables went down. The hospital is being run on diesel generators. For the first two days, the hospital was being run on small gensets. Later, we asked for industrial generators as we were flooded with calls and requests. The situation has improved now, but water supply has been poor,” chief medical superintendent BK Mishra told ET.The scene at the medical ward was no different from any government-run hospital. Patients were forced to share beds, but they did not complain as they felt the worst was over. “Everyone admitted here got injured during the cyclone. My husband was brought here on the first day and it’s been a week now. The doctors said that he will have to stay at the hospital for a few more days. The first two days were tough on everyone, but it has improved now. This place (hospital ward) at least has power supply,” said Tarini Jali, who has been staying at the hospital with her 10-year-old son and injured husband. Her husband Surya is an autoricksaw driver who was injured when strong winds toppled his vehicle.Besides providing treatment at the hospital, the Puri administration has deployed up to 32 medical teams and opened as many medical relief centres.“For treatment of cattle, 45 veterinary teams have been deployed and we have distributed 2,799.82 quintals of chivda, 468 quintals of jaggery and 30,280 polythene sheets till Thursday,” an official from the state administration told ET.Though they have faced hardships since cyclone Fani walloped the town, the locals are hopeful the situation will improve gradually, and they will be able to watch the counting of votes cast in the general elections on May 23. Puri was among the six Lok Sabha constituencies in Odisha that went to the polls on April 23. The BJP’s Sambit Patra contested against sitting MP Pinaki Misra of the BJD. While Mishra, a Supreme Court advocate has been a three-time MP from Puri, Patra’s entry was backed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi Puri has about 1.4 million voters – 742,939 males and 661,592 females. It has an estimated Scheduled Caste population of 15.57% and a Scheduled Tribe population of 1.48%. With their fates sealed, the two candidates have not been very visible in the wake of the cyclone, according to locals. Anant Kumar, the owner of a shop opposite the Puri temple, said, “The option for both BJP and BJD in Puri is open. Majority of us see Modi (BJP) for Delhi and Naveen (BJD) for Bhubaneshwar. The local BJD MLA visits us, but overall, the business is bad and essentials like vegetables and milk are in short supply and prices are soaring.”Kumar also complained that the administration supplied chivda and jaggery only for the first few days. The state government had ordered immediate distribution of 50 kg of rice, Rs 2,000 in cash and a tarpaulin to all those affected. “Yesterday, over 5,000 men were deployed to clean the city,” he said. Shops open only during daylight hours because there is no electricity supply. “If you come to this city after sunset, it’s darkness everywhere. We have people coming from Andhra Pradesh to help us restore the city,” he said. Puri authorities said 64 roads of the 560 affected had been cleared as of Thursday.Every May, the town witnesses the Chandan Yatra, a religious procession that is celebrated with fanfare and enthusiasm. This year, the yatra started on May 7 and will end on May 25, but the fervour is missing. “The footfall has come down 1/10. There is no power and every time we need to recharge our walkie-talkies, we have to go to police headquarters where generators have been installed,” said assistant commissioner of police Kaushik Naik, who heads the temple security. “Police also faces public ire every day as the situation has not improved even after a week. There have been daily protests in front of the Collector’s office. Angry residents block the roads to protest the delay in return to normalcy. We have to deal with everything.”Naik has been posted with the temple security for the past four years and said he had never witnessed this kind of a crisis. Ashish Kumar, 25, who works in Puri, said he cannot believe that this is the same city in which he has lived for so many years. “My family has been staying in Puri for the last 50 years. I was born here but even my father says he has not witnessed anything of this magnitude since the time he began staying in Puri. The relief work is slow and restoration is taking time. Those who could afford it left the city before the storm came. Hotels, lodges, everything is down and we have no support from the administration for daily chores,” Kumar complained. Still, Prabhat Singh, who plies his rickshaw near the Puri temple, thinks the situation is improving. Singh said he availed of a tarpaulin to cover the damaged portion of his house. “It has been tough here, but the situation is gradually improving,” Singh said.According to State Emergency Response Commission (SERC), Puri has suffered extensive damage, with the worst-hit being kutcha houses. Stalls of temporary street vendors have been completely damaged. The special circuit house, office and residence of the SP and the Collector have been badly damaged, like many other buildings, according to SERC. Officials estimate that more than 5,200 primary school buildings, over 500 secondary school buildings and close to 180 higher education institutes were damaged due to the cyclone.Cyclone fury damaged the entire summer crop, orchards and plantations on a large scale. The state administration claimed to have evacuated 24,889 tourists safely from Puri, Ganjam, Cuttack and Balasore districts.
