Man killed for refusing to Rs 10 for parking

Man attempts to immolate self at Vidhana Soudha



Depressed man jumps to death

Bengaluru

The Bharathi Nagar police have arrested two people for murdering a 36-year-old man after a fight over paying Rs. 10 for two-wheeler parking on Thursday night. The police have arrested the parking ticket collector Selvaraj (50) and another theatre staff Shekhar (20) for the murder. The deceased, Bharanidharn, a resident of Austin Town and was working at a tiles shop. Bharanidharan had parked his bike in a parking lot near Lavanya theatre around 4:30 pm. The accused, Selvan asked him to pay Rs. 10 for parking space to which he refused and a fight broke out between the two. During the fight, the two pushed him against the wall and Bharanidhar collapsed. They rushed him to the nearby hospital where he was declared dead on arrival.*****Tension prevailed at Vidhana Soudha premises on Friday morning after a three member family protesting in front of the building threatened to immolate themselves. Ashwatha Reddy a farmer from Ragehalli and his wife Nafarathana and their son Sanjay Reddy, a ninth standard student, arrived at the government building complex with two litre of diesel and placards demanding justice in connection with a 10-year-old case against a senior retired official from forest department. The security personnel at the Soudha intervened and took them into custody before they did anything.According to VIdhana Soudha police, Reddy was protesting with his family against a former Assistant Conservator of Forest who had ordered for a major tree cutting operation near Bannerghatta without proper sanction, over 10 years back. Ashwatha Reddy has claimed that he along with four others were asked to axe the trees by this forest official during which there was an accident that left Ashwatha and his co-workers injured. Ashwatha has alleged that one of his co-workers, Hariprasad succumbed to his injuries a couple of days after. Police sources also said that none of them were awarded any compensation.Ashwatha Reddy was protesting at Vidhana Soudha demanding compensation for himself and his co-workers. Vidhana Soudha police have booked a case of suicide attempt against Reddy and his family on Friday.*****A 28-year-old man jumped to his death from a flyover on the Peenya-Tumakuru Highway on Friday morning. The deceased was identified as Narasimha Murthy, originally from Andhra Pradesh, who was working here at a lathe workshop. He was reportedly to be in a state of depression for a few weeks. Police said that he was a resident of Kamakshipalaya and borrowed some money from his friends, claiming that his son had passed away. He had also asked his supervisor at the lathe unit to grant him three day leave to go and visit his relatives in Andhra Pradesh.However later police traced his sister who was also residing in the city and she told them that Murthy's child was alive and her brother was depressed due to some financial issues. Police are still ascertaining the exact reason that forced Murthy to end his life. According to Peenya police, Murthy jumped from the flyover at around 7:30 am. Some pedestrians took him to the hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. Police also said that Murthy was married five years back and was living with his wife and two children at a rented facility in Kamakshipalaya."Initial investigation indicate that he did not have any family issues and had a good relation with wife and children. But his family has said that he seemed to be distressed during the last few days. Further investigations are on," said N Shashi Kumar, deputy Commissioner of Police(North).Peenya police have registered a case in connection with the incident.
