India gets its first Apache Guardian attack helicopter: Know why it's a game changer

AH-64E Apache Guardian attack helicopter

The AH-64E Apache Guardian is said to be one of the most lethal attack helicopters and the Indian Air Force has received its first one at the chopper production facility in Arizona, US.

Air Marshal AS Butola accepted the first Apache on May 10 in presence of US government representatives. According to reports aircrew and ground crew who will lead the Apache fleet in IAF have already undergone training at the training facilities at US Army base Fort Rucker, Alabama.

So far over 2100 choppers have been produced worldwide and India has received the latest Block III configuration that the US got in 2011. India has signed a deal for 22 of the Apache Guardian choppers with the US.

Indian Air Force receives its first Apache Guardian attack helicopter at its production facility in Arizona, in the US. India has signed a contract with the US, for 22 of these choppers. pic.twitter.com/YjJmVcpqqk — ANI (@ANI) May 11, 2019

As per defence experts, Apache is designed for all kinds of missions - including the stealth ones. It's equipped with infrared systems for bad weather, operable in day-night and loaded with Hellfire missiles, in addition to its arsenal of 70 mm rockets and an automatic cannon.

India currently operates Russian Mi 35 attack helicopter but the chopper was specifically designed to carry troops into enemy territories whereas Apache is a dedicated attack chopper.

The Apache India is getting has been customised to suit IAF's future requirements and will have significant capability in the mountainous terrain. It has the ability to transmit and receive the battlefield picture to and from the weapon systems through data networking.

Earlier in March, India inducted first four of the fifteen US made CH-47F (I) Chinook helicopters. These are advanced multi-mission heavy-lift helicopter that will give a boost the capabilities of the Airforce primarily in the mountainous operations or where the terrains are difficult to negotiate.

Defence deals with the US in the recent times have concluded with sales of C-17 transport aircraft, 155 mm light-weight towed howitzers, UGM-84L Harpoon missiles, support for C-130J Super Hercules aircraft to India.


