Ganja trade busted in Hyderabad: Two persons including woman kingpin held

Ganja trade busted in Hyderabad: Two persons including woman kingpin held

The police confiscated a total of 13 kilograms of the banned contraband.

news Crime

One woman ganja kingpin, and another new entrant into the ganja trade in a related case, were arrested by the excise enforcement team of the Hyderabad police on Friday. The police confiscated a total of 13 kilograms of the banned contraband.

Sayed Saleem, a resident of BK Guda at SR Nagar, entered into the ganja trade after incurring huge losses in the transportation business. He was recently in jail for a domestic violence case against his wife. It was during his time at Chanchalguda central jail that he befriended Sunil Singh, a resident of Gangabowli, and Durgaprasad from Visakhapatnam, both of who were in jail for illegal ganja trade.

After being released from jail, Sayed entered the ganja trade along with his jail mates. The gang would source ganja from Chintapally, Vizag for Rs 1500 to Rs 2000 per kilogram and resell it for Rs 4,000 to Rs 5,000 per kilogram to the ganja peddlers in Dhoolpet.

The excise enforcement officials were keeping track of the route near Jaffer Hotel on the Jirra road in Dhoolpet being used for ganja supply. The officials noted the white Honda active used by Sayed and caught him carrying 11 kilograms of dry ganja in five bundles of 2.2 kilograms each. The police are on the lookout for his associate, Sunil Singh who is now absconding.

The police later raided the home of Aruna Bai also known as Anguribai, a repeat offender known for organising sale of ganja at Yateemkhana of Balaramgully, Upper Dhoolpet. She had recently started selling ganja in wholesale. Police seized 2 kilograms of dry ganja from the accused.

Aruna’s husband, her sister, brother and their spouses are also accused in several cases of ganja sale.

These raids were conducted as per the directions of C Vivekanandareddy, Deputy Commissioner of Hyderabad Police under the direct supervision of N Anjireddy, Prohibition and Excise Superintendent, Enforcement.
