After a fight over biryani, Congress leaders now clash over chair in Telangana. Watch video

Follow us on Image Source : INDIA TV Congress leaders clash over chair in Telangana

After fighting over biryani in Uttar Pradesh in April this year, Congress leaders clashed in Telangana on Saturday, this time over a chair. Senior Congress leader V Hanumantha Rao clashed with another leader publicly and collapsed during a fight.

In what comes as a huge embarrassment for the Rahul Gandhi-led party, former member of Rajya Sabha, Hanumantha Rao and Telangana Pradesh Congress Committee (TPCC) spokesman M Nagesh pushed each other on the dais.

The incident occurred in the presence of AICC General Secretary and in-charge of party affairs RC Khuntia and leaders of various opposition parties.

The commotion broke out during a meeting organised by the opposition parties at Indira Park to protest goof-up by the Telangana Board.

Rao, who was holding the mike to invite leaders on the stage, took objection to Nagesh occupying a chair meant for Khuntia. A heated exchange ensued between the two and soon they started pushing each other even as other leaders tried to pacify them.

In the melee, Nagesh collapsed on the ground. He stood up and pushed Rao, who too fell down leaving the leaders and other protestors in shock.

Leaders of Telugu Desam Party (TDP), Communist Party of India (CPI), Telangana Jana Samithi (TJS) and others intervened to bring the situation under control.

Khuntia, state Congress chief Uttam Kumar Reddy and other senior leaders took a serious view of the incident.

The day-long protest meeting was called by the Congress and other opposition parties.

The parties had also invited parents of 22 students who had committed suicide over the failure in the exams. The opposition has blamed the government for the suicides and demanded compensation for their families.

In a previous incident, several people were injured after clashes broke out among supporters of Congress candidate Nasimuddin Siddiqui in Uttar Pradesh's Muzaffarnagar.

According to officials, the clash broke out over biryani, which was being served at an election meeting without permission. Nine people were arrested as authorities lodged a police case following the incident.

Watch TV Coverage

Latest India News
