Balakot air strike: People used to ask where is 56-inch ka seena, PM showed 76 inches, says Dr Harsh Vardhan

File picture: Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Union Minister of Science and Technology & Earth Sciences and Environment, Forest and Climate Change Dr Harsh Vardhan has come down heavily on the opposition for blaming the Bharatiya Janata Party for politicising the Indian Air Force strikes against terrorists in Pakistan's Balakot.

Confident of the BJP's victory in 2019 Lok Sabha Elections, Dr Harsh Vardhan, in an exclusive interview with timesnownews.com, hailed Prime Minister Narendra Modi's leadership as fantastic. Dr Harsh Vardhan is contesting again from the Chandni Chowk constituency in Delhi.

Here are the excerpts:

Kamna Arora: Will BJP win more than 282 seats this time?

Dr Harsh Vardhan: Oh, yes! I can tell you that results of the 2019 Lok Sabha Elections will be far more convincing and impressive than that of 2014 parliamentary polls. Dr Harsh Vardhan’s victory will also be more impressive too as compared to 2014.

Kamna Arora: A lot has been changed since 2014. Do you think Rahul Gandhi is a challenger to PM Modi now?

Dr Harsh Vardhan: Rahul Gandhi cannot be a challenger to PM Modi, not even for a second. There is a zameen and aasman difference between the two. Modi ji is an international leader, a statesman. What to say about the other person?

Kamna Arora: Opposition alleges that the BJP is trying to politicise Balakot air strikes.

Dr Harsh Vardhan: I think this allegation in itself is very humorous. What is there to politicise? Everybody in this country talks about it, everybody feels proud of our armed forces, air force, prime minister show showed valour and strength. Something happened on 26 November 2008 also, but nothing much was done against the neighbour. You see the difference. People used to say 56-inch ka seena kahan hai, he (PM Modi) showed 76 inches.

Kamna Arora: Both Omar Abdullah and Shashi Tharoor called the designation of Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar as a ‘global terrorist’ by the United Nations as a symbolic victory because there was no mention of Pulwama attack.

Dr Harsh Vardhan: I am happy that they accepted it as a victory, even it is symbolic for them. Why could not they achieve any such ‘symbolic victory’ in the last 10 years? It is only because of the fantastic leadership of PM Narendra Modi, this could be done.

Kamna Arora: Do you think GST and demonetisation could negatively impact the BJP’s prospects?

Dr Harsh Vardhan: I do not think so. The entire country was in the queue but not even a single person in the country ever doubted the intentions of the prime minister. On the contrary, people said it was the first time a bold, honest PM wanted to change things in the country. People had faced hardships for some time but they all appreciated that there is an honest man at the helm of affairs who had the guts to change the culture of this country.

Similarly, in the case of GST (Goods and Services Tax), he took a bold stand. The previous government was also trying to bring GST. Now if they criticise GST and call it anti-people, I would like to remind them that they had been trying to implement it for 10 years but could not because of lack of dynamic leadership. Prime Minister Modi did that because he is a reformist.

After implementing it, the PM has been so receptive and ready to incorporate good suggestion. I myself suggested changes twice to further simplify the implementation process for people and they were incorporated to an extent. All the amendments that took place in the GST act later were based on the voices of the people. Their issues have been addressed. The overwhelming response given by traders when the PM came to Talkatora Stadium to address them speaks volumes.
