Uttar Pradesh: Minor boy attacked by man over personal dispute, suffered critical injuries

The 10-year-old received critical injuries in his eyes, head and other parts of the body. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Shahjahanpur: A 10-year-old boy was attacked by a man in Uttar Pradesh on Saturday. The incident happened in Muzaffarpur village near Shahjahanpur in Uttar Pradesh. The minor boy was attacked over a personal dispute. The police have registered an FIR in the case.

The 10-year-old, who was attacked by a man over a personal argument, received critical injuries in his eyes, head and other parts of the body, news agency ANI reported. The police told that they have filed an FIR in the case and that the accused man would be arrested soon.

Shahjahanpur: A 10-year-old boy was attacked by a man yesterday in Muzaffarpur village over a personal dispute. The boy received critical injuries in the eyes, head & other parts of body. Police (in pic) say "FIR has been registered, the accused will be arrested soon." pic.twitter.com/p1bS2AstoT — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) January 20, 2019

In another incident reported from Ghaziabad, a 16-year-old boy suffered serious burn injuries after he was set on fire by three men. The men had poured an inflammable liquid on him over a dispute on broken phone. The accused had broken the minor boy's phone and when the boy demanded money, the three men beat him up and injured his face with a sharp object.

About a week later, when the boy met them again, he demanded money for a second time. This time, after beating him up severely, the accused poured an inflammable liquid on him and set him ablaze. They escaped the crime spot. The boy was rushed to a hospital in Delhi. He suffered critical burns on his face, chest and lower parts of the body.

Also Read: Faridabad teenager fakes own kidnapping to go for vacation with ransom money

The police registered an FIR against the three accused men for attempting to murder and imposed provisions of the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act at Sahibabad police station.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
