All 3 terrorists killed as security operation completed at PC Gwadar: ISPR

RAWALPINDI: All three terrorists were killed as security forces completed clearance operation after the attack at the Pearl Continental Hotel in Gwadar, said the Inter-Services Public Relations on Sunday.



According to the ISPR, the bodies of terrorists were held for identification.

During the operation, five people got martyred including four hotel employees and a Pakistan Navy soldier. Six individuals got injured including two Army captains, two Navy soldiers and two hotel employees, said the ISPR.

The ISPR said that the terrorists had attempted entry into the hotel to make hostage the guests present in the hotel.

The security guard at the entrance challenged terrorists, denying them entry into the main hall, however, the terrorists went to the upper floors. The terrorists opened fire resulting into martyrdom of security guard Zahoor.

On the stairs, terrorists kept firing indiscriminately, resulting into martyrdom of three more hotel employees, Farhad, Bilawal and Awais, while two got injured.

The ISPR said that Army, Navy and police personnel immediately reached the hotel, secured guests and staff present in the hotel and restricted the terrorists within the corridor of the fourth floor.

The terrorists had made CCTV cameras dysfunctional and planted IEDs on all entry points leading to the fourth floor. Security forces made special entry points to get to the fourth floor, shot down all terrorists and cleared planted IEDS.

After ensuring safe evacuation of guests and staff, a clearance operation was launched to take on terrorists.

DG ISPR Major General Asif Ghafoor thanked the entire media for responsible reporting and coverage of the operation. "This actually denied terrorists of possible live updates, thus facilitated security forces in smooth execution of the operation," said the ISPR statement.

On Saturday, security forces battled three heavily armed attackers who stormed the five star Pearl Continental hotel in the southwestern port city of Gwadar, officials said.

Locals said several gunshots were heard after the terrorists entered the luxury hotel.

Other officials also confirmed that security personnel had safely evacuated guests and cordoned off the hotel.

Provincial information minister Zahoor Buledi said security forces immediately responded by surrounding the premises. He said that security personnel were currently battling the terrorists.

The luxury Pearl-Continental hotel is located on the Koh-e-Batil Hill, south of West Bay on Fish Harbour Road and overlooks the Arabian Sea.

The Gwadar port region is the focal point of the multi-billion-dollar China-Pakistan Economic Corridor (CPEC) project, which is part of China's mammoth Belt and Road infrastructure project.

China condemns attack

Meanwhile, the Chinese Embassy in Islamabad strongly condemned the attack on Gwadar hotel.

"[We] appreciate courageous steps taken by Pakistan Army and security agencies," the embassy said in a statement, extending condolences to the relatives of martyred security guard.

The Chinese Embassy also extended its wishes for speedy recovery of guards injured in the attack.

'Such things shall not deter us'

Chief Minister Balochistan Jam Kamal Khan said Saturday's attack in Gwadar was a clear picture of how their enemies didn't want to see Balochistan progress.

"Such things shall not deter us and Balochistan shall continue on its path to progress," he said in his tweet. "We'll in sha Allah face all such challenges and take Balochistan to prosperity."








