Katrina Kaif turns into sunkissed beach babe; Amy Jackson flaunts baby bump in sheer black gown

Follow us on Katrina Kaif and Amy Jackson

Katrina Kaif can give anyone a run for their money when it comes to looking hot and cute at the same time. Katrina, who will next be seen in Salman Khan starrer Bharat will soon become busy with promotional activities. Hence, after wrapping up Ali Abbas Zafar's film, the actress decided to hit the beach for photoshoot. The pictures of the photo shoot are out and we have to say, Katrina looks hotter than ever.

Katrina took to her Instagram to share her latest photo and she looks phenomenal. Katrina is not just giving us vacation goals but also some serious style tips. Katrina is donning a printed jersey bikini top along with loose yellow cotton shirt. Minimum makeup and statement neckpiece are oozing Boho vibes.

The 35-year-old actress flaunts her bare midriff in orange and pink-hued bikini in another picture. Check out her all sizzling photos:

Meanwhile, talking about finding love in her life, Katrina said, "I’m not cynical at all about love. I am open to it with a positive mind and attitude. If you’ve known bitterness, you can also recognise when you are in a good space. It’s cool. I am open to new things and experiences."

Katrina won hearts with her last film Zero. After Bharat release, the actress will start shooting for Sooryavanshi along with Akshay Kumar. Katrina also plans to venture into production.

Now, let's talk about the hottest soon-to-be mama Amy Jackson. The Rajinikanth 2.0 actress shared a picture of herself lying on a bed in a sheer black printed gown, Amy wrote, ''Thinking about you lil one''. Amy is expecting her first child with boyfriend George Panayiotou.

Amy Jackson and George got engaged in January in Zambia this year. "He proposed on a raft in Zambia, with the sun setting and over a private dinner. It was beautiful," she told a magazine.

Amy Jackson took to Instagram to announce her pregnancy. Sharing a photo, the actress captioned the image: "I have been waiting to shout it from the roof tops, and today, being Mother's Day, it could not be a more perfect time. I already love you more than anything in this world, the purest most honest love. We cannot wait to meet you our little Libra one."

For unversed, Amy Jackson and George got engaged in January in Zambia this year. "He proposed on a raft in Zambia, with the sun setting and over a private dinner. It was beautiful," she told a magazine.

Reportedly, Amy and George have been dating since 2015. George is the son of British property developer Andreas Panayiotou and the founder of The Ability Group. The Panayiotous have a chain of luxury hotels such as Hilton, Park Plaza, Double Tree among others.

On the professional front, Amy made her acting debut in 2010 with Tamil movie Madrasapattinam and later featured in several Telugu and Kannada projects. Amy was also seen in Bollywood films such as Singh Is Bliing and Freaky Ali.
