Deadly attack: I watched as my son was being ‘chopped’ alive

Ali Weimi [Photo: Courtesy]

For six years, Ali Weimi, has not been able to breathe normally and relies on a tube.

On November 16, 2013, an improvised cane milling machine, powered by a posho mill engine, almost killed him at their home in Mwilunya village, Matawa location in Mumias West sub-county.

The machine caught his shirt and pulled him into the sharp edges, chopping off his left hand and split his mouth into two.

He was lucky his father rescued him after he heard his screams.

Speaking to The Nairobian, Weimi’s father, Rajab Weimi, said his son’s life changed after the ordeal that almost killed him.

Read Also:British SAS stormed Dusit with elite units, took on gunmen

Rajab, a father of 11, said that on the fateful day, his son was adding more cane to the crusher, but accidentally his shirt was caught by the machine that started crushing him.

“It happened so fast. Luckily, I managed to pull him out of the machine but he had suffered multiple injuries and blood was oozing from all over his body. We rushed him to St Mary’s Hospital Mumias, who referred him immediately to Moi and Teaching Referral Hospital (MTRH –Eldoret),” he said.

Weimi was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) as medics deliberated on the next move.

“They wanted to airlift him to Kenyatta National Hospital (KNH), but one doctor came into the theatre and said he be operated on since he might die before reaching Nairobi. The surgery lasted for 13 hours,” he said, adding that: “My son underwent skin grafting (surgery involving the transplantation of skin) in a bid to fill the left jaw that was completely destroyed. He was taken back to the ICU after the operation for one week and then transferred to the High Dependency Unit (HDU) for another week.”

Read Also: Waruguru’s hubby on the spot over millions belonging to accident victim

Weimi, who scored a B- in last year’s Kenya Certificate of Secondary Education (KCSE), has undergone 10 correctional surgeries. Rajab Weimi with his son Ali Weimi [Photo: Courtesy]

“My son has so far underwent nine correctional surgeries at Moi Teaching and referral hospital and the 10th one at KNH. Medical specialists from Indiana University who were on an exchange programme were always called in to help in carrying out the surgeries,” he disclosed.

Ali’s father has so far spent at least Sh3 million in medical bills and he was forced to sell his 5-acre parcel of land and other investments.

“It has been tough for us. The first 18 months after the accident, he was fed only on milk, porridge and water with the aid of a gastronomy tube inserted through the abdomen that delivers nutrition directly to the stomach. Ali was in Form One when the incident happened. He was forced to spend six years instead of four years in school since he was in and out of class,” Rajab added.

Read Also: Day before Dusit attack, terrorist’s girlfriend put household items on sale

Weimi revealed to The Nairobian that he wants to pursue a course in pharmacy.

“I want to study pharmacy so that I can be able to take care of myself since I have a condition that requires close supervision. If I take pharmacy, I will be near medics who will be able to assist me in case of any emergencies,” wrote Ali on a piece of paper.

Henry Ngoitsi, an otolaryngologist, who treats patients with diseases and disorders of the ear, nose, throat (ENT) at MTRH, was among the medics who saved his life.

“I am familiar with the case. The patient was brought in critical condition. I, together with colleagues, have been helping the family in treating the patient and I thank God he survived,” said Ngoitsi.

Ngoitsi said the patient needs plastic surgery to restore his speech, breathing and his jaw.

Now the family is in need of help to have Weimi undergo a plastic surgery, either in India or the United States of America.
