Two more held in spurious toddy racket

3,500 kg choral hydrate seized from ‘main supplier’

The Mumbai Police have arrested two more people in connection with the spurious toddy racket busted earlier this month, including the alleged main supplier of chloral hydrate, which was being used to brew the toddy. Investigations have also revealed that that racket spans to several other cities in the country.

The lid was blown off the racket on May 1, when the police arrested Buniyad Ansari, Rajendra Basarapu and Venkata Karbuja. Mr. Ansari and Mr. Basarapu were said to be storing 2,200 kilograms of chloral hydrate, a toxic substance, while Mr. Karbuja was using it to brew spurious toddy. The raid was conducted by a joint team of the Aarey and Khar police stations, led by senior police inspector Vijaylaxmi Hiremath, Aarey police and Police Inspector Daya Nayak, Khar police.

According to police sources, interrogation of Mr. Karbuja led the investigating team to Prakash Gopwani (40), a Kandivali based sharebroker, who allegedly supplied the chemical to the former.

“Mr. Gopwani was constantly changing his location for several days but we received a tip off that he would be coming to Malad on May 9 to meet his wife, as it was her birthday. Accordingly, we laid a trap and picked him up from the Khwahish Hotel in Kachpada, Malad. In his interrogation, Mr. Gopwani revealed that he was only a middleman, and that the chemicals had come from a Nashik resident named Dilip Jadhav,” an officer who is part of the investigating team said.

The police then obtained more information about Mr. Jadhav and found out that he runs a company named Alpha Solvents in Dindori. On Saturday morning, the Aarey and Khar police, in collaboration with the Dindori police, raided the Alpha Solvents premises and found 3,500 kilograms of chloral hydrate in drums and containers in the company compound. The police also arrested the accused from the spot and brought him to Mumbai, officers said.

“Preliminary inquiries have revealed that Mr. Jadhav sold a consignment of 270 kilograms of chloral hydrate to a toddy retailer, identified so far only as Vasu, and we are trying to identify and trace this man,” the officer said.

Meanwhile, Mr. Karbuja has also revealed in his interrogation that he has, in the past, supplied large quantities of chloral hydrate to various persons in Borivali, Bhiwandi and Hyderabad, and teams will soon be despatched to all these locations on their trail, sources said.

“Several others are suspected to have been part of the supply chain, which seems to extend far and wide. While some acted as middlemen, others took care of the logistics. Inquiries are underway so that we can identify and apprehend them,” the officer said.
