Madhya Pradesh: Kailash Vijayvargiya, Shivraj Singh Chouhan demand CBI probe into BJP leaders’ deaths

BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya (left) with family members of Prahlad Bandhwar who was shot dead on January 17. | Photo Credit: ANI

Bhopal: Bharatiya Janata Party leader from Madhya Pradesh, Kailash Vijayvargiya, on Sunday, met the family members of fellow BJP leader Prahlad Bandhwar who was shot dead in Nai Abadi area of Mandsaur on January 17 and sought a CBI investigation into the matter.

“We demand a CBI investigation into the matter. If the case is not investigated, then other representatives of the people could be targeted next,” Vijayvargiya said, according to a report by news agency ANI.

Bandhwar, who was the Mandsaur Municipal Corporation president, was shot near the Central Bank at Nai Abadi area and died on the spot. However, after his son filed an FIR, the Rajasthan Police on Saturday arrested a person from Pratapgarh in connection with the murder. The accused was identified as Manish Bairagi, a BJP worker.

Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath said there is no need of an investigation into the murder. “The son of the victim himself registered the name of the accused in the FIR. There is no need for a big investigation, there are two eyewitnesses. The death should not be politicised, especially when it's an internal matter of a party,” Nath had said last week.

Former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan also voiced his concerns over the matter and demanded a similar step over the killing.

“The government is taking this lightly. There seems to be a larger conspiracy behind this. I demand a CBI inquiry. Today, a BJP leader was killed in Balwadi… I warn the government to stop such incidents otherwise BJP will come out on the streets,” Chouhan threatened, according to ANI.

Attacking the incumbent Congress government, Chouhan said that the law and order in the state have collapsed. “Law and order have completely collapsed in the state. Criminals are fearless these days… The Congress used to talk about change but what sort of change is this?”

A Bharatiya Janata Party leader from Madhya Pradesh was found dead in a field on Sunday morning. BJP leader from Balwadi, Manoj Thackeray, had gone for a morning walk today and his body was later found in a field. The police have recovered a blood-stained rock from the crime site.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
