Colaba mill may open for film shoots again

Amitabh Bachchan

BMC

East African Hardware Ltd

Mahimtura Consultants Pvt Ltd

Bollywood films

The mill was set up before Independence and thrived as cotton business picked up

The location whereshook a leg to Jumma Chumma De De was shut last month afterfound it dilapidated; owners want ‘safe’ portions to be opened.Colaba’s Muktesh Mill, a popular film shoot location that had been shut last month, might soon open for business.Last month, the BMC had shut down the premises after declaring the structures dilapidated and unsafe for shooting. The A ward office issued a note, asking the owners to conduct a fresh audit of all structures on the 10-acre mill land and to stay shut until then.Formally owned by’s Muljibhai Madhvani, the plot was later taken over by TCI Industries Ltd.In a letter dated April 30, the owners told the BMC that they had carried out a structural audit and found that only some of the structures inside were dilapidated. Pointing out that the unsafe structures were located near the seaside and not close to the open ground, they requested that the remaining portions be opened for shoots.Hinting that it’s willing to meet halfway, the civic body directed the mill owners to demolish the dangerous structures before being granted permission for film shoots. “We have received a report from the owners. The structural audit has been carried out by. They have claimed that only a handful of structures are dilapidated, while most of the mill structures are in good condition. But we have asked them to first demolish the dangerous structures before allowing any film shooting,” said Kiran Dighavkar, assistant municipal commissioner of A Ward. “We can’t take any risk. For us, the entire mill is one structure. So we can only allow any kind of shooting once the dangerous structures are demolished.”Officials said that the mill, located on a sea-facing plot at Colaba’s NA Sawant Marg, was originally set up before Independence. “At that time, this was probably the only mill in south Mumbai. The mill itself had a large private dock. There, bales of cotton and load yards of finished cloth were unloaded. They were then transferred to large vessels and exported,” an official said.BMC officials said that the mill became defunct in the 1980s and soon became Bollywood’s favourite spot to shoot climaxes, action sequences and songs. It has been featured in close to 50since the 1980s. The popular song Jumma Chumma De De from Hum (1991), featuring actor Amitabh Bachchan, was shot there, as were portions of films like Lukka Chuppi, Heropanti, Raaz, Jee Karda and Badlapur in recent times. Many advertisements, too, have been shot there.
