Constable shot at in Bihar's Gaya, investigation underway

It is unknown as to how Yadav received the bullet injuries (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Gaya: A policeman died after he was shot at in Gaya district of Bihar on Saturday. The deceased constable was identified as 25-year-old Kundan Kumar Yadav. The incident took place in the police lines in Gaya district. The deceased constable was the bodyguard of the Deputy Superintendent of Police (DSP), Gaya Police Lines, Mohammad Sabir.

Raj Kumar Shah, DSP of Gaya Town, while talking to The Indian Express, said that Yadav was recruited as a constable in 2015. He was a resident of Vijval village in Nalanda district of the state. Shah added that it was unknown as to how Yadav received the bullet injuries and that the police is investigating the case. Yadav's wife is also a constable. She is posted in Motihari district.

According to police officials, the deceased constable's body has been sent for an autopsy at Anugrah Narayan Magadh Medical College. The constable's family has been informed of his demise.

Also Read: Delhi: Brother stabs childhood friend 7 times for molesting his sister

In another incident reported from Bihar's Khagaria district, a policeman died in an encounter with gangsters in October 2018. The deceased cop was identified as Ashish Kumar, station house officer of Pasraha. Kumar (32) died on the spot while another cop was injured.

Kumar was leading his team during an encounter with Dinesh Muni gang in the outskirts of Khagaria. His team raided the gangster's hideout during late night after a tip off. The gang of criminals opened a fire on seeing the police arrive. During the encounter, Kumar was shot on the chest. He died on the spot.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
