Madhya Pradesh: Another BJP leader found dead; Sambit Patra accuses United Opposition

Follow us on Image Source : PTI Madhya Pradesh: Another BJP leader found dead; Sambit Patra accuses United Opposition

BJP spokesperson Sambit Patra on Sunday accused the United Opposition for the recent deaths of BJP leaders in Madhya Pradesh even as as another party leader was found killed in Balwadi.

Balwadi BJP leader Manoj Thackeray was found dead in a field in Warla police station limits on Sunday morning, less than a week after Mandsaur Municipal Corporation President Prahlad Bandhwar was shot dead.

"He (Manoj Thackeray) had gone for his routine morning walk. A blood-stained rock has been found from the crime site. Speculation is that he was killed with that rock. Investigation is being done," Balwadi (Barwani) ASP told ANI.

On Thursday, Bandhwar was shot at in Nai Abaadi of Mandsaur. He died on the spot. A day after the incident, Manish Bairagi, a BJP worker, was arrested in Rajasthan's Pratapgarh in relation to the death of Bandhwar.

Accusing the United Opposition of using murders as weapon to silence democracy, Sambit Patra indirectly alleged involvement of the Congress government in the recent murders.

"Within days of Congress assuming power in Madya Pradesh, two of BJP's senior leaders have been killed. Is this how they plan to leave or save democracy. They are kiling the democracy," Patra told media at a presser in New Delhi.

Meanwhile, former MP chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan claimed that law and order has collapsed in the state. "Congress used to talk of change but what change is this? Murders have started here, there was one in Indore, then in Mandsaur where a BJP leader was killed, another BJP leader killed in Barwani. Criminals are fearless today. Law and order completely collapsed."

"Govt is taking this lightly. There seems to be a larger conspiracy behind this (BJP leader killed in Mandsaur). I demand a CBI inquiry. BJP leader was killed in Barwani, I warn the govt that they stop such incidents otherwise BJP will come out on streets," he said.

The BJP has also sought CBI investigation into the death of its leader Prahlad Bandhwar.
