Kangana Ranaut's Manikarnika producer Kamal Jain critical after paralytic stroke? Here's the truth

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Kangana Ranaut's Manikarnika producer Kamal Jain critical after paralytic stroke? Here's the truth

Ahead of Kangana Ranaut starrer Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi release on January 25, film’s producer Kamal Jain has been hospitalized. The producer himself posted about his health on social media and. as soon as the news was out, speculations started flying high that Kamal Jain suffered paralytic stroke and his health was in critical condition. However, a Times Now report has it that Kamal Jain’s health isn’t critical and he has actually been hospitalized due to throat and lung infection.

"Yes, he has been hospitalised but it's due to throat and lung infection. His condition is not criticial as reported...But of course, lung infection is not an easy health problem to deal with either", Vishesh from Kamal Jain’s production company was quoted a saying to the daily.

Jain had tweeted about his condition on Saturday, “Dear friends, this certainly is not the best time to be in hospital. Hope to get well soon and enjoy the success of our collective dream & hardwork. My best wishes to all, “ adding, “I will be back as soon as possible, till then I’ll be with you in spirit and soul,” he added in his tweet.

Kangana Ranaut was considered the best person to take over the mantle to complete patchwork and to direct a few additional scenes for "Manikarnika - The Queen of Jhansi", when director Krish moved on to his new film, says producer Kamal Jain. The movie has been in the midst of a controversy ever since the news of Kangana stepping in behind the camera for it emerged.

Clearing speculations about the film, Jain said in a statement: "The additional shoot of the film is presently underway at ND Studios at Karjat, near Mumbai. After the last schedule was over, we saw the line-up of the film. On seeing it, we decided that apart from the patchwork, we also needed a few additional scenes.

Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi releases on January 25.

More stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
