Nepalese tourist 'plied his Sydney friend's flatmate with shots of tequila then raped her'

A Nepalese tourist allegedly plied his friend's flatmate with tequila then repeatedly raped her as she slept before fleeing Australia hours later.

Balram Shiv, 35, now languishes in a Sydney jail cell after being extradited from the U.S., charged with raping and molesting the 21-year-old woman in June 2017.

Early the next morning he caught an Uber to Sydney Airport and flew home to New York where he simply resumed his life as an aviation engineer.

But his self-indulgent social media posts bragging about his decadent lifestyle led to his arrest when the woman identified him to NSW police as her alleged rapist.

Balram Shiv, 35, allegedly plied his friend's flatmate with tequila then repeatedly raped her as she slept before feeling Australia hours later

The Nepalese citizen, living in the U.S. on a green card, arrived in Australia on June 9, 2017, and stayed with two female friends at an apartment in Carlton.

On the night of June 13 he brought home a bottle of tequila, an affidavit filed to the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of New York alleged.

Shiv convinced the alleged victim, who had never drunk tequila before, to take four or five shots as they and one of his friends quickly finished the whole bottle.

The victim claimed in the affidavit that she blacked out and later woke up on a mattress on the floor of her room as Shiv was molesting her.

Shiv allegedly pulled her legs apart and performed several sex acts on her despite her telling him not to - and she wasn't strong enough to stop him.

He now languishes in a Sydney jail cell after being extradited from the U.S., charged with raping and molesting the 21-year-old woman in June 2017

Social media photos like this one of him celebrating the Hindu Diwali festival led to his arrest when the woman identified him to NSW police as her alleged rapist

The woman passed out again and allegedly woke up to Shiv raping her as she drifted in and out of consciousness.

'The victim continued to plead with Shiv to stop, but felt very sick and passed out again. When she awoke, she vomited four times on her pillow,' the affidavit read.

'Because of her state of intoxication, the victim was unable to raise her head from the pillow before passing out again.'

The affidavit claims about 9.50pm the other woman heard the allegedly victim yelling 'I don't want, I don't want'.

Another woman later arrived at the flat and when she opened the door, saw Shiv get up from the mattress and heard the alleged victim crying.

She left and returned with her uncle and they asked her what happened.

'I didn't want to do that, he forced me... I know I have a boyfriend. I didn't want to do that. He forced me,' the alleged victim told them, according to the affidavit.

'I cannot fulfill my father and mother's dreams now.'

Shiv made numerous self-indulgent social media posts bragging about his decadent lifestyle, including posing with this flash car

Shiv organised a fundraiser for the National Kidney Foundation for his 35th birthday in November, and later posted photos of him celebrating the milestone with a rich cake, bottle of red wine, and balloons

Among Shiv's numerous travel photos was this one of him lounging in a pool. Each of his photos is accompanied with a pithy, often cringeworthy, line

Shiv's other friend, who also lived at the flat, arrived home about 11pm and asked the alleged victim if Shiv raped her and was told 'yes he did'.

The alleged victim claimed she then fell asleep on her bed before waking up to Shiv molesting her again until someone opened the door.

Shiv ordered an Uber to Sydney Airport about 8.30 the next morning and flew back to New York on a 9.39am flight.

The woman reported the alleged rape later that morning and DNA samples taken in hospital matched Shiv's, court documents alleged.

Once home, Shiv continued to live his life in New York, where he worked as an aviation engineer and lived in Lynbrook, NY, just east of JFK Airport.

Photos posted to a Facebook profile under the name Pratham Shiv, as friends call him, documented his travels and life in the U.S.

He visited Nepal and India in 2018 where he was pictured meeting family and old friends, riding an elephant, and lounging in a pool.

Shiv convinced the alleged victim, who had never drunk tequila before, to take four or five shots after he brought a bottle back to the Sydney apartment

Shiv pictured riding an elephant on one of his holidays last year, on a trip where he also visited family and old friends in Nepal

Other photos show him in New York posing with his car, hitting the gym, visiting temples, and celebrating the Hindu Diwali festival.

Shiv organised a fundraiser for the National Kidney Foundation for his 35th birthday in November, attracting $102 in donations.

He later posted photos of him celebrating the milestone with a rich cake, bottle of red wine, and balloons.

Each of his photos is accompanied with a pithy, often cringeworthy, line such as 'don't be scared to fly alone, find a path that is your own'.

'Always be a first rate version of yourself. Instead of a second rate version of someone else,' another read.

These posts caught the attention of NSW Police and in June 2018 the Sydney woman identified Shiv as her alleged rapist from his posts.

He was charged with two counts of sexual intercourse without consent and five counts of assault with act with indecency

A federal warrant was signed on January 17, hours before Shiv was due to board a flight from JFK Airport to Nepal via Doha, Qatar.

New York cops arrested him as he tried to get on the plane. He did not oppose the extradition request.

U.S. marshals escorted him on a flight to Los Angeles where he was met by NSW police detectives last Thursday.

He arrived in Sydney on Saturday morning and was charged with two counts of rape and five counts of indecent assault.

Shiv faced court on both Sunday and Monday and was refused bail both times. He will near appear at Sutherland Local Court on June 28.
