Opposition flays PM Modi's 'clouds helped planes escape radar' comment on air strike

Jumla hi fekta raha paanch saal ki sarkar mein, Socha tha cloudy hai mausam, Nahi aaunga radar mein. pic.twitter.com/xDeOg4Yq5K — Congress (@INCIndia) May 12, 2019

National security is not something to be trifled with. Such an irresponsible statement from Modi is highly damaging. Somebody like this can’t remain India’s PM. https://t.co/wK992b1kuJ — Sitaram Yechury (@SitaramYechury) May 11, 2019

No secret that Balakot strikes failed to hit the intended target. Was it because PM overruled the advice of IAF & authorised airstrikes in bad weather? Cloud cover logic is painfully embarrassing.Remind me again, why is RG derided as Pappu? #cloudonradargone pic.twitter.com/yfZOiUMzFk — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) May 12, 2019

Looks like the tweet got lost in the clouds. Luckily there are screen shots floating around to help pic.twitter.com/zSW7CsdhKL — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) May 11, 2019

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi has come under sharp attack from the Opposition leaders for his reported remarks about clouds helping the Indian Air Force jets escape Pakistani radars during Balakot airstrikes. During an interview to a News channel aired on Saturday, Modi said, "Experts were re-thinking the airstrike due to bad weather, but I said, so much cloud cover and rains could be beneficial. Maybe we could escape their radar. This was my raw wisdom, I said there could be a benefit. Ultimately I said, there's cloud cover, please go ahead." The Prime Minister's quote was shared on the official BJP and BJP Gujarat Twitter pages, only to be deleted later. The remarks triggered a troll-fest on all social media platforms. Politicians, celebrities and general public took to Twitter to express disbelief, shock and even anger against the Prime Minister.Targetting Modi, the Congress on its official Twitter handle wrote: "Jumla hi fekta raha paanch saal ki sarkar mein, Socha tha cloudy hai mausam, Nahi aaunga radar mein."CPI-M General Secretary Sitaram Yechury said: "National security is not something to be trifled with. Such an irresponsible statement from Modi is highly damaging. Somebody like this can't remain India's PM." "Modi's words are truly shameful. Most importantly, because they insult our Air Force as being ignorant and unprofessional. The fact that he is talking about all this is itself anti-national; no patriot would do this," Yechury tweeted.Former Jammu and Kashmir chief minister Mehbooba Mufti described Modi's reported remarks as "painfully embarrassing". Mehbooba wondered whether the prime minister authorising the operation in bad weather by overruling the advice of the IAF led to the strikes "failing" to hit the intended target. "No secret that Balakot strikes failed to hit the intended target. Was it because PM overruled the advice of IAF & authorised airstrikes in bad weather?" Mehbooba asked in a tweet.Cloud cover logic is painfully embarrassing. Remind me again, why is RG (Congress president Rahul Gandhi) derided as Pappu? #cloudonradargone". The Peoples Democratic Party president said the Bharatiya Janata Party's ability to "suspend logic" in its quest to win another term is "mind numbingly fatuous", adding that the armed forces do not deserve this. "I was raked over the coals for questioning veracity of Balakot strikes. But seeing Pak media & journos troll PM on cloud gaffe is awfully embarrassing," Mehbooba added. Poking sarcasm, former Jammu and Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah posted a screenshot of BJP Gujarat's then deleted tweet. "Looks like the tweet got lost in the clouds. Luckily there are screenshots floating around to help.""Pakistani radar doesn't penetrate clouds. This is an important piece of tactical information that will be critical when planning future air strikes," he tweeted.
