Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: RAF zero in on IS mastermind

We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox

Intelligence that the religious fanatic has fled to the war-torn country comes two weeks after an SAS unit had to be evacuated by the RAF following the rapid advance of rogue general Khalifa Haftar and his forces. Now the RAF is back, with a Sentinel airborne battlefield and ground surveillance aircraft and an RC 135 reconnaissance jet to join Italian and US aircraft, which are flying round-the-clock sorties. Code-named ABB, al-Baghdadi is now the coalition's most wanted high-value target with a $25million (£19million) "kill or capture" bounty on his head.

Coalition forces lost sight of him in February, in the final few weeks of the so-called Islamic State caliphate, when he fled Baghouz in Syria following a plot by foreign fighters close to his inner circle to kill him.

But "reliable" intelligence from within Libya has pointed to the fugitive having targeted the war-torn country as his next base.

It came shortly after he broadcast a video - the first in five years - in which he said the battle for Islam would be long.

He also praised the terrorists behind the Sri Lanka attack, which led to an intelligence breakthrough, sources claim.

The sorties, which are said to be flying from RAF Waddington in Lincolnshire, are collating signals intelligence on individuals and groups who might support the 48-year-old.

"It is reliable intel, but it needs to be verified," said a military source last night. "The air component operation is delivering high-grade intelligence and we can map names and groups to people we known that have been or are part of ABB's inner circle."

Other operations were also active last night, however, as military intelligence officers confirmed al-Baghdadi could be sheltering with any of the terror group's seven affiliates in North Africa.

Last week US Africa command deployed Special Forces to the landlocked country of Burkina Faso, in West Africa, where French forces freed two French hostages as well as an American and a South Korean woman just as they were about to be handed over to Islamic militants.
