Maharashtra reels under drought as reservoirs dry up

Despite assurances from the officials, residents of the area complain of water shortages

Even as the water situation steadily worsens in the arid Marathwada region, districts in the ‘water-abundant’ western Maharashtra, too, are feeling the impact of the drought stalking the State.

Soaring mercury levels have resulted in the rapid depletion of water stocks in the 22 reservoirs which are part of the Bhima River basin in western Maharashtra and are the potable water lifelines of Pune and the township of Pimpri-Chinchwad.

Zero storage

At least five of these reservoirs including Dimbhe and Temghar have zero storage now, while the total water stocks in seven other reservoirs was less than 10% of their capacity.

The remaining 10 had a collective reserve stock of a little over 20% of their cumulative storage capacity.

While Pune’s Guardian Minister Girish Bapat announced that Pune city would not face water cuts, sources in the Water Resources Department said reservoirs in the Pune region had barely 18% live water stock available as on May 6, compared to 38% at the same time last year.

Pimpri-Chinchwad is also going dry, with water levels of the Pavana reservoir – the township’s lifeline - rapidly declining. The Pavana reservoir water stock which stood at 31% of its capacity at the beginning of the month has now been reduced to 26%.

Water in the township is already being rationed with Pimpri-Chinchwad receiving water only on alternate days.

Authorities informed that more than 750 tankers were deployed to provide relief to the worst-afflicted districts in the Pune division, of which Solapur, Mangalwedha, Satara and Maan among others were the worst-hit areas.

As opposed to Pune district, the water situation was far worse in neighbouring Satara and Solapur districts.

The Ujjani dam, the lifeline of Solapur, currently has a water level of -34.98% (dead water stock).

On Sunday, Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) chief Sharad Pawar toured villages in Maan taluk, ticking-off the Devendra Fadnavis-led Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government for its inadequate arrangements to combat drought.

“Merely holding conference calls over phone with secretaries and other officials and taking a review will not help to provide relief to the drought-afflicted public. It is important to know the precise condition of the livestock, their owners, the fodder camps, the crops and these can only be ascertained by field visits,” said Mr. Pawar, in a strong rebuke to Mr. Fadnavis.

He further pointed out that the aid of Rs. 90 per animal announced by the government was insufficient to tide the farmer in this hour of crisis as fodder and water were expensive and scarce.

“The per animal monetary aid for fodder must be raised to Rs. 120. Furthermore, while the government may have arranged for tankers, water-supply through them was highly irregular at best,” Mr. Pawar said.

The NCP chief said that people had complained to him during his visit that the potable water they received was of poor quality and often contaminated.

“I am least interested in indulging in politics at this hour. But I urge the government to ensure that these problems are rapidly remedied and that employment opportunities be immediately created to prevent the increased migration of the rural populace,” Mr. Pawar said, urging the government to take responsibility for combating the crisis.

Meanwhile, in Marathwada, despite the relief packages announced by the government, the scenario on ground remains grim as ever.

Residents in pockets of Parli town in Beed district - the bastion of the Munde clan – are on a hunger strike in front of the Parli Municipal Council protesting against the acute water shortage.

The groundwater table has plummeted sharply in several villages in Beed district as in other parts of rural Marathwada.

In Jalna, irate residents staged a ‘rasta roko’ (roadblock) on Saturday protesting against the alleged mismanagement and theft of precious water resources.

According to reports, the desperation of the people of Halsi village in Latur’s Nilanga taluk turned to bitter rage directed at their local representatives as they assaulted the village sarpanch (headman).

The villagers had collected money to dig up three wells. But the headman, citing model code of conduct, refused to implement it causing the restive citizens to physically manhandle him.
