In Indore, PM Modi seeks answers to years of Congress misrule

In a fresh attack on the Congress party, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday, while addressing an election rally in Indore, said that the veteran party and its allies would have to account for years of misgovernance and lack of vision.

Taking a swipe at the Congress, PM Modi - who was accompanied by Lok Sabha speaker and sitting Indore MP, Sumitra Mahajan, whom he addressed as “Tai” throughout his speech - said the Congress and its policies could be described in just three words—“hua toh hua”. “The Congress and its mahamilawati allies have no right to be in public life even for a day. These 3 words describe the attitude of the Congress towards the people of the country and their complete lack of vision,” the prime minister said.

A couple of days ago, Congress overseas chief Sam Pitroda, who is also a close aide of Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, came in for a lot of criticism after he referred to the anti-Sikh riots of 1984 and said “hua toh hua”. He, however, later apologized for his remarks.

Accusing the Congress of not wanting to discuss issues related to defence infrastructure, nor how to stop terror attacks in the country, PM Modi reminded the gathering that terror attacks had significantly reduced after the BJP was voted to power in 2014. Mentioning Pakistan, the prime minister said that earlier the neighbouring country kept reiterating that terrorism was an internal matter that India had to deal with. However, during the tenure of the BJP government at the Centre and after its efforts, Pakistan now has to answer questions on the global stage about the steps it plans to take to eradicate terror camps on its soil, PM Modi said.

He said it was the Congress party’s soft attitude on terror which had led to frequent terror attacks in several cities of the country and the loss of innocent lives.

.“In 2014, when the Congress was in power, the electoral trend was an anti-incumbency one, but in 2019 I can assure you the election results will reflect the pro-incumbency mood of the electorate,” the prime minister said.

Expressing confidence that the BJP would return to power when the results of the Lok Sabha polls are declared on May 23, PM Modi urged the people of Indore to turn out in large numbers and cast their vote in favour of the BJP so that his government could continue to build a strong nation.
