Committee formed to control ‘fall army worm’ attack in maize

Coimbatore: The district agriculture department has constituted a joint pest monitoring committee this year to check losses by pests and to inspect and direct pest control methods adopted by farmers. This move comes after there was a widespread attack by the invasive insect pest ‘fall army worm’ (Spodoptera frugiperda) in maize plantations across the region last year.

Officials from the agriculture department said the committee not only consisted of officials such as the joint director of agriculture and assistant director of agriculture (quality control), but also experts from academics such as the head of the entomology department of the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University.

An official said the objective of the mission is to create awareness among farmers and input dealers who sell pesticides about integrated pest control methods and judicial use of pesticides. “Farmers might purchase pesticides and use it indiscriminately. So, we are also seeking to sensitise input dealers who sell pesticides,” said the official.

While a session has already been conducted to educate the first set of field-level officers on the issue, the mission to take the knowledge to farmers would start from June, said the official. “Though as it is summer at present, there is hardly around 10acres to 15acres of maize crop in the region, we expect it to go up to around 2,000hectares by June and to reach around 4,500hectares the coming season,” said the official.

Before the sowing season, the department would reach out to all farmers who would cultivate maize, said the official.

Officials said they have devised an integrated pest control method to tackle fall armyworm, which lays emphasis on field preparation and sowing methods and biological control methods and has pesticides only as a last resort.

The method includes summer ploughing in May and June which would destroy the pupae of the pest present in the soil, farmers planting maize at the same time so that the pest attack is controlled and cultivating intercrops such as castor and sunflower which would dampen the pest attack. The joint director of agriculture has asked dealers to sell the seeds of these crops along with maize seeds.

Also, the department has been recommending biological control methods such as applying a solution of the fungus Metarhizium anisopliae which would kill the pest and using pheromone traps which would prevent the reproduction of the pest.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
