Uttarakhand wildfire: Massive wildfires in Uttarakhand; Almora, Nainital worst hit

Video of a wildfire in Uttarakhand https://t.co/EP2mIxuvED — TOI Cities (@TOICitiesNews) 1557721913000

Massive wildfires in Uttarakhand; Almora, Nainital worst hit

NAINITAL: Massive forest fires have broken out in the jungles of Almora and Nainital districts. In Nainital district , wildfires have been raging in Bhimtal, Sattal and Devidhura areas; flames raging in inflammable pine jungles on Bhowali Road in the district have left environmentalists particularly worried. The state capital, too, has witnessed around 32 cases of forest fires in the last 11 days.A total of 189.25 hectares of forest area was lost in Almora district which witnessed 76 fire incidents while 168.28 hectares of forests were gutted in Nainital district, which saw the highest number of 170 wildfire incidents.The state has been witness to 595 fire incidents till May 12. Of these, Tehri Garhwal saw 70 fire incidents, Champawat (60), Pauri Garhwal (68), Dehradun (34), Pithoragarh (27), Rudraprayag (26), Bageshwar (20), Chamoli (15), Haridwar (13), Uttarkashi (12), and Udham Singh Nagar (4).Environmentalists say that most of the wildfires are entirely man-made.Vishal Singh, executive director, Dehradun-based CEDAR (Centre for Ecology Development and Research), told TOI, “Wildfires in the Western Himalayan region are almost entirely man-made. Villagers and forest officials set land on fire to burn agricultural residue and for controlled burning of pine needles to encourage grass and fodder growth.”“The real problem arrives when such fires get out of hand,” Singh added.“Experiments show that the productivity of fodder grasses under pine canopy is much higher; for example, the yield of Napier grass (pennisetum purpureum) is close to 8 tonnes per ha per year. The forest department needs to take such simple low-cost measures to avoid forest fires as well as provide green nutritious fodder to the cattle,” Singh said.Meanwhile, local residents have alleged that miscreants are putting jungles on fire.Gauri Rana, a resident who has been fighting forest fires in Sattal for over a week, said, “We saw two people with torches putting jungle on fire. We warned and chased them but they disappeared. Many houses have also been affected due to these fires.”Renu Pal, a resident of Dehradun’s Rajpur area, said, “The forest fire I have seen on Sunday was one of the worst cases in the recent past.” She added that revellers and lack of moisture in forests are to blame for wildfires in the state.Jai Raj, principal chief conservator of forest and head of forest force, Uttarakhand , said, “One person in Kumaon division has already been booked for an attempt to start fires. We are on a high alert statewide to prevent any such act. Many a time, winds help spread of fires started by farmers in their fields to nearby jungle areas.”
