KUNA : Turnout hits 63 pct in sixth phase of Indian parl't elections

12/05/2019 LOC21:20 18:20 GMT

NEW DELHI, May 12 (KUNA) -- Indian Election Commission said on Saturday that the total voter turnout in the sixth phase of General Elections in which around 100 million people are eligible to vote was at 63 percent.

The second last phase of the seven-phased Parliament Elections in 59 constituencies spread over seven states saw high voter turn out, the Election Commission said.

However, there were sporadic incidents of violence in West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh.

A supporter of the Prime Minister Narendra Modi's right-wing Bharatiya Janata Party was allegedly killed by party opponents and a supporter of Trinamool Congress of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee was also found dead.

In the sixth phase, polling took place for 14 seats in Uttar Pradesh, 10 seats in Haryana, eight each in West Bengal, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh, seven seats in Delhi and four in Jharkhand, the Election Commission said.

According to the preliminary assessment of the Election Commission, the overall voter turnout in this phase stood at 63.3 percent.

West Bengal recorded the highest polling at 80.16 percent followed by Jharkhand 64.46 percent, Haryana 62.52 percent, Madhya Pradesh 60.30 percent, Bihar 56.89 percent, Delhi 55.51 percent and Uttar Pradesh at 51.91 percent by 6PM according to the Election Commission figures.

Senior Deputy Election Commissioner Umesh Sinha said that polls have been concluded in 483 constituencies out of 543 Lok Sabha constituency till today.

The current Parliamentary Elections, in which National Democratic Alliance led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party and the opposition Indian National Congress party led by Rahul Ghandi, started on April 11.

The seventh phase is scheduled to take place on 19th May while counting and result announcement would take place on May 23.

Modi's government is facing criticism for its wrong-headed economic policy especially the new tax reforms and demonetization.

The current government is also held responsible for creating an atmosphere of fear among the minorities especially Muslims and pitching them against extremist elements among the majority Hindus.

Opinion polls are not giving any concrete majority to form the government for any of the competing parties and it is seen that any government would be made up of post-election coalition. (end) atk.ibi
