Coimbatore: Youth loses life while trying to save himself from getting robbed, 5 arrested

A body was found abandoned on the railway tracks near the Lanka Corner, the body was later identified as that of Karthick's, a youth from a Southern District (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Coimbatore: A group of five people was arrested for murdering a man on January 15. The arrest was made after the Ukkadam police discovered a body near the railway track at Lanka Corner. The group also included a 20-year-old transsexual named Mani alias Jenifer who identified the body.

The body of an injured boy was found near the railway tracks in the Lanka Corner area. After discovering the body, a police team led by inspector Rajavel inquired in the nearby areas about the frequenters and found Mani, a 20-year old transsexual who finally identified the body.

While talking to the Times of India, a police officer involved in the case revealed that the body was identified as that of Karthick, a resident from a southern district. The officer also added that Karthick used to frequent the area seeking sex where Mani met him. When the two met, the deceased had Rs 7000 in his pocket. In alliance with his friends, Mani tried to rob Karthick of his money.

Also Read: Increasing vehicles, inadequate infrastructure and manpower! Traffic congestion in Thane claims another life

On being robbed, Karthick resorted to shouting in an attempt to save himself and escape. Contrary to his efforts, Mani and his four friends, choked the deceased with a belt which resulted in his death on the spot. After his death, the five accused abandoned his body on the railway tracks where it was discovered by the police.

Senthil, who is a cook from Devakottai, Rajesh, another cook from Kumbakonam and Muthumohammad and Ansar who belonged to Ukkadam and Podanur respectively were the alleged allies of Mani and assisted him in the murder. Muthumohammad and Ansar have pre-existing police records in their names.

Mani used Rs 3000 from the amount that he snatched from the deceased for the purchase of a new mobile phone. Neighbouring police stations are being contacted in the nearby districts in an attempt to identify the dead body and confirm the details.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
