Ali Abbas Zafar: Salman Khan's circus sequences in Bharat inspired from Dharmendra's character in Mera Naam Joker

Salman Khan, who will be seen as a stunt artist in Ali Abbas Zafar's Bharat, is a big fan of veteran actor Dharmendra. Bhaijaan of Bollywood time and again pays respect to his favourite actor on and off-screen. This time, the actor took inspiration from Dharmendra's character from the 1970 film Mera Naam Joker.

Ali Abbas Zafar, director of Bharat, informed DNA that the circus scenes shot with Salman Khan Bharat, who is a stunt artist in a circus, is modelled on Dharmendra in the film Mera Naam Joker. Ali Abbas Zafar said that Bharat is a tribute to Raj Kapoor's Mera Naam Joker. In a recent interview, Ali said, "Our circus sequences are inspired from Raj saab’s Mera Naam Joker. Our circus troupe is international, just like the one in the film."

When Dharmendra was informed that Salman Khan's character in Bharat is based on his character in Mera Naam Joker, the veteran actor expressed his happiness and said, "Salman is like my third son (after Sunny and Bobby). He has always shown the greatest love not just for me, but also for my entire family. I am very fond of Salman. I am not surprised if he has modelled his character on me. He always says I’m his role model, so nice of him."

In Bharat, Salman Khan will be seen donning five different looks. From a young stunt artist to an old inhabitant of Delhi, Salman Khan will portray different age groups in the film. In a recent interview, Ali Abbas Zafar revealed that Salman took nearly two-and-a-half hours to transform into a seventy year old man. The actor had to go an extensive process of prosthetic make-up. "The prosthetics were designed by a UK-based company and executed with Indian make-up artists. SK (Salman) sir also tried over 20 different kinds of beards and mustaches for this look. It's a very tedious process, but he would be patient. It would take him two-and-a-half hours to get ready," said Ali.

Apart from Salman Khan, the film also stars Katrina Kaif, Disha Patani, Tabu and Sunil Grover. Bharat will hit the screen on Eid, 2019.

Watch the official trailer of Bharat:

ALSO READ | Bharat director Ali Abbas Zafar: Took 2.5 hours every day to make Salman Khan 70 years old

ALSO READ | Bharat first poster: Salman Khan rocks salt-and-pepper look in Ali Abbas Zafar's film

ALSO READ | Producer Atul Agnihotri on Salman Khan's Bharat clashing with India's World Cup: It will be fine
