Prabhas: Have done a lot of homework for 'Saaho'

Mumbai: Pan India sensation Prabhas who is currently amidst the shoot of his big budget and high octane action film, Saaho is taking Hindi lessons and going leaps and bounds for the movie.

Saaho is a multilingual film and will be shot and released in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu languages.

While the actor is proficient in the Southern region languages, he is having some difficulty with Hindi. And to do justice to his character, the actor has taken Hindi lessons to get his dialect and fluency right. Though he is familiar with the language, Prabhas cannot converse fluently in it.

Sharing his experience of the preparation Prabhas shares, "Saaho will cater to audiences across the nation with its story and setting. It is not difficult, but Hindi is not my first language. So, a lot of preparation went into it. I can read and write the language, but we don’t speak in Hindi at home."

The actor further adds, "I have done a lot of homework for it and Soni (my teacher) conducted dialogue classes for more than a month. The first schedule was tough for me, but from the second one, it got better. I will only be dubbing for it in Hindi."

Prabhas has left no stone unturned as he went under extensive action workshops for the multilingual film. The actor sometimes spent as many as 10 hours at a stretch to master the new stunts. So far, one has caught just a few glimpses of the film's action scenes in the teaser and the discussion around it clearly shows that the audience is already expecting a surprise element and the novelty of the terrific stunts.

The actor shot to fame with his fantasy adventure movie Baahubali: The Begining, which released in 2015. The second installment of the franchise Baahubali 2: The Conclusion has been the highest grosser films ever in the history of Indian cinema. Prabhas who has dedicated five years to the shoot of Baahubali was showered with multiple offers during the shoot of the film, however, Prabhas chose to focus only on the magnum opus.

The actor will be next seen in the big-budget film 'Saaho' alongside Shraddha Kapoor and his next movie under the direction of ‘Jil’ fame Radha Krishna Kumar. The working title of the movie is ‘Amour’ along with Pooja Hegde.
