Ahead of TN bye-polls, searches carried out in hotel where AMMK functionaries stayed

Ahead of TN bye-polls, searches carried out in hotel where AMMK functionaries stayed

The searches were carried out based on a tip-off that cash and other valuables were stashed at the hotel for distribution to voters.

news TN bye-elections

Tipped off on information that cash and valuables were stashed at a private hotel on TPK Road in Madurai where Amma Makkal Munnetra Kazhagam (AMMK) functionaries were staying, an election flying squad conducted a sudden search on Sunday. An hour-long search was conducted by four teams in around 40 rooms in the three-storey hotel.

While no cash or other incriminating documents were seized from the hotel, sources from the District Election Office had told The Hindu that the search was conducted based on a complaint that cash was stashed at the hotel for distribution to voters in the constituency.

The AMMK functionaries who stayed at the hotel for Tirupparankundram Assembly bye-election campaign, included party’s propaganda secretary Thanga Tamilselvan and party spokesperson CR Saraswathi. While Thanga Tamilselvan was not present at the venue when the search was conducted, CR Saraswathi had addressed the media soon after.

“The Election Commission of India is unable to control cash distribution by the ruling party. However, the ruling party, through the officials, is trying to intimidate us through such raids,” she said.

In April this year, just before the Lok Sabha Elections, a minor tussle ensued between police officers and AMMK functionaries in Andipatti when a flying squad got a tip-off that cash was being hoarded by AMMK party members with the intention to bribe voters ahead of the April 18 Lok Sabha Election. Shots were fired in the air in Theni’s Andipatti when AMMK cadre allegedly refused to let police officials discharge their duty.

This election season has been plagued with allegation of voter bribery and the Lok Sabha Election in Vellore constituency was cancelled after the Income Tax Department seized unaccounted cash from the residence of DMK leaders.

Tamil Nadu saw Lok Sabha Elections in 38 out of 39 constituencies with bye-elections in 18 out of the 22 constituencies on April 18. The remaining four Assembly seats will see bye-polls on May 19 and the results will be announced on May 23.
