India’s first terrorist was a Hindu, his name is Nathuram Godse: Kamal Haasan

Kamal Haasan said he was one of those “proud Indians” who desires an India with equality and where the “three colours” in the tricolour “remained intact.”. (File photo)

Makkal Needhi Maiyam (MNM) founder Kamal Haasan stoked a controversy Sunday night when he said free India’s first terrorist was a “Hindu”, while referring to Mahatama Gandhi’s killer Nathuram Godse.

Addressing an election campaign in Aravakurichi in Tamil Nadu, the actor-politician said he was one of those “proud Indians” who desires an India with equality and where the “three colours” in the tricolour “remained intact.”

“I am not saying this because this is a Muslim-dominated area, but I am saying this before a statue of Gandhi. Free India’s first terrorist was a Hindu, his name is Nathuram Godse. There it (terrorism, apparently) starts,” he said.

Referring to Gandhi’s assassination in 1948, Haasan said he had come here “seeking answers for that murder.”

“Good Indians desire for equality and want the three colours in the tricolour to remain intact. I am a good Indian, will proudly proclaim that,” he added.

Soon after, Modi biopic actor Vivek Oberoi criticised Haasan for the comment. Mentioning that terrorism has no religion, he said Haasan can dub Godse a terrorist, but it’s not fair to specify his religion.

“Dear Kamal sir, you are a great artist. Just like art has no religion, terror has no religion either! You can say Ghodse was a terrorist, why would you specify ‘Hindu’ ? Is it because you were in a Muslim dominated area looking for votes?” tweeted Oberoi, who has been seen campaigning for BJP this election season.

Earlier too, Haasan had stoked a row, when in November 2017, he took potshots at what he termed as “Hindu extremism,” which drew condemnation from the BJP and Hindu outfits. Aravakurichi is one of the four Assembly constituencies where bypolls are scheduled on May 19. MNM has fielded S Mohanraj from this segment.
