Haryana horror! Dead female tech employee's disrobed body found afloat in well

The body of the missing woman was discovered after the police received a call from the control room informing them about the same (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: A 25-year-old woman was found dead in a well in Jhajjar district in Haryana. The dead body of the woman was found after she went missing from near her home situated in Najafgarh. The body which had injury marks all over it, was found in a well in a farm in Jhajjar, which is a part of Haryana.

The deceased woman was employed with a tech company based in Gurugram and had gone missing on Thursday. According to reports, a medical board has been formed in order to perform the autopsy of the deceased in order to direct further investigation.

Senior police officers told the Times of India that the case has been registered under the Haryana police and that the woman was last seen near her residence at 7 pm on Thursday. The police also mentioned that no complaint concerning the incident was lodged with them and that the family of the deceased ventured alone in the quest of the missing woman.

Also Read: Gujarat horror! In rage man kills wife with axe, injures minor sons: commits suicide

The report also stated that Jhajjar police received a Police Control Room (PCR) call about the dead body of a woman which was afloat inside the well of a farm. The woman was identified as a resident from Najafgarh after the police team went to the area. The message about the same was then conveyed to the Delhi Police, after which, identification was done by the family members of the deceased.

After the incident, the footage of nearby CCTV cameras was seen in order to gauge the whereabouts of the deceased. Reportedly, the police is also considering the possibility of this being an abduction case. The police also contacted the owner of the farm to trace any possible connection of the woman with him.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
