India aims to be hub for shooting world class films: official - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-05-13 16:19:47|Editor: Shi Yinglun

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, May 13 (Xinhua) -- The Indian delegation to the Cannes Film Festival, to be held in France on May 14-25, would popularise shooting of films in India through Film Facilitation Office that facilitates Single Window Clearance for film-makers, an official said on Monday.

The delegation would also strengthen the steps by the Indian government to combat film piracy, Secretary in the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting Amit Khare added.

The official further stated that India will be showcased as a post-production hub to promote collaborations for films with international production houses, in order to take advantage of availability of technicians and skilled professionals.

A comprehensive Film Guide will also be distributed at the India pavilion to showcase the importance of the film ecosystem and government incentives to shoot in India.

Elaborating further, Khare said the initiatives such as co-production and single window clearance would facilitate integration of the Indian filmmakers with production houses worldwide.

He further added that "it would be possible for filmmakers of different countries to come together under bilateral co-production agreements. These arrangements would also forge new markets and wider audiences by making India a hub for shooting world class movies."

The India Pavilion at the Cannes Film Festival will showcase Indian cinema across linguistic, cultural and regional diversity, with the aim of forging international partnerships in distribution, production, filming in India, script development, technology, promoting film sales and syndication, said an official statement.

The pavilion would also serve as a platform for the Indian delegates to meet international delegates attending the Film Festival to promote networking with other countries and organizations. Besides, it would serve as an information dissemination point about India and Indian cinema for the global film community.

The Indian delegation to the film festival this year will be led by Khare, and would consist of Chairman of the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) Prasoon Joshi, and acclaimed filmmakers Rahul Rawail, Shaji N. Karun and Madhur Bhandarkar.

During the film festival, the Indian delegation members will be interacting with key stakeholders of Cannes as well as other members of the film fraternity. A key focus area of the Indian delegation this year will be to promote the Golden Jubilee Edition of the International Film Festival of India to be held in southern state of Goa later this year.
