Khayala Ground Report: Neighbours Recall Gory Triple Murders, Say They Have Been Wrongly Painted As Cowards

Veerpal worked as a labourer in a cloth factory, making just about enough to pay the modest monthly rent of around Rs 5,000. "The family was so poor that they had to pull out Saahil — the couple's surviving 11-year-old son — from school," said a resident.

In contrast, Azad is perhaps the richest in the colony who owns all the three floors of his building. Neighbours say Azad owns one more house in the area. They say while Azad's wife and children lived in Khayala, he spent most of his years in Saudi Arabia and Mumbai, before moving into this colony about two years ago.

They also recall that Azad often boasted to residents about being from a superior caste.

Eyewitnesses Recall The Savagery

Veerpal lived on the third floor of the building right opposite to Azad's. Azad's immediate neighbour Sonia (she only uses her first name) is a key eyewitness to the gory incident.

She recalls, "barely half an hour before she was killed, Sunita came to me asking for Rs 500, promising she would return it soon. Sunita often borrowed money from me but she always returned it on time. I gave her the note and she went to the market to buy vegetables. When she returned, she looked furious. She kept the vegetable bag outside and barged into her house, shouting and telling Aakash to give her the mobile number so she could dial 100 and call the police. Azad had said something to her while she was still entering the colony."

Azad had entered his house and locked the door from inside when an enraged Aakash rushed down the stairs and kicked at Azad's door. Aakash was loudly demanding why Azad abused his mother, saying he needed a faisla [decision] to the recurring fights. Moments later, Azad emerged with a meat chopper and stabbed Aakash. "A chunk of his flesh fell down," says Sonia.

Sunita and Veerpal ran downstairs, shouting and telling Aakash to leave the spot. Aakash managed to reach the colony's exit but Azad dragged Sunita and Veerpal out in the open and manically went on a stabbing spree. "Their intestines came out. It's even visible in the video," says Sonia.

Azad fled the scene immediately. "Within minutes, his wife, along with her two children, came down and locked her house, telling us she is going to the police station to lodge a complaint against her husband," a resident said.

"But she instead went to a relative's house. Around 10 pm she phoned one of us to inquire if police had come. We lied and said no. But we passed on the number [from which she made the call] to the police. That's how they caught her," a resident said.

When Swarajya visited the colony on Saturday, Azad's house was locked and his wife and children were in police custody. The two minor children of Veerpal also were in police custody while their flat was swarmed with neighbours and relatives.
