BJP has alliance with 125 crore people, but 'Mahagathbandhan' all about corruption: PM Modi

Follow us on "This alliance is between the 'Naamdaars'. This alliance is about nepotism, corruption, scams, negativity, instability and inequality", the prime minister added.

Describing the show of strength by opposition parties in Kolkata on Saturday as an 'alliance among the corrupt', Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday said that the Bharatiya Janata Party had an alliance with '125 crore people' of the country.

Taking a jibe at the recently formed Grand Alliance between Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party in Uttar Pradesh ahead of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, PM Modi said that this 'mahagathbandhan' is a unique type of alliance. "This alliance is between the 'Naamdaars'. This alliance is about nepotism, corruption, scams, negativity, instability and inequality", the prime minister added.

Addressing BJP's booth level workers of Maharashtra and Goa through video conference, PM Modi stated; "They have formed an alliance with 125 crore countrymen. Which alliance do you think is stronger? Most leaders at that stage in Kolkata were either sons of influential people or were trying to set their own children in politics. They have money power, while we have people's support".

Lashing out at the opposition parties for their concern over the efficacy of EVMs, PM Modi said; "They have already started making excuses for their defeat in 2019 general elections. EVM is being made a villain. It is natural that every political party wants to win the polls, but it is worrisome if some parties take the public for granted. They consider public stupid and keep changing their colours".

Earlier on Saturday during an address in Silvassa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, PM Modi fired a fresh salvo at the Opposition Mega Rally in Kolkata and the SP-BSP Alliance in Uttar Pradesh. He also stressed the fact that the BJP government is constantly working towards the betterment of 130 crore Indians.
