Telangana Cong spokesperson Nagesh suspended after clashing with Hanumantha Rao

Telangana Cong spokesperson Nagesh suspended after clashing with Hanumantha Rao

The tiff began after Hanumantha Rao objected to Nagesh sitting on the chair meant for AICC General Secretary RC Khuntia.

news Politics

The Telangana Pradesh Congress has suspended party spokesperson Nagesh Mudiraj after he came to blows with another leader during a protest in Hyderabad. He clashed with senior Congress leader and former member of Rajya Sabha V Hanumantha Rao publicly, and led to Hanumantha Rao collapsing during the fight over a chair. The entire incident was caught on camera.

In a video of the tiff that surfaced, Hanumantha Rao and Nagesh were pushing each other on the dais in the presence of AICC General Secretary and in-charge of party affairs R C Khuntia and leaders of various opposition parties. The fight broke out during a meeting at Hyderabad’s Indira Park which was organised by opposition parties to protest against the errors by the Telangana State Board of Intermediate Examination (TSBIE) in the results that were declared.

The tiff began after Hanumantha Rao objected to Nagesh sitting on the chair meant for Khuntia. A heated exchange followed, and they began pushing each other.

In the melee, Nagesh collapsed on the ground. He stood up and pushed Hanumanth Rao, who too fell down leaving the leaders and other protestors in shock.

Leaders of Telugu Desam Party (TDP), Communist Party of India (CPI), Telangana Jana Samithi (TJS) and others intervened to bring the situation under control.

This did not go down well with the Congress leadership. Khuntia, state Congress chief Uttam Kumar Reddy and other senior leaders took a serious view of the incident.

The day-long protest meeting was called by the Congress and other opposition parties over the bungling by the Board of Intermediate Education in the results of Intermediate (11th and 12th standard).

The parties had also invited parents of 22 students who committed suicide over the failure in the exams. The opposition has blamed the government for the suicides and demanded compensation for their families.
