Protests in Kashmir following rape of three-year-old girl

Advertisement

Violent clashes erupted in Kashmir today as stone-throwing protesters battled riot police in a wave of anger after a three-year-old girl was raped in a school bathroom.

Dozens of people were injured in the Himalayan province as government forces fired tear gas and pellet guns to quell the protests.

Schools and shops across the Kashmir Valley shut spontaneously thousands of people joined the demonstrations to demand that the alleged culprit be executed.

The suspect, a car mechanic and a neighbour of the victim's family, allegedly lured the child into the toilet of a nearby school and raped her there last Wednesday.

Fury: Female Kashmiri protesters shout slogans and raise their arms in a protest march on the outskirts of Srinagar today, as thousands took to the streets to demand the death penalty for a man suspected of raping a three-year-old girl

Raising the issue: A woman wearing a veil and red headscarf raises her arm in protest as female demonstrators shout slogans in Kashmir today at a rally against the alleged rape of a three-year-old girl by a local man at Malikpora

Retaliation: A Kashmiri protester throws back an exploded tear gas shell at Indian police during violent clashes today

Onslaught: A protester launches a stone at Indian police during clashes on the outskirts of Srinagar, followed by a large crowd of people following the masked attackers down a road

Slogan: A group of protesters, some of them children, hold up a sign saying: 'The culprit should be hanged for this shameful act' during the demonstrations in Kashmir today

The man, who comes from the Sumbal area north of the main city of Srinagar and is thought to be 20 years old, has already been arrested.

But there was further anger today after it was claimed that the principal of another school had vouched for the suspect, saying he was only 13 years old.

Thousands of people took to the streets in the Indian-controlled part of Kashmir today as security forces wearing riot gear tried to calm the violence.

Hundreds of students at three university campuses also protested, demanding capital punishment for the alleged perpetrator and action against the school principal.

Lawyers abstained from work in the courts on Monday to express solidarity with the victim, with many schools and shops in the Muslim-majority region also closed.

Arms raised: A group of young men make themselves noticed near Srinagar while one of them hurls a stone at police, as protests erupted at several places on the second consecutive day in Indian Kashmir

Strength in numbers: A group of female Kashmiri protesters cover the width of a road near Srinagar and hold a sign saying that the alleged suspect should be hanged

Ready for battle: A female Kashmiri protester holds a stone in her hand during a protest on the outskirts of Srinagar

Aggression: A Kashmiri protester throws stones at Indian policemen during clashes on the outskirts of Srinagar, the summer capital of Indian Kashmir

At least a dozen people including government forces personnel were injured in the clashes, top police officer Swayam Prakash Pani told AFP.

'One of the injured protestors is critically wounded,' Pani said, adding that police had registered a separate case against the school principal and detained him for questioning.

Condemnations of the crime poured in from leaders from across the political spectrum appealing for calm, with a top separatist leader, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq saying on Monday the incident was 'a crime against humanity'.

Another separatist leader with a wide following in Kashmir, Syed Ali Geelani, said the alleged crime was 'a black stain on the social fabric' of Kashmir.

Separatists have for decades fought an armed conflict against Indian rule in Muslim-majority Kashmir. The majority of these groups want independence for Kashmir or to join India's arch-rival Pakistan.

Noise: A group of protesters shout slogans and raise their hands during the protests today which saw police fire tear smokes shells to disperse stone throwing protesters in the Himalayan province

Stoking anger: Protesters throw sticks to make a fire today as they hold up placards and shout slogans near Srinagar today

The Muttahida Majlis-e-Ulema (MMU), a council of Muslim religious leaders and scholars, said they wanted to address what they said was a rise in sexual violence in the region.

Crimes against women jumped eight per cent to 3,168 cases in 2017 from 2,915 the previous year, according to government figures.

Baseer Ahmad Khan - the region's top administrator - also appealed for calm and said in a statement that the 'enquiry of Sumbal incident is being conducted on a fast-track basis'.

In January 2018, an eight-year-old girl was abducted, starved for a week and murdered after she was raped by several people in the southern Kathua area of the territory.

That incident caused widespread outrage and protests in Kashmir and many Indian cities and towns.

The outrage has also drawn comparisons with the massive protests that followed the gang rape and murder of a woman on a Delhi bus in 2012.

Making themselves heard: A man walks away from a group of shouting women near Srinagar amid violent clashes on Monday
