Top news of the day: MHA tweaks travel norms to Nepal and Bhutan, comments against Mayawati trigger controversy, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

Aadhaar cards are now valid travel documents for Indians under 15 and over 65 travelling to Nepal and Bhutan, according to a Home Ministry communique. Indians other than those in the two age brackets will not be able to use Aadhaar to travel to the two neighbouring countries, for which no visas are needed, clarified the communique issued recently.

A BJP MLA in Uttar Pradesh has triggered a controversy after targeting BSP chief Mayawati with objectionable comments, saying she “lost everything” for power and comfort, and was a “blot on womankind”.

Unfazed by the Opposition’s show of unity at a rally in Kolkata, Prime Minister Narendra Modi dismissed it as an alliance of corruption, negativity and instability, saying while those parties have “money power”, the BJP has “people’s power”.

Union Minister Prakash Javadekar on January 20 remarked that the country would be in the grip of anarchy with Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Taking potshots at Opposition rally organised by the Trinamool Congress in Kolkata, Mr. Javadekar said: “All the Opposition parties who banded together during Saturday’s rally in Kolkata wish to overthrow Prime Minister Modi. But then who is the alternative? They are incapable of presenting an alternative… such is the condition in the country that if there is no Modi, there will be anarchy.”

U.S. President Donald Trump on Saturday offered to temporarily shield a million immigrants from deportation if Congress authorises funding for his Mexican border wall — an idea Democrats rejected, making the U.S. government shutdown likely to grind on.

The burial ground of Yusuf Shah Chak, who ruled Kashmir from 1579 to 1586 and was one of the last native rulers of independent Kashmir, is under threat from landgrabbers. The mutawalli (caretaker) of the cemetery in Biswak village in Bihar’s Nalanda district where Yusuf Shah is buried, has written over 200 letters to the government, seeking protection for the monument. But the encroachment has continued, with villagers building homes on the graveyard land.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi has condemned “fascist forces” attempting to “destroy the idea of India” in a letter to Manipur journalist Kishorechandra Wangkhem detained almost two months ago on charges of sedition.

BJP president Amit Shah, who was undergoing treatment for swine flu at All India Institute of Medical Sciences in Delhi, was discharged on Sunday. “Shah was discharged at 10.20 a.m. from AIIMS after recovering from swine flu,” said an AIIMS official.

Taking a step forward to boost indigenous production, Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman inaugurated the Tamil Nadu Defence Industrial Corridor on January 20. The Tamil Nadu Defence Industrial Corridor — also called the Tamil Nadu Defence Production Quad as the nodal cities form a quadrilateral — includes Chennai, Hosur, Salem, Coimbatore and Tiruchirappalli as nodes.

Come Pongal, it is time for festivities and the traditional sport of jallikattu. With a spurt in the number of events, are organisers playing by the rules?

Gerardo Perez returned on Saturday to the scorched field in central Mexico where he’d seen an illegal pipeline tap burst into flames to see if he could recognize missing friends. He couldn’t. Only a handful of the remains still had skin. Dozens were burned to the bone or to ash when the gusher of gasoline exploded, killing at least 73 people.

A BJP leader was found dead in Barwani district of Madhya Pradesh on January 20 morning, with the police suspecting that he was murdered. The death of Manoj Thakre (48) came to light three days after another BJP leader was shot dead in Mandsaur, prompting the party to claim that its leaders were being targeted.
