Signature Bridge to get safety overhaul

After 12 deaths in a span of six months, authorities seem to have woken up to the possibility that Delhi's Signature Bridge, a politically muchcoveted structure, might have serious flaws that need immediate remedies.

The bridge across the Yamuna was compared to the Eiffel Tower by Delhi's Tourism Minister Manish Sisodia during the inauguration ceremony on November 4 last year. But within months it has earned the reputation of a deadly, accident-prone stretch.

On April 25, a 22-year-old boy died and three of his friends were injured when their SUV hit a roadside barrier on the bridge. Six days before that, another 25-year-old biker died when a metal wire pierced his chest on the bridge. He was killed at the exact spot where two friends - a doctor and a student - had fallen off their bike on November 23 last year and died.

When it was launched amid much fanfare, parties were literally jostling with each other to claim credit for the bridge - that connects Wazirabad to the inner city. But none of the politicians fighting for credit has pointed out the flaws in its engineering that are now under examination.

In the latest measure, a safety audit of the bridge will be taken up as part of Delhi government's Zero Fatality Corridor Project with the objective to eliminate accidents, Mail Today has learnt.

The 'Zero Fatality Corridor' model, which has helped reduce road crash deaths by 30% on the Mumbai-Pune Expressway, looks at 360-degree intervention, road engineering, police enforcement, rapid emergency care and road-user engagement. Among the measures to be studied and the faults addressed are identifying gaps in medians/dividers and missing shoulders (emergency stopping lanes) and putting in place speed curbs, de-congestion, better signage, signaling and a quicker emergency response system.

THE PRECEDENT

The project, being conducted jointly by the Delhi government, the Delhi Police and road safety non-profit SaveLife Foundation, aims at assessing the causes for the crashes. The police will help investigate the accidents and Delhi government will help provide access in terms of engineering-related work. The idea is to study if the engineering design is indeed leading to fatal accidents and how stringent enforcement measures, preferably electronic surveillance, can help avert further mishaps.

The precedent is evident in the Mumbai-Pune Expressway. Addressing issues such as ironing out engineering flaws, enhancing the reach of emergency care and enforcement of traffic rules have helped cut fatalities on the Maharashtra expressway from 158 in 2016-17 to 105 in 2017-18. The ultimate objective is to bring accidents down to zero by 2020.

"We included the Signature Bridge in the Zero Fatality Corridor project because of the frequent crashes. The audit, which began in February, was earlier limited to just three kilometers, the stretch between Burari Chowk and Bhalaswa Chowk. Now after adding the bridge and the other peripheral roads, the stretch becomes 12 kilometres," said Piyush Tewari, CEO and Founder, SaveLife Foundation.

Based on the causes identified, the non-profit will recommend counter-measures for Delhi government and Delhi Police to implement and make up the corridor fatality free.

"The drawings of the design and other recommendations will be ready by next month and will be submitted to the state government," Tewari said.

THE BIGGER PICTURE

According to Delhi Traffic Police statistics, 1,690 people were killed and 6,086 injured in 6,515 road crashes in 2018. While 12 deaths owing to road accidents were reported on the Signature Bridge alone, the threekm stretch excluding the bridge is known to be one of the most dangerous stretches, claiming 33 lives since November.

The Delhi Traffic police acknowledge engineering flaws as the probable reason for the accidents and say a number of surveys have been done, but the ground reality hasn't changed.

"We have already submitted recommendations of a survey by Central Road Research Institute to the construction agency (Delhi Tourism) which is yet to adopt them," said Taj Hasan,Special Commissioner, Traffic.

Rakesh Pawaria, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Traffic, said the department was already taking measures such as installing speed guns in the morning and evening hours to curb mishaps. "The approach road towards the bridge is really narrow. This leads to traffic congestion."

OFFICIAL APATHY

After the accidents in April, Shishir Bansal, Chief Engineer of the Signature Bridge project (earlier known as Wazirabad Bridge Project), had ruled out any technical issues on the bridge and attributed the mishaps to the "over-enthusiasm

enthusiasm" of youngsters.

The general manager of Delhi Tourism and Transport Development Corporation (DTTDC), C Arvind, who is looking into the recommendations, said, "Issues have been identified as per various survey audits. We will implement the recommendations once we finalise them."

Signature, the country's first asymmetrical cable-stayed bridge, which was constructed by the DTTDC at a cost of Rs 1518.37 crore, was inaugurated last year amid a credit war between the Congress, the BJP and the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP). While the Arvind Kejriwal government claimed it had completed the long-pending project, the Congress said it was started by the Sheila Dikshit government in 1998. Minutes before the inauguration, local BJP MP Manoj Tiwari and his supporters were allegedly involved in a scuffle with AAP workers and the police.

Safety experts have come up with their own solutions to cut fatalities. "When you come from a low-speed zone to a high-speed one, it is difficult for motorists to change lanes, and that leads to fatal accidents. To resolve this fault, having separate textured roads for (high-speed and lowspeed stretches) could be a solution, besides installation of reflectors, night blinkers and strict implementation of speed limits. Separating two-wheeler lanes could be wiser here as they have been proved more vulnerable to fatalities on the Signature Bridge," recommends Professor Sewa Ram, a road safety expert from the School of Planning and Architecture.
