Why a united Africa offers great prospects for an emerging Kenya

Swahili is a rich and beautiful language. Our ancestors have passed down meaningful stories and phrases for generations that encourage us to be stronger together.

We come across phrase after phrase that speaks of the importance of working together. 'Chombo hakiendi ikiwa kila mtu anapiga makasia yake', 'Dau la upweke haliendi joshi', 'Jifya moja haliinjiki chungu'. Working together and cooperating is at the heart of our culture.

Ever since the struggle for our independence, discussions have prevailed on what Kenya is. Is this modern nation State made up of multiple tribes and subtribes? With sporadic outbreaks of violence, those questions have been rehashed over and over again; can this formula work?

Are we stronger together? Can the Kikuyu, Luo, Luhya, Kalenjin, Kisii and Kamba really live and work alongside one another in harmony under the national banner?

We even heard discussions on potential breakaway sections of the country. Who can forget the post-election threats by Raila Odinga that he would cut off the Luo and Luhya parts of the country and secede into an independent ‘Western Kenya’.

Many have spent great amounts of energy on these pages convincing us that we are all now post-tribalism. That we are one Kenya and that we are beyond the ethnic fissures that have held us back for so long.

The masses

To an extent they are right. Or at least their aspirations are well placed. Perhaps today, the solution of strong independent nation states is not enough for Africa to take off and thrive. To bring true prosperity and opportunities to the masses.

After all, what are these colonial lines drawn for us by outsiders? Is it not time we thought bigger?

The answer being pushed by many proud Kenyans, and indeed committed nationalists is not to brush off our Kenyan identity, but to build on it.

To add a new level that says, yes I am Kamba, yes I am Kenyan, and yes I am African; part of this great continent and this great super nation.

African pride is slowly creeping back into our vocabulary, into our popular culture, into our mindsets.

The inter-governmental bodies, be it the EAC, SADC, ECOWAS and of course the AU have proven to be positive influences in the region. The mere fact that the AU does not recognise military coups itself has led to a massive decline in military take-overs and greater stability.

But reducing tariffs and increasing cooperation are just the beginning. The challenges which we face today are almost all multi-national in their nature.

The greatest threats to the people of Africa today are simply not country specific. Corruption. A lack of jobs. Drought exacerbated by global warming. Terrorism. These problems are common across our continent.

Trade deals

They demand a united response. They demand unity. All the countries of Africa must come together and demand transparency of their leaders, local and national. They must work hand in hand with countries such as Switzerland and other offshore tax havens to find out where our money has disappeared to.

Our riches have been siphoned off for far too long. We must now come together and claim them back.

Likewise, in the realm of job creation. A strong united African economy can raise everyone up. A rising tide, after all, lifts all boats. A common economic union, a single strong currency, a powerful block with which to negotiate trade deals with the likes of India, China and the EU.

Let’s not forget that together we are nearly four times the size of the United States. In fact, the US, Canada, Mexico and the entirety of Europe is still no demographic match for the continent of Africa.

Intelligence sharing, fiscal and monetary coordination, trade links and massive infrastructure building can turn this land mass into the safest, securest and fastest growing investment on the planet.

And just as the creation of nation states and national identities didn’t wipe out tribal affinities, cultures of traditions, the supra-state of Africa can supplement without negating.

'Chombo hakiendi ila kwa nyenzo'. This cannot therefore happen alone, it won’t be a passive process or an organic amalgamation. This fusion will need real leadership.

The embrace of pan-Africanism should be welcomed by us all. It’s time to think big.

Mr Temba is a communication consultant.

Share this story
