Priyanka vs PM in MP’s Ratlam

shalender@tribune.com

Anup Dutta

Bhopal, May 13

Playing on PM Narendra Modi’s “tapasya” comment, AICC general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra today remarked: “Modi ji ek bahut badey tapaswi hai, jinhoney 50 saal tapasya ki. paanch saalon mein tapasya dwara hi kitney badey badey kaam kar daley (Modi ji is a great tapasvi who has done tapasya for 50 years. In the past five years, all works were done through his tapasya).” She was addressing her first-ever public meeting in Ratlam, Madhya Pradesh, after being made AICC general secretary.

She alleged the “tapasvi” PM ignored the sufferings of farmers, youth, the weak and others sections. “Modi reaches out to you only during rallies. He did not find five minutes in five years to visit the home of a poor person or farmer in his constituency Varanasi.”

The PM in an interview with a leading newspaper had said that his image was not the creation of the “Khan Market gang” (in Delhi), but his 45-year tapasya (hard work). Priyanka alleged that Modi government’s five-year tenure witnessed only “prachar and prasar” and no work.

She told the gathering to question representatives and leaders of their areas and cautioned the people, especially women, not to be influenced by those who made “fake” promises.“You are being used politically. It is you who make politicians. Understand your strength. Your vote is important, don’t waste it,” she urged.

Earlier, Priyanka visited Mahakaleshwar Temple in Ujjain, the fourth member of the Gandhi family to do so.

She later held a roadshow in Indore to drum up support for Congress candidate Pankaj Sanghvi.

PM Modi, also addressing a public meeting in Ratlam, reiterated Sam Pitroda’s ‘Hua toh hua’ remark on the 1984 anti-Sikh riots to corner the Congress.

He recalled the sacrifice of Lieutenant Commander Dharmendra Singh Chouhan, a Ratlam native who was killed while fighting a blaze aboard INS Vikramaditya recently. “On the other hand is the naamdar’s family, who used a warship for picnic. When questions are raised about it, they shamelessly say hua toh hua,” he remarked.

The Ratlam Lok Sabha seat is part of the Malwa- Nimar region which is seen as the nerve centre of electoral politics. It is said that Madhya Pradesh election results (both Assembly and parliamentary) are decided in Malwa–Nimar, that elects eight MPs and 66 MLAs.

In 2014, the BJP won all eight seats in the region while in the Assembly elections, the Congress won 35 seats and formed government after 15 years.
