Modi used digi cam, e-mail in ’87-88

India got 1st digital cam in ’87 & Net in ’95, but…



Narendra Modi

digital camera

Jawaharlal Nehru

Asaduddin Owaisi

.

Former chairman-cum-managing director of the Videsh Sanchar Nigam Limited, BK Syngal on Monday admitted to having “goofed up” for bad services when internet browsing was launched in India. Syngal need not have apologised though. Testimony for India’s highquality internet services have come from none other than Prime Ministerhimself, who had used it at least seven years before being launched.After being trolled for his ‘cloud theory’ on the Balakot air strike, the PM on Monday came under attack from politicians as well as twitterati for his claims that he had usedand email in 1987-88 to send across a photo of his mentor and party veteran LK Advani in a timely manner. He had said this in response to a query during an interview to a news channel.“First time I used digital camera in 1987 or 1988… then a handful of people had email. At one of the public meetings of (LK) Advaniji, I had a digital camera. I took a photo of Advaniji and transmitted it to Delhi. He was surprised and said how did my colour photo appear today,” Modi told the interviewers.He had told the same interviewers that he had suggested to the IAF to go ahead with the Balakot air strikes despite clouds saying that the cloud cover could prevent detection by Pakistani radars. The comment has since been subjected to memes, jokes and also serious debates by ‘chowkidars’ like Baijayanta Jay Panda who quoted from Quora, an online question-answer platform, to justify Modi’s radar theory.The email and digital camera clip that went viral left economists, filmmakers and rival politicians in the country wide-eyed because internet services did not come into India till August 1995.However, there was some truth in what Modi said. In the mid-80s, email was indeed available to “handful of people”. That included scientists at the Mumbai-based National Centre for Software Technology (now known as Centre for Development of Advanced Computing) and IIT-Bombay. The year was 1986 when a dial-up link was established between the two centres.Modi claims to have crossed crocodile-infested rivers as a child to attend school, killed terrorists across the border as Prime Minister, whose degree in Entire Political Science remains the most-guarded document in the country, but has not yet staked claim to having close ties with either the IITs or the NCST, both set up by former PMsand Rajiv Gandhi, targets of Modi’s derision in this poll campaign.“This is the latest in the long series of delusional assertions, fudged claims and brazen lies uttered by Modi. These would make for a great joke if the matter was not so serious involving the post of PM,” tweeted CPM general secretary Sitaram Yechury.In the same interview, Modi claimed he never used a wallet because he did not have anything (meaning cash) to keep or did not have a bank account till 2001 when he first entered the Gujarat legislature. The statement of course was keeping in tune with the frequent assertion of his poverty and tea-seller background.“PMO India ke paas batwa nahi tha (kyun ki paise nahi the!) lekin 1988 mein digital camera aur email tha? All of this would be really funny if it weren’t so embarrassing. A PM who’ll literally say ANYTHING that comes to his mind can’t possibly be trusted with our national security,” tweetedArjun Malhotra, claiming to be a positive human, tweeted: Maybe, he had an academic friend who helped him out with this stuff. Nikon sold its first digicam in India in ’87, so Modi could have used a borrowed one in 1987.”Like the classmates in the Entire Political Science stream, India is waiting to hear from Modi’s academic friend.Tweeters have credited Modi with discovering printing press by putting a paper instead of sugarcane in a sugar-cane crusher, the Global Positioning System after he once lost his way, the Apple logo by throwing a bitten apple at Steve Jobs, colour TV by scribbling with crayons on a black and white television screens among scores of other such “inventions”.“First time I used digital camera in 1987 or 1988… then a handful of people had email. At one of the public meetings of (LK) Advaniji, I had a digital camera. I took a photo of Advaniji and transmitted it to Delhi. He was surprised and said how did my colour photo appear today,” the PM had told the interviewers.
