Mumbai: Man helps identify erring employee only to be abducted and murdered by her friend

The owner of Alpha Metals, Palghar was on his way to his factory when the incident took place (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A group of three men were arrested after they allegedly abducted and killed a man. The deceased was identified as Arif Shaikh. The deceased was travelling in his car when he was allegedly attacked by the accused. The accused allegedly burned the body of the deceased.

The deceased was a businessman. Allegedly, his body was burnt in the Dahanu forest. The police are suspecting the incident to be caused by personal enmity.

The police detained a woman who was fired from her job because of embezzlement. The deceased used to supply metal parts to the firm where the woman used to work. The accused had allegedly relocated to Bengaluru just a week before the incident took place. The woman had allegedly accused the deceased of informing her boss about the embezzlement.

While talking to the Times of India, Additional Superintendent of police, Yogesh Chavan stated that the deceased was abducted by his business rival, Prashant Sankhe. Sankhe was allegedly assisted by his supervisor and relative. The owner of Alpha Metals, Palghar was on his way to his factory when the incident took place.

The accused allegedly made the deceased enter into a white SUV and strangled him to death. It was further alleged that the deceased was then taken to the Birwadi forests and was burnt there. The accused allegedly used 15 litres of petrol to set the deceased ablaze. It was the brother of the deceased who guided the police to the accused.

The accused, Prashant was friends with the woman. The accused allegedly blamed the deceased for exposing his friend. It was alleged that the police was informed about the incident in just 30 minutes but they did not reach the deceased on time. The superintendent, Chavan had another story to tell. Chavan stated that they formed four teams and tracked the accused using the phone locations of the deceased.
