Delhi: After revival, Neela Hauz lake battles public apathy, faces threat to existence

The officials of the biodiversity park has recently procured a boat to sweep the waste from the lake every morning. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: The public apathy is back after revival of Neela Hauz lake in South Delhi three years back. The public has again made the lake a dumping ground for all kinds of waste. People park their vehicle near the lake, situated on the Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, and dump all waste including plastic bottles, puja material among other waste material.

According to a report in Times of India, the biodiversity park officials have written to Delhi Development Authority seeking fencing of the road around the lake to prevent people from dumping the waste.

The officials of the biodiversity park that comes under Delhi Development Authority (DDA) has recently procured a boat to sweep the waste from the lake every morning.

"The first thing we do each morning is to take a boat ride and two staff members carry out a clean-up.We retrieve all types of waste items. Plastic bags can be seen floating on the surface, but heavier items sink to the bottom and are more difficult to remove.People also offer prayers like they do at the Yamuna and puja materials have been found on a daily basis. We have tried to stop people but they seldom listen," the report quoted in-charge at Neela Hauz, Yasser Arafat, as saying.

Arafat has also worked also worked on the revival project of the lake. Park officials say that they have even found carcasses of animals in the lake.

It was Centre for Environmental Management of Degraded Ecosystems (CEMDE) that had started the work on the revival of the lake in 2015. In in 2016, the CEMDE also constructed a wetland system, which naturally purifies the water reaching the lake. After its revival, the Neela Hauz lake emerged as the ‘model’ for rejuvenating other waterbodies in the capital.

"The lake was seeing an increase in the arrival of birds each year, but the waste might disturb the habitat," the report quoted Faiyaz Khudsar, scientist-in charge at Yamuna Biodiversity Park, as saying.
