Video: Will Smith talks about his Bollywood ambition in Jordan

Video: Will Smith talks about his Bollywood ambition in Jordan

Reuters

Disney's upcoming film 'Aladdin' featuring Will Smith will release in the UAE on May 23.

By Arti Dani Published: Tue 14 May 2019, 9:25 AM Last updated: Wed 22 May 2019, 11:23 AM

We went all the way to Jordan to meet the star cast of Disney's upcoming live-action film Aladdin featuring Will Smith, Mena Massoud and Naomi Scott.

The film enjoyed a premiere in Amman, Jordan because a significant portion of the movie was shot here in collaboration with the Royal Film Commission. Over one hundred fifty crew members from the Royal Film Commission of Jordan were involved in the making of this film. The film which narrates one of the most loved Arabic stories of Genie and Aladdin was shot for around three weeks in Jordan. Many generations of people have grown up reading this story of Genie and his magic lamp. Director Guy Ritchie also attended the special screening in Amman.

Watch: @KTCityTimes at the first regional screening of @disneyaladdin in Amman, Jordan.



Read our interview with #WillSmith, @MenaMassoud, @NaomiScott and @realguyritchie here - https://t.co/09tzOm3Xts #MagicCarpetTour #AladdinAmman #Aladdin @Disney



(Video by Arti Dani/KT) pic.twitter.com/QhTFu2ZADj

— Khaleej Times (@khaleejtimes) May 14, 2019 The film is being praised for its diverse class. The lead star cast of the film comes from Egyptian and Indian background.

Director Guy Ritchie said that the natural location of Wadi Rum added a lot of authenticity to the Disney classic, "I was familiar with the Jordan topography and geography, and so it was a natural choice."

Disney's #Aladdin stars Will Smith, @MenaMassoud, @NaomiScott, and director @realguyritchie attend the Jordan press conference and screening! (1/3) pic.twitter.com/1zIyeR6XXa

- Disney's Aladdin (@disneyaladdin) May 14, 2019 The Men in Black star Will said that he was the happiest shooting in Wadi Rum because of the warm weather, "When we were in Wadi Rum, you experience the wonder and awe that you want to infuse the character with. We had the greatest time shooting here because it was so beautiful. Naomi was the only one who was not scheduled to work here, and hence she missed out on a lot of fun."

British actress Naomi who is getting a lot of praise for giving a modern take to the character of Princess Jasmine spoke about the lavish lives of the movie stars, "Will is so generous as he was willing to fly me to Jordan even though I was not scheduled to shoot there. Unfortunately, I had organized many meeting in Los Angeles, and hence I couldn't be here."

Whereas Mena who plays the title role said, "Jordan reminds me of a lot of my home Egypt and people are incredibly kind. There is so much peace in the middle of the desert."

One of the biggest stars of this world, Will Smith, spoke about his Bollywood ambition as well, "I have never done a musical before. I am in India all the time. I did an episode on a show called Bucket LIst, and one of my bucket lists was to be in a Bollywood dance sequence. I met Ranveer Singh and Karan Johar, and they fulfilled my dream. I am not a dancer, but I am comfortable looking silly. I am a massive fan of Bollywood dance, and I kept telling Guy that our song needs to be bigger than a regular Bollywood dance song." He also joked that this is his Bollywood dream come true in Hollywood.

Aladdin will release in the UAE on May 23, 2019.


