Lagadapati survey Andhra Pradesh: Nervous over poll results, NRIs flock to Lagadapati Rajagopal survey

VIJAYAWADA: After an intense political battle in Andhra Pradesh , suspense over the election outcome is haunting everyone. The Non Resident Indians ( NRIs ) from both the Telugu states, who were tracking the political developments back home, are also equally holding their nerves.Some of these NRIs, now residing in United States of America (USA) are now flocking around former Vijayawada MP, Lagadapati Rajagopal who is well-known for his surveys and predictions on elections.Rajagopal is currently in USA on a personal tour. The former MP received a rousing welcome in California and Minnesota, where he participated in a meet-and-greet. The first question he faced from many was with regard to his survey results of the assembly elections.However, Rajagopal has remained tight-lipped about his survey results this time, after his predictions failed in the Telangana assembly elections. Rajagopal has maintained that he will reveal his survey details only on May 19, after completion of the final phase of elections. After his comment in one of the meetings that people of Andhra Pradesh have voted for development and welfare went viral, Rajagopal is completely avoiding questions on elections results.Speaking to TOI, Rajagopal said, “All the NRIs whom he met are eager to know the elections results. However, this time he will only reveal his survey results only on May 19. He also said most NRIs are divided along caste lines and support the three major political parties. They wanted to know how their party fared in the elections.”Many Telugus staying in USA flew to India to participate in political campaigns and to cast their votes. Speaking to TOI, Sai Bollineni, Rajagopal’s family friend said,“The first question he faced in USA was on election results. He did not reveal much, but gave some hints like people voted for welfare and development. He did not give any specifics but said TDP will have the edge in some regions while YSRC will have the edge in other areas. He also said Jana Sena could get more votes than anyone expects.”
