Man hacked to death in Chennai for stopping child marriage, one arrested

Man hacked to death in Chennai for stopping child marriage, one arrested

The police are currently on the lookout of 21-year-old Vinodh and others who seem to have executed the murder.

news Crime

The Chennai police on Monday arrested one member, Magesh, from a gang that hacked 45-year-old auto driver Jebaseelan to death on Sunday around 7.45 pm. The police are currently on the lookout for 21-year-old Vinodh and others who allegedly executed the murder.

Jebaseelan who was heading to his daughter’s wedding reception on that fateful night was intercepted by an armed gang of men and hacked to death right in front of his family just a few metres away from his house in Thikkakulam area.

His wife Prescilla, 42, who tried to stop the attack was grievously injured. She is currently undergoing treatment in a hospital, the reports state.

A police officer was quoted by The New Indian Express as saying that Jebaseelan had attended his daughter’s wedding in Tirupathi two days ago and her reception was scheduled to happen in Minjur, Chennai on Sunday.

The police are now probing whether his murder was planned as revenge for stopping the child marriage in his locality in Ayanavaram. Just two weeks ago, on April 17, Jebaseelan saw posters announcing the wedding of a 16-year-old girl and alerted the police about the matter.

The child marriage was consequentially averted when Jebaseelan went to the venue with police officers and Vinod, who was set to marry her, along with his family was warned as a result. The police took an undertaking from the family that the marriage should be held only after the girl completes 18 years of age, as mandated by law. It is being said that Vinod however, was angered by the incident and the police are looking to find if this was Vinod’s motive behind his murder.

One officer was quoted by The Times of India as, “He had planned to murder Jebaseelan on the day of the marriage itself but had to change the plan.” According to initial investigations, the police have found out that Jabaseelan frequently advised people in the area and as a result, upset many.
