Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan shoot for Imtiaz Ali's next in Mumbai

Mumbai (Online): Actors Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan are among most fancied onscreen couples in Bollywood. The duo, who is currently collaborating on Imtiaz Ali’s Love Aaj Kal sequel, was seen in Mumbai after wrapping the film’s shoot for the day on Sunday.



In a series of pictures, the two and their director Imtiaz can be seen getting in cars. Sara and Kartik were seen getting into the same car before riding off. One schedule of the film was canned in Delhi last month. Kartik had also shared a video of him dancing with Imtiaz after the completion of Delhi schedule of Love Aaj Kal 2.



Sharing it, he had written: “Ahun Ahun Ahun @imtiazaliofficial And Its a wrap for us !!! Schedule 1 Exactly after a month .. Thank you #Delhi for all the Love We missed you @saraalikhan95 @wearewsf !!!”



Post the success of Soni Ke Titu Ki Sweety last year, Kartik has emerged a huge favourite with girls, and not just fans, but female Bollywood actors too. Talking to Karan Johar on Koffee With Karan 6, Sara had famously declared in the rapid fire section that she would like to marry Ranbir Kapoor but go out on a date with Kartik Aaryan. Her father Saif has interjected, saying she could if Kartik had the money. When Kartik found himself on the couch on Karan’s chat show later, he blushed about putting together money to take Sara out.



A viral video later emerged which reportedly show Sara and Kartik kissing each other for the film. Reacting to it, Kartik had told BollywoodLife: “Was that really Sara and me?” Later, in an interview with Vogue in April, Sara had said: “If you knew all the thoughts I have but don’t do anything about, I promise we would get over this Kartik Aaryan thing.”



Apart from Love Aaj Kal 2, Sara will also be seen in the remake of David Dhawan’s Coolie No 1. Her co-star in the film will be Varun Dhawan. Kartik, meanwhile, will be seen in Pati Patni Aur Woh, which also stars Bhumi Pednekar and Student of the Year 2 star Ananya Panday.
