Sauna centre destroyed as fire breaks out at NIS

The fire tenders took around one hour to douse the flames

PATIALA: Panic gripped the Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports (NSNIS) after a massive fire broke at its sauna and steam bath centre in the early hours of Monday.The fire was witnessed by the security guard who immediately dialled up the fire brigade. One of the security guards at the institute claimed that while he was switching off the lights, he witnessed thick smoke coming from the sauna and bath centre. He claimed that short circuit at the sauna centre had caused the fire which left the centre gutted.The security guard who witnessed the fire said the fire-brigade was immediately informed but they took a while to reach the institute. Varinder Verma, security in-charge at the NSNIS, said, “The fire was witnessed at the centre by one of our guards who immediately informed me. The guards within no time also informed the fire officials in Patiala . In the meantime, we tried to douse the fire with fire extinguishers installed at the institute. The efforts by the team helped in not spreading the fire in the entire centre. The fire brigade reached the spot and doused the fire. Even, some areas were saved following the usage of fire extinguishers and sand. No one was injured in the incident.”S S Roy, executive director of the institute said no loss of life was reported and the centre had witnessed partial damage but it would not be appropriate to comment on the exact losses as it was being assessed. He said the incident took place in the early hours. He added that a probe was being carried out to know the exact cause or reason behind the incident.Meanwhile, Laxman Dass, a fireman said, “The fire tenders were pressed into service immediately to douse the fire at the centre. The fire tenders took around one hour to douse the flames.”He said when the firemen reached they found the door of the sauna centre closed from inside following which they broke open the door. Laxman added that all three firemen were covered under the smoke that came out with pressure after the door was broke open.
