Is this why Mamata Banerjee is sparring with PM Narendra Modi?

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee have targeted one another in acrimonious tone during the Lok Sabha election campaign. (Photo: PTI file)

No state has seen an election campaign in the 2019 Lok Sabha polls so acerbic as West Bengal. Vitriolic barbs and jibes have flown between West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Leaders from their respective parties have followed suit.

Bengal has 42 parliamentary seats nine of which will vote in the seventh and final phase of the national election.

First, how have they led Lok Sabha election campaign?

War of words between Mamata Banerejee and PM Modi is not new. In the run up to the 2014 Lok Sabha election, Mamata Banerjee called then prime ministerial candidate Narendra Modi Danga Babu (Mr Rioteer). This time around, Mamata Banerjee used fascist Modi description to attack the prime minister.

If PM Modi teased Mamata Banerjee, in an interview, saying that despite bitter political rivalry she sends him special Bengali sweets occasionally, the Bengal chief minister responded by saying that she would send rosogolla made of clay and filled with gravels to break his teeth.

He has repeatedly called Mamata Banerjee speed-breaker Didi in his rallies in West Bengal to allege that she has blocked the development schemes run by the central government fearing that the people would become a Modi supporter.

At one rally, PM Modi said Mamata Banerjee has made Bengal infamous for Triple T Trinamool Tolabaazi Tax. Tolabaazi refers to extortion in Bengali.

Mamata Banerjee shot back saying, If I am a tolabaaz, what are you? Your entire body -- from head to toe -- is drenched in the blood of peopleonly riots, only riots and only riots.

The BJP has alleged that Mamata Banerjee government has denied permission to its top leaders including party president Amit Shah, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and Union minister Smriti Irani. Mamata Banerjee refuted the charge every time it was brought up by the BJP leaders.

But why does Mamata look angrier?

This can be traced to BJP’s convention in Odisha in 2017, when the party planned its Act East strategy to focus on West Bengal and states of the eastern coast to make for the possible losses in the 2019 Lok Sabha election that it might suffer in the northern and western states.

The BJP launched an aggressive outreach in West Bengal’s Maoist affected regions. The BJP has gained significant ground in Maoist-affected districts of Jhargram and Purulia in the state in the past two years.

In 2018, the BJP won 644 of the 1,944 gram panchayat seats in Purulia, and 329 of the 806 seats in Jhargram. More significantly, the TMC lost 28 gram panchayats out of 79 in Jhargram.

Mamata may be wary of history

Incidentally, Jhargram was the place from where Mamata Banerjee picked her political fight against the Left Front government of Buddhadeb Bhattacharya in 2008 and ended a 35-year communist rule in Bengal in 2011.

The TMC, though, retained its political supremacy in Bengal’s panchayat election and the BJP’s progress could at best be described in terms of fractional power. For record, the TMC won 21,110 panchayats compared to 5,747 by the BJP followed by Left Front’s 1,708 and Congress’s 1,062.

While the TMC largely banks on the charismatic personality of Mamata Banerjee, the BJP focuses more on organisational strength to top it up with PM Modi’s oratory.

Left to Right

Further, there has been marked shift at the cadre-level in West Bengal. At many places, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) -- CPI(M) -- cadre and local leaders have switched sides to the BJP, which has cashed in on the prevailing sentiment, particularly in the poorer areas, that the people are denied their rightful share of the welfare schemes under the TMC rule.

This trend led Buddhadeb Bhattacharya to tell the CPI (M) cadres, through the party mouthpiece Ganashakti, that there is no use in leaping from a TMC fying pan into the BJP’s fireplace.

This ebbing of the Left cadre to the BJP camp has followed a significant drop in the vote share from 39.6 per cent in 2011 to 25.6 in 2016 and subsequent below par performance in the panchayat election last year.

What about last phase of Lok Sabha polls?

Polling will be held in the Lok Sabha constituencies of Dum Dum, Barasat, Basirhat, Jaynagar, Mathurapur, Diamond Harbour, Jadavpur, Kolkata Dakshin and Kolkata Uttar on May 19, the last phase of the parliamentary polls.

The TMC had won all the nine seats in 2014. The BJP had come second on two of these seats Kolkata Uttar and Kolkata Dakshin. Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose’s grandnephew Chandra Kumar Bose is the BJP candidate from Kolkata Dakshin.

In the last phase, the BJP is putting up a tough fight to the TMC on Jadavpur and Dum Dum seats besides the two constituencies in Kolkata. The CPI (M) was the runner up at four of these seats five years ago and hopes to benefit from the anti-incumbency against the Mamata Banerjee government in the polls on coming Sunday.

Of 42 Lok Sabha seats of West Bengal, the TMC had won 34 and the Congress 4 while the CPI (M) and the BJP won two each. The TMC has a tough task on hand to repeat its 2014 performance against a rising BJP and still significant presence of the Left Front supporters.
