Foreign minister Javad Zarif, Sushma Swaraj discusses Iran nuclear deal & Afghan peace process

The Iran nuclear deal, the Afghan peace process and India's import of Iranian oil were the three important subjects of discussion when Iran's Foreign Minister Javad Zarif met external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj on Tuesday.

Zarif's Delhi visit is part of tour to countries such as Russia, China, Turkmenistan and Iraq to brief about the Iran Nuclear deal among other issues.

This is the second visit by Iranian foreign minister to India this year and a significant one since it comes as tensions rise in West Asia due to Tehran - Washington showdown.

Saving the Nuclear Deal

Iran foreign minister Zarif briefed his country's position on the 2015 Iran Nuclear deal or Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and steps taken by Tehran as part of the deal.

Recalling the steps announced by Iranian President Rouhani on May 8 including decisions linked to the export of enriched material and heavy water, the visiting foreign minister mentioned that 60 days timeline given to EU-3 (France, Germany and UK) and other parties to JCPOA for restoring the oil and banking channels which has been blocked due to American sanctions.

New Delhi, reiterated its position on the deal and said it would like all parties to the agreement to continue to fulfil their commitments. Remember the US had withdrawn from the 2015 deal. Tehran is now banking on the EU to save the deal now.

Afghan Peace Process

The Afghan peace process was discussed by both sides with the spokesperson of the ministry of external affairs Raveesh Kumar in a tweet on the Zarif-Sushma meet said, "Good exchange of views on the evolving regional situation, including Afghanistan."

Iran's Chabahar port plays an important role in connecting India with Afghanistan and India last year took partial control of it. Chabahar port is also central to International North-South Transport (INSTC) Corridor which will connect Mumbai to Moscow.

Both sides expressed satisfaction at the operationalization of the interim contract on the Chabahar Port between India Ports Global Limited (IPGL) and Ports and Maritime Organization (PMO).

In January, India formally established shipping lanes with the Chabahar port and now every two weeks Indian ships go from three Indian ports—Mumbai, Kandla and Mundra to the port in Iran.

India has been engaging with regional countries such as Russia, Iran, China and Central Asian countries on the Afghan peace process and supports an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned and Afghan-controlled process.

Import of Iran Oil

The Iranian Foreign Minister landed in Delhi from Turkmenistan on Monday. Speaking to media on his arrival, he lauded his countries ties with India and said New Delhi "is one of our most important partners - economic, political and regional."

On the oil Imports by India, Zarif said, "the two sides have designed a special financial system to augment trade and economic cooperation."

During the Tuesday talks, external affairs minister said New Delhi will take any final decision on continuation of import of Iran oil only after election results "keeping in mind our commercial considerations, energy security and economic interests."

India is one of the largest importers of Iranian oil, but due to the American sanctions faces pressure from Washington to cut oil imports from the west Asian country.
