Uber CEO reassures employees after disappointing IPO – saying Amazon and Facebook also poor

Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi has written to staff to calm fears over the ride-hailing firm's disastrous stock market debut.

Mr Khosrowshahi emailed employees on Monday after the company's share price tumbled by almost 12 per cent that day to $36.63.

That final value was a total of 18.6 per cent lower than Thursday's initial public offering (IPO) price of $45 a share.

Keep smiling: Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi at the New York Stock Exchange at his firm's initial public offering, which saw the share price tumble

The CEO pointed out in the email, posted on Twitter by New York Times reporter Mike Isaac, that Facebook and Amazon also had rough starts on the stock exchange.

'Remember that the Facebook and Amazon post-IPO trading was incredibly difficult for those companies,' he wrote. 'And look at how they have delivered since.'

Amazon was floated in May 1997, falling from $2.44 a share to $1.96 on its first day of trading, and taking two months to recover to its initial price, which has since almost doubled.

Facebook plunged 21 per cent in the first month after its May 2012 debut, but has since risen 377 per cent over its starting share price.

Hail to the chief: Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi at the New York stock exchange for the floatation of the ride-hailing app firm

'Obviously our stock did not trade as well as we had hoped post-IPO,' Mr Khosrowshahi conceded.

'There are many versions of our future that are highly profitable and valuable, and there are of course some that are less so,' he wrote.

'During times of negative market sentiment, the pessimistic voices get louder, and the optimistic voices pull back.'

Uber CEO Dara Khosrowshahi outside the New York Stock Exchange on Thursday May 10 for his firm's initial public offering

Uber has been hit by numerous controversies since it was founded in 2009.

The company's previous CEO Travis Kalanick stepped down in 2017 after seven years over allegations that he presided over a toxic workplace culture and ignored allegations of sexual harrassment at the firm.

Mr Kalanick remains an Uber shareholder and board member.

Licensed cab drivers in France, Spain and other countries have staged protests and strikes against the app they say undercuts their business.

In March 2018, pedestrian Elaine Herzberg was run down and killed by an experimental self-driving Uber cab.

In January 2018 Alfonso Alarcon-Nunez, an illegal immigrant working as an Uber driver, was arrested for raping, assualting and robbing four female passengers.

In October 2015 Indian Uber driver Shiv Kumar Yadav was jailed for raping a 26-year-old woman passenger, an incident which prompted Delhi to ban the the firm.

Uber has also been banned in London, the Czech city of Brno, most of the US state of Oregon and the whole of Bulgaria. It has also had its licence suspended in Denmark and Hungary.
