In a first, India to host part of International Army Games

NEW DELHI: India for the first time will host and participate in a major army competition involving eight countries, including China and Russia, in Jaisalmer, defence ministry officials said.The event called the ‘Army International Scout Masters Competition 2019’ will be held in August this year. It will comprise five main stages which involve simulated battle scenarios of infiltrating behind enemy lines via helicopters, setting up ambushes, driving infantry combat vehicles, surviving in chemical and nuclear affected environments, tactical moves in a target area and finally exfiltrate from the enemy territory.Major military platforms such as BMP infantry combat vehicles Mi-17s and Advanced Light Helicopters and Unmanned Aerial Vehicles. A planning conference for the event is scheduled to be held from Tuesday to Friday. Representatives including from Russia and China are in Jaisalmer for this.The competition is part of the International Army Games 2019, which will be held in 10 countries, including Russia, India and China, in August. While India had last year participated in the annually held army games, where it was knocked out of the ‘tank biathlon’ event , this will be the first time when it will take part in the scouts competition.China’s participation is also important, coming in the backdrop of India having conducted naval exercises with US, Japan and Philippines and then France on different occasions in the contested South China Sea and Indian Ocean. The competition would signify India’s efforts to create a balance and further improve military cooperation with China.“It has been our endeavor to forge strong ties with friendly foreign countries and promote peaceful co-existence, tranquility and development. Army Scout Masters Competition gives that opportunity and the medium to learn from each other, co-operate and carry back best practices,” Colonel Aman Anand, Spokesperson Defence Ministry said.An official added, “The fifth Army International Scouts Masters Competition 2019 is being held in Jaisalmer. Russia, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Zimbabwe, Armenia, Belarus and China besides India are participating. The competition is being held in India for the first time under the Indian Army and being organised by its Konark Corps at Jaisalmer Military Station.”While preparations for the event will begin from July 24, the competition will be conducted from August 6-14. It will have the participation of army reconnaissance teams from the eight countries. The competition's first stage involves drills of the scout squad mounting in a helicopter to infiltrate behind enemy lines.The squad will be evaluated for navigation skills at night and their battle drills will be tested. The second stage involves exercises on driving infantry combat vehicles over obstacles and surviving in chemical, biological and nuclear affected environments. The other stages include demonstrating small arms firing skills and exfiltrating out of simulated enemy territory.
