West Bengal govt writes to EC over deployment of central forces at polling booths

Mamata Banerjee had alleged that central forces personnel were asking voters standing in queues to exercise franchise in favour of the saffron party.

The Mamata Banerjee-led West Bengal government wrote to Election Commission of India over deployment of central forces across all polling booths in the state for 2019 Lok Sabha polls.

In a letter to the EC, the West Bengal government on Tuesday alleged that the BJP government at the Centre was using central forces to manipulate the voting process.

In the wake of recurring instances of violence during voting in West Bengal, the Election Commission of India deployed Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) inside all polling booths in the state for Phase 5 and Phase 6 of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. Around 770 companies of Central forces were deployed to ensure free and fair elections on Phase 6 of 2019 Lok Sabha polls held on Sunday.

Mamata Banerjee on Sunday alleged that the BJP government at the Centre was using the central forces to influence voters in West Bengal.

"I do not disrespect the central forces. But they are being instructed to influence the voters. On the pretext of deploying central forces in West Bengal, the BJP is forcefully pushing BJP and RSS activists here. I doubt that some RSS activists in (central forces') uniform are being pushed into West Bengal," Mamata Banerjee said while addressing a rally in Basanti area of South 24 Parganas district.

Banerjee also alleged that central forces personnel were asking voters standing in queues to exercise franchise in favour of the saffron party.

"How can they do that? Is this the job of the central forces to ask voters to cast vote for the BJP? A few retired officers are being used by the Modi government to conduct polling here and they are doing whatever they feel like," Mamata Banerjee said.

West Bengal has 42 Lok Sabha seats where nine of which will vote in the seventh and final phase of 2019 General elections on May 17. The Lok Sabha election 2019 result will be declared on May 23.
