TMC, BJP both play victims after violence during Amit Shah's rally in Kolkata; BJP to hold protest rallies

Visuals from clashes broke out during Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata today | Photo Credit: Times Now

Kolkata: Unprecedented chaos erupted at BJP chief Amit Shah’s mega roadshow in Kolkata where massive clashes broke out between Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers and supporters and students of Calcutta University after the latter protested against the BJP chief’s rally. Ugly scenes were witnessed as furious BJP supporters confronted the agitating students and even threw stones and bottles at the University gates.

Students of the Calcutta University had reportedly shown black flags as the BJP roadshow passed in front of its gates and had also raised slogans such as “Amit Shah go back”, targeting the BJP president. The protest irked the BJP supporters who charged upon the students, resulting in utter chaos and mayhem at the spot in the presence of police.

In his first reaction after clashes broke out during the roadshow, BJP chief Amit Shah claimed that the TMC goons were frustrated with the positive response that the BJP roadshow had received on Tuesday. Speaking to news agency ANI, Shah said, "Today the way BJP's roadshow got a response in Kolkata with almost every citizen attending it, TMC's goons were frustrated and so attacked it. I would like to congratulate BJP workers as even after such chaos the roadshow continued and concluded at the planned place and time."

Notably, Trinamool Congress' students' union wing has a strong presence in the students' body at the Calcutta University. During the clashes, the mob also barged into nearby Vidyasagar College and vandalised college property, including the bust of noted Bengali philosopher Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar.

West Bengal: Latest visuals from BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata after clashes broke out. pic.twitter.com/KvS7wlwRky — ANI (@ANI) May 14, 2019

West Bengal: Clashes broke out in roadshow of BJP President Amit Shah in Kolkata after sticks were hurled at Shah’s truck. Police later resorted to lathicharge pic.twitter.com/TSvJMAdemQ — ANI (@ANI) May 14, 2019

Meanwhile, TMC chief and West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee visited the spot of the clashes - Calcutta University and Vidyasagar College - and blamed the "BJP goons" for the vandalisation of Vidyasagar's statue. Calling the clashes "unprecedented political riots", Banerjee also said that she would not "spare anyone who had vandalised Vidyasagar's statue". She also announced a counter-rally on Thursday to protest against the clashes.

On the other hand, the BJP has decided to move the Election Commission against the TMC, claiming that TMC cadres had instigated violence as "more than one lakh" people had attended Shah's rally in Kolkata.

The saffron party has also decided to hold protest rallies against the TMC in Delhi and Kolkata. While Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis called it a "murder of democracy" in West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath demanded the dismissal of West Bengal government.

Visuals from the scene of the protest showed that a couple of motorcycles and cycles had also been set on fire outside the varsity gates. With the situation deteriorating, the cops had shut the gates of the University campus. The BJP workers later left the spot to attend the closing ceremony of the road show.

The roadshow was supposed to end at the residence of Swami Vivekananda in the city. However, in view of the violence, the BJP chief did not get a chance to pay tributes and garland Vivekananda's statue, Shah told a local news channel.

Earlier in the day, the war of words had intensified between the BJP and the ruling Trinamool Congress after posters of Amit Shah and PM Narendra Modi were removed in key areas in Kolkata, just hours ahead of Shah’s mega road show. The BJP had claimed that TMC workers were responsible for removing the posters, with senior party leader Kailash Vijayavargiya saying, “Mamata ji's goons and police removed all the posters and flags. They escaped soon after we reached here."

However, TMC had dismissed the allegations, with party leader Derek O’Brien terming the BJP “desperate.” He said in a tweet, “Just figured why the BJP are getting more and more desperate in Bengal. Top exit pollsters confide in private, that BJP hurtling to below 30 in UP.”


