Defeat in sight, Opposition looking for excuses: PM Modi to India TV

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday said that out of "desperation" the Opposition is attacking him.

"Desperation of the Opposition is evident in their attack against me," Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in an exclusive interview to India TV.

"In the initial phases of the long-drawn Lok Sabha Election 2019 campaign, their attack was targeted at Modi. Towards the end, 50 per cent of that has been diverted against EVMs," Prime Minister Modi said.

"This basically reflects the desperation of opposition parties. They are finding excuses to hide an imminent defeat," PM Modi said.

The prime minister gave an exclusive interview to India TV after West Bengal Police resorted to lathi charge to disperse the crowd in Kolkata during Amit Shah's roadshow. The roadshow was marred by violence.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi launched a direct attack on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee saying that her government has been harassing BJP workers for last one year.

"The people of Bengal are watching all this and Mamata Banerjee will get a befitting reply in this Lok Sabha Elections", said PM Modi.

He thanked the voters for an enthusiastic response during the first six phases of Lok Sabha Elections 2019.

PM Modi said, "Opposition is preparing the ground to find excuses for their defeat. They are frustrated as they neither could form a grand alliance nor could decide a common agenda. They are not capable of discussing developmental issues"

PM Narendra Modi told India TV that Chief Ministers of various BJP-ruled states were denied permission to hold rallies. He said that even their helicopters were not allowed to land.

"It is very important to have a comprehensive discussion in the country whether the federal structure should be mocked in this way and whether the constitution should be allowed to be broken into pieces. This is a matter of great concern. It is not an issue of Central or the State Government. So please do not try to save Mamta Banerjee. I urge the media to highlight what is happening in West Bengal and not suppress it," said PM Modi.
