Several injured after clashes mar Amit Shah’s Kolkata rally

College hall ransacked, bikes torched; BJP demands ban on Mamata

Clashes broke out on Tuesday evening as the mega rally of BJP president Amit Shah passed through the north Kolkata neighbourhood dotted with educational institutions.

The first floor hall of a college affiliated to Calcutta University was ransacked and at least three motorcycles were set on fire.

Several people, mostly Trinamool Congress supporters, were injured. Trinamool chief Mamata Banerjee accused the BJP of damaging Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar’s bust, while Mr. Shah too condemned the incident. More than 100 people were detained, said Kolkata Police Commissioner.

According to eye witnesses, the clashes were triggered after students presumably with Trinamool Congress’ students’ wing of Vidyasagar College held up “Go back, Amit Shah” posters when his roadshow passed the college. When the participants in Mr. Shah’s roadshow spotted the posters, some of them rushed into the campus, and indulged in violence.

Following the violence, senior leaders of the BJP including Ministers Nirmala Sitharaman and Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi led a delegation to the Election Commission in New Delhi.

“We demand that the EC ban campaign by West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, because she is making provocative speeches. Rocks and stones were thrown at our party workers during the roadshow, police lathis used by Trinamool Congress workers were also used against them. False allegations have been made against the BJP of destroying the statue of noted reformed Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar. All this proves that the law and order situation is bad in the State,” Ms. Sitharaman said.

Mr. Naqvi said “history sheeters and lumpens who, with the connivance of the State administration” were allegedly hiding out in hotels, guest houses and even private residences to disrupt the polls with violence” be tracked down and kept away. He also demanded that the EC get flag marches done by central forces in areas where polling is to take place
