Amit Shah roadshow: Vidyasagar’s statue smashed at Vidyasagar College; 'won’t spare vandals', vows Mamata

Vidyasagar's bust was vandalised during clashes at Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, a renowned philosopher and a key figure of the Bengali Renaissance, at Vidyasagar College in Kolkata during the violent clashes that broke out during BJP chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata on Tuesday evening. During the chaos, Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) members supposedly entered the college premises and vandalised property, reports said.

High drama was witnessed in the West Bengal capital after massive clashes broke out between BJP workers and students of Calcutta University, who were protesting against the BJP chief’s roadshow in Kolkata. The students had shown black flags at Shah’s convoy and had raised “Amit Shah go back” slogan.

The protest by the Calcutta University students, where the Trinamool Congress Chhatra Parishad (TMC’s students’ wing) has considerable influence on its student body, infuriated the BJP workers participating in the road show, who charged at the students, resulting in mayhem and violence.

As the situation deteriorated, members of the mob – allegedly the BJP supporters - also broke into the nearby Vidyasagar College at Shankar Ghose Lane – and went on a rampage, during which college property was damaged, including the statue of the iconic Bengali leader.

Kolkata: Statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was vandalised at Vidyasagar College in the clashes that broke out at BJP President Amit Shah's roadshow. #WestBengal pic.twitter.com/XSSWyYbMwu — ANI (@ANI) May 14, 2019

Vidyasagar College principal Gautam Kundu told a private news channel that the college authorities would lodge a complaint with the police against the “BJP attackers” and termed the entire incident as “condemnable.”

Meanwhile, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who visited Calcutta University and Vidyasagar College after the clashes, stated that Vidyasagar had been “disrespected.”

A livid Banerjee warned that she would not spare "anyone who broke Vidyasagar's statue and damaged college property." She said, "Today, during the roadshow of Amit Shah, a section of BJP goons set Vidyasagar College on fire. They damaged the statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar. It’s a shameful incident, which never before happened in West Bengal."

Threatening BJP of retaliatory measures, Banerjee said, “I can reach you in Delhi also. I will not spare anyone who broke Vidyasagar’s statue and damaged college property.”

TMC leader Derek O’Brien also condemned the vandalisation of Vidyasagar’s statue and said claimed that BJP had brought "desperate goons" to break Vidyasagar's bust. He said, “Violent mob of BJP 'outsiders' in presence of Pukeworthy Shah. How little you know about Bengal, its rich history, its culture. Bengal will never forgive for what you did today. (sic).”

The TMC chief has also announced a protest rally on Thursday over the vandalisation of the statue.

On the other hand, BJP chief Amit Shah blamed the TMC cadres for inciting violence and said that the TMC goons were frustrated due to the massive participation of citizens in the roadshow.

The police have taken suo motu cognizance of the incident and have lodged a case against the vandals.


