24-yr-old held for supplying illegal arms; 20 pistols, 12 spare magazines seized

The Delhi Police Special Cell has arrested a 24-year-old man accused of supplying illegal arms on Saturday from Delhi’s Dwarka area. The accused allegedly arrived in Delhi on Saturday to deliver a consignment of weapons to a member of the notorious Gogi gang.

Police were able to recover 20 sophisticated 0.32 bore country made pistols and 12 spare magazines with his arrest. According to police, the accused identified as Mohammad Musa, resident of Shamli District, Uttar Pradesh, has previously been involved in three cases of attempt to murder, Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act and Arms Act.

“Incidents of using sophisticated firearms have increased in the area of Delhi and its Neighbouring cities in various criminal activities and that illegal arms used in these crimes are being supplied by arms suppliers from Kairana, UP. Therefore, a team of Head Constable Surender Kumar and Constable Sonu Sharma was deputed to develop the information about the suppliers,” Deputy Commissioner of Police (Special Cell) Sanjeev Kumar Yadav stated.

On Saturday, information was received Mohammad Musa would arrive with a big consignment of illegal firearms to deliver the same to a receiver in Dwarka.

Subsequently, a trap was laid and at about 7 pm, he was spotted with two bags and arrested. “On checking his bags, 20 sophisticated country made pistols of 0.32 bore along with 12 spare magazines were recovered. Accordingly, case under section of appropriate law was registered at Special Cell police station, New Delhi,” said the DCP.

During sustained interrogation, the accused Musa reportedly told police that he procured weapons from an arms dealer in Sandwa, Madhya Pradesh. “In order to hoodwink the law enforcing agencies he travelled by his car and sometimes he commuted by train to ferry the weapons. He bought the weapon for Rs 8000 and sold it for Rs 25,000 to Rs 30,000. He further disclosed that he was arrested by Sharanpur police in a gun supply case in the year 2017,” DCP revealed.
