Namaste India: Iran tries hard to protect oil ties

The nuclear deal, the Afghan peace process, and India's import of Iranian oil were the three important subjects of discussion when the country's foreign Minister Javad Zarif met external affairs minister Sushma Swaraj on Tuesday.

Zarif's Delhi visit, second this year, is part of his whirlwind tour to Russia, China, Turkmenistan and Iraq amid rising tensions in West Asia due over a Tehran-Washington showdown.

India is one of the largest importers of Iranian oil, but due to the American sanctions faces pressure from Washington to cut oil imports from the west Asian country.

The minister explained his country's position on the 2015 Iran Nuclear deal steps taken by Tehran, said sources.

Recalling the steps announced by Iranian President Rouhani on May 8, including decisions linked to the export of enriched material and heavy water, Zarif said that a 60-day timeline has been given to EU-3 (France, Germany and UK) and other parties for restoring the oil and banking channels that have been blocked due to American sanctions.

New Delhi reiterated its position on the deal and said it would like all parties to the agreement to continue to fulfil their commitments. With the US backtracking on the agreement, Tehran is now banking on the EU to save the deal.

"Good exchange of views on the evolving regional situation, including Afghanistan," tweeted Raveesh Kumar, spokesperson of the Ministry of External Affairs, on the Zarif-Swaraj meeting.

On the oil Imports by India, Zarif said, "the two sides have designed a special financial system to augment trade and economic cooperation."

Swaraj said said India will take any final decision on continuation of import of Iran oil only after election results "keeping in mind our commercial considerations, energy security and economic interests".

Also, Iran's Chabahar port plays an important role in connecting India with Afghanistan and India last year took partial control of it. Chabahar port is also central to International North-South Transport Corridor which will connect Mumbai to Moscow.
