Moti Nagar murder triggers political blame game in city

Man was killed for opposing lewd comments at daughter

The murder of a 51-year-old businessman, allegedly for opposing lewd comments and gestures at his daughter, took a political turn here on Tuesday.

While AAP alleged that some “political forces” were trying to give a “religious colour” to the incident, the BJP questioned the “delayed” response of the AAP government over the incident.

“It was an unfortunate incident and religion must not be brought into it. Some political forces are trying to give a religious colour to the incident, but that is unacceptable,” senior AAP leader Sanjay Singh said adding that the party would give full support to the victim’s family.

If the city police does not probe the incident properly, the Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal, who took to Twitter to state, “Delhi police must take strongest action against the guilty” in relation to the incident, and other senior AAP leaders would hold a protest, Mr. Singh added.

Delhi BJP president Manoj Tiwari, expressing grief over the incident, also demanded a fast-track trial in the case. “All of us should condemn it and demand stern action against the guilty...The BJP demands a trial in a fast-track court to ensure a speedy justice to the victim’s family...the family should also be given adequate compensation,” he said.

‘Govt has turned blind’

BJP leader Vijender Gupta argued that “no response” from the AAP government in relation to the incident meant that it had “turned blind” to it in its “thirst for power”.

“I condemn the heinous crime. The culprits will not be spared. Why is the Kejriwal government silent on such a painful incident? Will they speak only if they see some political advantage in reacting or they don’t want to react as the accused belongs to a particular community and it will adversely affect their vote bank?” he demanded.

Arguing that the Delhi government was “apathetic” to the cause of women’s security, Mr. Gupta alleged, “The apathy of the Kejriwal government towards women’s security is quite obvious from the incident. He only believes in blaming others. While the Kejriwal government never took the issue of women security seriously, the Congress, which was in power for 15 years, also failed to recognise it.”

Meanwhile, Delhi Pradesh Mahila Congress president Sharmishtha Mukherjee tweeted, “Now objecting 2 lewd remarks to ur daughter can lead 2 murder! Can Govts use their humongous publicity budget 2 create campaigns on sensitisation, awareness & put fear of law in people? Any1 seen a single hoarding by Govts saying its not ‘cool’ 2 pass offensive remarks at women? [sic].”
