Akhilesh Yadav promises easy army job drive

BALLIA: SP chief Akhilesh Yadav said in Ballia on Tuesday that if SP-BSP alliance comes to power at Centre, it would begin recruitment in military and paramilitary forces on lines of easy recruitment in police done in UP during SP regime.Addressing an election meeting in Alawalpur locality here on Tuesday, Akhilesh said while the Narendra Modi government failed to fulfill the promise of employment, the SP government under him had ensured that recruitment in police was done on merit.“The same yardstick will be applied on recruitments for military and paramilitary forces if the ‘gathbandhan’ (SP-BSP alliance) comes to power at the Centre. We would simplify the rules of recruitment,” he said and added that “there is a vast scope of employment for youths in the forces”.Akhilesh minced no words in criticizing the Modi and Yogi governments and accused both of deceiving the people. “Today, the PM had also come here. I don’t know what he gave to you or what he promised. Tell me, what could he give you when his five-year term is over... his time is over now,” he said and added that “he (Modi) is the first PM of the country who has not met his promises”.“Not a single promise has been fulfilled,” Akhilesh said and asked the gathering if ‘achhe din’ had come.“In 2014, he was a ‘chai wala’ (tea seller). After being done with ‘chai’ hangover, he has now taken the avatar of ‘chowkidar’,” he said and wondered who would believe this ‘chowkidar’.“Ek baba CM (Yogi Adityanath) hain jo kahte hain ki law and order thik karna hai to thok do (There’s a baba CM, who says shoot to improve law and order). But the police are in a dilemma... they don’t know whom to shoot,” he said, alleging that the police were never humiliated as badly as during the Yogi government.Referring to Modi as ‘chowkidar’ and Yogi as ‘thokidar’, Akhilesh exhorted the people to defeat them both. “Keval chowkidar ko hi nahi thokidar ko bhi hatana hai,” he said and added that the BJP was doing politics of hate.Speaking about SP’s failed bid to field sacked BSF jawan Tej Bahadur Yadav against Modi in Varanasi, Akhilesh said: “Desh ki raksha par rajniti karne wale kaise atankwad rokenge jab sena k eek barkhast jawan se ghabra gaye (How could those doing politics in the name of national security check terrorism when they are even sacred of a sacked jawan).”Akhilesh also justified the ‘gathbandhan’ (SP-BSP alliance). “Both Baba Saheb Bhim Rao Ambedkar and Ram Manohar Lohia wanted to work together for social change but did not get an opportunity. Netaji (Mulayam Singh Yadav) and BSP founder Kanshiram, too, came forward to align for this purpose but it did not work due to a conspiracy by the BJP,” he said.“We have now come together to carry forward the struggle of social change for which we have taken two steps back,” he said claiming that “no one had ever thought that the alliance would become a possibility some day”.
