No Heroes Here

By Kinjal Sethia



Watch a Hindi play that exposes Mumbai’s murky underworld



Mainstream Hindi cinema has made films on Mumbai’s underworld, more often than not lending it a sheen that romanticises organised crime. And it is this hero worship of criminals that the makers of the award-winning Hindi play Bambai (Mother of Crime) wanted to avoid right from the time they put pen to paper to script the play. “Ajay Devgn plays a stylised image as Sultan Mirza, which is inspired by underworld mafia don Haji Mastan, in the film Once Upon A Time In Mumbai. We have consciously avoided such needless heroism of people who are criminals,” says Sumit Sanghamitra, the playwright who also essays the character of Haji Mastan in the play.



The play has been conceptualised and directed by Yash Ruikar who has been inspired by books such as Black Friday, Dongri to Dubai and Mafia Queens of Mumbai, written by S Hussain Zaidi. “The play focuses on Jenabai, who is a little-known yet dominating figure in the Mumbai underworld during the decade preceding the 1993 blasts. After the blasts, she feels that she could have stopped the disaster if she had controlled Dawood Ibrahim, who was like a son to her,” adds 22-year-old Ruikar, who has coscripted the play.



The two-act play revolves around the guilt that eats up Jenabai Daruwali when she realises that she could be indirectly responsible for the 1993 Mumbai bomb blasts by having mentored Dawood who masterminded the attack. Jenabai visits the mansion of Haji Mastan and confesses her guilt and anxiety. The conversations between them reveal how they protected Dawood Ibrahim from serving time in prison, as part of their masterplan. “We overcame the initial challenge of portraying criminal mindsets on stage and decided to make a realistic depiction of these characters. Their criminal acts cannot be justified and even though the influence of the underworld may have subsided, the political aspect of their methods still remains relevant,” adds Sanghamitra, the 26-year-old theatre artiste who has directed the Marathi film Virat Zindagi.



Even though Jenabai is a negative character, she is also a strong woman who acts like a puppet master controlling the other notorious dons of her time. It is this strength which makes the on-stage performance a powerful experience for 23-year-old Shruti Kulkarni, who plays Jenabai. “The character belongs to a time of which I knew very little. Even today, there are very few references to Jenabai. We developed her character through much study and group discussions during rehearsals. She is a criminal who is open-minded enough to accept her guilt,” adds Kulkarni, a graduate of Sociology from SP College and a Bharatanatyam dancer and teacher. Nishad Bhoir too referred to books, films and real footage to play the role of Dawood Ibrahim. “I want to avoid the cliched portrayals depicted in Hindi films and show him realistically through three phases of his life,” says 26-year-old Bhoir, an actor who has completed his drama studies at Academy of Theatre Arts, Mumbai University.



Playwrights Ruikar and Sanghamitra were initially wary of ascribing real names to their characters. But they were motivated by the desire to portray criminals in their true light. “Zaidi once said that a criminal wants to be a criminal. The person always has a choice and there can be no excuse for criminal conduct,” adds Ruikar, who also closely observed the plot lines of films such as Shootout at Lokhandwala. While most characters speak in “Bambaiyya Hindi,” as the colloquial Hindi in Mumbai is known, Haji Mastan speaks Urdu-infused Hindi.



This is the fifth rendition of the play, which was awarded second prize at the Hindi Rajya Natya Spardha held earlier this year. Tickets are available via phone booking and online at www.ticketees.com.



WHERE: Bharat Natya Mandir, Sadashiv Peth

WHEN: May 17, 9.30 pm

CALL: 7447405844

COST: Rs 150




