Displaced back PM Narendra Modi despite compensation delay

DEOGHAR: Two years after he gave around eight acres of land for construction of an international airport project in Deoghar , 60-year-old Chandan Singh is still awaiting compensation. He is not alone. More than 100 families of Paharpur village, who were displaced in 2017 for the ambitious project, are battling a similar fate. Once ready, the multi-crore airport in Deoghar’s Kunda area, will put the famed temple town on the country’s aviation map.On Wednesday, as Prime Minister Narendra Modi will address his maiden election rally in Deoghar from the airport ground, many land-losers who have shifted to Karankola, a km from Paharpur, lamented his failed promises.Modi’s rally, the last one in Jharkhand this Lok Sabha polls, is aimed at giving a final push to BJP’s prospects in the JMM stronghold. Deoghar is a part of Godda parliamentary constituency, the only seat here represented by BJP. The two seats — Dumka and Rajmahal — are with JMM.Singh alleged land was acquired for laying the foundation of the airport, but the same zeal wasn’t adopted for paying compensation. “We were given a deed of Rs 4 crore in lieu of our land. But not a penny has been paid to us till date. Ironically, records show that Rs 2 crore were handed out, but we don’t know to whom?,” said Singh, who along with his younger brother Gowardhan and his family is running to different offices for compensation.Jai Narayan Singh, another land-loser, levelled similar allegations. “I lost 3.4 acres, but no money has been given to me,” he said.According to Gowardhan, over a dozen nearby villages were keen to part with their lands initially, but the government began land acquisition and they had no option but to budge. As per the deal offered to land owners, apart from money in lieu of land, a displacement compensation of Rs 18 lakh per adult per family was promised. This apart, they were promised a 1,200 sq feet house per individual of a family, they said.Land-losers claimed that these clauses were changed abruptly. “The Rs 18 lakh displacement compensation was brought down to Rs 10.36 lakh, the size home decreased to 700 sq feet. We don’t know the reasons,” Munal Singh, another resident added.But despite the widespread resentment, Modi seems to have won people ’s heart. Ask Gowardhan’s younger son Shiv Shankar (25) who they will vote for and the response is immediate. “Modiji ko hi.” Why? “Desh ka suraksha ka sawal hai (It’s a matter of country’s security).”
