CPM rallies to protest against BJP-TMC clashes in Kolkata | Updates

A day after both Trinamool and BJP clashed on the streets of Kolkata during a roadshow by BJP president Amit Shah, a police complaint was filed against him while he addressed a press conference to level severe charges against Mamata Banerjee.

Amit Shah held a media address and said that he barely came out alive after the Kolkata rally, thanks to CRPF personnel.

He also said that the Election Commission is nothing but a mute spectator to all the violence.

Bengal chief minister and Trinamool chief Mamata Banerjee, on the other hand, will be holding a protest march in the city on Wednesday.

CPI(M) has taken out a protest march in Kolkata to condemn the violence during Amit Shah's rally on Tuesday. The party has slammed both Trinamool and BJP for the violent clashes on Kolkata streets.

Trinamool spokesperson Derek O' Brien has released multiple videos to show how BJP workers clad in saffron outfits were seen burning motorbikes and cycles parked outside the Vidyasagar College.

The videos seem to have been shot from inside the college.

The Election Commission, too, will be holding a meeting with West Bengal observers via video conferencing to discuss the violence.

This comes in the aftermath of violent clashes in Kolkata during Amit Shah's roadshow in the city on Tuesday.

The Vidyasagar College that was ransacked in the clashes has been left with shards of glass lying around the premises and burnt motorbikes lying outside the gates.

Clashes broke out when Trinamool workers allegedly pelted stones at Amit Shah's rally in Kolkata which triggered BJP workers to hit back, resulting in clashes and vandalism.

PTI photo

BJP has alleged that Trinamool workers attacked the BJP rally from inside the Vidyasagar College.

The Vidyasagar College was ransacked and a bust of the 19th century social reformer, educationist and writer Vidyasagar was vandalised by alleged BJP supporters, triggering massive outrage across political circles.

Later at night West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee took out a padyatra from the Vidyasagar College to Calcutta University as a mark of protest against the vandalism.

Mamata Banerjee and several other TMC leaders have also changed their Twitter profile picture to that of Vidyasagar to condemn the razing of his bust.

Banerjee hit right back, calling Shah a "goonda". "If you lay your hands on Vidyasagar, what will I call you other than a goonda," she said at a rally in Kolkata.

"I hate your ideology, I hate your ways," she said, and announced a protest rally on Thursday against the vandalisation of the bust of Vidyasagar.

Several BJP leaders slammed Mamata Banerjee for attacking the BJP rally while Amit Shah said, "Today the way BJP's roadshow got a response in Kolkata with almost every citizen attending it. TMC's goons were frustrated and so they attacked us. I would like to congratulate BJP workers as even after such chaos the roadshow continued and concluded at the planned place and time."

Later, a BJP delegation went to the Election Commission to seek action against "disturbing elements and history-sheeters" in West Bengal.

(With inputs from Manogya Loiwal)
