Shah questions EC role in Bengal; accuses TMC of conspiracy in vandalism

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, May 15

Accusing Mamata Banerjee-led TMC of rioting during his Tuesday roadshow in Kolkata, BJP president Amit Shah on Wednesday alleged that the state’s ruling party workers were part of a conspiracy to vandalise the statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar.

He asserted that the gate of the Vidyasagar college had been shut till the conclusion of the roadshow, while asking as to who opened the door where the statue had been vandalised.

Claiming that the TMC is headed for a resounding defeat in West Bengal, Shah said Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee had been rattled with the rise of the BJP in the state. He also showed photographs to allege that TMC workers indulged in stone-pelting and arson, which were aimed at him and he could come out unharmed only because of the CRPF personnel protecting him.

Shah alleged that the Election Commission had been a mute spectator to the “attempts of rigging” in West Bengal. “Historysheeters across the country are put behind bars during elections. Such criminal elements are freely indulging in political violence in the state. Why has the EC not acted against such historysheeters?” he asked.

Questioning the silence of the EC over Banerjee’s open threat to BJP workers, the BJP chief said the party’s campaigners, including Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath, had been restrained from campaigning in West Bengal.

Shah said the TMC is contesting elections on 42 Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal, while the BJP is in the contest on much higher number of seats across the country. “If the BJP is indulging in violence, then why there is no such incident like seen in West Bengal in any other parts of the country. It just means that the TMC indulges in violence,” he said.

The BJP chief also asserted that the party cadres wouldn’t be deterred by filing of an FIR against him. “Seven of the BJP workers had been killed in the state as part of the TMC-staged political violence. We wouldn’t be deterred. People in the state will answer with ballot in the seventh phase of the election,” he said, while stating that the TMC had been practising the culture of threatening the political rivals.

Shah asserted that the BJP would sweep the elections in the state and would win at least 23 Lok Sabha seats out of 42 in the state.
