Noida Student Accident News : Two BTech students on scooter crash into bus after it slams brakes, killed

GREATER NOIDA: Two third-year engineering students — a 21-year-old boy and a 19-year-old girl — died after the scooter they were riding crashed into the rear of a UP Roadways bus that had slammed the brakes suddenly to pick up passengers on the Noida- Greater Noida Expressway.The accident took place near Chaprauli turn in Sector 168 when Utkarsh Singh and Vaishnavi Gupta were on their way to Noida. Utkarsh, who was riding the scooter, had a helmet on, but it broke into two under the impact of the collision. The girl, Vaishnavi, did not have any protective gear. Both were declared dead on arrival at a private hospital.Police said Utkarsh was from Allahabad while Vaishnavi was a Varanasi resident. Both had been pursuing a BTech course in electronic communication from IIMT College in Knowledge Park area.The accident occurred around 12.15pm. The bus, which was travelling at a speed of 60-70kmph on the expressway, stopped suddenly to pick up passengers at a stop. Police said the scooter was moving at almost the same speed just metres behind the bus and Utkarsh would have had little chance to either slam the brakes or change the lane when the bus screeched to a halt. The momentum carried the scooter under the bus. The bus, bearing the registration number UP16 P-9340, has been seized, but its driver and conductor managed to escape.“We came to know about the accident around 12.20pm. A police team was sent to the spot immediately. Both students were rushed to the nearby Jaypee Hospital in Sector 128, but were declared dead on arrival. Their parents have been informed,” said Hansraj Bhadouriya, SHO of Expressway police station.A spokesperson for the hospital said: “They had suffered injuries to the head. It’s presumed that the boy died on the spot while the girl succumbed to injuries on way to the hospital.”Virender Gupta, Vaishnavi’s uncle and local guardian, said she had taken admission at IIMT College three years ago and stayed at the hostel. “The boy was wearing a helmet but it broke under the impact of the crash. This is sheer negligence on the part of the bus driver,” said Gupta. The SHO said the bus had been seized. “We are waiting for the parents of the two students to arrive. A case will be registered if there is a complaint,” he added.
