Delhi: Victim's family rejects communal angle into Moti Nagar murder case

The deceased businessman's relatives say Muslim family prevented physical assault on the victim's daughter as people looked on. | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Rejecting communal angle into Moti Nagar murder case, the family of the victim has denounced efforts on social media to give the incident a communal colour. The victim's family said it was their Muslim neighbours that came to their rescue during the incident. On May 11, a city businessman was stabbed to death by four miscreants after the victim resisted the harassment of her daughter by the accused.



According to a report in Hindustan Times, the deceased businessman's relatives maintained that the Muslim family not only took the injured businessman and his son to the hospital on their scooter, but also prevented the physical assault on the victim's daughter while others looked on.

The police have arrested four accused including a rickshaw puller and his three sons. The crime was given communal colour when the news spread on social media that some people from a particular community killed a businessman in Basai Darapur village of Moti Nagar after the victim protested lewd gestures at his daughter.

The deceased businessman's teenage son was also injured in the attack when he was stabbed during the fight.

A tweet by official handle of Bharatiya Janata Party’s Delhi unit also questioned the silence of Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal. The Delhi Chief Minister had asked Delhi Police to take strong action against the accused.

According to killed businessman’s brother, some visitors repeatedly tried to communalise the incident.

"We have pleaded with so many people not to see the crime though a Hindu-Muslim prism. The killers were habitual criminals who did not see the religion of their victims before harassing them.My niece is also pained by the communalisation. She is an educated woman who has friends from all religions and she strongly believes in secularism,” the report quoted the victim's brother as saying.
