This Father Was Murdered For Objecting To Lewd Remarks About His Daughter

Walking on the streets, travelling in public transport, in night clubs, and even at the nukkadwali chai shop--we have been at the receiving end of lewd comments and heckling. We ignore most of it and when in the company of a man, be it a friend or family member, we urge him to not give into the instigation. Women have conditioned themselves to be immune to bullshit, inclusive of patriarchy, sexual abuse, misogyny, sexism, and even societal norms. Someone in the back, asking why don’t we call out our oppressors? Well, because a father was stabbed to death for protesting the lewd comments that were made about his daughter.

The incident that shook Delhi happened in West Delhi’s Moti Nagar area. A 51-year-old businessman was returning from a hospital with his 24-year-old daughter on a two-wheeler when some boys passed lewd comments and made indecent gestures towards the daughter. Like all dads, the girl's father was concerned and angered at the same time. Choosing a better alternative than to confront the boys, the businessman went to one of the boy's father. What was supposed to be a learning curve for the unruly boy, turned into a life-altering event for the businessman and his family.

The meeting between the two fathers turned ugly after an argument broke out about the issue. In the middle of the argument, the accused father and son attacked the businessman with knives, stabbing him multiple times. After hearing the commotion, many people rushed to the streets--but nobody came forward to help. The victim’s 19-year-old son who had accompanied him came forward to help him and met with a similar fate. He was gravely injured in the incident too. Yet, he somehow managed to inform his mother, who came to the spot with her daughter and took the injured duo to the hospital. Unfortunately, the father passed away on the spot while his son is still battling for his life.

The price that a family had to pay to guard the honour of their daughter was bigger than they could have imagined. A case has been registered, and the 20-year-old culprit along with his 45-year-old father, and two other juveniles have been arrested. But it won’t fill the void the incident has created. The unruly boys and their mentality were backed by their families who thought it was their right to tease and harass women. The culprit father found it easy to murder someone, rather than teach his son a lesson on respecting people--including women.

A country is not safe for anyone if its women are not safe. If women are supposed to take unwarranted advances and comments lying down because the repercussions would be rape or murder then the world is doomed to be a perilous place for all humans. The girl's father and brother should have been safe and their concerns should have been addressed maturely. Unfortunately, the world doesn’t know better than violence.
