FIR against Amit Shah a mockery of democracy: Rajnath

New Delhi [India], May 15 (ANI): Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh on Wednesday said the filing of a First Information Report (FIR) against BJP national president Amit Shah for the attacks on his road show in Kolkata is a 'mockery of democracy and due process'.

"The FIR against BJP National President, Shri AmitShah for the attacks on his road show in Kolkata is a mockery of democracy and due process," Singh tweeted.

On Tuesday, clashes broke out during Shah's mega road show in Kolkata after sticks were hurled at his convoy. Police had to resort to lathi charge to disperse the crowd.

The protest left several injured, due to which Shah was asked to end the roadshow. Bengali polymath Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar's statue was also vandalised during the clashes.

Taking on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for misusing state machinery to stifle democratic rights of the people, Singh said, "West Bengal Govt is misusing the state machinery to stifle democratic rights of the people. These attempts at intimidating the leaders and workers of a political party will fail miserably."

The Union Minister further expressed concerns over the increasing incidents of political violence in the state. "It seems that the Law and Order situation is worsening further in the state with every passing phase in the ongoing General Elections. The Law and order is a primary responsibility of a State government and its Chief Minister. The West Bengal government and Chief Minister, Sushri Mamata Banerjee should own the responsibility of the prevailing situation in the state."

Kolkata police had registered an FIR against Shah in connection with the violence during his roadshow, at Amherst Street police station yesterday. In the FIR, students of Vidyasagar College and Calcutta University named the BJP president as an accused. The students are said to be affiliated to Trinamool Congress Chatra Parishad (TMCP), the student wing of the Trinamool Congress. (ANI)
