Political Violence In Bengal, Cyclone Fani Aftermath In Odisha And Other Top Stories Of The Day

A bust of 18th-century social reformer Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was vandalized at Vidyasagar College in Kolkata during the violent clashes that broke out during BJP chief Amit Shah’s roadshow in Kolkata on Tuesday evening.

According to reports, the clashes broke out after activists of Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) the student's wing of BJP entered the Vidyasagar College where students were protesting against the BJP chief chanting "Amit Shah go back" slogans. Read more

Restoring Electricity, Finding Missing Deer Remains Odisha's Biggest Challenge

It has been 12 days since Cyclone Fani made a deadly landfall in Puri, Odisha and people are still reeling under lack of electricity and water shortage. The post-cyclone heat has made it even worse.

Protests have erupted in different parts of the state. Authorities said that power has been restored in all parts of the affected state except Puri. They say the restoration of power in Puri is a big challenge. Read more

Stubble Burning Is Still Happening In Punjab, Haryana And Elections Are Partly To Be Blamed

Delhi and it's adjoining areas have seen some improvement in the toxic air quality in the past couple of days, thanks to some summer rains. But the improved air quality may not last long and could turn toxic in a matter of days as stubble burning, one of the main contributors of pollution in Delhi NCR, is back.

Despite a ban and efforts from the government to discourage farmers from burning the crop residual, the practice is happening unchecked, in parts of Punjab and Haryana. Read more

Man Inserts Motorcycle's Handle Grip Inside Wife's Private Parts After She Questioned His Affair

In a case of shocking cruelty, a man from Madhya Pradesh has been arrested by police for inserting a plastic grip of a motorbike handle inside the private parts of his wife. The incident which happened almost two years ago came to light only recently after the woman sought medical help due to excruciating pain.

Doctors at the Maharaja Yeshwantrao Hospital in Indore removed the plastic grip after a complex surgery that took four hours. Read more

Maharashtra Woman Forges UAE-Based Husband's Sign For Divorce To Marry Boyfriend

All's fair in love, or so thought Nilofer, who not only romanced her old boyfriend as her husband worked in the UAE, but even fabricated his signature on a divorce document and married her sweetheart.

Nilofer, a Mumbra resident who has a nine-year-old son, is now on the run and is seeking anticipatory bail following a complaint of cheating by her husband Yusuf Sherif Mastan. Read more
