TMC, BJP blame each other for damaging Vidyasagar's statue

Kolkata

Amit Shah

Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar

Vidyasagar college

BJP leaders Harsh Vardhan, Vijay Goel, Nirmala Sitharaman and others take part in a silent protest against the Kolkata clashes in New Delhi on Wednesday. PTI Photo

WhilePolice swung into action and arrested 58 people for their alleged involvement in Tuesday's violence in the state capital during BJP chief's roadshow, the Trinamool Congress intensified its attack against the party. The TMC claimed that the people who desecrated the bust of social reformerduring the violence were "BJP goons" and they released videos that they stated supported their assertions.Trinamool Parliamentary team comprising Derek O'Brien, Sukhendu Sekhar Ray, Manish Gupta, Nadimul Haque also met the Election Commission over the issue and submitted "proof" in support of their claim.Earlier, at a press conference here, TMC leader Derek O'Brien said, "The video not only clearly establishes what the BJP did, but proves that its chief Amit Shah is a liar and 'dhokebaaz' (betrayer)."One of the videos shows a group of men purportedly trying to break down the gate of theand enter the campus by jumping over its walls."It is a childish argument to ask who had the keys to the gate? The video establishes beyond doubt who desecrated the statue," O'Brien said, claiming his party has as many as 44 videos to support its claims.CPI-M condemned TMC-BJP for the violence and breaking of Ishwar Chandra’s bust and also demanded the Election Commission to launch an investigation into Tuesday’s violence.West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and several top TMC leaders changed their Facebook and Twitter profile pictures (DP) with photo of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar on Wednesday to protest the attack.Mamata also took out a huge protest rally in the city from Vidyasagar College. A huge number of party workers joined the rally.However, BJP national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya said in Kolkata that all videos released by the TMC are "untrustworthy". "We have trust in the people. Yesterday's incident was a big conspiracy."BJP Bengal leadership demanded an independent probe led by a High Court Judge who must scan through the CCTV footage to find out the accused, they said.BJP also observed nationwide Black Day on Wednesday and held silent protests across the state, including at Gandhi Statue in Kolkata. BJP leadership in Bengal claimed that the motorbikes set ablaze in front of Vidyasagar College belonged to BJP workers.Hitting back at TMC's charge that the BJP was behind the violence, Shah accused TMC "goons" of vandalising the statue of Vidyasagar, saying it was done to gain "sympathy" as the Mamata Banerjee-led party has realised its "reverse count" has begun. He too showed pictures of Tuesday's violence to blame the TMC."All evidence indicate that TMC goons were behind it. The TMC has done this to turn around a losing battle. It has lost in all six phases so far. For vote bank politics, statue of a famous educationist was damaged. The countdown of the TMC rule has begun," Shah said.-- With inputs from agencies and Jayatri Nag.
