Kolkata violence: BJP delegation submits memorandum to VP Naidu

New Delhi [India], May 15 (ANI): A BJP delegation on Wednesday met Vice President Venkaiah Naidu at his residence and submitted a memorandum to demanding appropriate action to be taken in connection with the violence at party president Amit Shah's Kolkata roadshow.

The BJP delegation comprised Union Ministers Nirmala Sitharaman, Prakash Javadekar, Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi and Vijay Goel, spokespersons Anil Baluni and GVL Narsimha Rao, and Rajya Sabha MP Rakesh Sinha.

The delegation demanded that report of the matter be sought and appropriate action should be taken.

"The protection of BJP Rajya Sabha members is the responsibility of House and Chairman. We have submitted a memorandum to the Vice President on it and demanded that a report be sought and appropriate action be taken," Javadekar told reporters after the delegation met Naidu.

Stating that the repeated attacks on Shah was a "matter of serious concern", the Union minister alleged that the violence was sponsored by the TMC.

"This is an attempt to silence the voice of Amit Shah and BJP. The violence was sponsored by TMC," Javadekar said.

On Tuesday, clashes broke out after miscreants threw sticks at Shah's convoy. The incident took place on College Street when TMC supporters allegedly began sloganeering.

Furious BJP supporters responded by pelting stones and sticks at the Calcutta University gates, resulting in chaos and mayhem.

During the clashes, a bust of social reformer Vidyasagar was allegedly vandalised by BJP workers at Vidyasagar College.

While BJP accused the Banerjee government of "murdering democracy", the TMCclaimed that the saffron party instigated the violence.

Since the Lok Sabha elections began on April 10, both BJP and TMC have been at loggerheads in West Bengal.

Workers of two parties have repeatedly clashed with each other on polling days.

Voting for nine seats in the state will be held in the seventh and final phase of the general elections on May 19. Counting of votes will take place on May 23. (ANI)
