Nusraat Faria gets candid about her new films

Photo: Sheikh Mehedi Morshed

Popular actor, model and anchor Nusraat Faria has carved a space for herself in the film industry of not just Bangladesh, but also India. She is set to star in Birsa Dasgupta’s Kolkata-based film, Bibaho Obhijaan, as well as Shamim Ahmed Rony’s Shahenshah, set in Bangladesh. In a candid conversation, the charismatic artiste talks about her expectations from the films and more.

What can you tell us about Bibaho Obhijaan?

We have finished filming most of the major sequences of Bibaho Obhijaan. I will be going to Kolkata on the 20th of this month to shoot parts from the final schedule. It has been an incredible experience so far and I am immensely confident about the film.

Shahenshah is your first film with Shakib Khan. How was it to have him as your co-star?

Shakib Khan is a brilliant actor and human being. He made me feel really comfortable on the sets, so much so that I did not feel like this was my first film with him. He is a thorough professional who goes out of his way to help his colleagues.

In Shahenshah, you are playing a girl who comes from a rural background. Was it challenging to pull off a character like that?

I believe that I was able to get into the skin of the character quite naturally and easily, so it was not much of a challenge. It was a pleasant experience for me as an artiste.

Tell us a little about your other upcoming projects.

I have teamed up with director Dipankar Dipon for a film. I wanted to work with him ever since the release of Dhaka Attack and I have very high expectations from this project.

Where are you planning to spend Eid-Ul-Fitr this year?

After I wrap up Bibaho Obhijaan in Kolkata, I will be going to Bangkok to shoot a television commercial. I will be returning to Dhaka a couple days before Eid. I stay quite busy all year around due to my work and studies. So, I always look forward to some time off during Eid. I will celebrate the occasion with my family.
