Maoists acting through Vidyarthi Vedika ?

We have definite information that naxals are funding the student body, says Karimnagar CP

For over a decade and above, after making tactical retreat, suspected Maoists have resumed their moves to regain their foothold in northern Telangana. But this time, they are coming back as activists belonging to the Telangana Vidyarthi Vedika (TVV) instead of the banned Radical Students Union (RSU), say intelligence agencies.

Sources said Maoists’ plan was to constitute Urban Sub Committees (USCO) in the form of student organisations and enrol them as members and take up fight against the government. Accordingly, the TVV was formed as part of USCO and funding was done by the Maoists. Already, the Maoists had made their presence felt indirectly by forcing students associated with the TVV to participate in various anti-government activities in the Satavahana University in Karimnagar town such as demanding release of social activist and Delhi university professor Saibaba and removal of “false cases” against revolutionary writer Varavara Rao, the intelligence sources say.

“We have definite information about TVV activists meeting Maoists leader Chandranna in Chattisgarh and collecting funds from the banned organisation for strengthening of the party clandestinely by taking up enrolment of students as members of the TVV and forcing them to participate in anti-government activities and agitations in the integrated Karimnagar district,” the sources said.

The Maoists’ move is to train these youngsters into hardcore activists to fight against the government. Later, after indoctrinating them and making them fall in line, they would give them short weapons to commit offences, the sources said.

The sources said some faculty members of the Satavahana University had taken the students to Chatisgarh to meet naxalites in the name of study tours via Polavaram and Badrachalam. “What is the reason for the student organisation to stage protest and fight for the cause of Maoist ideology and demand the release of arrested Maoists by the police, they asked.

Appeal to students

Commissioner of Police V. B. Kamalasan Reddy said they had definite information about the Maoists funding the TVV. He appealed to the student community to distance themselves from the banned organisations and not to spoil their bright future by supporting or getting involved in naxalite activities. He appealed to the youth not to get attracted to wrong ideology and disturb the peace.
