Shiv Sena slams TMC over attack on Amit Shah’s roadshow

The BJP chief escaped unhurt, but was forced to cut short the jamboree and had to be escorted to safety by the police.

BJP president Amit Shah waves at supporters during a roadshow ahead of the last phase of the Lok Sabha polls in Kolkata on Tuesday. (Photo: Abhijit Mukherjee)

Mumbai: BJP’s allies in Maharashtra Wednesday called out the West Bengal government over the attack on BJP president Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata. Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut described the incident as unfortunate for democracy. Another BJP ally, Union minister Ramdas Athawale, demanded that President’s Rule be imposed in West Bengal.

“If the violent acts in West Bengal are going to keep increasing and pose a danger to democracy, it is better to bring the state under President’s rule,” Mr Athawale said while addressing an election rally in Amritsar, where he was campaigning for a candidate of the Republican Party of India (Athawale).

Targeting West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee, Mr Athawale said, “Every party has the right to campaign during elections. People will decide who will win and who will lose. But not allowing one’s opponent to campaign is detrimental to democracy. Ms Banerjee lectures the entire world about saving democracy. But in her own state, she cannot stop violence during elections. Therefore President’s Rule should be imposed in West Bengal.”

Supporters of the BJP and TMC (Trinamul Congress) Tuesday fought pitched battles on the streets of Kolkata during Shah’s roadshow. The BJP chief escaped unhurt, but was forced to cut short the jamboree and had to be escorted to safety by the police.

Mr Raut, a Rajya Sabha MP, said that there could be no restrictions on anyone to campaign anywhere in the country. "West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee did not want Narendra Modi and Amit Shah in Bengal. Did anyone stop Mamata from campaigning in Gujarat?" Mr Raut asked.

It was unfortunate that the statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, a noted philosopher and key figure of the renaissance in Bengal, was desecrated, Mr Raut told reporters in Mumbai.
