Aurangabad: At Rs 274 crore, drought relief expenses shoot up in Marathwada region - India

Prasad Joshi

AURANGABAD: The state government has disbursed Rs 274.30 crore towards different drought mitigation measures in Marathwada during the last finacial year, while the actual expenditure is slated to rise further till the arrival of the rainy season. The fund includes special allotment of Rs 40.10 crore towards clearing the electricity dues of public water schemes and other such distribution arrangements.

The amount does not include expenses towards running fodder camps as the expenditure towards it is yet to be released by the government.

The authorities said the expenditure on drought mitigation may surpass the funds arranged to tackle the 2016 drought as holistic and sustainable measures are being taken this time to tide over the crisis.

Among the eight districts of Marathwada, Beed tops the chart in expenditure on drought relief measures. The district, which is currently supplied with the highest number of 1,083 tankers, has received Rs 147 crore, which is more than 50% of the total funds disbursed in the region.

The money has been spent on specified relief works, including supply of water tankers, compensation towards acquired wells, digging of borewells and revival of public water supply schemes, among others.

As per official records, Marathwada is supplied with 3,011 tankers, while over 4,600 private and public wells have been acquired in eight districts for refilling the tankers. Total 710 fodder camps are in operation in the region, giving shelter to 4.88 lakh cattle.

Deputy divisional commissioner (revenue) for Aurangabad division Vijaykumar Phad on Tuesday said the state government has resolved to offer all possible help in drought-hit areas by providing necessary funds. “The water scarcity is very acute in several parts of Marathwada. In keeping with the demand from different districts, the government has been releasing money in instalments to carry out drought relief measures.” As per official records, the government had incurred expenditure of Rs 322 crore during 2016-17.

When asked whether the expenditure on drought mitigation this time would surpass the expenditure in 2016, Phad said the expenditure was directly proportional to the scale of relief measures. “Our priority is to extend all possible help to the affected population and livestock. We have been responding to the crisis situation in a proactive manner without bothering much about the expenditure,” he said.

As per official data, the Aurangabad division comprising eight districts had a roller coaster ride of monsoon during the last season.

The division received 117% average rainfall in June, followed by 54% in July, 93.2% in August and 13.4% in September. Marathwada did not receive any major rainfall during the return phase of monsoon, which worsened the water situation.

As fallout, the groundwater level in 71 out of total 76 talukas of Marathwada has dropped compared to the average level during the past five years. It includes 27 talukas where the groundwater level has worrisomely dipped by more than 2m, official data from the Groundwater Surveys and Development Agency, show.
