Mayawati rallies behind Mamata Banerjee, says Modi-Shah targeting her is dangerous

Mayawati has come out in support of Mamata Banerjee.

Day after Election Commission (EC) cut short campaign time in West Bengal in view of the violent clashes during Amit Shah's roadshow, Mayawati came out in support of Mamata Banerjee.

Addressing a press conference, Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati said, "Election Commission has banned campaigning in West Bengal, but from 10 pm today just because the PM has two rallies during the day. When they had to put a ban why not from morning? This is unfair and the EC is acting under pressure."

Mayawati added, "It is clear that PM Modi, Amit Shah and their leaders are targeting Mamata Banerjee. This is planned targeting. This is a very dangerous and unjust trend and one which doesn't suit the PM of the country."

In an unprecedented decision in India's electoral history, the EC on Wednesday invoked Article 324 of the Constitution to cut short campaigning for the last phase of the election on May 19 in the wake of violence between BJP and Trinamool Congress workers in Kolkata on Tuesday.

It ordered that campaigning in nine seats will end at 10 pm on Thursday, a day before its scheduled deadline.

The Congress also slammed the Election Commission, saying it has been a "shameful fall for a once-independent constitutional body".

Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said the use of Article 324 by the EC is an "unpardonable betrayal of the Constitution" as the poll body has failed to maintain a level-playing field.

Questioning the Election Commission's decision to end campaigning in West Bengal from 10 pm on Thursday, CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury asked if the poll body had set the time to allow Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address two rallies in the state in the afternoon.

"If a ban is intended for 72 hours, why is it starting at 10 pm tomorrow? Is it to allow the two rallies of the PM before that?" Yechury tweeted.
