BJP Oppositon : BJP targets opposition for ganging up against PM Narendra Modi

NEW DELHI: Comparing the recent coming together of 22 opposition parties in Kolkata with “a group of terrified animals, rodents, reptiles and men hanging on a tree to protect themselves from a deluge”, former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chauhan on Sunday said there was no real bonding among these leaders.Speaking at Delhi BJP’s Yuva Vijay Sankalp Maharally at Ramlila Maidan, Chauhan said: “Everyone knows that BJP has a commander in Prime Minister Narendra Modi , but who will be their (opposition parties)commander?”Manoj Tiwari, BJP’s Delhi unit chief, said the rally was fifth among a series of events recently organised by the party at Ramlila Maidan ahead of the LS polls and there was a lot of enthusiasm among BJP workers. While there were plenty of empty seats at Sunday’s event, BJP Yuva Morcha president Sunil Yadav claimed that at least 20,000 people attended the rally. Unhappy over some in the gathering leaving the event midway, Tiwari warned of a probe into who these people actually were.The party had planned to burn 40-feet effigies of chief minister Arvind Kejriwal and Congress chief Rahul Gandhi. However, the idea was dropped “keeping in mind the poor air quality in the city”. Yadav, however, said: “The effigies will be burned later because Kejriwal and Gandhi have been lying.”As he launched his attack against the opposition, MP CM Chauhan narrated an incident from some decades ago. “Several villages were inundated in the floods of 1973. Many people hung on to trees to save themselves. A local priest was among them. A group of youths joined me in getting a boat and rescuing the priest. We saw a monkey, a snake, a squirrel and others clinging on to the tree. All of them were terrified. The gathering in Kolkata was like that…all of them came together when they saw the flood of Modi and feared for their lives.”He added: “The corrupt are calling the chowkidar (Modi) chor... these 22 parties can go to any extent for power.”Specifically targeting Kejriwal, Chahuhan said: “Kejriwal used to leave no stone unturned in attacking Congress. Now, he was also sitting there (at the opposition meet). AAP was born out of opposition to Congress,” he said.Terming the outcome of the recently concluded assembly election in MP “strange”, Chauhan said BJP got more votes, but Congress won more seats. “Don’t think that mama (Chauhan is popularly known as mama) has become weak. BJP got 27 seats out of 29 in 2014 and I played an important role there. In assembly elections, we were ahead in 17 Lok Sabha seats and I promise that BJP will win at least 27 in the upcoming polls,” Chauhan stated. He asked BJP workers to leave no stone unturned in helping BJP win all the seven LS seats in Delhi.
