Why was Tabu missing from Bharat trailer? Actor says ‘I just have one scene’

Bollywood actor Tabu was reported to be playing Salman Khan’s sister in his upcoming film Bharat. However, her absence from the film’s trailer and most of the promotional videos and events sparked speculations about her role and she has now revealed that she just has one scene in the film that also stars Katrina Kaif. An Asian Age report claimed Tabu said she has just one scene in the film so there is no point in joining the promotions.

Actors Tabu and Rakul Preet Singh during a press conference for De De Pyaar De in Mumbai on May 11. (IANS)

Asked if she will be seen with along with Bharat stars during the promotions, Tabu was quoted as saying, “No. I will not be a part of the promotion of that film because I have a very small role. I just have one scene in it. Now what all can I talk about that one scene to you.”

Also read: Cannes 2019: Hina Khan makes her scintillating red carpet debut

Earlier, while announcing Tabu’s involvement in the film, director Ali Abbas Zafar had said, “I’ve been a huge fan of Tabu’s work and always wished to work with her. After several meetings with her, I’m happy it is finally happening with Bharat and am looking forward to the shoot.”

An official remake of Korean drama An Ode to my Father, Bharat also stars Jackie Shroff, Sunil Grover, Disha Patani and Nora Fatehi. It is slated for release on Eid 2019, June 5.

Director Zafar recently shared pictures from the sets of Bharat and tweeted that recreating scenes from the Partition of India and Pakistan was the most challenging part of the shoot. Tweeting the pictures, he wrote, “Partition was the most challenging part of (the) shoot, to recreate the scale of this defining moment of history and to keep the emotions Zinda in the middle of that chaos ..is the soul of an extraordinary journey of an ordinary man.”

Partition was the most challenging part of @Bharat_TheFilm shoot , to recreate the scale of this defining moment of history and to keep the emotions Zinda in the middle of that chaos ..is the soul of an extraordinary journey of an ordinary man #BHARAT pic.twitter.com/90eQWz8aJ0 — ali abbas zafar (@aliabbaszafar) May 15, 2019

Currently promoting her film with Ajay Devgn, De De Pyaar De, Tabu will also be seen in Saif Ali Khan’s Jawaani Jaaneman.

Follow @htshowbiz for more
