Tahira Kashyap says she gave up on her marriage with Ayushmann Khurrana many times: ‘He didn’t give up but he also didn’t make up’

Ayushmann Khurrana and wife Tahira Kashyap have one of the strongest marriages in Bollywood and the actor stood by his wife as her rock as she battled cancer recently. However, Tahira has confessed that she gave up on marriage many times before she and Ayushmann evolved as companions.

Talking about the rough patch in their marriage post the release of Vicky Donor, Tahira told Spotboye in an interview, “I had a problem with him kissing on screen. I felt like a big, huge fat whale sitting at home. When you are pregnant your hormones also go up and down. Here this boy is looking at his youngest youth best and he is romancing women and what is this onscreen kiss! We both were very young. He didn’t have the time and patience to take me along and I didn’t have the patience to understand. There was this disconnect that we were not there for each other to take each other along in that journey. Somewhere he knew that she doesn’t mean mad. I also knew he wasn’t cheating. I had to evolve as a person to understand what art is.”

WATCH: Watch Ranveer, Akshay, Ayushmann groove on stage at HT India’s Most Stylish 2019

Talking about how she couldn’t deal with it, she said, “I had given up many times but he did not. He didn’t use to give up but he also didn’t make up... We both have really evolved as artists, as companions and we have seen a journey including cancer being a part of it. Where we are right now, it is at its strongest best.”

Tahira also spoke about the time when Ayushmann made a leap in his career as an actor and she took the back seat due to her own “conspiracy theories”. Talking about following him into the film industry, the author-turned filmmaker said that she didn’t want to be a shame for him by making a very juvenile, stupid short film. “He has reached a certain professional point of his career and I didn’t want to be a shame. I was very scared what people would think. We are our biggest enemies,” she said. On being asked about how Ayushmann reacted to her plans of directing, she said, “I didn’t even tell him for the longest time that I wanted to be a director.”

Tahira will now make her directorial debut with a film to be produced by Tanuj Garg and Atul Kasbekar. Talking about the same, she said, “It will be shot entirely in Mumbai. It’s a slice-of-life film, which will have 5 girls.” Any girl who will be more like Tahira? “Oh, there’s a bit of Tahira in every girl in that bunch of five,” she concluded.

Follow @htshowbiz for more
