Gang rivalry: Four arrested for hacking two with sickles

The city police has arrested four persons from Saravanampatti on Wednesday and searching for five more persons

COIMBATORE: A day after two youths were attacked with sickles in full public view near Upplipalayam, the city police on Wednesday arrested four people involved in the crime. They also have launched a manhunt for another five people in connection with the case.

Police identified the arrested as M Sathiskumar alias Vellai Sathish, 25, B Hari alias Thiruttu Kosu, 25, T Dhanabal, 24, and R Surya, 24, all residents of Ganapathy in the city. All the four are repeated offenders and police have recovered from them five sickles and two two-wheelers.

Meanwhile, the condition of the victims - N Pradeep, 19, of Kamarajapuram, and his friend M Tamilvanan, 21, of Ganapathy - are said to be stable. While Pradeep is undergoing treatment at the Coimbatore Medical College and Hospital, Tamilvanan is recuperating in a private hospital in the city.

A police source said Pradeep was not detained under the Goondas Act in the case in which he, along with his friends Rajesh and Prasanth, attacked loadman R Santhoshkumar, of Moore Market, on April 1.

The Saravanampatti police had arrested the trio in that case, but Pradeep managed to come out on bail with a condition to appear before judicial magistrate II on a daily basis, while his friends were detained under the Goondas Act. "Pradeep was exempted only because case proximity - the number of cases required to detain him under the Goondas Act, - was less," said a police officer.

Pradeep and his friend were attacked by the four-member gang on Tuesday to take revenge for the attack on Santhoshkumar. The rivalry between the Moor Market gang and Kamarajapuram gang has been going on for a long time, the officer said. According to him, the gang had planned to attack Pradeep in his area a couple of days ago, but they could not execute it.

The city police have registered a case against the four under Sections 147, 148, 341, 307 and 506 (ii) of the Indian Penal Code (and produced them before a judicial magistrate who remanded them in judicial custody for 15 days. They were subsequently lodged in jail.

The police officer said they have intensified patrolling across the city limits. "A total of 24 two-wheelers and 44 four-wheelers have been deployed to patrol the city round the clock. In addition, directions have been issued to carryout regular patrolling in both Moore Market and Kamarajapuram areas."


