Opposition rallies behind Mamata Banerjee over West Bengal campaign ban, Didi says thanks

A united Opposition has emerged in support of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee after the Election Commission cut short campaigning in the state in aftermath of clashes between Trinamool Congress and Bharatiya Janata Party workers.

Regional political stalwarts, including Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati, Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister N Chandrababu Naidu, Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) chief Arvind Kejriwal, and Congress leaders slammed the Election Commission for its decision to cut short the poll campaign duration in West Bengal.

A day after political slugfest erupted in West Bengal in view of the violent clashes during Amit Shah's roadshow, Mayawati came out in support of Mamata Banerjee.

"Election Commission has banned campaigning in West Bengal, but from 10 pm today just because the PM has two rallies during the day. When they had to put a ban why not from morning? This is unfair and the EC is acting under pressure," Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP) chief Mayawati said.

Mayawati: Election Commission has banned campaigning in West Bengal, but from 10 pm today just because PM has two rallies in the day. If they had to ban then why not from today morning? This is unfair and EC is acting under pressure pic.twitter.com/s7v0xpvAkO May 16, 2019

Mayawati added, "It is clear that PM Modi, Amit Shah, and their leaders are targeting Mamata Banerjee. This is planned targeting. This is a very dangerous and unjust trend and one which doesn't suit the PM of the country." Chandrababu Naidu too threw his weight behind Mamata Banerjee.

"It is disturbing to see prompt action by the ECI on a complaint by the BJP and Amit Shah in West Bengal, while conveniently ignoring the complaints of TMC," Chandrababu Naidu tweeted.

It is disturbing to see prompt action by the ECI on the complaint by @BJP4India and @AmitShah in West Bengal, while conveniently ignoring the complaints of @AITCofficial. N Chandrababu Naidu (@ncbn) May 15, 2019

Saying that it is high time that the Election Commission acts on complaints by the Opposition, Chandrababu Naidu said, "Giving clean chits to Narendra Modi, taking unjustified prompt action after false complaints by BJP, wilful inaction on genuine complaints by opposition parties; clearly raises doubts about the neutrality, impartiality, and fairness of the Election Commission of India."

Accusing the Election Commission of going against all norms of democratic fair play, SP chief Akhilesh Yadav said, "The EC's decision to call off campaigning in Bengal is against all norms of democratic fair play. I fully support @MamataOfficial ji in her fight to stop the undemocratic march of the two and a half men who have used and abused every institution of our country for their own gain."

The EC's decision to call off campaigning in Bengal is against all norms of democratic fair play. I fully support @MamataOfficial ji in her fight to stop the undemocratic march of the two and a half men who have used and abused every institution of our country for their own gain. Akhilesh Yadav (@yadavakhilesh) May 15, 2019

CPI (M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury also questioned the Election Commission's decision. Sitaram Yechury asked if the poll body had set the time to allow Prime Minister Narendra Modi to address two rallies in the state in the afternoon.

"If a ban is intended for 72 hours, why is it starting at 10 pm tomorrow? Is it to allow the two rallies of the PM before that?" Sitaram Yechury tweeted.

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi also hit out at the Election Commission and asked campaigning was cut short only in West Bengal. "Why only West Bengal, natural justice & fair play demands it should have been for entire 7th Phase why only West Bengal, why not for Eastern UP," Asaduddin Owaisi said.

Congress also accused the Election Commission of losing its credibility and independence.

Congress's chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala said the order prohibiting campaigning in West Bengal by 20 hours is a "dark spot" on India's democracy and institutions like the Election Commission.

"Election Commission has completely abdicated its Constitutional duty under Art 324 to ensure level playing field, besides negating the due process under Article 14 and 21 of India's Constitution," he told reporters.

Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal had also come out in support of his West Bengal counterpart Mamata Banerjee saying the people of the state will give a befitting reply to the "perpetrators of violence and hooliganism".

ELECTION COMMISSION ACTION DIRECT ATTACK ON DEMOCRACY: MAMATA BANERJEE

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Thursday thanked Opposition leaders, who came out in her support as she protested against the Election Commission's decision.

"Thanks and gratitude to @Mayawati, @yadavakhilesh, @INCIndia, @ncbn and others for expressing solidarity and support to us and the people of #Bengal. EC's biased actions under the directions of the #BJP are a direct attack on democracy. People will give a befitting reply," Mamata tweeted on Thursday.

Thanks and gratitude to @Mayawati, @yadavakhilesh, @INCIndia, @ncbn and others for expressing solidarity and support to us and the people of #Bengal. EC's biased actions under the directions of the #BJP are a direct attack on democracy. People will give a befitting reply Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) May 16, 2019

Accusing the Election Commission of acting on the instructions of the BJP, Banerjee said the move was "unethical and unconstitutional".

READ | Mayawati says Modi-Shah targeting Mamata Banerjee is dangerous

WATCH | Kolkata showdown: Who is keeping Bengal on the boil?
