Study in valour: Congress’ Rajasthan govt introduces Balakot airstrike, Abhinandan Varthaman in school books

IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's MiG-21 had downed Pakistan's F-16 jet on February 27 | Photo Credit: ANI

Jaipur: The Congress may have questioned the Narendra Modi government on the Balakot airstrike after the Pulwama attack, but its Rajasthan government has decided to include information about it Class IX syllabus for students of social science. School textbooks which will be used by Class IX students from July when the new academic session begins will introduce the Balakot airtsrike and also discuss the courage and bravery shown by IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman.

As per the Times of India, the text regarding the airstrike does not have any headline but has been included in the chapter "Rashtriya suraksha evum shaurya parampara ( National security and tradition of valour) by the Rajasthan Board of Secondary Education. The text details India's air strikes on the camp of the terrorist group in Pakistan on February 26 after the February 14 Pulwama attack.

It also mentions the role by IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, who bravely brought don Pakistan’s F-16 jets after the Pakistan Air Force jets attempted to breach India’s airspace following the Balakot strike. Varthaman was captured by Pakistan after his MiG-21 Bison jet was downed, however, was later released two days after spending time in Pakistani custody.

Notably, the chapter makes no mention of the government at the Centre or the number of terrorists killed in the attack, a topic which had become a bone of contention between the ruling BJP at the Centre and the opposition Congress.

The text read, "After an attack on defence forces by terrorists in Pulwama, the IAF on February 26, 2019, with 12 Mirage-2000 fighter jets, attacked terrorist camps in Balakot. The next day, an F-16 Pakistan fighter het violated Indian air space and attempted to attack (military establishments). IAF directed its "braveheart" Wing Commander Abhinandan, who flew a MiG-21, to respond. He displayed his excellence by shooting down a plane which was better than the jet he was flying.”

Following his return, Varthaman underwent a few tests in Delhi and was subsequently given a posting out of Jammu and Kashmir due to security reasons and service policy.


