Proud to be anti-national if Hindu fanatics hailed as nationalists: Mehbooba Mufti lambasts Pragya Thakur

PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

Srinagar: PDP chief and former Jammu & Kashmir chief minister Mehbooba Mufti lambasted BJP Bhopal candidate and 2006 Malegaon blast accused Pragya Thakur for her ‘Nathuram Godse a patriot’ remark.

Referring to Thakur’s statement in which she hailed Mahatma Gandhi’s killer as a patriot, Mufti said, she is proud to be an anti-national if a Hindu fanatic is called a nationalist.

“I take pride in being called an anti-national when a Hindu fanatic who gunned down Gandhi ji is hailed as a nationalist. Aisi nationalism aur desh bhakti humaray bas ki naheen. Yeh aapko Mubarak (We’re not capable of practising such nationalism. You keep it),” she said in a statement on Twitter.

I take pride in being called an anti national when a Hindu fanatic who gunned down Gandhi ji is hailed as a nationalist. Aisi nationalism aur desh bhakti humaray bas ki naheen. Yeh aapko mubarak. — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) May 16, 2019

The controversy started with Makkal Needhi Maiam (MNM) founder Kamal Haasan while campaigning for his party’s candidate for Tamil Nadu's Aravakurichi ahead of the by elections on the four remaining assembly seats in the state, said Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin Nathuram Godse, “India’s first terrorist was a Hindu”.

On Thursday, speaking to reporters, BJP’s Bhopal candidate and 2006 Malegaon blast accused Thakur said, “Nathuram Godse was a deshbhakt, is a deshbhakt and will remain a deshbhakt. People calling him a terrorist should instead look within, such people will be given a befitting reply in these elections,” causing a huge furore.

The BJP has distanced itself from Thakur’s comments and party spokesperson GVL Narasimha Rao said the party strongly disagrees with her statement and will ask her to tender a public apology for the same.

“BJP does not agree with this statement, we condemn it. Party will ask her for clarification, she should apologise publicly for this statement,” Rao said.

Congress condemned the statement stating that 'successors of Godse' are a threat to India's democracy.

Congress's Bhopal candidate Digvijaya Singh Thakur for her statement saying Naturam "modi ji, Amit Shah ji and the state BJP should give their statements and apologize to the nation. I condemn this statement, Nathuram Godse was a killer, glorifying him is not patriotism, it is sedition," he said.




