Gangster Ramua's wife plotted husband's cold-blooded murder along with her lover and son, reveal police

Three of Samir's friends who shot Dewar have confessed to the crime (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Kolkata: The murder of Howrah-based gangster Rammurti Dewar alias Ramua is unravelling much like a story out of an Agatha Christie's unpublished work. A day after Khardah police arrested the deceased gangster's wife and 19-year-old son for plotting his murder, another man was nabbed by officials with the Barrackpore police detective wing on Sunday. With this latest development, the total number of arrests, in this case, has risen to six as of yet.

Dewar's 33-year-old wife Kajal, their son Samir and Samir's friends namely Prashant K Singh, Vishal Menon, and Shyamsundar Rao were arrested by Khardah police last week. Going by reports, the man arrested on Sunday has been identified as Kartik Jadav from Howrah's Shibpur. An insurance agent by profession, Jadav, Kajal's paramour, is believed to have hatched the plan to murder the 47-year-old gangster.

Kajal and Jadav met in 2015 when the former's husband was in jail. Dewar and Kajal's son Samir also knew about his mother's illicit relationship but kept quiet since he, like his mother, was fed up of his father's abusive behaviour and short-temper. Deciding to take matters into their own hands, Samir, Kajal, and Jadav conspired to get Dewar killed.

Officials familiar with the investigation said that Jadav hired three of Samir's friends namely Prashant K Singh, Vishal Menon, and Shyamsundar Rao to execute the crime. The trio demanded Rs 4 lakh but Jadhav paid them only Rs 1 lakh.

On the night of January 13, Samir left the door of his father's third-floor apartment at Sodepur's Amrabati open while Kajal gave the killers her husband's revolver. The three boys hired for the job then shot Dewar twice with his own weapon and fled the spot. Latest reports suggest that Jadav, Singh, Menon, and Rao have been remanded to police custody for nine days.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Pune: Minor girls accuse dance teacher of touching inappropriately, showing obscene videos
