Profiling Vicky Kaushal's on Screen Performances

The Hindi film industry is always on the lookout for an actor who has a mass appeal and acting talent in equal measure. Now, it seems the filmmakers, have another star on their hands that they can always rely on. Initially, when the trailer of Raazi came out in 2018, people assumed that Vicky kaushal was just trying to fit into a more “mainstream” Bollywood zone after Masaan, which wasn’t exactly a commercial masala film. However, once the film released, it was evident that he has what it takes to be the best as he made a successful impact in a film that was tailor made for Alia Bhatt. In the second half of the year, he emerged as a surprise package in Rajkumar Hirani’s Sanju, a film which completely revolved around Ranbir Kapoor’s character Sanjay Dutt. He also tried his hand successfully in the digital space with Love Per Square Feet and played lead in Karan Johar’s short film in the Netflix Original Lust Stories. He also became the latest entrant of the Rs. 200 crore club with his last release URI: The Surgicial Strike, which proves that he also has the power to attract audiences to theatres and does not require another superstar in the cast to play off. Many people believe Masaan to be his first film, however, he did have small cameos in films like Luv Shuv Tey Chicken Khurana and Bombay Velvet. While he’s still in a relatively early stage of his career, Vicky has been able to portray a range of emotions through his roles and has done more than enough to convince us he can pull off just about anything. So, on the occasion of this rising star’s birthday, we profile his work so far.





1.Deepak Kumar - Masaan



Director: Neeraj Ghaywan

Release date: 24 July 2015





Neeraj Ghyawan throws you right into the tragedies of these people from the very start of the film and the intensity of it is so substantial that a feeling of discomfort and unjust takes over you literally 5 minutes into the film. Unjust, as you are forced to see the catastrophic consequences of greed, corruption, and casteism. In Masaan , Vicky played Deepak, a Varanasi boy from the Dom community which traditionally carries out the duties on a cremation ground. Masaan is a film set in the holy city of Benaras and tells the story of a few ordinary people whose lives intertwine in two tales of love and loss. Directorthrows you right into the tragedies of these people from the very start of the film and the intensity of it is so substantial that a feeling of discomfort and unjust takes over you literally 5 minutes into the film. Unjust, as you are forced to see the catastrophic consequences of greed, corruption, and casteism.

2.Dilsher - Zubaan

Director: Mozez Singh

Release Date: 4 March 2016

Vicky Kaushal had shot for Zubaan even before he had started working for Masaan, but the release of this film had been delayed. In the film, he played a man who stammers while talking but can sing surprisingly well. Vicky’s performance in the film didn’t seem to have the same impact he had with Masaan but that also could be down to the poor writing of the film.

3.Raman Raghav 2.0

Director: Anurag Kashyap

Release date: 24 June 2016

serial killer.

With Raman Raghav 2.0 , Vicky Kaushal was seen playing a character completely opposite to his two previous roles. In the film, he played an unlikable, abusive, coke-snorting police officer who’s battling his own dark demons even as he chases a

4.Iqbal Syed - Raazi

Director: Meghna Gulzar

Release Date: 11 May 2018

Raazi, without a doubt, was Alia Bhatt’s film but Vicky Kaushal portrayal of Iqbal Syed who is torn between the love for his wife and nation will always be remembered by the audience.



He infused the character with kindness and love which is completely opposite of the demonic depiction of a Pakistani officer that you would expect from a Hindi film. Both Alia and Vicky got into the skin of their characters and was the most important factor that made Raazi click with the audience.

5.Kamlesh "Kamli" Kanhaiyalal Kapasi - Sanju

Director: Rajkumar Hirani

Release Date: 29 June 2018

Ranbir Kapoor walks away with a star on his shoulder for his effort in Sanju, but If Vicky showcased his tenderness in Raazi, he gave us a glimpse of his goofiness through Sanju. Often the role of the hero’s friend goes unnoticed by the audience and is not given enough significance. However, Vicky made his presence felt with his portrayal of Kamli. While there are no doubts about the fact thatwalks away with a star on his shoulder for his effort in Sanju, but Vicky Kaushal , who plays Sanju's Gujarati NRI friend who has his heart in the right place, stays with you long after you watch the film... and so do his Sex-spearean quotes.

6.Vicky Sadhu - Manmarziyaan

Director: Anurag Kashyap

Release Date: 14 September 2018

As far as the looks are concerned, Anurag Kashyap gave Vicky Kaushal a complete makeover in his love triangle Manmarziyaan . Vicky was seen as the quintessential Punjabi brat who wants to become a DJ. The fact that he considers Yo Yo Honey Singh to be one his role model tells us enough about him.

While his character could have easily been stereotyped due to the wild masculinity one generally associates with gypsy driving men of North India, Vicky Kaushal allows his character to be vulnerable and aware of his own weaknesses. His eventual awakening makes for one of the best scenes of the film.





7.Major Vihaan Singh Shergill - URI: The Surgical Strike



Director: Aditya Dhar

Release Date: 11 January 2019



When the director declares that his film is a ‘Tribute to a brave new India’, you can assume Nationalism to be written all over it. When the director declares that his film is a ‘Tribute to a brave new India’, you can assume Nationalism to be written all over it. URI: The Surgical Strike was based on India’s reply to terrorism after the horrific attack on an Indian Army infantry in Chandel district of Manipur.

Vicky not only rocks an army uniform, but also pitches Shergill just right — neither a chest-thumper nor a brooder, but a patriot who’d give anything for his country and also is bit of a ladies man.





Digital







8.Sanjay Chaturvedi - Love Per Square Feet



Director: Anand Tiwari

Release Date: 14 February 2018









Love Per Square Feet was a slice of life romantic comedy with its heart at the right place. The opening frame of Netflix’s Love per Square Foot has Vicky Kaushal standing on top of a building, a red gamcha tied around his neck while he brushes his teeth, gazing at a house and its occupants in a neighbouring high rise. This frame sums up what the film is all about — a longing for something better and bigger. The film makes for a fun watch but could have done with a shorter runtime though.





9.Paras - Lust Stories



Director: Karan Johar

Release Date: 15 June 2018







Karan Johar’s story in this Netflix Director: Karan JoharRelease Date: 15 June 2018story in this Netflix Lust Stories Original probably stood out from the rest as it did not underplay like others and was more ‘in your face’. It also features the least complex leads amongst the lot. Paras aren’t able to sexually satisfy his wife Megha ( Kiara Advani ). This makes her sexually frustrated, and she ends up trying to fulfill her desires through a vibrator. The climax scene really is the highlight of the film when the vibrator (which is inside Megha) goes off in front of the entire family.

This film is as ‘in your face’ as they come. There are no moments of comic reliefs as you are all but mute spectators to the spiraling lives of the characters and that are nothing but the power of good cinema. Masaan also was the film that got Vicky Kaushal on the map as he was able to portray the angst of his character on losing his loved one with just enough subtlety to make you relate to it.In fact, his character was so complex that Vicky ended up locking himself inside a room for five days just to bring out the dark side in him. It was not only the materialistic things that the actor detached himself from but also his family, who he had asked not to contact him during the process.
