Muslim Man Puts Humanity Over Religion, Defies Curfew To Rush A Pregnant Hindu Woman To Hospital

Yesterday, we came across Babu Muddrappa, an auto driver in Bengaluru who took an abandoned pregnant woman to hospital, paid her medical bills and even took care of the baby as his own, when her mother fled. We salute Babu for everything he did for the mother and the baby.

People like Babu are rare to find, but not impossible and this brings us to another unsung hero of our society, Maqbool. In case you didn't know, there is a curfew going on in riot-hit Hailakandi, Assam. In the ongoing communal clashes, Maqbool, with prayers on his lips, drove his auto-rickshaw as fast as he could to take a pregnant Hindu woman to hospital.

© Pexels

If there was a face for the idiom, "A friend in need is a friend indeed", it will probably be Maqbool's, who helped his neighbour Rubon Das and his wife Nandita in the time of crisis.

Rubon was desperately calling his near and dear ones to help him arrange for an ambulance to take his wife to hospital, "I was trying to calm my wife down saying someone will surely come to take us to hospital in Hailakandi town." Nandita's pain increased, but no help came for them in the curfew hit area.

© Pexels

At that time, Maqbool heard Rubon's story and without thinking twice he rushed to his residence with his auto-rickshaw. Maqbool was only worried about whether he will make it in time or not, while speeding through the roads. He said, "I was trying to comfort them…. telling them everything will be fine. But I myself was praying."

Thanks to Maqbool, Nandita who was in an advanced stage of labour, could reach the hospital on time and give birth to a boy who they have now named, 'Shanti'. Honestly, there couldn't have been a better name than that.

© Pexels

"We need more such examples of Hindu-Muslim unity and amity," said Hailakandi Deputy Commissioner Keerthi Jalli, when she visited the new-born baby and the parents. She also congratulated Maqbool for helping his friend in the time of distress.

Just when we think the society has become selfish and heartless, where no one wants to help one another; some people come around and make this world a better place to live in with their selfless acts of kindness.
