Human trafficking: Boat shifts destination to Indonesia due to fuel, food shortage

Thiruvananthapuram: The Kerala police received information that the boat carrying 230 people suspected of human trafficking has moved to Indonesian coast. It is learned that the boat which sailed to New Zealand changed its destination due to shortage of food and fuel.

The boat which sailed from Munambam coast has crossed India's maritime boundary line, said reports.

The boat from Kochi has to cross 11,470 kilometres on sea to arrive at New Zealand. And that will take 47 days to reach their destination.

Police assume that the boat is moving close to Indonesian coast as it is difficult to sail 47 days of journey without halting the boat.

People including natives from Ambedkar colony in Delhi, Chennai and Sri Lankan refugees are in the boat.

In order to carry out further investigation on the suspected human trafficking, the Kerala police decided to seek assistance of international probe agencies. The move was made as police suspect international links in the case.

Investigation report forwarded to national agencies

The police have officially informed the progress of the investigation to the central government. It was also mooted to initiate diplomatic interventions and other procedures for further probe into the case. Investigation reports were handed over to national investigation agencies.

The probe team will also review similar cases related to human trafficking at Kollam.

Raid in key conspirator's house

In connection with the case, police raided house of Sreekanthan who is the key conspirator of human trafficking at Chavadinada in Thiruvananthapuram. Police recovered some documents written in Tamil from his residence. The probe team is investigating on the coin bags found from this house.

While raiding Sreekanthan’s house, police recovered the documents which prove Sreekanthan has savings account in Swiss bank. Though further search was carried out, no evidence was obtained. Six passports, numerous bank pass books, cheques and title deeds were recovered from his house.

The police will carry out evidence collection under tight security in the house. Anil Kumar, Sreekanthan’s friend, who was arrested in connection with the case will be taken for evidence collection.

Probe on local support to the team

The Kerala police have been carrying out a detailed investigation on the human trafficking. It is reported that the probe team is keen to trace whether the boat riders got any local support to sail from Munambam.

According to police, hundreds of people will never start their ride from a boat from Munambam without giving any clue to the locals. Police strongly believe that if someone outside Kerala sailed from Munambam, they might have received help from the local people.
