In Bengal, people jailed for 'Jai Shri Ram', 'Jai Maa Kali' chants: PM Modi

Dumdum (West Bengal) [India], May 16 (ANI): On the last day of campaigning in West Bengal, Prime Minister Narendra Modi came down heavily on the "arrogant" chief minister Mamata Banerjee blaming the TMC supremo for the deteriorating situation in the state.

"Didi has created such a situation in West Bengal that infiltrators are having a free run while the devotees of Kali and Ram are forced to live in fear. Youths are being jailed just for chanting "Jai Shri Ram" and "Jai Maa Kali". Daughters are being arrested just for sharing memes," he said while addressing an election rally here.

Claiming that Mamata is losing ground in West Bengal, the Prime Minister said, "This election will be remembered for Didi's attitude towards democracy and constitution. Several of our workers were attacked and killed," the prime minister said.

Modi also alleged that Didi thought of West Bengal as her "personal property". "West Bengal is not your or your nephew's personal fiefdom," he added.

"Today, Didi is abusing the Election Commission, the election process and security forces. Don't forget these are the same constitutional institutions which helped you. If not for these institutions, you would not have been a chief minister today," he said.

Modi also asked the West Bengal chief minister to "accept the truth and shun violence".

The Prime Minister alleged that Mamata Banerjee and other TMC leaders were abusing their power to openly threaten security forces too.

"Their leaders openly threaten security forces. They chase them and kill them. Such tactics are used by stone-pelters in Jammu and Kashmir," he said.

"Everyone has the freedom to dream. You also have freedom of becoming the Prime Minister. But by abusing our Army and security forces, you have lowered your credibility," Modi added.

The Prime Minister also reiterated his part's poll promise to amend the Citizenship Bill. "Those who visit temples, churches, and gurudwaras, those who were forced to come to India because of their worship styles, they do not need to worry. We are going to amend the Citizenship Bill and give them permanent citizenship."

Taking a dig at the Congress party, the Prime Minister said, "Even a party like Congress which believes that the post of the Prime Minister is its birthright is now ready to give up its claim on Prime Minister's post. You can now guess the results of May 23."

Seeking to douse the controversy on Pragya Singh Thakur's comment on Nathuram Godse, the Prime Minister said, "Lord Sri Krishna is known as 'Sudarshan Chakradhari Mohan' and Mahatma Gandhi is known as 'Charkhadhari Mohan'. Today, the country needs to walk on the paths of both these 'Mohans'. For development- Charkhadhari Mohan and for security- Chakradhari Mohan."

Around nine seats of West Bengal will go to polls in the final phase on May 19. The counting of votes will be done on May 23. (ANI)
