With mother by his side, Sangrur MP Bhagwant Mann pledges to quit alcohol

Drinking habit used to target me: Bhagwant Mann

BARNALA: AAP MP Bhagwant Mann , with his mother Harpal Kaur on his side, pledged to quit drinking alcohol to avoid any embarrassment to the party due to his habits."I have taken a solemn vow to say 'no' to booze for good in my mother's presence. Today onwards, I shall devote my precious time 24X7 for the cause of the people of Punjab," said Mann, who was greeted with cheers from the audience.Mann confessed before a large crowd gathered for AAP convener Arvind Kejriwal 's rally that he used to drink alcohol occasionally.When my mother heard my detractors passing nasty comments against me, she advised me against drinking for the cause of the people. This made me to decide to part ways with alcohol for my people and my Punjab,” he said. His drinking habit had been wrongly used by the opposition parties and some colleagues in the AAP to target him, Mann claimed.“The SAD-BJP alliance and the ruling Congress party are all in league with each other to malign my image by portraying me as a drunkard. They have fallen to the level of uploading my old video clips to defame me for the heck of it,” he added.AAP MP Harinder Singh Khalsa had a few years ago objected to sitting beside Mann in the Lok Sabha and urged the Speaker to allot him a seat away from the Sangrur MP, claiming that he had to tolerate bad odour of liquor even in Parliament.Prime Minister Narendra Modi too had mentioned Mann’s reputation for drinking during a speech in Parliament, saying, “We drink milk but Bhagwant Mann drinks something else.” Nearly three years ago, a viral video clip allegedly showed Mann behaving abnormally in a car at the Chandigarh Press Club. Even the congregation in Bargari on October 25, 2015 for the bhog ceremony of two protesters killed in police firing at Behbal Kalan, Mann had faced accusations of being drunk, which he had vehemently denied.The AAP MP got support of his party leaders, who welcomed his decision. Kejriwal described Mann’s pledge as a bold decision and said it was a lesson for youths who too need to quit alcohol. “By making this pledge, Bhagwant Mann has won my heart and also of lakhs of his fans and supporters,” the Delhi chief minister said.Kejriwal’s deputy Manish Sisodia too tweeted his encouragement: “At Barnala rally, Bhagwant Mann's announcement - on January 1, he has resolved not to touch alcohol ever. From the stage, he made the promise before his mother and the people of Punjab that he would apply his tan, man, dhan (body, soul and mind) in the service of Punjab.”Mann also said that he would go and take the pledge again in Gurdwara Mastuana Sahib in Sangrur. “There may be some shortcomings in me as I am not perfect but people will see a different kind of Bhagwant Mann without drinking. I will go to Gurdwara Mastuana Sahib and will again repeat my pledge of not drinking for the rest of my life,” the Sangrur MP said. His mother Harpal Kaur, told TOI that Mann used drink alcohol sometimes. “Now I have prevailed over him against drinking alcohol and he has taken an oath,” she said.
