Top Jaish commander among 5 terrorists killed in Kashmir

SRINAGAR: A top Pakistani Jaish-e-Muhammed commander was among the five terrorists killed on Thursday in two different encounters — in Kashmir’s Pulwama and Shopian districts — which also claimed the lives of two civilians and two soldiers.The top JeM commander , Khalid Bhai, who a police spokesperson said had masterminded the 2017 fidayeen attack on a CRPF camp in Lethpora that had left five CRPF men dead, and two other JeM terrorists — Naseer Pandith of Karmibad Pulwama and Umar Mir of Shopian — were slain by security forces in an encounter at Dalipora village, in south Kashmir’s Pulwama district, in the early hours of Thursday. A soldier and a civilian were also killed while three people, including two Armymen, were injured during the gunfight in Dalipora.A police officer said that in the initial phase of the encounter, three soldiers and two civilians, brothers Younis Dar and Rayees Ahmad Dar, were injured. While Rayees died at the encounter site, his brother Younis was immediately taken to a nearby hospital from where he was referred to a Srinagar hospital for specialised treatment, the officer said. The injured soldiers were airlifted to the Army’s 92 Base hospital at Badami Bagh, Srinagar, where one of them, Sandeep Kumar, died. The other two soldiers, who were injured, are Sepoy Arunesh GSW and Sepoy Ravindar GSW.All three terrorists were killed in the Dalipora encounter and their bodies, along with arms and ammunition, were recovered from the site, the police officer said.In another encounter, two terrorists, one civilian and one Armyman were killed in Handew area of south Kashmir’s Shopian district on Thursday. The encounter occurred when the Army’s 44 RR, SOG and CRPF launched cordon-and-search operations at Handew village on Thursday afternoon.A police officer confirmed that two militants were killed and their bodies recovered. The slain civilian was Ishtaq Ahmad Bhat and the soldier who succumbed to injuries sustained in action was Rohit Yadav.The officer said the Pakistani terrorist Khalid, killed in Dalipora, had been active for the last eight years in Kashmir and that his killing was a major success. According to police records, Naseer Pandith had a long history of crime before joining the JeM and several cases were registered against him for planning and executing attacks in the area after joining the proscribed JeM. He was also involved in the 2018 killing of a policeman, Mohammad Yaqoob Shah, of Pulwama, on the eve of Eid, and in some weapon-snatching incidents in the area. “He also had several criminal cases registered against him, including case FIR No 30/15 & 277/14 under the NDPS Act and case FIR No 25/16 pertaining to forgery,” a police spokesman said. The third terrorist slain in Dalipora, Umar Mir, also was involved in several terror attacks and had been part of groups responsible for attacks on security forces, the police spokesman said.The officer said Wednesday’s early morning encounter erupted when the three terrorists fired upon a joint team of police and Army personnel conducting a cordon-and-search operation in Dalipora village following credible inputs about the presence of the militants.Soon after the encounter ended, the villagers clashed with security forces at various places in Pulwama district. The authorities then imposed curfew in Pulwama town as well and Internet services were suspended in the southern Kashmir district.Meanwhile, another encounter broke out between terrorists and security forces, in Kandi forest in north Kashmir’s Kupwara district , on Thursday morning. Reports said a joint team of the Army’s 47 RR, 28 RR and the police’s SOG launched a cordon-and-search operation at Portel Nad and Razdan Nad — the upper reaches of Kandi which connect to the Lolab forest.An Army officer said the operation was launched following intelligence inputs about the movement of suspected terrorists in the woods. He said contact was established soon after the forces challenged the movement of the group of terrorists in the forests.Kupwara SSP Ambarkar Shriram Dinkar said the encounter was on in the upper reaches of Kandi when reports last came in.
