Kolkata clashes: Election Commission relieves two cops of duty

In the wake of violence between BJP and Trinamool Congress workers in Kolkata, the Election Commission (EC) on Thursday “relieved” the Officer-in-charge of Amherst Street police station and the SDPO of Diamond Harbour.

“The Commission has directed that Mithun Kumar Dey, SDPO of Diamond Harbour, and Kausik Das, officer-in-charge of Amherst, Kolkata, stand relieved with immediate effect. Both the officers shall not be given any election related posts”, reads an EC letter.

Supporters of BJP and TMC clashed on the streets of Kolkata during a massive roadshow of BJP chief Amit Shah on May 14. A bust of Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar installed on the campus of Vidyasagar College was smashed. Several motorcycles were vandalised and set on fire.

Lok Sabha Elections 2019: Polling schedule, results date, constituency-wise results, FAQs, key candidates

Following the incident, Kolkata Police arrested 58 people.

On Thursday, police formed a five-member Special Investigation Team (SIT) to probe the case. An official of the rank of Deputy Commissioner, an Assistant Commissioner of the Detective Department, an officer from Anti-Rowdy squad, an investigating official and an official of sub-inspector rank will be part of the team. Sources said police have received and procured 50 video footages from various sources. With the help of these videos, five to six people have been identified, who were directly involved in the violence at Vidyasagar College.

“They are being traced, two of them were from Kolkata, while the remaining are from other parts of Bengal. We have also procured two footages from inside the college premises. A man in blue shirt has been captured on CCTV camera while vandalising the bust. We are trying to identify the person,” said a senior police official. Police said the attack was “pre-planned”. The SIT will work and find out about people who were directly involved with the incident, said sources.

Regarding the incident, police sources have also been interrogating 10 BJP supporters, who have been remanded in police custody.

“We sought their police custody to dig out more information about the incident. It was not spontaneous for sure. What exactly had happened, how they entered college is what we are trying to find out, but they seem to be a tough nut to crack,” said an official. Sources said they denied all allegations.

Meanwhile, Governor Keshri Nath Tripathi had expressed his concern over the vandalism at Vidyasagar College and asked Calcutta University to ensure installation of a new statue at the same place.

“It is an attack on India’s culture and we condemn it strongly. Vidyasagar College has informed us about the incident. If they seek our help in order to install a new statue, we will definitely extend our support,” Sonali Chakraborty, Vice Chancellor of Calcutta University, said at a press conference on Thursday.

The ABVP, meanwhile, has accused Trinamool Chhatra Parishad (TMCP) for vandalising the Vidyasagar bust and challenged them to show CCTV footage to public.

“If one can be arrested for chanting ‘Jai Shree Ram’, then why can’t one be arrested for showing black flag to another leader. We have no connection with statue vandalism incident. It is a conspiracy of the TMC. The TMCP members smashed it, if not, then why is the college not sharing CCTV footages,” ABVP state secretary Saptarshi Sarkar told The Indian Express.
