Rain, strong winds lash Coimbatore, 19-year-old killed

COIMBATORE: A 19-year-old youth was killed after a tree fell on him in the heavy rain that lashed parts of the district on Wednesday evening. Many trees were uprooted and windows of several houses were damaged in the downpour that was accompanied by strong winds and thunderstorms. According to weathermen, the thunderstorms and showers are likely to continue in the region for the next 24 to 48 hours.It all began with thunder around 7.15pm on Wednesday in areas such as Nambialaganpalayam, Periyanaickenpalayam and Sungam. In less than half-an-hour, rain lashed the city, accompanied by strong winds. Even those areas that did not receive rainfall, saw heavy winds. The wind velocity was recorded at 14kmph in the western and central parts of the city, the weathermen said.As per the data available with the district collectorate, the southern parts of the district received 16mm rainfall and the western parts, around 13.5mm. “The rain and the wind are brought by the weather trough that has been extending from Chhattisgarh till Kerala,” said Mahesh Palawat, meteorologist at Skymet weather services. “Scattered rains, thunder and winds will continue for the next 24 to 48 hours. Even after that, scattered rainfall will continue on and off every two to three days until monsoon sets in.”City corporation commissioner Shravan Kumar Jatavath, accompanied by other officials and engineers, inspected the parts of the city that saw heavy tree fall and the underpass of the old Avinashi flyover. They also inspected areas like Sungam and Trichy Road to check if uprooted trees were blocking any road or someone was injured in such incidents. “Officials immediately began working to drain out water from the flyover underpass and open it to traffic again,” said a source.Police, meanwhile, identified the deceased youth as Surya Sakthivel. The incident took place when he was returning home from the Big Bazaar godown at Ettimadai . “When it rained suddenly, he stopped his two-wheeler to take shelter under a tree. As ill luck would have it, a branch of the tree suddenly fell on him. Passersby called the 108 ambulance service and took him to the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital, where doctors declared him brought dead,” they said.
