Mysuru cop guns down gangster from Punjab

Punjab gang came to Mys to collect DeMo notes

Sukhwinder is from Faridkot

MYSURU: Police gunned down a gangster from Punjab after they intercepted him and two of his accomplices on Outer Ring Road, west Mysuru, on Thursday morning.Vijayanagar inspector BG Kumar opened fire at Sukhwinder Singh, 40, from Faridkot, injuring him in the chest. He was rushed to KR Hospital where he was declared brought dead. Kumar said he acted in self-defence when the burly Sukhwinder held him tight.Two accomplices fled in a hired car steered by a driver of Mysuru origin. The car bearing Mysuru RTO (west) registration was seized by cops, but the whereabouts of Singh’s accomplices are not known. Police stepped up checks at entry and exit points, and issued alerts to counterparts in the region.Police commissioner KT Balakrishna said the gang had come to exchange demonetised notes in Mysuru.Officers inspect the spot where Sukhwinder Singh was gunned down in Mysuru on ThursdayWhen a police team led by inspector Kumar reached the spot on a tip-off, the gang assaulted them and cops opened fire. In the incident that took place between 9.15am and 9.45am, Sukhwinder died of a bullet injury.An officer said Sukhwinder grabbed a cop after he was stopped at a junction on Outer Ring Road. When Kumar pulled out his revolver and warned him to release the cop, Sukhwinder obliged only to hold the inspector tight. Kumar opened fire in the melee and shot him in the chest. A senior officer claimed Sukhwinder had a firearm and any delay on the inspector’s part would have had serious consequences. A second gang member was also armed.In his complaint, Kumar said he received information about an unlawful currency notes exchange and rushed to the spot with a Garuda patrol vehicle and his official jeep. Sukhwinder was talking on the phone, while the others fled. What’s baffling cops is that a Punjab gang was in Mysuru to collect demonetised notes, outlawed in November 2016, from an unidentified person.It took cops five hours to confirm that the murdered man was from Faridkot. Except for his phone number, cops didn’t have a clue.When police checked his name on different platforms, three names surfaced with the last name as ‘Singh’. Finally, police ascertained his identity and contacted his sister and uncle through Punjab police. They confirmed it is Sukhwinder’s number.
