National security and Kashmir focus of Amit Shah's roadshows

Gorakhpur: A day before campaigning ended for the last phase of the Lok Sabha elections, BJP President Amit Shah held two road shows in Ballia and Gorakhpur supporting party candidates Virendra Singh Mast and Ravi Kishan During his speech after the roadshow in Ballia, Shah focused on the issue of national security and attacked Congress strategist Sam Pitroda and National Conference leader Omar Abdullah.“Rahul Gandhi’s guru Sam Pitroda said that attacks like Pulwama happen all the time…why were the air strikes required? We said that if you want to appease terrorists, you do it, but we will never forgive those who disrupt peace within our borders. If Pakistan fires a bullet, we will surely bomb them,” he said. Attacking Abdullah, he said: “Omar Abdullah said Kashmir should have a separate prime minister. How can a country have two prime ministers? These people want to separate Kashmir from India. Rahul Gandhi and Omar Abdullah should know that Kashmir is an inseparable part of India and till the day BJP leaders are alive, nobody can take Kashmir away from us. Re-elect Narendra Modi as our PM and we will remove Article 370.”In Gorakhpur, the roadshow which was scheduled for 3.30 pm, began only at 6 pm from the Town Hall and covered 3 km before reaching Vijay Chowk in the heart of the city. The roadshow comprised five specially designed raths. On one rath, BJP president Amit Shah, UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath , BJP candidate Ravi Kishan, BJP general secretary Anil Jain, union minister Shiv Pratap Shukla, BJP media in-charge Sanjay Mayukh, Nishad party leader Sanjay Nishad, all the MLAs of Gorakhpur Lok Sabha seat and the city mayor travelled.There were two raths for mediapersons and one rath for local leaders. The last rath played music and songs supporting the BJP. “Abki Ba Mission Ravi Kishan Bhaiya Jeetihe (This time, the mission is to make Ravi Kisan win),” the loudspeaker played loudly throughout the roadshow. “These roadshows are being organised as part of our strategy and the last roadshow happened in Gorakhpur,” said Anil Jain. “The Gorakhpur roadshow will directly influence Gorakhpur voters and the eight nearby constituencies and the party candidates will benefit from it.” In Gorakhpur, Shah said, “We will make Uttar Pradesh the number one state in India with the help of the Modi-Yogi Jodi.”
