Indian troops martyr five youth in IHK

ISLAMABAD: Indian troops in their fresh acts of state terrorism martyred five Kashmiri youth in Pulwama and Baramulla districts.

According to Kashmir Media Service, the troops martyred three youth, Naseer Pandit, Umar Mir and Khalid Ahmed, and destroyed a residential house during a cordon and search operation (CASO) in Dalipora area of Pulwama district in wee hours, on Thursday. Another youth identified as Rayees Ahmed Dar was martyred and his brother Younis Ahmed Dar was injured in the firing of the troops in the area. They are believed to be the sons of the house owner.

Earlier, one Indian soldier was killed and two others were critically injured in the same area. The operation was going on till last report came in.

Following the killing of the youth, massive clashes between protesters and Indian forces personnel were reported from the area. The occupation authorities have imposed curfew and suspended internet services in Pulwama district following the clashes. More details are awaited.

Meanwhile, a 23-year-old Arshad Ahmed Dar, who was injured in Indian forces violent action on 13th May at Chanabal in Pattan area of Baramulla district, succumbed to his injuries at Soura Institute of Medical Sciences in Srinagar. Arshad had multiple injuries of bullets and pellets including on his skull and both eyes, said Medical Superintendent of Soura hospital, Dr Farooq Jan.

Pro-India PDP activist, Irfan Lone, who was shot at by unidentified gunmen along with another worker at Zainapora in Shopian district last week, also succumbed to his injuries in a Srinagar hospital early morning, today. On the other hand, unknown gunmen killed a youth, Nayeem Shah, at Nalthi Pull in Bhaderwah area of Doda district. Curfew was imposed in Bhaderwah town of Jammu region following violent protests triggered by the killing of a Muslim youth by Hindu extremists.

According to Kashmir Media Service, relatives of the deceased Nayeem Shah said that he was a victim of cow vigilantism. Nayeem was shot dead by the Hindu extremists at Nalthi Pul in the town, last night. Soon after the incident, people took to the streets and staged demonstrations against the killing. Indian police used brute force and fired teargas shells to disperse the protesters. The occupation authorities have imposed curfew and suspended internet service in the town.
