Janhvi Kapoor starrer Gunjan Saxena biopic's shoot called off due to thunderstorm warning?

Bollywood actress Janhvi Kapoor | Photo Credit: Instagram

With Shashank Khaitan's Dhadak, Boney Kapoor and late Sridevi's daughter Janvi Kapoor made her big Bollywood debut last year. The diva not only impressed the audience with her spectacular performance in her first movie but, has also become the tinsel town's favourite. Janhvi is currently working on the upcoming Gunjan Saxena biopic and on Thursday she went back to Lucknow to resume the shoot of the same. However, a recent report has suggested that the shoot of the movie was called off due to bad weather conditions.

A report in Mumbai Mirror has stated that the Lucknow schedule of the movie which has been tentatively titled Kargil Girl was called off due to warnings of a thunderstorm. The report also stated that the team is to film the climax over the next few days.

The publication quoted a source as saying, "Janhvi and her onscreen brother Anshuman (played by Angad Bedi) will be shooting an intense scene at Captain Manoj Kumar Pandey UP Sainik School in Lucknow, besides other locations including one near the Air Force Station. The schedule will go on till May 24. Security has been increased to ensure a smooth shoot for the actors."

Mumbai Mirror also stated that Janhvi has been utilising the break between her shooting schedules by prepping for the war sequences at a flying club in Indore. After wrapping up the Lucknow schedule, the team will go abroad for a recently added international schedule. As per the source, the team will be heading to the UK for a month-long schedule in July.

Actor Pankaj Tripathi, who will be seen playing Janhvi's father in the movie is also expected to join the team shortly. Based on the life of first female IAF pilot Gunjan Saxena, the movie is being directed by first-timer Sharan Sharma.

Apart from this, the actress has also bagged a vital role in Karan Johar's upcoming directorial Takht. Janhvi will be seen sharing the screen space with Bollywood biggies like Ranveer Singh, Ali Bhatt, Kareena Kapoor Khan and Anil Kapoor in the film.

Stay tuned to this space for more updates!
