Janhvi Kapoor’s Gunjan Saxena biopic shoot cancelled in Lucknow, here’s why

Bollywood actor Janhvi Kapoor reached Lucknow on Thursday to resume shooting of Gunjan Saxena biopic but the shoot had to be cancelled due to warnings of a thunderstorm, according to reports.

A Mumbai Mirror report quoted a source as saying, “Janhvi and her onscreen brother Anshuman (played by Angad Bedi) will be shooting an intense scene at UP Sainik School in Lucknow, besides other locations including one near the air force station. The schedule will go on till May 24. Security has been increased to ensure a smooth shoot for the actors.” The team has been shooting in Lucknow since March.

Directed by Sharan Sharma, the film is based on the life of first female Indian Air Force combat pilot and first female Shaurya Chakra recipient Gunjan Saxena, who played an important role in picking up injured soldiers during the 1999 Kargil War.

Also read: Salman Khan wants a remake of Revathy-starrer Love, Varun Dhawan calls it a ‘wonderful film’

“The team is headed to the UK for a month-long schedule in July. Before that, they will go there on a recce to finalise locations,” the source added.

Pankaj Tripathi, who plays Janhvi’s father in the film, had earlier said, “I am having a lot of fun while shooting for the film. Janhvi is a very sincere and well behaved actress. She respects me a lot and I too respect her for the sincerity and commitment towards her work. Sharan is a very talented director and is well versed with his craft. It’s an opportunity working under Dharma Productions. They leave no stones unturned to get the right things on board.”

Child actor Riva Arora who played late actor Sridevi’s daughter in her last film Mom, will be seen playing the young Gunjan in the film.

Meanwhile, Janhvi has also signed Karan Johar’s Takht. It will see Ranveer Singh play Dara Shikoh while Vicky Kaushal will be seen in the role of Aurangzeb. It will a multi-starrer featuring Ranveer Singh, Kareena Kapoor, Alia, Bhumi Pednekar and Vicky, among others.

Follow @htshowbiz for more
