Taiwan has legalised same-sex marriage – but when was gay marriage legalised in the UK and where in the world is it still a criminal offence?

T aiwan’s parliament has voted to legalise same-sex marriage following a landmark ruling on Friday.

Hundreds of gay rights supporters cheered outside the parliament building in the capital, Taipei, as three different bills legalising same-sex unions were passed on Friday 17 May – which is also the International Day against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia.

In 2017, Taiwan’s constitutional court ruled that banning same-sex couples from marrying was unconstitutional and gave parliament two years to make the necessary changes.

The ruling marks a huge victory for Taiwan’s LGBT community who are still fighting the social stigma around homosexuality in their country. But where else in the world is being gay still illegal? Here’s everything you need to know:

Taiwan legalises same-sex marriage - In pictures 1 /12 Taiwan legalises same-sex marriage - In pictures Taiwan has become the first in Asia to pass such a law REUTERS Same-sex marriage supporters cheer outside parliament in Taiwan following the vote AP Member of Taiwan's ruling Democratic Progressive Party hold a sign with Chinese word "Agree" during the parliament vote REUTERS Crowds hold rainbow flags as they take part in a rally during the parliament vote REUTERS The vote is a landmark first in Asia AFP/Getty Images Same-sex marriage supporters gather outside the Legislative Yuan in Taipei, Taiwan AP A gay rights supporter holds a flower outside Parliament AFP/Getty Images Supporters of same-sex marriage gather outside the parliament building as a bill for marriage equality is debated EPA Supporters of same-sex marriage gather outside the parliament building as a bill for marriage equality is debated by parliamentarians EPA

What will the new bill mean for Taiwan’s LGBT community?

The proposal of a new bill legalising same-sex marriage was met with public backlash, leading parliament to hold a series of referendums, The results of these showed that the majority of Taiwanese people believe marriage to be strictly between a man and a woman.

For this reason, a special separate bill was created which refers to same-sex partnerships as “same-sex family relationships” or “same-sex unions.”

Whilst some of Taiwan’s LGBT community are not completely satisfied with the new bill, for many it is regarded as the closest thing to full equality with heterosexual couples, despite its limitations.

Supporters of same-sex marriage react as they gather outside the parliament building as a bill for marriage equality is debated by parliamentarians in Taipei, Taiwan. / EPA

Ahead of the vote, President Tsai Ing-wen said she recognised the divisiveness of the issue between “families, generations and even inside religious groups.”

“Today, we have a chance to make history and show the world that progressive values can take root in an East Asian society,” she added in a Twitter post.

When did the UK legalise gay marriage?

Up until 1967 in the UK, gay and bisexual men could face a maximum sentence of life in prison.

In 1967, gay sex was partly decriminalised by the Sexual Offences Act, but gay people living in the UK still faced discrimination.

In 2002, the law was changed to allow gay people to adopt children.

A foodie's guide to Taiwan

And it was only in 2003 when the 1988 ban on 'promoting' homosexuality in schools was overturned.

In 2013, gay marriage was made legal in England and Wales, and later in Scotland. In Northern Ireland, gay marriage is still not legal.

Where else in the world is homosexuality still illegal?

Homosexuality is still outlawed in the following countries:

The Americas

Antigua and Barbuda

Barbados

Dominica

Grenada

Guyana

Jamaica

St Kitts and Nevis

St Lucia

St Vincent and the Grenadines

Africa

Algeria

Angola

Botswana

Burundi

Cameroon

Comoros

Egypt

Eritrea

Ethiopia

Gambia

Ghana

Guinea

Kenya

Liberia

Libya

Malawi

Mauritania

Mauritius

Morocco

Namibia

Nigeria

Senegal

Sierra Leone

Somalia

South Sudan

Sudan

Swaziland

Tanzania

Togo

Tunisia

Uganda

Zambia

Zimbabwe

Middle East

Iran

Kuwait

Lebanon

Oman

Palestine

Qatar

Saudi Arabia

Syria

United Arab Emirates

Yemen

Central, South and East Asia

Afghanistan

Bangladesh

Bhutan

Brunei

Indonesia

Malaysia

Maldives

Myanmar

Pakistan

Singapore

Sri Lanka

Turkmenistan

Uzbekistan

India's Supreme Court legalises gay sex in landmark ruling 1 /21 India's Supreme Court legalises gay sex in landmark ruling Gay rights activists celebrate after the country's top court struck down a colonial-era law AP Celebration: The law made homosexual acts punishable by up to 10 years in prison AP Indian Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community react at the Supreme court premises in New Delhi EPA The judges in the case had previously said that gay people in India faced deep-rooted trauma and live in fear. EPA An activist celebrates after the result of the ruling was announced EPA The Supreme Court ruled that consensual gay sex is not a crime and said that sexual orientation is natural and people have no control over it. AFP/Getty Images The law - known as Section 377 - held that intercourse between members of the same sex was against the order of nature. The five petitioners who challenged the law said it was discriminatory and led to gays living in fear of being harassed and prosecuted by police. EPA Members of the LGBT+ community hold placards outside the Supreme Court AFP/Getty Images Campaignes react outside the Supreme Court in New Dehli AFP/Getty Images India's Supreme Court ruled on 6 September, that gay sex is no longer a criminal offence. EPA Five Supreme Court judges repealed a colonial-era law and legalised gay sex between two consenting adults EPA Gay rights activists celebrate after the country's top court struck down a colonial-era law Reuters Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community react at the Supreme court premises in New Delhi EPA Supporters and members of the LGBT community celebrate AP Indian Members of the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) community react at the Supreme court premises in New Delhi EPA People hug in celebration after gay sex is legalised in India AFP/Getty Images

Oceania

Kiribati

Papua New Guinea

Samoa

Solomon Islands

Tonga

Tuvalu

In April, Brunei’s attorney general announced new sharia-based laws which make homosexual sex a criminal offence, punishable by whipping or stoning to death.

In Iran, Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Yemen, homosexuality is still punishable by death, under sharia law. The same applies in parts of Somalia and northern Nigeria.

In Syria and Iraq, the death penalty is carried out by non-state actors, including Islamic state.
