Tujhse Hai Raabta : Kalyani shares her plan with Malhar

MUMBAI: The episode starts with Anupriya beating Kalyani for agreeing to marry Atharv. She asks her to take her life. Kalyani asks her to listen and jumps. Anupriya asks what is your helplessness? Kalyani shouts and tells that she doesn’t want to marry Atharv. She asks her to listen and says Malhar is enquiring from where did Atharv get the wealth and that’s why he needs time, so she agreed so that Malhar can get some time to expose Atharv. She says she didn’t tell this to Malhar about this. Anupriya asks what did Atul tell you in room? Kalyani says Papa blackmailed me taking Madhuri’s name. She says you have beaten me hard. Anupriya apologizes. Kalyani says you didn’t beat me hard. She says she needs to go with Malhar and runs out of room. Anupriya thinks if Atharv forces Kalyani to marry then.

Kalyani comes in front of Malhar’s jeep and asks him to stop. She reminds him that she is his voice for today and asks how he will make the criminal confess to crime, by threatening him on the notepad. Malhar asks her to get down from the jeep. He writes asking her to get down. She says she won’t. Malhar thinks she is strange to make me angry and then asks who do I get angry. He writes on the note pad. Kalyani reads and says you are upset that I agreed for marriage and says I agreed because. She whispers in his ears and says Atharv might get busy in arrangements and we will enquire about him. Malhar gets happy and thinks he can’t believe that she agreed to his sayings. He writes asking her not to worry about Maai, once Atharv’s matter is settled, they will get Maai divorced Atul.

Atharv asks Sampada if she will dance in his marriage. Sampada asks him to leave. Atharv says I will leave from your life. In the Police station, Malhar writes for Kalyani asking her to say whatever he writes and not to use her mind. Pawar brings the criminal. Malhar writes. Kalyani reads and asks the criminal, if he was present at the time of murder, when your brother murdered. Goon looks on angrily. Malhar writes on the paper. Kalyani reads the threatening message and tells goon that she is very stubborn. She says there are crores of people who didn’t get justice. Malhar tries to stop her. Kalyani shows Billu’s pic and says whoever your brother Abhijeet’s killed is having a little son, and says the boy will become a frustated man and will become criminal like him. Malhar tries to stop her. The goon speaks up and tells that he don’t want any boy to become like him, and tells that nobody was there to teach him right and wrong. Kalyani says if I make you brother then. and ties rakhi thread to his hand. The goon blesses her and asks her to call him whenever needed. He tells Malhar that he is ready to give statement. Kalyani thanks the goon calling him Bhai.

Anupriya asks Sampada to tell Atul. Sampada says Atharv can stoop low to get anything and says I did a big mistake by loving him, and says it was his plan to kidnap and elope with me. She says Atharv slapped Kalyani and tried to sell Kalyani at some place. Atul asks her to stop it and says I can’t listen anymore. Atharv comes there. Atul asks Anupriya if they want to provoke him more against Atharv and tells her that she can’t stop their marriage. Anupriya says just now Sampada told you everything. Atul says she has betrayed her husband and says she can lie as Atharv is getting away from her. He says Atharv told him everything and tells that Sampada is behind all his wrong doings. He returned my house and also promised to give me manager’s job in his office. Sampada says Mama…Atul says it is enough and asks her to go. Atharv apologizes to Atul and asks him to forgive him. He says Pandit ji is waiting outside. Atul asks him to come. Anupriya thinks something bad is going to happen.

Sampada tells Anupriya that she was scolded badly by Atul and tells that if Atharv marries Kalyani then he will ruin her life. She asks why Kalyani agreed for marriage and says she has eyes on his money, and is ready to marry him for money. Anupriya says Kalyani is not having any plan to marry him. Sampada asks what do you mean and asks her to tell. Anupriya thinks she shall not tell her and says Kalyani don’t want to marry him, but Atul forced her. Sampada says this all is happening because of money and says loyalty changes for money. Atharv comes and holds Sampada’s hand asking her how dare she talk badly about his would be wife.

What do you think about this Showtee?
