This is Xiaomi Redmi Note 7S in Red, Flipkart availability confirmed

Xiaomi is all set to launch the Redmi Note 7S in India on Monday, May 20. Ahead of the launch, the Xiaomi India has confirmed several details about the Redmi Note 7S like the 48MP main rear camera, dual rear camera setup, Dot drop notch, Redmi Note 7-like design, among other things. Xiaomi India Managing Director Manu Jain has now posted a photo holding the Redmi Note 7S in his hand. In the picture, the Redmi Note 7S appears in Red colour. We expect the phone to be available in some other funky colours. Jain confirms that the Redmi Note 7S will come with a glass body. The phone will include Gorilla Glass 5 on both front and back like the Redmi Note 7 and the Redmi Note 7 Pro.

Overall, we believe that the Redmi Note 7S will boast of the same design as the other two Redmi Note 7 series phones. This means expect the phone to come with a glass body, slim bezels, dot drop notch and more. Furthermore, on Thursday, Xiaomi India also revealed some of the camera samples clicked with the Redmi Note 7S. Looks like the key highlight of the Redmi Note 7S will be its camera with a 48MP sensor.

The feeling when you get your hands on #RedmiNote7S.



I generally don't dress up like this, but posing with this amazing #48MP camera phone is special. How do you like this steaming hot Red coloured Gorilla Glass 5 back?



Launch on Monday!#Xiaomi #48MPForEveryone pic.twitter.com/BsHlwEJahM Manu Kumar Jain (@manukumarjain) May 17, 2019

The camera samples show both daylight and low-light pictures. The low-light pictures clicked with the Redmi Note 7S look superb with lots of details. Considering both the Redmi Note 7 and the Redmi Note 7 Pro come with Night mode, we expect the same for the Redmi Note 7S too.

The Redmi Note 7S is expected to be the China variant of the Redmi Note 7. This means that the Redmi Note 7S will come with dual camera setup on the rear panel -- main will be 48MP sensor and second will be a 5MP sensor for depth shots.

If the Redmi Note 7S is indeed the Redmi Note 7 China variant then the phone will include a 13MP selfie shooter that will sit inside the Dot drop notch on the top of the screen. Besides the camera difference, other specs of the Redmi Note 7S is expected to be the same as the Redmi Note 7 India variant. This means expect Snapdragon 660 processor, up to 4GB RAM and 64GB storage, 4000mAh battery, a 6.3-inch full-HD+ (1080x2340 pixels) LTPS display with 19.5:9 aspect ratio, MIUI 10 based on Android 9 Pie and more.

Additionally, it is confirmed that the Redmi Note 7S after it goes official in India will be available on Flipkart. The phone is also expected to be available across Mi.com, Mi Home, Mi Preferred partners and others. As of now, we aren't aware of the price of the Redmi Note 7S in India but we believe it to be aggressively priced similar to the other two Note 7 series of phones.
