From The Ground In Punjab: The Victory Path Of This Constituency Goes through Pakistan

The Gurdaspur Lok Sabha constituency, the bastion of the late Vinod Khanna, who passed away in 2017, is one of the few in the country where voters also factor in India’s foreign policy before making their electoral choice. Dera Baba Nanak, Dina Nagar and Bhoa — the towns located on the India-Pakistan border — are instrumental to the voting preferences within the constituency. On the other hand, the region across Qadian, Pathankot, Gurdaspur, Batala and Fatehgarh Churian is the agricultural belt with most farmers cultivating sugarcane.

The last five years have been quite rough for this constituency. In July 2015, three civilians and four policemen were killed after three shooters, disguised as army men, opened fire on a Punjab Roadways bus returning from Jammu and Kashmir.

At the time of attack, the bus was carrying 75 passengers, thanks to the bravery of the bus driver, Nanak Chand, who drove the bus through the gunfire and headed towards a government hospital, dozens of lives were saved.

Later, the gunmen hijacked a car and attacked the Dina Nagar police station. Bombs were also found and diffused on the railway line connecting the towns of Dina Nagar and Jhakholari.

A few months later, in January 2016, the Pathankot Air Force Station which is a part of the Western Air Command was attacked in one of the deadliest terrorist attacks in recent years. The operation continued for almost four days, resulting in the death of five terrorists. Six soldiers were martyred in the attack. Both attacks were facilitated by terrorist groups from Pakistan, and not any Sikh separatist groups, as some initial reports said.

In April 2017, sitting Member of Parliament Vinod Khanna passed away. He had been a four-time MP from Gurdaspur, and even today, locals remember the turnout that was witnessed when Khanna had come, for the first time, to campaign in the constituency over two decades ago. “He was an actor from Bombay then, but for the people here, he was one of us. His passing away was a personal loss for Gurdaspur,” a local recalls.

Backed by the entire machinery of Congress’ state unit, candidate Sunil Jakhar won the by-election for the seat in 2017. His victory followed the landslide majority of Congress under Captain Amarinder Singh in the state elections a few months earlier. Jakhar garnered 58 per cent of the vote share, leaving Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP) Swaran Salaria far behind. This time, Jakhar is against BJP’s new political discovery, Sunny Deol, and Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) candidate Peter Masih.

The competition brings together contenders from two extreme ends of the political spectrum. Jakhar, a political veteran, and proposed as the next and first Hindu Chief Minister of Punjab by Captain Amarinder Singh, is up against Sunny Deol, who can be best described as an intern in the multi-state corporation of Indian Politics. What works for the latter, however, is the party that backs him, for it has shown success on the Pakistan policy front, an issue critical to the residents of Gurdaspur constituency.

The previous voting preferences of the constituency are not much of help now to predict an outcome as the political equation has wholly changed. In 2017, out of the nine state assembly seats from the region, seven were won by the Congress, and one each by BJP and the Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD). However, on the ground, those numbers feel a lifetime ago, for so much has changed since then.

From The Ground On India-Pakistan Border: Navigating Through The Kartarpur Corridor

Located 40-odd kilometres away from the holy town of Amritsar, Dera Baba Nanak, as a town, doesn't inspire a lot. The road to the town is a single lane, with merely enough room for two cars to pass each other. The town is a maze of narrow lanes with the office of the town authorities on the outskirts. Farming is critical to the subsistence of the six-odd thousand people residing here.

However, if all goes well, starting November later this year, this town of 6,000 people would irreversibly change tourism in Punjab for good, for this is where the Kartarpur Corridor begins.

The first guru of Sikhism, Guru Nanak, founded the town of Kartarpur in 1504, more than 20 years before North India would have its Mughal king. The town was established on the bank of river Ravi and became the first Sikh commune.

After his death in 1539, both Hindus and Muslims raised mausoleums to commemorate the Guru. However, with time and because of consistent flooding in Ravi, they were destroyed. Eventually, Dera Baba Nanak was formed on the other side of the river as the new commune.

During the Partition of 1947, Kartarpur, located on the right side of Ravi, went to Pakistan while Dera Baba Nanak became a part of India. To put things in perspective, Dera Baba Nanak and Kartarpur are only a 45-minutes walk apart. Today, over five centuries later, this is where the electoral battle for a contemporary civilisation is being fought.

The proposal for the Kartarpur Corridor was first discussed between former prime ministers Atal Bihari Vajpayee and Nawaz Sharif in 1999 as a part of the Delhi-Lahore bus diplomacy. The same was again pitched during the Congress government in 2004 and 2008 but without much headway.

In a miraculous turn of events in 2018, Pakistan expressed its willingness to establish the corridor before the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak in November 2019. The state government passed a resolution for the same, took it up with the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government at the Centre, and in November last year, the foundation stone for the project was laid by the Indian Vice-President, Venkaiah Naidu, and two days later, by Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan.
