British comedian Stephen Fry shares Indian 'Adarsh Balak' poster and Twitter goes into a frenzy

Stephen Fry

When we look at our childhood days, coin chocolates were a prize and school projects were a burden. In fact, glueing up art files and preparing glitter work on sheets was what composed most of our summer holidays. Charts that had 'Types of Historial Monuments', or even 'Types of Fruits', were what used not on projects for our regular class notebooks.

These charts were the easiest way of escaping any sort of drawing. Although they seem to be ancient now but bringing those memories back was none other than British comedian Stephen Fry who posted a photo of a chart like this, listing the good habits of an 'Adarsh Baalak' which was hung at his doctor's office. The comedian immediately received attention from several Indian fans began questioning him, if he followed these habits, in a funny way.

On his twitter post, Stephen wrote, "Decidedly odd of my doctor to hang this in his surgery. I've tried to live up to it though. Haven't managed to "Pray Almighty" or "Join NCC", otherwise I'm getting there." Not just bursting into laughter from this childhood memory, fans have also posted counter charts of Bad girl habits on his feed. (Also read: Deepika Padukone's inspiring story of her battle against depression to be included in a children's book)

Decidedly odd of my doctor to hang this in his surgery. I've tried to live up to it though. Haven't managed to "Pray Almighty" or "Join NCC", otherwise I'm getting there. pic.twitter.com/Dl52jaqang — Stephen Fry (@stephenfry) January 19, 2019

Check out what fans are saying about his post...

You are a good actor. Enjoyed a few of your roles but this poster brings back memories :) — Mohammed bin Tughlaq(@Tughlaq9) January 20, 2019

And here's a cheeky meme follow up inspired by this ideal kid using the same artistic style (unlikely that you'll read this)https://t.co/vKnHAt8jiY pic.twitter.com/T6BGBQXC2i — Nicole (@nicolexavier111) January 19, 2019

Oh! this is so nostalgic. We were made to get entire booklets of these posters and make scrapbooks out of them as kids here in India and they ranged from The Ideal Boy/Girl to Being a Good Child to Cleaning your Neighbourhood. It's quite a meme now. — The Vallinorean (@vallinorean) January 20, 2019

Joining NCC is just a message to convey that one must be disciplined in day to day life. — Vishal Raj Sehijpal (@vishalsehijpal) January 21, 2019

Hitler youth posters could never match this aesthetics — Shantanu (@shaanse00) January 21, 2019

Don't Worry



Even if you meditate on the blank for a couple of minutes, that wud suffice for 'Pray to Almighty'



'Join NCC': Even our @RahulGandhi doesn't know much of it so ur ignorance is accepted



Rest u are doing good for now — Vinay Gupta (@truckalaya) January 20, 2019

Stephen Fry is known for the comedy double act Fry and Laurie along with Hugh Laurie. He is also an actor and known for his role in the movie V for Vendetta and famous English TV series such as Kingdom and Bones. Besides this, he is also an author. Some of his famous books include Moab Is My Washpot, The Fry Chronicles, and More Fool Me. He has also lent his voice for the Harry Potter novel audiobooks, UK version.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
