Glowing tributes paid to martyred youth

Srinagar, May 16, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, Hurriyat leaders and organizations have paid glorious tributes to the youth martyred by Indian troops in Pulwama and Pattan areas. The troops martyred four youth in Dalipora area of Pulwama district in wee hours, today. A youth, Arshad Ahmed Dar, who was injured in Indian forces’ violent action on 13th May in Pattan area of Baramulla district, succumbed to his injuries at Soura Institute of Medical Sciences in Srinagar, last night.

The Chairman of Tehreek-e-Hurriyat, Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, in a statement in Srinagar said that by killing and maiming youth in occupied Kashmir every day, India would not be able to suppress the Kashmiris’ political aspirations for which they had been struggling for the past over 71 years. He said the Indian aggression and repression can never intimidate the Kashmiri people into submission. He appealed the international community to take cognizance of the continued genocide of the Kashmiris by Indian troops.

The Patron of Jammu and Kashmir Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen, Maulana Abbas Ansari, and President, Maulana Masroor Abbas, in a joint statement said that Indian forces’ personnel were killing and maiming innocent Kashmiris at their will. They said that no amount of Indian state terrorism would be able to force the Kashmiri people to surrender their just cause and they will continue their struggle till complete success.

The Jammu and Kashmir Democratic Freedom Party spokesman in a statement said that the Kashmiri people were continuously being murdered even in the month of Ramadan on one pretext or the other. The fact of the matter is that Indian occupation is proving detrimental for the Kashmiri people who have been demanding their political rights since decades, he said.

Hurriyat leader, Mushtaq-ul-Islam in a statement said that Indian troops were carrying out genocide of the people of occupied Kashmir. He appealed to the UN to take serious note of the bloodshed in the occupied territory and take steps to settle the Kashmir dispute in line with its resolutions.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
