Amazon quietly introduces flight bookings for users in India

A possible sign of things to come for Amazon: the e-commerce giant has quietly introduced flight search and booking on its platform in India.

The service is only for flights within India at the moment and is powered by domestic online travel agency, Cleartrip.

Amazon is expected to outline further details regarding the service early next week.

The integration works through the Amazon Pay section in the site, where members can select services ranging from utility bills to gift cards.

A "Flights" button is now featured alongside and takes users to the white label version of the OTA's existing flight functionality.

Carriers such as AirAsia, IndiGo, Air India and GoAir are shown in the search results.

Get a dose of digital travel in your inbox each day Subscribe to our newsletter below Submit I accept the Terms and Conditions and Privacy Policy

A 15% cashback offer is currently in play and is redeemed when users complete the booking.

The emergence of a flight booking tool comes amid ongoing speculation that Amazon will make a concerted effort to re-enter the travel space.

Its most recent attempt was the Amazon Destinations service, which opened and closed in the space of five months in 2015.

Much of the talk in industry circles over the course of the last 18 months has been concentrated on what Amazon could do with hotel bookings, so the introduction of flights as a potential first move is surprising.

In an article earlier this week, finance house Morgan Stanley outlined how the entry of Amazon into the online travel business could have far-reaching consequences, especially for the powerful online travel agency incumbents.



The company's move into the industry could give it a baseline $600 million profit on an annual basis - but this was only taking hotels into account.

In addition, Morgan Stanley says, Google could see its travel ambitions under threat from a range of tactics that could be deployed by a company that already has 300 million estimated and engaged customers.
