West Bengal: Prominent Muslim cleric who slammed TMC's Nusrat Jahan's temple run, attacked

TMC candidate Nusrat Jahan I Photo credit: @nusratchirps | Photo Credit: Twitter

Kolkata: Maulana Sharif Pirzada Mohammed Khobayeb Amin from West Bengal's Basirhat, a very influential cleric in the region was allegedly attacked by TMC men on May 15. He suspects TMC to be behind the attack as he had revolted against Mamata Banerjee and her candidate from Basirhat constituency –Nushrat Jahan.

Nusrat Jahan, the TMC candidate from Basirhat, had offered prayers and paid obeisance at different temples during election campaign. Pirzada questioned the move of Nusrat, a Muslim, offering prayers at a temple. He said that there is a difference between visiting a temple and offering prayers there.

“Why does a Muslim candidate need to offer prayer in a temple to prove a secular image? Under threat from BJP did Mamata make Nushrat Jahan act in a temple?” he asked.

The cleric dubbed it “Nushrat's hypocrisy for political gains”. He asked if Nushrat was "acting inside those temples to fool Hindus".

In Basirhat, Muslims constitute 56% of the vote share. Pirzada openly admitted that their support has brought people to power including former TMC MP Idris Ali. But now he has urged the people to not vote for Nushrat because he is of the opinion Mamata has cheated Muslims.

Pirzada claimed that TMC Minister Firhad Hakim had come and met him requesting to give up his anger but the cleric had demanded Nushrat to apologise. Nushrat is yet to apologise.

The cleric most importantly questioned the development work that TCM has done for Muslims. He believes that Muslims have been cheated and alleged that Mamata has created an atmosphere in Bengal that if BJP is being voted then Muslims will not even get to offer namaz.

Pirzada alleges that Mamata has intentionally created this fear psychosis to consolidate Muslims and in garb of that she has made Hindus her principal focus in her campaigns....so that Hindus do not go the BJP way. He laments that the same Mamata who use to do inshallah inshallah is now quiet about Muslims.

It’s a clear dare from the cleric who has taken the attack on him very seriously. He claims that post May 23 irrespective what is the outcome Muslims will take out a mega protest against Mamata in Kolkata.


