With 24000 villages in Maharashtra battling severe drought, experts term Jalyukt Shivar scheme 'unscientific'

As many as 24,000 villages in Maharashtra are looking at an acute water crisis (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Mind-boggling developments have emerged from the state of Maharashtra where as many as 24,000 villages are staring at an acute water crisis. In a state which has witnessed four severe droughts in the past six years, locals and activists are claiming that the state government has failed to tackle the issue and make provisions to relieve them of their water woes despite making it a major issue during the last Assembly elections.

Earlier this month, an RTI reply by the Maharashtra government had revealed that 610 farmers committed suicide in the state within a period of three months, from January to March of this year. The rising number of farmer suicides in the drought-affected state pose a serious cause for concern, one that has not been addressed by the government or local bodies in any form or manner. The situation is grim in not just Maharashtra but several other states, including Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.

The Maharashtra govt claims that they have done plenty & it claims the #JalyuktShivar project has solved the problem. If that's so, then why are so many people in distress? @fayedsouza #MarathwadaDrought pic.twitter.com/A4L0wftXcD — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 17, 2019

Speaking exclusively to Mirror Now, senior journalist Girish Kuber says that none of the municipal corporations in Marathwada which is the worst affected by the drought, have water supply management schemes due to lack of funds. Not even a single contractor in these parts is ready to take up the contracts, says Kuber. The scribe also adds, "On one hand, there is a water crisis in Maharashtra but on the other hand whatever water is available govt and the municipal corporation does not have a system to supply that water."

.@fayedsouza to BJP’s Ganesh Hake: If you’ve done enough work, then why is there no drinking water available in Marathwada? #MarathwadaDrought pic.twitter.com/sC9Tx1iJ2w — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 17, 2019

When asked about the Maharashtra government's flagship scheme to tackle the water crisis, 'Jalyukt Shivar', retired associate professor with the Water and Land Management Institute (WALMI), Pradeep Purandare says that the scheme is flawed. "Jalyukt Shivar is an unscientific scheme and not a regular watershed management project, it is a convergence of 13 different schemes," he adds.

Editorial: Jal daan is the biggest & greatest thing you can do. We must do something. We must make the Govt more accountable for what they're doing to these people, save water yourself, send a tanker to these villages. @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/xo3mRQLLNG — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 17, 2019

Senior journalist Yogesh Pande adds to this line of argument by saying that since the implementation of this scheme, the benefits are not reaching the people to the extent they were promised. "If the government had spent even 1-2 per cent of the money it is using on its propaganda to make itself look grander then it really is, then these many farmers would not be dying," adds Pande. Yogesh Pande with the Swabhimani Shetkari Sanght also states that the state government has drastically failed and the bitter reality is that there is no mechanism to help the farmers of Maharashtra survive the next two months.
