Can’t forgive Pragya for Godse remark: Modi

Khargone: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Friday said he will never forgive BJP candidate Pragya Singh Thakur for insulting Mahatma Gandhi by calling his assassin Nathuram Godse a true patriot.

Modi told a television channel during his last rally here ahead of the last phase of voting in the Lok Sabha polls that her comments were detrimental to society.

“Whatever has been said about Gandhi or Godse, these kinds of statements are very bad and worth contempt. In a cultured society, this type of language is not permissible. This type of thinking won’t do. Therefore, those who are doing this have to think a hundred times. Though she has apologised, I won’t be able to pardon her with my heart,” Modi said.

Meanwhile, the BJP has issued show cause notices to its three leaders, including Lok Sabha candidate Pragya Singh Thakur, over their remarks on Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin Nathuram Godse, party chief Amit Shah said earlier on Friday, promising “appropriate action” against them.

The entire BJP regrets the remarks and that is why prompt action has been taken, Shah said at a press conference, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi alongside him. The party’s disciplinary committee has issued a notice to them and has given 10-days time to respond, he said. “We will immediately decide on appropriate action on them after that,” Shah said.

The Pandora ’s Box opened on Thursday with BJP’s Bhopal Lok Sabha candidate and Malegaon blast accused Thakur lauding Godse as a “patriot” and issuing an apology hours later, saying she respected Gandhi and his work for the country cannot be forgotten.

As the row over Thakur’s remarks escalated, BJP MP from Karnataka Nalin Kumar Kateel compared Godse with former prime minister Rajiv Gandhi. “Godse killed one, Kasab killed 72, Rajiv Gandhi killed 17,000. You judge who is more cruel in this??” Kateel tweeted on Thursday, equating Godse with 26/11 Mumbai terror attack convict Ajmal Kasab, and Rajiv Gandhi.

Union minister Anantkumar Hegde also found himself in the news with a purported tweet justifying Godse’s action. However, later the minister claimed his account was hacked into.

“The BJP does not associate with the comments of the three leaders. We not only consider such remarks as personal but also we have issued notices to those responsible and disciplinary proceedings have been initiated against them,” Shah said. He asserted that Thakur’s candidature from Bhopal is the party’s “satyagraha” against fake “saffron” terror case.
