Student fakes income docs, school finds him in a bungalow

At a time when the state government is struggling with the implementation of Right To Education (RTE) Act in the state, there are some who are misleading the schools to gain benefit out of the Act. Anand Niketan school in Satellite has won a case, after a three-year battle in court, against a student who had sought admission under the RTE.

The school has cancelled the admission of the student after the Gujarat High court, in its order in April, observed that the income certificate submitted by the parents was not genuine and kept it open for the students to seek admission afresh.

As per case details, in 2016, Kiranbhai Bharvad sought admission for his son under RTE stating that he resides at Bharvad Vas in Makarba village and that he belongs to OBC with income less than Rs 1,00,000. He had submitted two certificates to the taluka education officer and to the district education officer to get admission into Anand Niketan school. While the school found the caste certificate issued by Department of Social Welfare to be genuine, it however had concerns for the income certificate.

Upon inquiry, it was found that during pre-school, the student studied in a well-known self-financed school by paying Rs 40,000 annually.

On further inquiry, the school found that the student lives in a bungalow in Ahmedabad that is worth more than a crore of rupees. He owns properties, sheds for cows and buffaloes. He also has several pieces of lands in and around Ahmedabad, the petition filed through advocate Anand Yagnik stated.

In July of 2016, school requested the DEO to cancel the order of admission granted under 25 per cent quota. However, being denied admission, the students father filed a petition seeking admission and the school was asked to admit the student. In the meantime, the school to filed an independent petition seeking cancellation of admission.

In February 2017, in-charge mamlatdar of Vejalpur filed an affidavit stating that the income certificate was never signed by deputy mamlatdar and hence it was never issued.

LOWDOWN
