CID to probe Punjab gangster’s killing in Mysuru

Mysuru: A day after a Punjab-based gangster was shot dead by Mysuru police in the city, the state police has decided to hand over the investigation to crime investigation department.The gangster, Sukhwinder Singh (40), from Faridkot, was killed by an inspector when the former attacked him on the outer ring road near SV regency apartment, close to Vijayanagar police station on Thursday.According to sources, DGP Neelamani N Raju has issued an order handing over the probe to CID as per the guidelines of the Supreme Court.As per the guidelines, in such cases, an independent investigation shall be conducted into the encounter by CID or by a team of another police station under the supervision of a senior police officer one rank above the officer who led the encounter team. In this case, the state police chose to order a CID inquiry.Meanwhile, relatives of Sukhwinder Singh are likely to arrive in Mysuru late on Friday. If sources are to be believed, they’re likely to file a complaint against the police party that engaged in the encounter. Once the relatives give permission, a post-mortem would be conducted. Sukhwinder’s body has been kept in MMCRI mortuary. A reserved police team has been stationed there as a precaution. The autopsy is expected to be conducted on Saturday.A team led by DSP Chandrashekar of CID has also arrived in Mysuru, probably to take over the case, sources said.KR Hospital medical superintendent BL Nanjundaswamy told TOI that post-mortems are not conducted after sunset.Since it’s an encounter, a judicial magistrate must conduct an independent inquiry as per the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The autopsy must be conducted in the presence of a judicial magistrate after a thorough body search. The JM has to ensure that the entire process is videographed, record statement of witnesses and relatives, said sources.Deputy commissioner of police M Muthuraju told TOI that relatives of Sukhwinder Singh have reached Bengaluru in the evening on Friday.The state police have sought information about Sukhwinder and his criminal antecedents, if any, from the Punjab police but they are yet to reply, the DCP said.‘Udaare Saale Ko’As per a complaint filed by BG Kumar, inspector of Vijayanagar police station, Sukhwinder and two of his gang members directed each other to kill the police team. They shouted, “Udaare saale ko (kill them) and nikaal ke thokdal (pull out the weapon) when four of us intercepted the gang on the outer ring road near SV Regency apartment, close to Vijayanagar police station,” the inspector said in his complaint.“The gang members attacked Veerabhadra, a constable, and kicked me (inspector) after hitting us with the rear-end of their guns. When things started getting out of control, a gang member tried to snatch my service pistol. I opened one round of fire in the air before aiming one at the gang,” said Kumar in his complaint, a copy of which is with TOI.Kumar said he received information about the gang from outside Karnataka. They were in Mysuru for illegal money exchange from one of his informants, who too was with the gang at the time of encounter, he said. Only three cops were present when they intercepted the gang, he said. Kumar, the inspector, was in mufti. Kumar said he had changed his uniform and reached the spot in a private car.When TOI contacted BG Kumar, he said he was in hospital. He asked TOI to ask call his seniors and snapped the phone.
