Dugri car dealer’s murder solved

Ludhiana: Dugri police claimed to have solved the murder of car dealer Sanjiv Kumar Sharma, who was found dead inside his locked house in MIG flats in Dugri Phase-2 on Thursday, with the arrest of two accused. The police have arrested one employee of Sharma — Amit Kumar (23) of Durga Colony — and Amit’s friend Sahil of Sant Enclave, and also recovered cash, car, and gold, which they had stolen from Sharma’s house.

Additional deputy commissioner of police (ADCP-2) Jaskaranjit Singh said Amit Kumar was working with Sanjiv for the past six months. Other accused Sahil was also known to Sanjiv, as he had bought a car from him recently. The ADCP added that a few days ago, cash from Sanjiv’s PayTM account was stolen, and he suspected Amit for it. Sharma had even filed a complaint against Amit with the police. Sahil, who bought the car through Sharma, also suspected that the car was involved in an accident, and Sharma had concealed the facts from him.

“Both accused had grudges against Sanjiv. However, their motive was to get money. Amit knew that three days ago, Sanjiv had sold a car and got a payment of Rs2.5 lakh. They thought Sanjiv would have kept the payment at his house and hatched a conspiracy to get it. On May 14, the accused went to see Sharma, where they made him drink liquor. After Sharma got inebriated, the accused strangulated him to death. After murdering, the accused took away cash, jewellery, mobile phone, and victim’s car and fled. The police have recovered Rs17,600 from the possession of the accused, along with car and jewellery. The police have also recovered the scooter of the accused,” said the ADCP. Further, officials said the accused had thrown Sanjiv’s mobile in Kharar, which was yet to be recovered.

The killers had locked the flat from outside before fleeing. The police came to know about it when his friends approached them, informing that he had not been responding to calls for the past two days.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
