4 monasteries to visit in India this Buddha Purnima

Buddha Purnima is revered as a holy festival in India, and falls on May 18 this year. The day is celebrated as Lord Buddha’s birthday, and is an auspicious day for Buddhists across the world, especially in East Asia. India has a sizeable population of Buddhists, and the day is of great importance in the country. If you want to celebrate Buddha Purnima to the fullest, you must try visiting one of the famous monasteries in the country.Here is a list of the most popular Buddhist monasteries in India.The Key Monastery is an absolutely stunning architectural wonder, located very close to the Spiti River in Himachal Pradesh’s Spiti Valley. Sitting atop a hill at 13668 ft above the sea level, it is a religious training centre for Buddhist monks. The monastery was once attacked by the Mongols way back in the 17th century. Rich in history and culture, the Key Monastery is a must visit.The largest monastery in India and the second largest in the world, the Tawang Monastery is yet another architectural marvel. Founded between 1680-1681, the monastery is called, Gaden Namgyal Lhatse, in Tibetan. The monastery holds some old, valuable Buddhist scriptures that are of great importance. Many legends are attached to this monastery, and it would be quite something for interested travellers to explore and learn.Located only 6 km away from the main Darjeeling town, the Ghum Monastery is a popular Buddhist Monastery in this part of the Himalayas. The monastery belongs to the Gelukpa, or the Yellow Hat Sect of Buddhism, and was established way back in 1850. During the 1959 Chinese occupation of Tibet, high ranking officials of Tibet fled the nation and took refuge here at this grand old monastery.The official residence of the Dalai Lama, Tsuglagkhan Complex in Dharamshala is the ultimate spot to celebrate Buddha Purnima. Located near Mcleodganj, the Tsuglagkhang Complex is surrounded by nature’s beauty and has a lot to offer to curious visitors. It houses two temples and a Tibet museum, and this is where you will find monks debating in the central courtyard!
