Disha Patani basks in the sun in a hot pink monokini and soars the temperature! : Bollywood News

Disha Patani is one of the hottest new-age actresses of B-town and there are no two ways about it. While she can carry all her looks with extreme perfection, we absolutely love it when she basks in the sun looking as gorgeous as ever. She has never shied away from showing off her perfectly toned bikini body, be it in the pictures from her Maldives vacation or athleisure attires for Calvin Klein. With just a couple of weeks left for her next release, Bharat, Disha decided to make our weekends better with this stunning picture.

She is seen posing by the pool in a hot pink and black monokini and we can’t get over this picture. She is donning a wet-grunge hairdo and minimal makeup. This monokini is also by Calvin Klein and we just wanna thank them for choosing Disha as their brand’s face. There’s no one better than Disha who could have done this job. This picture is surely going to bring in all the summer vibes for you and we strongly believe that she does play quite a role in soaring the temperatures.

Take a look at her picture.

View this post on Instagram ???????? A post shared by disha patani (paatni) (@dishapatani) on May 17, 2019 at 8:43pm PDT

On the work front, Bharat is slated to release on 5th June with Salman Khan, Katrina Kaif, Jackie Shroff and Sunil Grover as their star cast. Disha will be seen playing the role of a trapeze artiste from the 60s and we can’t wait to see her in that avatar.

Apart from Bharat, Disha Patani has also started shooting for Malang starring opposite Aditya Roy Kapur. The movie is a thriller based out in Goa and is a Mohit Suri directorial with Anil Kapoor and Kumal Kemmu in pivotal roles.

Also Read: Disha Patani nails a PERFECT butterfly kick and we’re floored

BOLLYWOOD NEWS - LIVE UPDATES

Catch us for latest Bollywood News, New Bollywood Movies update, Box office collection, New Movies Release , Bollywood News Hindi, Entertainment News, Bollywood Live News Today & upcoming movies 2021 and stay updated with latest hindi movies only on Bollywood Hungama.
