Jessica Lal murder: What is Manu Sharma-Jessica Lal case that gripped India?

Manu Sharma shot Jessica Lal dead after she refused to serve him liquor. | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: The convict in Jessica Lal murder case, Manu Sharma, moved to Delhi High Court seeking an early release from prison. The move came a month after the HC ordered the premature release of Sushil Kumar Sharma who was convicted for the murder of his wife Naina Sahni in 1995. Seeking the same relief, Manu Sharma (43) has filed a plea through Amit Sahni. Sharma has been serving his life term in Tihar jail since 2006. Let's take a look at what Manu Sharma-Jessica Lal murder case is and its developments.

Jessica Lal, shooting model/actor, worked at the Tamarind Court restaurant owned by socialite Bina Ramani at Qutub Colonnade in Mehrauli area of south Delhi. On the night of April 30, 1999, after Lal refused to serve liquor to Manu Sharma, son of former Union minister Venod Sharma, he shot her. Lal who was rushed to Appollo Hospital was declared brought dead by the doctors.

(Jessica Lal) (File Photo)

Delhi Police recovered Sharma's Tata Safari from Uttar Pradesh's Noida in May 1999. Sharma surrendered before a Chandigarh Court as 10 other accused in the murder case, including Vikas Yadav, son of a Uttar Pradesh politician, were arrested, according to a report in The Indian Express. In May 2001, several witnesses of the prosecution turned hostile. Sharma was acquitted by the trial court in February 2006.

The case gained momentum after a nationwide public outcry against Sharma's acquittal. Following this, the case was re-opened through a fast-track trial. In December 2006, the Delhi High Court reversed trial court's order and convicted Manu, Vikas Yadav and Amardeep Singh Gill, and acquitted Aloke Khanna, Vikas Gill, Harvinder Singh Chopra, Raja Chopra, Shyam Sunder Sharma and Yograj Singh. Sharma was sentenced to life imprisonment and a fine of Rs 50,000. The other convicts were sentenced to four years' imprisonment and a fine of Rs 3,000 each.

When Sharma appealed to the Supreme Court of India, his plea was rejected twice. The apex court upheld his conviction and life sentence in April 2010.

(Prime accused in Jessica Lal murder case, Manu Sharma) (File Photo)

Meanwhile, Lal's sister Sabrina in April 2018 said that she had forgiven her sister's murderer. Sabrina, in a letter to the Tihar jail's welfare officer, said that she would not object to Sharma's release as he had been doing good work for charity and helping inmates in the jail.

Sharma had filed an early release plea last year which was rejected by Sentence Review Board (SRB) headed by Delhi home minister Satyendra Jain on October 4, 2018.

Sharma, in his plea filed through advocate Amit Sahni, has asked setting aside of the SRB's rejection of his plea and Delhi government's order of upholding the board's decision.

In the petition, Sharma has argued that the reports received from several authorities such as prison, police and social welfare department of Delhi government, have recommended his early release. The petition is likely to be heard on Monday by Justice Najmi Waziri.

Also Read: Bulls run amok killing two spectators at Jallikattu event in Pudukottai, Tamil Nadu

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
