EXCLUSIVE - BJP backstabbed us in 2014, alliance with it not on our priority list: Shiv Sena leader

File picture | Photo Credit: PTI

2019 Lok Sabha Elections are just a few months away and all eyes are on the political chemistry created by the magic of alliances between different parties. A report had last month said that an internal survey carried out by the Bharatiya Janata Party in Maharashtra has forecast that the party could repeat its 2014 performance in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls if it fights the polls in alliance with the Shiv Sena. However, Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray has repeatedly said that he will not have an alliance with the BJP. Despite being the alliance partner in NDA, Shiv Sena has also been slamming the BJP over a number of issues like Ram Temple construction and demonetisation.

In an exclusive interview with Kamna Arora of timesnownews.com, Shiv Sena spokesperson Manisha Kayande speaks about the ties between the Shiv Sena and the BJP and the rumoured alliance talks between them, the upcoming film 'Thackeray' loosely based on the Sena's founder-chief Balasaheb Thackeray (who passed away on 17 November 2012), Congress chief Rahul Gandhi and much more.

Here are the excerpts:

Kamna Arora: The trailer of the film ‘Thackeray’ is not only receiving accolades but some criticism too. In fact, a South Indian actor has said the film is promoting 'hate speech’.

Manisha Kayande: Pertaining to the film, I think honourable Mr Sanjay Raut would be the best person to give satisfactory answers to your queries. But all the more, as a spokesperson of the party, I think that despite whatever objections were raised, the film has been cleared by the Censor Board. So, I think that the board members must have been satisfied and therefore the film is passed now.

Kamna Arora: Well, a lot has been talked about the fact that the Hindi trailer of the film is different from the one in Marathi. Why was it done?

Manisha Kayande: I have not seen the film, neither have I heard the dialogues. I have seen only the teaser of the film and a couple of videos. So, I will not be able to comment on that. However, I would like to add that Balasaheb Thackeray was not just limited to Maharashtra. He was a national figure and popular even outside India. The film had to be in two languages to put across his views on the national as well as regional issues.

Kamna Arora: Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his New Year interview, had said the government was waiting for the legal process to end over the issue of Ram Temple construction in Ayodhya. Do you think the BJP is dilly-dallying over the issue? If yes, why?

Manisha Kayande: The BJP has always used the Ram Mandir issue for gaining power. Earlier, we always supported them on this issue as we want the Hindus to be united under one roof and not divided in this country. Hence, we always supported the BJP purely to avert any split creeping in among the Hindus of the country. We believe that the construction of Ram Mandir in Ayodhya, which is the janmabhoomi of Lord Rama, is a just and legitimate demand and that it needs to be carried out.

When the demolition of the Babri structure took place, at that time also the issue was sub-judice. Still, the RSS, BJP, Vishwa Hindu Parishad went ahead with the demolition of the Babri structure. The BJP had always promised that once it comes to complete majority, the party will pursue the matter. But now that the BJP is in complete control of the government and it is the majority party, neither the Prime Minister nor did the BJP president (Amit Shah) did anything regarding it in the past four years. Now they say it is sub-judice and they have to wait for the Supreme Court’s order, so, why the SC’s order or any other court’s orders were not followed 25 years ago?

So, this (Ram Temple construction) is like many other jumlas or promises made in 2014. All those promises, like getting back black money and creation of millions of jobs, are not being kept. Demonetisation was suddenly forced on all the people and alliance parties were not taken into confidence.

People have understood that the promise to construct Ram Temple was just a hype. We are objecting to this. Don’t fool people in the name of Lord Ram.

Kamna Arora: You just mentioned alliance parties were not taken into confidence.

Manisha Kayande: During NDA-I rule, regular meetings were held. There was a convenor who used to coordinate among 25 fractions led by the then prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee. But now, we find that the BJP does not require its allies since it has a majority. Though it is called an NDA government, in the real sense, it is not an NDA government. They have taken people of different parties and allocated them one or two ministerial berths here and there. But, in the true sense, the allies are not taken into confidence while taking some major decisions.

Kamna Arora: So, why is Shiv Sena in alliance with the BJP?

Manisha Kayande: In Maharashtra, Shiv Sena has 18 MPs. We contested the elections together and at least, we can work for the people. Albeit we have just one ministerial berth but that is an important position through which we can do something for people. Also, we wanted to keep the NCP and Congress out of power in Maharashtra at any cost. That is why we are together. But that does not mean we will be dragged with them in every decision. Like, Uddhav ji criticised demonetisation before anyone else and it has now been proved that it was indeed a blunder.

Kamna Arora: The passage of quota bill is said to be a BJP’s masterstroke ahead of 2019 polls. Do you agree?

Manisha Kayande: This thought of giving reservation on economic basis was originally floated by honourable Balasaheb Thackeray several years ago. At that time, people did not like this thought that reservation should be on economic issues because it was not in our Constitution. The Constitution always said that it should be for the backward class, for the underprivileged. But now, we realise that even people in the General category are economically-weak and are deprived of their rights. So, I think that though the thought is good, I doubt if it will sustain the legal hurdles because people are sure to challenge it.

Kamna Arora: NCP state president Jayant Patil has claimed that Uddhav Thackeray had secretly met CM Devendra Fadnavis in a Mumbai hotel earlier this week. So, are Shiv Sena and BJP holding alliance talks despite public posturing of there being a tussle between them ahead of the 2019 polls?

Manisha Kayande: Honourable Uddhav Thackeray has made it very clear that Shiv Sena will be contesting on its own. We do not want to be fooled. Like in 2014, the BJP backstabbed us during Maharashtra Vidhan Sabha elections. The alliance is not on our priority list but issues like farmers’ rights, loan waivers for them, and Ram Temple are. Until and unless the BJP comes out clear on these, Uddhav ji does not want to think of any alliance.

Kamna Arora: So, there was a meeting between them.

Manisha Kayande: Well, meetings take place. But whether it is for an alliance or for some other issues, only Uddhav ji and the CM can clarify.

Kamna Arora: Recently, actor Naseeruddin Shah said that he fears for the safety of his children in India where the life of a cow is more significant than the life of Indians. Your comment.

Manisha Kayande: Millions of people are living in India. And among the problems being faced by the country, to put those like mob lynching over suspicion that someone is carrying beef as the main one is stretching things too far. These are not the real problems of the country due to which people should feel unrestful. These sudden incidents of mob lynching are really spoiling the fabric of our country. But all the more, Naseeruddin Shah should not feel fearful about it, or for that matter Aamir Khan and Kiran Rao. There are larger issues.

I can understand that if a farmer’s wife says it or when a farmer expresses apprehensions that the government is not paying attention to their problems. But people like Naseeruddin Shah, who is well-decorated, should not say that. Naseeruddin Shah has affection towards Pakistan, which he has also displayed a number of times. He can suggest to the government, or even speak about mob lynching, but saying that he feels unsafe about his children is illogical. It is really objectionable.

Kamna Arora: Many mob lynching incidents have happened, especially in Uttar Pradesh. How do you rate the UP government as far as combating such incidents is concerned?

Manisha Kayande: The government, whether in the one at the state level or the Centre, has failed to control the incidents of mob lynching. People had a lot of hopes from Yogi Adityanath that he would be a stern chief minister. But the crime rate in Uttar Pradesh, especially against women, has not been reduced. In fact, the Centre boasts of ‘Beti bachao, beti padhao’, but some of their own party leaders make anti-women remarks or are booked in some oppression cases and they are still being protected.

Kamna Arora: Shiv Sena hailed Rahul Gandhi after Congress’ victory in Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh. Can I say that Shiv Sena has a soft corner for Rahul Gandhi?

Manisha Kayande: We have always criticised the Congress, especially because of their appeasement policies towards Muslims. During the time of the Shah Bano case, Congress came up with an ordinance which overruled the SC verdict awarding her alimony. Shiv Sena criticises Congress’ policies, be it on their stands on Amarnath Yatra, terrorism in Kashmir, appeasement of Muslims or whatever. But Balasaheb also praised Indira Gandhi in one his cartoons. So, the criticism for Congress is always pertaining to issues, Even Atal ji praised Indira Gandhi.

Coming to Rahul Gandhi, Shiv Sena never considered him a serious politician because of the way he spoke and carried himself. People belonging to various political parties do comment on leaders of different parties. But that does not mean, we will go with Congress. We do find some change in Rahul Gandhi. He is moving towards becoming a seasoned politician. Earlier, he used to get mocked at and called ‘Pappu’, all thanks to the social media. See how the BJP has built PM Narendra Modi’s chaiwala image. I always appeal that even if one person tasted tea prepared by Narendra Modi should come forward. But it seems like there is not one person in this country who has tasted the tea that had been prepared by PM Modi. So this was an image created.
