Shutdown against killing spree cripples life in IOK

Srinagar, May 17, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, normal life was crippled, today, due to complete shutdown against the ongoing killing spree by Indian troops in the territory.

Call for the shutdown was given by the Joint Resistance Leadership. All shops and business establishments were closed in Srinagar and all other major cities and towns of the occupied territory while traffic was off the road.

The occupation authorities imposed restrictions in parts of downtown Srinagar to thwart any protest in the area against the killing of youth. Juma prayers could not be held at historic Jamia Masjid in Srinagar as the authorities locked down the mosque. The authorities also continued to suspend class work in all educational institutions in the Kashmir valley for the third consecutive day, today, to prevent students’ protests against the stepped up Indian state terrorism in the territory. Train service in the valley was also suspended.

The APHC Chairman, Syed Ali Gilani, and other Hurriyat leaders and organizations including Muhammad Ashraf Sehrai, Shabbir Ahmed Dar, Muhammad Iqbal Mir, Imtiaz Ahmed Reshi, Ghulam Nabi War, Ghulam Nabi Waseem, and Islami Tanzeem-e-Azadi in their statements in Srinagar paid glowing tributes to the youth martyred by Indian troops in Pulwama, Shopian and Baramulla districts. Hurriyat leaders, Yasmeen Raja and Muhammad Rafiq Ganai visited Kareemabad area of Pulwama and expressed solidarity with the family of a martyred youth, Naseer Pandit.

Senior APHC leader, Agha Syed Hassan Al-Moosvi Al-Safvi, the Kashmir High Court Bar Association and the Chairman of Employees Movement, Muhammad Shafi Lone, in their statements in Srinagar condemned the killing of a youth Arshad Ahmed Dar. Arshad was injured in Indian forces’ violent action on protesters on Monday at Chanabal in Pattan area of Baramulla district and succumbed to his injuries at a hospital in Srinagar on Wednesday night.

Meanwhile, curfew remained imposed in Bhaderwah town of Doda district of Jammu region for the second day, today. The curfew was clamped in the town following massive protests against the coldblooded murder of a Muslim, Nayeem Ahmed Shah, by Hindu extremists on Wednesday night. Shutdown was observed in the town, today, on the call of President of Anjuman-e-Islamia, Bhaderwah, Pervaiz Ahmed Sheikh.

On the other hand, Kashmir Council Europe organized a one-day camp in connection with its widespread awareness movement on the Kashmir dispute titled ‘One Million Signature Campaign’ in Warsaw, the Capital of Poland. The Council in a statement said that a large number of Polish people by making their signatures demonstrated their support to the oppressed people of occupied Kashmir during the camp. The Council’s Chairman, Ali Raza Syed, said the basic aim of signature drive is to collect a million signatures in order to highlight the Kashmir dispute and pressurize India to stop human rights abuses in occupied Kashmir.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
