Kasautii Zindagii Kay: After Hina Khan, Erica Fernandes to exit the show? Here’s what we know

Till date, the news of Hina Khan aka Komolika’s exit from Kasautii Zindagii Kay hasn’t gone down well with the fans. While they are yet to come to terms with it, there is another piece of shocker awaiting the viewers. According to a report in Mumbai Mirror, Erica Fernandes aka Prena is also going to exit the show! Ekta Kapoor’s Kasautii Zindagii Kay reboot kick-started in September 2018, and since then, the show has been topping the TRP charts and fans have been loving Anurag and Prerna’s jodi, but if there is any truth to the news of Erica’s exit from the show, then we are sure that the show is off to an abrupt end vis-a-via the cast.

“The writers are currently working on how to justify her exit. At the moment, they have yet to figure if Erica will be replaced,” as quoted by Mirror. When Erica was contacted, she said that she wouldn’t want to comment on this. Before heading to Cannes, Hina Khan shot her last few episodes and the cast and crew of Kasautii Zindagii Kay bid an emotional farewell to the actress. Erica Fernandes, who developed a friendly rapport with Hina Khan over the last few weeks, took to social media to pen a heartwarming note for Hina as she wrote, “I know i am late as always! But for me this wasn’t a farewell , it was us wishing you all the luck and love for whatever you choose to do ahead @realhinakhan . Our wishes , blessings and support will always be there with u . Its a shame that we grew close in the last few days of you being with us in the show. Thankyou for being there as a guide and support. Will have to meet soon once your back to continue the masti n madness.”

A few days back, it was being reported that Dill Mill Gayye fame actor Karan Singh Grover is all set to make an entry to the show as Mr. Bajaj and the makers are planning to shoot Karan’s entry scene in Switzerland. For all those who don’t know, the original Mr. Bajaj was essayed by Ronit Roy. Well, we wonder how fans will react to the news of Erica Fernandes aka Prerna’s exit from the show. Stay tuned to Pinkvilla for all the updates!

ALSO READ: Kasautii Zindagii Kay: Erica Fernandes wishes co star Hina Khan good luck; says this wasn't a farewell
