Top news of the day: Stage set for last phase of Lok Sabha elections, Chief Election Commissioner terms reports on Ashok Lavasa’s 'recusal' from MCC matters ‘unsavoury', and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

The seven-phase Lok Sabha elections, one of the most bitterly fought in recent memory, will come to a close on Sunday when polling will be held in 59 constituencies including in Varanasi where Prime Minister Narendra Modi is seeking to retain the seat.

In a sharp reaction to media reports that Election Commissioner Ashok Lavasa has recused himself from meetings on issues concerning the Model Code of Conduct (MCC), pending his demand for including dissenting opinions in the final orders, Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) Sunil Arora termed them “unsavoury and avoidable controversy”.

On the eve of polling in Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s constituency, BSP supremo Mayawati wondered if Varanasi would be a repeat of Rae Bareli in 1977 when maverick politician Raj Narain defeated Indira Gandhi.

Nobel laureate Kailash Satyarthi said Mahatma Gandhi is above power and politics and people like Pragya Singh Thakur are killing the soul of India and the BJP should expel her from the party.

Maoist leader Sabyasachi Panda was sentenced to life imprisonment by the Additional District Judge (ADJ) court in Odisha’s Berhampur. Panda was convicted under Section 121 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), according Additional Public Prosecutor (APP) Anil Sahu.

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra says that Prime Minister Narendra Modi is one of the least decisive leaders that India had seen in recent years. She gave written responses to questions submitted by The Hindu,which was followed by a brief interaction.

Four militants, including one who took part in the abduction and killing of Army soldier Aurangzeb last year, were killed in twin operations in Kashmir.

One of Anurag Kashyap’s most direct films on electoral politics, Gulaal, started off as being about college politics. However, it was with the location — Rajasthan — that it found specificity and context in terms of the larger socio-economic politics. Like the fading away of the aristocracy. All the royals the film’s team met during the research retained a sense of pride despite having lapsed into bad days.

Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) president and former Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti praised Election Commissioner Ashok Lavasa “for his integrity”.

India, which is owed $38 million by the UN for peacekeeping operations, has voiced concern over the “unjustifiable and inexplicable” delays in reimbursement to countries providing peacekeeping troops and police for UN missions.

An attentive dog in northeastern Thailand is being hailed as a hero after finding and saving an infant allegedly buried in a field by his teenage mother, police said.
