My sons were used as human shield: Father of slain youth

SRINAGAR: The father of the civilian killed during an encounter late on Thursday night in Pulwama district has accused security forces of “using his sons as human shields”.Brothers Rayees and Younis Ahmed Dar were dragged out of their house late Thursday night (May 16) by security forces as the family prepared for ‘sehri’ at about 2.30am, Jalaluddin Dar has said.He said Army men used his sons to flush out militants holed up in a neighbouring house that belonged to Ghulam Hassan Dar. “My wife, my daughter-in-law, and I… we tried to resist but the soldiers forced me as well out of my home,” the 67-year-old said.Jalaluddin recalled to TOI, “I told them I will come with you, let my sons go, but they paid no heed. The soldiers took my sons in different directions and I was taken in another direction. The soldiers ordered my sons to ask our neighbours to come out of their houses.”Younis, who was also hurt but survived, said, “No sooner had my brother Rayees knocked on the door of the house just next to ours, that another man, his face masked, told Rayees and me to go to the house of Ghulam Hassan Dar, which is the third house from ours.“I was a little distance away. The moment Rayees knocked on Ghulam Hassan’s door and asked them to come out, lights in the house went out. Gunshots were heard from inside. This perhaps killed the soldier from the search party. In the exchange of fire, my brother was killed and I received a bullet on the thigh,” Younis said, adding he tried to crawl away but his brother was killed on the spot.In Thursday’s encounter, security forces killed two Jaish terrorists at Dalipora village, in south Kashmir’s Pulwama district. A police officer had initially said three soldiers and two civilians, brothers Younis and Rayees Ahmad Dar were injured. But Rayees died at the encounter site, and his brother Younis was taken to a nearby hospital from where he was referred to a Srinagar hospital, the officer said. All three terrorists were killed.Jalaluddin added: “The soldiers ordered me to lift an army man who I carried on my back till some 200 yards away from the encounter site though it was still dangerous.”J&K Police have denied the family’s claim. “As police and security forces were evacuating civilians from the neighbourhood area around the target house, the hiding militants fired indiscriminately. In the process, one Army jawan Sepoy Sandeep was killed and one civilian Rayees Dar also lost his life,” a police statement said.Jalaluddin said there was no police or paramilitary force, but that “it was Army men who took my sons as human shields”. Rayees, on completion of an MBA from a Srinagar college, was studying Islamic banking in an online course, his family said. Younis’s wife Firdousa recalled: “It was a fearful sight when my father-in-law was pleading with the soldiers to take him instead of his two sons.”A senior officer told TOI J&K Police could probe the allegation.
