Rifleman Aurangzeb’s killer among 4 terrorists killed in 2 Kashmir encounters

SRINAGAR: The killer of rifleman Aurangzeb was among four Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists gunned down in two encounters in Kashmir Valley on Saturday. Aurangzeb, a soldier of 44-RR, was kidnapped and shot dead by terrorists on June 14 last year when he was on his way from Shadipora in Shopian district to his village in Poonch in a private vehicle to attend a family function.While three of the terrorists, including the killer of the soldier, were gunned down at Panzgam in Awantipora of south Kashmir’s Pulwama district, the fourth one was killed at Hathlangoo in north Kashmir’s Sopore.Awantipora SSP Tahir Saleem said the three terrorists killed at Panzgam have been identified as Showkat Ahmad Dar of Panzgam, Irfan Ahmad of Sopore and Muzzafar Ahmad of Tahab Pulwama, all affiliated to Hizbul Mujahideen.Saleem said Showkat Dar was “directly involved” in the killing of Aurangzeb, who was part of a team that had killed Hizbul commander Sameer Tiger on May 1 last year.The Panzgam encounter broke out in the wee hours of Saturday. An official said a joint team of forces, including Army’s 55-RR and SOG, cordoned off Bonpora Panzgam after credible inputs about the presence of some terrorists in the area. As the forces closed in on the suspected hideout of the terrorists, they were fired upon. The forces retaliated, leading to the encounter and subsequent killing of the three terrorists.The second encounter took place after security forces cordoned off Hathlangoo on Saturday afternoon after getting information about the presence of terrorists there. “During the search operation, the hiding terrorists fired on the search party. The fire was retaliated, leading to an encounter in which one terrorist was killed,” a police spokesman said.“The body of the slain terrorist, identified as Waseem Ahmad Naik of Udipora village in Pulwama district, was retrieved from the encounter site. Naik too belonged to the Hizbul Mujahideen. Search operation in the area continues,” he said, adding that it was a clean operation and no collateral damage took place during the exchange of fire.Soon after news of the encounters spread, youths took to the streets and started pelting stones on security forces, which was retaliated by teargas shelling. Several youths received minor injuries during the clashes, reports said.
