General category students protest admission quota for Marathas to PG medical courses

The Maharashtra government had given reservation to Marathas which was struck down by a Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court. (Photo: PTI)

A day after its ordinance, the Maharashtra government faced protests from Marathas and general category students. While the general category students were against it, the Marathas were in support of it.

The Maharashtra cabinet on Friday gave its nod to promulgate an ordinance to uphold admissions of 253 postgraduate medical and dental courses under the Maratha quota. The move came as PG students had been sitting on a dharna at Azad Maidan for the last 13 days.

To oppose the ordinance, general category students protested at Carter's Road on Saturday. Maratha students have also refused to withdraw their protest saying they will wait till an ordinance is passed and their admissions are restored.

Admissions of more than 2,000 PG students are at stake. The Maharashtra government had given reservation to Marathas which was struck down by a Nagpur bench of Bombay High Court.

The reservation was to grant 16 per cent quota to the Maratha community for admissions to PG medical courses on the grounds that the admission process had begun much earlier.

The Supreme Court upheld its decision. The Maharashtra government on Friday brought an amendment in section 16 (2) of the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes (SEBC) Act to reinstate admissions that were granted under state quota for Marathas.

The 253 Maratha students who got seats under the quota say they will lose a year if they don't get admissions this year. However, general category students argued that this was not true. They claimed if the quota is removed, admissions will be on merit and these students can't get admission on merit.

Maratha students say their reservation is based on their financial background, i.e, income less than Rs 8 lakh a year and that not all Maratha's got reservation. General category students argued if these students were MBBS students and since they interned and paid fees along with general category students, why were they being differentiated now?

There is also the issue of students leaving out the opportunity of studying in other states and central colleges. One top ranking student questioned why he should settle for less when they deserved better.

The Maharashtra government is ready to move caveats in various benches of the Bombay High Court once the ordinance is passed. Legal experts believe the ordinance may amount to malice in law as it attempts to overreach judicial orders.
