Village Life

The Accidental Prime Minister

Uttar Pradesh

Narendra Modi

In the January of 2002, Turkmenistan’s ‘President For Life’ Saparmurat Niyazov decreed that the Gregorian Calendar would cease to exist in his country, and days of the week as also months would instead be renamed – one of them after himself, another one after his mother, yet others after his mentors. Turkmenistan’s Dear Leader simply turned the page in the calendar to make a fresh date with history.In other countries, say in argumentative India, manufacturing history can be both long-term and painstaking. Look at the backlash terror accused Pragya Singh Thakur had to face when she extolled the Mahatma’s assassin as a true patriot. But her comments are of a piece with the larger enterprise that is currently underway to write an altogether fresh history: Subaltered History, if you will. Before the government changed in Rajasthan there had been a proposal by the BJP to name an over-bridge in Alwar after ‘Shaheed’ Nathuram Godse which was eventually scotched after a public outcry, and on the Mahatma’s death anniversary this year a middle-aged woman from the Hindu Mahasabha was filmed shooting at his poster with a pistol.Since they cannot fell a giant like him in one blow, they attack him with a thousand nicks and cuts.The diminishing of Gandhi, the discrediting of Nehru, the appropriation of Patel is important for the BJP not just for ideological reasons. The only way the party, seen until 2014 as a party of traders and urban middle class, would grow was if it could ingress into rural India where the big votes are. It’s also where the hold of the heroes of Independence – all Congressmen – is still strong.The last five years have seen the assiduous cultivation of a new form of nationalism that is delinked from the Congress party. This is done variously through cinema – the muscular nationalism of films like Uri, hit jobs by films like Tashkent Files and. It’s achieved via the consistent falsehoods spread about Nehru’s debauchery and indeed about his Muslim antecedents which have percolated to the villages thanks to WhatsApp. And now it’s being done through the on and off extolling of Nathuram Godse rather than the Mahatma as the real patriot.The Prime Minister’s chaiwala, chowkidar rhetoric, his validation of pakodawalas, or even his seemingly ridiculous statements about India inventing plastic surgery with Ganesha don’t stem from ignorance; they are issued with the strategic intent to resonate in the villages. When the Prime Minister gives interviews about the kind of mangoes he likes, or when he offers simplistic ‘gharelu nuskhe’ in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, he is not talking to the reader of this column, he is talking to the moffusil. Likewise, when he attacks Lutyens’ Delhi or the Khan Market gang, we mustn’t delude ourselves that he is attacking us. Like Arjun, his eye is only on those who feel left out from post-liberalisation India. It’s this revanchism again that’s led to the creation of new faux mythical figures like Jhalkari Bai or Suheldev Passi in the villages of, and the rise of leaders like Yogi Adityanath who feed into both, the faith and the bigotry of people.When Rahul Gandhi talks about alleviating rural distress,attacks him not on policy but on the fact that Gandhi, a ‘naamdaar’, has had the temerity to offer a solution for the poor when it’s he, the Prime Minister, who is from among the poor. It was Gandhiji who had said, India lives in her villages; she now has a Prime Minister who is also the head man.
