Ahmedabad: Cops solve murder mystery after 18 yrs

Nearly 18 years after the crime, Ahmedabad Crime Branch has cracked a double murder case of Naroda, in which the husbands (accused) killed their wives and fled out of Gujarat. While the cops nabbed one of the accused from Chambal in Madhya Pradesh, other accused is still on the run.



As per case details, Muneshsingh aka Munnasingh aka Laghusingh Ramjitsingh Bhadoria and his relative Narendrasingh Bhadoria, residents of Naroda, choked their wives to death a day after Diwali in 2001. While Munnasingh (27 then) took this extreme step as he was unhappy with his wife for not bearing a child, Narendrasingh (27 then), who had two children, doubted his wife for having an extra-marital affair. After the murder, they left the dead bodies next to the children, locked the house and fled.



Police inspector Darshansinh Barad who led a team of four to MP for investigation said, "Munnasingh hated his wife Vandana after she told him how she was molested by her uncle in her childhood. His hatred intensified after she was unaable to bear his child. However, at the time of murder, his wife was three months pregnant. Both accused conspired the murder after discussing with each other. After the murder, they called their in-laws from a PCO and informed them that their wives had committed suicide. The incident was reported by the neighbours back then."



Post the incident, Munnasingh got remarried in MP and worked as a farmer with two children whereas Narendrasingh lives in a big city. "We did not have any photograph of the accused, and since it is an old case, we contacted the then investigating officer, who is now retired, to help us with this case. Through our manual network, we learnt about Munnasingh and left for MP in a private car. We posed as bank employees while looking for his house in the village," said Barad.



He further assured that they will nab the other accused soon. "He will be nabbed soon. Post the incident, his children were taken by their relatives to a village. However, when Narendrasingh's mother passed away, his 16-year-old daughter committed suicide by jumping into the well," said Barad.

Accused 1

Name : Muneshsingh aka Munnasingh Bhadoria

: Muneshsingh aka Munnasingh Bhadoria Reason for murder : Problem in his marital life arose after his wife Vandana told him that she was molested by her uncle in her childhood. Since then, Munnasingh developed hatred for her. This increased when she could not bear his child.

: Problem in his marital life arose after his wife Vandana told him that she was molested by her uncle in her childhood. Since then, Munnasingh developed hatred for her. This increased when she could not bear his child. Life post murder : Moved to Chambal, remarried, has two children and does farming

: Moved to Chambal, remarried, has two children and does farming Status: Arrested

Accused 2
