Hina Khan makes her debut at Cannes, Saumya Tandon resumes shoot - here's a quick TV roundup for this week

TV Round Up This Week | Photo Credit: Instagram

This week has been raining with baby announcements and ones that make your uterus skip a beat. Chhavi Mittal and Navina Bole delivered a baby boy and a girl respectively this week. Sara Arfeen Khan also announced her pregnancy and said that she will be delivering her munchkin in July this year. Hina Khan broke the internet and how with her debut at the Cannes Film Festival red carpet. Fans cannot stop talking about the actress making her debut at the international film festival and launched the poster of her upcoming film, Lines. In other news, Ishqbaaaz actress Mansi Srivastava broke up with her fiancé, Mohit Abrol, and the two called off their engagement.

Here’s everything that made headlines this week in TV town.

Chhavi Mittal and Navina Bole welcomed their baby

Chhavi Mittal gave birth to baby boy Arham and Navina Bole welcomed her baby girl into the world this week. Chhavi has been posting updates on her health and the baby quite frequently on social media.

Hina Khan makes her debut at Cannes Film Festival red carpet

Hina broke the internet with her debut at the international film festival’s red carpet where she also launched the poster of her upcoming film, Lines. The actress is still slaying all of her looks at Cannes.

Sara Arfeen Khan announces her pregnancy

The Jamai Raja actress revealed to Bombay Times that she is expecting her first child with husband, Arfeen, around July this year.

Saumya Tandon resumes shooting for Bhabhiji Ghar Par Hain

Saumya went live from the sets of the show and even took her son, Mirran, for the shoot. She revealed to a portal that her son is still dependent on her for food so she cannot just leave him at home and shoot for longer hours.

Mansi Srivastava and Mohit Abrol call off their wedding

The Ishqbaaaz actress and the Porus actor had been dating each other for over six years. They were even engaged to each other for two and a half years. However, there were some irreconcilable differences that led to this decision.
