INS Kochi Current Affairs, GK & News

INS Kochi Current Affairs, GK & News

India and Saudi Indian is all set to conduct their first ever naval exercise called “AL-MOHED AL-HINDI 2021”. Highlights To participate in the exercise, India’s guided-missile destroyer INS Kochi reached Saudi Arabia. The joint naval exercise will showcase the reflection of growing defence and military cooperation between India and Saudi Arabia. INS Kochi reached to ..

Month: Current Affairs - August, 2021

Category: Defence Current Affairs • International Current Affairs

Topics: AL-MOHED AL-HINDI 2021 exercise • India-Saudi Arabia • INS Kochi • Joint Naval Exercise • Project 15A

Indian Navy test-fired the BrahMos supersonic cruise missile, from the Navy’s stealth destroyer INS Kochi. The supersonic missile successfully hit a decommissioned target ship in Arabian Sea. Moreover, the second ship of Project 15-A ‘Kolkata-class’ guided missile destroyer test-fired advanced missile during a naval drill in west coast. Earlier the BrahMos missile has been successfully ..

Month: Current Affairs - November, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Brahmos • Cruise missile • Indian Navy • INS Kochi • INS Kolkata • Missile Test

The Indian Naval Forces and the Japanese Maritime Self Defense Force (JMSDF) was held on November 23, 2019. This is the firs time an explosive ordance disposal and mine counter measure was held by Indian and Japanese forces. Mine Counter measure Vessels The naval ships that are designed to locate and destruct the naval mines ..

Month: Current Affairs - November, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: india-japan • Indian Navy • Indian Navy Ships • Indian Navy Warships • INS Kochi • Japan-India Maritime Exercise • Maritime Exercises

Indian Navy successfully conducted test firing of Medium Range Surface to Air Missile (MRSAM) on the Western Seaboard. Key Highlights About: The Indian Navy undertook its maiden cooperative engagement firing of Medium Range Surface to Air Missile (MRSAM) and has achieved a significant milestone in enhancing its Anti Air Warfare Capability. These Surface to Air ..

Month: Current Affairs - May, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Anti Air Warfare Capability • DRDL Hyderabad • DRDO • Indian Navy • INS Chennai • INS Kochi • Israel Aerospace Industries • Kolkata Class Destroyers • medium-range surface-to-air missile • Western Seaboard

The Indian Navy has launched guided missile destroyer INS Imphal at Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders in Mumbai on April 20. It’s the third state-of-the-art warship built as part of Project 15B, in which ships are built to carry and operate two multiple role helicopters. INS Imphal has a length of 163m and 17.4m at the beam ..

Topics: Destroyers • INS Imphal • INS Kochi • INS Mormugao • Mazagon Dock Shipbuilders • Ships • Visakhapatnam-class destroyer • Warships
