2019 Lok Sabha Polls: Villagers in Madhya Pradesh's Mandsaur boycott polls over non-payment of crop insurance

Mandsaur has been the focal point of the farmers' agitation in 2017 when six farmers were killed in police firing.

Bhopal: As the seventh and the final phase of the 2019 Lok Sabha polls draw close today, over 500 residents of Sitamau village in Mandsaur district of Madhya Pradesh have boycotted voting over non-payment of crop insurance for 2 years now.

Mandsaur has been the focal point of the farmers' agitation in 2017 when six farmers were killed in police firing during a protest demanding better price for their produce.

#IndiaVotes | Over 500 villagers from Sitamau in Madhya Pradesh, boycott voting because the farmers have not received crop insurance for 2 years now@disha2791 gets the details#LokSabhaElections2019 #GetInked #Phase7 pic.twitter.com/YYhrPw1avG — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 19, 2019

In February this year, hailstorm destroyed hundreds of acres of crop and the farmers were supposed to get crop insurance before the elections. The farmers have said that they are not going to vote unless they get an assurance in written from government officials.

The Mirror Now ground check confirms that 80 percent of the farmers in the state of Madhya Pradesh haven't received their crop insurance. For the last three seasons, crops got damaged due to hailstorm, unseasonal rains. According to official figures, of the 52 lakh farmers, only 21 lakh have got the crop insurance amount.

In the last ass

embly elections, loan waiver was a big promise that made the Congress win the state polls. In 2014, BJP won 27 out of the 29 seats.But this time it faces a tough battle after it lost the assembly elections to Congress. The eight constituencies voting today in MP are considered a BJP stronghold.

All the eight seats voting today went to the BJP. This Lok Sabha elections, Congress hopes to gain the lost ground after it announced a crop loan waiver after it stormed to power in assembly elections.

The BJP in its attempt to retain the existing seats had dropped five of its MPs in the region. The BJP has targeted the Congress loan waiver scheme calling it an utter failure.
