Leading From Front: IAF Chief Flies MiG-21 On Visit To AFS Sulur – Home Base To Tejas

In order to send a clear message about the vitality of MiG-21, Air Chief Marshal and IAF Chief, BS Dhanoa, flew a number of MiG-21 jets in Coimbatore’s Sulur, Tamil Nadu.

#LeadingFromFront :The Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa, is on an official visit to AFS Sulur- 'Home base to Tejas'.

The CAS, interacted with the team 'FLYING DAGGERS' during the visit. pic.twitter.com/PRNIPIauWL — Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) May 17, 2019

The IAF chiefs have flown the fighters earlier as well as a morale-booster for the force, Air Marshal Dhanoa’s move is seen in the back drop of MiG-21, the soviet era aging fighter shooting down Pakistan’s Air Force (PAF) F-16 which is considered as far superior fighter plane in air warfare. The dog fight had taken place on February 27 after India on February 26, destroyed terror camps inside Pakistan in response to Pulwama terror attack by Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror outfit in which more than 40 of CRPF soldiers were martyred.

#LeadingFromFront : Glimpses of Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa's solo sortie from AFS Sulur.

The CAS has more than 2000 hrs of flying on the MiG-21 jet.

He has led a MiG-21 Sqn from front during 'Op Safed Sagar', Kargil Ops. pic.twitter.com/chbpX4QiKZ — Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) May 17, 2019

The MiG-21 was flown by Wing Commander Abhinandan Vardhman, who had shot down F-16 near LoC in a dog fight. However, Wing Commander Varthaman was taken into custody by Pakistani army after his MiG-21 was hit by an anti-aircraft gun which forced him to eject. Pakistan returned the captured Wing Commander days later as “peace gesture” as Pakistan PM Imran Khan called it.

#LeadingFromFront : Glimpses of the Chief of the Air Staff, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa's sorties at AFS Sulur. pic.twitter.com/GtzthdhXAY — Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) May 17, 2019

Air Marshal Dhanoa undertook the sortie in the fighter Jet’s two-seater version and followed it with three sorties solo on MiG-21 Type 96, the oldest variant of the aircraft with IAF which is a single-seat variant of the MiG-21. The news agency PTI reported.

Air Marshal Dhanoa had commanded 17 squadrons (flying Type 96) during the Kargil war in 1999.
