Patna’s conjoined twins cast their votes as separate individuals with independent voting rights

Patna's conjoined twins voted as separate individuals | Photo Credit: ANI

Patna: Conjoined twins, Sabah and Farah, cast their votes today as separate individuals with independent voting rights for the first time in India’s election history.

During the 2015 assembly polls in Bihar, the 19-year-old sisters had cast their votes on a single voter identity card. This time, however, the twins earned the right to be treated as separate individuals, reported PTI. Saba and Farah were enrolled in the electoral roll for Digha assembly segment under Patna Sahib Lok Sabha seat which went to poll today in the 7th phase of Lok Sabha elections.

Congress’ Shatrughan Sinha is locked in a keen fight with Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad in the Patna Sahib seat.

The sisters, after exercising their voting right, were photographed outside the polling station today.

Patna: Conjoined sisters Saba & Farah cast their votes as separate individuals with independent voting rights for the first time. #Bihar #LokSabhaElections2019

(Pictures courtesy- Election Commission) pic.twitter.com/t0ZFucfQiU — ANI (@ANI) May 19, 2019

Election Commission of India’s official Twitter account had earlier shared the twins’ touching story with their hashtag - #Chunavkikahaniyan. Now, the sisters have gone viral on social media for exercising their democratic rights.

District Magistrate-Patna, Kumar Ravi, told PTI the sisters were treated as a single voter because of the rules of the secret ballot which prohibits a second individual to be present when another is casting his or her vote.

However, Sabah and Farah are conjoined in such a way that their heads are always turned in the opposite direction, thus making it impossible for one to check out the other’s voting activity.

Saba and Farah, who were born in a poor family, were treated multiple times at AIIMS in New Delhi. However, doctors were unsuccessful to separate them through surgery.
