Seer Shivakumara Swami, head of Lingayat mutt, dies at 111

(MENAFN- NewsBytes)





Seer Shivakumara Swami, head of Lingayat mutt, dies at 111

21 Jan 2019

On Monday, Shivakumara Swami of Siddaganga Mutt of Karnataka died after battling illness.

Recently, reports of his deteriorating health emerged. He had been kept on a ventilator.

As news of his health surfaced, senior politicians of the state including BS Yeddyurappa, Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy, and Home Minister MB Patil reached the mutt.

Kumaraswamy, who had canceled his scheduled his appointments, announced his death.

For decades, he had been feeding thousands of poor children

The seer

Siddaganga Mutt, which Shivakumara Swami headed, is a prominent Lingayat mutt in Tumakuru.

The seer was known for his humanitarian work. He had started the Akshara dasoha scheme.

The 111-year-old seer had been feeding nearly 8,000 children of poor families for the last seven decades.

The seer was referred to as 'Walking God' by many. Shivakumara Swami had received a Padma award too.

Shivakumara Swami had a surgery in December last year

Surgery

Shivakumara Swami's health deteriorated after he underwent a liver surgery in December last year. After being operated at a Chennai hospital, the seer returned to the mutt.

A spokesperson of the mutt had said he was recovering well. However, in recent days he started keeping unwell, after which doctors from Bengaluru reached the mutt to treat him.

His age also worsened the condition.

Doctor had said he showed slight improvement

Doctor's take

Earlier today, Dr. Parameshwar, who attended to the seer told the press his condition showed a slight improvement.

Dr. Parameshwar said doctors at BGS Gleneagles Global Hospital were approached to ensure the revered seer got the best treatment.

He had requested the devotees to stay patient.

Notably, a special yagna was organized for Shivakumar Swami's health in the mutt.

PM Modi, HD Deve Gowda and others express grief

Condolences

Politicians mourned the death of Shivakumara Swami. Prime Minister Narendra Modi tweeted he had the privilege of meeting the seer. He added the scale of community service taken up by him was immense.

Former Prime Minister HD Deve Gowda said, "We must be grateful to walk on the land he lived in."

Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwara said the state was at loss today.
