Confession is bad poetry

Something made me fish the remote from underneath the couch and rewind the scene where Tony, the mob boss in the HBO drama series Sopranos says “’Remember when’ is the lowest form of conversation.” He delivers the odd punchline, draws his chair away and walks out. For the rest of the evening, I carried the sentence around as if it was a key to a drawer, long forgotten. As I stared at the blank page, gearing to write about Ashitha, it found its way back like a faithful pet and in turn led me to the question; why after 60 years of silence did the writer abruptly choose to let her readers in on the secret, ‘Adh njaan aayrnu’ (That was me) The agony was hers, the writing was autobiographical. She had known all her life that confessions sell yet chose to stay away from it. What must have changed in the few months of life before death that made her want to list the constellation of traumas that made up her life?

The tapestry of literature when Ashitha bloomed in the early nineties was replete with women writers who wrote about motherhood, domesticity and life as seen through their kitchen window. It was also the era when Madhavikutty and her confessional writing were riding the highest wave. She was more a warning, than an inspiration, the great example of what’s done to a woman who no longer cares. Even the taunts Ashitha met with constantly had references to Madhavikutty, after all, they were both from mid-Kerala, spent their childhoods in a much liberal and accepting city and were caught in what the writer herself describes as an inner diaspora.

“Ashitha wrote most of her stories during the period when Madhavikutty was being called a nymphomaniac, when being a woman writer would appear to be a criminal act. And for someone who wasn’t financially independent, who was at the mercy of others for blank papers even, the courage to risk confessing what she had been through must have seemed impossible,” says Shihabuddin Poythumkadavu, whose interview with the writer is already in its 3rd edition in merely a year-and-a-half. Perhaps more success than Ashitha’s fiction could ever garner.

The starting point of this story, however, was a letter, not the poignant kinds that Ashitha wrote to her Aami Oppu. But one that was diligently penned by her own brother and shared as an explanation. “So many have expressed deep shock and even revulsion at what she did so unexpectedly in the very last stage of her life,” he writes. His frustration ebbing from the spaces between the words. For him, Ashitha’s confessions were an attempt to generate sympathy. “Ashitha suffered from acute schizophrenia in varying degrees from her teenage. The symptoms began to manifest in the early 70s after Victoria college hostel warden, Palghat, suggested she be taken out of the hostel due to some personal aberrations. My parents were in Mumbai when she developed signs of mental illness. She was taken back to Mumbai for treatment after display of mild violence and threats of suicide,” he explains, with a vocabulary of shame and anger, accusing the world of not verifying the facts. But how does one verify someone else’s memories?

A river of soap slithered between my grandmother and me the morning she passed a vile remark about my teenage breasts. She was in one of her moods, near the washing stone and I had almost darted past the back gate when she said what she did over a decade ago. There is a fiction-like quality to a memory so scarring. Irrespective of its trueness, a memory is a recollection susceptible to edits, omissions and interpretations. After all these years, this moment could still define us. The hurt, a shadow that lurks in and out of the occasional conversation. Confessional writing without the crutches of fiction possesses an anti-feminist quality, at once indulging the reader’s appetite for harrowing narratives and encouraging the commodification of women. It’s the same as the strange interest to see blemished no-make-up pictures of celebrities.

In a social media post which talks about battling cancer, Ashitha who calls herself a housewife instead of a writer grants herself only two adjectives, ‘normal’ and ‘typical’. Perhaps towards the end, she wanted to be something more. It is said that all diseases originate in the mind before it manifests in the body and Shihabuddin who interviewed the writer between her chemotherapy sessions believes that with Ashitha, this was the truth. “Her intention wasn’t character assassination. She had suppressed her traumas for so long that towards the end she just wanted a means to unburden herself.” He doesn’t deny that the interview led to a widespread reading of Ashita’s books, as if knowing the source of grief, made the grief more palatable.

Ashitha’s contemporary, Sulochana Ram Mohan finds it difficult to understand why after a career-long catharsis through her writing would Ashitha feel the need to discuss at length her personal traumas towards the very end. But she finds the answer before she finishes the sentence. “We cannot begin to imagine what changes in a person with the realisation of the end nearing,” says the writer who dislikes autobiography as a genre, and prefers the magical quality of fiction with its grey areas. “When readers invest time in sifting the autobiographical elements out from a lifetime of work, fiction starts to lose its relevance. This is a sort of voyeuristic pleasure,” she adds.

In one of Ashitha’s most-endearing stories, ‘Between The Lines’, a little child comes home to her mother with bruises every day. When her mother learns that her child is being punished for the mischiefs committed by her friend with the same name, she goes to her school but finds neither the teacher nor her friend. It is one of her many stories about lying. Three months after Ashita’s demise, as confessions from the interview continue to rock the lives of the many generations of characters she introduced to her readers, I am reminded of this mother who fondly embraced her child who had spun a yarn. Though the confessions won’t soon fade from her biography, Ashitha is more a writer than a victim and the truth, forever a silence that would swing between her and the reader.

The writer is an independent features journalist whose work has appeared in several national and international publications

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
