Can Vidyasagar Be the Substance of Our Resistance to BJP?

The scenes of rabid violence and organised goondaism that flashed through the streets of Kolkata on May 14 do not call for much shock. That Amit Shah’s election rally would aim at something like this – unleashing hordes of hired BJP ‘supporters’ on a college campus and outside a university’s gates – is not paranormal activity. The past five years have stitched up enough of these spectacles for us to feel any trace of renewed moral angst.

Let us begin by rejecting the fake surprise therefore. The BJP’s is, accurately, a politics of desecration in the name of the sacred. We have seen the everydayness with which this desecration has extended across and beyond the domains of education, history, culture, political rhetoric and of course constitutional governance. Bengal is definitely not a stranger to such tendencies, though the BJP’s electoral romance with the ‘cultured’ bhadralok Bengali might have just begun.

What then does one make of Tuesday’s mayhem? Have the responses on public and social media – as well as of the ruling party in the state – been adequate to what it demands? Has there been an attempt to articulate a political opposition to the incident – whether from a prominently non-BJP state leadership or from the ‘cultured’ bhadralok left?

A politics of hurt

Plainly put, there have been two distinct sets of paranoiac response that one would have encountered in the immediate aftermath.

The first is what unites the TMC with varying shades of the Bengali left, from the liberal to the radical. It angrily asks: how dare ‘they’ touch Vidyasagar? ‘They’ refers to the non-Bengali interloper, with no respect for the hallowed heritage of a 19th century Bengal renaissance and its glorious intellectual traditions of reform. Also, there is a hint that touching a Lenin or a Gandhi bust would have provoked grossly different quantities of rage or outrage, owing to their ‘outsiderness’ to a pan-Bengali cultural conscience. This makes a monument out of community pride, and uses the broken pieces of Vidyasagar’s statue to level out an unequally-shared modernity.

Also Read: Vidyasagar is Rooted in the Bengali Soul, Desecrating His Statue Will Cost BJP Politically

As a calculated campaign strategy, most Trinamool leaders in the state changed their social media profile pictures to an image of Vidyasagar’s face soon after. The irony in this must not be missed, insofar as the student wing of the TMC has had a history of rounding up teachers on college campuses or harassing them for preventing cheating-practices in university examinations.

The state government’s love for the ‘educationist’ in Vidyasagar cannot however go uncontested by the Bengali left’s ownership claims over all that passes for ‘culture’. The latter’s many hues went equally red in their faces, and nursed their wounds by joining in the chorus.

In all the jingoistic raking up of Bengali self-pride and community belonging, what this variety of response has overlooked is the political advantage it provides to the BJP instead. A heightened Bengali sub-nationalism – with its obvious elitist overtones – feeds into the same structures of sentiment that mandate a National Register of Citizens (NRC). It references a demand for ethnic authentication, by weeding out the ‘uncultured’ immigrant and then creating a no-trespass canon of literate ‘insiders’. The nation is re-erected in raw provincialism, while citizenship is reduced to cultural membership and rites of passage through official documents/monuments of knowledge. In condemning the BJP, we manufacture a ground ripe for its potential conquests. If the middle-class Bengali parent can no longer bequeath a knowledge of her mother-tongue (standardised by Vidyasagar in the primer Borno-Parichay) without a trace of shame, must she displace that shame to all ‘other’ tongues and bodies?

Standing by statues

The second cluster of responses to the BJP-led vandalism is qualitatively not very different, though it cloaks its resistance in a liberal framework. This group of naysayers has in fact questioned the very politics of breaking statues. Using references from the Hindutva brigade’s favoured pastime of vandalising monumental installations – from the Babri Masjid to Ambedkar-Periyar’s statues – liberals from the civil society have asked: why must ‘they’ touch statues at all? Interestingly, many among these had even witnessed the Naxalite moment in 1970 when student leaders went about the city of Calcutta, pulling down statues of Ashutosh Mukherjee, Vivekananda, Tagore and Vidyasagar.

Moni Guha, an impassioned Marxist-Leninist dissident, wrote in the Frontier Weekly of 28 November 1970:

The attack on dead heroes and on their statues did not begin in West Bengal, nor was it initiated by the ‘anti-social Naxalites’. The attack on dead heroes began from the very rostrum of the 20th Congress of the CPSU (Communist Party of the Soviet Union). The statues of Stalin were razed to the ground, demolished, defiled in Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, East Germany and the USSR. The Stalin statues faced the same fate as those of Vidyasagar, Netaji and others. The bourgeois Press, at that time, reported gleefully that these events were the expression of the just and spontaneous hatred against the Stalinist totalitarianism. But now in West Bengal, statue breaking is the act of a ‘few vandals and miscreants’ against progressivism!

From Guha’s historical reflections on the iconoclastic “uses” of statues, it is clear that attacks on memorials and monuments that distil official memory has long been part of progressive political practice. Does that mean that the Naxal students’ attack on Vidyasagar in 1970 carries the same political significance as that of the BJP now? No, and emphatically so.

Also Read: Recent Spate of Statue Vandalism Gives Us a Perspective on Iconoclasm

The act of demolishing a statue is replete with a deep symbolism in the first case – where, as Ashok Rudra maintains in another Frontier edition of May 1970, the attempt is to place a finger on the “absurdity” of the social order and its writing of a commissioned history. In its rejection of literality, such an event is by default within the realm of discourse.

With a mob forcibly entering a college campus and wreaking its muscular aggression on a bust of Vidyasagar, the violence carries no symbolic import. It is real and visceral; Vidyasagar, for the BJP workers, is just another physical ‘body’ and the only one they had access to at that moment. Had there been a woman student hiding behind the stone structure, she would have been assaulted in much the same way.

Is a cultural defence enough?

Unfortunately, the BJP is that idea of violence as nothing but literal. And its politics of desecration therefore spares neither the letter of the Constitution nor the body of an Akhlaq or Najeeb. It is this idea of violence – whether vigilante or genocidal – that has parasitically eaten into the soul of our political culture and has become the minimal condition of democratic functioning. If the BJP is a disease, the TMC is not far from internalising its symptoms either. And better still, it only prescribes the disease for its cure. The mainstream left, blind to the sins of its past, must stand in the wings and add the ghee of ‘sanskriti’ to the fire.

It is time to structure a political response to the BJP’s political onslaught – and, not one seeped in the anxieties of bad cultural ‘touch’. Bengali protectionism need not defend a spectral Vidyasagar. It would do better to save its culture from felling other victims to NRCs and suchlike, long after these Lok Sabha elections are done.
