In West Bengal, attacks by wild elephants kill three locals in same week

The most recent attack took place in Jhargam district on Saturday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kolkata: Recent instances have once again brought the man-animal conflict prevalent in West Bengal to the fore. Going by the latest reports, as many as three people were killed in separate attacks on civillians by elephants in West Midnapore and Jhargam districts. Such incidents point out how urbanisation has led to more and more wild animals trespassing on human settlements.

The most recent attack has come to light from Kharikhushali area in Jhargam district where 75-year-old Nilkantha Mahato was killed by a wild jumbo on Saturday morning. Mahato was reportedly trampled by elephants when he went to respond to nature's call. His death has come to light a day after 33-year-old Sailen Mahato was killed by a wild jumbo when he stepped out of his home to attend nature's call in the early hours of Friday.

Districts such as Bankura, Jhargam and West Midnapore witness the deaths of as many as 30 people on an average every single year due to elephant attacks. According to a report by Hindustan Times, three people were trampled to death by wild elephants in separate incidents just this week. However, forest department officials continue to claim that the deaths are a result of locals not paying heed to warnings issued to them by rangers.

The Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) of Jhargam told the national daily that rangers have continuously asked locals to refrain from going into the forests to attend nature's call. DFO Basabraj Hellaichi further added that Sailen Mahto who lost his life to an elephant attack on Friday was clicking pictures of the majestic animal when he got trampled to death.

Helliachi also added that two other locals in Baghmudni area of Ayodhya hills in Puralia district, Ganesh Mahto and Nepal Mahato, incurred severe injuries when they were attacked by wild elephants earlier this month. The injured are currently undergoing treatment at the Puralia district hospital.
