Full-blown gang war erupts on streets of Delhi in Dwarka Mor, two dead

Visuals from the spot where two men were shot dead (Photo Courtesy: @AkashTy86588674) | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: The streets of the national capital resembled a Hindi movie set on Sunday afternoon after a gang war broke out in Dwarka area of south-west Delhi. Going by reports, the deadly altercation was caught on closed-circuit television (CCTV) cameras installed in the area.

Around 4 pm, two bike-borne assailants opened fire at a car in Dwarka Mor area. The people in the car returned fire, turning the suburban neighbourhood into a war zone. However, a police control room (PCR) vehicle arrived at the spot and managed to chase the criminals away. In the shootout which ensued, cops reportedly shot down one armed assailant while another was caught in the middle of the crossfire and sustained fatal injuries.

Delhi Police personnel are yet to reveal the identities of the deceased or state which gang they are a part of. A case has been registered in this regard and an investigation into this matter is underway. More details are awaited.

This is not the first time a full-blown gang war has erupted on the streets of the national capital. Earlier this month, two bike-borne assailants pulled up next to a 28-year-old man walking towards a mall after appearing at a hearing in a Saket court and pumped two bullets in his chest. The victim was later identified as one Prince, a history-sheeter with multiple cases against him.

#WATCH Delhi: A man was shot at by unknown assailants in Rohini, Sector-11, yesterday. He has been admitted to a hospital in critical condition. pic.twitter.com/Zvrx5hDqBV — ANI (@ANI) May 18, 2019

A similar instance took place in Sector 11, Rohini, earlier this month where a man was chased by armed assailants and shot multiple times over a suspected gang-rivalry. The victim, Manish, was returning home from a party with his friends when they were ambushed by armed men. As per the latest reports, Manish was admitted to a local hospital where his condition was believed to be critical. Eyewitness accounts suggest that around 17 rounds were fired at Manish.
