Kolkata rally decoded: Why the Opposition wants to make the Lok Sabha contest a sum of many battles

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee, SP president Akhilesh Yadav, Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy and DMK president MK Stalin at the Opposition rally in Kolkata, Saturday, Jan 19, 2019. | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: On the face of it the 20-plus political parties gathered at Kolkata’s Brigade Parade Ground on January 19 appeared to have a single-point agenda: oust Narendra Modi from the PM’s chair. Indeed, in speech after speech, Opposition leaders targeted the prime minister and BJP president Amit Shah.

But the question remains: Who is the face of the Opposition to take on Modi? Feeble attempts in the last few months – including one by DMK chief MK Stalin -- to prop up Rahul Gandhi as the prime ministerial face of the Opposition have backfired spectacularly, with the likes of West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and Samajwadi Party (SP) leader Akhilesh Yadav publically distancing themselves from any such portrayal of the Congress president.

So, what exactly is the Opposition’s strategy?

‘Collective leadership’

In her speech at the rally, Mamata Banerjee, the force behind the gathering, referred obliquely to the chief problem facing the Opposition – the lack of a PM’s face. “So many leaders of different parties are on the dais, it is like the country has come together against the BJP….Everyone will have to come together, we have to strongly support everyone. Collective leadership is important,” the Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief said.

But “collective leadership” can be a confusing term in the context of the Lok Sabha polls. For instance, Banerjee’s TMC, Arvind Kejriwal’s Aam Aadmi Party (AAP), and Chandrababu Naidu’s Telugu Desam Party (TDP), all part of the anti-BJP front, face electoral challenges particular to their own states.

The TDP’s support for Banerjee, to take just one example, is unlikely to sway voters in the West Bengal Lok Sabha elections.

So what’s going on?

2019 vs. 2014

Most political pundits agree that unlike 2014, this year’s Lok Sabha polls will not be a ‘wave’ election. This means even if Modi continues to be the single most popular politician in the country, the 2019 Lok Sabha election will be less presidential in nature than the last time around.

Put differently, state-level battles will play a more prominent role than 2014, especially in the Hindi heartland.

Since there is no single Opposition face for PM, BJP strategists will try to pitch the 2019 battle as Modi vs. an unreliable rest. For Opposition parties, the trick lies in breaking down the 543 Lok Sabha seats into several smaller contests and make strategically important caste coalitions.

The SP-BSP (Bahujan Samaj Party) alliance in Uttar Pradesh is a case in point. Whichever way the election campaign plays out on the ground, the math of the gathbandan remains strong, giving the Opposition in Uttar Pradesh what it lacked in both the 2014 Lok Sabha election and the 2017 Assembly polls: a head start.

Does it all add up?

In Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, alliance politics will take a backseat, and it will be a direct Congress vs. BJP tussle. But what role the Congress will play – or agree to play – in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal remains unclear.

Together, the two states contribute a whopping 122 seats to the Lok Sabha, but the challenges are different for the Opposition. In Uttar Pradesh, it is to reverse the BJP’s tide, which may have peaked in 2017. In West Bengal, on the other hand, it is to prevent the BJP, which has been historically weak in the state, from making gains.

If strategic thinking in Uttar Pradesh got two sworn enemies together, strategic thinking in West Bengal could see the TMC going it alone.

It is in the context of the state-wise battles against the BJP that the Opposition parties that got together on January 19 hope to project a united front to the voter. The logic is that a vote for, say, Mamata Banerjee has greater value than simply handing West Bengal’s Lok Sabha seats to the TMC, and there are enough serious parties within the Opposition that can together present a viable national alternative to the BJP.

Or at least that’s the layered message the Opposition seeks to convey to the voters who are wary of a fractured mandate. January 19 was the Opposition's opening salvo.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
