CSIR labs played a key role during Cylone Fani: DG

‘It was a war-like situation and our labs helped in disaster management’

It was not just the Union Ministry of Earth Sciences and the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) which played a key role in tackling the recent Cylone Fani which hit Odisha, but several labs of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) too pegged in.

“The cyclone was very devastating and apart from predictions, and where it would hit, these were done fantastically. But, what do you do before and after it hits? This is where our institutions played a key role which has been missed by many,” said CSIR Director General Shekhar C. Mande on Friday.

It begins with vulnerable sections shifted to 200 sturdy cyclone shelters built by the CSIR’s Structural Engineering Research Centre (SERC) in Chennai and implemented by the Indian Red Cross which could house up to 4,000 people at a time and keep them safe from the calamity.

After the cylone passed, it left behind a trial of death and destruction and there were many people seeking potable water and food. Here too, the CSIR institutions contributed their mite.

“The mobile water purification bus developed by Bhavnagar-based Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute (CSMCRI) housing a water purification and desalination system generating 4,000 litres per hour moved into all the affected villages,” he said. The water purification vehicle could purify any kind of contaminated water, including silt-laden left by floods, and brackish water along coastal areas to make it potable by removing viruses and bacteria, explained Mr. Mande.

Similarly, the Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysuru, and the Institute of Himalyan Bioresource Technology (IHBT) too joined the relief and rehabilitation efforts in supplying lakhs of food packets which could be stable for some time.

“It was a war-like situation and our labs helped in disaster management,” added Dr. Mande.
