Shrill campaigns and captured narratives: Why the derailed general elections don't catch my fancy anymore

Vehicle torched at Amit Shah's roadshow in West Bengal | Photo Credit: PTI

What are the exit polls saying? Who's winning? Who's losing? What about... yada yada yada!!!

Good news is that all the seven phases of voting are over and done with. Most importantly, the shrill campaigns that accompanied the canvassing of the 17th general elections are over. At least for now. But then we have the exit polls and projections of vote shares and coalition mathematics and alliance formulae. We aren't done yet! I wonder if we will be done even after the counting day on May 23.

The elections, touted as the world's largest democratic exercise, sadly assumed the form of the ugliest one as the slugfest raged ever since the Election Commission (EC) declared the phases and dates of the Lok Sabha elections. No party lagged behind in showing the rival party down while claiming the moral high ground for themselves.

The war of words that raged showed the so-called "respectable" members of various political parties use the choicest of abuses against each other. When pulled up by the EC, they would then subvert the meanings or the assumed meanings of the abuses. There were apologies, "to the Supreme Court, not to the BJP or Modi", and some never came. Agendas were manufactured to suit the polls. Claims for the impossible and doles that would puncture the economy were made... Someone said we know so many generations of our party leader's family, does "anyone is so-and-so's father". That was followed by an "XYZ is a chor", then the so-called "chor' (on whom the tag would not stick) dragged the alleged political misdeeds of a dead leader from the opposition party... Why can't the world's largest democracy also be the cleanest or the most well-behaved, is a question I often want to ask our political leaders.

Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's denial of permissions to the BJP to hold rallies in the state, possibly stemming from political insecurity, became almost farcical. PM Modi's "Didiiiiii" retaliation to Mamata's almost hurried and frenzied attempts to guard the TMC bastion, assumed comic overtones. But the political violence, deaths and threats were anything but funny.

Apart from the rancorous war of words, the unsavoury violence and that wrecking of the bust of renowned social reformer Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar showed how bad political battles can get. The violence in Bengal prompted the EC to call a halt prematurely to the election campaign in the state three days prior to the seventh and final phase of voting.

Apart from the Mani Shankar Aiyar nuggets of wisdom, we had popular Tamil actor-turned-politician Kamal Haasan of the Makkal Needhi Maiam drag the ghost of Mahatma's assassin - Nathuram Godse - into the election narrative. To muddy the waters further, some reporter asked Bhopal BJP candidate Sadhvi Pragya Thakur about her thoughts on Godse and when she voiced what she thought, oh boy! Did it turn out to be a source of major embarrassment for the BJP.

The seventh phase done, various media channels began falling over themselves trying to put forth their projections of who will likely form the government after votes are counted on May 23. And that was no less shrill too. Get ready for the EVMs to be called fraudulent, the unabashed horse-trading from all parties, the hurriedly stitched coalitions between disparate partners... the circus of electoral politics has only just begun.

As a viewer, as a journalist, I feel exhausted with the last month and a half's riotous political jamboree. So who is to be our next 'gormint'? "Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn!" a certain Mr Rhett Butler would have said.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
