Nagaland Police on high alert after hitman’s confession

Kohima: Nagaland police have beefed up security in the state and various guest houses following the arrest of a Haryana based criminal, reportedly contracted to kill a Nagaland based politician.

Condemning the plot, Nagaland Deputy Chief Minister and Minister in-charge of Home, Y Patton appealed to the Union Home ministry to constitute a committee to carry out an impartial inquiry.

In a press note issued through the Deputy Chief Minister’s Office media cell Patton said, “No Naga leader or Nagas should be threatened by any criminal syndicate in any circumstances.”

Patton said he has directed the state police to coordinate with its counterparts in New Delhi to elicit the details in order to bring out the truth and reveal those involved in paying such a huge amount to kill the Nagaland leader.

He said the state government has taken serious note of the case and assured to leave no stone in searching for the truth.

He also warned of stringent action as per the law, if any citizen from Nagaland is found to be directly or indirectly involved with the criminal syndicate.

While expressing shock, Patton said that such “blood money” killers and “assassins” were alien to Naga culture. He stated that Nagas are peace loving people and those who plan to carry out criminal acts against the citizens of Nagaland will not go unpunished.

Patton further lauded Delhi police for apprehending the hardcore criminal who has been identifed as Vijay Farmana. Farmana had taken the contract to kill a Nagaland-based politician along with his associates.

According to reports, Delhi police on Friday claimed to have arrested Farmana and two of his associates from Lucknow.

Intelligence sources were of the opinion that the assassins may planed to carry out the high profile attack in Delhi, since most of the politicians from Nagaland frequent the national capital for work.

It may be mentioned that Farmana and his associates had taken a contract in April 2019 to kill a politician in Nagaland after the ongoing Lok Sabha elections, Delhi police had said.

His aides were reportedly given a sum of Rs 80 lakh and a Ford Endeavour car for the hit job, police said. Farmana (29) was wanted in 11 cases of murder, one rape including several cases of carjacking.

Nagaland Opposition leader, T.R. Zeliang expressed shock after learning about the contract.

Taking to twitter, Zeliang said: “Investigating agencies should treat this as high profile case and find out the persons, who paid for the hit job. I would like to appeal to the Government of Nagaland and the State Home department in particular to coordinate with the @DelhiPolice in unearthing the truth behind the contract. This is an unprecedented case in the annals of Nagaland State.” (UNI)
