Exit polls 2019 suggest Modi back as PM

NL Correspondent

New Delhi, May 19

As the polling for the seventh and final phase of the 2019 Lok Sabha elections ended on Sunday, exit polls gave a clear edge to BJP-led NDA.

India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is on course to win the general election, exit polls suggest.

The BJP and the main opposition Congress party battled it out with powerful regional rivals in a bruising campaign over seven phases of polling.

Results will be announced on 23 May. Analysts warn exit polls have often been wrong in the past.

Many saw the election as a referendum on Mr Modi who won a landslide in 2014.

The EC said the polling for 542 parliamentary constituencies across states and Union Territories concluded at 6 pm. The majority mark is 272.

Polling was held in 59 seats in the last phase, which will decide the fate of 918 candidates, including Prime Minister Narendra Modi who is seeking re-election from Varanasi.

Under the provisions of Section 126-A of the Representation of the Peoples Act, 1951, exit polls could not be conducted and publicised by means of print and electronic media or dissemination in any other manner till 6.30 pm.

As per the Election Commission, 7.27 crore voters took part in the Lok Sabha elections. Of these 3.47 crore were women and 3,377 were persons of third gender.

What are the exit polls saying?

Four exit polls saw big wins for the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA), predicting that it would win anywhere between 280 and 315 seats, far more than the Congress party.

However, a Nielsen-ABP news channel poll suggested that the BJP alliance would win 267 seats, falling short of a majority.

This prediction comes despite its projection that the party would lose heavily in the bellwether state of Uttar Pradesh, which sends 80 MPs to parliament, more than any other.

In 2014 the BJP won 71 of the state’s seats, and the poll suggests it will lose as many as 51 of those seats to powerful regional parties.

The election began on 11 April and was held in seven phases for security and logistical reasons. With 900 million eligible voters, it is the world’s biggest exercise in democracy.

Political parties have not commented on the projections so far. As voting ended, there was a flurry of meetings by opposition leaders, sparking speculation.

What were the key issues this election?

With farming in crisis, unemployment on the rise and growing fears that India is heading for a recession, he economy is perhaps the biggest issue.

Under Mr Modi, the world’s sixth-largest economy has lost some of its momentum. Growth hovers around 7% and a leaked government report claims the unemployment rate is the highest it has been since the 1970s.

A crop glut and declining commodity prices have led to stagnant farm incomes, leaving many farmers saddled with debt.

Many also see this election as a battle for India’s identity and the state of its minorities.

And national security is in the spotlight after a suicide attack by a Pakistan-based terror group killed at least 40 paramilitary police in Kashmir in February.

India then launched unprecedented air strikes in Pakistan, prompting Pakistan to respond and bringing the two countries to the brink of war.
