Two wanted criminals killed in shootout in Dwarka

Officials deployed on PCR duty killed one of them; 2 others managed to escape

Two wanted criminals were shot dead after a fierce gun battle on a busy road beneath Dwarka Mor metro station on Sunday evening.

The police said that a wanted criminal identified as Parveen Gehlot, a resident of Nawada, was in his car when three criminals in another car intercepted him at a traffic signal beneath Dwarka Mor metro station and opened fire at him.

Police fire 3 rounds

Police officials in a PCR van near the metro station also fired three rounds at the criminals and shot one of them dead. The shooter has been identified as Vikas Dalal, a wanted criminal.

“The incident took place at 4 p.m. when the occupants of a black car opened fire at a white car from inside the vehicle. Later, one of the occupants with a pistol in his hand came out and shot the car driver from a close range. Total 15 rounds were fired at the man who was seated in the white car,” said a police officer.

Gunshot sounds on the busy street created chaos as passers-by and motorists ran for their lives. Constable Naresh who was deployed on PCR duty at Dwarka Mor metro station challenged the criminals from the other side of the road. “One of the shooter opened fire at Naresh and in retaliation he opened fire. While one of them died on the spot, the other two managed to flee in their car,” said a police officer.

Joint CP (Western Range) Madhup Tiwari said both the deceased are criminals and have several cases of murders, extortion and robberies registered against them at various police stations in Delhi and Haryana.

He added that Vikas Dalal was the most wanted criminal and has been on the run since he escaped from the custody of Haryana Police from a court in Faridabad in 2018.

Cop to be rewarded

“The policeman who shot dead the criminal at the spot will be awarded and his name will be recommended for the out-of-turn promotion,” said Mr. Tiwari.

DCP (Dwarka) Anto Alphonse, said that a case under IPC section 302 (murder) has been registered at Bindapur police station against two persons who accompanied the shooter, who was shot dead by policeman.

“We have identified the other two shooters. The murder was a fallout of a property dispute between the two gangs for the last several months,” said the DCP.
