Now, a film on Indian Navy's Karachi attack

Bollywood

Atul Kasbekar

Bhushan Kumar; Tanuj Garg; Atul Kasbekar; Swati Iyer Chawla; Razneesh Ghai

Operation Python

Ram Madhvani

Indian Air Force

Today, war dramas are vying for attention with biopics and sequels but so far, the efforts have largely been focused on the Army and the Air Force. Now, a mainstreamfi lm is being planned around Operation Trident, one of the most audacious naval attacks the world has ever witnessed. Conducted on the night of December 4 and 5, during the Indo-Pakistan war of 1971, it targeted the Karachi Harbour. As a tribute to its success, December 4 is celebrated every year as Navy Day. The fi lm is provisionally titled Navy Day and expected to go on the fl oors by mid-2020.Bhushan Kumar, who is producing the lavishly-mounted film with Tanuj Garg,and Swati Iyer Chawla, points out that this was one of the most successful operations in modern naval history after World War II. “Our Navy suffered no losses and caused heavy casualties on the enemy side. It’s an extraordinary tale of strategy, thrill and bravery,” he avers.Operation Trident was planned under the leadership of Admiral Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda and masterminded by then Fleet Operations Officer of the Navy, Gulab Mohanlal Hiranandani. For the first time, anti-ship missiles in combat were used in this region. The Karachi Harbour was the headquarters of Pakistan’s Navy and almost its entire fleet was based there in 1971. According to reports, a minesweeper, a destroyer, a cargo vessel carrying ammunition, and fuel storage tanks were eliminated, along with another destroyer that was badly damaged and had to be eventually scrapped. It was followed byon December 8 and 9, which was another success.And while the attacks will undoubtedly be the film’s USP, Navy Day will also focus on how a bunch of people came together, their inter-personal dynamics and the high-level strategising in utmost secrecy, that resulted in a milestone achievement in the country’s military history. According to a source, the script should be locked by August-September with extensive research and interviews with those who were a part of the operation, after which casting will start, followed by three-four months of exhaustive prep. It will be directed by ad filmmaker Razneesh Ghai.“After(Neerja) and Suresh Triveni (Tumhari Sulu), we are launching another leading figure from Indian advertising. He’s an Army kid who shot the campaign to commemorate the 84th anniversary of theand motivate youngsters to reach for the skies. With the panache of his story-telling, I’m sure Razneesh will bring a new approach to the genre,” asserts Tanuj, adding that the film will be shot in Mumbai and Delhi with the action scenes picturised at an international location. Navy Day is looking at a late 2020 or early 2021 unveiling.
