Xiaomi Redmi Note 7S India launch today: Expected specs, India price, how to watch livestream

Xiaomi is all set to launch the Redmi Note 7S in India today. The launch will take place via livestream. Interested consumers can watch the launch livestream on Xiaomi India's official website aka Mi.com. Click on this link to watch the livestream of the Redmi Note 7S India launch. You can also watch the Redmi Note 7S livestream on Youtube. Click here. Ahead of the launch Xiaomi India has confirmed several details about the Redmi Note 7S. The company has revealed that the Redmi Note 7S will come with 48MP camera like the Redmi Note 7 Pro, glass body, Redmi Note 7 series like design with dot drop notch.

Xiaomi India has also confirmed that the Redmi Note 7S will be able to shoot great low-light pictures. The company has posted several camera samples shot with the Redmi Note 7S. The camera samples shot in daylight appear with great details and also colours. The low-light camera samples suggest that similar to the Redmi Note 7 and the Redmi Note 7 Pro the Redmi Note 7S will also come with a dedicated Night mode that will help consumers click detailed pictures with spot on colours in low-light situations.

Rumours suggest that the Redmi Note 7S in India is the Redmi Note 7 in China. If this turns out to be true the Redmi Note 7S will sport much better camera setup when compared to the Redmi Note 7 India variant. The Redmi Note 7 in China comes with a 48MP + 5MP camera setup. In comparison, the Redmi Note 7 in India is slightly toned down. The Redmi Note 7 in India incorporates 12MP + 2MP camera configuration on the rear panel, while on the front the phone includes a 13MP selfie camera which is also the case for the Redmi Note 7 Pro.

As far as the Redmi Note 7S India price is concerned, we believe it to be slightly higher than the Redmi Note 7 but lower than the Pro version of the Redmi Note 7 Pro. In India, the Redmi Note 7 sells for a starting price of Rs 9,999. This is for the base model with 3GB RAM + 32GB storage. There's also a 4GB RAM + 64GB storage model of the Note 7 that comes for Rs 11,999. Meanwhile, the Redmi Note 7 Pro base model with 4GB RAM sells for Rs 13,999 while the India price of the top-end model of the Pro is Rs 16,999. Xiaomi has confirmed that the Redmi Note 7S will be available for grabs on Flipkart.

We will need to wait until the livestream ends to know the price and the availability of the Redmi Note 7S in India.
