Top Asian News 3:58 a.m. GMT

JAKARTA, Indonesia (AP) — Indonesia's President Joko Widodo has been elected for a second term, official results showed Tuesday, in a victory over a would-be strongman who aligned himself with Islamic hardliners. Official counting was completed just before midnight and the Election Commission announced the formal result early Tuesday. It said Widodo won 55.5% of the vote in the April 17 election to 45.5% for his challenger, ultra-nationalist former general Prabowo Subianto. Thousands of police and soldiers are on high alert in the capital Jakarta, anticipating protests from supporters of Subianto, who refuses to concede defeat. The Election Commission's headquarters in central Jakarta are barricaded with razor wire and heavily guarded.

WELLINGTON, New Zealand (AP) — Crews in New Zealand on Tuesday reentered an underground coal mine where a methane explosion killed 29 workers more than eight years ago, raising hopes among family members that they might find bodies and new evidence that leads to criminal charges. Anna Osborne, whose husband Milton was killed in the explosion, said the families had been fighting for this ever since the Pike River mine exploded. "We did it. We won," she said. She said it had been a "hugely emotional" day for the families and it was a moving experience to watch people going back into the mine.

BEIJING (AP) — Hong Kong retiree Lee Wai-man loves pork fresh from the market but eats a lot less now that the price has jumped as China struggles with a deadly swine disease that has sent shockwaves through global meat markets. China produces and consumes two-thirds of the world's pork, but output is plunging as Beijing destroys herds and blocks shipments to stop African swine fever. Importers are filling the gap by buying pork as far away as Europe, boosting prices by up to 40% and causing shortages in other markets. "I'm a fresh-pork lover, but it's too expensive," Lee, 87, said as she shopped at a Hong Kong market.

Story continues

KATHMANDU, Nepal (AP) — Apa Sherpa has stood on top of the world more times than all but one other person. Now he wants to make sure no one feels compelled to follow in his footsteps. As a boy growing up in Nepal, Sherpa dreamed of becoming a doctor, but poverty and lack of education steered him to a far more dangerous path : Working as a guide on Mount Everest, carrying climbing equipment and helping foreign mountaineers scale the world's tallest peak. Now retired in the U.S., Sherpa returns every year to his roots in the foothills of the Himalayas to provide financial assistance to village schools and try to show children from the Sherpa minority group that they have options in life.

KATHMANDU, Nepal (AP) — A Sherpa mountaineer has extended his record for successful climbs of Mount Everest with his 24th ascent of the world's highest peak. Nepal Department of Tourism official Mira Acharya said guide Kami Rita reached the top of the 8,850-meter (29,035-foot) peak Tuesday with other climbers. It was his second time at the summit in a week. He climbed to the top on May 15 then returned to base camp before climbing again this week. The 49-year-old Sherpa guide is closer to his target of 25 ascents of Everest before retiring from high mountain climbing.

BEIJING (AP) — For four decades, Beijing has cajoled or pressured foreign companies to hand over technology. And its trading partners say if that didn't work, China stole what it wanted. Communist leaders deflected demands for change until foreign frustration erupted into a showdown with President Donald Trump. He sent shockwaves through their export industries by slapping punitive tariffs of up to 25% on Chinese goods. Europe, Japan and other trading partners object to Trump's tactics but echo American complaints. They say Beijing's tactics violate its market-opening commitments under the World Trade Organization. American prosecutors go further. They say the Communist Party is the ringleader of a global industrial spying operation.

Trump administration sanctions against Huawei have begun to bite even though their dimensions remain unclear. U.S. companies that supply the Chinese tech powerhouse with computer chips saw their stock prices slump Monday, and Huawei faces decimated smartphone sales with the anticipated loss of Google's popular software and services. The U.S. move escalates trade-war tensions with Beijing, but also risks making China more self-sufficient over time. Here's a look at what's behind the dispute and what it means. ___ WHAT'S THIS ABOUT? Last week, the U.S. Commerce Department placed Huawei its so-called Entity List , effectively barring U.S. firms from selling it technology without government approval.

TOKYO (AP) — Plans for U.S. President Donald Trump to check out the ancient Japanese sport of sumo wrestling during a state visit are raising security issues for organizers. Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is eager to have Trump and his wife Melania attend a tournament May 26 and hand over a trophy to the winner. But Japanese media reports say security needs mean those who have already bought tickets to 1,000 seats near the ring have to be checked in advance. Ring-side seats are coveted for sumo, an art-like sport that dates back to the 17th century. The Japan Sumo Association declined comment Tuesday.

SRINAGAR, India (AP) — A prominent rights group in Indian-controlled Kashmir is advocating for the United Nations to establish a commission of inquiry to investigate what it calls the endemic use of torture by government forces amid a decades-long anti-India uprising in the disputed region. The Jammu-Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society on Monday released a detailed report saying India is using torture as a "matter of policy" and "instrument of control" in Kashmir, where rebels have been fighting against Indian rule since 1989. "Torture is the most under-reported human rights violation perpetrated by the state," the report noted. "Due to legal, political and moral impunity extended to the armed forces, not a single prosecution has taken place in any case of human rights violations" in the region, the report said.

SYDNEY (AP) — Prime Minister Scott Morrison looked set on Monday to form a majority government as vote counting from Australia's weekend election allayed fears that his conservative coalition may have to rule in the minority following its shock victory. The coalition was returned to power in a stunning result on Saturday, after opinion polls and odds-makers had tipped the opposition Labor Party to win. The outcome ranks as Australia's biggest election upset since 1993, when Labor Prime Minister Paul Keating was returned to power. With 76 seats in the House of Representatives needed for majority rule, figures from the Australian Electoral Commission on Monday showed that with around 84% of votes counted, the coalition was on target to win 78 seats — an increase of five after going into the election as a minority government.
