All the latest world news in one place

The international stories making headlines around the world.

Photo: Photo / AFP

Google cuts Android to Huawei

Google has barred phone maker Huawei from some updates to the Android operating system, dealing a blow to the Chinese firm.

New designs of Huawei smartphones are set to lose access to some Google apps.

The move comes after the Trump administration added Huawei to a list of companies that American firms cannot trade with unless they have a licence.

In a statement, Google said it was "complying with the order and reviewing the implications".

Huawei declined to comment.

-BBC

Coalition secures outright victory in Australian election

Australia's Liberal-National coalition secured an outright parliamentary majority on Monday, following a shock election victory, allowing Prime Minister Scott Morrison to progress his legislative agenda without the support of independents.

Morrison's coalition defied forecasts to be re-elected on Saturday in what he called a political miracle.

The Australian Electoral Commission said Morrison's coalition has won 76 seats in Australia's parliament, which is comprised of 151 elected lawmakers.

The AEC said the coalition is ahead in one of the three seats that have not been declared.

Respected ABC election analyst Antony Green said the Morrison's coalition will retain its lead in at least one more seat, allowing it to select a parliamentary speaker and still retain a majority.

The result sent Australian banking, property and health-related stocks to an 11-year high as investors cheered.

One of Morrison's first tasks after being sworn in will be a cabinet reshuffle after the retirement of several front-benchers. The personnel shift will be closely watched for signs of policy changes.

-Reuters

Modi closes in on victory in Indian poll

India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi's BJP is on course to win the general election, exit polls suggest.

The BJP and the main opposition Congress party battled it out with powerful regional rivals in a bruising campaign over seven phases of polling.

Results will be announced later this week.

Many saw the election as a referendum on Mr Modi who won a landslide in 2014.

A party or coalition needs 272 seats in parliament to form a government.

Four exit polls saw big wins for the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance, predicting that it would win anywhere between 280 and 315 seats, far more than the Congress party.

- BBC

Trump issues new threat to Iran

President Trump has warned Iran not to threaten the United States.

In a strongly-worded tweet, Mr Trump said that if Iran wants to fight it will be the official end of the country.

Last week when asked if the US was prepared to declare war on Iran Mr Trump said "I hope not".

The US has recently deployed an aircraft carrier and bombers to the region to counter what it says is a growing threat from Iran.

- ABC

Life support battle over tetraplegic man draws to an end

A man whose case has been central to the right-to-die debate in France for over a decade is set to have his treatment stopped this week.

Vincent Lambert, 42, has been in a vegetative state since a motorcycle accident in 2008.

His family have been fiercely divided over his care - his wife wants his feeding tubes withdrawn and his parents insist his life should continue.

The case went as far as the European Court of Human Rights.

Europe's top court upheld the decision of a French court to allow him to be taken off life support. However, doctors then did not carry out the plan - amid security concerns raised by Vincent Lambert's father, who feared there was a plan to kidnap him.

Now a new medical team have moved forward with withdrawing his care, as further appeals have been dismissed.

- BBC
