Dwarka Mor shooting case: Brave constable who killed assailant receives all-round praise

The firing session led to panic among the locals and the people who were returning from home. | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: On Sunday, a Delhi Police constable was hailed as a hero by his colleagues after a shoot out took place near the Dwarka Mod Metro Station in southwest Delhi.

The 56-year-old constable, Naresh Kumar with 30 years of service has always been a regular policeman. Reportedly, on Sunday, Kumar and his colleague ASI Prem Singh were confronted with armed criminals. According to a report in the Times of India (TOI), with people running for cover there could have been multiple injuries during the firing.

The firing session led to panic among the locals and the people who were returning from home. Reportedly, around 4 pm, two bike-borne assailants opened fire at a car in the area and the people in the car returned fire, turning the neighborhood into a war zone.

Meanwhile, the local police vehicle arrived at the spot and managed to chase the criminals away. Local residents told TOI that they heard the gunshot and suddenly people began running to find a cover. Meanwhile, one person said that might be there is a terror attack.

Meanwhile, another resident added if the police did not reach in time, the criminals could have done anything. As soon as the police reached the spot, Naresh hid behind a pillar and shot the criminal, he shot thrice and the bullet hit the criminal in the face, arm and neck.

In the shootout which ensued, cops reportedly shot down one armed assailant while another was caught in the middle of the crossfire and sustained injuries. Naresh joined the forces in 1991 and he is a resident of southwest Delhi and he has been in the police PCR unit for about two years now.

The Joint Commissioner of the operations told TOI that their PCR personnel showed exemplary courage and reacted swiftly to the situation showing presence of mind and excellent counter-firing things.
