Islamic State modules: National Investigation Agency conducts raids at 10 locations in Tamil Nadu

NIA conducts raids in 10 locations in Tamil Nadu. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Chennai: The National Investigation Agency on Monday conducted 10 raids in the state of Tamil Nadu after getting a tip off about possible Islamic State terror modules operating in the state. The case was earlier registered by the Tamil Nadu police.

The raids are related to the alleged setting up of terror modules by the Islamic State, where they called it 'martyrdom is our only motto'. This got the National Investigation Agency alarmed as they heard that several terrorists were trying to target a section of Hindu leaders, particularly from organisations such as the Hindu Munnani and also engaging in activities such as a collection of arms and ammunition and carrying out terrorist activities in Tamil Nadu. The information and the case were transferred to NIA.

The raids were conducted at Ramanathapuram, Salem and Chidambaram on Monday.

Tamil Nadu: NIA conducts raids at 10 places in the state in connection with a case filed on January 8 against eight people for allegedly supporting ISIS.

The raids are being conducted at Ramanathapuram, Salem and Chidambaram. pic.twitter.com/7GIBaIQUmt — ANI (@ANI) May 20, 2019

Meanwhile, the NIA is also reportedly investigating how close a 29-year-old youth from Palakkad, Riyaz Aboobacker, came to executing a 'suicide attack' in Kerala. The probe agency had earlier claimed that it had foiled a home-grown terror plot last month. As per The Hindu report, the NIA was expected to probe whether the suspected had tried to assemble an explosive device, carried out recce for potential targets, conducted experiments with timer devices or attempted to recruit any person as a suicide bomber.

Last month, NIA had conducted raids at the houses of four people in north Kerala in connection with investigations into the Easter Day bombings in Sri Lanka, in which 250 people were killed, and the ISIS had claimed responsibility. Reports had suggested that the NIA had decided to carry out searches at the residences in Kasargod and Palakkad after evidence surfaced that the four individuals had allegedly followed the activities of Zahran Hashim on social media.

Sri Lankan authorities believe that Hashim was the mastermind behind the Easter Sunday attacks. Aboobacker was one of the youths that was allegedly influenced by the ideologies of Hashim and purportedly planned to carry out a similar suicide attack in Kerala.
