BJP worker's killing:Chouhan says fallout of political rivalry

A war of words has broken out between the BJP and the ruling Congress in Madhya Pradesh over the killing of a BJP worker on Sunday during polling for the final phase of Lok Sabha elections in Indore district.

BJP national vice president and former Madhya Pradesh chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan Monday alleged the party worker, Nemichand Tanvar, 60, was killed over a "political rivalry and because he had voted for the BJP".

Tanvar was shot dead Sunday evening at Palia village, about 20 km away from here, allegedly by Congress leader Arun Sharma and his two sons, Pankaj and Navin, police had said.

All the three are absconding.

On Monday, Chouhan visited late Tanvar's wife and sons, who had sustained pellet injuries during the incident, at hospital here.

Later, talking to reporters Chouhan alleged "Congress people Sunday asked Tanvar to whom he had voted for. When he replied that he had voted for the BJP, he was beaten up and threatened with dire consequences after 5 pm. He was then shot dead".

He alleged that BJP workers in the state are not only being terrorised and threatened, but are also being "murdered".

Alleging a "series of murders of BJP workers in the state", Chouhan said, "Chief Minister Kamal Nath should understand that we will not allow Madhya Pradesh to become Bengal".

On the other hand, the Congress has circulated a purported picture of one of the murder case accused, Pankaj, standing on dais with BJP Lok Sabha candidate from Indore, Shankar Lalwani.

When asked about this, Chouhan said that Congressmen can make anything viral on social media.

"Such tactics will not reduce severity of the crime. Everyone knows the truth," he said.

Chouhan also announced a Rs five lakh compensation for Tanvar's kin from the state party unit.

He also warned of protests by the BJP in the event of delay in arresting the accused trio by police.

State Congress spokesman Santosh Singh Goutam said, "Tanvar was not murdered because of a political rivalry but due to a personal dispute".

He alleged that accused Pankaj is associated with the Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) and had campaigned for the BJP in recently-held Lok Sabha elections.

He accused the BJP of levelling false allegations against the Congress over the killing.

Meanwhile, Tanvar's supporters staged a road blockade on Indore-Ujjain road before police dispersed them.

Senior Superintendent of Police Ruchivardhan Mishra told PTI, "Police are probing the incident from all angles. We are also trying to find whether Tanvar and the accused persons had any old rivalry".

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
