Congress workers who got EC to order re-polling in Kasargod booths, attacked with crude bombs

Congress workers who got EC to order repolling in Kasargod booths, attacked with crude bombs I Photo credit: Times Now | Photo Credit: Times Now

Kasargod: In Kerala, where pollsters expect the Congress-led United Democratic Front (UDF) to register a definitive victory in the state, two workers from the Congress party were attacked.

The houses of the two Congress workers who had complained to the Election Commission (EC) alleging bogus voting were attacked and vandalized and bombs were hurled at their residences.

The EC had ordered re-polling based on the complaint of two Congress workers who also furnished CCTV footages of alleged bogus voting at two booths in Pilathara. Congress has alleged CPI (M) to be behind the attack.

The UDF (Kerala) is likely to post a victory in 15 out of the total 20 seats in Kerala, as per the exit poll. On the other hand, the CPI(M)-led LDF is expected to win four seats in the 2019 general election, four less than what it had won five years ago.

Kasargod is one of the key strongholds of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) since 1967. Congress has only won the seat thrice since 1957. The seat witnessed 80.57 per cent voter turnout in 2019.

CPI(M) incumbent and veteran parliamentarian P Karunakaran won the seat in a close battle with Congress candidate T Siddique with a margin of 6,921 votes.

In 2019, CPI (M) fielded KP Sathishchandran against Congress candidate Rajmohan Unnithan.

Interestingly, the Times Now-VMR exit poll 2019 sees BJP-led NDA to finally open its account, by winning one seat in the state this year.

In 2014, the UDF had won 12 seats out of 20 seats in Kerala. The Congress-led alliance is likely to register a swing of three seats, according to the Times Now-VMR exit poll. The Left Democratic Front (LDF), meanwhile, had won eight seats in the 2014 general elections. It has registered a negative swing of four seats in this year's national election, according to the exit poll.
