Indian Wife and her Father killed by In-Laws’ over Dowry

They were allegedly beaten with a hammer before both were strangled

A 24-year-old Indian wife and her father were beaten to death by the woman’s in-laws and their family on Saturday, May 18, 2019.

The victims, who were from Etah in Uttar Pradesh, were murdered over a dowry dispute.

Savitri Devi and her father Rakshpal Gupta, aged 70, had gone to her husband’s house in an attempt to resolve the ongoing dowry disagreement between the families.

As a result of the dowry issues, Savitri had left her husband’s house. According to the police, she has been staying with her parents since.

On May 18, 2019, the father and daughter went to the house to compromise.

However, things did not work out and they were allegedly attacked by Savitri’s in-laws and their family.

They were allegedly beaten with a hammer before both were strangled to death. Police said the incident occurred at around 2 am.

Savitri’s brother, Rahul Gupta, filed a police complaint. According to his complaint, his sister had got married in 2016.

Since being married, the Indian wife had been physically and mentally abused by her in-laws and husband for dowry. This included Rs. 5 Lakh (£5,600) in cash and a motorcycle.

Mr Gupta explained that the matter had been reported to the village council, however, they were not ready to resolve the issue.

An FIR was registered against nine people under sections 498-A (Husband or relative of a husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty), 304-B (Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage), and 302 (murder) of the IPC.

The case was also registered under section three and four of the Dowry Act.

Three of the nine suspects were arrested when police officers visited the house.

They included the victim’s mother-in-law Maina Devi, father-in-law Girish Chand and her husband’s uncle Bhagwan Das.

However, the six others, including her husband Paras Gupta, have gone on the run.

At the scene, police officers recovered the rope and hammer that were used by the suspects.

SSP Swapnil Mamgain explained that both bodies were sent for a post-mortem. He added that they are conducting raids in order to arrest the accused.

Committing horrific acts of violence for dowry is something which has become very common in India. There have been several cases which have come to light.

A man from Hyderabad harassed and beat his wife for more dowry. When she failed to provide it, he beat her to death with a hammer.

He then put her body into a water drum before dumping it in a forest.

Police later found the body and the suspect was arrested. He was convicted and jailed for life.
