Wide angle

With a computer science background Srivatsa Shandilya is pursuing his love for photography straddling the world of IT, films and dance

Srivatsa Shandilya realised his passion for the camera, but was determined to get a degree in Computer Science. He joined BMS College of Engineering for an evening course, so that he could have the day for his photography assignments. “Doesn’t this explain my passion for the camera?” he says when asked why he did not take up an IT job. “I loved to delve into computers, as my enthusiasm for the camera grew.”

Talking about his childhood observing his father taking pictures, Srivatsa says, “My father, K Ramachandra worked as a photographer with Karnataka Film Development Corporation. He did photo-shoots as a freelancer later for many government departments. In fact most Gandhinagar theatre owners wanted only Ramachandra’s photos for their functions. His spillover assignments came to me, when I was studying SSLC. I developed a passion for photography, learning on the job with my father as my mentor.”

A series of interesting incidents led Srivatsa into becoming a photographer for magazines, films and classical dance over the last 35 years.

After getting a vocational board diploma in Computer Science, Srivatsa started a circulating library, which was quite popular. “When I flipped through film magazines such as Stardust, I wondered why we could not shoot film stars for local magazines or extend services for film stars to possess personal albums.”

Srivatsa approached Shivrajkumar during the shoot of Mr. Putsami in the 1990s and told the star that he wanted to shoot his portfolio. “This was the first of my film personality shoots at Bangalore University. I was surprised when Shivrajkumar said ‘Your angles have made me look like any Bollywood hero, you will do well with the camera’,” recollects Srivatsa.

The next thing to help Srivatsa on his journey was local magazines opening up to centrespreads. “When I heard that SL Bhyrappa was being featured, I jumped at the chance to photograph the great writer. I convinced the then editors of Sudha magazine to use my pictures.”

The appreciation that followed formed the backbone of his continued inspiration. “I worked with actors such as Ramya, Rakshita and Shilpa Shetty when she was part of Kannada films such as Auto Shankar, Preesod Tappa and Ondaagona Ba.”

Srivatsa’s love for computers may not have made him look for a job in the IT industry, but his love for photography did. “In the early 1990s when the IT boom was about to take off, cyber-media and computer assembling became the need of the hour. That was when the Boston-based IDG was looking for professionals in photography for technology-related photos and I joined them.”

Computer magazines and R & D centres opened up for this space and Srivatsa stepped in with his camera. His understanding of the cyber-world and pictures helped people assemble computers. “I also took pictures of international leaders visiting the IT world.”

Computers gave him exposure and weekends were devoted to dance recitals. “Colourful and challenging that they seemed, the subject only widened my lens. In the last 15 years I have shot dance productions and the dancers in Bengaluru. So from analogue, digital to creative dance photography I have been part of the changing scenario,” says Srivatsa who is also the founder of International Art and Cultural Foundation that has recently completed five years of cultural programming.

This column features those who choose to veer off the beaten track
