Kamal and Godse: Let’s debate without losing it

If Indian politics is a theatre, Tamil Nadu is a multiplex. Where cigarette flicks and dark glasses are the perennial symbols of style and substance, sycophancy does a tandava over psephology. And with the players ensconced in the ministerial thrones in Delhi, it is no longer just a southern delight. Arun Ram, Resident Editor, The Times of India, Tamil Nadu, who alternates between the balcony and the front row, says it incites as much as it excites. During the intervals, he chews on a bit of science and such saner things. LESS ... MORE

In the opening scene of the Gautham Menon movie ‘Vettaiyadu Vilayadu’, rowdy Royapuram Mani asks for deputy commissioner of police (played by Kamal Haasan) Raghavan’s eye. Raghavan goes to the rowdy’s den, hands him a penknife and challenges him to scoop out his eye. To thunderous applause in the theatre, Kamal parts his eyelids with his fingers and utters in his trademark baritone: Edrraa…

In real life, a few days ago, Tamil Nadu dairy minister Rajenthra Bhalaji asked for Kamal’s tongue. Now imagine Kamal pushing open the gates of the minister’s house, walking up to him and sticking his tongue out at the minister. I can’t stop laughing at that image.

But this is no laughing matter. We have enough loose tongues and uncouth elements in public life, but a minister in the state cabinet – however genuinely boorish he may be – shooting his mouth in such a manner speaks of his party’s poor leadership – or a complete lack of it. I wouldn’t go into the political correctness of Kamal’s statement referring to Nathuram Godse (all historical facts don’t sound politically correct today) that the first extremist in independent India was a Hindu (In the lead article on this page, Justice K Chandru goes into the merits of the statement). Insults are an integral part of politics, but such impertinence shines light on the poverty of our average politician’s imagination.

And we aren’t even talking about ‘when insults had class’ (My favourite is the exchange between Winston Churchill and Lady Astor at a dinner, when she told him, “Winston, if you were my husband, I would poison your coffee,’ and Churchill, without batting an eyelid, retorted, “Madam, if I were your husband, I would drink it).

There are certainly several politicians in other parties who can outscore Bhalaji in the University of Impertinence, just that he seems to be taking a test with zero supervision and generous (dis)grace marks. We know how the cowering gentlemen of the AIADMK kept their mouth shut (and thereby their foot away from there) when J Jayalalithaa was at the helm. All that pent-up crudity seems to have found an outlet as the leadership is more bothered about survival than collective civility.

Add to that extreme eagerness to be more loyal than the king (you-know-who), and the result is such AIADMK leaders turning guardian angels of Hinduism (apparently the affront to the Hindu religion got Bhalaji bristling). We’ve seen fisheries minister D Jayakumar doing this for Edappadi K Palaniswami, and H Raja as the sole representatives of all Hindus in the world, and not many take them seriously nowadays because they overdid it.

And then, our politicians have this amusing trait – an antithesis of political correctness – of being receptive in private and intolerant in public. The sad part is that even the well-educated and modern-looking politicians in the state cease to be tolerant once they are on a public platform. Yes, it’s the constituency, stupid, but reverse hypocrisy is still hypocrisy. It’s sad.

Kamal has every right to say what he did. So does Pragya Thakur, who called Godse a patriot (for many people in this country, he is; so what, let’s debate that). Debate, not another round of mudslinging. I am sure, there are millions like me who look forward to that day when we all could speak our convictions – in a civil way, that is – and engage ourselves in intense debates fuelled by historical facts and perceptive analyses. We will still hurt each other, but we will not look as uncouth as Royapuram Mani.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
