'Gopinath Munde was murdered, 2014 general elections rigged': US hacker at London event

In 2017, Aam Aadmi Party MLA Saurabh Bhardwaj claimed that anyone knowing a "secret code" can tamper with the EVMs. It would be interesting to note his party’s reaction as according to the expert the 2015 elections was also rigged in which AAP magnificently emerged victorious. "These EVMs are manufactured in Bharat Electronics Ltd. & Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. under very strict supervisory&security conditions. There are rigorous Standard Operating Procedures observed under supervision of a Committee of technical experts constituted in 2010," it further said. On the event being organised in London, EC said , "It is being separately examined as to what legal action can and should be taken in the matter." In its first reactions to the shocking statements of the hacker, the BJP has said the Congres is making a hacking horror show of their possible defeat in the upcoming elections. MA Naqvi: Kapil Sibal didn't go by accident. He was sent by Congress, by Rahul Gandhi&Sonia Gandhi.Jin logon ko bhi desh aur desh ki loktantrik vyavastha ko badnaam karne ki supari di gayi hai,us supari ko lekar yaha se koi dakiya to jaana chahiye na. Two wo dakiya bheja gaya hai https://t.co/TtMEbzcYyu — ANI (@ANI) January 21, 2019

London: In what could have immense political ramifications, an alleged US-based cyber expert on Monday claimed that BJP leader Gopinath Munde did not die of cardiac arrest during a road accident but was murdered in 2014. Syed Shuja who claims being a part of the team which designed Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs) in India has also alleged that the 2014 general elections which was swept by the BJP were completely rigged. Shuja demonstrated the hacking through a video conference in an event organised by the Indian Journalists' Association (Europe) in London this evening. Notably, the event was also being attended by senior Congress leader Kapil Sibal whose party has often alleged that the EVMs in the country were tampered by the ruling BJP in most elections, a claim which the Election Commission has always outrightly rejected. The hacker in his sensational claims has said the elections in Maharashtra, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, and Gujarat was also rigged. He said the results were swerved in favour of AAP.
