48-year-old man gets jail for rest of natural life for raping minor

BOKARO: A local POCSO court on Monday awarded life sentence till death to one person and 20 years rigorous imprisonment to his associate in a two-year-old rape case of a 13-year-old girl. The incident occurred on May 22, 2017 in Swang under Gomia police station area.Special judge of POCSO court, Ranjit Kumar, held both Mohammad Farid Khan (48) and Santosh Kumar (32) guilty. Both are residents of Hazarimoad in Swang under Gomia block.“Court awarded life imprisonment till the end of his natural life to Khan and 20 years rigorous imprisonment to Kumar under Sections 376D, 354B, 450 and 506 of IPC, and Sections 6 and 10 of POCSO Act,” Sanjay Kumar Jha, special public prosecutor, POCSO, said.The court slapped a fine of Rs 30,000 each on Khan and Kumar. The amount collected will be given to the survivor. “The court also awarded imprisonment under other sections to both the convict. Those sentences will run concurrently. In total, the statements of 12 witnesses were recorded before the court, including those of the younger brother and sister of the survivor,” Jha added.Jha said, “The incident happened when the survivor was at home with her brother and sister. Her parents were not at home then. The men came to the survivor’s house on a motorbike. Khan and Kumar entered the house while the third person, who was riding the motorbike, didn’t enter the house. He was wearing a helmet and couldn’t be identified.”He added, “Khan took the survivor to a different room while Kumar confined her siblings in another. Khan raped the girl by threatening to kill her siblings. After her parents returned home, the survivor narrated her ordeal to them.”In another incident, Giridih district judge Kumar Dinesh on Monday awarded life imprisonment to seven members of a family in connection to a sensational murder case of one Rajesh Yadav in 2013. Yadav was beaten to death at Anta Bangla ground at Station Road owing to a past dispute, additional public prosecutor Manoj Singh said. The court held Sachin Yadav, Vikki Yadav, Chiku Yadav, Babu Yadav, Pudiya Yadav, Titu Yadav, and Rajesh Yadav guilty of the crime. The deceased Yadav was admitted to Rims after the incident, but he succumbed to his injuries.
