Judge’s security squad clashes with toll plaza staff

Toll plaza’s in-charge claims the judge’s squad manhandled the staff. PHOTO: FILE

HYDERABAD: The legal fraternity of Jamshoro district protested on Monday decrying alleged misbehaviour with District and Sessions Judge Jamshoro Jahangir Ahmed Dayo and his security squad at M9 Motorway's toll plaza in Jamshoro district. Led by advocates Mir Ahmed Mangrio, Agha Kausar and Nisar Ahmed Chandio, they staged a sit-in protest on the Indus Highway blocking the movement of traffic as they demanded registration of FIR against the staff of Frontier Works Organisation (FWO).



"We can't let this hooliganism happen. The police should lodge an FIR," demanded one of the protesting lawyers. The incident took place on Sunday. The staff also clashed with the district police and beat its personnel when Jamshoro SHO Ashfaq Mangi went to arrest the staff on the judge's complaint.



The staff allegedly snatched weapons and wireless sets besides a fighter police motorcycle from the police. As the clash continued, thousands of vehicles were seen passing through the toll plaza without paying the toll tax.



Jamshoro SSP Touqeer Muhammad Naeem later sent DSP Nazar Muhammad Deeshak along with several more police mobiles to control the situation. However, the police had to withdraw as the clash aggravated. Only one security guard at the toll plaza, Ali Baksh Chandio was arrested, but no FIR could be lodged till the filing this report on Monday.



While talking to the local media, the toll plaza's in-charge Mubashir Kamal claimed that the judge's squad manhandled the staff after which the clash occurred. He said the police left behind two rifles and a motorcycle which will be returned to the police.



Jamshoro SSP told the media that he sent the police to arrest the toll plaza's staff on the complaint of the judge. However, he added, the staff manhandled the policemen and snatched their weapons. The incident's videos, showing policemen being beaten by people in plain clothes, has also become viral on the social media.



Published in The Express Tribune, May 21st, 2019.
