Amitabh Bachchan to make Marathi debut with Milind Lele's family comedy AB Ani CD

Amitabh Bachchan | Photo Credit: Instagram

After starring as attorney Badal Gupta in Badla or as the glorious Khudabaksh in Thugs Of Hindostan, Amitabh Bachchan’s kitty is full of films, at least for the next two years. The actor who has signed up Tamil and Telugu movies, Big B will now dip his toes in the Marathi film industry. The actor will be seen in Milind Lele’s AB Ani CD. Touted as a family comedy, the movie also features famous actor Vikram Gokhale who is although a well-known name in the Marathi industry, has also starred in several movies like Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam and Bhool Bhulaiya.

Talking about the project, producer Akshay Bardapurkar explained to Mumbai Mirror about the title of the film. He said, “AB is of course Amitabh Bachchan and CD is Chandrakant Deshpande, enacted by Vikram Gokhale. Mr Bachchan plays himself, a superstar in his 70s. Vikram ji's character's family is planning a bash for his 75th birthday in this family comedy, which encompasses the journey of the leads who have known each other for well over six decades."

The movie will resume filming shortly for a month-long schedule in Pune in the first week of June. "We will wrap up by mid-July and are planning to release the film in December," he said.

While Amitabh is also tied up in Sairat director Nagraj Manjule's Bollywood debut, he has also been roped in for a Tamil film and a Telugu movie.

Talking about signing the film with Big B, Akshay said, "I narrated the script to him two months ago. he loved it and on Vikram Gokhale's request, immediately accepted the film as he has not ventured into this territory before. But we have to rush to get this done now because, after July, he is not free for six months. At this point, it's only going to be in Marathi. Maybe at a later stage, we could consider remaking it in Hindi." Although Big B is not a stranger to Marathi cinema as he did make a special appearance in Akka (1994).

Meanwhile, the megastar will be seen in Nagraj Manjule's Jhund which he is currently filming. He will also be seen in the Tamil movie Uyarndha Manithan that will also be shot in Hindi which will be titled Tera Yaar Hoon Main. Besides this, Big B will be seen in Ayan Mukerji's Brahmastra co-starring Ranbir Kapoor, Alia Bhatt, Akkineni Nagarjuna and Mouni Roy.
