Analyst Outlines Three Possible Difficulties in Vote Count For India's Elections

Statistically speaking the possibility of Narendra Modi repeating the success of 2014 is very low. 272 is the magic figure which is required to attain a majority. BJP won 282 seats in the last election. BJP won most of the seats from what we call the "cow belt". It includes the states of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, and Gujarat. The state of Maharashtra also played an important part in this victory for BJP. If we bifurcate the results in these states, in 2014, BJP won 71/80 seats in UP, 25/25 in Rajasthan, 27/29 in MP, 26/26 in Gujarat.

Now BJP is bound to lose around 30-35 seats in UP, and at least 5 seats each in Chattisgarh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, MP and Rajasthan (this number may vary). The total of the seats that BJP will lose comes around to 55 seats in the aforementioned states alone which is their stronghold (this number may also increase to 80-95). They are trying to focus on northeastern states and West Bengal to recover from this loss. If they do well in that area then they might come closer to the majority, but it is still difficult for them to cross the magic figure of 272. In such a scenario, a BJP-led NDA government will come into power. There are multiple possibilities here.

If a majority of Modi-supporting MPs get elected from BJP and only 1-2 allies are required to form the government, i.e. if BJP crosses 240-250 then Modi will remain the PM. If it comes below 240 and if allied parties want a change in the leadership then we might see a new PM from BJP. In such a scenario, there will be two possibilities. First will be the most performing minister of the previous term, Mr Nitin Gadkari will become the PM and if not him then Rajnath Singh may become the PM but Mr Nitin Gadkari will always be the favourite of the people, more than any other name except for Mr Modi.

READ MORE: India's Ruling Party BJP in Hot Water Over US Citizen's Support in Elections

Now in a scenario of Congress getting more than 170 seats then there is a good chance that a Congress-led UPA will come into power with Rahul Gandhi as PM (or if he refuses then someone close to the Gandhi family might get the post of PM like Jyotiraditya Scindia, Sachin Pilot, Ghulam Nabhi Azad or Prithviraj Chavan). If both BJP and Congress fail to cross 160 seats, then we will see a prime minister from the third front. The strongest candidates in such a scenario will be Sharad Pawar of NCP and Chandrababu Naidu of TDP (If he manages to get good seats in LS, which is less likely). These two names have a national acceptability, Mamata Banerjee, Mulayam Singh, and Mayawati won't have that.

Sputnik: Talking to reporters, Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan said that there is "better chance of peace" with India if the BJP wins the general elections. In your view, why is the Pakistani establishment favouring the BJP?

Chintan Thorat: There may be many explanations for this. Statements from Pakistani politicians have played a fair share in Indian elections in the last five years. Almost all the statements were either pro-Congress or anti-Modi and they absolutely benefited the BJP in those elections. So maybe this might be a deliberate mischievous attempt from the Pakistani PM to make a negative impact on the BJP campaign in India. The other alternative is that Pakistan is the biggest victim of terrorism and Modi has a strict zero tolerance to terrorism policy. Maybe he believes that with mutual assistance, they may get rid of the problem of terrorism together.

Sputnik: How will Pak-Indian relations, especially regarding the settlement of the Kashmir territorial dispute, develop in both cases (if the BJP or the INC win the election)?

Chintan Thorat: If BJP comes to power, then there is a good chance that separatist issue in Kashmir will get solved in the next five years. There is a good chance of solving the problem at the earliest in such a scenario. If INC comes to power then mutual peace talks will continue as they used to happen between 1984-2014. But it will take a much longer time as it will be difficult to tackle with staunch elements in such a situation.

The views and opinions expressed by the speaker do not necessarily reflect those of Sputnik.
