Shooting of Prithviraj’s debut directorial ‘Lucifer’ wrapped up

Shooting of Prithviraj’s debut directorial ‘Lucifer’ wrapped up

The film, a political thriller with Mohanlal in the lead, is scheduled to release on March 28 this year.

Flix Mollywood

The shooting of Mohanlal starrer Lucifer has been wrapped up, confirmed its director Prithviraj. He posted on his social media page, “At 4:30 am today, out on the ocean, ahead of the eastern jetty in Kavarati Island, Lakshadweep, we canned the final shot of #Lucifer. It’s a wrap!”

Earlier, the team was in Russia to shoot a few important portions and during that schedule Mohanlal’s portions were completed. And now, with the entire shooting coming to an end, the post production will begin full swing. Lucifer is scheduled to hit the silver screens on March 28 this year and the team is racing against time to meet this deadline.

Lucifer is one of the most anticipated films in the Malayalam film industry as it marks the directorial debut of actor Prithviraj Sukumaran. It will be a political thriller where Mohanlal will be playing an anti hero. He plays a politician in the film, and his character is named Stephen Nedumballi.

The film also has actors Manju Warrier, Indrajith Sukumaran, Vivek Oberoi, and Tovino Thomas in pivotal roles. Those in the supporting roles include Kalabhavan Shajon, Sai Kumar, director Fazil, Sunil Sughatha, Thara Kalyan, Praveena Thomas and Mala Parvathy.

The shooting of this film began on July 18 last year and was supposed to be wrapped up by December 2018. However, the shooting schedules went haywire for certain reasons which have resulted in some delay.

The technical crew of the film includes Sujith Vasudevan for cinematography and Samjith for editing while Stephen Devassy is in charge of the music composition. Veteran writer and actor Murali Gopy has penned the script for Lucifer which is touted to be a political thriller. The film is produced by Antony Perumbavoor under the banner Aashirvad Cinemas.

Lucifer has been shot in various places in Kerala including Ernakulam, Idukki and Thiruvananthapuram and in Mumbai. Some important portions were also canned in Lakshadweep and Russia.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
