Great start to slow end: How Congress ceded perception battle space to rivals

JALANDHAR: Whatever may be the poll result, the Congress, which appeared invincible till three months ago, lost a lot in the perception battle during electioneering. Before the elections were announced on March 10, it was being considered that barring Bathinda, the Congress would have a walkover given the unpopularity of the Shiromani Akali Dal However, as election day neared, SAD was not just back in the perception battle, the Congress appeared to be facing tough battles at most seats. If that was not enough, bitterness between chief minister Capt Amarinder Singh and local bodies minister Navjot Singh Sidhu was out on polling day.It was the worst performance of SAD in the 2017 assembly polls after reorganization of Punjab in 1966, as the party was never reduced to third place in Punjab. The Akali Dal’s popularity appeared at its nadir during Bargari sit-in, and its senior leaders started deserting the party. Even as SAD appeared to be battling on all front, it managed to get back in arena within a few weeks once the ball was set rolling by the Election Commission.Even before that the CM had launched ‘Mission 13’, aimed at wining all the seats in the state. However, when the slackness among Congress leaders became apparent, Amarinder had to issue a warning to his ministers and MLAs that losing parliamentary seats would lead to ministers losing their berth and MLAs their tickets in next assembly elections.When Punjab Congress was battling with its inertia, SAD president Sukhbir Badal raised the bar for himself by declaring his candidature from Ferozepur. The aggressive posturing helped the party gain more ground in perception battle. At the same time, despite being last to announce candidates and faced with Union minister Vijay Sampla venting out his anger after denial of ticket, BJP still made the life tough for the Congress on two of the three seats it contested. What’s more, the saffron party’s cadre actually worked hard across the state.Another dent in Congress image was change of stance of sorts by Capt Amarinder. When the issue of CM’s own accountability was raised by other Congress leaders like Rajya Sabha member Partap Singh Bajwa, Amarinder lowered the bar for himself saying he would resign “if the Congress is wiped out in the state”. Wiping out of the Congress was never a question and none in Punjab expected the party to be routed While SAD campaigning appeared much cohesive and organized with its social media cell also working actively, the Congress candidates faced troubles in managing dissenters or those showing complacency. At the same time, BJP and RSS worked aggressively at all the 13 seats and their micromanagement was visible on polling day.To top it all, Sidhu alleged a “friendly match” at Bathinda on May 17 on the last day of campaigning without naming anybody and also raised the pitch on issue of justice for Bargari sacrilege. It was not for the first time that such allegations were being made. The CM himself faced this question during an interactive session was held at Kartarpur on May 2.Now, it is to be seen if fireworks in the Congress on Thursday would be of celebratory sort or infighting.
