Rajkummar Rao and Mouni Roy cut cake on set as they wrap up the shoot of Made In China - see pics

It's a wrap on Mouni Roy and Rajkummar Rao's Made In China | Photo Credit: Instagram

Rajkummar Rao and Mouni Roy have wrapped up the shooting of their movie together, titled Made In China. On Monday, the television turned Bollywood diva took to social media in order to share pictures from the cast and crew's last day on the sets of the upcoming movie.

Helmed by Mikhil Musale, who has previously directed the National Film Award-winning 2016 Gujarati thriller drama Wrong Side Raju, Made In China has been bankrolled by Dinesh Vijan under his banner Maddock Films. The movie is slated for an August 30 release this year.

The film had gone on floors in Ahmedabad in September last year and was initially scheduled for an Independence Day 2019 release. However, in December, film critic and trade analyst Taran Adarsh announced that the release date has been pushed back to a fortnight later. A box-office clash with Akshay Kumar, Vidya Balan, Sonakshi Sinha and Taapsee Pannu's Mission Mangal and Prabhas and Shraddha Kapoor's Saaho was thereby averted.

Here, without further ado, check out the pictures in question below.

Mouni captioned the gallery post, "Oh what a trippppp! MADE IN CHINA." The team was seen cutting a red velvet cake in the pictures.

Besides the lead actors, the film will also see Sumeet Vyas of Veere Di Wedding fame, Amyra Dastur and Boman Irani in important roles. As per reports, Rajkummar would be essaying the role of a struggling Gujarati businessman in the movie. Also, only recently it was reported that Rajkummar and Mouni would be recreating a Gujarati folk song called Odhani Odhu.

On the film front, Rajkummar would next be seen reuniting with Queen co-star Kangana Ranaut in Prakash Kovelamudi's Mental Hai Kya. The film is produced by Ekta Kapoor and Shailesh R Singh and is ready for a July 26, 2019 release.

Mouni Roy, on the other hand, would also be seen as the female lead opposite Nawazuddin Siddiqui in Shamas Siddiqui's Bole Chudiyan. Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
