Telangana, Maharashtra cities among hottest on earth

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Naveen S Garewal

Tribune News Service

Hyderabad, May 21

Two Telangana cities of Adilabad and Ramagundam in the north of the state have achieved the distinction of becoming the 7th and 9th hottest places on earth at the moment.

The second, third and fourth places have been bagged by three Maharashtra cities with temperatures varying between 45.9 degree Celsius to 45 degrees Celsius. Barring four locations, the top 14 hottest places in the world are in India, according to a report released by Eldorado weather, a weather aggregating website.

Nizamabad, a Parliamentary segment in Telangana, finds itself on the 14th spot with maximum day temperature hitting 44.6 degree Celsius. Seven Indian cities and towns — all in Central and South India are among the list of hottest places. Hyderabad has seen several cases of heat stroke and includes a Russian national, who was found dead due to heat stroke last week.

There has been a persistent heat wave in Telangana for the past four weeks, crippling normal life as it has constantly registered 44 degrees or more since April 21. Slight drizzle last night at some places in the region has failed to lower the temperatures that have hovered over 40 degrees Celsius going up to 45 degrees on some days.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has issued an advisory asking people not to have a direct exposure to sunlight and to take necessary precautions due to the heat wave. The IMD has suggested that there will be a few more hot to very hot day in different parts of Telangana.

According to the report released on Monday the other places in India that have been sizzling at over 45 degrees include Brahmapuri in Maharashtra that recorded 45.9 degrees.

The hottest place on earth at the moment has been Bilma in the African nation of Niger that has recorded 46.4 degrees Celsius. The website draws its data from Ogimet.com, a website developed by meteorologist working for the National Meteorological Institute, Spain.

The report said both websites depend on information provided by various national weather services and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of United States of America.
