Arunachal Pradesh MLA, 10 others gunned down by NSCN militants

China announces more ‘standardised’ official Chinese names for 15 more places in Arunachal Pradesh

Arunachal Pradesh MLA, 10 others gunned down by NSCN militants

India

oi-Deepika S

Itanagar, May 21: At least 11 persons, including a sitting MLA of Arunachal Pradesh and his son were gunned down by suspected NSCN (IM) militants in Tirap district on Tuesday.

According to the reports, the incident took place around 11:30 am at Bogapani, nearly 25 km from district headquarters Khonsa in south-eastern Arunachal Pradesh when the convoy of MLA was attacked.

Aboh, 41, was on his way to his constituency from Assam, along with son Longgem, other family members, four personal security officers and a poll agent in a convoy of four vehicles when the suspected NSCN rebels opened fire at them near 12 Mile area in the district at around 11.30 am, Director General of Police (DGP) S B K Singh.

"Of the 15 people in the convoy, 11 were killed on the spot, two have been admitted to a hospital with serious injuries and two others escaped unhurt.

Tirong Aboh, the deceased MLA was also the NPP candidate for the Khonsa West assembly seat. Polling for 60 assembly seats along with the two Lok Sabha seats in the state took place on April 11. National People's Party is part of the BJP-led North-East Democratic Alliance.

"Extremely shocked by unfortunate incident of killing of Khonsa MLA Tirong Aboh along with several others by insurgents," tweeted Arunachal Pradesh Chief Minister Pema Khandu.

"The NPP strongly condemns the brutal attack on Shri Tirong Aboh and his family and his security personnels" (sic.), tweeted Conrad Sangma, Meghalaya Chief Minister and NPP Chief.

"The NPP is extremely shocked and saddened by the news of the death of its MLA Shri Tirong Aboh (Arunachal Pradesh) and his family. We condemn the brutal attack and urge (Home Minister) @rajnathsingh and @PMOIndia (Narendra Modi) to take action against those responsible for such attack," he said.

Home Minister Rajnath Singh offered condolences and assured action. "Shocked and anguished by the killing of MLA Tirong Aboh ji, his family & others in Arunachal Pradesh," Mr Singh tweeted.

"It is an outrageous attempt to disturb peace and normalcy in the North East. The perpetrators of this heinous crime will not be spared. My condolences to the bereaved families," he said.
