Indian army providing weapons to anti-Muslim elements in IOK

F.P. Report

ISLAMABAD: Defence spokesman for Indian army’s Udhampur based Northern Command says Indian Army has started providing armed training and weapons to the notorious anti-Muslim elements in the name of Village Defence Committees (VDC) in Jammu region.

Navneet while confirming the training and weapon supply to the VDC members said Indian army regularly meets VDC members in most remote areas of Jammu Kashmir to harass and keep the local Muslims under constant threat.

He said these VDC members have killed many innocent Muslims at the behest of Indian army in Jammu region in the past.

Report on India’s brutal torture released in IOK: The Jammu Kashmir Coalition of Civil Society and the Association of Parents of Disappeared Persons while releasing a comprehensive report on human rights violations by India have urged the United Nations to establish a commission of inquiry to investigate the brutal torture inflicted by Indian forces in the occupied territory.

The report released by the JKCCS and APDP in Srinagar on Monday also called upon India to ratify the UN Convention against torture and also allow global right groups’ unhindered access to Kashmir, Kashmir Media Service reported.

The 560-page report focuses on the torture perpetrated in Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian forces since 1990.

The report points out that torture is used as a matter of policy by the Indian State in Jammu and Kashmir in a systematic and institutional manner and tens of thousands of civilians have been subjected to torture.

The report cited the recent case of the custodial killing of a 29-year-old school principal, Rizwan Pandit and said that no case was registered against police officials responsible for his custodial killing.

The forms of torture that have been documented in the report include stripping the detainees naked, beating with sticks, iron rods or leather belts, roller treatment, water-boarding, dunking detainees head in water, electrocution, hanging from the ceiling mostly upside down, burning of the body with hot objects, solitary confinement, sleep deprivation and sexual torture.
