Ahead of Amarnath Yatra, Civilian Traffic Ban on Jammu-Srinagar Highway to Be Lifted

New Delhi: The Jammu and Kashmir governor’s administration on Tuesday withdrew an order restricting movement of civilian traffic on the national highway between Srinagar and Jammu from Monday.

An official statement said in view of the Amarnath Yatra and following a review of the security situation in the state and of the requirement of security forces’ convoys, governor Satya Pal Malik has decided to lift the remaining restrictions on civilian traffic movement on the national highway connecting Jammu to Srinagar with effect from May 27.

May 26 will be the last day of restriction on the movement of civilian traffic on the highway.

The state administration, on May 7, reduced the number of days from two to one and allowed civilian traffic on Wednesdays.

The government said the restrictions were imposed after the movement of security forces rose to an unprecedented scale after the Pulwama terror attack, according to the statement.

The forces were required both for anti-militancy operations and for smooth conduct of the general elections.

Also Read: Highway Ban in Kashmir Sparks Outrage, Comparisons With Israel

In order to facilitate safe and secure movement of convoys of the security forces, the state administration had imposed prohibition on civilian traffic on the highway from Baramulla to Udhampur twice a week – Sunday and Wednesday – from 4 am to 5 pm.

According to reports, the Jammu-Srinagar-Uri national highway, directly and indirectly, impacts a population of over 69 lakh.

The government claimed that elaborate arrangements were made by the local administration to facilitate movement of public during the period of restriction.

Earlier, restriction on civilian movement between Srinagar and Baramulla on the highway was limited to Sunday with effect from April 22 and later completely withdrawn from May 2.

Restrictions on the Srinagar-Udhampur stretch were limited to just one day from May 13.

“After a detailed review today with all security agencies, civil and police administration in connection with the preparations for the Shri Amarnathji Yatra, the governor directed that there should be no restriction on civilian movement on the highway from Monday next,” the statement said.

The restriction had come into force after a suicide bomber triggered an explosive laden car next to a bus of a CRPF convoy leaving 40 personnel dead.
