Step in the right direction! Specialised supervisory cadre best way to deal with financial sector worries

File photo of Reserve Bank of India | Photo Credit: PTI

The Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) decision to create a specialised supervisory and regulatory cadre to strengthen the supervision and regulation of commercial banks, urban cooperative banks and non-bank financial companies can be read as 1) belated admission of the RBI’s failure on this front and 2) recognition of the need for a specialised cadre (with the requisite skills) to do a more effective job on the supervisory front.

The decision, taken at the meeting of the Central Board of RBI in Chennai on Tuesday, follows a series of unhappy developments, including high and rising level of non-performing assets in both banks and NBFCs, default by IL&FS group companies and serious liquidity issues in the NBFC sector in the last few months, all pointing to the RBI falling short on its supervisory role.

This is not surprising. RBI officials may be sound on theoretical knowledge but their lack of practical knowledge of banking puts them at a huge disadvantage when it comes to spotting danger signals in the financial sector. Moreover, over the years, RBI has increasingly moved away from detailed in-depth financial inspections of banks, including individual large branches and accounts above a certain cut-off level, to what it called risk-based supervision based on audit and other reports.

Growing complexity and inter-connectedness of the financial sector meant RBI was increasingly out of its depth. The Asset Quality Review under former governor, Raghuram Rajan’s watch, that saw a sharp increase in NPAs, was, in truth, a condemnation of the Bank’s faulty supervision since these were the very same accounts had been treated as kosher by the Bank’s inspectors earlier.

However, for the most part, the RBI escaped criticism. So while banks came under attack for their lending practices, RBI got away relatively lightly. Few fingers were pointed at its flawed supervision. It is good, therefore, that the Bank’s Central Board has now sat up and taken notice.

A dedicated, specialised cadre with a liberal lateral entry is the only remedy. The world over, supervisory agencies are staffed by people who have practical, rather than theoretical, knowledge of the sectors they are supervising. India is an exception to this. The main financial sector regulators – RBI, SEBI and IRDA – rely on their internal staff most of who are generalists, albeit in the financial space.

Generalised expertise, if I may be pardoned the oxymoron, might have sufficed when the financial sector was less complicated. But not any longer! Today the financial sector is not merely incredibly complex but also interconnected. Bad apples cannot be contained in one sector; the contagion effect means it can rapidly spill over to other sectors, including the all-critical banking sector.

Lateral entry from commercial banks and NBFCs might have addressed this lacuna. Unfortunately, the idea of lateral entry did not find found favour with the Bank’s own staff that, quite naturally, saw this as usurping their space.

Clearly, the situation could not be allowed to continue. Fortunately the Bank’s Central Board has stepped in; hopefully, it will not be too late!

Mythili Bhusnurmath is a guest contributor. Views expressed are personal.
