Shutdown at Lal Chowk, other areas on 29th anniversary of Gowkadal massacre

Shutdown at Lal Chowk, other areas on 29th anniversary of Gowkadal massacre

SRINAGAR, Jan 21: Complete shutdown was observed in parts of Srinagar city including its commercial nerve centre, Lal Chowk, following JRL call to mark 29th anniversary of Gowakadal massacre today.

51 civilians were killed after personals of paramilitary Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) resorted to indiscriminate firing on a procession at Gowkadal Bridge on this day in 1990.

All the shops business establishments were closed in Lal Chowk and its adjoining areas; however traffic plied normally on Moulana Azad and residency Roads amid heightened security arrangements ahead of the JRL proposed march to Gowkadal.

Senior separatist leaders including Syed Ali Shah Geelani and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq were detained at their residences while JKLF Chairman Mohammad Yasin Malik and Hurriyat (M) leader, Hilal War were arrested by the police this morning from their residences at Maisuma.

Besides Lal Chowk, complete shutdown was also observed in Gowkadal, Maisuma, Kralkhud, Basant Bagh, Budshah Chowk, Red-Cross Road, Maulana Azad and Residency Road, Regal Chowk, Abiguzar and Polo-View market .

Stringent restrictions were put in place by the authorities in Maisuma which also houses JKLF head office and its Chief’s residence and Gowkadal areas to avoid law and order situation.

Police had blocked all the entry and exit points in Maisuma with spools of concertina wires and iron barricades. Forces were also seen frisking and verifying identity of people.

Pertinently on January 21, 1990, 51 civilians were by the government forces in Gowkadal area. The day is considered as the darkest day in the history of Kashmir.

Meanwhile, a joint protest rally was taken out to Gow Kadal, the venue where more than fifty civilians who were protesting against alleged molestation of a local woman in Chotta Bazar locality were lost their lives.

Paying glowing tributes to 1990 Gowkadal martyrs, the speakers while addressing people at Gow Kadal Chowk appealed to them to be untied till Kashmir gets freedom from India.

“These martyrs sacrificed their lives against Indian brutality, we are duty bound to take their mission to its logical conclusion,” said they.
