Boy rescued within hours of abduction, kidnapper shoots himself

(Representative image)

ALLAHABAD: Sanjay Yadav, the former driver of a city-based contractor who had abducted his six-year-old kid Ranveer on Tuesday evening, has succumbed to his injury late on Tuesday night.

"SP city, Brijesh Srivastava confirming his death, said, "After being chased by the police at Bhadhoi and when his car could not move further, he stepped out and ran towards the nearby fields, surrounded by police and injured by one leg, he shot himself at the temple. He was taken to the nearby CHC but he succumbed to his injuries."

Earlier in the evening, Six-year-old Ranveer was kidnapped from the city on Tuesday evening. Son of a contractor of Allahapur, Abhishek Singh, Raveer has been kidnapped by Singh’s former driver, Sanjay Yadav, who was removed from service two months back.

According to SSP Allahabad, Atul Sharma, Ranveer, who studies in class 1 of a English medium school of the city, used to go to the gymnasium located at another prominent English medium school of the city for the past couple of years.

26-year-old Sanjay, a native of Jhunsi, used to drop and pick the little kid during the evening hours.

However, Singh had removed Sanjay, from the service two months back.

“On Tuesday evening, Sanjay arrived at the gymnasium and asked Ranveer to come with him, luring for a giving a toy," said the SSP.

Later on the day, the kidnapper phoned the kid’s parents and demanded Rs 3 crore and threatened for dire consequences if the money is not paid. When the parents asked for further details, he hung up.

However, on late night, as police had sealed all the borders of the district, the kidnapper was spotted near Bhadhoi and was intercepted by the police.

“On spotting the chasing police, he fired at the police vehicle and in retaliation, one of the tyres of his car got punctured but he kept driving on the punctured wheel for around 3km and when he finally stopped, he tried to flee and was injured after the police team fired on him," said the SSP.

The kid was safe and the injured kidnapper was taken to the hospital for treatment where he later died, added the SSP.


