Water crisis in Kurnool turns into 'prestige issue', locals fear shortage may lead to violence

As many as 95% of villages in Kurnool are reeling under acute water crisis (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Hyderabad: Several parts in India are reeling under an acute water crisis with a shortage of drinking water being reported from states such as Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka among other states. Locals in affected areas have reiterated that they have been forced to buy drinking water from private tankers which are under the control of the water mafia. The shortage of water is now reportedly turning bitter following reports of violence erupting in pockets of Telangana over the shortage of water.

Residents of Kurnool and Adnoi revenue divisions of Kurnool district in Andhra Pradesh have alleged that the water crisis is turning into a prestige issue with locals fearing that it could trigger bouts of violence in various pockets across the district. Such is the situation that people have been driven to depend almost entirely on water pits for their potable drinking water needs. Also known as 'chalimalu', these pits are acting as a boon for people living along Tungabhadra, Kundu and Handri rivers.

According to a report by New Indian Express, inhabitants residing in settlements on the outskirts of Kurnool city and along the Tungabhadra River are struggling to get water for their daily needs. A local told the publication that a ruckus erupts at the public taps every single time water is supplied through them once a week by gram panchayats. The severity of the situation can be summed up by the fact that almost 95 per cent of the total 1,575 villages in the district is battling an acute water crisis.

With the erratic depletion of groundwater and other sources of water drying up, people are left with no other option than to walk all the way to public wells to fetch water every single day. Schemes implemented by the state and district authorities have, unfortunately, failed to allay the concerns and demands of the villagers. A similar situation has come to light from Maharashtra where as many as 25,000 villages are wrestling with severe drought conditions. Reports of a woman dying as the result of a quarrel over the shortage of water have also emerged from Kurnool, however, the same are yet to be confirmed.
