IAF officers may be charged with culpable homicide

IAF officers may be charged with culpable homicide

# ‘Probe almost confirms friendly fire’ # `Srinagar Air base AOC removed’

NEW DELHI, May 21: A senior Indian Air Force (IAF) officer and three other personnel of the Srinagar Air Base could be booked for “culpable homicide not amounting to murder” in the February 27 crash of a Mi-17 helicopter that killed six IAF personnel and a civilian.

Meanwhile, the Air Officer Commanding (AOC) of the Srinagar Air Base, the most senior officer of the base, has been moved out as part of the probe into the crash.

The crash, which took place while the Indian defence forces were on hair-trigger alert in light of an incursion by Pakistan Air Force planes, has almost been confirmed as a result of friendly fire, the agencies reports quoting two national newspapers and their sources said. The chopper is believed to have been taken down by an Israeli-origin air defence system fired in error on the Indian side.

On Tuesday, two days after the final phase of voting, two national newspapers reported that the IAF is considering charging officers with culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

The reports suggested that the IAF was asked to “hold” the findings until after elections, a charge which has denied by IAF.

The reports about possible action against IAF personnel come even as the Court of Inquiry (CoI) into the incident is still underway. The inquiry will shortly move to the next step, ‘summary of evidence’, which is akin to a chargesheet.

The inquiry is said to be looking into the role of the Terminal Weapons Director (TWD) of the airbase, who cleared the launch of the missile. The sources said the Chief Operations Officer (COO) was in charge at that point of time.

The probe seeks to find out whether the order was issued by the officer concerned on phone or if he was present in the control room.

“The IAF is very clear that whoever is guilty will face the music,” a senior officer was quoted by a web agency quoting its sources. “They could be charged with culpable homicide not amounting to murder but this has not been established yet,” the anonymous officer was further quoted in the agency report.

Meanwhile, according to the sources, the Air Officer Commanding (AOC) of the Srinagar Air Base, the most senior officer of the base, has been moved out as part of the probe into the crash.

The AOC, the sources added, was moved out immediately after the incident to ensure an impartial probe.

Agencies reports quoting sources said that at the time the chopper was hit by a missile fired by the Israeli-made Spyder air defence system, it had been in contact with Air Traffic Control (ATC) as it was approaching the air base.

“The ATC was in touch with the helicopter and knew it was coming back. However, the weapon operators fired because they felt it was an unmanned aircraft coming their way,” one of the sources was quoted. “There was lack of coordination. These are some of the issues that the CoI is looking into.”

It has been learnt that the IAF’s Barnala-based Integrated Air Command & Control System (IACCS), which is tasked with monitoring incoming aircraft from Pakistan, had not designated the helicopter a ‘Red’, the classification for enemy aircraft.

The helicopter’s Identification of Friend or Foe (IFF) — a transponder-based identification system — was switched off. However, sources said the system was switched off because it interferes with civilian aircraft transmissions and because the aircraft could be identified by the enemy during battle.

A number of interviews with service personnel and video recordings are being used to identify the cause and lapses that led to the incident. An earlier report by defence analyst Ajai Shukla said that the CoI had “conclusively determined” that the Mi-17 V5 helicopter was brought down by friendly fire. Shukla said the IAF has been asked to “hold” the findings until after elections.

As per a report published in a national daily, the senior-most officer of the Srinagar air force base has been removed for related reasons. The Air Officer Commanding (AOC) Srinagar Air Base was removed as the incident occurred on his watch.

Other lapses, include air traffic control asking the chopper to return to base while Indian and Pakistani jets were engaged. “Ideally, the helicopter should have been sent away to a safer zone instead of being called back to the base,” a senior defence ministry official told the paper.

The officer who was Terminal Weapons Director (TWD) is also under scrutiny, another national daily reported, as the person who cleared the missile’s launch. The CoI is determining whether the TWD was present at the control room when the command to fire the missile was issued, or if he relayed it over a hand-held transmitter.

“The report adds that the helicopter was not marked a “red target” by the IAF’s Integrated Air Command and Control System (IACCS) at Barnala, Punjab. The IACCS monitors incoming aircraft from Pakistan. “A Spyder [air defence system] unit reported a lock-on and the order to fire was issued, possibly under the impression that the target was an incoming unmanned aerial vehicle,” it added.

Both newspapers reported that the proceedings could take months, even a year, to complete because the investigating team needed to meticulously collect data and evidence, in view of the serious charges that could be initiated against culpable officers.

Previous reports suggested that the missile that took down the IAF chopper was an Israeli short-range surface-to-air missile (SR-SAM), which can engage targets at ranges out to 20 km. This did not leave any scope for visual identification of the target.

According to Shukla’s report in late April, the CoI found that IAF and army units across J&K were “in a state of hair-trigger alert against expected Pakistani retaliation”. Two crucial omissions apparently led to the missile being fired, downing the own chopper.

“First, to guard against misidentification of aircraft in the prevailing state of alert, all IAF aircraft coming in to land in Srinagar were required to approach the air base only through a designated air corridor. Ground missile units would know that the aircraft approaching through the narrow “funnel” was a friendly aircraft. The Mi-17 chopper was not in the safe corridor for some reason. It approached the base from Budgam, to the south of Srinagar, which led ground units to believe it was a hostile aircraft.”

“The helicopter was also installed with a device called the Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) system. The IFF beams a coded signal that helps IAF radars identify the aircraft. It is required that it be switched on, “especially in a situation where ground missile units are on high alert. For reasons that remain unclear. the CoI has found that the ill-fated helicopter’s IFF system was not switched on that day.”

Shukla was quoted in the reports mentioning IAF sources that they were keen to “serve justice quickly and make an example of those found guilty of operational lapses, they were held back by a “go-slow” order from above.”

“The IAF strikes in Balakot and India’s claim that it shot down a Pakistani F-16 jet were heavily politicised during the election season. Prime Minister Narendra Modi repeatedly evoked the strike as his government’s strong response to the Pulwama terror attack. In this scenario, admitting the loss of a helicopter and seven personnel due to friendly fire would present a bleaker picture,” reports quoted Shukla’s article.

“The IAF declined to comment to Shukla, saying “the CoI is still in progress” and “the time line of any CoI cannot be predicted.” After the report was published, the Air Force issued a rebuttal, saying Shukla’s report “incorrectly speculated” that the CoI has been put on hold. This is his imagination and IAF categorically denies this,” it said.

“Shukla stood by the report, saying: The IAF accepts the article’s basic point that, two months after the deaths of seven persons in a “friendly fire” incident, the CoI has not been finalised. None of the other details in the report, about how and why an IAF missile battery shot down an IAF helicopter, are being rebutted by the IAF. Although the IAF claims that a two-month delay in finalising a CoI relating to an operational debacle is normal, Shulka said, top IAF officers say the delay “has been imposed from above,” the reports further quoted Shukla’a article.

Investigation sought to determine how safeguards failed. On April 1, a national daily had reported reported that the IAF’s investigation will focus on determining how multi-layered safeguards against friendly fire had failed. Air force top brass would consider a court martial against personnel whom the inquiry found guilty.

Quoting its sources, it said that an alert was raised about Pakistan deploying unmanned aerial vehicle (UAVs) during the February escalation. The slow moving Mi 17 chopper could have been mistaken for an armed UAV.

“The chopper is one of the sturdiest in service across the world and is not prone to technical faults of catastrophic nature. Eyewitness reports said there were two separate explosions: a bang, followed by a shower of aircraft parts, and then a louder explosion as the chopper hit the ground. This indicated that an external event contributed to the crash. While the IAF acknowledged the crash, it did not mention it in the context of the aerial battle with Pakistani jets. The Pakistani military said it was not involved in bringing down the chopper,” the report further said.
