This is what you'll get if you vote for Nigel Farage's Brexit Party

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Want the latest Welsh news and politics updates sent straight to your email?

Nigel Farage’s Brexit Party is on course to win the European Parliament election in Wales and the UK as a whole – an undeniably impressive achievement for a party that was officially registered with the Electoral Commission just weeks ago.

So far, according to a poll released on Thursday, the Brexit Party will be backed by one-third of the voters in Wales, mainly defectors from the Conservative Party, which is polling at an appalling 7%.

But before they drop their ballot papers into the box at the polling station, or post their votes back to the returning officer, what exactly is it that they’re voting for?

The Brexit Party is not a conventional political party in the sense that it is not – at least as yet – a membership party.

It was established as a limited company on November 23, 2018.

At that time only one £1 share was issued, to a woman called Catherine Blaiklock, who was also listed at Companies House as the firm’s sole director and company secretary.

In March she abruptly resigned as the party’s leader after being asked by the Guardian newspaper about a series of retweeted posts from far-right figures, as well as some of her own messages.

However, she remained a director until resigning on May 3, according to a document lodged at Companies House.

Among the messages she shared was one by Mark Collett, a former British National Party activist, referring to “white genocide”.

Retweeted in 2018, it showed a photo of a multi-racial primary school class with the message: “This is a British school. This is white genocide.”

The term is often used in extreme right-wing and racist online activism of the sort seen as having inspired the man suspected of shooting dead 50 people at mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand. Another post by Mr Collett retweeted by Ms Blaiklock claimed that multiculturalism amounts to “the replacement of the indigenous European people”.

One of Ms Blaiklock’s own messages read: “Islam = submission – mostly to raping men it seems.”

Three more directors were appointed during April, including Mr Farage.

(Image: AP Photo/Frank Augstein) (Image: AP Photo/Frank Augstein)

On May 8, a confirmation statement lodged with Companies House described Mr Farage as an “individual person with significant control” of the company, adding: “The person has the right, directly or indirectly, to appoint or remove a majority of the board of directors of the company”.

Such a set-up gives Mr Farage the luxury of knowing that he has virtually total control of the party, without the risk of disagreements with a national executive committee elected by the membership – a problem he encountered as leader of Ukip.

As things stand, the Brexit Party is not a democratic party, but one that is run according to the wishes of Mr Farage.

Earlier this week, when announcing that four AMs had joined the Brexit Party, Mr Farage confirmed he had appointed Mark Reckless, a former Tory MP and now AM for South Wales East, as the Brexit Party’s group leader at the National Assembly.

None of the AMs who have declared themselves members of it were elected to the Assembly under its colours, although that in itself would not be enough to prevent the formation of a group in accordance with the Assembly’s standing orders.

The Electoral Commission decided to register the Brexit Party as a political party despite its status as a private company rather than a membership organisation.

And Mr Farage has claimed during his visit to Cardiff that the four AMs were “members” of the Brexit Party – an essential requirement of the standing orders if they are to be accepted as a group.

Video: Nigel Farage gets 'milkshaked'

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

Rather oddly for a party seeking election, Mr Farage has decreed it will have no policy commitments that voters can ponder in advance – beyond, of course, the single policy implicit in its title.

To judge by the party’s apparent popularity, many voters appear not to care about its lack of a manifesto or detailed policy programme.

As a pointer, however, it may be worth taking notice of Mr Farage’s previous pronouncements.

The anti-Brexit group Led by Donkeys has highlighted a number of his past utterances on a series of billboards.

One of the most controversial of his statements is: “We need to move to an insurance-based system of healthcare.”

More recently he has refined his position on the NHS, denying he wanted to replace it with private insurance, but stating that insurers could “take the burden off the NHS”.

He added: “If I was encouraged to opt out of the system, to relieve the burden on the health service, I would do so gleefully.”

Another of his past quotes, now featuring on billboards, states: “The European Parliament, in their foolishness, have voted for increased maternity pay.”

Throwing back at him his current opposition to another referendum on EU membership, Led by Donkeys quotes his comment from March 2016: “In a 52-48 referendum this would be unfinished business by a long way. If the Remain campaign win two-thirds to one-third that ends it.”

It has also highlighted his comment: “If Brexit is a disaster, I’ll go and live abroad.”

Led by Donkeys has also highlighted statements made by other Brexit Party candidates.

(Image: Jiri Rezac/Led By Donkeys/PA Wire) (Image: Luke MacGregor/Led By Donkeys/PA Wire)

A billboard in Neath quotes Brexit Party candidate James Bartholomew: “The NHS is not a national treasure. It is the cause of great suffering.”

Former Tory minister Ann Widdecombe is a much better-known candidate for the Brexit Party. She appears on a billboard stating: “Homosexual acts are wrongful.”

In 2017 Mr Farage withdrew defamatory remarks he made about the anti-fascist campaign group Hope Not Hate, in which he had accused it of engaging in violent activity.

The group is in fact highly respected and has exposed, through its undercover work a neo-Nazi who planned to murder Labour MP Rosie Cooper.

As part of an agreed legal settlement, Mr Farage stated: “Having now considered the position further I am happy to acknowledge that Hope Not Hate does not tolerate or pursue violent or undemocratic behaviour.”

The year before, Mr Farage came in for severe criticism after he wrote in response to a terrorist attack in Berlin that left 12 dead and dozens wounded: “Terrible news from Berlin but no surprise. Events like these will be the Merkel legacy.”

Other controversial statements made by Mr Farage over the years include:

“I have to confess I do have a slight preference [in terms of which immigrants to accept into the UK]. I do think, naturally, that people from India and Australia are in some ways more likely to speak English, understand common law, and have a connection with this country than some people that come perhaps from countries that haven’t fully recovered from being behind the Iron Curtain.”

A devoted supporter of President Trump, he said: “In some ways, backing the Trump campaign was even harder than battling for Brexit. I received almost total condemnation, including from many senior figures in my own party.”

“For whatever reason, Trump likes my story, likes what I’ve done. He trusts me.”

By contrast, he is no fan of President Trump’s predecessor: “That Obama creature – a loathsome individual who couldn’t stand our country.”

He is also no fan of a minimum price for alcohol.

“Minimum sales prices for alcohol are a startlingly bad idea," he has said. "As with excise duties, the effects are regressive.”

Raising concerns that he favours watering down employment rights, Mr Farage said: “I think the employer should be much freer to make decisions on who she or he employs.”

Asserting that measures to combat global warming were “stupid”, Mr Farage has also said: “I believe that if we decide in this country to tax ourselves to the hilt, to put hundreds of thousands of people out of work in manufacturing industries, given that we produce less than 2% of global CO2, that isn’t terribly intelligent.”
