This is why security at YS Jagan and N Chandrababu Naidu`s residence boosted

Home >> Hyderabad This is why security at YS Jagan and N Chandrababu Naidu`s residence boosted

Both are expected to monitor the election results right from their residences. Anticipating the rush of party legislators and leaders soon after winning the elections, Guntur urban police deployed additional forces at the residence of Chandrababu Naidu and Jagan.

AMARAVATI: Security has been tightened at the residences of YSRCP chief YS Jagan and TDP supremo N Chandrababu Naidu in view of the rush of the leaders on counting day.Chief minister Chandrababu has been residing in a private bungalow in Undavalli, Jagan is also moving into his own bungalow in Tadepalle on Wednesday.

Both are expected to monitor the election results right from their residences. Anticipating the rush of party legislators and leaders soon after winning the elections, Guntur urban police deployed additional forces at the residence of Chandrababu Naidu and Jagan.As per the report, two each company of AP special protection force (APSP) have been deployed at CM and Jagan`s residences.

In addition to the APSP personnel, the district police would also manage the route security and security inside the bungalows. A special police team have been asked to take care of the management of rush of leaders from other districts.With both TDP and YSRCP locked in a bitter fight to snatch the power in the state, police decided not to take chances on security aspects. Police are also in touch with some key leaders in both the parties to streamline the rush on the counting day. The leaders particularly winning candidates along with their followers from Guntur, Krishna, West Godavari and Prakasam districts are expected to meet their respective party supremos soon after the declaration of the results.YSRCP chief Jaganmohan Reddy will oversee the poll results from his residence in Tadepalle. Chief minister Chandrababu Naidu would be at his official residence in Undavalli on the counting day.
