UP Election Result 2019: SP, BSP Mahagathbandhan fails to stop Modi wave

UP Lok Sabha Election Result: The BJP-led NDA negated the impact of SP, BSP Mahagathbandhan in the crucial state.

Uttar Pradesh Lok Sabha Election Result: The Bharatiya Janata Party has won comfortable victory in Uttar Pradesh, the state where it created a record by winning 71 of 80 Lok Sabha seats in 2014. The BJP managed to negate the combined force of Samajwadi Party, Bahujan Samaj Party Mahagathbhan and the Congress-led UPA. The BJP was ahead on 59 seats, SP+BSP on 21 and Congress on just one seat till reports last filtered in. PM Narendra Modi has retained Varanasi seat. On the other hand, Union Minister Smriti Irani recorded a stunning victory over Congress president Rahul Gandhi in Amethi.

Lok Sabha Election 2019: Full Coverage

Exit polls had also predicted that the BJP will win in Uttar Pradesh in 2019.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath thanked voters for their trust in BJP. “Alert voters have rejected the ‘mahagathbandhan’ (grand alliance) of opposition parties. It is high time for the opposition to introspect and shun politics of negativity,” Adityanath told PTI.

Live Blog UP Election Result LIVE Updates: Highlights Rahul Gandhi concedes defeat in Amethi ‘I congratulate Smriti Irani,’ Congress president Rahul Gandhi said at a press conference conceding defeat in Amethi. Rahul Gandhi represented Amethi in Lok Sabha thrice – 2004, 2009 and 2014. | READ HERE We accept people’s decision, says Rahul Gandhi Speaking to reporters during a press conference at Congress headquarters in New Delhi, Rahul Gandhi congratulated PM Modi and BJP over Lok Sabha election 2019 victory. “We accept the people’s verdict,” Rahul Gandhi said. BJP wins big in Uttar Pradesh As per trends available so far, the BJP-led NDA is winning big in Uttar Pradesh. Though the party is unlikely to win the number of seats it did in 2014, it has negated the challenge posed by the SP-BSP Mahagathbandhan. The NDA is ahead on 59 seats, BSP+SP 20 and the Congress just one seat in Uttar Pradesh. UP Election Result LIVE: Ajit Singh trailing Rashtriya Lok Dal’s chief Ajit Singh is trailing by over 20, 000 thousand votes from Muzaffaranagar seat. The BJP is ahead on 60 seats in Uttar Pradesh, BSP on 12 and SP on 7 in the state. Amethi witnessing close contest The Congress bastion of Amethi is witnessing a close contest between Smriti Irani and Rahul Gandhi. The Union minister has extended her lead over the Congress president by nearly 9,000 votes. UP Election Result LIVE: Mixed fortune of Samajwadi Party’s Yadav clan Akhilesh Yadav’s Dimple Yadav is leading by 5,420 votes over BJP’s Subrat Pathak in Kannauj. Mulayam Singh Yadav ahead in Mainpuri by 15,297 votes over the BJP’s Prem Singh Shakya. UP Election Result LIVE Saamajwadi Party stalwart Azam Khan is leading in Rampur by over 18,000 votes over BJP contender Jaya Prada. The actor-turned-politician was with the Samajwadi Party earlier and joined the BJP just days ahead of Lok Sabha election 2019. UP Election Result LIVE: Congress leading in Raebareli The Congress is leading on only one seat in Uttar Pradesh. Former Congress president Sonia Gandhi is leading from Rae Bareli. Dinesh Pratap Singh of the BJP is trailing Sonia by over 20,000 votes. UP Election result LIVE: Akhilesh Yadav leads by over 13,000 votes Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav leading by over 13,000 votes in Azamgarh, while his father and SP patron Mulayam Singh Yadav ahead by nearly 12,000 votes from Mainpuri seat. While Mayawati’s Bahujan Samaj Party was ahead in 12 seats, Akhilesh Yadav was leading in eight seats, as per latest trends. Varanasi Election result: Modi leads by over 2 lakh votes Prime Minister Modi extends lead on Varanasi Lok Sabha seat. He is now leading by nearly 2 lakh votes as counting of votes continue. Varanasi election result LIVE: Prime Minister Narendra Modi appears set for yet another astounding victory from Varanasi Lok Sabha seat. As per latest trends, PM Modi is ahead by 1.20 lakh votes. Congress candidate Ajay Rai has got 25,000 votes and Samajawadi Party’s Shalini Yadav 30,000 votes so far. Amethi election result LIVE Smriti Irani is ahead by 4500 votes in Amethi against Rahul Gandhi in a neck-and-neck battle. Rahul Gandhi has represented Amethi seat in Lok Sabha since 2004. Amethi Election Result: Smriti Irani maintains lead over Rahul Gandhi BJP candidate and Union Minister Smriti Irani maintains her lead over Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Amethi seat. As per latest trend, Irani is ahead by 2500 votes. UP Election Result LIVE: Maneka Gandhi trailing from Sultanpur, Sonia Gandhi leading from Rae Bareli BJP candidate and Union Minister Maneka Gandhi trailing from Sultanpur, Sonia Gandhi leading from Rae Bareli. Varun Gandhi leading from Pilibhit. UP Election Result LIVE: Modi extends lead from Varanasi Prime Minister Narendra Modi has now extended his lead from Varanasi seat by over 25,000 votes against his nearest Congress rival Ajay Rai. UP Election Result LIVE: Akhilesh Yadav trailing in Azamgarh Bhojpuri actor Dinesh Lal Yadav ‘Nirahua’ is leading against Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav from Azamgarh Lok Sabha seat. UP Election Result LIVE: Smriti Irani extends lead from Amethi, Jaya Prada leading from Rampur Union Minister Smriti Irani has extended her lead to 8000 votes on Amethi seat against Rahul Gandhi. BJP’s Jaya Prada is leading from Rampur seat. UP Election Result LIVE: Ravi Kishan ahead on Gorakhpur seat, Dimple Yadav leading from Kannauj

BJP’s Ravi Kishan is leading on Gorakhpur seat. Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav’s wife Dimple Yadav leading on Kannauj seat. UP Election Result LIVE: RLD’s Jayant Chaudhary trailing from Baghpat

Rashtriya Lok Dal’s Jayant Chaudhary is trailing from Baghpat Lok Sabha. NDA ahead on 48 seats, Mahagathbandhan on 12, Congress on 2 seats in Uttar Pradesh. UP Election Result LIVE: RLD’s Jayant Chaudhary trailing from Baghpat

Rashtriya Lok Dal’s Jayant Chaudhary is trailing from Baghpat Lok Sabha. NDA ahead on 48 seats, Mahagathbandhan on 12, Congress on 2 seats in Uttar Pradesh. PM Modi leading in Varanasi Prime Minister Narendra Modi is leadin by over 10,000 votes from Varanasi against his nearest Congress rival Ajay Rai. Smriti Irani ahead in Amethi Smriti Irani ahead by 5600 votes in Amethi against Rahul Gandhi. Ravi Kishan is leading on Gorakhpur seat. UP Election Result LIVE: Smriti Irani leading in Amethi Smriti Irani is leading in Amethi against Congress president Rahul Gandhi. Irani is leading by 2000 votes. The NDA is ahead on 36 seats in Uttar Pradesh. UP Election Result LIVE: Smriti Irani ahead by 2000 votes in Amethi Smriti Irani has now taken a lead of over 2000 voters against Rahul Gandhi on Amethi Lok Sabha seat. The NDA is ahead on 32 seats, SP+BSP leading on 10 seats. The Congress is ahead on 4 seats. UP Election Result LIVE: Raj Babbar trailing Congress leader and film actor Raj Babbar is trailing from Fatehpur Sikri seat as counting of votes continue in Uttar Pradesh. UP Election Result: Smriti Irani ahead in Amethi Union Minister Smriti Irani is running ahead against Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Amethi seat. Sonia Gandhi ahead from Raebareli Former Congress president Sonia Gandhi is ahead from Raebareli Lok Sabha seat as per initial trends. The BJP-led ND has taken lead on 16 seats, Mahagathbandhan on 7 and Congress on 4 in Uttar Pradesh. UP Election Result LIVE: First trends start pouring in First trends start pouring in from Uttar Pradesh. BSP, SP Mahagathbandhan ahead on 4 seats, BJP on 7 and others on 1 seat, as per IndiaTV. UP Election Result LIVE: Counting of votes begin Counting of votes on all 80 Lok Sabha seats of Uttar Pradesh has started. The BJP is hoping to repeat its 2014 performance by winning over 70 seats. While the SP-BSP Mahagathbandhan is looking to dent its prospects. UP Election Result LIVE: BJP hoping to repeat 2014 super show The BJP, which had won 71 seats in Uttar Pradesh in 2014, is facing a tough battle against Samajwadi Party-Bahujan Samaj Party alliance. Ajit Singh’s Rashtriya Lok Dal is also part of the Grand Alliance in UP. UP Election Result LIVE: All eyes on battle for Amethi In Amethi, Union minister Smriti Irani is once again hoping to stun Rahul Gandhi. The Congress president has represented Amethi Lok Sabha constituency in Lok Sabha since 2004. UP Election Result LIVE There were speculations about Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi will challenge Narendra Modi on Varanasi seat. However, the party decided against fielding her from the seat. UP Election Result LIVE: How many votes PM Modi will get? Prime Minister Narendra Modi is seeking a second term from the temle town of Varanasi. His main challengers are Ajay Rai from the Congress and Shalini Yadav from the Samajwadi Party. UP Election Result LIVE: Ravi Kishan seeks divine blessings ahead of counting of votes Bhojpuri actor and BJP candidate from Gorakhpur Ravi Kishan offers prayers ahead of counting of votes for Lok Sabha election 2019. Actor Ravi Kishan, who is fighting on Gorakhpur Lok Sabha seat, offers prayers as #ElectionResults2019 will be announced today; counting of votes for #LokSabhaElections2019 to begin at 8 am. pic.twitter.com/b1d38nuq02 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 23, 2019 UP Election Result LIVE Couting of votes for Lok Sabha Election 2019 is scheduled to begin in a short while from now. Follow all the latest updates HERE Uttar Pradesh Election Result LIVE: Voting for Lok Sabha election 2019 was held across Uttar Pradesh in all the seven phases from April 11 to May 19. Uttar Pradesh sends 80 MPs to Lok Sabha. UP Election Result LIVE Hello and welcome to Financial Express.com for live coverage of the Uttar Pradesh Lok Sabha election result 2019. Can the Mahagathbandhan spoil the BJP’s attempt to repeat its 2014 success? Picture will be clear in a short while from now.
