Briefing

SHOPIAN



Thursday witnessed two back-to-back encounters in Shopian and Pulwama district in which two civilians, five militants and two army personnel lost their lives. Reportedly, a civilian, Raees, who was killed in Pulwama encounter, was allegedly used as a human shield along with his brother, who was also injured in the encounter, and their father. But, so far, it is not clear how the civilian Ishtiyaq Ahmad Bhat was killed in Shopian encounter. Initially, police claimed to have killed three militants but after identification of bodies at DPL Shopian, the locals refuted the claims and confirmed one as a civilian.

LUCKNOW

Bringing laurels to their schools, the student delegation of Delhi Public School, Srinagar won the best delegate trophy at the recently held La Martiniere Girls Model United Nations Conference held from May 9 to May 13, 2019, at La Martiniere Girls School, Lucknow. Reportedly, the DPS team beat twenty schools for the honour. The conference is an educational simulation where children get acquainted with diplomacy, international relations and procedural functioning of the UN in its real-time, besides enhancing their leadership qualities, researching capacity, critical thinking and listening and debating skills. Chief guest Aditi Pathak, national programme officer, UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Education for Peace and Sustainable Development gave away the awards.

REASI

The education department in the state reached another low after a video surfaced on social networking sites showing mass copying at an examination centre (no. 5903) in Reasi. The exam superintendent, Master Sharif-Ud-Din and his deputy, teacher Ashiq Ahmad, were later suspended by the directorate of education Jammu.

SRINAGAR

The J&K Bank, the state-owned premier financial institution, has reported a 129 percent growth in net profit for the Financial Year 2018-19 at 465 Cr as compared to 202 Cr in the previous fiscal.

ANANTNAG

Social media is changing lives every day by keeping a close watch on society. Last week, a video surfaced on social networking sites showing students in uniform washing vehicles. Later, the action was taken against a teacher, Mohammad Iqbal Khan and a class 4th employee, Shabir Ahmad Lone, by Chief Education Officer (CEO) Anantnag; the teacher had asked at least six students of a government school Badray in Vailoo area of Anantnag to wash their personal vehicles during school hours.

KASHMIR

Last week, a small video clip was uploaded by state police showing a CRPF personnel feeding a differently-abled child somewhere on a roadside in Kashmir. The clip, which created quite some buzz on social media, won appreciation online and even made some emotional. He was later identified as Havaldar Iqbal Singh, one of the drivers in the CRPF convoy that was attacked in Pulwama by a Jaish-e-Mohammad suicide bomber on February 14.

SRINAGAR

In first of its kind, elections were held by the Kashmir Working Journalist Association (KWJA) for different posts of the body. Senior journalist Naseer Ganai was elected as the president, Hakeem Irfan as vice president, Samaan Lateef as general secretary, and Saima Bhat as Secretary of the KWJA. The election process witnessed 89.83 percent voting.
