ISRO Successfully Launches RISAT-2B, Tik Tok Celebrity Shot Dead In Delhi And Other News

The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) successfully launched the RISAT-2B Satellite which will enhance the country's surveillance capabilities.

ISRO launched the RISAT-2B from the first launch pad of the Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota at 5.30 am. The 615 kg satellite was launched into space on-board the PSLV-C 46. It was the 48th flight of PSLV. Read more

Tik Tok Celebrity Gym Trainer Mohit Mor Shot Dead At Point-Blank Range At A Shop In Delhi

In a shocking crime, a gym trainer, who had a huge fan following on social media was shot dead by unidentified gunmen.

The incident happened in Delhi's Najafgarh area on Tuesday evening, when the deceased, Mohit Mor was at a photocopy shop run by a friend in the Dharampura area. Read more

Fishermen Living In Chilika Lake Feel Cyclone Fani Devastation Has Taken Them 20 Years Back

Cyclone Fani has devastated the state of Odisha and damage done by the natural calamity is unlikely to be covered in months and even years to come.

On the contrary, people think that devastation caused by the cyclone has thrown some particular sections of people in Odisha almost 20 years back and fishermen in Asia’s largest brackish water lake-Chilika think that the cyclone “took them 20 years behind”. Read more

UAE Introduces 'Golden Card' Permanent Residency Scheme For Expats

The UAE has introduced a permanent residency scheme to woo wealthy individuals and exceptional talents.

Shaikh Mohammad Bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Vice-President and Prime Minister of the UAE and Ruler of Dubai, on Tuesday, launched the permanent residency system which is aimed at attracting more investors and professional to move there. Read more

Man Arrested For Raping Seven Cows At A Shelter In Ayodhya; Claims He Was Drunk

A man was arrested in Ayodhya for raping several cows at a shelter in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh. The accused has been identified as Rajkumar. He was caught red-handed by the shelter authorities and volunteers at Kartaliya Baba Ashram.

The volunteers were keeping a vigil after watching a man sexually abusing cows in the CCTV footage. The accused was caught in the act after he returned to the shelter and attempted to rape cows again. Read more

Scripting History, Marriage Between Transgender Woman And Man Registered In Tamil Nadu

On October 31, Arun Kumar and P Srija got married at a temple in Thoothukudi, Tamil Nadu but they were denied marriage receipt by the temple management. Reason- Srija is transwoman while Kumar is a cis man.

Cut to May, 2019, Kumar and Srija finally got their marriage registered at the district registrar office in Tamil Nadu's Thoothukudi, making it a first of its kind marriage. Read more
