Hassan girl battles for just one mark and makes it to the top in SSLC results with perfect score of 625

Kannada

SSLC

Karnataka

SSLC results

A class 10 student who secured 624/625 from Hassan battled it out for just one mark that she has missed in herlanguage paper.After the revaluation marks, this girl secured 625/625 and made it to the top three students who secured out of out marks in the Secondary School Leaving Certificate () examination.Pragathi M Gowda of Vijaya High School, Hassan gained 1 mark to be the joint top scorer in the state.When she took the answer script for photocopy, she was surprised to see how she had lost one mark in Kannada language paper.Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, she said, “I was expecting 625 in Kannada. I was confident that I did not make a mistake in the paper. I applied for a photocopy of the answer script and found out that one question was not evaluated. Hence I applied it for revaluation,” she added.“When the scanned copy arrived, I saw that one of the answers where I was supposed to get 4 marks I was given 3 marks. After consulting with my teachers and receiving feedback that the answer was right I applied for re-evaluation.”After re-evaluation, her marks were revised and she received that one substantial mark in Kannada language paper and her total went up from 624 to 625. This puts her on the top of state rankings in. She will be sharing the first rank in the state with Srujana D of Bengaluru and Naganjali of Kumta.Pragathi now plans to pursue aeronautical engineering in the future. Pragathi credits her teachers and parents for her success. “I studied for three and a half hours a day according to the time table my teachers had set for me. However, as the exams were coming close I increased my study hours and it helped me,” she added.She also said that her role model is Sudha Murthy and she wants to engage herself in social work like Mrs Murthy. Pragathi also credited her success to her avoiding social media.Theof Karnataka was announced on April 30 2019. Amongst the 8,25,486 students who appeared for the exam, 73.70% of students managed to successfully clear the exams. Amongst these after the revaluation, a total of three students have scored 625/625 and ten students have scored 624/625.
