Lok Sabha Poll Results: Three-Ring security deployed

NL Correspondent

Jammu Tawi, May 22

One of the top government officials told that security personnel including central reserve police forces (CRPF) and state police will be deployed tomorrow in all the counting centres for ensuring smooth and violence-free counting. “There will be a three tier security cordon in the vicinity of the counting centers. The first line of security manned by the Security forces will be located almost 100 meters from the concerned counting premises. The second line of security will be around the counting premises and the third line of security personnel will be deployed inside the counting halls. The counting centers will follow three-tier cordoning system,” the official maintained wished not to be named.

Giving details about arrangements being made for counting, official further said that 10 counting centers have been established in the state.

While there will be one counting center each for Baramulla, Anantnag, Srinagar, Jammu and Udhmapur parliamentary seats, two centers have been established for Ladakh segment, one each in Kargil and Leh.

Apart from them, three centers have also been established for counting of migrant votes at Udhampur, Jammu and New Delhi.

They said that 90 counting halls have been set up in these centers. “There will be 896 counting tables in these halls,”

Sources said that no person other than candidates, their election counting agents, public servants on election duty or persons authorized by Election Commission would be permitted to enter counting centers. Counting will be done simultaneously for all the six seats Jammu, Srinagar, Udhampur, Anantnag, Baramullah and Ladakh.

Sources said that to avoid any untoward incidents prohibitory orders under section 144 of Cr. P.C. will be also been enforced at the counting centers.

Chief Electoral Officer (CEO), Shalindera Kumar said, “As per the ECI guidelines, all arrangements have been made for the Counting Day,”

Sources said that the whole process will be monitored by General Observers and each of them will be accompanied by Micro observers.

The outcome of the six Lok Sabha seats is being keenly watched in J&K as it is considered as “semi-final” before the Assembly polls.
