Slain RTI activist’s 19-year-old son murdered in village near Rajkot

Rajkot: Tempers were running high in Rajkot on Wednesday after a 19-year-old class XII student, son of slain RTI activist , was brutally thrashed to death by a group of people in Manekwada village, 50 km from the city. The deceased Rajesh alias Raju was the son of Nanji Sondarva, the RTI activist who has murdered in the same village in March last year. Sondarva, a Dalit was murdered, allegedly for seeking information on financial irregularities in construction of road, by Rajput community members.Those who attacked Rajesh, a student of city-based Virani High School, are reportedly sons of some of the people arrested for killing his father.Rajesh, who stayed in M G Hostel in Rajkot, He had gone home for vacation. On Tuesday night, he and his friend Milan Parmar were returning home on a two-wheeler when a group of people intercepted them near Bapa Sitaram temple and started thrashing Rajesh with sticks and pipes. While Milan ran away from the spot, a critically injured Rajesh was brought to Rajkot Civil Hospital, where he succumbed early on Wednesday morning.As soon as the news of his death spread, angry Dalit community members blocked the roads at Hospital Chowk near the statue of Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar. Police had a tough time controlling the crowd and traffic was stopped on several roads.Dalit leader and MLA Jignesh Mewani, who reached Rajkot on Wednesday evening, warned that Rajesh’s body will be taken to chief minister Vijay Rupani’s residence on Thursday morning if the state government fails to meet their demands.Talking to TOI, superintendent of police, Rajkot rural, Balram Meena, said, “We have detained six out of the eight persons named by Rajesh’s family and they are being interrogated. They are the sons of those accused of killing his father Nanji Sondarva last year.”Six people of Rajput community were arrested in this murder case but they got bail from Gujarat high court few months ago.=.Talking to media persons, Mewani said, “Police should provide the protection to the victim’s family and fulfil all other demands like job and land for the family. If our demand is not met by Thursday morning, we will be forced to take his body at CM’s house in Rajkot at 10am.”Mewani also sought investigation into this case by CID (crime) or a special investigation team and that the community must have a say in appointment of one officer in the probe team.Out of the total 1,500 population in Manekwada, there are 150 Patel families, 35-40 Rajput families and around 15-20 Dalit households.Issue weapon licenses to Dalits, demands BJP MLARajkot: Lakha Sagathiya, BJP MLA from Rajkot rural constituency, extended support to the Dalits and went on to demand weapon license for the community people. Seeking forensic postmortem of the victim’s body, Sagathiya said, “Rajesh’s family had been living under constant fear after his father’s murder. They want to shift to Rajkot for which, the government must give them a plot, Rs 25 lakh cash assistance and government job for his mother. The government must also bear the entire cost of Rajesh’s younger brother’s studies.”He added: “Since the police are unable to provide protection to the Dalits in the village, they should be issued weapon license.”
