Bihar, Jharkhand election result: BJP-led NDA sweeps both states; RJD, Congress face humiliation

Bihar Election Result 2019, Jharkhand Election Result: The BJP-led NDA swept both Bihar and Jharkhand almost on lines of what exit polls had predicted.

Bihar Election Result 2019, Jharkhand Election Result 2019: The Bharatiya Janata Party-led National Democratic Alliance swept both Bihar and Jharkhand winning an overwhelming number of seats. While the BJP, JDU, LJP combine won 39 seats, the RJD secured just one seat for itself in Bihar.

The RJD, which contested the general elections for the first time ever without the active participation of its president Lalu Yadav, appears to have missed his services dearly as it suffered a humiliating defeat. On the other hand, Nitish Kumar’s Janata Dal-United seems to have gained people’s support by joining the NDA again.

Similarly in Jharkhand, BJP got an overwhelming people’s support winning 11 seats. The Congress and JMM won a seat each.

Lok Sabha Election 2019: Full Coverage

Election results of seats like Begusarai, from where former JNU student leader Kanhaiya Kumar was defeated by BJP’s Giriraj Singh by over four lakh votes and Patna Sahib, where Shatrughan Sinha had to face defeat against Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad, had attracted a lot of media attention.

Live Blog Bihar, Jharkhand Election Result 2019: Highlights Bihar Lok Sabha Election Result LIVE Union Minister Giriraj Singh wins from Begusarai by over four lakh votes against CPI candidate Kanhaiya Kumar. Former Lok Sabha Speaker Meira Kumar loses from Sasaram Chhedi Paswan of the Bharatiya Janata Party has defeated Congress candidate and former Lok Sabha Speaker Meira Kumar by over 1.50 lakh votes on Sasaram seat. Giriraj Singh wins Begusarai seat by 4 lakh votes Union Minister Giriraj Singh has defeated Kanhaiya Kumar by nearly 4 lakh votes from Begusarai Lok Sabha seat. BJP-led NDA sweeps Bihar Bharatiya Janata Party-led NDA has swept Bihar Lok Sabha election. BJP, JD-U, and LJP candidates are ahead on 37 seats out of 40 Lok Sabha seats. RJD and Congress are ahead on just three seats as per the trends available so far. Ravi Shankar Prasad set for big win in Patna Sahib BJP’s Ravi Shankar Prasad leading over Congress’s Shatrughan Sinha from Patna Sahib with a margin of 144249 votes. Shatrughan Sinha, who joined the Congress just days ahead of elections, had represented the seat twice. Bihar Election Result LIVE BJP’s Giriraj Singh has extended his lead over CPI’s Kanhaiya Kumar to over 2 lakh votes on Begusarai seat. Bihar Election Result LIVE: Ravi Shankar Prasad addressing media The NDA, BJP had got an overwhelming support from the people all across the country, including Bihar. My campaign on Patna Sahib seat was based on asha (hope) banam awsarvad (opportunism), says Ravi Shankar Prasad. Jharkhand election result: Shibu Soren trailing from Dumka Jharkhand Mukti Morcha chief Shibu Soren is trailing behind BJP’s Sunil Soren on Dumk seat. The NDA is ahead on 10 seats, Congress, JMM combine on 4 seats in Jharkhand as per the latest trends available. Begusarai election result LIVE Union Minister and BJP candidate Giriraj Singh is leading by over 1.25 lakh votes against CPI candidate Kanhaiya Kumar. Bihar Election Result LIVE: Shatrughan Sinha trailing Union minister Ravi Shankar Prasad is leading over his Congress rival Shatrughan Sinha by 12,734 votes. LJP candidate Chirag Paswan is leading against his RLSP rival Bhudeo Choudhary by 8,821 votes. Bihar Election Result 2019 Prominent leaders among those who are trailing are RJD’s Sharad Yadav, Union Minister Ram Kripal Yadav, former Lok Sabha speaker and Congress candidate Meera Kumar, RLSP’s Upendra Kushwaha and former chief minister Jitan Kumar Manjhi. Begusarai election result 2019: Kanhaiya Kumar trails Former Jawaharlal Nehru University Students Union leader Kanhaiya Kumar is trailing by 77,000 votes against BJP’s Giriraj Singh Bihar Election Result 2019 LIVE: Congress, RJD face humiliation in Bihar The RJD, Congress combine seems have failed to gather much public support in Bihar, trends for Lok Sabha election result show. While the RJD (Misa Bharti) is ahead from Patliputra seat, the Congress has failed to open its account. The BJP, JDU, LJP combine is ahead on 39 out of 40 seats in Bihar. Bihar, Jharkhand Election Result LIVE Rashtriya Janata Dal’s veteran leader and Lalu Yadav’s close aide Raghuvansh Prasad Singh is trailing from Vaishali Lok Sabha seat. Bihar Election Result 2019: Sadhu Yadav trailing Bahujan Samaj Party candidate and Lalu Yadav’s brother-in-law Sadhu Yadav is trailing from Maharajganj Lok Sabha seat. Bihar Election Result LIVE: Shatrughan Sinha trailing Shatrughan Sinha trailing by 4000 votes on Patna Sahib seat against his BJP rival Union Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad. Jharkhand Election Result LIVE: Jayant Sinha leading in Hazaribagh Union Minister and sitting BJP MP Jayant Sinha leading in Hazaribagh seat against his nearest Congress rival Gopal Prasad Sahu. BJP’s sitting MP Vishnu Dayal Ram is leading by 9,450 votes against his nearest RJD rival Ghuran Ram in Palamau. In Khunti Lok Sabha seat Kali Charan Munda of the Congress is leading against his nearest BJP rival and former chief minister Arjun Munda by 1,113 votes. Bihar Election Result LIVE: Rajiv Pratap Rudy leading from Saran, Misa Bharti trailing BJP’s Rajiv Pratap Rudy is leading from Saran seat against RJD candidate and Tej Pratap Yadav’s father-in-law Chandrika Rai. Lalu Yadav’s daughter Misa Bharti is trailing from Patliputra seat. Jharkhand Election Result 2014: BJP ahead in Ranchi Bharatiya Janata Party candidate Sanjay Seth is running ahead on Ranchi Lok Sabha seat in Jharkhand. Bihar Election Result LIVE: NDA on course of sweeping Bihar The BJP-led NDA looks on course of sweeping Bihar. The alliance is ahead on 29 seats, while the UPA is leading on 8 seats. Exit polls had predicted that he NDA will win 30 out of 40 seats in the state. Bihar Election Result LIVE: Kanhaiya Kumar trailing from Begusarai Union Minister Giriraj Singh is running ahead of Kanhaiya Kumar on Begusarai Lok Sabha seat. RJD’s Tanweer Hasan is the other candidate on the seat. Bihar Result LIVE: BJP takes initial lead The BJP-led NDA has taken initial lead as couting of in Bihar is underway. NDA is leading on 9 seats. Bihar, Jharkhand Election Result LIVE Counting of votes on all 40 Lok Sabha seats of Bihar, and 14 of Jharkhand begins. Exit polls have predicted that the BJP will get a clear majority in both the states. Bihar Election Result LIVE: The big battle for Begusarai The Rashtriya Janata Dal fielded Tanweer Hasan from Begusarai. In 2014, Hasan had given a tough fight to BJP’s Bhola Singh who eventually won the election. Bihar election result LIVE: All eyes will be on Begusarai seat Begusarai attracted huge media attention during campaigning. The erstwhile stronghold of the Left is witnessing an interesting battle between CPI candidate Kanhaiya Kumar, former Jawaharlal Nehru University Students Union president and Giriraj Singh, who is Minister of State for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in the Narendra Modi government. Bihar Election Result LIVE Results of seats like Begusarai, Patna Sahib, Saran, Jamui, Patliputra are eagerly awaited as these Lok Sabha constituencies witnessed contest between ‘star’ candidates. Bihar, Jharkhand Election Result LIVE Counting of votes for Lok Sabha election 2019 is set to start in a short while from now. Follow all the latest updates HERE Bihar election result LIVE Voting on 40 Lok Sabha seats in Bihar was held across all seven phases from April 11 to May 19. Bihar, Jharkhand Election Result LIVE Hello and welcome to Financial Express.com for live coverage of the Bihar, Jharkhand Lok Sabha election result 2019. Stay tuned for all the latest updates as counting of votes is scheduled to begin in a short while from now.
