Indian Father sets Daughter on Fire over her Phone Addiction

"he got furious and poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze."

Mohamad Mansuri, aged 40, of Virar, Mumbai, was arrested on Monday, December 31, 2018, after setting his daughter on fire after becoming angry with her because she was constantly hooked to her mobile phone.

The incident took place at their home and it was just the two of them as Mansuri’s wife and other three children were away.

It was heard that Mansuri had previously warned his 16-year-old daughter about her constantly on the phone to her friends.

The girl had told her father that she had lost her phone, but when Mansuri caught her on the phone on Monday, December 31, 2018, they got into a heated argument.

Mansuri thought the constant mobile phone use was because she had been talking to a boy. He became angry and smashed the phone on the ground following the argument.

He later poured kerosene on her and set her on fire. Neighbours heard the teenager’s screams and rushed to the house to help.

They immediately took her to a local hospital where she was later transferred to JJ hospital in Mumbai in a critical condition.

A police officer from Virar police station said: “Mansuri didn’t approve of his eldest daughter, a Class 4 dropout, speaking to her friends on the phone. He had twice warned her to not do so.

“The girl told her father that her mobile was lost, but when he caught her talking on the phone on Monday again, he got furious and poured kerosene on her and set her ablaze.”

Deputy superintendent of police Jayant Bajbale also spoke about the incident, he said:

“On Monday afternoon, Mansuri saw his daughter speaking on her phone when he went to tell her to serve lunch. He thought she was speaking to a boy, which made him angry.”

The teenage girl underwent immediate treatment as she suffered burn injuries to 70 per cent of her body.

Dr Sanjay Surase, medical superintendent at JJ hospital, said: “The victim has suffered injuries on more than 60 per cent on both upper and lower limbs.

“It is 3rd-degree burn injuries, which is fire exposure from domestic gas. Her vitals are stable, however, she is under observation right now.”

Mansuri was arrested and charged with attempted murder under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code.

DS Bajbale added: “We have arrested Mansuri under Section 307 (attempt to murder) of the IPC and he has been remanded in police custody after being produced in court on Tuesday.”

Another officer said: “Mansuri is now resenting his action and says that the crime was committed in a fit of rage.”
