Odisha election results: Fingers crossed as all eyes on Odisha’s 152 counting centres

BHUBANESWAR: The stage is set for counting of votes for the high-stake simultaneous Lok Sabha and assembly elections on Thursday when fate of 174 LS and 1,127 assembly candidates will be decided. The big political debate occupying people’s mind in Odisha is whether chief minister Naveen Patnaik will retain the state for the fifth term, as has been predicted by various agencies, or the BJP will storm to power proving the exit polls wrong.Though chief minister Naveen Patnaik has not responded to the exit polls predictions of BJD doing well in the Vidhan Sabha but losing out LS seats to BJP, most of his party leaders are of the view that the regional party will do extremely well in both.“Naveen’s popularity remains intact. All those speculating the contrary will be proved wrong. The BJD will have an easy victory in the Vidhan Sabha and have enough LS seats in its kitty,” said senior BJD leader Amar Prasad Satpathy.Though there was no official confirmation, both NDA and UPA are believed to have reached out to Naveen seeking his support in case of a hung Parliament.The Naveen-led party has publically said it would be open to support any political formation which fulfils Odisha’s legitimate demands of special category status.BJP leaders are of the view that the saffron party will replace the BJD in the state. “The writing on the wall is clear. Apart from contributing substantial number of MPs from the state to strengthen Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s hands, the BJP will form the government in the state and work towards its promise of a New Odisha,” state BJP president Basanta Panda.Chief electoral officer Surendra Kumar said elaborate arrangements have been made for smooth counting of votes across 152 counting centres in 63 locations. “Around 6,700 officials will be engaged in the counting. Efforts are being made for maximum transparency and faster dissemination of information,” he said.Apprehending violence, police have deployed maximum resources for an incident-free counting process and its aftermath. Thirty-six companies of central armed police force, 250 platoons of Odisha State Armed Police Force have been deployed. “Mobile patrolling has been intensified. Special attention is being given to constituencies which have witnessed violence in the recent past and the ones likely to witness close contests,” said DGP Rajendra Prasad Sharma.Results are being keenly watched in the LS seats of Kendrapada, Puri, Cuttack and Bhubaneswar. In Kendrapada, Baijayant ‘Jay’ Panda, who won from the seat in past two elections on BJD ticket, is contesting from BJP this time and is pitted against actor-turned politician Anubhav Mohanty (BJD) and Dharinidhar Nayak (Congress).In Bhubaneswar, IAS officer-turned politician Aparajita Sarangi (BJP) is lodged in a fierce battle with former Mumbai police commissioner Arup Patnaik. Former DGP Prakash Mishra faces seasoned politician Bhartuhari Mahtab in Cuttack. BJP’s TV face Sambit Patra challenges sitting BJD MP and Supreme Court lawyer Pinaki Mishra in Puri.
