Odisha Congress coordination panel convener quits post

SAMBALPUR: Even before the Lok Sabha and assembly results are out, the churning has started within the Congress with(Representative image), the convener of the party’s coordination committee, resigning from the post in protest against wrong selection of candidates. Patnaik has also quit the membership of the state election committee (PEC), dealing a blow to the party a day before counting of votes.Addressing a press conference here on Wednesday, Patnaik said some criteria had been set to select candidates before the election. “But it was not followed during the distribution of tickets,” he alleged.Pointing finger at the party leadership in Odisha for its failure to capitalise on the gains of the assembly results in Rajasthan, Madhya Paradesh and Chhattisgarh, Patnaik said, “There was resentment among the people of Odisha over issues pertaining to farming, communalism and failure of the state government. Moreover, Rahul Gandhi’s visits had created a very good political atmosphere for Congress in Odisha and the party had the opportunity to do well. But we failed to cash in on the opportunity because our organization was weak.”Patnaik also launched an attack on former Union minister Jitendra Singh, who was appointed the Congress’ Odisha in charge last year in March. “There were many committees that were formed in the state Congress before the election, including manifesto committee, coordination committee and publicity committee. But surprisingly, barring the manifesto committee, not a single committee functioned during the election. Though Singh is the chairperson of the coordination committee, not a single meeting of the committee was held during the election,” Patnaik said.The senior Congress leader said he has sent in his resignation to Rahul but affirmed he hasn’t quit the party. He added that the party should review its shortcomings and decide the future course of action.Talking about the exit polls which predict a dismal performance by the Congress in Odisha, Patnaik said it creates an opportunity for discussion. “But the fact is that the Congress is not in a position to perform well in the state. But the party will do better than what the exit poll has predicted,” he added.
