Siddaramaiah dismisses exit poll predictions, says Cong will win 16 to 18 seats in Karnataka

Mysuru: “I have campaigned in all the 28 Lok Sabha seats, and I know in which direction the political winds are blowing. That is why I find it hard to believe when I see exit polls giving the JD(S)-Congress coalition three seats in Karnataka ,” said senior Congress leader and former chief minister Siddaramaiah on Wednesday.Siddaramaiah, who was in the city on Wednesday, exuded confidence of the Congress bagging 16 to 18 seats in Karnataka. However, he voiced his reservations about the reliability of the Electronic Voting Machines (EVMs). “I have my doubts about EVMs, which function on the basis of a software,” he said.Rejoining reporters who queried him about the poor show predicted by the surveys, Siddaramaiah asked, “Who do you think will have a better picture of the results? Those of us who have campaigned on the ground or those who have carried out these surveys? How can Congress get just three to five seats in Karnataka?”‘BJP tampering with EVMs only in select seats’The former CM also questioned Karnataka inspector general of police D Roopa’s statements in favour of using EVMs. Siddaramaiah further alleged that the BJP was tampering EVMs only in select constituencies so as to avoid arousing suspicion. “They are not meddling with the EVMs in all seats since that would create doubts. It is impossible for the BJP to win as many seats in the state as predicted by the exit polls. The saffron party is using the exit polls to conceal the fact that they are tampering with EVMs,” Siddaramaiah said.Meanwhile, the former CM fired yet another broadside at Prime Minister Narendra Modi , accusing the latter and the BJP of resorting to undemocratic means to grab power in Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh. Questioning Modi’s reluctance to hold a press conference, Siddaramaiah said, “BJP has no faith in democracy. The party is destroying it.”Siddaramaiah assured the people that he would speak to social welfare minister Priyank Kharge about denial of scholarship to students from OBC communities to pursue higher education abroad.Senior Congress member and MLA R Roshan Baig’s remarks Siddaramaiah dismissed as those of a resentful leader. “Baig is hungry for power. He wanted to become a minister. He also sought a Lok Sabha ticket. Since he was denied both, he decided to speak against the party. The party leadership will decide on what is to be done,” the former CM said. On being called arrogant, Siddaramaiah said, “Those with self-respect will understand me. I don’t care about others.”Siddaramaiah, however, refused to react to statements made by JD(S) state president Adagooru H Vishwanath. “I will not react to his statements in public. I will raise the issue at the next meeting of the coordination committee,” he said.
