Kerala election results: Cong-led UDF set to sweep state, massive lead for Rahul in Wayanad

Key Highlights Rahul Gandhi has a massive lead in Wayanad in Kerala, he is however locked in a close battle in Amethi (UP) against BJP's Smriti Irani

Congress's Shashi Tharoor has moved ahead in Thiruvanthapuram

NEW DELHI: The Congress-led UDF alliance is leading in Kerala, according to Lok Sabha election results from the state. Kerala had witnessed heavy polling at 77.68%. The UDF is leading on 19 seats, while the CPM-led LDF was only ahead on 1 seat. 20 seats up for grabs in the state.

Star candidate Rahul Gandhi has a massive lead of over two lakh votes from Wayanad in Kerala, however the picture is different from Amethi (UP) where is locked in a close contest against BJP's Smriti Irani.

In Wayanad, Rahul was pitted against LDF's P P Suneer, a young CPI leader. A key constituency in 2019, Wayanad is one of the youngest districts (1980) and parliamentary constituencies (2009) in the state -- thanks to the candidature of the Congress president. Considered a safe bet for the Congress president, in 2009, Congress party's M I Shanavas defeated CPI's M Rahmatullah by over 1.5 lakh votes. In 2014, Shanavas won again, defeating CPI's Sathyan Mokeri by a reduced margin of 20,000 votes. The constituency has a strong presence of the minority community, including Muslims, Christians and Jains.

Congress candidate Shashi Tharoor has moved ahead in Thiruvanathapuram, contesting against NDA candidate Kummanam Rajasekharan and LDF candidate CPI's C Divakaran. In 2014, Tharoor (34%) had beaten O Rajagopal of the BJP (32.3%) by 15,470 votes.

The CPM is ahead in Alappuzha, where sitting party legislator A M Arif is ahead of Congress candidate Shanimol Usman by around 4,000 votes.

E P Jayarajan, senior CPM cabinet minister and number two in the Pinarayi Vijayan state government said what has happened in Kerala is due to religious grouping in voting patterns and it favoured the Congress-led UDF.

"This is a setback and we will look into what happened. This is not against the state government. Just look, nationally the Congress has been wiped out," said Jayarajan.

In 2014, UDF had won 12 seats and LDF 8 seats here, with the BJP failing to make any headway in the state. In terms of individual party vote share, the Congress had 31.1%, CPM had 21.59%, CPI 7.59% and others 28.22%. The BJP did not win any seat but managed to record a vote share of 10.33%.


