Chhattisgarh Election Results 2019 Highlights : BJP leads in 9 seats, Congress ahead in 2

NEW DELHI: The BJP is leading in nine out of the 11 Lok Sabha seats in Chhattisgarh, while the ruling Congress is ahead in the remaining two, according to the latest counting trends in the state.The saffron party is ahead of its rivals in Raipur, Durg, Rajnandgaon , Raigarh, Surguja, Korba, Janjgir-Champa, Kanker and Bilaspur seats. Its rival is leading in the Naxal-hit Bastar and in Mahasamund seats.The BJP would be hoping to repeat its 2014 performance in the state when it won 10 of the 11 seats. However, the Congress, which won 68 of the 90 seats in the last year's state assembly polls, will be hoping to turn the tide in its favour. It was one of the three Hindi Belt states where the Congress was able to wrest power from the BJP in 2018.Following its defeat in the assembly polls, the saffron the party has replaced all sitting MPs and fielded fresh faces for the 2019 Lok Sabha polls in the state.The BJP’s decision to change all candidates was seen as a move to beat the anti-incumbency against the sitting parliamentarians in the state.In 2014, though the Congress could win only one seat, its vote share was 39%. The BJP, on the other hand, registered a vote share of 49.66%.The state went to poll in three phases for its 11 Lok Sabha seats. An impressive 68.66% polling was recorded from the states, including the Naxal-affected Bastar constituency.A total of 166 candidates are in the fray for the 11 Lok Sabha seats. The key issues in the state were farmers and tribal welfare policies.One of the key constituencies in the state is the capital city of Raipur where BJP's Ramesh Bais enjoys considerable political clout. He has represented the constituency seven times. However, for 2019 polls, BJP dropped Bias in favour of a fresh face, Sunil Soni, who will be facing Pramod Dubey of the Congress.In the Naxal-affected Bastar constituency, as many as eight candidates are contesting. A day before the first phase of voting, BJP MLA Bhima Mandavi and four policemen were killed in an IED explosion in Dantewada.
