Avani Chaturvedi Current Affairs, GK & News

Avani Chaturvedi Current Affairs, GK & News

Flight Lieutenant Mohana Singh has become the first woman fighter pilot to fly by day a Hawk advanced jet aircraft. She achieved the feat at the Kalaikunda Air Force Station in West Bengal. Lt Mohana’s training involved flying both air-to-air combat and air-to-ground missions. She has undertaken many practice missions which involved firing of rockets, ..

Topics: Aircraft • Avani Chaturvedi • Aviation • Bhawana Kanth • Fighter pilot • Indian people • Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21 • Mohana Singh Jitarwal

Flight Lieutenant Bhawana Kanth scripted history by becoming first woman pilot of Indian Air Force (IAF) to qualify to undertake combat missions on a fighter jet. About Bhawana Kanth She is from the first batch of women fighter pilots of the IAF and joined the fighter squadron in November 2017. For the first time she ..

Month: Current Affairs - May, 2019

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Avani Chaturvedi • Bhawana Kanth • Fighter pilot • Flight lieutenant • Indian Air Force • MiG-21 Bison • Mohana Singh • Operational by Day

Flying Officer Meghana Shanbough MR, an engineering graduate, has become the sixth female fighter pilot to join the ranks of Indian Air Force (IAF). She is the first from Karnataka and South India. She graduates from the Air Force Academy (AFA) in Dundigal. The other fighter pilots: Avani Chaturvedi from Madhya Pradesh, Bhawana Kanth from ..

Topics: Air Force Academy • Avani Chaturvedi • Aviation • Bhawana Kanth • Chaturvedi • Fighter pilot • Hakimpet • Hakimpet Air Force Station • Helicopter Training School • Indian Air Force • Mohana Singh Jitarwal • States and union territories of India

Flying officer Avani Chaturvedi from Madhya Pradesh has scripted history by becoming the first Indian woman to fly a fighter aircraft solo. She flew a MiG-21 bison in her first solo sortie from IAF’s Jamnagar base in Gujarat on February 19. She is one of the three in the first batch of female pilots, besides ..

Topics: Avani Chaturvedi • Aviation • Bhawana Kanth • Chaturvedi • Fighter pilot • Indian Air Force • Indian people • Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-21 • Mohana Singh Jitarwal • States and union territories of India

Flying officer Avani Chaturvedi (24) created history by becoming first Indian woman pilot of Indian Air Force (IAF) to complete a solo flight in a MiG-21 Bison fighter aircraft. She had achieved this feat by completing half-an-hour long solo flight in Russian-origin jet in the skies over Jamnagar Air Base, Gujarat. The first solo flight ..

Month: Current Affairs - February, 2018

Category: Defence Current Affairs

Topics: Avani Chaturvedi • Defence • Gender equality • Indian Airforece • Persons in News • Woman pilot • Women Related Issues
