Indian Road Congress sets rules for BMC to concretise footpaths

While the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) has been finalising the pedestrian policy over the last two years and recently, declared the concretisation of footpaths by replacing paver blocks, a list of guidelines set by the Indian Road Congress (IRC) has been passed. The IRC set guidelines to ensure better facilities for pedestrians and therefore, revised them in 2012. In the absence of a city-specific policy, the municipal corporation is supposed to develop roads and footpaths according to the IRC 103-2012 guidelines. The rules are not rigid and underline a holistic approach towards walkability.

The guidelines are based on physical characteristics as well as feasibility. As per the guidelines, to walk comfortably, an even surface without cracks or bumps is required. A surface meant for walking should be stable, firm, and slip-resistant. The footpath should be wide (not less than 1.8 metre) enough to accommodate the flow of pedestrians at any given point of time. However, the IRC took the average road width in the country into their consideration and made it flexible. In case of roads less than 10 metre in width, a width of 1.5 metre for footpaths is acceptable. There are also instructions with regard to height. Maintaining a height of 2.2 metre is required and thus, no tree branches, utility poles, electric or telecom boxes, or signboards should be there up to the said height.

The footpath should be free from obstructions. The obstruction could be an electric pole, a tree, a garbage bin, or hoardings. Informal commercial activities are a part of footpaths in India. The informal sector like shops and so on has to be integrated by providing alternate spaces for them to operate. To protect pedestrians from vehicles, the footpaths have to be raised by 15 centimetre or half a foot and guardrails must be installed. But, the most important part is continuity. Frequent ups and downs make the footpaths uncomfortable especially for old and disabled pedestrians. The provision of kerb ramps is essential for the continuity of any footpath.

"The city's footpaths are not the best. The BMC should have to take a holistic approach while designing them. Details like the flow of pedestrians, parking, crossing, intersection, entry points have to be accurate," said Dhaval Ashar, transport expert from the World Resource Institute. He added, "Only even surface footpaths are not good enough if they don't have an intersection and continuity."

FOR FEASIBILITY'S SAKE
