1 jawan dies, 7 injured in Mendhar blast

1 jawan dies, 7 injured in Mendhar blast

No IED explosion, blast occurred during training activity: Army

MENDHAR, May 22: An army jawan was killed while seven others were injured, one of them critically, in a blast during a “training activity” along the Line of Control (LoC) in Dera Dabi area of Mendhar in Poonch district on Wednesday.

“On Wednesday at 0915 hours, during a training activity on a military post in Mendhar sector, one soldier was critically injured and later succumbed to injuries,” PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand said.

The jawan who succumbed to his injuries has been identified as Naik Shreeshailappa Balabatti, 34, resident of district Bagalkot, Karnataka. He joined the army in 2005. He is survived by his wife Geetha.

Seven others also suffered injuries and two of them were taken to the Udhampur military hospital. Another injured soldier identified as Naik Tusserappa too is critical however the condition of others was stated to be stable.

The incident took place at Puna forward post of the 12 Madras Regiment.

Initial reports suggested that an army patrol of 12 Madras regiment was passing through the area near Dera Dabsi when an IED explosion took place. In the explosion, eight soldiers suffered injuries and were evacuated to nearby army's health facility, they said. One among the injured soldiers succumbed to injuries. “Militants had planted an IED across LoC and an army party trapped while patrolling. In the subsequent IED explosion, an army jawan lost his life and two others sustained serious injuries,” the reports had claimed.

However army denied these reports stating that it was not an IED explosion but blast occurred during training activity.

“There was no IED blast in Poonch, army soldier was injured in accidental explosive during training,” the defence spokesman stated.

“One soldier got seriously injured while others suffered minor injuries in a training event accident in forward area in Poonch sector. There was no IED blast in the area. It was an accidental explosive of low intensity which caused injuries to our soldiers,” he said.

Local army sources said this morning a mysterious blast took place during a training activity near Line of Control in Mendhar Sector of Poonch district in which an army jawan died while two jawans were injured in the mishap, other troops immediately rescued them and shifted him to unit dispensary from where they were airlifted to command hospital Udhampur.
