Dimple Kapadia to star in Christopher Nolan’s Film ‘Tenet’?

This includes Anil Kapoor who simply said: "Phenomenal."

A lot of details regarding Christopher Nolan’s next film have been revealed, including some of the cast such as Dimple Kapadia.

The film is titled Tenet and deals with the changing world of international espionage.

Cast members initially included John David Washington, Robert Pattinson and Elizabeth Debicki.

Tenet has now added more cast members such as Aaron-Taylor Johnson, Kenneth Branagh and Bollywood actress Dimple Kapadia.

The announcement took the Internet by storm and many are congratulating the actress for her new film role.

Fans and fellow Bollywood stars sent messages of congratulations on social media. This includes Anil Kapoor who simply said: “Phenomenal.”

The film will be shot across the world in seven countries, as is expected in a film of this genre. Nolan reportedly chose Estonia and Italy as two locations and has also chosen India.

This comes after the changing landscape of filming in India was discussed.

This will not be Nolan’s first time filming in India as he previously shot scenes in Jodhpur for The Dark Knight Rises.

He also visited Mumbai for a special IMAX screening of Dunkirk and Interstellar so the filmmaker knows his way around the country.

Nolan is set to produce the film with his wife Emma Thomas who is serving as executive producer.

Other members of Nolan’s innovative team include Hoyte Van Hoytema as the cinematographer, Jennifer Lame as the editor, Jeffrey Kurland as the costume designer and Andrew Jackson as visual effects supervisor, with Ludwig Goransson composing.

However, this will be the first time since 2006 in The Prestige where Nolan will not be working with renowned composer Hans Zimmer.

When the film was announced in January 2019, it had been shrouded in secrecy and was only described as a “big innovative blockbuster”.

That was enough to get fans excited as the director is known for creative stories and visually stunning cinematography.

Dimple Kapadia is a veteran in Bollywood and has delivered memorable performances including her 1973 debut in Bobby where she won the Filmfare Award for Best Actress.

Her announcement in Nolan’s film is huge but will not be her first venture in western cinema. She starred in Leela (2002) where she played a woman who falls for a younger man.

While details about Tenet are still scarce, it will be intriguing to see what kind of role Dimple will play.

Principal photography for Tenet is set to begin in June 2019 and is set for a July 17, 2020 release.
