Meet Bhawana Kanth, The First Woman Fighter Pilot Of The Indian Air Force

On Wednesday, Bhawana Kanth flew a MiG-21 Bison aircraft to complete her operational syllabus to carry out combat missions. When she landed, she had created history. The 26-year-old from Begusarai, Bihar, became the first woman fighter pilot of the Indian Air Force (IAF) to qualify for combat missions by day.

Bhawana is part of the first batch of women fighter pilots of IAF and only the second woman ever to conduct a solo fight. The Indian Air Force announced the news with the hashtag #Girlpower.

#WomenPower: Flt Lt Bhawana Kanth adds another feather to her cap by completing Day Operational syllabus on MiG-21 Bison aircraft. She is the first women fighter pilot to be qualified to undertake missions by day on a fighter aircraft. pic.twitter.com/J5SWN8A4oD — Indian Air Force (@IAF_MCC) May 22, 2019

Bhawana, who grew up the refinery township of Begusarai, joined the fighter squadron in November 2017 and flew her first solo flight on a MiG-21 Bison in March 2018. She was an engineering student before joining the IAF and fostered the dream to become a pilot from a young age.

Bhawana’s father Tej Narayan Kanth, an electrical engineer with the Indian Oil Corporation, told a leading national daily: “Bhawana was good at studies right from the beginning. She used to talk about flying from her school days. Even though she pursued engineering from Bengaluru, she kept trying for the Air Force. We are so proud of her.”

The news of Bhawana’s triumph comes the same day as her hometown is in the news. Begusarai was a closely watched electoral match between CPI’s candidate Kanhaiya Kumar, the JNU student leader who mesmerised the nation in 2016, and BJP’s Giriraj Singh.

While Kanhaiya may have not won the ballot, Bhawana’s triumph is a step in the right direction for real representation of women in the defence forces. This year has seen the cause take many leaps and bounds. From India’s army chief publicly stating that women are not fit for combat on the front lines to a new rule which allowed women officers to be granted Permanent Commission in the Indian Army in all the ten branches where women were earlier inducted for Short Service Commission. Then there were smaller victories won on the way, like the decision to post women officers as defence attaches in India’s overseas missions.

You may ask, why do we celebrate Bhawana Kamath’s achievement? The face of women in war has always been one of victimhood, and she offers a powerful counter-image. And these are the images that we all need to see.
