India Election Results: 10 reasons why Narendra Modi-led BJP won Lok Sabha elections 2019

No PM face

Divided opposition

Negative politics

Nyay came too late

Women

National Security

Developmental activities

Alliances

Political strategy

Hindutva

Caste equations

The BJP has done it again. Led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi and party president Amit Shah , it has demolished its opponents in the 2019 Lok Sabha election as in 2014.Going by the trends as counting of votes continues, BJP looks set to improve on its 2014 performance.The BJP had won 282 out of 543 Lok Sabha seats in 2014. This year, the party looks set to increase its tally. Here are some of the reasons that helped the BJP return to power.While the BJP-led NDA had an undisputed leader in Prime Minister Narendra Modi, there was no such face in the opposition camp. Congress president Rahul Gandhi was acceptable only to a couple of its alliance partners, one of them being the DMK. There was no unanimity among the opposition parties about any other prime ministerial candidate either. West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee , BSP supremo Mayawati, former prime minister HD Deve Gowda, NCP president Sharad Pawar were some of the leaders who had thrown their hat in the ring for the PM’s post, creating a confusing picture for the voters.A united Opposition contesting the elections together look like a possibility when top leaders shared the stage at the swearing-in ceremony of Karnataka CM HD Kumaraswamy last year. Most of the opposition leaders such as Sonia Gandhi , Rahul Gandhi, Arvind Kejriwal, Sitaram Yechury, Tejashwi Yadav, Mamata Banerjee, Akhilesh Yadav and Mayawati joined hands and held them aloft presenting a picture of unity. However, by the time elections were announced in March, most of them parted ways and were seen fighting against each other. The BSP and SP joined hands in Uttar Pradesh, which returns the maximum number of 80 seats to the Lok Sabha, leaving the Congress behind. Similarly, the Congress and the Left did not align in Kerala or in West Bengal. The BSP did not forge an alliance with the Congress either in Madhya Pradesh or in Rajasthan. Though NCP and the Congress are alliance partners at the national level, they fought against each other in Gujarat. This is what led Narendra Modi to call the opposition unity as ‘mahamilawat’ (massive adulteration). He said they were like oil and water which do not gel even though they are mixed together.The negative politics of the opposition parties also led to its rout. Instead of presenting their own plan if they came to power, they focused more on attacking Narendra Modi. Rahul Gandhi’s ‘chowkidar chor hai’ jibe has been rejected by the voters as well as his allegation that PM Modi indulged in corruption in the Rafale deal.Rahul Gandhi talked about distributing Rs 6,000 per month to the 20 per cent poorest households. Though it appeared impressive on the face of it, Rahul Gandhi was late in announcing the sche,e. It was announced in the last week of March, a few days before the first phase of elections which took place on April 11.The women seem to have proved decisive in Narendra Modi’s victory. The PM’s programmes such as construction of toilets under the Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-G) and distribution of LPG cylinders under the Ujjwala Yojana. These programmes cut across castes and religions. Besides them, Narendra Modi also wooed the Muslim women by promising to do away with the evil practice of triple talaq. Though the government introduced a bill, it could not get it passed. Subsequently, it promulgated an ordinance to ban it.During the election campaigning, PM Narendra Modi, BJP president Amit Shah and other party leaders boasted about the February 26 Balakot air strikes carried out to avenge Pulwana terror attack in which 40 CRPF personnel were martyred. They also reminded the voters about the September 2016 surgical strikes launched to avenge Uri terror attack. Modi “ghar mein ghus ke marunga” (will enter their house and strike) and also that India will respond with cannon if it is hit by gunshots (goli ka jawab gola se diya jayega) were common refrains. Modi also sought to remind the people that the internal security situation had never been as secure as it was in the last five years when no terror strikes took place on the civilians and outside the Kashmir Valley.It is not that Narendra Modi, Amit Shah and other BJP leaders harped only on the air strikes and surgical strikes. A considerable part of their election speeches covered the developmental activities undertaken by the NDA government. They talked about schemes to build toilets, distribute gas cylinders, electrify households, build houses, release money under the Mudra yojana to start business, Ayushman Bharat Yojana for health insurance cover for the poor, open Jan Dhan accounts, build roads and the likes.The BJP scored over its opponents in stitching alliances, sharing seats with alliance partners and building a solid electoral strategy. The Congress and other opposition parties could not join hands in all the respective states to take on the BJP. In fact, they worked on cross-purposes in several states. While the BSP and SP did not field their joint candidates on two seats of Amethi for Congress president and Raebareli for his mother Sonia Gandhi, they issued statements against each other. Similarly, the Congress and Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) failed to forge an alliance in Delhi. On the other hand, the BJP followed the give and take policy to keep NDA intact. Even though it had won 21 seats in Bihar in 2014 and Nitish Kumar-led JDU was victorious on just two of the 40 seats, the BJP made a climb down and agreed to contest on only 17 seats. It gave 17 seats to JDU, six seats to Ram Vilas Paswan’s LJP. It also kept the Maharashtra-centric Shiv Sena in good humour over seat-sharing arrangements.Second, the BJP built upon a strategy to win seats in the Northeast and the eastern states of West Bengal and Odisha to offset the losses they would have suffered in states such as Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Delhi, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh. This worked to their advantage. It did not lose much in UP and in fact matched or bettered its 2014 performance.Narendra Modi wore Hinduism on his sleeves and never appeared apologetic about it. He proudly took holy dip in the confluence of three rivers in Prayagraj during Kumbh. He repeatedly took part in ‘aarti’ by the Ganga in Varanasi, the latest one a day ahead of filing his nomination from his constituency. On May 18, just a day ahead of the last phase of elections, he left for Kedarnath shrine and sat in a cave to meditate while dressed as a hermit. On the other hand, he mocked Rahul Gandhi for choosing to contest also from Wayanad besides his traditional seat of Amethi. He said the Congress president had chosen a seat where the majority was in the minority. This majoritarianism seems to have helped the BJP and the NDA.On the one hand, the BJP created the correct caste equations and on the other hand it demolished the caste equations of the opposition parties. In alliance with the JD(U) and LJP in Bihar, the BJP beat the formidable mahagathbandhan of Lalu Prasad-led RJD, Upendra Kushwaha’s RLSP, VIP of the fishermen and the Congress. The Modi government did it by wooing all sections of the society - Dalits, OBCs and upper castes. It made several symbolic gestures to the Dalits such as releasing two commemorative coins of Rs 10 and Rs 125 denominations on the Mahaparinirvan Divas (death anniversary) of Babasaheb Ambedkar in 2015. The government had a bill passed for creation of National Commission of OBCs and another one for granting 10 per cent quota in government jobs and educational institutions for economically weaker sections irrespective of religion and caste.
