Farm distress pitch by Congress fails to find resonance in rural areas of Hindi heartland

Farm distress, a potent issue raked up by Congress in the run-up to parliamentary elections, did not seem to resonate on the ground with BJP sweeping almost all Lok Sabha segments in Hindi heartland states witnessing perennial farm crisis.The Congress had made a pro-farmer pitch in its manifesto promising a separate farmer budget to ensure the farmers know their rights. The party had hoped that this coupled with farm loan waivers extended by newly-formed Congress governments in Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh would help the party in swinging its political fortunes. However, the results clearly show that farm distress was not a consideration when the electors voted in crisis-ridden Vidarbha in Maharashtra and Hadoti region across Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.Maharashtra’s Vidarbha, a region BJP-Shiv Sena alliance swept winning all 10 seats in 2014 parliamentary election, shows a very small dent. The ruling alliance won eight of the 10 seats spread across 11 districts of Nagpur and Amravati divisions. The only two seats which Congress-NCP alliance did well on were Amravati and Chandrapur. In Amravati, Navnit Ravi Rana, an independent supported by Congress-NCP, defeated Shiv Sena’s Anandrao Adsul and Chandrapur was won by Congress’ Suresh Dhanorkar against BJP’s Gangaram Ahir.In Rajasthan, Hadoti region spreads across two parliamentary segments – Kota-Bundi and Jhalawar-Baran. The parched belt is traditionally a BJP bastion where former chief minister Vasundhara Raje has considerable influence. Despite suicides by garlic farmers steeped in debt last year and Raje’s defeat in November 2018 elections, BJP has been able to bag both the parliamentary segments. In Kota, Om Birla won by almost 3 lakh votes and Raje’s son Dushyant Singh bagged Jhalawar-Baran seat with a margin of close to 5 lakh votes. The performance of Congress in Rajasthan, and more specifically in Hadoti region, shows that Ashok Gehlot government’s farm loan waiver also could not swing it for the Congress.Just across the border in Madhya Pradesh’s Mandsour, where farmers had been killed in police firing in June 2017, the issue failed to turn the election. BJP’s Sudheer Gupta defeated Congress’ Meenakshi Natarajan by almost 4 lakh votes in Mandsour. Interestingly, Madhya Pradesh cief minister Kamal Nath had gone to great pains to prove his government’s record of waiving off farm loans. He had held special press conferences and even invited people to inspect records of waivers to counter a BJP campaign that refuted Congress government’s claims of waiver.
