Pakistan media closely monitors Indian election results

The results of the Lok Sabha elections in India made headlines in Pakistan on Thursday. Several Pakistani media platforms provided a comprehensive coverage of the results of the polls, which resulted in a landslide victory for PM Narendra Modi-led Bharatiya Janata Party.

The results of India's general elections are very significant for Pakistan as the formation of the next government in New Delhi will determine the course of Indo-Pakistan ties, which were pushed to a new low after the Pulwama terror attack.

The website of Dawn news carried a dedicated section for providing live updates about the results of major candidates contesting Lok Sabha elections, trends in market and reactions of the political leaders. Dawn headlined its top story as 'India wins again' says Modi; BJP set to secure historic victory in general election as votes are counted'. The Express Tribune carried an agency story titled 'Modi stuns opposition with massive' election win. Both media outlets also covered the congratulatory messages PM Narendra Modi received from the world leaders.

Geo TV, however kept the coverage simple by providing data only on the initial trends. Sate-run Radio Pakistan in its South Asia segment carried a story titled 'Modi's BJP leads in early India vote count'. Almost all media outlets including ARY News, The Nation and The News also covered the story. They also provided details of the coverage by the Indian media.

In April, Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan said he believed there may be a better chance of peace talks with India and settle the Kashmir issue if Modi's party BJP wins the general elections.

Tensions flared up between India and Pakistan after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Muhammed (JeM) killed 40 CRPF personnel in Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14.

The Indian Air Force (IAF) carried out a counter-terror operation, hitting the biggest JeM training camp in Balakot, deep inside Pakistan on February 26. The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and lost an F-16 fighter jet in an aerial combat with India's MiG-21 Bison. The pilot of the MiG 21, which also crashed during the combat, was captured by Pakistan and later released amid mounting diplomatic pressure. The relations between the two countries have remained battered since the incident.

(With inputs from PTI)
