Foreign policy challenges await the PM

By Dr Raj Kumar Sharma

Foreign policy is generally believed to play a marginal role in Indian general elections. PM Narendra Modi has been able buck this trend as he has earned a second term weaving his election campaign mainly around foreign policy and security issues. However, tricky foreign policy challenges await the PM as great power rivalry exacerbates in international politics bringing disruptions for India at bilateral and regional level.

US President Donald Trump is fighting a trade war with China while he has also hinted about differences with India over trade issues. Given his hallmark unpredictability, one cannot say for sure that Trump would not drag India into a similar trade war. Current US-Iran tensions would place India into a catch-22 situation as both the countries are important for India. Trump has also ended waivers for all the countries including India to buy oil from Iran. This will not only impact India-Iran relations but also India’s West Asia policy and connectivity to Afghanistan and Central Asia. The spectre of secondary sanctions like Countering American Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA) also looms as India has plans to buy big budget military purchases from Russia. India does not want disagreements to overpower its relations with the US which could spoil their strategic understanding to balance China.

India’s another challenge would be to balance between its Indo-Pacific and Eurasian strategies. Indo-Pacific seeks to balance China along with maritime democracies like the US, Japan and Australia while in Eurasia, India would want to deepen relations with Russia and manage differences with China. Russia’s overtures to Pakistan and its growing dependence on China have ruffled some feathers in New Delhi and PM Modi would need his personal chemistry with Russian President Putin to keep the strategic trust alive in this time-tested relationship. Some warmth is back in India-China relations after China did not block designation of MasoodAzhar as a global terrorist. There is likelihood of improved relations between the two Asian giants and it would be a sigh of relief for India in case the US-India relations enter troubled waters. There is an opportunity for both India and China to launch oil buyers club in the wake of Trump’s decision to end waivers. However, India has to deal with China’s growing profile in South Asia which squeezes India’s strategic space in its neighbourhood. Here, India has to reduce implementation gap as projects announced by India take years for completion giving an advantage to a more focused approach from China.

In South Asia, things are likely to change faster in Afghanistan where the US is desperate to strike a deal with the Taliban and withdraw from its longest ever war on a foreign soil. Taliban has been legitimized in Afghanistan as almost all the important powers have a contact with them. India’s dilemma is whether to have a dialogue with Taliban or not. Relations are frosty with Pakistan after India’s air strike at Balakot in response to Pak sponsored Pulwama terrorist attack. Given his stable and strengthened position in Indian parliament, PM Modi is well placed to initiate a dialogue process with Pakistan but the outcome is uncertain. Rise of Islamic State in Sri Lanka has raised some important questions for India as well. Some experts believe that ISIS has recruited some Muslim youths from South India and the Indian Ocean Region could be their next target.

By the 2024 elections, India would be close to $ 5 trillion economy but to achieve that target, India would need to safeguard its economic interests in international arena. In all likelihood, PM Modi would continue his focus on economic factors in his second term while navigating the complex relations among great and big powers and a clear mandate would help him in moving through the vagaries of international politics.

Dr Raj Kumar Sharma is an Academic Associate at the Faculty of Political Science, IGNOU, New Delhi.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
