Jaipur cops arrest gangsters looking to shoot other gang member in city

Increase in vigilance by the city police bore fruits when on Monday, the cops foiled a major gangwar and arrested three men looking to shoot down a member of the opposite gang. The cops confiscated a huge cache of arms from the men including three pistols and nearly four dozen live rounds. Notably, two of the arrested men belong to a third group and had been hired to conduct the firing while the one remaining miscreant is part of the gang that originally hatched the plan of gangwar.

Keeping in view the increasing incidents of firing using illegal weapons, a special team had been formed under senior officials that were tasked with gathering intelligence about men involved in such activities while steps were also taken to increase vigilance.

“The efforts revealed that gangster Manish Saini, who is lodged in jail, was looking to settle score with Gagan Pandit’s gang and for the purpose, Saini contacted Manish Bhandari of Kranti gang active in Haryana to shoot Rupa Meena of Gagan pandit gang. Bhandari is lodged in jail and he directed two of his gang members – Surendra Rundla and Dinesh Prajapat – to act. The duo was supported by Phoolchand alias Adi Yadav of Manish Saini gang in conducting recce about Rupa Meena,” officials said.

Meanwhile, after conducting the recce, the shooters of Manish Bhandari gang left the city informing they will come back within a week’s time to commit the act. “The police team learned of the plan and was keeping an eye on the movements of the miscreants. On Sunday, the team learned that the miscreants were in Nagrik Nagar in Sanganer police station area and informed the senior officials about the same. The CIU team of Commissionerate and Sanganer police team conducted a raid at their hideout and nabbed the three men while recovering three pistols, one extra magazine, one country-made pistol and 45 live rounds,” officials said, further adding, “Manish Saini is in touch with one man called Binda, a native of Rohtak in Haryana and a member of Kranti gang, with whose help the weapons were delivered in Kaman town of Bharatpur.”

Special Team

Keeping in view the increasing incidents of firing using illegal weapons, a special team had been formed under senior officials that were tasked with gathering intelligence about men involved in such activities while steps were also taken to increase vigilance.
