Bengal violence: A one-sided view

Editor,

Apropos Salil Gewali’s “Anarchy in Bengal” (ST May 23, 2019), I must say that I am not too concerned about the events in West Bengal. And as far as his lengthy second paragraph is concerned the writer should know that the rally that evening, conducted by Amit Shah and which ended in Vidyasagar College was watched by all across the country on neutral TV Channels. The four videos aired by TMC MP, Derrick O’Brien which I believe are not doctored, are enough to give us the true picture. Of course the dark side, according the writer might be there but to club the sad incident at Vidyasagar College with some shortcomings is to miss the full view of what was going around.

Mr Gewali may snub other writers and label those who were mute spectators as hypocrites. We should remember that ‘hypocrite’ stated a hundred times can well be defeated by ‘just ignoring them’. The fact is if we rake up a rotten mango which is odourless, the peel will emit an unpleasantly pungent smell. From different write-ups we learn to size up the writers and to understand which party they are affiliated to and where their loyalties lie.

Yours etc.,

Khyriem,

Nongkrem 15.

Modi magic

Editor,

As the nation waits with bated breath for the counting to be over, the NDA has come out victorious and staking claim to form the new government as the exit polls had predicted. Full credit must go to Narendra Modi and Amit Shah the strategist. Perhaps it is the will of the God that Modi should come for the second term to take up the reins of the country. And what was the incident that turned the tide in favour of Modi? Undoubtedly, it was the Pulwama terror attack and its subsequent retaliatory action against Pakistan that made the people rally behind Modi. All the gimmicks and poll promises made by Congress and its allies fell-flat and some of the allies received a fatal bow.

The greatest casualty in Indian politics is the Waterloo of the Communist party. Its presence in Kerala, West Bengal, Tripura and elsewhere seemed to have disappeared and dejected its leaders culminating in an unprecedented drubbing. And in West Bengal too, Mamata’s TMC could not put up a good show as per her pep talk as her strong bastions fell one by one silencing her for the time being. In Andhra Pradesh, Chandrababu Naidu a national figure bit the dust and his party TDP is completely wiped out from Andhra. Some of the regional parties also received a drubbing.

Coming back to the impressive win, the BJP has fairly captured a good number of seats to rule the country, and it performed well in the north except in Punjab. Elsewhere in the country too BJP has been able to garner as many seats as it could. The notable win posted by the BJP was in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Assam and Delhi.

Anyway, Kudos to Modi and Shah whose tireless work round the clock to come back to power is praiseworthy. Now, people have given the mandate, and it is up to them to rule the country well to wipe the tears of the farmers and other workers. Modi should not forget the trust people reposed in him and he has to rise to their aspirations. Modi’s first priority should be to wipe out the scourge of poverty from this land and take the country economically forward. Let us all look forward to a more prosperous India during his tenure as the Prime Minister of India.

Yours etc.,

T K Nandanan,

Via email

Erratic power supply in Tura

Editor,

Power comes and power goes in Tura. This disruption in power supply has been going on for quite some time now and it happens not less than 5-6 times a day. Rain or no rain, wind or no wind, sunshine or cloudy weather, there is power cut for reasons best known to the MeECL. This disruption in power supply is in addition to the regular load shedding hours from 3 pm to 6 pm every day. We need power not only to cool ourselves from this heat but also for running industries and businesses. Even banking operations are affected due to power cuts. Lots of people are unemployed and looking for jobs. How will the unemployed people get employment if the industries do not run/operate or business establishments close down because of erratic power supply?. Agriculture alone cannot absorb all the unemployed people. We need industries and the service sector to develop side by side and gainfully employ the unemployed youth. It is high time the Govt. seriously think of completing and commissioning the Ganol Hydel project which will definitely augment the power supply to Tura and its adjoining areas.

The Govt. should also find out ways and means to clear the outstanding dues to NEEPCO so that allotted power supply is restored. Till such time that the regular power supply is restored, the people of Tura will have to silently suffer for no fault of theirs. Or is it a blessing in disguise as power cuts are the only time that the whole family assemble together and speak to one another as wifi, TV remains off?. Perhaps this is the new idea of connecting people by disconnecting power.

Yours etc.

Fergertson R Marak

Tura-11
