In the bhadralok’s heart, Vietnam and Jai Shri Ram

KOLKATA: Anywhere else, it probably wouldn’t have raised eyebrows. But this was Kolkata’s swank airport. A young man spotted someone he knew. “Jai Shri Ram,” he smiled. Heads turned in the lounge.Bhadralok in their late 40s, many of whom frequented Nizam’s restaurant in central Kolkata for beef rolls during their college days, are yet to reconcile with the metamorphosis from “Tomar naam, amar naam, Vietnam” (Your name, my name, Vietnam) to “Jai Shri Ram.” And, yes, Nizam’s has stopped serving beef.But many would argue that the schism was always there, straining under the skin. ‘The city of joy’ carried somewhere within it the hurt of Partition, and with it a dormant apathy towards Muslims — even the desi variety. Many Bengali Hindus in Kolkata would ignore Bengalispeaking Muslims when intellectuals celebrated “Bhasa Divas”, the International Language Day. “Uni ki Bangali na Musholman? (Is he Bengali or Muslim?),” a neighbour could be heard inquiring about someone looking for a house in Bijoygarh — a refugee settlement in south Kolkata where landlords still have inhibitions welcoming a Muslim tenant.Caught by traffic police riding motorbikes without helmet, young men will sometimes grumble about different laws and point to Muslim youths whizzing past in a skull cap.Two years ago, posters sprang up in memory of “Hindu vir” Gopal Mukherjee, or ‘Gopal Patha’. An associate of ex-CM Bidhan Chandra Ray, he owned a “goat shop” close to his home. A right-wing outfit, Hindu Samhati, celebrated Mukherjee’s centenary year, calling him the “saviour of Bengali Hindus” during the Great Calcutta Killings of 1946. No one had remembered him until Tapan Ghosh of the Samhati dug out the name — which doesn’t find mention in history books. Ghosh insists Gopal Patha was marginalised by Left historians. A teacher at a paan shop recently said: “There is need for such people. Don’t you see how ‘they’ are multiplying? They will overrun us one day.”“Us and them” became all too apparent in 2007 following the mysterious death of teacher Rizwanur Rehman, who had secretly married Priyanka Todi, the daughter of an influential local businessman. Bengali bhadraloks condemned Rizwanur’s death. But, while talking in private, few camouflaged their “anxiety over the way our sisters and daughters are being waylaid”.The distrust was already there among many who had to leave their home in East Pakistan in 1947, and later in 1971. It grew when Islam was declared Bangladesh’s state religion in 1988. The decree fanned insecurity among Hindu minorities in the neighbouring country. Soon, the sentiment percolated to this side of the border and relatives in Bengal yearned for a Hindu Rashtra in India. Yet, the spread was neither rampant nor pervasive, especially among educated youth who grew up in an atmosphere where assertion of one’s religious identity was never encouraged.In 1985, the central government under Rajiv Gandhi ignored Supreme Court directions in the Shah Bano case under pressure from the Muslim Personal Law Board. This is when BJP’s politics started gaining traction. Young men and women unable to get employment in a state already in economic decline blamed illegal migrants from Bangladesh for taking away unskilled jobs. Political parties, though, were unrelenting. They gave ration cards to masses from Bangladesh for the sake of votes.The “anti-appeasement” chorus touched a high during Mamata Banerjee ’s rule. Many of her gestures — posters of Banerjee donning a hijab, her claim of fasting during Ramzan — didn’t go down well with the bhadralok. Irritation turned into anger when her government announced a monthly honorarium for imams and muezzins (later struck down by the Calcutta high court ). The CM went into damage control, proclaiming herself a devout Hindu and chanting the Gayatri mantra at public meetings, but that was perhaps a little late. Polarisation on religious lines had started taking root in Bengal’s soil.
