Congress: How Congress lost the plot in recently won Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh, MP

New Delhi: Unfulfilled promises of newly-formed governments, sharp division within the top leadership and limited resonance of farm distress as an election issue saw the Congress losing the momentum it had gained in the recently won states of Rajasthan, Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh Of the 65 parliamentary seats in the three states that Congress won in December 2018, the party could bag a mere three - two in Chhattisgarh and one in Madhya Pradesh. Like in 2014, it drew a blank in Rajasthan.The unfulfilled promises of Congress governments made the electorate question the intentions of the party. One big factor was unemployment allowances promised by Congress during the assembly elections. On January 26, both MP chief minister Kamal Nath and his Rajasthan counterpart Ashok Gehlot gave exact dates when they would roll out their initiatives for unemployed educated youth. While Gehlot promised Rs 3,000 to men and Rs 3,500 to women in their bank accounts on March 1, Nath promised Yuva Swabhiman Yojana from April. However, neither governments could deliver. In Chhattisgarh, a budget provision was made but no plan fructified.Though this was attributed to imposition of the model code of conduct on March 10, it made Congress’ minimum income guarantee scheme or Nyay look like a tall promise. Farm distress, a potent issue raked up by Congress in the run-up to parliamentary elections, did not seem to resonate on the ground with BJP sweeping all Lok Sabha segments in Hindi heartland states witnessing perennial farm crisis.The Congress had made a pro-farmer pitch in its manifesto, promising a separate farmer budget to ensure the farmers know their rights. The party had hoped that this coupled with quicklydelivered farm loan waivers in Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and MP would help the party in swinging its political fortunes. However, the results clearly show that farm distress was not a consideration when the electors voted in crisisridden Hadoti region across MP and Rajasthan. Though farm loan waivers were rolled out efficiently by the three governments within days of coming to power, the limited electoral productivity of waiver plank did the party in. The Hadoti region in Rajasthan, which spreads across two parliamentary segments — Kota and Jhalawar-Baran — once again voted for BJP overwhelmingly.In Madhya Pradesh’s Mandsaur, where farmers had been killed in police firing in June 2017, the issue failed to turn the election.Congress also failed to fight as a united side. In Rajasthan, the feud between CM Ashok Gehlot and his deputy Sachin Pilot divided the cadres and weakened the organisation, which had fought the might of BJP just four months back in November-December 2018.The Congress’ development plank across the three states failed to take on the Modi magic. The Congress tried to keep the contest solely on local issues and claimed to have delivered on its poll promises. However, this proved to have only a limited impact on the electorate.
