45 year old murdered

Ludhiana: A 45-year-old man was found murdered in his house in Koom Kalan area on Thursday morning. The man was attacked with a sharp-edged weapon behind his neck and chest. The police have found no sign of forced entry in the house where the deceased was alone. The deceased has been identified as Wakeel Chand (45) of Baba Mundra Wali Colony, Koom Kalan. Chand was workers at a clothing store in Sahnewal.

According to information, Wakeel Chand had a fight with his wife Nisha on Tuesday, after which she left the house with their three children and went to their parent’s house in Mandi Gobindgarh. According to police, Chand was suspecting of an illicit affair of his wife which was one of the primary reason of their strained relation. Sub-inspector Davinderpal Singh said, “Wakeel Chand with his wife Nisha and three children live in one house, while his mother Maya Rani with younger son Manoj Kumar in another house in the same locality. On Tuesday, Nisha and Chand had a fight, after which his wife went to her parent’s house with their children.”

On Wednesday, at around 9.30pm, Maya Rani went to Chand’s house to give her dinner, in the absence of his wife and went back. On Thursday morning, at around 8.30pm, Maya Rani went to Chand’s house to give him tea, when she saw his son dead in the pool of blood. She raised an alarm, after which neighbours huddled there and sounded police. The official added that there was no sign of forced entry in the house. Moreover, dinner was kept untouched.

“It is suspected that after Maya Rani left the house, minutes later someone knocked the door. When Chand opened the door and turned around, he was attacked from behind with a sharp-edged weapon. There was blood all over the door, and the body was lying on the floor. Chand was first attacked on his neck from behind, and then twice near his chest and armpit,” said SI Davinderpal Singh. The Koom Kalan police have registered a case against unidentified accused under Section 302 (murder) of the IPC. On other side, mother Maya Rani and brother Manoj have accused Nisha and her brother for killing Chand. Manoj Kumar said: “When Nisha left the house on Tuesday, she warned to teach Chand a lesson. Moreover, her brothers also have threatened Chand several times.” The SHO said as of now, Nisha and her family were prime suspects in the case, as Chand had no other rivalry.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
