Ideology of Mahatma Gandhi’s killer won, says Digvijaya Singh after facing humiliating defeat in Bhopal

Digvijaya Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Bhopal: After facing a humiliating defeat by BJP’s Pragya Singh Thakur in Lok Sabha elections, Congress stalwart Digvijaya Singh said the ideology of the killer of Mahatma Gandhi won by defeating the ideology of Gandhi and added that it was a cause of concern for him.

Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur defeated the senior Congress leader by a huge margin of 3,64,822 votes in the Bhopal Lok Sabha seat.

While Thakur bagged 8,66,482 votes, Singh received 5,01,660 in the high-profile seat. A total of 14,07,954 votes were polled in Bhopal, which has been a BJP bastion since decades.

Though there were 30 candidates in the fray in the high-profile constituency, the main contest was between Thakur and Singh, who has been a two-time chief minister of Madhya Pradesh.

The Congress was decimated in Madhya Pradesh and out of the 29 Lok Sabha seats, the Grand Old Party managed to win one seat only.

Thakur, who has been an accused in the 2008 Malegaon bomb blast case, is currently out on bail. She joined the saffron party in April and was fielded from the BJP citadel against the Congress heavyweight.

During the campaign, Thakur made controversial remarks against Maharashtra ATS chief Hemant Karkare who was killed on the fateful night of 26/11, saying that he died because she cursed him.

Thakur apologised after facing backlash for her statement but made another controversial statement soon after by calling Nathuram Godse a “patriot”. Even the BJP condemned her for this remark after which she apologised saying that “party line is her line.”

It was Karkare who tracked the motorcycle which was registered in Sadhvi’s name and was allegedly used to carry out the blast at Malegaon. Later, the National Investigative Agency gave a clean chit to Thakur but the trial court refused to discharge her from the case.

However, the firebrand leader may be in fresh trouble as the Madhya Pradesh government is planning to reopen an old murder case of ex-RSS pracharak Sunil Joshi against Thakur.

The Kamal Nath-led Congress government is seeking legal opinion on reopening the case in which Thakur had been acquitted.

Joshi was shot dead in Dewas district in December 2007 and the police named Thakur and seven others as accused in the case. However, all of them were acquitted by a court in 2017 due to lack of evidence.
