Where Modi’s Victory Isn’t What It Seems - The New York Times

NEW DELHI — With Narendra Modi re-elected as India’s prime minister with an intimidating majority, the fact that his Bharatiya Janata Party also triumphed in the far-flung northeastern state of Arunachal Pradesh, by the border with China, may seem incidental, like a foregone conclusion. It’s not. And while liberals and secularists throughout India despair that Hindu nationalism and fear-mongering have prevailed again, the B.J.P.’s victory in this distant corner of the country doesn’t mean what it seems.

Arunachal Pradesh’s name translates, officially, as the “land of the dawn-lit mountains.” Ever since the country took its present shape in 1947, the first light of each Indian day has fallen on an Arunachali mountain hamlet called Dong. This is the kind of sentimental factoid that appeals to bureaucrats in New Delhi, where the sun rises a good hour and 20 minutes later. And that’s probably why the six-week process of India’s 17th general elections, which concluded this week, began in a quixotic paramilitary outpost of Arunachal Pradesh: at the Animal Training School of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, where a company of horsemen from across the country cast the very first ballots.

Although the state has only two seats out of 543 in the national Parliament’s lower house, the Lok Sabha, elections here are a reliable source of journalistic tchotchkes: the arrival of an electronic voting machine, in the snow, at the “highest polling station” in Luguthang village or the somewhat overcooked tale of intrepid election officials braving jungles and trekking “six kilometers over uneven terrain” to set up a polling booth for a single desultory voter.

It’s difficult not to exoticize Arunachali politics. Ten years, or two elections, ago, I was in the small mountain-town of Hawai (not too far from Dong), walking up the serpentine driveway of Kalikho Pul, a member of the state’s Legislative Assembly. The cemented driveway was long and steep, and every 20 feet, on either side , stood a wooden pole topped with the blackened skull of a massive “mithun,” or bison (bos frontalis). I must have passed dozens of skulls before I got to the house on the hill.
