In rarest of rare act, tiger kills and eats tigress' body at Kanha National Park in MP

The tigress' carcass was found in Mundidadar (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Bhopal: Wildlife officials are still attempting to figure out what might have led to brutal infighting between tigers at the Kanha National Park in Madhya Pradesh. The matter came to light when a patrol team discovered the scattered carcass of a tigress at Mundidadar prompting them to probe her death.

While some animals attack and eat their own, this sort of behaviour is extremely rare in tigers. In fact, Kanha's field director K Krishnamurthy told Times of India that that animal the got killed seems to be a tigress, adding that the cannibal is a tiger. While asserting that the fight is most likely to be a territorial fight, Krishnamurthy said that the incident falls in the 'rarest of rare' categories.

Odisha: Tiger 'Mahavir' that was brought from Madhya Pradesh's Kanha Tiger Reserve has been found dead in Satkosia Reserve forest area in Anugul district — ANI (@ANI) November 15, 2018

The tigress' carcass was examined by officials with the World Wildlife Federation (WFF) and the Wildlife Trust of India (WTI) who concluded that claws and canines were intact. These findings indicate that foul play can be ruled out with respect to the death of the tigress, said officials with the forest department. Those familiar with the matter said that there is no declining availability of prey for these big cats which would force them to indulge in 'tiger-eating-tiger'.

A report published just last year highlighted the rising number of tiger deaths caused by fights between tigers over territorial supremacy across India. In 1995, Madhya Pradesh was declared a 'Tiger State' since it harboured nearly 20 per cent of India's and 10 per cent of the world's tiger population.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.

Must Read: Endangered Indian Humpback Dolphins spotted near Bandra-Worli sealink in Mumbai
