Top stories of the day: At least 17 students killed in Surat fire, Theresa May to quit as British PM, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

At least 17 students died in a massive fire in a commercial building in Surat. The students were attending their tuition class when the fire engulfed the area, supposedly due to a short circuit. “Around ten students trapped on the third and fourth floors jumped from windows to save themselves from fire and smoke. Many have been rescued and sent to hospital. The operation to douse the fire is on,” said an official at the Surat fire control room.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Council of Ministers have tendered their resignation, according to the President of India. President Ram Nath Kovind has accepted the resignation. They will continue in office till the new Government is formed.

British Prime Minister Theresa May announced on May 24 that she will step down as U.K. Conservative Party leader on June 7, sparking a contest to become the country’s next Prime Minister.

After the flood of calls and congratulatory letters to Prime Minister Narendra Modi from foreign leaders are dealt with, the new government’s tasks on the Foreign policy front in the next few weeks are quite clearly cut out.

The Delhi High Court on Friday issued notice to the Election Commission (EC) on a petition to review political parties having names with religious connotations or using symbols similar to that of the national flag and to de-register them.

Four new judges were sworn in at the Supreme Court, two of whom will go on to be the Chief Justices of India in the line of seniority. Justice B.R. Gavai will become the CJI for over six months in 2025. He will be the second Chief Justice of India from the Scheduled Caste community after Justice (retd) K.G. Balakrishnan.

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Shiv Sena alliance will likely carry forward gains from the Lok Sabha elections into the Assembly elections in October 2019. The two partners, after sweeping most of Maharashtra’s 48 seats, hinted at taking their long-standing partnership into the future hours after the results came in on Thursday. The final tally also showed the two parties may have retained their social bases in rural Maharastra as the farmers as well as the Maratha community supported the election campaign by Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis and Shiv Sena leader Uddhav Thackeray, political experts said.

Riding the crest of a strong anti-incumbency wave against the Telugu Desam Party (TDP) government and after a nine-year wait, YSR Congress Party leader Y.S Jagan Mohan Reddy inched closer to his dream of becoming Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh, steering his party to a landslide victory.

Omung Kumar’s PM Narendra Modi is tailored for an election campaign but works equally well as (56-inch) chest-thumping now that the BJP has regained power. The obsequious biopic has faithfully incorporated every rhetoric, slogan and claims Modi has made in his rallies and “interviews”.

A traffic jam of climbers in the Everest “death zone” was blamed for two of four new deaths reported Friday, heightening concerns that the drive for profits is trumping safety on the world's highest peak.
