Actor Akshay Kumar congratulated PM; Modi replied ‘committed to providing good governance’

shriaya.dutt@tribuneindia.com

Tribune Web Desk

Chandigarh, May 24

Several B-town celebrities like actor Akshay kumar took to their social media accounts to congratulate Prime Minister Narendra Modi for securing majority of votes in Lok Sabha elections 2019.

Akshay tweeted: “Heartiest congratulations Hon. Prime Minister @narendramodi ji on the historic win. All your efforts to advance the nation and put it on the global map have been acknowledged. Wishing you an even more successful second term.”

Heartiest congratulations Hon. Prime Minister @narendramodi ji on the historic win. All your efforts to advance the nation and put it on the global map have been acknowledged. Wishing you an even more successful second term. — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) 23 May 2019

To which, PM replied: “Thank you @akshaykumar. We are fully committed to providing good governance that leads to empowerment of every citizen and furthers prosperity in our society.”

Thank you @akshaykumar. We are fully committed to providing good governance that leads to empowerment of every citizen and furthers prosperity in our society. https://t.co/vqTIBzkg75 — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 23 May 2019

Akshay, a few weeks ago came under social media fire for his ‘apolitical interview’ with PM Modi, where the actor wished Modi “good luck” for a more successful second term.

While the whole country is talking elections and politics, here’s a breather. Privileged to have done this candid and COMPLETELY NON POLITICAL freewheeling conversation with our PM @narendramodi . Watch it at 9AM tomorrow via @ANI for some lesser known facts about him! pic.twitter.com/Owji9xL9zn — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) 23 April 2019

Akshay's wife and author Twinkle Khanna also congratulated BJP on its sweeping victory. A few days ago, Twinkle took a jibe at PM Narendra Modi's meditation session in Kedarnath caves.

Twinkle tweeted: “Congratulations to Prime Minister @narendramodi and @BJP4India on their sweeping victory. Democracy must always be celebrated. Here’s to our India that I hope becomes synonymous with inclusivity, harmony and development #Election2019Results”
