Delhi Police arrest man who thrashed stray dog to death after it bit his wife

The accused has confessed to the crime, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Police in the national capital have arrested a man accused of killing a stray dog in a fit of rage in PS Bhalswa area. The arrest was prompted by a complaint to the PS Bhalswa dairy police, accusing the man of murdering a dog after the canine bit his wife. A case was then registered in this regard and city police launched an investigation into the matter which eventually led to the man's arrest.

An officer familiar with the case said that a probe led police to retrieve closed-circuit television (CCTV) camera footage from the area where the incident took place. A CD recovered by investigators shows visual evidence of the accused killing the dog, added the officer. Named in the police complaint, Fauzi Colony in Mukundpur resident Rajkumar was brought in for questioning.

During the course of the interrogation, Rajkumar confessed to killing the dog after it bit his wife when the two had gone out for a stroll with their own pet dog. In his statement, the accused said that the stray attacked his pet dog and bit his wife when she tried to rescue their pet. This angered Rajkumar to the extent that he thrashed the canine to death. An investigation into the matter is still underway pending further inquiry.

This is not the first time a dispute over pet dogs led to mindless violence in the national capital. In January of this year, a man shot a 30-year-old tailor dead after the latter pelted a stone at his pet dog. While the incident took place in north-east Delhi, the accused was arrested from Kashmere Gate by police officials within 24 hours of the crime taking place. He was later identified as Mehtab, a history-sheeter with 18 criminal cases against them.

In August of last year, Delhi Police had registered a case after seven dogs were brutally murdered in sector 18A of Dwarka area. Allegations had also come to light about the culprits tormenting the canines before slaughtering them and leaving their bodies on the main road inside the Kargil Apartments society. This horrific instance came to light after a drunkard mercilessly butchered five little puppies and threw the dead bodies in the garbage after they barked at him.
