Lok Sabha Election Result: Where BJP sowed, Congress reaped

What went wrong?

NEW DELHI: BJP did all the hard work during the Sabarimala agitation but Congress walked away with the trophy. That is the story of the Kerala results, in which widespread resentment and anger among the majority community on the Sabarimala issue – and the minority consolidation that it, in turn, provoked – helped Congress sweep 19 out of the state’s 20 seats.Hindu mobilisation on such an unprecedented scale in Kerala, as the Sabarimala issue precipitated, should have benefited the BJP, yet it did not. It was not for want of trying. Since last October, as the Pinarayi government tried to implement the Supreme Court order allowing entry of women between 10 and 50 to the shrine, the issue was a godsend for the Sangh Parivar and BJP to finally make its presence in a state where it had been organisationally strong for decades but electorally a marginal player.BJP spearheaded the agitation that dragged on for almost three months — hundreds of its cadres were arrested and sent to jail following protests across Kerala. The Hindu faithful recognised its efforts, yet when results came in, the sentiment did not translate into votes. BJP’s vote-share rose barely 0.5% up from 15.01% in 2016 assembly polls to 15.06 in 2019. Worse, it came a cropper in three seats where it fielded its strongest candidates, where the issue was expected to have most resonance.The main reason appears to be cross voting by those sympathetic to BJP. If the idea was to teach the Pinarayi government a lesson, then Congress seemed the better option. Why waste votes on BJP candidates when the main battle was between LDF and UDF , so went the logic. There was also baggage associated with BJP; while most Hindus tended to identify with the party’s defence of Sabarimala traditions, they couldn’t stomach the mob lynchings and vigilantism the party was accused of condoning in other parts of India.And with Rahul Gandhi deciding to contest from Wayanad, the pro-Congress sentiment intensified. In fact, Swami Chidanandapuri, a patron of Sabarimala Karma Samithy, whose speeches gave momentum to the anti-temple entry movement, went so far as to publicly appeal to Hindus to ensure LDF’s failure.One other factor added to BJP’s poor showing in Thiruvananthapuram, Pathanamthitta and Thrissur where it fancied its chances. Nair Service Society, the organisation of upper caste Nairs, which vociferously defended belief and customs in Sabarimala and was one of the main petitioners in the Supreme Court, supported BJP’s agitation but refused to transfer its votes. They thought the problem could have been swiftly resolved if the Centre had brought in an ordinance to negate the SC verdict but which it did not. In the NSS’s eyes, this cast doubts about BJP’s intentions – was it a defender of traditions or was it merely exploiting Hindu sentiment?So Congress, ridiculed as fence-sitters by the BJP, had the last laugh. Veteran BJP leader O Rajagopal – the party’s first-ever MLA in Kerala –captured it succinctly by citing a local adage: “Mannum chari ninnavan pennum kondu poyi’’ (‘the one who was shooting the breeze decamped with the girl’). This was evident from the fact that BJP’s best bet Kummanam Rajasekharan, who fought from Thiruvananthapuram where BJP finished second in 2014, actually got 1% less votes than last time. Shashi Tharoor who defeated Rajagopal with a margin of only 15,000 votes in 2014, won in 2019 by around one lakh votes.BJP candidates made impressive strides in Pathanamthitta and Thrissur. In Pathanamthitta, the epicentre of the Sabarimala stir, BJP state general secretary K Surendran polled close to three lakh votes. But he finished third in a tight triangular fight. So did actor politician Suresh Gopi in Thrissur. The aggrieved Hindu voter, it appears, had let down the BJP.
