Wicked Love! Married woman flees with Rs 40 lakh to help driver she last saw 2 years ago; duped

The driver had contacted her earlier this month and asked her to help him financially for the treatment of his ailing mother (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Bengaluru: A 27-year-old married woman was duped of Rs 40 lakh and 450 grams of gold jewellery she took from her father’s residence to help a driver she met in Kullu Manali two years ago. The driver who was identified as Kamaldeep had contacted her earlier this month and asked her to help him financially for the treatment of his ailing mother.

The woman, who is a resident of Hennur, had visited Shimla in 2017 with her family where she befriended the driver of her tourist vehicle. Kamaldeep had been in touch with the woman since then. The driver called up the woman on January 5 seeking financial help. Kamaldeep told her that his mother had to undergo surgery and if she helped him, he would take care of her.

Also Read: Chennai shocker: Man, recently released from prison, brutally murdered by mystery gang

A police officer investigating the case told Bangalore Mirror that she took Rs 40 lakh and gold ornaments from her father's residence and left the city on January 6 to meet the driver in Khanna district near Ludhiana in Punjab. Kamaldeep, along with his brother Dharamveer, took the money and ornaments from her assuring her that they were safe in their hands. They left her at a house that they claimed belonged to Dharamveer. When the duo did not return, the woman tried contacting the driver. However, his phone was switched off.

Meanwhile, the woman's father reported to the police about his daughter's disappearance at Hennur police station on January 6. The woman's husband told the police that she had woken up at about 6 am that morning. A police team from Hennur located her in Punjab and brought her back to the city on Thursday. It is suspected that the woman was duped as a part of an elaborate plan. The police registered a case of cheating under section 420 of IPC against the duo who is yet to be nabbed.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
