A Losing Hand | Congress

At the entrance of Delhi's upscale Khan Market, which, according to Prime Minister Narendra Modi, is the epicentre of all the political and intellectual forces out to demolish his image, a large hoarding of Congress president Rahul Gandhi stares out at you. It displays the NYAY message, the Congress's minimum income guarantee scheme launched on April 2, nine days before the first phase of the 2019 general election. Through NYAY, the party promised to deposit Rs 72,000 annually in the bank accounts of the poorest 20 per cent of Indian households. In that context, the positioning of the NYAY hoarding at Khan Market-frequented by Delhi's uber rich-seemed a perplexing decision. In fact, several Congress leaders opposed putting up the hoarding in posh localities of Delhi, as NYAY was perceived to be a populist measure by the country's upwardly mobile middle class and the rich. There was a fear that higher taxes would be imposed to fund NYAY.

Yet, the Congress brass overruled such app­rehension and the cash-starved party paid a hefty amount to put it up in the hope that it would create a buzz. "A senior Rajya Sabha member felt that as 'thought leaders' and journalists often visit the market, the hoarding will become a talking point among them and eventually influence the larger narrative," says a Congress leader who did not want to be identified. The incident was a shining example of the party's disorienting campaign, based mostly on far-fetched inferences. So it's not surprising that 24 hours before the election results were declared, the party's data cell convinced Rahul that the NDA would not cross 230 seats and the Congress think-tank assumed that the regional parties of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana-the Telugu Desam Party (TDP), the Yuvajana Shramika Raithu Congress (YSRC) and the Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS)-would join the United Progressive Alliance (UPA).

The Star Campaigner Priyanka Gandhi: She arrived on the scene very late, further delayed by the Balakot air strike; harmed the SP-BSP alliance more than she did the BJP (Photo: Getty Images)

The above two instances are a reflection of the Congress campaign strategy this election. There was no vision or cohesion and the voters had little clue as to what the Congress stood for except that it opposed Modi. It talked about farmers' distress and unemployment, but its manifesto-which was unanimously hailed as a well-prepared document-came too late in the day. It talked of government jobs for the unemployed and NYAY for the poor and distressed, but the party neither had the time to take the message to the last voter nor did its leaders, except for Rahul Gandhi, show enough enthusiasm for the idea. And, often, misplaced priorities-such as the Khan Market hoarding-diluted the communication strategy too. In a losing cause, many reasons will be put forth for the Congress's disastrous performance-from its mis-steps in not stitching up alliances in Uttar Pradesh and Delhi to lacklustre leadership-but the party's defining failure was winning just 3 seats out of a 100 (a repeat of 2014) across six heartland states-UP, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh-where they were in a direct contest with the BJP. What made matters worse was that the humiliation comes within six months of the Congress storming to power in three of these states-MP, Rajasthan and Chhattisgarh.

Rahul’s failed Lieutenants- 1

A year ago, it gave a spirited fight to the BJP in Modi's home state Gujarat and brought down the saffron party to double digits for the first time in 15 years. In the process, a new, combative Rahul Gandhi had emerged. He travelled across the country, visited temples, appeared at press conferences, indulged in theatrics such as hugging Prime Minister Narenda Modi in Parliament and laced his social media messaging with sarcasm (aimed at the PM). It looked a perfect strategy, just as Rahul's 'suit boot ki sarkar' jibe in 2016 had forced the Modi government to turn populist and shed the image of being anti-poor. The triple victories in December 2018 led to distress reactions from the Modi government as it announced reservations for the economically backward and cash transfers of Rs 6,000 a year for farmers. And, in January, the Congress added a "potent" weapon to the campaign in the form of Priyanka Gandhi, who was charged with reviving the party in eastern UP.

Rahul’s failed Lieutenants- 2

But as Priyanka prepared to address her first press conference on February 14, Pakistan-based terrorists killed 40 CRPF soldiers in Pulwama. From that moment on, the Congress campaign was on the back foot. The party kept switching from supporting the Modi government on the Balakot air strike inside Pakistan to doubting the government's claim of such a strike. In the narrative of macho nationalism, the Congress lost the plot. In an aspirational India, the comparison was stark-the Manmohan Singh-led UPA government's silent diplomatic manoeuvring after the 2008 terror attack in Mumbai against Modi's count of surgical strikes.

But Rahul's biggest mistake was perhaps his incessant focus on the Rafale deal, which found little traction among voters, especially in rural areas. As he said in an interview with india today, he believed the allegations of corruption in the deal would bust Modi's incorruptible image, the prime minister's biggest strength. Taking a cue from Modi's statement that he was the chowkidar (guard) of the country, Rahul coined his election slogan-"Chowkidar chor hai"-without realising that he was taking on the 'master of messaging' at his own game. Modi turned the slogan on its head, made everyone a chowkidar, and dug up past controversies of the Gandhi family to boot. The message was simple-the scion of a family that had faced corruption charges in the past was questioning a prime minister who had left his family to work for the nation.

In 2014, when the Congress was reduced to a historic low, millions of words were written about how the party could be revived. Five years later, there is hardly any change. The party has hit rock bottom in several significant states-UP, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Assam-which have 305 seats between them. There has been no visible effort to revive the organisational structure or nurture a strong leader in these states in the past five years. The abysmal situation is highlighted by the poor show in the states the Congress is in power-with the exception of Punjab.

The only tangible changes in the past five years were Rahul succeeding mother Sonia Gandhi as the Congress president and Priyanka Gandhi joining the party as a general secretary. While Rahul's leadership will now be a topic of national debate, Priyanka's much- publicised entry has resulted in further reduction of its vote share in UP. She could not even protect brother Rahul's home bastion. Perhaps the defeat in Amethi has sent out a larger, more categorical message-it's time the Congress rid itself of dynastic politics.

10 reasons for the grand debacle

1. Rahul Gandhi has come a long way since his 'Pappu' days, yet in the public perception, he was no match for PM Naren­dra Modi in terms of charisma, credibility and communication skills

2. He did not have a consistent core political team; he kept changing his counsellors. If one day he was listening to Ahmed Patel and Randeep Surjewala, another day he would go by the suggestions of K.C. Venugopal and Rajeev Satav. If one day the party stood by the central government on the Balakot air strike, the next day it was questioning the strike's authenticity

3. Rahul targeted Modi over "corruption" in the Rafael deal. It was too complicated a theme to get traction among rural voters. Hitting at Modi's biggest strength-his incorruptible image-boomeranged

4. In the past five years, there has been no visible effort to build the party organisation in big states such as UP, West Bengal, Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana where the Congress is almost extinct. It was a marg­inal player in 243 seats in these states

5. Even in states where the party is strong-MP, Gujarat, Assam and Utt­arakhand-there was no effort to nurture a strong local leadership. Only Sachin Pilot in Rajasthan, Ashok Chavan in Maharashtra and Siddaram­aiah in Karnataka were given a free hand, but they could not deliver thanks to internal feuds

6. There were several baffling appointments by Rahul, which became counter-productive. Harish Rawat was made in-charge of Assam, a complicated state, while Rawat's focus remained Uttarakhand. Shakti Singh Gohil, a warhorse in Gujarat, was given cha­rge of Bihar where the party is a minor ally. Mallikarjun Kharge, who had a tough battle in Karnataka, was made in- charge of Maharashtra. An inexperienced Gaurav Gogoi was given the big state of West Bengal

7. Congress gave the BJP a spirited fight on social media, yet there was no coordination among various departments. Ego clashes among the heads of different teams complicated matters

8. Though NYAY was launched as a possible game-changer, it came too late in the day. Apart from Rahul, other leaders rarely promoted it

9. Rahul's emergence as a Shiv bhakt janeudhari Hindu projected the party as a BJP lookalike, while also affecting the party's Muslim vote bank in states like UP, West Bengal and Assam. The party's failure to stitch alliances with SP and BSP in UP and AAP in Delhi gave the BJP a window to polarise Hindu votes

10. The party genuinely suffered from a funds crunch; even the limited funds did not reach many candidates

What next for the grand ol’ party

Scenario 1: There is a clamour for a new leadership in the party; chorus will begin to replace Rahul with Priyanka Gandhi

Scenario 2: There could be revolt from the state wings; some veterans could plot splits while several young turks may seek political careers with other parties

Scenario 3: Rahul may introduce drastic changes, which he has held back till now, as there is nothing left to lose; Uttar Pradesh 2022 may be the first laboratory

Scenario 4: There is no change, party continues to function as it has, waiting for the BJP to weaken on its own
