Uttar Pradesh: Man with criminal record shoots woman after she resists molestation attempt; no arrest made

Though the accused was identified by the victim, the police are yet to arrest him (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Baghpat: A shocking incident surfaced from Uttar Pradesh after a woman was allegedly shot. The woman was allegedly shot at after she resisted a molestation attempt. The incident surfaced from the Baghpat district of Uttar Pradesh.

Following the incident, the victim was taken to the hospital for a medical examination. The police registered an FIR against the accused. Investigation revealed that the accused had several criminal cases under his name. Though the accused was identified by the victim, the police are yet to arrest him.

Woman shot at allegedly for resisting molestation in Baghpat. R Singh ASP says, "We received info day before yesterday that a woman was shot at, the woman has identified the accused who has also been named in FIRs earlier. Medical examination of victim & investigation underway." pic.twitter.com/EsGk1jJj1L — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 25, 2019

While talking to the news agency, ANI, additional superintendent of police (ASP) R Singh stated that the victim was shot at after she resisted a molestation attempt. Singh further added that the victim had identified the accused.

In another incident, a girl jumped from an autorickshaw after the driver attempted to molest her. The video of an angry mob thrashing the accused also went viral on social media. The incident took place in the Gomti Nagar area of Lucknow. After repeated sexual advances of the accused, the victim decided to jump from the vehicle.

Investigation revealed that the accused was under the influence when the incident took place. After the girl jumped from the vehicle and injured herself, the locals came to her rescue and caught hold of the erring driver. The locals handed over the accused to the police after beating him up. The police also detained the people who were involved in thrashing the accused. The victim was taken to the hospital for treatment.
