Allahabad: Tired of live-in partner's demand to get married, man shoots her; commits suicide moments later

The deceased had three children from his first marriage (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Allahabad: A man allegedly murdered his lover and killed himself in Allahabad. The deceased was living in with his lover. The incident took place at the Preetam Nagar residence of the deceased. The deceased allegedly took the drastic step after his lover kept asking him to get married.

The principal was identified as Pramod Chaudhary. Chaudhary was working as a principal at the Lal Bahadur Shastri Inter College, Chail. The live-in partner was identified as Rakhi.

The deceased had three children from his first marriage. The children used to live with the deceased in his flat. Investigation revealed that Chaudhary had recently fixed the marriage of his eldest daughter.

The younger brother of the deceased principal told the police that his brother's live in partner wanted him to marry her first. While talking to the Times of India, Inspector of the Dhoomanganj police station, Jay Prakash Sharma stated that after repeated arguments, Chaudhary flew into a rage and took the drastic step.

The deceased had used a country-made pistol. Moments after killing his partner, Chaudhary shot himself. When the incident took place, the deceased's son was present at the house. Though Chaudhary was rushed to the hospital immediately after the incident, the doctors declared him brought dead. Rakhi succumbed on the spot.

In another incident, a woman was allegedly murdered and chopped into eight pieces by her live-in partner. The police cracked the murder mystery with the help of three tattoos on the body of the woman. The mother of the deceased identified her and helped solve seven-year-old case.

The man accused of murdering the deceased was awarded life imprisonment. The accused was identified as Yogesh Sharma. Sharma had allegedly filed missing complaint of the deceased but when the police went to his factory, he tried to escape. Investigation revealed that the accused was the live-in partner of the deceased.
