Budgam Helicopter Crash: Feel Cheated, Says Family Of Sergeant On Board Mi-17

After IAF’s airstrike in Balakot in Pakistan on February 26, the Indian and Pakistani jets scrambled against one another on February 27. Amid the news of Pakistan breaching India’s air space, a news came that IAF’s Mi-17 helicopter had crashed in Budgam in which six of the IAF personnel on board and civilian lost their lives. One of the IAF personnel who died in the crash was Sergeant Vikrant Sherawat.

instagram

The initial reasons given were “technical fault” but the preliminary findings have revealed that helicopter was shot down by a friendly fire done by India’s own ground based air-defence apparatus and now knowing this has made family of Sergeant Sherawat feel cheated as they were kept in dark for months.

Twitter

Sergeant Sherwat’s father, 62-year-old farmer, Sri Krishan has all rights to complain. The Hindu went to Bhadani village in Jhajjar, Haryana to Sri Krishna, the father of the IAF officer.

We don’t understand the politics. But it could be because of the elections that the facts were hidden from us. The way the Pulwama attack was politicised to seek electoral mileage, it seems the matter [friendly fire] was hushed up to avoid embarrassment to the government in election season,” says Mr. Krishna.

Suman, the wife of the officer told that a week after the incident, she read in a Hindi daily that the helicopter was hit by fire from Indian forces.

The mother of late sergeant also voiced that other friends of his son who also serve in IAF and are from neighbouring villages hinted that the helicopter was downed by friendly fire, but adviser her to maintain silence.

Now the report of the Court of Inquiry probing the incident is expected to submit its report in couple of weeks and only then the official version will come before the family and until all the information that family has got is through media.

“News reports suggest the senior-most officer among those guilty is being transferred as punishment. I demand that all officers responsible be given strict punishment,” said Devi.
