Tamil Nadu: Skeleton of girl who went missing found in a well after 7 years

Police teams from Asaripallam and Iraniyal rushed to the place as the area borders both the localities. | Photo Credit: Getty

Chennai: Maintenance work on a well in Nagercoil town revealed a sensational crime as workers excavated a skeleton, allegedly of a girl who had gone missing seven years ago. The incident came to light when a retired bank worker, Jayakumar, bought a coconut grove in the area to build a house.

The 62-year-old man was a native of SS Nagar, an area near Christopher Colony in Nagercoil, wanted to dredge the well in his grove. Subsequently, he hired four workers to work on the well and they were shocked to see a skeleton in the well soon after they started combing the structure.

The workers informed Jayakumar and he immediately passed the information to police control room. Police teams from Asaripallam and Iraniyal rushed to the place as the area borders both the localities.

After it was clarified that the case would be investigated by Iraniyal police station, ASP Karthick initiated further investigation. Forensic department officials tested the specimens and found an artificial tooth in the jaw. A small cloth was found dangling from the hand bone and an anklet was also recovered from the body.

Also Read: Chennai shocker: Man, recently released from prison, brutally murdered by mystery gang

The recovered cloth was a part of a girl's outfit and the cops started investigation on the assumption that the skeleton may be of a girl. The team then looked into records for a missing person report from the area. They found out that a girl from the same area, who lived at some distance from the well, went missing seven years ago.

It was found that a doctor named Jagabar Sathik was living in that house and in 2012. Police asked him about the same and he informed the cops that his wife's relative, 25-year-old Lissy Adaikalamari, lived with them in his house.

Sathik had also undertaken her medical treatment but she had gone missing from his house in 2012. They searched for her and complaint about her going missing was filed at Asaripallam Police Station.

Sathik also stated that her one of teeth had to be plugged due to an infection. She was wearing a dress on the day she went missing. Police then enquired Lissy’s mother, Lurthu Mary, about her anklet.

Mary also confirmed that her daughter used to wear an anklet. Police have now suggested a DNA test for further confirmation. The missing case of Lissy was being handled by the CBCID and they might take over this case as it seems to be directly linked with her.
