Sanatan Sanstha lawyer Sanjiv Punalekar among 2 arrested by CBI in Narendra Dabholkar murder case

Narendra Dabholkar, anti-superstition activist, was shot to death in 2013

Pune: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Saturday arrested two more activists of the Sanatana Sanstha, including its lawyer Sanjiv Punalekar and Vikram Bhave, pertaining to the murder of rationalist and anti-superstition activist Narendra Dabholkar in Pune. Punalekar has been the public face and counsel of Sanatana Sanstha, often defending the right wing group’s stance on several TV debates.

Punalekar, an official of the Hindu Vididnya Parishad, which is a lawyer's body, has represented the Sanatana Sanstha and other Hindutva activists in the courts as well as in news channel studios in different cases. He had also represented the accused in the 2008 Malegaon blast case.

Bhave, who is also a Sanatan Sanstha member, had been previously convicted in the case of blasts at theatres and auditorium in Thane in 2008. The Bombay High Court had later released him on bail in 2013.

Punalekar and Bhave would be produced before the special court in Pune on Sunday, a senior CBI official confirmed to the Indian Express. With the arrests made on Saturday, the total number of arrests made in connection with the murder case has reached eight.

As per CBI sources, the two have been accused of plotting the "cover-up" of Dabholkar's murder and of destroying crucial evidence to mislead investigators. Reportedly, the accused had allegedly asked the shooters to destroy the gun which was used to kill the rationalist.

Meanwhile, in a press statement, Sanatan Sanstha “strongly protested” the arrest of two of its activists, claiming that it was a “conspiracy” by the “progressives” after a “pro-Hindutva government” was elected to power.

Its statement read, "To arrest Adv. Sanjiv Punalekar and Shri. Vikram Bhave when the pro-Hindutva Government is in power smacks of conspiracy behind such an action. The CBI has bowed before the demand of the progressives. It is very serious to arrest Adv. Sanjiv Punalekar who proved the falsehood of saffron terrorism behind Malgaon explosion case, filed several Public Interest Litigations."

The first arrest made by the CBI in connection with murder case was in 2016 when the probe agency had nabbed ENT surgeon and Sanatan Sanstha member Dr Virendra Tawde, who has been accused of being the mastermind behind the conspiracy to murder Dabholkar.

In its chargesheet against Tawde, the CBI had stated that Sanatan Sanstha members - Sarang Akolkar and Vinay Pawar - had shot at Dabholkar, killing him.

However, later, the CBI alleged that arrested accused Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar had pulled the trigger and killed Dabholkar on August 20, 2013, when he was out during his morning walk in Pune.

During the course of the investigation, CBI arrested three more people - Amol Kale, Amit Digwekar and Rajesh Bangera - who also allegedly played a role in the murder of Bengaluru-based journalist and activist Gauri Lankesh in September 2017.
