‘I don’t want to remain as CM’

Congress president Rahul Gandhi gestures while talking to his mother and Congress party senior leader Sonia Gandhi during a Congress Working Committee meeting in New Delhi, yesterday. Story on back page. Photo: AFP

Mamata Banerjee, addressing her first press conference after her party's national election setback in Bengal, said she did not want to continue as chief minister and had told her Trinamool Congress that.

"I have told my party, for six months I have been unable to work. I was a powerless Chief Minister. I cannot accept that. I don't want to continue as Chief Minister. The chair is nothing for me. Party symbol is most important for me," Mamata Banerjee told reporters.

The BJP scored a remarkable tally in West Bengal, a long-term Left stronghold turned Trinamool territory. It won 18 of the state's 42 Lok Sabha seats, in a massive improvement over its 2014 tally of two seats. Mamata Banerjee's Trinamool won only a few more, 22.

At yesterday's meeting, the Trinamool Congress began a review of its dismal performance and the challenge ahead for the assembly elections 2021. A few leaders who have spoken on the results have said this was a temporary setback and people will be back with the Trinamool Congress by the time assembly elections come around.

Mamata Banerjee questioned the fairness of the election.

"I can only continue if people are willing to take a bold step. We need to increase our vote share. BJP's vote has come from the Left. This is mathematics," said the Chief Minister.

"I can't accept this. How can BJP win so many seats in Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana? People are scared to speak but I am not."

Meanwhile, clashes between supporters of BJP and TMC has left one dead, officials said.

Paramilitary forces boosted security yesterday because of the violence.

The BJP said a 23-year-old party worker was shot dead by Trinamool activists late Friday at Chakda, north of the regional capital Kolkata. The rival party denied any involvement.

The man's family said he was shot in a field near his home.

Clashes between BJP and Trinamool activists were also reported in three other districts.
