A year after being named, Sanatan’s lawyer held

Sanathan Sanstha

Sanjeev Punalekar

Narendra Dabholkar

Gauri Lankesh

lawyer

Lawyer asked me to destroy the gun after Gauri Lankesh ‘event’ Sharad Kalaskar’s statement is part of the 9,235-page additional charge-sheet filed by the SIT in November before a special court in Bengaluru.

Bengaluru

CBI arrests’s lawyerfor destruction of evidence in the 2013-murder of. Incidentally, Punalekar’s name has also cropped up in’s murder probeNearly a year after right wing organisation Sanathan Sanstha’s- Sanjeev Punalekar’s - name cropped up in the 2013-murder of rationalist Narendra Dabholkar, the CBI has arrested him in Mumbai. A former convict and Punalekar’s close aide Vikram Bhave was also arrested. Punalekar is accused of “aiding and abetted” duo Sharad Kalaskar and Sachin Andure, sharpshooters who gunned down Dabholkar on August 20, 2013, as well as several other Hindu extremists wanted in a variety of cases. There are also allegations of tampering with evidence. In his statement to the CBI last year, Kalaskar had said that Punalekar, who is also the national secretary of the Hindu Vidhidnya Parishad, asked him to destroy the weapons used to murder Dabholkar and journalist Gauri Lankesh, among others. These allegations are also made in the supplementary charge sheet filed against the duo earlier this year.The two accused will now be produced in a Pune Court tomorrow. The CBI had alleged that it was the longstanding enemity between Dabholkar, who led the Andhashraddha Nirmoolan Samiti, and Sanatan Sanstha that led to the rationalist’s murder. It further alleges that Santan’s members Virendrasinh Tawde and Amol Kale planned the murder. In January 2019, BM had reported that the statement of Sharad Kalaskar, a key accused in the Gauri Lankesh murder, included in the 9235-page chargesheet filed by the Karnataka Special Investigation Team (SIT) stated that Punalekar had instructed Kalaskar and Vaibhav Raut (arrested in 2018 Nallasopara arms haul) to destroy the firearms used in the killings of their targets including Professor MM Kalburgi and Gauri Lankesh. Another accused in the Gauri Lankesh case, Vasudev Bhagwan Suryavanshi alias Mechanic from Jalgaon who used to steal bikes that were used by the group for recce and execution of their targets was also instructed to meet Punalekar at his office near Churchgate in Mumbai.Sharad Kalaskar in his 28-page long statement has said that in 2018 July, he along with Vaibhav Raut met Punalekar at his office in Fort area of Mumbai. Punalekar, according to the chargsheet, immediately asked Kalaskar about the guns and also whether the police have got any links between Amol Kale and Veerendra Tawde, who was the former leader of their radical outfit till his arrest in 2016. Sharad Kalaskar, originally a farmer from Aurangabad, was originally recruited by Veerendra Tawde and had later emerged as Kale’s key aide in Belagavi and was also trained in making country-made firearms. Amol Kale has been named as the mastermind behind the Gauri Lankesh murder. “Destroy guns used for all events (code for murder) along with its barrels. Firearms and bombs that are in Murali’s custody should also be destroyed,” Punalekar reportedly told Kalaskar, as per the statement.The statement also reveals that Punalekar told Kalaskar that he would pay for the guns. Kalaskar’s statement also reveals how Punalekar reassured him when he asked about the Narendra Dabholkar case as he was reportedly involved in it. Punalekar back then told him that somebody else had been already chargesheeted in that case. “You don’t worry about it,” Punalekar tells Kalaskar in the statement. In his statement, Kalaskar refers to Sanjiv Punalekar as advocate Sanju Punalekar. Sources in the SIT has confirmed that he was referring to Sanjiv Punalekar but refused to reveal any details about whether the SIT would move against him. When BM contacted Punalekar for his reaction, he admitted that he had met Kalaskar but dismissed allegations of destroying evidence. Sharad Kalaskar in his confession to the SIT has also said that after meeting Punalekar, he convinced Murali, Vaibhav Raut and Sudhanva Gondalekar to keep four firearms and dismantle the rest and dispose them off. He has claimed that he disposed those guns including the one that was used in the Lankesh and professor MM Kalburgi murders. It is expected that Punalekar would be taken into custody for further probe in the Lankesh case later, but the SIT formally refused to comment on the matter on Saturday evening.Legal experts have pointed out that it would amount to professional misconduct if a lawyer is involved in the destruction of evidence. They also pointed out that if the allegation of destroying evidence was proven to be true, the concerned advocate could even be debarred from practising law. “It is true that there is some level of immunity between a lawyer and his client. In cases like this the Bar Council of India should conduct an investigation. If charges are proven before the council then the accused lawyer could be debarred,” said P Prasanna Kumar, leading High Court Lawyer based inMirror had earlier reported how Punalekar had allegedly harboured those accused in the 2009-Madgaon blast case and were also wanted by the National Investigation Agency (NIA). However, the accused who had made these allegations against Punalekar was later acquitted. “During the interrogation of Kalaskar, it is revealed that in June 2018, Sharad Kalaskar visited advocate Sanjeev Punalekar in Fort, Mumbai, where Vikram Bave, assistant of Sanjeev Punalekar, was also present,” CBI’s supplementary chargesheet read. It further says that Punalekar allegedly told Kalaskar about ‘his role in the murder of Dabholkar’ and also asked him not to worry. It adds that Punalekar had asked Kalaskar to destroy the firearms used in murder cases in a creek, including the Gauri Lankesh case. The chargesheet reads: “On July 23, 2018, Kalaskar dismantled four country-made pistols (took out barrels and sliders containing firing pins) and threw them from a bridge into a khadi (creek) while on the way to the Nalasopara residence of Vaibhav Raut (accused in the Nalasopara explosive seizure case). He was returning from Pune in Raut’s vehicles.Despite Dabholkar’s brutal murder in 2013, it was only in June 2016, the agency filed its first chargesheet against Virendrasinh Tawde under sections 120B (criminal conspiracy) and 302 (murder) of the IPC, among other charges. In the supplementary charge-sheet filed in February, the agency has charged Andure and Kalaskar under IPC sections for criminal conspiracy and murder and provisions of Arms Act and Section 16 of Unlawful Activities Prevention Act. Section 16 relates to acts of terror and attracts punishment of life imprisonment in found guilty.With inputs from Mumbai Mirror Bureau
