CAUGHT ON CAM! Man brutally murdered in broad daylight on busy Chennai street; onlookers stand mute

Kumerasan ran out of the hotel when he saw the men but three of them chased him and hacked to him to death. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: In a shocking case reported from Chennai, a 30-year-old man, who was the prime accused in a murder case from three years ago, was brutally murdered by some unknown people in broad daylight on a busy road in Arumbakkam locality. The entire incident was captured in a CCTV camera.

According to the police, 30-year-old Kumerasan was a resident of Choolaimede. He was the prime accused in a murder case that happened three years ago. Kumerasan and his gang had allegedly murdered a man named Yuvaraj.

On Monday morning, he was returning home after appearing in a court at Poonamallee in relation to the pending murder case. At around 11.20 AM he went to eat breakfast and at that time, five men got down from an auto and entered the hotel with sharp weapons and sickles.

Kumerasan ran out of the hotel when he saw the men but three of them chased him and hacked to him to death. The incident happened in front of a private college in Arumbakkam, Chennai. After the incident, the gang escaped from the spot.

The brutal murder was captured in a CCTV camera installed in a shop nearby. The video shows three men hacking a man and what is more shocking is that the people who were passing by did not try to help the victim.

Police reached the scene of crime and have started investigating the people around the area. His body was later shifted to a government hospital for post mortem.

In a similar case reported from Pulianthope on Sunday evening, a 22-year-old rowdy, who recently came out of the prison, was brutally murdered by a gang. Pulianthope police have arrested six people in the case.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
