Smriti Irani close aide shot dead in Amethi, family blames Congress workers

Surendra Singh succumbed to his injuries at the trauma centre in Lucknow.

A close aide of BJP leader Smriti Irani was shot at in Amethi's Baraulia village late Saturday night. He succumbed to his injuries hours later.

Family members of the deceased have put the blame of Congress workers.

The incident took place just days after Smriti Irani won the Lok Sabha elections from the Amethi parliamentary constituency. Smriti Irani will visit Surendra Singh's family today and has already left for Amethi.

Delhi: Amethi MP & BJP leader Smriti Irani leaves for her constituency, she will meet the family of Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Barauli, Amethi who was shot dead last night. pic.twitter.com/NnIdRWRjvk ANI (@ANI) May 26, 2019

Surendra Singh, former village head of Baraulia village under Jamo police station limits, was shot by unidentified assailants at his residence.

Singh's son Abhay said, "We couldn't see the perpetrators but it is clear that Congress workers are behind this. My father was actively campaigning for Smriti Irani and BJP got many votes from our booth."

Son of Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Barauli, Amethi who was shot dead y'day: My father was a close aide of Smriti Irani&used to campaign 24/7. After she became MP, Vijay Yatra was carried out. I think some Congress supporters didn't like it,we have suspicions on some people pic.twitter.com/JKeWj2RsMo May 26, 2019

Singh was referred to Lucknow in a serious condition and he succumbed to his injuries during treatment, a police officer said, adding two people have been detained in connection with the incident and further investigation was underway.

Amethi SP said, "He was shot around 3 am. We've taken a few suspects into custody. Investigation on. It can be due to an old dispute or a political dispute."

Amethi: Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Baraulia, was shot dead by unidentified assailants at his residence, last night. Amethi SP says, "He was shot around 3 AM. We've taken a few suspects into custody. Investigation on. It can be due to an old dispute or a political dispute" pic.twitter.com/VYPy9jYDCR ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 26, 2019

Abhay further added that his father was sitting outside the house when they heard gunshots outside the house.

"When we rushed outside, we saw blood oozing out of his head," said Abhay.

He added, "We took him to the district hospital from where the doctors referred him to the trauma centre in Lucknow. He died while being brought from Amethi."

Baraulia village was in news during campaigning in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections, as Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra had accused Smriti Irani of distributing shoes to the residents in order to insult Rahul Gandhi.

Locals claim that Surendra Singh was considered close to Irani and he was involved in the distribution of footwear.

BJP convenor for Amethi Lok Sabha seat Rajesh Agrahari told PTI, "Considering the fact that the Congress is disappointed, especially after the defeat of its party president in Amethi, a high-level probe should be ordered, and the guilty should be punished."

"Surendra Singh was a popular and active grassroots level leader, and a close aide of MP Smriti Irani. He and other party leaders were actively involved in distribution of shoes," he added.

Amethi Superintendent of Police Rajesh Kumar said, "The incident cannot be ruled out to be a political murder. All aspects are being probed. There can be old enmity as well," the SP said.

Expressing grief over Singh's death, Deputy Chief Minister Keshav Prasad Maurya said, "The death of a party worker is indeed very sad and unfortunate. He was a hard worker. Even if his killers are hiding below the ground, they will be caught. The entire Amethi is sad over the incident."

UP minister Rita Bahuguna Joshi said there's no place for violence in a democracy and demanded strict action against the killers.

Smriti Irani on Friday won the Amethi parliamentary seat by overtaking Congress chief Rahul Gandhi with a margin of 55,120 votes. Irani polled a total of 4,67,598 votes.

Amethi is considered a stronghold of the Congress party since years. Gandhi has been winning on the seat since 2004.

Despite the poor performance of the party in 2014 general elections at the Centre, the Congress president had defeated Irani on the seat with a margin of 1,07,903 votes.
