Year after being named, defence lawyer arrested

Narendra Dabholkar

Govind Pansare

Gauri Lankesh

Mumbai

Nearly a year after the name of Sanjeev Punalekar, a lawyer from an organisation that provides legal support to all the accused in theandmurder cases, cropped up in the killing of rationalist Dabholkar, the CBI arrested him inon Saturday.Among the accused the organisation defends are alleged activists of Sanatan Sanstha. Punalekar’s close aide and RTI activist, Vikram Bhave, was also arrested. He was convicted in the Thane theatre and auditorium blasts case of 2008, but released on bail by the Bombay High Court in 2013.Punalekar, an office-bearer of the Hindu Vididnya Parishad, alawyers’ body that represents all the accused in Dabholkar, Pansare and Lankesh killings, is accused of “aiding and abetting” Sharad Kalaskar and Sachin Andure, alleged sharpshooters who gunned down Dabholkar on August 20, 2013, as well as several other Hindu extremists wanted in a number of cases. There are also allegations against him of tampering with evidence.He had until recently made defamatory statements about Dabholkar in several blogs and interviews with news channels. Mirror had reported on Punalekar allegedly harbouring those accused in the 2009 Madgaon blast case and was also wanted by the National Investigation Agency. However, the accused who had made these allegations against Punalekar were later acquitted. In his statements last year to the CBI and the Karnataka Special Investigation Team, which was probing the Gauri Lankesh killing, Kalaskar had said that Punalekar had asked him to destroy the weapons used in killing Dabholkar and Lankesh.These allegations were part of the CBI’s supplementary chargesheet filed against the duo earlier this year.The CBI’s chargesheet said that Kalaskar had claimed during his interrogation that Bhave had helped him and Andure conduct a reconnaissance of the target (Dabholkar), the proposed site of the murder and the exit route.The CBI had alleged that a longstanding enmity between Dabholkar, who headed the anti-superstition organisation Andhashraddha Nirmoolan Samiti, and Sanatan Sanstha led to the rationalist’s murder.“During the interrogation of Kalaskar, it was revealed that in June 2018, Kalaskar visited the chamber of advocate Sanjeev Punalekar at Nariman Street, Bazar Gate, Fort, where Vikram Bhave, the assistant of Sanjeev Punalekar, was also present,” the CBI’s supplementary chargesheet read.It further said that Punalekar allegedly told Kalaskar about “his role in the murder of Dabholkar” and also asked him not to worry. It added that Punalekar had asked Kalaskar to destroy the firearms used in murder cases, including that of Gauri Lankesh, in a creek. “On July 23, 2018, Kalaskar dismantled four country-made pistols (took out barrels and sliders containing firing pins) and threw them from abridge into a khadi (creek) while on the way to the Nallasopara residence of Vaibhav Raut (accused in the Nallasopara explosive seizure case). He was returning from Pune in Raut’s vehicles,” read the chargesheet.The CBI filed its first chargesheet in the case only in June 2016. In the supplementary chargesheet filed in February this year, it charged Andure and Kalaskar with criminal conspiracy and murder, as well as with provisions of Arms Act and Section 16 of the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act. Section 16 relates to acts of terror and attracts punishment of life imprisonment if found guilty.Chetan Rajhans, national spokesperson of Sanatan Sanstha, issued a statement denouncing the arrests, saying they smacked of “conspiracy”. “The CBI has bowed before the demand of the progressives,” he said, holding that Punalekar was innocent.Punalekar and Bhave will be produced in aPune court on Sunday.
