Smriti Irani’s close aide Surendra Singh shot dead in Amethi, son points finger at Congress; suspects arrested

Surendra Singh (left) was very close to BJP MP from Amethi, Smriti Irani. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Amethi: A close aide of newly-elected Lok Sabha Member of Parliament, Smriti Irani, was shot dead by unidentified assailants in her constituency of Amethi. Surendra Singh, former head of Baraulia village, was killed on Saturday night at his residence that falls under the Jamo police station limits. The police have registered a case and investigation is on to nab the culprits. Irani today left for her constituency to meet his family.

The incident took place just a few kilometres away from the district headquarters of Gauriganj in Amethi. On Saturday, bike-borne assailants reached his residence and fired indiscriminately at him. He received a few shots on his face. Additional Superintendent of Police Daya Ram said Singh (50) was referred to government hospital in Lucknow but later succumbed to his injuries while he was getting treated, PTI reported.

The police have picked up suspects, formed 5 teams to nab Singh’s killers. “The police has formed 3 teams at the police station level while one SOG and one surveillance team has been pressed into service to nab Surendra Singh’s killers. Several suspects have been taken into custody. But, the police are still not clear about the motive behind the murder,” Amethi SP Rajesh Kumar said.

Amethi: Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Baraulia, was shot dead by unidentified assailants at his residence, last night. Amethi SP says, "He was shot around 3 AM. We've taken a few suspects into custody. Investigation on. It can be due to an old dispute or a political dispute" pic.twitter.com/VYPy9jYDCR — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 26, 2019

The cold-blooded murder has shocked the residents of Amethi as it took place barely a couple of days after Irani's victory from the Congress bastion. Irani had been working very closely in the region ever since her defeat in the 2014 general elections and Singh had been working very closely with Irani for the past couple of years and was instrumental in getting votes for Irani.

“My father was a close aide of Smriti Irani and used to campaign 24/7. After she became an MP, a Vijay Yatra (victory lap) was carried out. I think some Congress supporters didn’t like it...we have suspicions on some people,” Singh’s son said, as quoted by news agency ANI.

Son of Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Barauli, Amethi who was shot dead y'day: My father was a close aide of Smriti Irani&used to campaign 24/7. After she became MP, Vijay Yatra was carried out. I think some Congress supporters didn't like it,we have suspicions on some people pic.twitter.com/JKeWj2RsMo — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 26, 2019

Last week, Irani emerged as 'a giant killer' after the Bharatiya Janata Party leader defeated Congress president Rahul Gandhi on his home turf of Amethi in Uttar Pradesh by a margin of 55,120 votes.

"It's a new morning for Amethi, a new determination. Thanks, Amethi, my obeisance. You put your trust in development and let the lotus bloom. Thankful to Amethi #PhirEkBaarModiSarkaar #VijayiBharat," she had tweeted after her victory.
