Election results 2019 — Live updates | Coming five years have to be years of people’s participation and raising awareness, says Modi

Ahmedabad

Modi addresses rally in Ahmedabad, first after election win

“The fire tragedy in Surat has saddened us all. We stand in solidarity with the bereaved families. May Almighty give them strength in this hour of grief. The State government is further strengthening disaster management infrastructure across Gujarat,” Mr. Modi says in his speech in Gujarati.

“I am here for a darshan of the people of Gujarat. The blessings of the State’s citizens have always been very special for me.

“I am coming back to the land that has nurtured me. I am back to a place with which I have a very old bond.

“After 6th phase of polling, I had said that it’s 300 plus for us. When I said it, people mocked me. But, the results are for everyone to see.

“We have to utilise these 5 years to solve issues of the common citizens. We have to further enhance India’s position at the world stage. The coming five years have to be years of Jan Bhagidari and Jan Chetna (people’s participation and raising awareness),” says Mr. Modi concluding his speech.

New Delhi

Election Commission lifts Model Code of Conduct

The Model Code of Conduct, which came into force on March 10 when the Lok Sabha election was announced, ceased to be in existence, the Election Commission said on May 26.

In an instruction to the Cabinet Secretary and Chief Secretaries of State governments, the Commission said the poll code had been lifted with immediate effect.

The code bars the party in power from using official machinery to further its political interests. The poll panel uses the code to pull up politicians who are either found guilty of threatening voters or using religion and bribe to seek votes.

Gangtok

P.S. Golay to take oath as new Sikkim Chief Minister tomorrow

Sikkim Krantikari Morcha (SKM) president Prem Singh Tamang, popularly known as P.S. Golay, will take oath as the new Chief Minister of Sikkim on May 27, a Raj Bhavan source said on May 26.

The 51-year-old Mr. Golay will be administered the oath of office by Governor Ganga Prasad at a function at Paljor Stadium at 10 a.m. on Monday, the source said.

Some Ministers are likely to be sworn in along with Mr. Golay, who was elected as the leader of the SKM Legislature Party on may 25 night.

P.S. Golay. File | Photo Credit: The Hindu

The SKM supremo, accompanied by the 17 newly-elected legislators of his party, on May 25 called on the Governor and staked claim to form the next government in Sikkim.

Mr. Prasad had reportedly told the SKM delegation to wait for his decision as he sought legal opinion on the matter as Mr. Golay had been convicted to a year’s imprisonment in a corruption case in 2016 and had served the prison term, sources said.

After getting the legal opinion, the Governor invited Mr. Golay to form the next government, the Raj Bhavan source added.

The SKM, founded in 2013, won a slender majority in the 32-member Sikkim legislative assembly by bagging 17 seats against 15 won by the SDF.

Mr. Golay did not contest the Assembly polls to devote his time to campaign for his party.

New Delhi

Modi to be sworn in on May 30

Narendra Modi will be sworn in as the Prime Minister on May 30, the Rashtrapati Bhavan has said.

“The President will administer the oath of Office and secrecy to the Prime Minister and other members of Union Council of Ministers on 30.05.2019 at 07.00 p.m.,”a communique from the Rashtrapati Bhavan said.

The ceremony will be held at the Rashtrapati Bhavan.

Islamabad

Imran speaks to Modi, expresses desire to work together

End of terrorism is essential for regional peace and development, said Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday while receiving a congratulatory phone call from Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan.

The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) informed that a number of regional leaders, including former President of Maldives Mohammed Nasheed, called PM Modi and expressed desire to work towards regional development and peace.

“He stressed that creating trust and an environment free of violence and terrorism were essential for fostering cooperation for peace, progress and prosperity in our region,” stated the MEA after Mr. Khan spoke to Mr. Modi on phone. During the phone call, Mr. Modi said that he recollected initiatives like “Neighbourhood First” that were started during his first tenure from 2014-’19.

Gujarat

Modi, Amit Shah to arrive in Gujarat to celebrate victory

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP president Amit Shah are arriving in Ahmedabad on Sunday a two-day visit to their home turf Gujarat, which has once again given the party all the 26 Lok Sabha seats.

They are expected to land at the Sardar Patel airport at 5 p.m. and offer floral tributes to the statue of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel at the airport, State party president Jitubhai Vaghani said.

A human chain will be formed from the Sardar statue to the airport circle. Twenty-two stages would be erected on both sides of the road to host cultural performances, according the party’s youth wing president Ritvik Patel, who is presiding over the preparations.

From there, the leaders will reach the old State BJP headquarters at JP Chowk in the Khanpur area. Mr. Modi used to live in a room when he was Gujarat BJP’s Organizational Secretary in the late 1980s during the party’s formative years in the state.

The Prime Minister and Amit Shah will address a public meeting at the JP Chowk where he always makes the first speech after every election victory. The meeting would be to convey his and the party’s gratitude to the people for giving such a massive mandate.

As always, Mr. Modi will have a night-halt at Raj Bhavan in Gandhinagar and visit his mother Heeraben to take her blessings at his younger brother’s house in Raisan area in Gandhinagar before leaving for Delhi.

Odisha

Patnaik unanimously elected leader of BJD legislature party

Naveen Patnaik was on Sunday unanimously elected as the leader of the BJD legislature party in Odisha for a record fifth term in a row.

Mr. Patnaik was chosen the leader by the newly elected Biju Janta Dal (BJD) MLAs during a 45-minute meeting at the party headquarters in Bhubaneswar, party sources said.

Thanking the newly elected legislators for electing him as the legislature party leader once again, Mr. Patnaik said the new government would work hard to ensure speedy development of the state.

“I am very grateful to the MLAs for unanimously electing me as the BJD legislature party leader. We will work hard for the state’s development,” Mr. Patnaik told reporters after the meeting.

He also said that he will meet the governor soon to stake claim for forming the next government.

Goa

BJP to introspect Panaji bypoll defeat, says Parrikar’s son

Former Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar’s son Utpal Parrikar on Sunday said the BJP will introspect its defeat in the by-election to the Panaji Assembly seat, which was held by his father for long.

Congress leader Atanasio Monserratte won the Panaji bypoll, necessitated due to the death of sitting MLA Manohar Parrikar in March.

The Congress nominee defeated BJP candidate Siddharth Kunkolienkar by a margin of over 1,700 votes in the seat, which was held by the saffron party for 25 years.

The former Chief Minister’s son was earlier among the candidates shortlisted by the BJP, but it later fielded Mr. Kunkolienkar in the bypoll, held on May 19.

Utpal Parrikar, who actively campaigned for the BJP in the bypoll, said the party will do an assessment of its defeat and make all efforts to win the seat next time.

“The state BJP leaders and workers will introspect on the results and will ensure that we win the Panaji seat in the next election,” he told reporters here.

He said he will give his inputs about the poll results to the party leaders, as and when there is a discussion on it.

“The party will go through the internal assessment and make the required corrections,” he said.

Asked if he would have managed to retain the seat had he been given the ticket, he said, “I don’t think we will achieve anything by speaking about the past.”

By-elections were recently held in four Assembly constituencies of Goa, out of which the BJP won three seats but lost the Panaji seat.

New Delhi

Will work with you for an inclusive India, Catholic Church tells PM Narendra Modi

Hoping for an inclusive and peaceful new India, the Catholic Bishops Conference of India (CBCI), a body representing 19.9 million Catholics and the largest bishops’ conference in Asia, has congratulated Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the BJP and party president Amit Shah on their emphatic election victory.

The Church said it hopes, prays and is willing to work together “for a new India which enjoys peace and prosperity and continues to make progress’’.

Bastar

Congress happy to win Naxal-hit Bastar seat

Despite receiving a drubbing in the just held Lok Sabha polls, the Chhattisgarh Congress has drawn consolation by wresting the Naxal-hit Bastar seat, reserved for Scheduled Tribe candidates, which it never won in the past.

Congress nominee Dipak Baij defeated BJP’s Baiduram Kashyap by a margin of 38,982 votes in Bastar.

Prior to the Lok Sabha elections, the Congress was hopeful of faring well and winning seats reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates as it won the Assembly polls last year with a thumping majority, uprooting the BJP which ruled the state for 15 years.

However, in the Lok Sabha polls to 11 seats in the State, the results of which were declared last Thursday, the Congress managed to win only two seats — Korba and Bastar.

But, the party is happy to have improved its tally from the previous record of winning just one seat in the last three Lok Sabha polls.

“We performed well in Bastar and Kanker — both reserved for tribal candidates. Though we won only Bastar of these two, the loss margin in Kanker was just 6,914 votes.

Despite a strong ‘Modi wave’, the Congress has improved its tally in Chhattisgarh to two seats,” state Congress spokesman Shailesh Nitin Trivedi told PTI.

“It is significant that the party has won a reserved Lok Sabha seat for the first time since the formation of Chhattisgarh in November 2000. The credit goes to Congress’ pro-tribal and pro-farmer measures taken in just two months of formation of its government in the state,” he said.

Prior to polling in Bastar Lok Sabha seat, ultras last month killed BJP MLA Bhima Mandavi and four security personnel in the region, which has been struggling with Naxal menace for the past three decades

Congratulatory messages to Modi

Theresa May, Angela Merkel, Saudi Crown Prince congratulate Modi

UK Prime Minister Theresa May, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Sadi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman congratulated Prime Minister Narendra Modi on his victory in the Lok Sabha elections, a statement said on Sunday.

According to the statement, Mr. Modi received phone calls from Ms. May, Ms. Markel, Mr. Salman, Qatar’s Emir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani and former Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa.

Ms. May congratulated the Prime Minister on the strong mandate.

“Describing the general elections as a major showcase for democracy, May complimented the people of India on completion of the significant exercise. Modi thanked her and expressed his desire to continue to work for further deepening bilateral cooperation with the United Kingdom in all spheres,” the statement said.

“Congratulating Modi, Merkel noted the growing relationship between the two countries and expressed her desire to further enhance cooperation in areas of mutual interests. The Prime Minister thanked her and noted the exemplary role played by her in furthering bilateral ties between the two countries as well as for global peace and prosperity.”

The two leaders looked forward to interacting with Mr. Modi at next month’s G20 Summit in Osaka Japan, and at the Inter-Governmental Consultations between the two countries later this year in India.

Mr. Modi has thanked the Crown Prince for his warm felicitations and conveyed his appreciation for his invaluable friendship with people of India and his personal interest in furthering the close relations between the two countries.

He has also thanked the Emir and expressed appreciation for his guidance in building strong partnership between the two countries.

Mr. Modi also thanked Rajapaksa for his greetings.

“Stating that as neighbours India and Sri Lanka enjoy longstanding, close and friendly relations, the Prime Minister expressed the confidence that these relations will continue to grow for the benefit of the people of the two countries as also for regional peace and prosperity,” the statement added.

New Delhi

Modi calls on Vice-President Venkaiah Naidu

A day after being appointed Prime Minister for a second term, Narendra Modi on Sunday called on Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu.

Sources described it as a courtesy call.

Mr. Modi reached the Vice-President house in New Delhi to meet him this morning.

Mr. Modi was on Saturday appointed Prime Minister by President Ram Nath Kovind after he was unanimously elected NDA parliamentary party leader at a meeting in which he asked coalition members to work without discrimination, stressing on the need to win the trust of minorities.

In the general election, he led the BJP-led NDA to a landslide victory with the alliance winning 353 seats, including an unprecedented 303 by the BJP.

Uttar Pradesh

Mandate for creating new India’s new Uttar Pradesh: Adityanath

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath says the massive mandate in the Lok Sabha polls was a mandate for creating “new India’s new Uttar Pradesh” and gave a befitting reply to those parties which cheated the poor in the name of social welfare and relied on caste politics.

Mr. Adityanath says his government’s focus on development helped him secure another term in the politically important state.

“While the opportunistic coalition of the SP and BSP were relying on caste politics, I kept toiling for development of citizens rising above caste, creed or religion. This is the reason people voted for the BJP,” the chief minister told PTI, giving full credit for the massive mandate to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP chief Amit Shah.

“The massive mandate received in Uttar Pradesh in favour of the ruling party is the mandate for creating new India’s new Uttar Pradesh. The mandate is against nepotism, casteism, corruption. It is a befitting reply to those hypocritical parties which cheated poor in the name of social welfare. It is a victory over goons of SP who were harassing our mothers and sisters by collecting ‘goonda tax’ from traders and industrialists,” Mr. Adityanath said.

During the poll campaign, while Mr. Modi talked about 55 years of Congress and his five-year tenure in rallies, Mr. Adityanath presented the report card of his two-year rule.

Noting that the law and order situation in Uttar Pradesh was earlier bad, the Chief Minister said, “Crime had become a business in the state because of nexus of criminals, corrupt police officers and politicians. But today the same group is running for cover due to ‘zero tolerance’ policy of the present government against criminals”.

“In last two years, for the first time in the history of Uttar Pradesh, stringent action was taken against criminals without looking at their caste, religion and political inclination. The police department, which had become infamous for its poor work culture and behaviour towards people, is now going through drastic changes,” he said.

On the Punjab and Haryana High Court recently ordering Punjab and Haryana governments to uproot emerging ‘gang culture’ and look at the measures adopted by UP, he said, “This is the result of commitment of our government that in a very short span of time, the UP law and order model has set an example for other states to follow.”

According to data provided by Mr. Adiyanath’s aides, in the 3,539 encounters during the BJP government, 8,135 criminals were arrested and 75 killed in self-defence.

Besides, 2,764 most wanted criminals were arrested, while 13,886 surrendered after their bail was cancelled.

Mr. Adityanath said, “There has not been a single incident of riot in the past two years“.

As per statistics given by his aides, there were 227 riots in 2012, 247 in 2013, 242 in 2014, 219 in 2015 and the year 2016 also witnessed the killing of innocent people in more than 100 riots.

Andhra Pradesh

Jagan Mohan Reddy meets Modi

Andhra Pradesh CM-designate Jagan Mohan Reddy with Prime Minister Narendra Modi in New Delhi on May 26, 2019. | Photo Credit: The Hindu

YSR Congress Party president and Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister-designate Y S Jaganmohan Reddy met Prime Minister Narendra Modi at his residence in New Delhi on Sunday.

Mr. Reddy, whose party stormed to power on Thursday with a landslide victory in Assembly polls, discussed the issues of special category status to Andhra Pradesh and the State’s financial situation and sought central funds during the meeting with Mr. Modi at his 7, Lok Kalyan Marg residence, sources said.

Amethi

Former village head shot dead in Amethi

A former village head was allegedly shot dead by two unidentified men in Uttar Pradesh’s Amethi district, police said on Sunday.

Additional Superintendent of Police Daya Ram said Surendra Singh (50), the former head of Baraulia village was shot at around 11.30 pm on Saturday.

He was referred to Lucknow in a serious condition and he succumbed to his injuries during treatment, the police officer said, adding two people have been detained in connection with the incident and further investigation was underway.

CSDS-Lokniti poll survey

Post-poll survey: explaining the Modi sweep across regions

The outcome of the general election of 2019 is historic in more ways than one. While it is a vote for a second term for the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government, it also indicates that alliance arithmetic by itself does not guarantee a victory. This election saw a near presidential-style electoral campaign, making personal leadership the central focus. This placed the BJP and the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) at a decisive advantage and left the United Progressive Alliance and other State-based parties finding themselves on the back foot. This election is also a story of the success of one strategy of alliance formation over the other.

Tamil Nadu

AIADMK, DMK to send three members each to Rajya Sabha

With the declaration of results of the Lok Sabha polls, the focus of Tamil Nadu politics has now turned to the Rajya Sabha elections scheduled for June.

The tenure of AIADMK MPs V. Maitrayen, R. Lakshmanan, T. Rathinavel and K.R. Arjunan, DMK MP Kanimozhi and CPI MP Raja will get over on July 24.

A member needs 34 votes to get elected to the Rajya Sabha and the current strength of the AIADMK will not allow it to elect four members. Thus the party will only be able to send three members to the Upper House.

Tamil Nadu

A resounding ‘no’ to the BJP-led coalition in Tamil Nadu

Narendra Modi has been chosen by the BJP-led NDA for a second term as Prime Minister. However, his party has once again failed in Tamil Nadu.

AIADMK supremo Jayalalithaa had stolen his thunder ahead of the 2014 Lok Sabha elections with her slogan ‘Lady or Modi’, urging people in T.N. to pick the 'lady' (referring to herself). She went on to win 37 seats. Of the two remaining seats, the BJP, leading a third front, managed one, and its ally, the PMK, took the other.

Also read: Two arch rivals garner over 50% of the votes

In 2019, the humiliation is greater. The BJP has drawn a blank. Its ally, the ruling AIADMK, has managed to win just one seat of the 38 Lok Sabha seats.

2019 poll percentage

2019 poll records the highest-ever turnout of 67.47%

The Lok Sabha election registered the highest-ever voter turnout of 67.47%, 1.03% more than the 2014 figure.

The BJP’s vote share stood at 37.41%, compared with 19.51% of the Congress and 4.07% of the Trinamool Congress. Of the total 61.30 crore votes polled, the winning candidates got 32.29 crore votes, amounting to 52.67%. In all, 78 female candidates were elected.

CSDS-Lokniti poll survey

Post-poll survey: Kamal Nath government falls in popularity charts in Madhya Pradesh

Just five months after narrowly losing power to the Congress in the Madhya Pradesh Assembly election, the BJP virtually obliterated its rival in the Lok Sabha election by winning 28 out of 29 seats and garnering a vote share that is 17 percentage points higher than what it had secured in the Assembly election. So massive was the scale of the BJP victory that except for Dalits and Muslims, all other castes and communities, including the Adivasis, ended up consolidating around the BJP in the State. It is quite astonishing that an electorate that gave a chance to the Congress only a few months ago has deserted it so quickly. What explains this sudden turnaround?

CSDS-Lokniti poll survey

Post-poll survey: Why Uttar Pradesh's mahagathbandhan failed

In this election, the alliance in Uttar Pradesh between the Samajwadi Party (SP) and the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP), referred to as the mahagathbandhan, was based on the premise that both parties will ensure the transfer of their votes to each other in their corresponding seats. They had tasted the success of this experiment in the Gorakhpur and Phulpur by-elections in early 2018 and a few months later in Kairana as well, when the Rashtriya Lok Dal (RLD) joined this alliance. However, the success didn’t last long. The vote transfer that worked in the by-elections did not fully materialise when it mattered most.

NDA meeting

Modi underlines need for inclusiveness at NDA meeting

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Saturday staked claim to form the next government after the NDA parliamentary party unanimously elected him as its leader.

At a meeting in the Central Hall of Parliament, Mr. Modi urged all NDA MPs to work in the spirit of inclusiveness and public service, namely “Sabka saath, sabka vikas aur sabka vishwas” [solidarity with everyone, development for all, with the trust of all].
