Man gets life term for tailor’s murder

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a person to life imprisonment for the murder of a tailor. The court of additional sessions judge Arun Kumar Aggarwal also imposed a fine of Rs25,000 on the convict, Sarvar Alam of Kishan Ganj in Bihar. However, the court acquitted one of the accused — Mohammad Nazim of Kishan Ganj (Bihar) — presently in Shivpuri, as the prosecution could not prove it was a case against him beyond any shadow of reasonable doubt.

On February 23, 2014, Laddowal police had registered a case, and booked Sarvar Alam and Mohammad Nazim, along with co-accused Mohammad Shafiq and Mohammad Numan (since declared proclaimed offenders) for the murder of Mujahir Alam of New Shivpuri.

As per prosecution, Rakesh Sharma posted as forest guard in Kadian Forest had told police that on February 21, 2014 at about 3.30pm, he went inside the forest, and when he reached the forest towards the highway side, he found the body of a man about 25-26 years, near a small wall towards the rear side of the zoo. There were injuries on the right side of his chest, neck, face, nose, and right arm bicep. After the identification of the deceased, his father Mohammad Hussain recorded a statement that his son was murdered by the accused, after which they were booked in the case, and arrested. Later, police presented a challan against Sarvar and Mohammad Nazim in the court.

During the trial, the accused pleaded false implication. The additional public prosecutor for the state pleaded for punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence, including the complainant’s statement and other evidence.

The defence counsel said the prosecution had not been been able to prove the alleged motive for murder by the accused. It mentioned that the prosecution had alleged two motives. Firstly, it was alleged that Sarvar Alam borrowed an amount of Rs1 lakh from Mujahir Alam, and after the repeated demands of Mujahir, Sarvar still did not return the said amount. When Mujahir repeated the request, Sarvar — along with the other co-accused — killed Mujahir. Secondly, it was alleged that Mujahir was having illicit relations with Sarvar’s wife.

The defence counsel, however, argued that so far, as the alleged borrowing of the amount of Rs1 lakh by Sarvar was concerned, there was absolutely no evidence on that. No document had been placed or proved to that effect, and oral evidence produced by the prosecution was only hearsay, as no one came forward to substantiate the claims.

The court — after going through the prosecution evidence — held that the prosecution had been able to prove the motive for murder, and that was borrowing an amount of Rs1 lakh by Sarvar from Mujahir, and on Muhajir’s repeated demands, Sarvar did not pay the said amount, and in order to avoid payment, he had killed Mujahir. The court held there was no cogent and convincing evidence to prove Muhajir had illicit relations with Sarvar’s wife.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
