Smriti Irani's close aide shot dead in Amethi

Smriti Irani's close aide shot dead in Amethi

Speaking to media, Surendra Singh's family told they suspected the hands of Congress workers behind the murder.

news Death

A former village head, known to be close to the newly elected BJP MP Smriti Irani, was shot dead in Baraulia village in Uttar Pradesh's Amethi district on Sunday.

Surendra Singh was killed by bike-borne assailants while he was sleeping outside his house.

Singh was taken to the district hospital from where he was referred to a hospital in Lucknow. He succumbed to his injuries while on his way.

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Amethi, Rajesh Kumar said that some people have been detained in connection with the murder and further investigations are on.

Sources said that Singh had worked for Irani during the recently concluded general elections.

Speaking to media on Saturday, Surendra Singh’s son told he suspected the hands of Congress workers behind the murder.

“My father was a close aide of Smriti Irani and used to campaign 24/7. After she became MP, Vijay Yatra was carried out. I think some Congress supporters didn't like it, we have suspicions on some people,” his son told ANI.

Son of Surendra Singh, ex-village head of Barauli, Amethi who was shot dead y'day: My father was a close aide of Smriti Irani&used to campaign 24/7. After she became MP, Vijay Yatra was carried out. I think some Congress supporters didn't like it,we have suspicions on some people pic.twitter.com/JKeWj2RsMo — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) May 26, 2019

“We couldn't see the perpetrators but it is clear that Congress workers are behind this. My father was actively campaigning for Smriti Irani and BJP got many votes from our booth,” he further added.

Smriti Irani won from the Amethi constituency in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections defeating Congress President Rahul Gandhi with a margin of 55,000 votes.

The police are yet to find a motive behind the killing. Raids are being conducted in adjoining villages to trace the accused.

A heavy deployment of forces has been made in the village in view of prevailing tension.

On May 24, a Samajwadi Party member of the zila panchayat Vijay Yadav had been shot dead in Ghazipur.
