Hyderabad: Mother stabs 2 kids with beer bottle, surrenders before police

The police have also recovered a note left by the accused informing about her decision to commit suicide | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: Mother is considered the epitome of love for her children. But proving it wrong, a woman has stabbed her two sons to death with a beer bottle in Siddipet town of Telangana. The accused has been identified as C Saroja.

The accused first stuffed the cloth into the mouth of the victims and then used broken beer bottle to kill them at her residence Ganesh Nagar residence in Siddipet.

According to a report in Times of India, the 25-year-old accused took the drastic step after a marital dispute with her husband. Saroja married Bhaskar, a taxi driver, seven years and had two kids with him. The victims have been identified as 5-year-old Shriya and 3-year-old Harshavardhan.

After killing her children, the woman boarded a bus to Karimnagar and surrendered before the police. The Karimnagar police alerted their Siddipet counterparts, who reached the spot immediately. The police found bodies of the kids lying in pool of blood on the bed.

The police have also recovered a note left by the accused informing about her decision to commit suicide after murdering the children.



“Saroja instead of committing suicide left for Karimnagar. She perhaps changed her mind. She is being brought from Karimnagar to Siddipet to know the details," the report quoted Deputy Superintendent of Police, Rameshwar, as saying.

Police said they prima-facie believe that the children were murdered following a quarrel between the couple.

The husband of the accused was at his workplace when the kids were killed by the woman. The accused has been booked for murder under Section 302 of the IPC.

In a similar case on May 23, a 29-year-old woman in Maduravoyal area of Chennai killed her two children and attempted suicide reportedly due to mounting debt.

According to police, the accused Shylaja was residing with her two kids in an apartment in Ganapathi Nagar, Alapakkam.
