Class XII topper falls on potholed road, run over

PATIALA: A 19-year-old student, who scored second position in the Class XII exams conducted by the Punjab School Education Board in the district, was killed after she fell off her two-wheeler and a tractor-trolley ran over her on a congested road filled with potholes in Nabha on Saturday.Manveer Kaur was on her way to Nabha from her Rohti Basta village to attend her tuition classes when she lost control over her twowheeler and fell owing to the potholes on Circular Road – a site where several accidents have taken place, according to local residents. Before she could recover, a tractor-trolley coming from behind crushed her. Kulwinder Singh, a family member, said Manveer was taken to a nearby hospital by passersby, but was declared brought dead by doctors.Manveer used to commute daily from her home to Nabha — a distance of 4 km — for her extra classes at a private institute. She was a commerce student. She had scored 97.11% marks in Class XII, bagging 11th position across Punjab. The daughter of a farmer, Jagtar Singh, Manveer was a student of Malwa Public Senior Secondary School, Nabha.She had planned to become an IAS officer and was preparing for UPSC examination. Besides her parents, she leaves behind her younger brother, a Class IX student in her school.School principal Alok Mukheja, said, “The word tragic is very small to define the demise of our intelligent student. It was more shocking for us as on Saturday we were distributing sweets to all parents participating in a parent-teacher meeting in the school. We were celebrating the meritorious achievements of our five students who had brought laurels.” “My wife Ritu was her English teacher and is inconsolable as Manveer used to call her mom instead of ‘m’aam’ and both shared a deep love. Like her parents, we too are left heart-bleeding.”Nabha DSP VS Thind said, “It is an unfortunate incident as the town has lost a brilliant student. We will register a case after we receive a complaint from the family members of the girl.”
