Sabarimala fiasco: BJP Sowed But Cong Reaped

The BJP did all the hard work during the Sabarimala agitation but the Congress walked away with the trophy. That, in a nutshell, is the real story of the Kerala results, in which widespread resentment and anger among the majority community on the Sabarimala issue – and the minority consolidation that it, in turn, provoked – helped the Congress sweep 19 out of the state’s 20 seats.

Hindu mobilisation on such a conspicuous and unprecedented scale in Kerala, as the Sabarimala issue did, should naturally have benefited the BJP, yet it did not. It was not for want of trying. Since last October, as the Pinarayi government tried to forcibly implement the historic Supreme Court order allowing the entry of women between 10 and 50 to the Sabarimala shrine, the issue was seen as godsend by the Sangh Parivar and BJP to finally make its presence felt in a state where it had been organisationally strong for decades but electorally a marginal player.



The BJP was in the forefront of the agitation that dragged on for almost three months, always intense, occasionally violent — hundreds of its cadres were arrested and sent to jail following protests and demonstrations centred around Sabarimala itself but that also spread to several parts of Kerala. Everyone, especially the Hindu faithful, were quick in recognising the BJP’s efforts, yet, when the results came in, that sentiment had obviously not translated into votes. The BJP’s vote-share more or less remained the same – an embarrassing rise of 0.5%, up from 15.1% in the 2016 assembly polls to 15.6 in 2019. Worse, the party came a cropper in three seats where it had fielded its strongest candidates, where the Sabarimala issue was expected to have its highest resonance, and where the party hoped for the best results.

WHAT WENT WRONG?

The main reason for the BJP’s inability to capitalise on the Sabarimala factor appears to be tactical crossvoting on the part of those sympathetic towards the party. If the idea was to spite the Pinarai government, to teach it a lesson, then Congress seemed the better option. Why waste votes on BJP candidates when the main battle was between LDF and UDF, so went the logic. There was also the baggage associated with BJP – while most Hindus tended to identify with the party’s staunch defence of Sabarimala traditions and customs, they couldn’t stomach the mob lynching, vigilantism, intolerance against the intelligentsia and culturati and rabid bigotry that the party was suspected of indulging in, or at least silently condoning, in other parts of India.

Meanwhile, the grand old party seemed to be on the ascendant and the Modi government on the mat on issues ranging from Rafale to demonitisation. And, when a seemingly resurgent Rahul Gandhi decided to contest from Wayanad, the pro-Congress sentiment among these voters solidified. In fact, Swami Chidanandapuri, a patron of Sabarimala Karma Samithy, whose electrifying speeches gave much-needed momentum to the anti-temple entry movement, went so far as to publicly appeal to Hindus to vote in such a manner that the failure of LDF should be ensured. In most of the constituencies, the Swami’s call turned out to be a blank cheque for the Congress.

One more crucial factor contributed to the BJP’s poor show, especially in the three constituencies – Thiruvananthapuram, Pathanamthitta and Thrissur – where it fancied its chances. Nair Service Society (NSS), the organization of upper caste Nairs, which vociferously defended belief and customs in Sabarimala right from day one, and was one of the main petitioners in the Supreme Court, supported the BJP’s agitation but refused to go the whole length by transferring its votes. This was principally because they thought that the whole problem could have been peacefully and swiftly resolved if the central government had brought in an ordinance to negate the SC verdict but which the Modi government never did. In the NSS’s eyes, this cast doubt’s about the BJPs’s real intentions – was it actually a defender of Sabarimala’s customs and traditions or was it merely exploiting Hindu sentiments?

As for the Congress, all along it proclaimed that it was with the believers, and that it would not allow hallowed Hindu customs and traditions to be trampled upon, but did precious little in terms of actual protests. They were ridiculed as fence-sitters or mere spectators by the BJP but when the results came, the Congress had the last laugh. Veteran BJP leader O Rajagopal – the party’s first-ever MLA in Kerala – captured it succinctly, by citing a local adage: “Mannum chari ninnavan pennum kondu poyi’’ (roughly translated as ‘the one who was shooting the breeze decamped with the girl’).

This was evident from the fact that BJP’s biggest bet Kummanam Rajasekharan, who fought the election from Thiruvananthapuram where BJP finished second in 2014, actually got 1% less votes than last time. BJP was almost sure of wresting the constituency from Congress’ sitting MP Shashi Tharoor who defeated Rajagopal with a margin of only 15,000 votes in 2014. However, Tharoor won in 2019 by around one lakh votes.

The BJP’s candidates made impressive strides in Pathanamthitta and Thrissur, where they literally rattled their opponents. In Pathanamthitta, the epicentre of the Sabarimala agitation, BJP state general secretary K Surendran won close to three lakh votes. But he finished third in a tight tricorner fight. So did actor politician Suresh Gopi in Thrissur.

The Hindu voter, it appears, has let down the BJP.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
