A big victory for soft Hindutva

All the major parties in Kerala had their cups half full with ecstasy and the other half with agony when the results of the Lok Sabha elections came out. The Congress and its allies were overjoyed to win 19 out of the state’s 20 seats in the Lok Sabha, but their joy was more than offset by the prospect of having to brave the winters and summers of Delhi in the opposition without any share of power or influence because of the overwhelming majority of the ruling party. The dream of the leftists to defeat the BJP came true, but in the process they themselves got decimated to win only a single seat. The BJP was thrilled that they increased their vote share but mourned the fact that it failed to send even a single MP to join the central cabinet. The result is that Kerala will be on the margins in Delhi, constantly bickering about the neglect by the Centre.

This is not the first time that Kerala swims against the national current and remains a minority in Parliament. The obvious reason is that Kerala’s concerns and needs are at variance with the heartland areas of the nation. The landslide victory of Narendra Modi this time was mainly on account of the nationalistic fervour aroused by the way he handled the terrorist attack in Pulwama and bravely risked a nuclear war to teach Pakistan a lesson. The temporary setback of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman being shot down and taken prisoner was turned into a victory by forcing Pakistan to return him forthwith.

Moreover, Modi attributed the feat to the success of his foreign policy. The overwhelming support of the international community for fighting terror mesmerized voters, who forgot the woes of demonetization and GST.

In Kerala, the whole episode was seen as jingoistic and an excuse to harm the minorities and the Kerala government kept harping on losses on account of GST and the denial of foreign assistance. Both the Right and the Left, totally unaware of the approaching Modi wave, voted against the BJP, hoping to share power at the Centre.

Even more paradoxical was the way the Sabarimala controversy played out in the elections. For a progressive state like Kerala, the emergence of Sabarimala as a political issue was intriguing. Both the Congress party and BJP were peeved by the fact that the Leftist government tried to enforce the Supreme Court verdict on a war footing and decided to isolate the Left and take advantage of the situation. BJP was the closest to the groups of believers, who were agitating in Sabarimala and, therefore, they expected that they would win a couple of seats where the Sabarimala sentiment was dominant. Both Congress and BJP opposed the “renaissance movement”, inspired by the Left. But when the agitators expressed disappointment over the refusal of the Modi government to legislate against the Supreme Court verdict, the Congress became the major beneficiary of the support of the believers. Combined with the anti-incumbency factor, a UDF wave was created which led to a sweeping victory for Congress and its allies. Even leftist votes in a constituency were reported to have been cast for the Congress candidate to prevent the victory of the BJP candidate.

The consolidation of minorities in favour of the Congress was also unique about Kerala. The reality in Kerala is that the votes are cast largely on the basis of castes and communities and any sense of fear of any deprivation of their rights will lead immediately to a consolidation of votes in favour of a secular party like the Congress. The alternative of the minorities working with the elected government to protect their interests does not seem to appeal to the minorities in Kerala. A stable government should be seen as a better bet to ensure the protection of the interests of all sections. No democraticallyelected government can afford to ride rough shod over the rights of minorities. Cooperation rather than confrontation may well be in the best interests of the minorities.

Even though Modi and BJP have been particularly attentive to Kerala’s needs at the time of natural calamities and other crisis situations, the people of Kerala have seen them with suspicion because of their “Hindutva” agenda, which militates against Kerala’s attachment to secularism. The “soft Hindutva” propagated by Congress had greater appeal to the Hindus of Kerala. This has added to the animosity towards the BJP in general and Modi in particular. The growth of BJP in the state has, therefore, been slow, while much of the rest of India favoured continuity of the welfare programmes and the robust foreign policy of the Modi government.

The apparent paradoxes in Kerala’s performance in the elections to the Lok Sabha have implications for the unitary features of the Indian Constitution, which has also been characterized as federal. As the state and Centre are not likely to have the same party in power for the next five years, the frustrations of the state will continue, despite the presence of a sizeable contingent of MPs in the opposition.

The writer is a former Indian ambassador to UN

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
