The Shillong Times

J-K protest against assault of boys by Army

Srinagar: A large number of people took to the streets on Sunday against the alleged detention and thrashing of two boys by the Army in Jammu and Kashmir’s Badgam district. The protesters alleged that during demonstrations that erupted in the aftermath of militant commander Zakir Musa’s killing, the Army detained some youths belonging to Dharmuna village at an Army camp. Family members of one of the two boys alleged that both had been ruthlessly beaten by the soldiers. One of the injured boys, Fazil Fayaz Malik (14) of Soibug village was referred to the Sher-e-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences (SKIMS) and was operated for a head injury. “He has been put on life support facility. His condition is critical,” a doctor said. Locals have also alleged that when they approached the Army camp earlier seeking the release of the detained boys, they were told that they had been handed over to the police. A police official said that they were now holding only three boys. Defence Ministry spokesman Colonel Rajesh Kalia told IANS that the Army was ascertaining details of the allegation and would soon come up with the facts. (IANS)

Congress worker killed

Bijapur: A local Congress worker was brutally killed by suspected Naxals in Chhattisgarh’s Bijapur district, police said on Sunday. Sahdev Samrat, a native of Thothapara area, was attacked with sharp-edged weapons on Saturday night when he went to attend a wedding in the nearby Kostapara area in Bhairamgarh town, a local police official said. He noticed that four to five men, armed with sharp weapons, were looking for him following which he tried to escape, he said. However, the assailants chased Samrat and beat him up brutally with sticks and attacked him with axes and knives, killing him on the spot, the official said, adding they were suspected to be Naxals. Samrat was as an auto-rickshaw driver and also a local worker of the ruling Congress, he said. (PTI)

BJP workers complain on meme

Mumbai: BJP workers on Sunday complained to police here against a Congress activist for allegedly posting a derogatory meme on a social media platform, an official said. According to the complaint, a Congress functionary uploaded a meme on local WhatsApp groups, depicting a dog ‘Motiji’ pooping and a man next to time dubbed as ‘bhakt’. Some BJP activists from Sion-Koliwada area here objected to the post and asked the Congress worker to delete it and tender an apology. However, when the post was not deleted, the BJP workers submitted a complaint at the Antop Hill police station. (PTI)

Woman abducted, gang-raped

Jaipur; A married woman was allegedly abducted and raped by six men in Rajasthan, police said on Sunday. The woman, who was reported missing for over a month, on Saturday filed a complaint against six men alleging that she was kidnapped by them and then taken to different places in Sikar and Churu districts where she was raped. Following the woman’s complaint, an FIR was lodged against the six men, Circle Officer, Deedwana, Ganesharam Jat said. Police has arrested the accused Rajuram, Deshraj and Vikas Meena, he said, adding the efforts are on to nab the other accused. (PTI)
