Sanatan lawyer Sanjeev Punalekar told shooters to destroy the weapon: CBI to court

Investigators alleged that Vikram Bhave, another accused, took them on his motorcycle to conduct recce of the spot and show them the possible escape routes



During the proceedings in connection with the 2013 murder of rationalist and social activist Narendra Dabholkar, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Sunday told the sessions court that advocate Sanjeev Punalekar had instructed Sharad Kalaskar, one of the alleged shooters in the murder case, to destroy the weapons used, including the one used in the Gauri Lankesh murder case.



Advocate Punalekar and his assistant Vikram Bhave, one of the convicts in the 2008 Gadkari Rangayatan (theatre) bomb blast case in Thane, was produced before the court under a huge police protection on Sunday. Additional sessions judge SN Sonawane remanded them in CBI custody till June 1.



During the hearing, the CBI officer told the court that Kalaskar and Sachin Andure, alleged shooters in Dabholkar murder, had conducted recce of the spot with the help of Bhave. After the incident, he took their motorcycle and abandoned it and also helped them escape after they shot Dabholkar dead.



Special public prosecutor (CBI) Prakash Suryawanshi argued, “During the investigation it was revealed that Bhave used to take Andure and Kalaskar triple seat on his motorcycle. In June 2018, Kalaskar visited Punalekar’s officer in Mumbai, where he explained his role in Dabholkar’s murder case.”



He added that custodial interrogation of Bhave is also required to ascertain the exact role in providing assistance to the shooters, conducting recce of the spot, abandoning the motorcycle and showing the escape route to the accused.



Suryawanshi told the court, “Punalekar had instructed Kalaskar to destroy the firearms used in multiple murder cases, including the killing of journalist Lankesh. On July 23 last year, Kalaskar dismantled four countrymade pistols (by taking out barrels and sliders containing firing pin) and threw them from a bridge in a creek while on the way to Nalasopara from Pune.”



“The custodial interrogation of Punalekar is required to prove his role in the destruction of the arms,” the prosecution lawyer argued.



While opposing the CBI’s demand of police custody, Punalekar said in the court, “Kalaskar had given a statement before Karnataka police in October 2018, and on the basis of the same statement CBI has arrested me. However, the statement was later retracted by Kalaskar himself. Now suddenly after seven and half months, CBI initiated an action on the basis of the same statement, which is illogical.”



He further added that only section 201 (causing disappearance of evidence and giving false information to screen offender) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) is slapped on him, which is a bailable section. However, prosecution lawyer said that as per investigation all the acts, including 302 of the IPC, relevant sections of Unlawful Activities Act and Arms Act are applicable to Punalekar and Bhave.



Advocate Virendra Ichalkaranjikar, who represented Punalekar, argued “In February 2019, CBI had filed a charge sheet against Andure and Kalaskar in which they had annexed the copy of the statement of Kalaskar given to Karnataka police. However, no investigation was done in connection with the role of Punalekar. Now suddenly they are stating that investigation has his role in conspiring Dabholkar’s murder.”



He further said, “If an accused wants to eliminate the weapon, he will destroy the entire weapon and not a part of it.”



Narendra Dabholkar was shot dead while he was on a morning walk on the Omkareshwar bridge in Pune on August 20, 2013. In June 10, 2016, CBI arrested Dr Virendra Tawde, an alleged western commander of the Hindu Janajagruti Samiti (HJS), an offshoot of the right-wing group Sanatan Sanstha, in connection with the murder.



In the first charge sheet filed in September 2016, the agency named two more Sanatan Sanstha members, Sarang Akolkar and Vinay Pawar, as assailants in the case. However, last year while probing a terror case, the Maharashtra ATS arrested Sanatan Sanstha seekers Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar, who allegedly confessed to have killed Dabholkar.





The Sabnis angle



Aday after the arrest of advocate Sanjeev Punalekar, author and former president of Akhil Bharatiya Sahitya Sammelan Shripal Sabnis has demanded that cops interrogate him over the threat Punalekar had given to Sabnis. Punalekar had allegedly threatened Sabnis. Sabnis had then filed a complaint with the cops but the cops had closed the investigation later. He said, “Cops did not investigate my case and closed it without conclusion. Now that Punalekar is arrested, I want them to investigate my complaint too and trace the roots of the case to the sanstha.”


