Colleges are arming guards with metal detectors

airports

malls

cinema theatres

Bangalore

By Sridhar Vivan & SameenAfter a few ‘incidents’, some colleges in the city have introduced metal detectors to screen students and visitorsScreening of visitors atandis par for the course. But now colleges have started screening students as well. Wait, what? If you’re walking into St Teresa Mahesh College and Soundarya PU College, both located near Hesaraghatta road, be prepared to have your bag screened by a hand-held detector.With terrorist activities on the rise and school shooting incidents making headlines in different parts of the world, the school is not a safe place anymore. And managements are not willing to take any risks. While it’s just a few colleges now, it may soon become the norm.At St Teresa Mahesh college, students walk through a narrow gate to enter the campus and a security guard with a hand-held device scans bags and students. Any suspicious objects detected are immediately reported to the college authorities. Prof G Arundathi, principal of St Teresa Mahesh College said, “We have taken these steps to prevent any untoward incident on campus.”College teachers, who didn’t want to be identified, said that with instances of students being attacked in colleges on the rise, educational institutions have been forced to increase security cover. In January this year, a 17-year-old boy was stabbed to death in a toilet by his college mate. In another incident reported in 2016, a second-year diploma student was attacked near the PES university campus. College authorities said that till now campuses in India were free of violence while it was common to hear of incidents of shooting and stabbing from the US.While these two colleges are already screening students and visitors, a host of other institutions are mulling over introduing screening devices on campus from the new academic year.PES University which runs many institutions in the city, has a hand-held metal detector facility at the entrance of its South Campus. Now, it is planning to implement it on all the campuses. “We already have in place most of the security measures recommended by the police. We have also alerted our students and teachers to report a stranger or anyone behaving suspiciously on campus. We are planning to implement it across all our campuses as we are sensitive towards the security on our campus from the beginning,” Dr Surya Prasad J, Director and Principal PES University.Meanwhile, city police officials had recently met many college authorities to ask them to increase the security cover on their campuses. In a recent meeting, the Commissioner of Police told organisations and college representatives and managements to ensure that security measures such as CCTV cameras and authorized security personnel from registered agencies were deployed on the campus. It was also suggested that if the institution so desired, it could install metal detectors and scanning machines on the campus. While talking on behalf of the police department, Nandeesha HL, the police inspector of the Parappana Agrahara area, said, “A notice was issued to all these organisations which made them answerable regarding their security arrangements. They were instructed to maintain CCTV cameras (HD quality is a must), baggage scanner, hand-held metal detector (HHMD), security metal detectors and door frame metal detectors (DFMD). Colleges were also given the same recommendations but it was left to their discretion whether they needed metal detectors and baggage scanners or not. Schools and colleges don’t require baggage scanners, they just need a visitors’ register, visitors’ checking cameras and visitors’ system management to be implemented along with licensed security guards. This is as per the Commissioner of Police, DCP and ACP’s orders.”On the other hand, it was rumoured that Christ (Deemed-to-be-University) will be installing scanning/X-Ray machines at the entrance of the campus to screen students’ bags for drugs. But, Dr Anil Joseph Pinto, Registrar of Christ (Deemed-to-be-University) has claimed that the discussions regarding the installation of metal-detectors or scanning machines is yet to take place. “We use metal detectors at the entrance to the auditorium when the campus is open to outsiders. Any discussion about the implementation of these new recommendations of the Police Department on all the campuses will take place by the month of June,” he added.However, Dayananda Sagar University has distanced itself from the rest of the colleges deliberating these stringent security measures by admitting that it will be tough for students to endure these security screenings daily. While talking toMirror, a faculty member who was a part of the discussion said, “Introducing metal detectors and screening students daily will be difficult. They already have a photo ID which helps in recognising them at the entrance itself. If we must get their bags scanned and detected for metals then it means we don’t trust out own students. We need to believe in them. But we have complied with other security measures such as CCTV cameras, security guards, and identity cards among other things recommended by the police.”College managements say that though it is easy to introduce metal detectors, it is very tough to make students go through it daily. “We face a lot of resistance from students. They ask us why they’re treated like criminals. We need to do a lot of sensitisation work,” said a college official. Narayan R, a I PU student said, “Walking through the metal detector shouldn’t be a problem as we do it whenever we are at airports or malls. So why all the fuss about a metal detector in a college campus?” However, Meenakshi S, a first-year degree student said, “It is not enough if colleges introduce hand-held metal detectors. Like at airports and Metro stations, they need to introduce female staff and a separate screening room for female students.”Meanwhile, a few schools like Delhi Public School have introduced hand-held metal detector screening in its campus long ago. “DPS has always had these hand-held scanners for outsiders and even the entry of parents is very regulated and guarded. They are not permitted beyond a certain point inside the school building during school hours. Other than that, we have had these security measures installed for more than a decade now for visitors only. These rules don’t apply to the students because they are young children and we don’t suspect them. We won’t be doing any physical screening of students. As of now, we just have walk-through scanners for them,” said Mansoor Ali Khan, a member of the board of management at DPS Bengaluru/Mysuru.
