Stray dog attacks 4-year-old in Doraha

LUDHIANA: A stray dog bit a four-year-old boy in Barmalipur village of Doraha on Saturday evening.Mehtab Singh, an LKG student, is under treatment at a private hospital, here.Manjit Singh, Mehtab’s grandfather, said, “The stray dog attacked Mehtab when he stepped out of his house. We rushed out on hearing his cries and drove the dog away. It had bitten on my grandson’s cheek. We took him to a private hospital in Doraha that referred him to a Ludhiana hospital. He has been admitted for three days as due to swelling, he is unable to open his eyes.”In the past some days, the dog had bitten other residents of the village too and might be affected by rabies , he added.Mehtab’s father, Sandeep Singh , works at a factory in Mandi Gobindgarh. “His cheek might be operated upon. It will be difficult for me to meet the expenses with my meagre salary,” Sandeep said.The village sarpanch, Kuldeep Singh, said, “There are 15 to 20 stray dogs in the village, but no steps have been taken to tackle the menace. Since the dog attacked Mehtab, villagers have been raising the demand to address the problem. We will take up the issue with Payal SDM on Monday.”Complaint filed with rights panelAn RTI activist from Ludhiana, Arvind Sharma , on Sunday filed a complaint against stray dog menace with Punjab State Human Rights Commission and Child Rights Commission. “In Model Town, the employees of the firm hired by the municipal corporation for sterilization of stray dogs are not performing their duties. They are not able to catch the dogs. I have filed the complaint in the wake of the Doraha incident as the problem needs an immediate solution.”Biting problemMay 10: Stray dogs bite a student in Mundian KalanMay 22: Stray dogs attack a nurse in Model Town; canines bite a student in ShivpuriApril 18: A youngster meets with an accident after dogs chase him in Model Town ExtensionDecember 31, 2018: Stray dogs bite off a finger of a mechanic in Maharaj NagarOctober 23, 2018: A five-year-old child dies of suspected rabies in Sarabha Nagar
