Not for cancer treatment but Irrfan Khan heads back to London to kick-start next schedule of Angrezi Medium

Irrfan Khan, Angrezi Medium | Photo Credit: Instagram

Bollywood actor Irrfan Khan who had made headlines last year of moving to London for treatment of neuroendocrine tumour. In February, after several speculations, the actor had returned to India and even began shooting for Dinesh Vijdaan’s Angrezi Medium, which is a sequel to the 2017 hit film Hindi Medium. The actor has been shooting in Rajasthan after several pictures of Irrfan with the cast and crew of the movie had surfaced on the internet.

In the latest development, Irrfan will not be heading back to London but it's not for the treatment this time. In fact, the actor will kick-start the next schedule of the Homi Adajania directorial in the UK. Irrfan will be filming his scenes for a month in London. The had earlier been to London last year for his treatment and spent time recuperating. It is expected that Irrfan will fly to the UK on Tuesday this week, as per a Bombay Times report.

Besides Irrfan, Angrezi Medium also features Kareena Kapoor Khan and Radhika Madan in pivotal roles. The movie will mark Irrfan’s return to the big screen, after his tumour recovery. A unit member told BT, “While a considerable amount of the film has already been shot in India, many crucial scenes will be filmed in London with the three actors.” Last month, the producers had shared the first glimpse of the movie where Irrfan - who will play the role of Champak ji, a shop owner - donned a simple look and was standing in front of a sweet shop. Till now, the team has shot several scenes in Udaipur and Rajasthan.

Radhika Madan, who made her debut in Bollywood with the film Patakhaa will be joining the actor to shoot some scenes in London. The actress is portraying the role of Irrfan’s daughter in the slice-of-life film. Apart from this, Kareena, who has been showing her enthusiasm of working with Irrfan for the first time, will be playing the role of a cop and, according to sources, will join the cast in mid-June. The movie is slated to release in 2020.
