Bengal and the politics of violence

Editor,

Apropos the letter – “Bengal violence, a one-sided view” by M. Khyriem, (ST May 23, 2019), I would like to further clarify my points. If a village is affected by malaria, a doctor will certainly be pointedly focused on hovering “mosquitoes” than “ants” on their way to their holes. Will I say that the doctor is one-sided and biased here? Normally ants do not bite if you do not “provoke” them. Ants normally just follow their path and head towards their colonies. Their road shows are beautiful. Please allow me to compare the TMC cadre with mosquitoes which have stung and killed many people. The deeper we go the more it reeks of targeted violence.

What all has not been done by TMC brigands in Bengal to win the election, or to remain in power? They have become “manav to danav” – from human to beast — most of their evil deeds were under-reported from day one. They not only imported people from outside and intimidated the natives but also tortured and shot them with guns with impunity. For the last four years, I have personally heard many painful stories from the people who have suffered. Their sufferings are unspeakable, unconstitutional and inhumane. A TMC worker did not hesitate to urinate on a woman’s mouth when she was found supporting the rival party.

One scholar – Prof Nirmal Maity of Kolkata quips, “About 42 people have been killed by TMC workers, countless other fatally injured in last eight months but they never became newsworthy; and therefore no one heard the scream that “India is under threat” or “democracy is in danger”.

If we analyze the series of violent incidents at different points of time and events in West Bengal in past few years, we can understand that Mamata’s administration has practically put the very “security” and sovereignty of the NATION at risk. This could have harmed and hurt other neighboring states too — even our Meghalaya in due course of time. I could foresee this happening!

Further, in my letters I have not said that the statue of Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar was destroyed by TMC. There are many “enablers” to accomplish the evil plans for narrow political ends. One believes that in one shot Didi’s anger could have brought the management of the college to submission. If not more watchmen and gate keepers of the institution could have spilled the beans. But that did not happen. Several “clues” were just pushed under the carpet. I don’t want to trust TMC MPs/MLAs who indulge in unholy tricks and betrayed their own people. It is in the know that many violent crimes were committed by TMC cadres by wearing particular kind of dresses to malign their rivals.

Nevertheless, to save myself, in my article – “Anarchy in Bengal” I had coined a phrase – damp wood. Even in non-TMC parties, a few could act like damp wood that can at times tarnish the image of the party they belong to. This is possible everywhere at any point of time.

However, my regular writings on Mamata’s misrule and her open discrimination was not at all for the purpose of showing who had destroyed that particular bust of an iconic figure. It is, in fact, to bring out other suppressed truths, which are detrimental to the state and country, and “endless sufferings” of the natives. My humble intention is to hold forth how the whole edifice of Bengal’s ethos and rich values are being systematically knocked down by chisels and hammers of bigotry and terror which are expanding their base and dominance. People are worried about the bust, but I am worried for much more. Of course, it is good to acknowledge the views of caution that the rude tremors in West Bengal can shake Assam and then immediately Meghalaya. I’m very glad that Mr. Khyriem’s letter has made me more informed, particularly about the ground realities.

Yours etc.,

Salil Gewali,

Shillong 2

NDA Govt musthit the groundrunning

Editor,

As the nation has now given a clear mandate to BJP ruled NDA alliance, it is high time now that this majority party in power puts the country’s focus quickly back on track. The governance and development issues which had taken a back seat for over two months, owing to enforcement of Model Code of Conduct, now needs immediate attention. The pomp and glory of election victory should immediately subside by giving due importance to further necessary steps to quickly form the new incumbent government.

The steps related to form the new government i.e. mammoth cabinet formation, ministries berth allocation, appointment of key officers to various ministries to spearhead the functioning of various departments and also to fast track various on-going development programmes/ welfare schemes should be accorded priority. The nation now has no time to patiently wait for victory speeches, ceremonies and celebrations to get over. A delay in formation of the new government, if it is still under jubilation, may further jeopardize a common voter’s morale on the ground who otherwise expects a speedy day-to-day functioning of the government machinery (i.e. post elections).

The incumbent government should now set an example of moving to business as usual quickly, which is now an easy task for NDA upon its second successive win. Many core issues now need immediate attention including working out a strategy on oil import with Iran and sanctions imposed by US, clarifying the stand on distorted unemployment data, impeding agrarian crisis and much more. The much expected quicker government formation move may perhaps result in getting all the newly elected political representatives of Lok Sabha up and running without much delay and ensure that the nation leaps back to normalcy in quick succession.

Yours etc.,

Varun SD

Bangalore – 72

NDA and the Sabarimala issue

Editor,

Now that the BJP government has come to power at the Centre, Sabarimala issue is surely going to be solved taking into account of the assurances given by the Prime Minister during his electioneering for the just concluded Lok Sabha Polls. It is a hot burning and the LDF government in the state of Kerala has never been able to come out of the catch-22 situation so far. Sabarimala has always been a thorn in the flesh of the Kerala government. But the onus is now on the state unit of the NDA to follow up on its repeated assurances to press the Centre to bring an ordinance to override the Supreme Court’s verdict permitting young women’s entry at Sabarimala. During Modi’s campaign in Tamil Nadu, where he alleged that the Communists were using brute force to strike at the roots of faith and expression, Modi offered and assured the faithful saying, “As long as the BJP is there, nobody will be able to destroy our faith and culture.”

It may be recalled that BJP state president Mr Sreedharan Pillai also had promised to press the Centre, once the BJP was back in power, to take recourse to the ordinance route to restore the status quo at Sabarimala. So, the mountainous issue can be solved by the Centre issuing an ordinance overriding the Supreme Court verdict which allowed women of the menstruating age at Sabarimala. The LDF Government had no other option since it is compelled to implement the court verdict, irrespective of whether it was for or against the entry of young women inside the temple.

Yours etc.,

TK Nandanan,

Kochi
