Fighter pilot Bhawana Kanth becomes India’s first woman pilot to undertake combat missions

Women in our country continue to break the glass ceiling every single day and the latest woman to do so is Flight Lieutenant Bhawana Kanth. The 26 year old has become the first woman pilot of the Indian Air Force to qualify to undertake combat missions on a fighter jet. It was a historic moment when she finished operational syllabus for carrying out combat missions on Mig-21 Bison aircraft recently.

It was two years ago, in November 2017 that Bhawana had joined the fighter squadron flew the first solo on MiG-21 Bison in March 2018. MiG-21 Bison is the same aircraft that Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was flying when he shot down a Pakistani's fighter aircraft.

She is currently undergoing training for night missions, after which she’ll be allowed to carry out night operations. IAF Spokesperson Group Capt Anupam Banerjee held her in high regard and was quoted saying, "With her dedication, hard work and perseverance she has become the first woman officer of the IAF to achieve this feat."

The journey was not an easy one. Presently posted at the Nal base in Bikaner, Bhawana was born and brought up in Begusarai. She completed her BE (Medical Electronics) from BMS College of Engineering in Bengaluru before joining the IAF. “It was something only boys were expected to aspire for. At least that was the stereotype. But my parents never made me feel I needed to think any different just because I am a girl," Kanth said, admitting that becoming a fighter pilot had been a childhood dream of hers.

Her parents were over the moon when they heard the wonderful news. "Bhawana was good at studies right from the beginning. She used to talk about flying from her school days. Even though she pursued engineering from Bengaluru, she kept trying for the Air Force. We are so proud of her. What else can a father ask for?", her father, Tej Narayan Kanth told The Indian Express.

This is not the first time that Bhawana Kanth has created history. She also forms the first batch of woman fighter pilots of the IAF along with two other fighter pilots namely Avani Chaturvedi and Mohana Singh. These women were commissioned as flying officers in July 2016 soon after the government decided to let women be a part of fighter stream, albeit on an experimental basis.

Bhawana has become a beacon of hope and inspiration for women across the country and we hope more women achieve such extraordinary feats in the near future.

NOW READ

Mumbai's Aarohi Pandit becomes world's first pilot to cross Atlantic Ocean in LSA

Meet Malhar Kalambe, the 21-year-old who has cleaned over 1000 tons of trash from Mumbai beaches

Who are Hinduja brothers, the Indian origin men who’ve been declared the wealthiest in UK?

> More on Get Smart
