UP Man Bludgeons Wife To Death, Drowns Son; Absconding

Hyderabad: In a case of double murder, a mother and her 4-year-old son were found murdered at their home in Jinkalvada, Sanathnagar, in Hyderabad on Sunday. The police suspect that the woman’s husband could have committed the murder as his phone was switched of and he is apparently absconding.

According to the Cyberabad police, Rajesh, along with his wife Urmila (27) and son Kishan (4), who hailed from Devaria in Uttar Pradesh came to the city on May 12in search o livelihood. The couple, along with their child, moved in with Urmila’s sister Chanda and her husband Deepak, who had been living in a rented house in Jinkalvada. Deepak was an auto driver and Chanda was working in a private firm.

Also Read: AP EAMCET 2019 Results: Check & Download Rank Card of Andhra Pradesh EAMCET

On Sunday morning, both Deepak and Chanda left for work, while Rajesh and Urmila stayed back at home. When Chanda returned home around 1 pm, she found that the door was locked. Presuming that they had gone in search of work returned to her workplace .When she came back with her husband Deepak, the door was still locked. She tried calling both of them, but their phones were switched off.

Tired of waiting they broke open the door, only to find Urmila lying in a pool of blood and Kishan was found upside down with his head in a bucket of water in the bathroom.It looked as of she was hit with a sharp weapon and Kishen was drowned in a bucket of water.

They called the police and a team from Sanathnagar police station along with the clues team and dog squad rushed to the spot and inspected the crime scene. The bodies of the mother-son duo shifted to the Gandhi Hospital mortuary for post mortem examination.

The police got to know that Rajesh who was married earlier used to harass his first wife and unable to bear the harassment she committed suicide. Rajesh later married Urmila, but was known to be in and out of jobs. This led to frequent quarrels between the couple. Upon Chanda's suggestion, Rajesh and Urmila had come to Hyderabad to look for work to improve their financial situation. The police have registered a case of murder and are on the hunt for Rajesh who is absconding.

Also Read: Siddipet Woman Batters Infant Sons To Death With Glass Bottles

Also Read: Youth Kills Father, Chops Body In East Delhi
