Fake vehicle insurance racket busted in Hyd, one held for cheating 183 customers

Fake vehicle insurance racket busted in Hyd, one held for cheating 183 customers

The accused would forge insurance policy documents and attempt to pass them off as genuine, the police said.

news Crime

The Hyderabad police on Sunday busted a motor vehicle insurance racket with the arrest of one person, who allegedly cheated 183 customers by indulging in forgery and delivering fake insurance documents.

The arrests were carried out by sleuths of the Commissioner’s Task Force, North Zone Team. The accused has been identified as 33-year-old Gudimala Sreekanth, an unemployed youth hailing from Karimmnagar district in Telangana.

Investigation officials said that Sreekanth had completed his MBA and was living in Hyderabad for the last three years. He had even worked as a Territory Manager in Bajaj Allianz General Insurance but was removed by the management due to "criminal antecedents", the police said.

Authorities told media persons that the racket came to light on May 23, when a complaint was filed with the Bowenpally police that the accused had introduced himself as an authorised agent of Bajaj Allianz General Insurance to an outlet selling motor vehicles. He told the management of the business that he would arrange for the insurance policy of all vehicles purchased at the outlet, with the lowest commission. He also showed an identity card and copies of a few insurance documents.

"The complainant believed his version and gave him the invoices of a few customers along with the policy premium amount. Later, the accused provided genuine policy documents and made the victim believe him. After that, Gudimala Sreekanth, with criminal intention, collected about 183 invoices of customers along with premium amount, in which he delivered 129 fake and forged policy documents as genuine, and cheated a large number of customers," the police said in a press note.

Police said that Sreekanth downloaded the genuine policy documents of Bajaj Allianz and converted them into Word documents. He then filled in the required information of the customer, policy numbers and affixed the forged signature and monogram of the insurance company on the document, before passing it off as genuine.

The police said they seized 183 fake and forged insurance policy documents, Rs 44,000 in cash, one desktop, one colour printer, one two-wheeler, a fake rubber stamp and a mobile phone, from the accused.

"The accused person along with seized material were handed over to the Bowenpally Police Station for further investigation," the police said.

A case has been registered under Sections 420 (Cheating), 468 (Forgery for purpose of cheating) and 471 (Using as genuine, a forged document or electronic record) of the IPC. He is expected to be presented before a local court on Monday.
