Political violence subverts the basic ideals of a democracy

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

Though the 2019 Lok Sabha elections are over, India is still reeling under political violence perpetrated by party workers against each other. A BJP worker was shot dead late last Friday in Kolkata. Another BJP worker and a close aide of Smriti Irani, who defeated Congress president Rahul Gandhi in Amethi constituency, was shot dead late night on Saturday in his village in northern Uttar Pradesh. In both cases, the involvement of rival political parties has been suspected.

During the 2014 parliamentary elections, 16 political workers were killed across India in poll-related violence, with the highest number of them coming from West Bengal, as per 2016 National Crime Records Bureau data. From 1999 to 2016, NCRB statistics reveal, West Bengal registered 20 political murders a year, on an average.

Across the country, as per data, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Kerala top the list when it comes to the number of political murders. The rate of political murders in Kerala is eight times more than Uttar Pradesh and five times more than Bihar. While Uttar Pradesh and Bihar are the topmost states with the highest number of murders of all categories, Kerala figures at the bottom. In other words, Kerala’s state machinery is effective in controlling overall crime but highly ineffective and apathetic about curbing political violence. More than 200 people have been killed in the last three decades in the right wing vs left wing violence in Kannur region of Kerala.

Political violence subverts the basic ideas of a democracy, where people should be free to register their choices and elect their representatives freely and fearlessly. Apart from the need for the Election Commission of India to review its inability to curb violence in West Bengal during the elections, state governments must ensure that post-election, normalcy is restored.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
