Asaduddin Owaisi responds to ‘Muslim hawker shot at in Begusarai’ tweet, says ‘We’re not human in their eyes’

File picture: AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi | Photo Credit: PTI

Hyderabad: All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM) chief Asaduddin Owaisi on Monday responded to a tweet which claimed that a Muslim hawker was shot at in Bihar’s Begusarai. As per the tweet by a user, Md Asif Khan, whose profile suggests he works as Assistant Director in the TV and film industry, a man asked the Muslim hawker his name.

“When the hawker responded ‘Mohd Qasim’, the perpetrator asked him: ‘What he was doing here, you should be in Pakistan and fired at him’,” read the tweet. Md Asif Khan, the self-avowed socialist, also attached a video with his post, stating: “This is Modi's Hindu Rashtra 2.0”.

In the video, Mohd Qasim can be seen telling the person, who probably made the video, that he was shot by someone called Rajeev.

Albeit the veracity of the video is not yet ascertained, Owaisi chose to make a comment on the tweet.

“Qasim almost lost his life for literally just saying his name. But sure, I am ‘fear mongering’ Where does Rajiv’s brazenness come from? From the top. BJP’s leadership has constantly demonised us & associated us with Pakistan We’re not human in their eyes, we’re target practice,” tweeted Owaisi.

The Begusarai incident comes two days after a 25-year-old Muslim man was purportedly slapped by a group of men in Gurugram. Reports said that the victim was asked to remove his skull cap and pushed to chant 'Jai Shri Ram'.

The Muslim man was later identified as Mohamad Baker Alam, who claimed that four unidentified youths approached him in Sadar Bazar area.

"They removed my cap and slapped me while asking me to chant Bharat Mata ki Jai. As I followed their instruction and chanted Bharat Mata ki Jai, they asked me to chant Jai Shri Ram which I refused. At this, the youths picked up the stick and began mercilessly beating me," he told the police in his complaint.
