Shashi Tharoor couldn't rest well on Munnar trip and the reason was Shah Rukh Khan

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Shashi Tharoor couldn't rest well on Munnar trip and the reason was Shah Rukh Khan

Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan, who was last seen in Aanand L Rai’s Zero, enjoys a huge fan following across the globe. Be it on Eid or his birthday, scores and scores of fans gather at his Mannat building to catch a glimpse of the superstar. And, now it has been revealed that SRK has an entire shrine dedicated to him at a Munnar hotel.

It so happened that Congress MP Shashi Tharoor stayed in the same Munnar hotel room that Shah Rukh Khan had once stayed while shooting Chennai Express.

The Thiruvananthapuram MP shared that has now been converted into a shrin dedicated to the actor and his film Chennai Express. He further revealed that every wall of that room has been decorated with the film’s posters and the suite of that hotel has been taken over by a huge cut-out of Shah Rukh Khan. So much so that Shashi Tharoor had no place to rest!

Taking to his Twitter handle, Shashi Tharoor shared some pictures and wrote, “Dear @iamsrk, when on a brief visit to Munnar yesterday I took rest in the room you occupied in 2013, which has been converted into a shrine for you & #ChennaiExpress! Every wall is decorated w/posters of the film &the suite is dominated by this cut-out of you. No place for rest!”.

Recently, after Prime Minister Narendra Modi's meetings with Bollywood, Shashi Tharoor met a delegation from the film industry at a Mumbai hotel.

Tharoor took to Twitter to share pictures from the meeting, saying, "Spent nearly three hours with film industry veterans to discuss what the film industry would like to see in the @INCIndia manifesto. Many useful ideas emerged which will be put to the party’s Manifesto Committee. India needs a thriving cinema."

Coming back to Shah Rukh Khan, King Khan will reportedly be seen next in Don 3.

More stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
