Begusarai: Muslim vendor shot at after revealing his identity to man

Cheria Bariarpur Police said a case had been lodged against Yadav for attempt to murder and under Arms Act provisions.

A Muslim hawker from Begusarai has alleged that a youth asked him his name and then shot at him, saying that he “should be in Pakistan”.

Police have, however, said the complainant, Mohammed Qasim, has not mentioned any “provocative remark” in his statement to the police and that he was shot at following an argument during bargaining. Police said a case has been lodged against the accused, identified as local youth Rajiv Yadav, on attempt to murder charge and under provisions of the Arms Act.

A video of an injured Qasim went viral after the incident on May 21. The video shows Qasim telling a local reporter that an inebriated Yadav approached him and asked him his name. “When I said I am Mohammed Qasim, he abused me and said, ‘tumko to Pakistan me hona chahiye (you should have been in Pakistan)’ and fired at me,” he alleged.

Qasim said nobody came to help him as Yadav held a pistol. He has been shot in the waist and on his back and is recovering at a government hospital where doctors said he was out of danger. Qasim, who sells items of daily use such as soaps and utensils at a market near the block town of Cheria Bariarpur, also alleged that the local sarpanch did not help him.

Begusarai SP Awkash Kumar told The Indian Express, “We have lodged a case against Rajiv Yadav for attempt to murder and also under provisions of Arms Act. Our investigation shows Yadav shot at Qasim after an argument during bargaining for some goods.”

Asked about the video that gone viral, the SP said, “In his written statement to police, Yadav only mentioned about being shot at after an argument. There is no mention of any such thing that he is seen saying in the video.”

The SP said that the police were conducting raids to arrest Yadav and added that attempts are being made to sensationalise the matter.
