It’s May 27: Here Are The Top Stories From AP And Telangana

1: TS EAMCET 2019 Results Date Likely To Be Announced Soon

Council of Higher Education (TSCHE) will soon release the date for the Telangana State Engineering, Agriculture and Medical Common Entrance Test (TS-EAMCET) 2019 results. The results will be available on the official website eamcet.tsche.ac.in.

2: Did not demand or command SCS, only requested PM: Jagan Mohan Reddy

With the NDA sweeping the Lok Sabha elections, AP Chief Minister-designate Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy said that his party could only request Prime Minister Narendra Modi and not demand or command Special Category Status for Andhra Pradesh, during their meeting here on Sunday. Jagan Mohan Reddy said he had requested Mr Modi to be “magnanimous” towards the people of Andhra Pradesh. Mr Jagan Mohan Reddy had an hour-long one-on-one interaction with the PM.

3: KCR to Visit Thummalagunta After Tirumala Darshan

Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao who is on a spiritual visit to Andhra Pradesh, arrived in Tirupati on Sunday evening. He was accorded a warm welcome by TTD joint executive officers and other officials. In a change of schedule and at Chandragiri MLA Chevireddy Bhaskar Reddy's request, KCR would offer special prayers at the Kalyana Venkateswra Swamy temple in Thummalagunta.

4: Annavaram Temple: Dress Code And Revised Booking Norms Implemented

From July 1st, devotees visiting the Sri Veera Venkata Satyanarayana Swamy Devasthanam, at Ananvaram in East Godavari district, will now have to wear traditional Indian clothes for having darshan in the temple. Executive Officer of the Devasthanam, MV Suresh Babu said that male devotees would have to wear dhoti while the females would wear either a sari, half-sari or churidar with a dupatta.

5: Heat wave scorches Telangana

Telangana turned into one big furnace on Sunday with an apparently angry Sun relentlessly beating down the State. Such was the heat during the day that several locations turned into fire pits with officials reporting record breaking temperatures of 47 plus and 46 plus degrees Celsius.

6: Karimnagar’s Re 1 funeral scheme gets massive response

The Re 1 funeral scheme announced by the Karimnagar Municipal Corporation (KMC) has received widespread support with donations coming in from various quarters. The civic body’s decision to perform the last rites of any person, irrespective of economic background or standing, at a fee of just Re 1, has received tremendous response from all sections of society.

7: Telangana doctor family killed in Saudi road mishap

In a tragic incident, a Telangana doctor family was killed in a road accident in Saudi Arabia on Saturday. The victims were identified as Swapna Lata and her husband Feroz Ahmed. The couple died on the spot while their four-year-old son, Abdul Raheem escaped unhurt.

8: Vijayawada: Juveline held for cheating at ATM booths

A juvenile was held by the Vijayawada police on Sunday for stealing from senior citizens at ATM kiosks, and Rs 1 lakh was recovered from him.The juvenile, a resident of Hanuman Junction and a diploma student, was habituated to vices and in order to earn easy money, took to targeting senior citizens at ATM kiosks.

9: Hyderabad: Body of baby girl found in VikarabadThe Telangana State

The body of a female baby was found near beside drainage near Vikarabad railway station on Sunday. Police have sent the body to postmortem examination at the government hospital and booked a case for the probe.

10: Lakshmi’s NTR Finally In AP Theaters

A month after he was prevented from entering Vijayawada to promote his upcoming film 'Lakshmi's NTR,' noted film-maker Ramgopal Varma Sunday said that the truth coming out is inevitable. The movie is to release in AP theaters on May 31st.
