Amit Shah tears into Trinamool chief Mamata Banerjee at Malda rally in Bengal, key takeaways

New Delhi:

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Amit Shah on Tuesday launched a scathing attack on West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and the proposed anti-BJP grand alliance. The BJP chief accused the ruling Trinamool Congress (TMC) of “killing democracy”, adding that the 2019 Lok Sabha election will determine the future of India and West Bengal. In a passionate speech, Shah, who recently discharged from the hospital after undergoing treatment for swine flu, said that bomb blasts filled the air of West Bengal where songs of Rabindranath Tagore used to play. He said that the BJP, if elected to power, will bring the glory back to Bengal.

Below are the key takeaways of Amit Shah’s speech at Malda rally:

1. The election of 2019 will not only determine the future of India but is also very important for West Bengal. The election of 2019 will determine whether this govt of TMC which is killing democracy, will remain in Bengal or will be uprooted.

2. I am assuring you, bring BJP and we will not let any infiltrators enter Bengal. But these people love infiltrators, that is why they go against us when we talk about NRC.



3. Speaking about the alleged political killings in the state, the BJP president alleged TMC’s involvement. “More than 60 karyakartas of BJP and other political parties were murdered in Bengal,” he said.



4. The entire administration has been politicised. Permission for the landing of my helicopter was not granted,” Shah said, adding that the BJP will address rallies if Mamata Banerjee didn’t allow them to take out Rath Yatras and will even visit house to house if she stopped them from holding rallies.



5. Accusing the TMC government of corruption, Shah said, “For all sort of construction work, people of Bengal have to pay Syndicate Tax. Everyone knows where this ill-gotten money goes to.”



6. Shah slammed the Opposition parties for their mega anti-BJP rally in Kolkata and asked what good they (grand alliance) will do to the country when they didn’t raise the slogans like Bharat Mata Ki Jay and Vande Mataram.



7. The leader of the grand alliance wanted to remove Modi while the BJP wanted to remove poverty and corruption.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
