Press Freedom challenged: I received 350 threatening calls after story was published; Editor, Kannada daily

The CM has rubbished the claims made in the report and said that the article is fabricated. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Bengaluru: The freedom of the press is under fire in Karnataka as the Bengaluru police have filed a case against the editor-in-chief of a Kannada daily, Vishwavani. The complaint was lodged for allegedly publishing an article carrying derogatory remarks against Karnataka Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy’s son Nikhil Kumaraswamy.

Upon asking if the editor had seen the copy of FIR filed against him, Vishveshwar Bhatt told Mirror Now, as per ruled the police is supposed to call the accused if there has been a complaint filed, but in this case, I have not received any call after the complainant lodged the FIR. Even after 24 hrs of the complaint being lodged, I still haven't received any notification from the police about the same, added Vishveshwar.

.@fayedsouza speaks to the @VishweshwarBhat, the editor of Kannada daily Vishwavani, against whom an FIR was filed after he published a report that allegedly contained derogatory comments against #Karnataka CM's son pic.twitter.com/w1drOB1HcM — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) May 27, 2019

He further added, I have received around 350 telephone calls, which are threatening me since the article was published. But I have been receiving such calls from years now, it has become a part of my job. The callers have been claiming that, even if I take any action, the forces would back the CM's son.

Reportedly, the article claimed that Nikhil who had lost the Lok Sabha Election from Mandya allegedly got drunk and he then abused his grandfather- Janata Dal (S) patriarch HD Deve Gowda.

The Kannada daily report claimed that the CM's son went to Deve Gowda's residence in an inebriated state, where he blamed him for failing to help his political career to take off. Vishveshwar added, that it was not an opinion-based piece rather it was based on sources. Before publishing the story, the facts were cross-checked by the reporter and only after confirming the story was carried out.

The police have booked the editor and some of his staff members under the relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. Reportedly, the CM has rubbished the claims made in the report and said that the article is fabricated.

In a recent report by the Reporter Without Borders analysis, India had dropped two places on the Global Press Freedom index, 2019 to be ranked 140th out of 180 countries. In the line of work, at least six journalists were killed in India, last year and several were brutally attacked.
