Qatar- Chemistry defeated arithmetic in polls: PM

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) Prime Minister Narendra Modi said yesterday that chemistry had managed to defeat arithmetic in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

'Elections are all about arithmetic but there is chemistry that goes beyond arithmetic. This time chemistry has defeated arithmetic, he said, addressing Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers at a thanksgiving function in Varanasi.

'Some people say that politics is all about perception but we do not create perceptions. For us, transparency and hard work scores above everything else, he said.

The prime minister said that he was a party worker and followed the directives of the Bharatiya Janata Party.

'I was asked to come here and on April 25 (for a roadshow), Kashi welcomed me with its ‘Vishwa Roop' (larger than life image) that had an impact beyond Kashi and Uttar Pradesh. It impacted all parts of the country. Kashi made me PM but I will always remain a worker for you.

Modi said that if he seemed complacent and relaxed during elections, it was because of the love and strength that Kashi gave him.

'You asked me not to come again for campaigning, so I went to Kedarnath after polling.

The prime minister thanked local officials, media persons and even his electoral rivals.

'I thank the workers for not making the election a war and the rival candidates for maintaining the dignity of Kashi. Elections were a festival of democracy that was celebrated by all, he said.

Modi said that there are many in politics whose profile runs into 50 pages or more but they are not connected to the poorest of the poor.

'We are dedicated to such people, he said.

'Uttar Pradesh has elected us in 2014, 2017 and in 2019 and deserves to be lauded for this hat trick which is not a small feat.

Modi said that it was the BJP which had maximum belief in democracy.

'When we are in power, the opposition comes alive. Tripura, for years, had no opposition but now that BJP is in power, the opposition is vibrant.

He said that the BJP had two main difficulties - selective sensitivity and political untouchability.

Modi praised the party's courage amid political clashes and killings after his latest landslide election triumph.

Three BJP workers have been killed and there have been pitched battles between BJP and West Bengal's ruling Trinamool Congress party activists in West Bengal since Modi secured a new five-year term last week.

Thousands of supporters lined the streets of Varanasi, waving flags, chanting his name and throwing flower petals at his cavalcade, despite 40 degree Celsius heat.

'Why are our workers being killed and attacked in Kashmir, Kerala or Bengal, Modi said.

'It is shameful and anti-democratic, he added.

A close aide of senior BJP leader Smriti Irani was shot dead by gunmen on a motorbike in the Amethi district of Uttar Pradesh on Saturday night.

Irani won the Amethi seat from Congress president Rahul Gandhi.

Another BJP worker was shot dead in West Bengal on Sunday night, triggering fresh clashes with supporters of the Trinamool Congress, officials said. The two sides hurled home-made bombs at each other and about a dozen people were injured.

A BJP activist was shot dead in West Bengal a day after election results were announced on Thursday.

Other politicians from the ruling party and opposition were killed during the campaign in several states.

MENAFN2705201900670000ID1098577147
