The Shillong Times

Dubai-based Indian names newborn son ‘Narendra Modi’

Dubai: A Dubai-based Indian expat has named his newborn son Narendra Damodardas Modi, as an honour to the Indian Prime Minister’s resounding victory in the recently concluded general elections, the media reported on Monday. Originally from Uttar Pradesh, Mustaq Ahmed, who works as a maintenance staff in an interior decor company in Hatta, about 130 km from Dubai, decided to name his son after Modi because he was born on May 23, the same day the Prime Minister won the Lok Sabha elections with a thumping majority for a second term. The baby was born in Ahmed’s village in Uttar Pradesh and Ahmed is yet to meet him. He said his newborn was already winning hearts as people in the neighborhood were all coming to see him. “I am sure people will keep teasing by calling him ‘Modi, Modi’. But when he grows up, no one will dare mess with him because he is Narendra Modi,” he added. (IANS)

Delhi HC seeks Vadra’s response

New Delhi: The Delhi High Court on Monday sought Robert Vadra’s response on the ED plea to cancel his anticipatory bail in a money laundering case on the ground that it required his custody as he was not cooperating in the investigation. Justice Chander Shekhar issued notice to Vadra on the Enforcement Directorate’s petition challenging trial court’s April 1 order which granted him anticipatory bail. The high court also sought response of Manoj Arora, an employee of Vadra’s Skylight Hospitality LLP and a co-accused in the case, on the agency’s plea seeking cancellation of the anticipatory bail. Solicitor General Tushar Mehta, representing the ED, said they required his custody as Vadra was not cooperating in the investigation and the trial court had not discussed the gravity of the offence in its order. Vadra, brother-in-law of Congress president Rahul Gandhi, is facing allegations of money laundering in the purchase of a London-based property at 12, Bryanston Square worth 1.9 million pounds (over Rs 17 crore). The case is being probed under the provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act. (PTI)

Temple installs elephant shower

Tiruchirappalli: A shower bath that very few people get to have these days, let alone a jumbo, in this sweltering heat, considering the shortage of water. To help a temple elephant beat the heat, a giant-size shower facility has been installed by the Jambukeswarar temple here. According to the temple officials, the facility was donated by a Chennai-based firm. The shower has 20 pipes constructed in a square pattern in the elephant’s enclosure The officials said they were amused to see the elephant taking the shower every now and then to keep itself cool. (PTI)

Firing over property dispute

Mumbai: A 30-year-old man was seriously injured when two persons allegedly fired at him in suburban Mankhurd on Monday over a property dispute, police said. One person was detained in this connection, they said. The incident took place around 5.30 am at Zakir Hussain Nagar when the victim, Abbas Shaikh, a resident of the neighbouring Palghar district, came to his friend’s house here, a police official said. When the two accused, who had some dispute with the victim over a property in Raigad district, came to know that Shaikh was in Mankhurd, they reached his friend’s residence and allegedly fired at him with their guns, he said. The victim received bullet injuries and was rushed to a civic-run hospital where his condition was reported to be serious, he said. One of the accused was detained and efforts were on to nab the other one, he said. A case was registered against the accused under Indian Penal Code sections for attempt to murder, he added. (PTI)

Railways runs 78 special trains

New Delhi: Due to unavailability of tickets in most fast and super fast trains during the summer holiday season, the Indian Railways is running 78 special trains to cater to the rush, an official said on Monday. “To cater to the extra rush, we have started 78 special trains from April 1,” a senior Northern Railway official told IANS. The special trains would make 1,354 trips until July, the official said. There are about 1,200 trains that ferry about 10-12 lakh passengers every day across the country. On the running late, often by over 5-7 hours, of trains, the official said huge traffic was one of the biggest challenge for running the trains on time. “If the train gets late then it goes on getting late as the rail traffic is already occupied by another train ahead,” the official said. The official also said sometimes the rakes of special trains were used for the main express trains when they gate late by over 5-6 hours. The maintenance of rakes takes about minimum of four hours. “But we are trying to ensure that the special trains run on time,” the official said. (IANS)

Man jumps off police station

New Delhi: A 58-year-old man died after he allegedly jumped from the balcony of the Bawana police station, where he was called for questioning regarding the whereabouts of his son, officials said Monday. The son of the deceased – Rahul is involved in two cases of attempted murder as well as another case of murder and has been declared an absconder by a city court. The deceased has been identified as Balraj, a resident of Bajitpur Thakran near Bawana, said officials. The police also denied allegations that the victim was beaten up at the police station. The incident took place at around 7.30 PM on Sunday when Balraj was called to Bawana police station. (PTI)
