No member of my family will join politics: Naveen

Bhubaneswar: Chief minister Naveen Patnaik on Monday ruled out the possibility of any member of his family joining politics or contesting an assembly seat that he will vacate. Naveen contested the Odisha assembly polls from two seats for the first time. He won both and will have to vacate one.“No member of my family will contest,” Naveen told TOI while responding to a query on whether any of his family members would contest Hinjili or Bijepur, the two seats he won this election. “I haven’t decided which seat I will (give up)” Naveen added.This puts to rest speculation in political circles that Naveen would launch his nephew, Arun Patnaik, in politics by getting him to contest from the Hinjili assembly seat.The chief minister — son of the iconic Biju Patnaik who took the political plunge after the death of his father in 1997 — made it clear that he was not thinking of furthering his dynasty in politics. On his political succession plan, Naveen said, “I don’t have one (a succession plan). The people will choose the next leader.”Arun, the son of Naveen’s elder brother Prem, has long been the subject of feverish speculation and is considered an obvious inheritor of his political legacy. A management degree-holder, Arun helps his father in the family business and lives mostly in Delhi. He visits Odisha but is hardly seen in public.In his maiden media appearance in Odisha in 2015, Arun had said he had no intention of joining politics. “I have no such intention at the moment,” he had told reporters then to a question on whether he had political ambitions.“It is great to see the feelings of the people towards my uncle (Naveen),” he had added while interacting with reporters in Cuttack after the Patnaiks signed over Biju’s home ‘Anand Bhawan’ in the city to the state government for conversion to a museum.With 73-year-old Naveen — the longest-serving chief minister of Odisha — about to begin a fifth term as chief minister on Wednesday, the question of ‘who next’ for Biju Janata Dal (BJD) have become intense. In the 19 years since he took control of BJD, no other party leader has emerged as a frontrunner for the post of ‘number two’.
