Irani aide killing: Cops find gun, identify shooter

LUCKNOW: UP police claimed on Monday that they had identified the trigger man in the murder of Surendra Singh, a key aide of Amethi MP Smriti Irani , and had also recovered the firearm used in the crime.Singh, a former village pradhan, had managed Irani’s elections in several parts of Amethi.Police suspect the murder to be the fallout of a dispute related to the election for the post of pradhan. Three of the accused, Nasim, Dharmnath Gupta and Ramchandra, have been arrested while police are seeking Wasim and Golu. All were named by the family as accused.Singh (58) was shot while he was asleep in the veranda of his house in Baraulia village early on Sunday.UP DGP O P Singh told TOI that a country-made pistol, a bloodstained towel and a mobile phone handset were recovered after the arrest of the three. “It is clear that the five accused had local-level political rivalries with Singh. We have arrested three people, recovered the weapon and identified the man who fired the shots,” claimed the DGP, adding that the bike used in the crime would also be recovered.“Initial investigation has found that Golu had fired the shots at Singh while co-accused Ramchandra played a role in hiding the country-made weapon in a neighbourhood pond from where it has been recovered. The two missing co-accused are switching their mobile phones on and off frequently after changing locations between UP and Delhi,” Singh told TOI.Meanwhile, IG ( Ayodhya range) Sanjeev Gupta said, “One pistol and a bloodstained towel were recovered from the residence of Ramchandra and another pistol was recovered from the residence of Nasim.”The bloodstains on the towel will be sent for forensic analysis. Police have made the arrests on the basis of electronic surveillance and circumstantial evidence.“Singh was pradhan till elections early this year. Baraulia village was made an SC seat in 2019 and co-accused Ramchandra wanted to become pradhan. He approached Singh for help but Singh helped another candidate win, which this upset Ramchandra,” Amethi SP Rajesh Kumar claimed. He added that while Singh was pradhan he had a case of loot registered against Ramchandra’s father.
