Payal Tadvi suicide case: State forms new committee to strengthen laws against ragging

While there is already an antiragging policy instituted at medical colleges across the state, with rules in place to take action against such incidents, the unfortunate suicide of a medical student in Mumbai last week sent out shockwaves, triggering the authorities to amend the laws into a more stringent avatar. Now, a committee has been formed by the state health department to draft new regulations, as also to look into what can be done to avoid such tragedies in future.On May 22, it was reported that Dr Payal Tadvi, a 23-year-old student of gynaecology at the civic body-run BYL Nair Hospital, killed herself when she could not take the alleged harassment of three senior doctors anymore. It is also being alleged by Payal’s relatives that she was subjected to casteist slurs by the three accused, and so took the drastic step of hanging herself from a ceiling fan in a hostel room. The accused resident doctors — Dr Hema Ahuja, Dr Bhakti Mehare and Dr Ankita Khandelwal of the obstetrics and gynaecology (OB-GYN) department — were pursuantly booked by Mumbai police under various sections of the Atrocities Act, Maharashtra Prohibition of Ragging Act and Indian Penal Code. At present, they are on the run.This year, three ragging cases have already been reported from medical colleges in Maharashtra. While the case in Nagpur was minor, the most recent one in Mumbai took on horrifying proportions; in Akola as well, three girls were caught troubling a junior student. The officials took stringent action against all three and their term was increased by two extra years as a penalty.State medical education minister Girish Mahajan has also taken serious cognisance of Payal’s death, and aims to prevent even minor incidents of ragging going ahead. He said, “The threemember committee will examine rules on ragging and send forth recommendations to be drafted to amend the existing law. This law will then be applicable at every medical college in the state irrespective of private, government, deemed or run by local bodies. The committee’s aim is to make the anti-ragging act stricter and to focus on incident prevention. Every six months, each college’s dean, medical superintendent, department heads and students should meet to discuss problems faced and solve them.”The committee will be headed by Directorate of Medical Education and Research (DMER) chief Tatayarao Lahane, Maharashtra University of Health Sciences (MUHS) vice chancellor Dr Deelip Mhaisekar, and KEM Hospital dean Dr Hemant Deshmukh. Their first meeting is on May 28. Mhaisekar said, “Supreme Court guidelines exist and amendments will be done keeping them in mind. MUHS will visit the college where the death occurred on Tuesday immediately take stringent action. An FIR has been filed and the accused are absconding. We will be discussing and drafting preventive measures soon.”Meanwhile, Pune’s BJ Medical College claimed they face next to nil cases of ragging. “We have put up a complaint box for students to submit plaints anonymously. If we hear of something, we immediately tackle and resolve it. Professors are appointed to take mentorship responsibility for 25 students each. Scholars can share all their worries with these professors, even if it is a health or financial issue,” said vice dean of the undergraduate section Dr AL Kowale, adding, “Our teachers are very alert about ragging and seniors are regularly instructed on the same. We inculcate a habit of seniors helping juniors.”
