I wanted to achieve something in my life other than Police: ‘Singham’ of Karnataka

I wanted to achieve something in my life other than Police: ‘Singham’ of Karnataka – Annamalai

Bengaluru/Udupi: As per reliable sources, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Bengaluru South) K Annamalai (hailed as ‘Singham’ of Karnataka) is said to resigning from his post on May 28, 2019.

He will send his resignation to the Chief Secretary through DGP soon. The Chief Secretary will send Annamalai’s resignation papers to UPSC New Delhi.When Mangalorean.com contacted Annamalai, he confirmed that he is leaving the police force within one week. After becoming an IPS officer, he was unable to give time to his family members. Annamalai said, “I have worked sincerely for 10 years in the Police Department, and now I wanted to achieve something else in my life. That is why I have decided to leave the police force soon.” When asked if he is joining politics, Annamalai responded, “No I don’t have any plans to join politics. I am not going anywhere. I do not know from where these rumours are coming; if anything is there, I will inform the media first.”

According to his friends, Annamalai had planned to resign from the police force since 6 month ago. However, he was unable to do so due to the Lok Sabha General Elections. Now that the polling duty has come to an end, he felt that it was the perfect time to resign. Annamali’s family are staying in his hometown in Tamil Nadu. After his resignation, he wants to go trekking in the Himalayas, as per sources.

Annamalai is a native of Karur district in Tamil Nadu. He completed his schooling in Coimbatore and pursued Mechanical Engineering, and later completed his MBA at IIM-Lucknow. While studying for his MBA degree in UP, Annamalai was exposed to the poverty and social disparities of the region. It was at that time that he decided to become a government servant. Annamalai, an IPS officer of 2011 batch, was posted as ASP of Karkala Sub Division on September 4, 2013. This was his first posting. During his tenure, four police stations in the Karkala Sub Division – Karkala Town, Karkala Rural, Kaup and Padubidri – received ISO 9001:2008 certification. He was promoted and posted as Superintendent of Police of Udupi district and took charge on January 1, 2015.

During his tenure as SP of Udupi district, Annamalai K not just won the confidence and hearts of the people but has also earned the name “Udupi’s Singham”. He not only has good crime detection skills but has also put a check on criminal activities like matka, murder, and theft in the district. After he took charge as SP, he has brought about a lot of change in Manipal which is known as an international education hub. He has restricted illegal activities in and around the Manipal area.

After Udupi district, he was transferred to Chikkamagaluru district as superintendent of police where he earned the love of the people. Annamalai managed to put an end to prostitution, drug mafia, betting, and human trafficking in his area of jurisdiction. It was during his tenure that the Dattamala programme was held peacefully for the first time which was hailed by the people of the district. The state government transferred Annamalai as DCP of South Bengaluru City in October 2018.

Also Read:
