Balakot not for propaganda, else would have used more potent weapons: IAF chief BS Dhanoa

There was no intent to use the Balakot airstrike for propaganda and that is the reason more potent weapons were not used during the cross-border air raid, Air Chief Marshal BS Dhanoa told India Today TV.

"If we wanted to do propaganda [sic] we would have used higher calibre weapons to cause more killings and damage but we did not want collateral damage. The weapons [used during the Balakot airstrike] were selected accordingly. The objective was to hit a terrorist camp," the air force chief said.

Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa spoke to India Today TV about lessons learnt since the 1999 Kargil War, post-Balakot assessment, chances of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman -- who was briefly detained behind enemy lines in the Balakot aftermath -- getting back in the cockpit and the China threat.

Air Chief Marshal Dhanoa spoke to India Today TV after flying a 'missing man formation' in remembrance of those killed in action during the Kargil War 20 years ago.

The air force chief flew along with Air Marshal R Nambiar, chief of the Western Air Command, and Lt Gen YK Joshi, who heads the Ladakh-based 14 Corps.

All three are Kargil veterans.

It's rare for a ten star formation -- a service chief who is a four star officer and two, three-star officers to fly together.

LIMITATIONS OVERCOME

Speaking about the limitations that have been overcome since the Kargil War, the air force chief pointed out that during Kargil, picking up small targets was a challenge for the air force. But, that has changed now, Air Chief Marashal Dhanoa said.

"That time only Mirage [fighter jets] could pick up small targets. Now all [air force jets] have laser designated pods in all fleet. In addition, UAVs are also [used] for picking up [small] targets," the air force chief said.

BALAKOT ANALYSIS

Air Chief Dhanoa said that after the Balakot airstrike, a detailed analysis was carried out about the strike itself and the air engagement with the Pakistani air force that took place the day after on February 27, when Indian and Pakistani fighter jets got into a dogfight over Jammu and Kashmir.

"What we did and what could have done better has been assessed. A detailed debrief has been carried out," he added.

The Indian Air Force carried out an unprecedented aerial strike on a terror camp in Balakot, Pakistan on February 26, responding to the attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama, South Kashmir on February 14 that killed 40 troops. The attack was orchestrated by Pakistan based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Speaking about Pakistani air raid that followed the Balakot airstrike and Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman being taken captive by Pakistani forces after his MiG-21 was hit, Dhanoa said, "While defending [the country] there is no guarantee that casualties will not happen [sic]."

"The aim is to ensure that enemy is not successful. You don't count costs, you count effects."

ABHINANDAN'S FUTURE

Responding to whether Wing Commander Abhinandan will get back to flying, Dhanoa said that will surely happen but only after all medical examinations are carried out.

"Must remember doctors have to be sure then only they will allow [him to fly]. Even I [have] ejected [from a fighter jet]... I know what it means. I was grounded for nine months," he said.

On the possibility of Wing Commander Abhinandan getting a gallantry award, Dhanoa refused to speculate, saying it was a confidential process and the country will get to know about it on 15th August.

BUDGAM AIR CRASH

Dhanoa also refused to speculate about the Mi17 helicopter crash that killed six people. The chopper crash took place around the same time Indian fighter jets got into a dogfight with Pakistani fighter aircraft on the day after the Balakot airstrike.

There is a possibility that the helicopter was hit by Indian air defence missiles in an incident of friendly fire.

Dhanoa said the court of inquiry investigating the crash wasn't complete yet. "We need to learn lessons, what happened, how did it happen and if mistakes were made... need to learn so that it doesn't happen again," Dhanoa also said.

Dhanoa added that the air force was open to sharing the findings of the court of inquiry with the families of those killed in the helicopter crash. "We are open about it. If the dependents [of those killed in the crash] want, we will give a copy of the findings and recommendations [of the court of inquiry]."

CHINA THREAT

On China, Dhanoa expressed confidence in tackling the growing threat. Dhanoa said the Indian Air Force has deployed its assets to match China's firepower.

"The number of our air fields is [higher] than what they have," Dhanoa said.

"They have an advantage in number of aircraft," he admitted. "The number of fourth-generation aircraft with them is much higher and they can replace them not having to deal with the problem of attrition."
