To help girlfriend crack MBA exam, BSP leader gets paper leaked, arrested

New Delhi:

All he wanted was his girlfriend to crack the MBA exam. But instead of helping her in studies or any other conventional way, he had some other ideas. The small-time BSP leader, with some considerable clout, decided to get the paper leaked! The plan, the paper, the process was in place. But in the end, Feroz Alam’s luck ran out and was arrested. Now, his girlfriend is absconding. The incident took place in Uttar Pradesh’s Aligarh, where Alam tried to get the prestigious Aligarh Muslim University’s MBA entrance paper leaked. However, the plan didn’t work out and the Aligarh Police raided the flat, where Alam along with two of his associates had hatched the conspiracy.

An IANS report said that Alam’s SUV bore he name plate ‘BSP coordinator Patiyali’ and always moved with bunch of bouncer-like mean. The BSP leader got in touch with one Irshad, who was an AMU employee. Alam promised him a permanent job in lieu of the question paper. With another friend Haider, whose flat was used to hatch the conspiracy, Alam asked AMU staff to get the paper leaked. Irshad, who was employed by the AMU to serve water to students during exams, got hold of an unused question paper. The Times of India report said that Alam and Haider got some ‘solvers’ to the flat to get the answers, which were subsequently Whatsapped to five students including Alam’s girlfriend.

However, Irshad couldn’t place the unused question paper back in the lot. The AMU officials realised the paper leak and cancelled the examination. Soon, police teams were formed to nab the culprits. All accused including Alam, Irshad and Haider have been arrested. Interestingly, the flat belonged to Haider’s uncle Tehseem Siddiqui who is said to be close to Samajwadi Party President Akhilesh Yadav.

Police have registered an FIR against five persons, Tariq Khan, Mohd Irshad, Firoz Alam, Haider, and Akram under sections 3/4/5/6/7/9/10 of Uttar Pradesh Public Examinations Act, 1998 and sections 420 (cheating), 406 (committing criminal breach of trust), and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code on the basis of complaint filed by Prof Iffat Asgar from the AMU.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
