Charting the path to success, on their own terms

With persistence and determination, these students succeeded in overcoming the odds

Mumbai may have stood eighth among the nine divisions in State in the Higher Secondary Certificate (HSC) results announced on Tuesday, but there were plenty of reasons to celebrate. Several students battled various odds to clear their exams with flying colours.

In a first in the State, Nishka Hosabgadi (20), who suffers from a muscular disability, appeared for the exam using an iPad, from where a writer picks up content and puts it on the answer sheet. Nishka, who was allowed to take the exam this way by the National Institute of Open School Board in Class X too, scored 74% in Arts.

Having secured 74% in Commerce, 18-year-old Aryan Kashyap of Jai Hind College, who suffers from a learning disorder, thanks his twin sister Anmol for the success. With her on his side, he knew he did not require any other help to accomplish his goal of clearing the HSC exam. “I knew I could do it on my own and I wanted to show it. My sister was a constant support, especially in learning the languages,” he said. Aryan wishes to pursue MBA in future.

Being visually challenged did not deter Simran Joshi from appearing for the HSC exam without a writer. The 19-year-old student from Ramnivas Ruia Junior College, Matunga, said she took the decision in a bid to not rely on anybody. “One needs to face challenges head on and not rely on others to do their work for them,” she said. Having secured 89.94%, she now aspires to pursue Sanskrit and psychology.

Around a fortnight before the exam, Rohit Takase (17), who suffers from a listening and speech disability, suffered a stroke. Despite being admitted to the Intensive Care Unit, he was persistent about not giving his Class XII exams a miss. “He would not take no for an answer. Even though he could not study in hospital, he had full faith in the hard work he had put in through the entire year. He decided to face his challenges head on,” his father, Uttam Takase, said.
