Is Godse a Patriot?

Omkar Dattatray

No, not at all, he was a Hindu fanatic and the assassin of the father of the nation Mahatma Gandhi who was a saint, freedom fighter, a great patriot, a philosopher, an educationist, what not, cannot be called a patriot and is not a patriot at all. Those who consider and call him a patriot have a myopic view. The assassin of Gandhi who fought british imperialism with the weapon of non violence and truth is not a patriot. The murderer of Bapu cannot be called a desh bhakt. He was an extremist through and through. He was a pure and total extremist and cannot be given the status of a patriot and a desh bhakt. He was an undiluted extremist and to call him a patriot is an insult to the concept of patriotism, nationalism and is against the country’s freedom movement.

Therefore Godse cannot be called a patriot. Sadhvi Pragya the one accused in the Malagoan blast and facing trail and the BJP’s Bhopal candidate has once again stirred a controversy by her uncalled for and unwanted remark of calling Mahatama Gandhi’s assassin Nathu Ram Godse a patriot. She stoked an avoidable controversy as she called Godse a patriot. Sadhvi is habitual of giving controversial statements to remain in limelight otherwise she has outlived her utility as a seasoned political leader. She is adept in giving controversial statements time and again to remain in the news. Otherwise her controversial and uncalled for remarks has no takers in our plural society. Pragya Singh Thakur while talking to a news channel at Agar Malwa in MP said, “Nathuram Godse was a desh bhakt (Patriot), he is and will remain a desh bhakt”.

Godse was a killer and he had committed a greatest sin of murdering Mahatma Gandhi. Therefore, he is a Hindu fanatic and an extremist and believed in the idealogy of violence as a means to attain ends. His ideology was in contrast with the Mahatama Gandhi’s philosophy and ideology. Pragya should desist from issuing controversial statements and should discipline herself. Calling Nathu Ram Godse a patriot is an insult to freedom struggle and its leaders particularly the torch bearer of freedom struggle Mahatma Gandhi who was a saint, freedom fighter and the great patriot. Senior congress leader Digvijay Singh has said that PM Modi and Amit Shah the BJP president should apologize to the nation for the unfortunate remarks made by Sadhvi Pragya. One wonders how prasing Godse is patriotism and nationalism. It is an anti-national act and should be condemned by one and all. Sadhvi Pragya and her likes are glorifying assassin of Mahatma Gandhi and calling him patriot, which is factually incorrect and misleading remark and should not have been given.

Nathuram Godse was a killer and cannot be given the name of a patriot and he should not be eulogized and as per former CM of M.P Digvijay Singh eulogizing him is no patriotism. It is a great disservice to the nation. But then there is a great irony and travesty of history that one man’s extremist/terrorist is another man’s freedom fighter and martyr. In order words there are good and bad extremists but the fact is that there should not be and there cannot be good and bad extremists/terrorists. An extremist is an extremist pure and total and you cannot differentiate between good and bad terrorists. It is a great conspiracy to bracket terrorists/extremists as good and bad. The fact is extremists are anti social, anti human and anti national and they should not be glorified as patriots. If the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi is a patriot as per the thinking of Sadhvi Pragya, then who is the real terrorist and extremist is a million dollar question.

The fact of the matter that you cannot equate Godse with a patriot and cannot shower praises on him as he is an extremist through and through. It is not the first time that Sadhvi Pragya has given a controversial remark and earlier she had said that Hemant Karkare was killed because she had cursed him while the fact is that Karkare is a martyr and a patriot who had fought valiantly in 26/11 terrorist attack and got martyrdom. This uncalled for remark of Sadhvi Pragya had landed him in trouble. But now she had given a very disturbing statement and had called Godse a patriot-a desh bhakt. BJP has rightly disassociated itself from this remark of Sadhvi Pragya and has infact apologized to the nation over the controversial and false remark of Sadhvi. She has also been asked by the BJP high command to apologize for her remark. There is a section of people in the country who glorify Godse but there number of small and they have myopic view of the things. They also should desist from glorifying the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi. In this lies the good of all. If Godse is a patriot then all assassins are patriots and this is perversion of values and cannot be accepted at all. While an extremist/terrorist is after human blood, a martyr dies for a noble cause and as such is worthy of glorification and eulogizing and is also worthy of emulation.

The extremist should be condemned for his anti social, anti religious, anti human and anti national acts. Sadhvi Pragya says that Nathuram Godse is a true patriot. Kamal Hasan had recently said that the first terrorist in India was Nathuram Godse. Sadhvi slammed the statement and said he was a true patriot and will remain so. Sadhvi was reacting to Kamal Hasan comments on Godse. Sadhvi has stirred several controversies ever since she was released in the Malegaon blast case. Earlier she quoted a major controversy by saying that she had cursed Maharashtra ATS chief Himant Karkare during her prison term, after which he died in firing during 26/11 Mumbai terror attack. She also invited trouble when she said that she herself had climbed on the top of Babri Masjid to demolish the mosque and was very proud of it. It is very sad that after Pragya Singh Thakur more BJP leaders have come out with the remarks in support of Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin Nathuram Godse. It is a big embarrassment for BJP but the party chief has apologized for Sadhvi’s remarks. Shad said three leaders were told to explain their Godse remark in ten days.

The BJP President Amit Shad clarified the party has nothing to do with offensive posts of Sadhvi Pragya Thakur, BJP M.P Nalin Kumar Katel and Union Minister Anant Kumar Hegde that seemed criticized Mahatma Gandhi and eulogizes Godse. BJP pulls up Sadhi Pragya over Godse remark and demands Public apology from her. BJP strongly condemned the statements made by its Bhopal Candidate Sadhvi Pragya and said she should apologize publicly for terming Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin a true patriot. We completely disagree with the statement of Sadhvi about the father of nation Mahatma Gandhi.

BJP spokesperson GLV Narsimha Rao told media that we strongly condemned this particular statement of the Sadhvi. Sadhvi Pragya was a barred from campaigning for three days by the poll body for her comment on Babri Masjid demolition. An FIR was also filed against her for her remarks. Congress slams BJP for Sadjhiv remarks and said it is insult to Mahatma Gandhi – the father of the nation. Sadhvi Pragya should desist from making controversial statement and should see reason and taker her words back. She should not be allowed to spit fire and venom by resorting to controversial and false remarks. While Godse kill the body of Mahatma Gandhi the congress has killed the ideology and the philosophy for which Mahatma stood all his life.
