Disney Child Stars Who Met With Incredibly Tragic Fates

Some of the players in the Disney family sadly don’t lead lives as happy as the ones we see in their shows and movies. We’ve watched so many Disney darlings grow, but unfortunately, not all of them have that privilege. For others, sad realities of adult world–like drugs, arrests and legal battles–taint their fame and worse, their own lives. And no, they’re not all Shias and they’re not all Lindsays.

Just this year, we’ve seen another Disney star who passed too soon and yet another tied up in a legal mess. But hopefully now, the Disney family will be tragedy-free for a while. See which Disney stars faced unlikely and tragic fates below.

Lee Thompson Young Disney From 1998 to 2001, Lee was the most badass kid on TV in The Famous Jett Jackson. Sadly, in 2013, the 29-year-old failed to go to an episode shooting of Rizzoli & Isles, when police later found him dead in his LA apartment. The actor committed suicide with a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head. It was later revealed he had been on medication for bipolar disorder and depression.

Lindsay Lohan Getty Poor Lindsay is the poster child of Disney stars gone tragic. One minute she was Tyra ’s sidekick in Life Size, the next her mug shots (plural) were haunting our dreams. It all started back in the good ol’ year of 2007, when Lindsay was arrested for a DUI (they found cocaine on the scene), sandwiched between two rehab stints. Later that year, she left rehab, was pulled over for another DUI and arrested on five accounts, then swung back into the rehab doors hours later. Two years later she was on probation for not completing her alcohol-education classes. In 2010, she was sentenced to 90 days in jail and rehab for violating probation. (She only served two weeks due to “overcrowding,” though.) Then comes 2011 when she was charged with burglary after leaving a jewelry store with a $2,500 necklace on (she was sentenced to serve time, but ended up being on house arrest, again, due to jail overcrowding.) After that, she continued to ignore probations, was involved in a sketchy car crash scene and was arrested again in 2012 for a hit-and-run. If you’re confused, see the whole timeline of her unfortunate events here.

Orlando Brown Getty Raven’s TV BFF Eddie has found himself in quite the pickle these days. The former That’s So Raven star was arrested last month in LA for suspicion of battery, drug possession and resisting arrest. He allegedly assaulted a woman he was romantically involved with. He denied the allegations and is due for a court hearing in March. Meanwhile, he’s out there calling Love & Hip Hop star Jhonni Blaze a THOT.

Shia LaBeouf Getty No one would’ve guessed the curly-haired kid on Even Stevens would turn out to be, well, such a hot mess. Like Lindsay, Shia’s legal problems started in 2007; he was arrested at a Walgreens in Chicago for being intoxicated and refusing to leave. Since, he’s been in a few bar fights, a car accident and was accused of plagiarism multiple times. In 2014, he was arrested and escorted from a live Cabaret show for harassing a homeless man. See the timeline of his misfortunes here.

Michael Galeota Disney Michael’s story is sadly another of a Disney actor gone too soon. Last month, The Jersey star was found dead on his living room floor at 31 by his friend who climbed through the window of his California home. A week prior, he visited the hospital due to abdominal pains and reportedly suffered from hypertension, high cholesterol and diverticulitis. Until autopsy results come in, it is said he passed due to “natural causes.”

Bobby Driscoll (the voice of Peter Pan) Disney Shortly after his 31st birthday, Bobby’s dead body was found by two boys playing in a deserted Manhattan living space. Cause of death was said to be advanced hardening of the arteries which caused heart failure. Sadly, the body was never identified and he was buried with an unmarked grave in New York. It wasn’t until 19 months later when his mother went to officials and a fingerprint match led to the site of his burial on Hart Island. Before his death, Bobby faced numerous arrests for drug possession, assault and forgery and was sentenced to six months in prison and experienced a stay at a psychiatric hospital.

Brad Renfro Disney You may remember Brad as the boy who played Huckleberry “Huck” Finn alongside Jonathan Taylor Thomas in 1995’s Tom and Huck. In 2008, he was found dead in his home at only 25 years old. A month later, the Los Angeles County Coroner’s office confirmed the cause of death was an accidental heroine overdose.

Britney Spears Disney Poor Brit Brit. At first she was bopping around on The Mickey Mouse Club alongside Justin Timberlake and Christina Aguilera . Once fame got to her head, in addition to many gas station cheeto stops and public meltdowns, she done lost her mind and shaved her head. But now she’s killing it in Vegas, even if she mostly always medicated.

Bridgette Andersen Disney The Parent Trap II star sadly struggled with heroin addiction through her teenage years and succumbed to an accidental overdose of alcohol and heroin in 1997. She was just 21 years old.

Matthew Garber Disney You may recognize this adorable child actor as the boy who played little Michael in the classic, Mary Poppins. At the young age of 21, he was infected with hepatitis during a trip to India. Once it spread to his pancreas it led to pancreatitis and became untreatable, which was his ultimate cause of death.

LaLaine Getty You remember LaLaine as Miranda Sanchez, Lizzie McGuire’s BFF on Lizzie McGuire. Unfortunately, LaLaine’s real-life fate wasn’t as fortune as her counterpart Hilary Duff’s. In 2007, the actress was reportedly charged with possession of crystal meth at 20 years old.

Marque Lynche Disney A few months ago, this former Mousketeer was found dead in his NYC apartment at just 34 years old, with the cause of death still unknown. It was soon revealed that he was charged with assault a few months before he passed when got into a fight with police officers, punching one in the face.

Jason Weaver The WB Jason’s fate was one none of us could prepare for. Especially these poor Atlanta homeowners. Apparently, the Smart Guy actor and man whose singing voice was that of cub Simba’s in The Lion King was arrested in 2011 for “illegally fertilizing” someone’s lawn. He was about 31.

Brian Bonsall Disney Brian was the cute little kid who starred in 1994’s Blank Check. In 2011, he was 28 when charged for using marijuana in violation of terms from a previous arrest. Before that, though, he was accused of “repeatedly hitting a friend in the head with a broken wooden stool” as well as missing a 2007 court hearing for another assault case.
