They interacted with leaders, not people: Sumalatha on why she won and if she plans to join the Modi govt

Sumalatha

Mandya

Ambareesh, the new Lok Sabha member from, says she is not averse to joining the Centre if that gives her a better opportunity to ‘serve the interests of Mandya’.In a free-ranging interview with Bangalore Mirror, the 55-year-old actor-turned-politician said she will take a final decision only after ‘consulting the people of Mandya’.Sumalatha is likely to announce her next political move at a thanksgiving meeting on Wednesday which coincides with the 67th birth anniversary of Rebel Star Ambareesh. Edited excerpts:I have no issues. Work is work. What was said and done (during elections) is over now. They too have to be large-hearted and magnanimous. I am ready to meet anyone and share the platform if it is going to help resolve issues.Combined will and collective effort has to be there. The government has to fight a legal battle in the courtrooms and not outside on the Cauvery water dispute. Saying it is the MP’s responsibility to ensure release of Cauvery water is just an expression of their frustration.I was never in Congress; for that matter, I was not in any party. I am free to go wherever I wish to go. The BJP had extended unconditional support (when I decided to contest) and now they have reiterated that it is unconditional if I choose to join them. I have to ask people, how and where they want to see me. This has to be done in an organic way and not because I want to do it or I want to benefit from it. Without the central government’s support, it is difficult to develop the constituency by giving special attention to Mandya and farmers. I hope the BJP’s support will continue even after the election to improve Mandya and its people.I am hearing all these speculations. Yes, they are weak in this belt of Old Mysuru region. Deicison has to be taken by those in power. But if an opportunity to serve interests of Mandya (presents itself), it would be a big boost for development. And it would be mutually beneficial. But I would keep considerations of Mandya first before taking any decisions.No, not really. I had met him for a minute or two. He is friends with my son Abhishek and had come home. I don’t blame him for this election. It was his senior party leaders and family who let him down.They failed to read the pulse of the people. Their strategy from Day One was wrong. They were believing and interacting with leaders, not people. They were confident and thought that money could do everything. They had eight MLAs, ministers, MLCs, the Chief Minister and the community (backing them). But they failed to estimate the power of Ambareesh and love of the people. Personal insinuations targeting me and Ambareesh and the emotions of the people worked against them.I was touched and grateful for whatever they did at that time. But it does now look that it was done with an ulterior motive. The Chief Minister was referring to the funeral throughout the campaign. I thought that was the worst part of their campaign, marketing somebody’s death to get a few votes. It went against them.I don’t think I should return a favour. Had I known that they had done this as a favour, I would have never allowed them to do it. Ambareesh is not some xyz. Mandya people would have still turned out for his funeral in large numbers; he was a former central and state minister, a film actor of immense popularity. We would have given an equally dignified, if not better, farewell that he deserved. It is not a favour, but the respect he commanded. If at all I had to return any favour, it is for the people of Mandya who showered their love and affection on our family, not to anyone else.A lot of people asked me how I could remain calm despite such personal attacks. I never thought of winning, it was just a bonus. I just wanted to tell people that Ambareesh’s family is still with him. But as the response grew, I started feeling that winning was a possibility. If I had lost, I would have taken it on my chin.My son was a little apprehensive. But it was never a do-or-die situation for me.Abhishek felt bad; he is too young. I used to counsel him. I felt really bad when they targeted Darshan and Yash. It was also an eye-opener to know who were the true friends of Ambareesh and who all merely used him.
