I cannot be in every Salman Khan film: Katrina Kaif on being the second choice for Bharat

Bollywood actress Katrina Kaif | Photo Credit: Instagram

After wooing the audience with their sizzling on-screen chemistry in several films, Bollywood actors Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif are all set for the release of their next film, Bharat. Helmed by Ali Abbas Zafar, the movie is based on the South Korean drama, Ode To My Father. Initially, global icon Priyanka Chopra was cast to play Bharat's female lead but she left the project before it went on floors due to her wedding with Nick Jonas. After her exit, Katrina was roped in and fans are loving her portrayal of Kumud Raina. Recently, the actress opened up about not being the first choice for the movie.

In an interview with Mumbai Mirror, the 35-year-old actress said that it doesn't matter who was first approached for the film, what matters is who the audience see in the film when it is finally released. She added that Ali Abbas Zafar had spoken to her regarding the script and role of Bharat when she was shooting Tiger Zinda Hai with Salman.

Katrina further said, "Everyone has a different perspective of looking at things. I cannot be in every Salman Khan film. If Priyanka was chosen for this role then she had her own reasons for not doing it. Doing Bharat was written in my destiny and I am happy it came to me. When I read the script, I simply loved it and I think this is the best role of mine so far."

In the end, the diva said that the question of being the first or second choice doesn't seem to be relevant to her at all and it is not about anyone's ego.

Apart from Salman and Katrina, Bharat also stars Tabu, Disha Patani, Nora Fatehi and Sunil Grover in key roles. The film will trace the history of India from the perspective of an ordinary man, so it shows the journey of the film's protagonist, Bharat, from the age of 18 to 70.

Co-produced by Salman's brother-in-law Atul Agnihotri under his banner Reel Life Productions, Bharat will hit the screens on Eid i.e. June 5.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates!
