Learning from recent fire tragedies, Delhi bans kitchens on rooftops and in basements

Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh where the tragedy happened (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: In light of recent events such as the tragic fire that claimed the lives of 22 persons (mostly students) at a building complex in Surat, the Delhi government on Monday amended the 'Unified Building Bye-Laws (UBBL) for Delhi 2016' concerning commercial buildings. The amended guidelines now prohibit kitchens and cooking on rooftops and in basements of commercial buildings. It is believed that the government's decision to approve of these amendments was also partly prompted by a massive blaze which killed 17 people at Hotel Arpit Palace in Karol Bagh February of this year.

Apart from imposing a ban on rooftop kitchens and basement kitchens, the amendment also forbids restaurant/hotel owners from storing inflammable materials on rooftops. Taking a cue from the Kamala Mills fire in Mumbai which led to the loss of 14 lives, the Delhi government has also restricted hotel proprietors from covering roofs or terraced with fibre reinforced plastic (FRP) or any other inflammable material.

In addition, the amendment also bans the use of wooden panels, foam panels and carpets among other inflammable materials in passages, staircases or corridors. Urban Development Minister Satyendra Jain said that this decision was taken in light of the Arpit Hotel fire tragedy where the staircase was covered with a carpet which led to the generation of a massive amount of smoke, restricting people from using the exit routes.

According to a report by The Hindu, amendments brought in by the Delhi government will also amount to non-issue of No Objection Certificates (NOCs) to buildings with more than four floors, excluding basement and stilt floor. Hotels in the national capital will also have to install carbon monoxide detectors in all rooms apart from mechanical arrangements for smoke ventilation in all corridors and passages at each floor and staircase. Delhi's Urban Development Minister reiterated that more people die due to inhalation of carbon monoxide than due to burns during a fire. Hotel owners will also have to ensure the fixation of doors with a fire-resistance rating of at least one hour at the entrance of staircases at each floor or if more than ten people reside on that floor, added the amendment.
