Live updates| ‘Decided not to attend oath ceremony due to false reports of killing of 54 BJP workers’: Mamata Banerjee

Will not attend oath ceremony due to false reports of killing of 54 BJP workers: Mamata Banerjee

“It was my plan to attend the oath-taking ceremony, however in past one hour, I am seeing media reports that the BJP is claiming 54 people have been killed in political violence in Bengal. This is untrue. I am compelled not to attend the ceremony,” said West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee. :ANI

Sheila Dikshit to stage demonstration urging Rahul Ganghi not to resign as Cong president

Sheila Dikshit is going to stage a demonstration urging Rahul Ganghi not to resign as Congress president. The demonstration will start at 4 pm outside the Gandhi scion’s Tughlak Lane residence.

Give me time to get treated, Arun Jaitley writes to PM

”I am writing to you to formally request you that I should be allowed a reasonable time for myself, my treatment and my health, and, therefore, not be a part of any responsibility, for the present, in the new Government,” Arun Jaitley writes to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

‘I will always be a part of Cong’: MLA over reports of him joining BJP

“The news is baseless, I am shocked such news being spread. I am with Congress and will be in Congress only, someone has intentionally spread this rumour to damage my reputation,” said Congress Maharashtra MLA Satyajit Deshmukh over reports of him joining BJP. :ANI

BJP leader Pema Khandu sworn-in as Arunachal CM

Pema Khandu was sworn- in as the Chief Minister of Arunachal Pradesh for a second term.

UP CM Adityanath hosted a lunch for most of the newly elected MPs

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath hosted a luncheon meet for most of the 62 newly elected MPs from Uttar Pradesh at his official residence in Lucknow on Wednesday. :ANI

Odisha CM’s first cabinet meet this term to take place today

Naveen Patnaik is going to meet top industrialists who attended the oath-taking ceremony. The first cabinet meeting of this term will also take place today afternoon.

Cong workers urge Rahul Gandhi to continue as party president

Congress workers demonstrated outside party office in Bengaluru, urging Rahul Gandhi to continue as Congress president.

Congress workers demonstrating in front of party office in Begaluru. ( ANI Twitter )

‘I humbly accept the responsibility’: Naveen Patnaik

“It’s a nostalgic and personal journey for me to reminiscence the past 19 years. Today, while I take oath of office for the 5th term, I humbly accept the responsibility that comes with the faith my 4.5 crore family members have reposed in me, yet again,” tweeted Naveen Patnaik.

No portfolios allotted to ministers who took oath today

No portfolios have been allotted to Odisha ministers who took oath today.

PM Modi congratulates Naveen Patnaik on Twitter

“Congratulations to Shri Naveen Patnaik Ji on taking oath as Odisha’s Chief Minister. Best wishes to him and his team in fulfilling the people’s aspirations. I assure complete cooperation from the Centre in working for Odisha’s progress,” Prime Minister-elect Narendra Modi tweeted.

Over 10,000 people attend Naveen Patnaik’s oath-taking ceremony

More than 10,000 people attended the swearing-in ceremony of Naveen Patnaik despite the temperature being over 40 degree Celsius. The ceremony is being held at a public ground in Bhubaneswar.

Delhi Pradesh Congress Committee to meet Rahul Gandhi today

Delhi Pradesh Congress Committee leaders are going to meet party President Rahul Gandhi later today.

Naveen Patnaik’s siblings Prem Patnaik, Gita Mehta attend ceremony

Naveen Patnaik’s elder brother Prem Patnaik and sister Gita Mehta, a celebrated writer, are attending the oath-taking ceremony.

20 ministers take oath after Naveen Patnaik

20 ministers took oath after him. Half of them are first-time ministers.

Naveen Patnaik takes oath as Odisha CM for the fifth time

Naveen Patnaik takes oath as the Chief Minister of Odisha. This is his 5th consecutive term as the Chief Minister. :ANI

WATCH: Naveen Patnaik takes oath as the Chief Minister of Odisha for a fifth time https://t.co/k5DSeKrkUm — ANI (@ANI) May 29, 2019

Kin of BJP workers killed in Bengal invited to PM Modi’s oath ceremony

Kin of BJP workers who were killed in West Bengal in political violence have been invited to the swearing-in ceremony of PM Narendra Modi. Son of Late Manu Hansda,on of the victims, says,”My father was killed by TMC goons. We are happy that we are going to Delhi. There’s peace in our area now.” :ANI

‘I am with my younger brother’: Tej Pratap Yadav

RJD supremo Lalu Prasad’s elder son Tej Pratap Yadav Tuesday told party men to leave the party if they don’t like his younger brother Tejashwi Prasad Yadav’s leadership. “I am with my younger brother as Krishna and will always stand by him,” he said.

Tej Pratap did not attend RJD meeting held to discuss poll debacle on Tuesday

Tej Pratap, who could not attend the RJD’s Tuesday meeting held at former chief minister Rabri Devi’s residence to discuss the poll debacle, said he had intimated the party leaders about his inability to attend the meeting.

Tejashwi Yadav to chair RJD meet at Rabri Devi’s residence today

RJD MLAs and MLCs are to meet later today at Rabri Devi’s residence in Patna. The meeting will be chaired by Tejashwi Yadav. :ANI

JD (U) bagged 16 parliamentary seats in Bihar

JD (U) is a part of BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) and bagged 16 parliamentary seats in Bihar. BJP-JD (U) had contested on 17 seats each.

JDU meeting at Bihar CM Nitish Kumar’s residence today

Meeting of Janata Dal(United) office bearers is to be held at Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar’s residence later today. :ANI
