Hit by bullet, fuel salesman saves Rs 5 lakh from snatchers

LUCKNOW: A fuel bunk employee foiled a gunpoint snatching attempt despite being shot at in Thakurganj, barely 2km from the local police station, on Tuesday morning.Alok Ranjan Yadav (45), who saved his employer Rs 5 lakh, sustained a bullet wound near his waist but is said to be out of danger. Colleague Sudhir Kumar Gautam (30), however, is battling for life at KGMU Trauma Centre.Police are examining surveillance camera footage near Dubagga under Thakurganj thana for clues on the two assailants who came on a bike, but fled on foot after opening fire from a .315-bore country pistol.According to preliminary police investigation, Gautam and Yadav - both sales executives with a fuel bunk near Budheshwar intersection - were biking to a bank in Chowk around 11am to deposit cash. While Yadav was driving, Gautam was riding pillion.Near Dubagga, two men on another bike closed in on them and fired a couple of rounds from behind. Yadav received a bullet below the waist and lost control of the bike. Gautam, shot in the back, slumped to the ground and lost consciousness. The shooters lunged at the bag of cash, which Gautam was holding, but Yadav despite bleeding profusely snatched it back. Eyewitnesses told police that the assailants hadn't expected such a fightback and were caught unawares. Their bike had crashed into that of the victims' and the curious crowd was swelling. They didn't risk a chance and fled on foot, without the cash and flashing the gun to avoid being chased, sources said.Police were informed on Dial 100 and two constables rushed Gautam to the trauma centre in an e-rickshaw. A PCR van arrived minutes later and took Yadav to the hospital as well. Thakurganj sub-inspector Ramesh Chandra Varun said the red bike the snatchers had left behind was a stolen one. "We have learnt that they were not wearing masks or covering their faces. We are looking for clues in CCTV camera footage," he added.Doctors at KGMU said Gautam had lost a lot of blood and his condition was critical. Yadav was operated on in the evening and is recuperating.
