Katrina Kaif on Priyanka Chopra in Bharat: I am unaware of who was selected before me

It is an age-old story, but no one is ready to let go of the fact that Priyanka Chopra walked out of Bharat. The actress was roped in to play Kumud in the movie. She left the Ali Abbas Zafar directorial after Nick Jonas proposed the star and a wedding was on its way. There's a lot of hullabaloo over Priyanka's decision months after the movie found its new Kumud in Katrina Kaif. With the movie set to release next week, the cast's reaction over PeeCee's exit is still making the headlines. We've heard a lot from Salman Khan, the actor playing the titular role in the movie. Now, Katrina has shared her opinion on Priyanka's exit.

Speaking to Mirror Online, the actress confessed that she was unaware about who was roped in to play Kumud before her. She recalls learning about the movie on the sets of Tiger Zinda Hai. She added that Priyanka had her own reasons for not doing Bharat. She feels that she was destined to portray the role.

"I am unaware of who was selected before me for Bharat. Ali Abbas had spoken to me regarding the script and role of Bharat when I was shooting Tiger Zinda Hai with Salman Khan," she said.

Katrina added, "Everyone has a different perspective of looking at things. I cannot be in every Salman Khan film. If Priyanka was chosen for this role then she had her own reasons for not doing it. Doing Bharat was written in my destiny and I am happy it came to me. When I read the script I simply loved it and I think this is the best role of mine so far."

The actress also said that it doesn't matter who was the first or second choice. "The question of being the first or second choice doesn’t seem to be relevant to me at all. It’s also not about anyone’s ego," she said.

Salman has been talking about Priyanka's exit ever since the promotions began. Recently, discussing her exit, the actor said Priyanka's exit was "embarrassing" for him.

Initially, Priyanka was very keen to do this film. Ali (director Ali Abbas Zafar) and we all thought it was Katrina Kaif’s film. But "Katrina and I did Tiger Zinda Hai just before that and Ali said that we need a girl who is ‘Hindustani.’I tried telling him, ‘Why can’t she (Katrina) pull off this role? She has been living in India for the last 20 years.’ But then Ali said, ‘Priyanka ka phone aaya tha‘ and it is also true that Priyanka and my sister Arpita Khan are good friends. After all this, the ‘Nick story’ happened, the embarrassing thing happened and she chose to get married," he recently said.

ALSO READ: Bharat: Disha Patani feels she and Salman Khan might NEVER work again; Here's why

What do you think about Priyanka Chopra leaving Bharat? Let us know your thoughts about it in the comments below.
