Families of Bengal BJP workers killed in poll violence invited to PM Modi's swearing-in

Manu Hansda was killed in poll violence in Bengal. His son (above) will be attending PM Modi's swearing-in ceremony on Thursday. (Image: ANI)

BJP has invited the families of over 50 party workers who were killed in different incidents of violence in Bengal, to the swearing-in ceremony of PM Narendra Modi. West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is also expected to attend the event on May 30.

According to a Times of India report, at least 51 BJP workers were killed in West Bengal in the past six years during panchayat elections and the recently-concluded Lok Sabha elections.

For the mega show on Thursday that will be attended by top dignitaries of foreign nations, BJP has invited the families of violence-hit party workers.

Midnapore: Kin of BJP workers (who were killed in West Bengal in political violence) invited to the swearing-in ceremony of PM Narendra Modi. Son of Late Manu Hansda says,"My father was killed by TMC goons. We are happy that we are going to Delhi. There's peace in our area now." pic.twitter.com/P0uR6bBLXp ANI (@ANI) May 29, 2019

One of the invitees, son of late Manu Hansda from Bengal's Midnapore told ANI, "My father was killed by Trinamool goons. We are happy that we are going to Delhi. There's peace in our area now." Hansda will be among the over 7,000 guests who will be attending the swearing-in ceremony at the Rashtrapati Bhavan.

In Midnapore, Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh won seat beating Trinamool Congress's Manas Bhunia.

This comes after the Bharatiya Party Party (BJP) dealt a massive blow to Mamata Banerjee in the recent Lok Sabha elections after it sealed 18 of 42 Parliamentary seats in West Bengal. In the last Lok Sabha elections, BJP had won only 2 seats and this time it has increased the tally manifold.

With just two years left to the West Bengal assembly elections, BJP has turned out to the biggest headache for Trinamool Congress and Mamata Banerjee.

On Monday, BJP leader Mukul Roy inducted a bunch of 50 Trinamool councillors and two MLAs into the BJP, dealing another big blow to the Bengal fortress and promising to do more damage in "seven phases".
