‘Please excuse me’: Mamata Banerjee’s big U-turn, says won’t attend PM Narendra Modi’s swearing-in

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: BCCL

Kolkata: A day after stating that she would come to Delhi to attend Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s swearing-in at Rashtrapati Bhavan, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Wednesday did a U-turn and said she would not be attending the ceremony.

In a message, the Trinamool Congress chief slammed the BJP for spreading lies about political murders in West Bengal. She further accused the BJP of using the august ceremony to score political points.

“Congratulations, new Prime Minister, Narendra Modi ji. It was my plan to accept the 'Constitutional invitation' and attend the oath-taking ceremony. However, in the last one hour, I am seeing media reports that the BJP are claiming 54 people have been murdered in political violence in Bengal. This is untrue. There have been no political murders in Bengal. These deaths may have occurred due to personal enmity, family quarrels and other disputes; nothing related to politics. There is no such record with us.

“So, I am sorry, Narendra Modi ji, this has compelled me not to attend the ceremony. This ceremony is an august occasion to celebrate democracy, not one that should be devalued by any political party which uses it as an opportunity to score political points. Please excuse me,” Mamata said.

On Tuesday, Mamata had said in Kolkata that she would be attending PM’s swearing-in ceremony as "constitutional courtesy".

"I have spoken to a couple of other chief ministers and have decided to attend it. There are certain ceremonial programmes under the Constitution. We try to attend such events when we get an invitation for the swearing-in programmes of the president and the prime minister," she had said yesterday at the state secretariat.

It may be recalled that PM Modi and Mamata had indulged in a heated verbal duel during the campaigning for the just-concluded Lok Sabha elections. While Modi had called Mamata "speedbreaker Didi", the CM had responded by referring to the BJP leader as “expired PM”.

In the Lok Sabha election results in West Bengal, the BJP won a surprising 18 seats out of the total 42. The TMC, on the other hand, won 22.
