Pakistan activates 16 terrorist training camps in PoK: Top Army sources

Sources said that Pakistan has activated 16 terrorist training camps in PoK and more such camps are being prepared. (Photo: PTI/Representational image)

In a bid to push terrorists into India, Pakistan has activated 16 terrorist training camps in Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir and more such camps are being prepared, top Army sources have said.

"As per the latest intelligence inputs received by us, Pakistan has activated 16 terrorist training camps in Pakistan occupied Kashmir and they are planned to be pushed into India during this infiltration season in summer months," top army sources told India today TV.

As per sources, the terrorist from these camps have already started moving towards their launch pads close to the LOC. Indian Army positions in the forward areas are on high alert and are keeping a strict vigil against any attempt by the Pakistanis to push terrorists into India.

Sources said the summer months are likely to see a lot of action as Pakistan would try to revive terrorist activities which suffered serious dent due to incessant operations by the Indian Army.

"After the killing of Zakir Musa, there were speculations that it would lead to wide unrest like it happened after the killing of Burhan Wani in 2016. However, we have seen that the entire Propaganda fizzled out in less than two days in this case. This also shows the extent of demoralisation among the terrorist Cadres," the sources said.

Sources said that the entire Jaish leadership has been either eliminated or neutralised and no new cadres are joining them due to the targeted operations by army and other security agencies in the state.

After the Pulwama attack, security agencies have gone on a targeted campaign against Jess terrorists and more than 30 of their leaders and other cadre have been killed in these actions. Approximately 90 terrorists have so far been killed by the army and other security forces in the year 2019.
