Jyotiraditya Scindia has lost, but all the king's men want him to be PCC president!

Amidst the crisis engulfing the leadership issue at the All India Congress Committee (AICC), a section of Congressmen in Madhya Pradesh has begun demanding that incumbent Pradesh Congress Committee (PCC) president in Madhya Pradesh, CM Kamal Nath be replaced by Jyotiraditya Scindia in case the party wants to revive its fortunes in the state.

The clamour to replace Nath with Scindia got an added push with Congress president Rahul Gandhi asking AICC General Secretary Jyotiraditya Scindia to stay back in Delhi for a few days after which Scindia cancelled a political program he had planned in his former constituency, Guna.

Ministers in the MP cabinet, Pradyumna Tomar and Govind Singh Rajput, both Scindia loyalist have been on record, demanding that Jyotiraditya Scindia be appointed PCC president. The demand is seen as being legitimate by the Scindia camp and is being made rather openly.

CM Kamal Nath had himself said he wants to relinquish the charge of PCC president after being appointed CM. However, Congress president Rahul Gandhi had asked him to continue till Lok Sabha elections. Since elections are now over, a new PCC president should be appointed to rebuild the party. There isn’t any candidate better than Jyotiraditya Scindia for the job, said Congress spokesperson Pankaj Chaturvedi.

While there may be merit in what Chaturvedi has demanded, the only hitch is that the state Congress unit is deeply factional. While Scindia camp may have a demand in place, the Kamal Nath and Digvijaya Singh camps are not very amenable to the idea of Scindia as Congress president. A number of PCC presidents have resigned in the aftermath of the Congress debacle but CM Kamal Nath has not done so as yet.

Sources close to Scindia said that his defeat from Guna notwithstanding, Scindia is likely to be given an important assignment in the party, either at the national or state level.

A section of Congressmen also believed that Scindia would have been appointed CM sometime later in the tenure of the government in MP but chances have been stymied with his defeat in the Lok Sabha elections. Congress president Rahul Gandhi had indicated on numerous occasions that while he is honouring experience now, the future belongs to the leaders who represent youth. Political observers read this as meaning Kamal Nath for now and Scindia as CM in the future.

CM Kamal Nath has also been battling threats of his government being toppled by a resurgent BJP in the state. What goes in Nath’s favour is that party leaders see him as someone who is the best bet to prevent the BJP’s plan.
