'No political murders in Bengal': Mamata decides to skip Modi swearing-in as BJP invites kin of slain workers

2/3

In what can be seen as a stern message to Mamata Banerjee, family members of BJP workers killed due to political violence in West Bengal have been invited for Prime Minister Narendra Modi's swearing-in ceremony scheduled to take place on Thursday.

"PMO has invited two members each from families of Bipin Das Datonka, Manu Hansda and Bahadur Mumrmu Maglika, who were allegedly killed in clashes with Trinamool supporters during panchayat polls in 2018, for the oath-taking ceremony in New Delhi," BJP's state Minority Morcha general secretary Kamal Hossain Khan told ANI.The arrangements for their travel and stay have been made by the BJP.

"All six people will travel by the Rajdhani Express. Their tickets have been booked. First, they will go to the state party office. Then some leaders will accompany them to the national capital," Khan added.

The ones who will be attending the ceremony are elated on being invited.Ganesh Hansada, son of late Manu Hansada, said, "My father was killed by TMC goons. Now it feels good that the prime minister has invited us."

"We are happy as we are going to meet the PM. Now our area is peaceful," Manu's wife Malati Hansda opined.Subal Das, whose father Bipin Das died due to violence, said, "We will request Modi ji to ensure peace in our district." In total, 50 families from across the state have been invited to attend the oath taking ceremony.

The special invitees will be part of the mega show that will be attended by top dignitaries including many nation heads at Rashtrapati Bhavan.Mamata Banerjee will also be in attendance at the swearing-in.

The development comes days after the Bharatiya Party Party made deep inroads into the TMC-ruled state winning 18 out of the 42 parliamentary seats in recently concluded Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal. Mamata Banerjee's party bagged 22.

With just two years left for West Bengal Assembly polls, the saffron party has turned out to be the biggest headache for TMC.In a major setback to Banerjee, two MLAs of her party, including Mukul Roy's son Subhrangshu, and over 50 municipal councillors crossed over to the BJP on Monday.The BJP has claimed that more state leaders are waiting to jump the ship and will be inducted in the party starting June 1.
