Rumoured couple Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan heads to gym together. Check out latest pictures

Follow us on Rumoured couple Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan heads to gym together. Check out latest pictures

Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan are really a thing now it seems. After sparking dating rumours with their frequent appearances in public, it seems like the duo are also going to the same gym and that too together. Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan seem to be bonding with each other on the film sets of Love Aaj Kal 2. They have already wrapped up the Delhi schedule are busy shooting for the film in Mumbai. On Wednesday, the rumoured couple was seen visiting a gym together in Juhu. They were papped leaving the gym together in the same car. This has further sparked the flames that the Love Aaj Kal couple has found love in each other in real life as well. Neither Kartik Aaryan nor Sara Ali Khan tried to dodge the paparazzi.

Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan spotted together at a gym

Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan spotted together at a gym

Sara Ali Khan, Kartik Aaryan spotted together at a gym

Days ago, Kartik Aaryan and Sara Ali Khan were seen spending some time together in a car. They were spotted holding hands by the paparazzi. On seeing the cameras, Kartik burst out laughing while the Simmba girl ducked and hid her face with her palms.

Sara Kartik holding hands

Sara Ali Khan has time and again expressed her crush on Kartik Aaryan on different public appearances. While making her debut on Koffee With Karan 6 with dad Saif Ali Khan, Sara revealed that she wants to date Kartik Aaryan. Even on her promotional interviews to different media houses, the young actress blushed whenever someone uttered his name. During one such public event, the paparazzi quizzed Kartik Aaryan about Sara, to which he replied cheekily. He said that he would love to take her out someday for a coffee or something.

Even, Sara Ali Khan's stepmother Kareena Kapoor Khan revealed that she would love to see Kartik Aaryan and Sara together in a film. She believes that Kartik is massy while Sara is classy. When Love Aaj Kal 2 was officially announced on Valentine's Day this year, hell broke loose. The dedicated Sartik fans couldn't wait any longer to see Sara and Kartik together.

For a short while, Kartik's name was also associated with his Pati Patni Aur Woh co-star Ananya Panday. However, the SOTY 2 actress revealed to the media that she would never like to come between Sara and Kartik.
