Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi to attend Modi’s swearing-in ceremony tomorrow

In the recently concluded polls, the BJP-led NDA bagged 353 of 542 parliamentary seats with over 45 per cent vote share.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi will attend Narendra Modi’s swearing-in ceremony on Wednesday, news agency ANI reported. A number of other Opposition leaders like Arvind Kejriwal and Rajinikanth have also confirmed their participation for the event.

Earlier in the day, West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee announced that she will not be attending the event, citing that BJP had sent an invite to those affected by Bengal “political violence”.

The oath-taking ceremony is an august occasion to celebrate democracy, not one that should be devalued by any political party pic.twitter.com/Mznq0xN11Q — Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) May 29, 2019

The BJP has invited family members over 40 party workers, who were killed in political violence Bengal in the last few months, for Modi’s oath taking as the PM for a second term.

The kin of 42 BJP workers killed in violence have been invited to the ceremony, West Bengal BJP president Dilip Ghosh told PTI.

As many as 8,000 guests, including VVIPs, will attend the swearing-in ceremony of Prime Minister Modi and his council of ministers on Thursday. This is the highest number of guests attending such a function.

The ceremony will be of about 90 minutes and after that dinner will be served to around 40 dignitaries, including Vice President M Venkaiah Naidu and the prime minister, besides leaders of all BIMSTEC countries, Rashtrapati Bhavan spokesperson Ashok Malik said Wednesday.

In the recently concluded polls, the BJP-led NDA bagged 353 of 542 parliamentary seats with over 45 per cent vote share. The BJP alone got 303 seats with over 37 per cent vote share, 6 per cent more than what it had got in 2014. In the last election, the saffron party had won 282 seats with 31.3 per cent vote share. This is the second time the BJP under Prime Minister Narendra Modi has got an absolute majority.
