Challenges of democracy: Modi-led NDA and secularists must work together

The unity of India was no longer merely an intellectual conception for me; it was an emotional experience which overpowered me. – Jawaharlal Nehru in The Discovery of India

It’s time the National Democratic Alliance (NDA), led by PM Narendra Modi, the opposition and the “apologists” of secularism walked extra miles, if not hand in hand, to take the democracy forward. Just as it will be difficult for Modi to obliterate Nehru (the symbol of secularism) from the mind space of Indians, it will also be impossible to stop the BJP from conquering India, politically, too. Modi looks good for 2024 despite many challenges. While, every vestige of Nehru, one of our founding fathers, is being erased gradually – Planning Commission has been disbanded; the Nehru Memorial Museum and Library is being converted into a memorial for all ex-PMs; a sustained campaign is on to root out his legacy – there are millions who are still reading his classics and swear by the “temples of modern India (the dams and IITs)” he helped build. With polls having ended, the Gandhis-Nehrus, the usual suspects of the poll season, must have heaved a sigh of relief. However, there are enough voters (55%) who have not voted for the NDA, whose voices cannot be silenced. There is a need for both the treasury benches and the opposition to see the bigger picture and cede space to each other to take the India growth story forward.

Elect and engage

When Narendra Damodardas Modi was given a mandate which links his roaring success at the hustings to Indira Gandhi’s victory in 1971, I was reminded of New York Times columnist and author Thomas Friedman. In March 2004, months ahead of the Bharatiya Janata Party’s (BJP) shocking loss in the Lok Sabha polls, the author of The World Is Flat rued in an NYT article titled ‘The Software of Democracy’ that Indian electorate had a motto: “elect and forget”. Now was the time to “elect and engage”, he suggested. By giving the National Democratic Alliance 353 seats in 2019, Indian voters have emphatically said they have engaged in the process. Fittingly, Modi, in his first address to the BJP workers, telecast live on national TV, said this victory was historic since 2019 Lok Sabha polls registered the biggest turnout since independence. He was right: the overall turnout was 67%. It is another matter that this is the ninth time that a government has got 300 plus seats, the biggest being in 1984 when Rajiv Gandhi’s Congress received 414 seats. Now that Modi returns to power, we will discuss here the good, bad and ugly of the elections and the challenges ahead for the NDA government, the opposition and the media in making India a healthy democracy.

Good: Ujjwal(a)-bhavishya

Narendra Modi’s victory has a lot to do with the schemes that connected him with the voter in the remotest parts of the country, where voters had little interest in how he was being trolled on Twitter for his “cloud cover” which he gave to the IAF, despite his “raw vision” and his claims about using Internet and digital cameras in the late 1980s when there was none. These voters, who had not read the Time magazine cover that called him the “divider in chief” or the Economist article were more concerned about gas chulha via Ujjwala scheme, toilets and Mudra scheme than the “negative stories” about him. By the time you read this, a positive story on Modi is running on Time, calling him a unifier. That is what victory does to you. While Rahul’s NYAY failed to reach the electorate, distressed farmers had seen a glimmer of hope in Samman Nidhi just when the electoral loss in three states had given the BJP nightmares. The cell phone carrying upwardly mobile generation had moved away from the Congress raj of hand-out and freebies. The numbers (as per media reports) are staggering: 75 million toilets, 300 million new bank accounts and 100 million Mudra loans. Fifty million smoke-filled kitchens got gas cylinders, reports added. The gist was, Modi has been a performer and will continue to do so, as his supporters believe. Modi’s win has as much to do with his muscular nationalism, “Hindu hriday samrat” image as with NDA’s “zero corruption” tag under his watch despite Rafale where Rahul Gandhi failed to produce evidence. Modi’s vaulting ambition to be seen as another Indira Gandhi and larger than Jawaharlal Nehru, whom he seems to admire secretly, was accompanied by a punishing schedule in the mould of these two leaders and a relentless campaign the opposition should now emulate.

Bad and ugly

However, the 2019 elections will also be remembered for leaders across the political spectrum stooping to the lowest level. If Rahul Gandhi’s “Chowkidar Chor” angered the masses, Modi reverting by “your father (Rajiv Gandhi) died as the corrupt number one” was muck-raking at its dirtiest. Modi knew things were not looking rosy months ahead of polls, hence the war talks. That was the art of the possible or the art of the deception that he employed, because growth had stagnated, and the unemployment rate was at a 45-year-high, post GST and DeMo, while hate crimes were becoming a norm in the last five years. The party that had been shouting from the rooftop about “no compromise on terror” fielded terror accused Sadhvi Pragya Singh Thakur, who said national hero Hemant Karkare died because of her “curse” and justified the act of Mahatma Gandhi’s assassin Nathuram Godse. BJP chief Amit Shah created more fear by invoking termites for immigrants, chiefly Muslims. These are fit cases for division in a society that has taken pride in unity in diversity earlier. Modi in his first speech in Parliament gave assurance to the minorities, but he will have to walk the talk in his second term, apart from launching major reforms and creating jobs – if he wants to be remembered alongside Indira if not Nehru. Talking of the software of the democracy, there is an increase of 26% in the number of MPs with criminal records in the 17th Lok Sabha as compared to 2014 elections. While the BJP leads with 116 (39%) out of a total of 233 MPs with criminal records, the others have not lagged behind. Hence the need to stop the criminalisation of politics (overall 43% MPs have criminal charges) and electing more and more women MPs, whose numbers have gone up from a mere 5% in the first Lok Sabha to 14% in the current House.

How Naveen, Stalin and Jagan defy die-nasty

There are at least 76 major political families in India, including Nehru-Gandhis, Scindhias, Abdullahs, Yadavs (Bihar-UP), Thackerays, Chautalas, Badals, K Karunanidhi, Singhs (Charan Singh), Paswans, NTR, Gowdas and Bishnois. Dynasty is so deep-rooted in India that it will take some more elections to make the non-performers redundant. But 2019 elections have proved, the dynasties that don’t perform will have a tough time, while winners Naveen Patnaik and YS Jaganmohan Reddy are shining examples, setting a template for others. Dynasty may have died for the Congress with top leaders having lost election, it’s alive and kicking in the BJP ranks. Consider some names: Hamirpur MP Anurag Thakur, Mumbai North Central MP Poonam Mahajan, Pilibhit MP Varun Gandhi, Jhalawar-Baran MP Dushyant Singh and Beed MP Pritam Munde.

The way forward for opposition

Leaders such as Rahul Gandhi and Akhilesh Yadav need to re-invent themselves to compete with Modi and Amit Shah’s team. Amid Congress’ existential crisis – winning 52 seats and drawing a blank in 20 states and UTs – it is time for organisational polls and grassroots connect. Gandhi needs to look at Patnaik’s record through Fani, Titli and Kalia among his other welfare and development works. Jagan’s continued padyatra should remind Rahul of Nehru and Gandhi who travelled the far corners of India to know the real Bharat before becoming who they were. It was time someone other than a Gandhi took charge of the party while Rahul built up the organisation. As the answer to a series of scams and the arrogance of the Congress leaders are speaking in millions of voices through EVMs, reviving Seva Dal, taking austerity measures and giving the common worker a voice might help the party. There is nothing more galling than the familiar sight of loyalists urging him to stay on. He must go now.

As for other players in the opposition ranks, the days of caste politics may not be over, but SP and RJD leaders need to look beyond their states for survival. For the voters, performance is the key. The Left that once loomed over Indo-US nuclear deal and gave nightmare to Manmohan Singh is decimated. The way forward for the Left is to look beyond Kanhaiya and JNU and do some soul-searching. The AAP of Arvind Kejriwal, the only leader to constantly talk of bijli paani, should not lose hope despite decimation. With assembly elections knocking, he will have to hit the ground running even as he harbours national ambitions. For democracy to be strong, opposition must be strong to keep the Centre on its toes.

Media’s objectively under scanner

With media’s role under scanner, it would not be a bad idea to remember the deeds of the past masters. In 1977, Kuldeep Nayar was threatened by Congress minister Vidyacharan Shukla with second “imprisonment” after he came out with a scoop in The Indian Express that Emergency was about to be lifted and Mrs Indira Gandhi was due to announce Lok Sabha polls. Nayar writes in his book Scoop that he told Shukla that “imprisonment is like virginity”. You develop an attitude where it doesn’t matter “how many times you are ravished”. A journalist’s chief job is to question – whoever is in power. Fearlessly, that is. One who seeks to be popular ceases to be one. Shekhar Gupta says in a YouTube video: You are not neutral once your finger is inked. But you need to be objective.

PM must take care of the rest too

Among other things, Modi and his government must not let agents of hate – cow vigilantes – continue to attack Muslims and dalits. Even Mahatma Gandhi, a vegetarian, would not approve of such violence in the name of cows. Writes Shashi Tharoor in his book, Why I Am A Hindu, “Mahatma Gandhi himself said that though he did not eat meat and was personally opposed to cow slaughter, in a multi-religious country like India he could not justify imposing his Hindu views on the many who did not share his faith.”

While the atmosphere has been vitiated across the political spectrum with former Congress PMs being made fall guys and the Election Commission looking appallingly biased, Modi will have to think about his legacy in his second term. The NDA cannot afford to isolate the 55 per cent voters who didn’t vote for it. Every big leader either tires himself out or faces some low moments. Nehru faced in 1962, Indira in 1977, Rajiv in 1989, Vajpayee in 2004 and Manmohan in 2014. Modi cannot escape his sunset. It is this sunset he should be careful about. With another five years in the office confirmed, Modi needs to give credit to his predecessors where it is due. Also, a nation of around 20 crore Muslims cannot wish them away. Muslims, who have zero representation in the most populous state (UP) from the BJP ranks do need assurance from the majority and above all the PM. Modi needs to reach out to opposition leaders and take them along towards the progress of the nation. In a country where WhatsApp University and social media have divided the society, the followers of Gandhi, Nehru and Tagore need an assurance from the government that secularists are not “apologists of the Muslim invaders”, as the critics of Modi would have us believe. In his second term, Modi must work towards a lasting legacy. To this end, one of the key challenges for him will be to reign in rabble-rousers such as Giriraj Singh and Sakshi Maharaj (who said GE 2019 could be the last election). Any PM who disrespects opposition does a great disservice to the democratic process.

For the democracy to become robust, we need to turn to Nehru: Politics and elections were day-to-day affairs when we grew excited over trumpery matters. But if we were going to build the house of India’s future, strong and secure and beautiful, we would have to dig deep for the foundations.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
