1 killed, 70 civilians injured during clashes near gunfight sites in Indian-controlled Kashmir - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-05-30 00:32:25|Editor: Mu Xuequan

Video Player Close

SRINAGAR, Indian-controlled Kashmir, May 29 (Xinhua) -- A civilian was killed and 70 others injured on Wednesday during intense clashes with government forces near two separate gunfight sites in restive Indian-controlled Kashmir, officials said.

The clashes first broke out in Tazipora-Mohamoodpora in Kulgam district, about 78 km south of Srinagar city, the summer capital of Indian-controlled Kashmir.

During the pre-dawn hours contingents of police and army cordoned off the area on specific intelligence information suggesting presence of militants, following which a gunfight broke out. However, while the stand-off was going on, hundreds of villagers thronged the gunfight site and clashed with government forces in a bid to help militants break cordon and escape.

Eyewitnesses said the irate protesters threw stones and brickbats towards police and army, who responded by firing tear smoke shells, pellets and warning shots to disperse them.

Health officials said 50 protesters were injured during the clashes in the area.

"We received 50 persons in the injured condition, out of which six were referred to district hospital Kulgam," a health official posted at Mahmoodpora health facility said.

Reports said the government forces were forced to call off the operation in the village and militants managed to escape.

While the clashes were underway in Kulgam, fresh clashes broke out during a cordon and search operation at Pinjura village of adjacent Shopian district.

According to locals, no sooner the gunshots were heard in the village, residents hit roads and clashed with government forces to disrupt their anti-militancy operation.

One civilian was killed and as per local media reports over 20 people were injured during the clashes.

"A civilian who was injured during the clashes here has succumbed," a police official posted in Shopian said. "The slain was identified as Sajad Ahmad Parray of village Badrahama."

According to the official, the gunfight between militants and government forces was underway in the area until last reports poured in.

Anti-India sentiment runs deep in the psyche of majority of Kashmiris. Irate residents took to roads and clash with police. The youth throw stones and brickbats on contingents of police and paramilitary, who respond by firing tear smoke shells, pellets and bullets, which often proves fatal.

Meanwhile, authorities have suspended internet service in all districts south of Srinagar.

A guerilla war is going on between militants and Indian troops stationed in Indian-controlled Kashmir since 1989. The gunfight between the two sides takes place intermittently across the region.

Kashmir, divided between India and Pakistan, is claimed by both in full. Since their independence from Britain, the two countries have fought three wars, two exclusively over Kashmir.
