Injured lion attacks forest tracker inside animal care centre

RAJKOT: A 52-year-old forest tracker was attacked by an injured adult male lion at the Vadal Animal Care Centre near Palitana in Bhavnagar district on Wednesday morning. The tracker suffered injuries on his leg and other parts of the body and is admitted to Sir T Hospital in Bhavnagar.The incident took place when forest tracker Tila Nanji Dodia had gone to feed the lion who was brought to the centre with injury in his legs.According to forest officials, the male lion about nine-years-old was brought to this animal care centre for treatment after he was found injured by forest officials.Sources said that Dodia after placing the food inside the lion’s cage forgot to close the gate after coming out. The lion followed Dodia out of the cage without him knowing and attacked him from behind.Assistant conservator of forest (ACF) Bhavnagar V R Rathod said, “The lion’s instinct was to get away out of the cage. When it saw cage door open it came out and the first person in saw was tracker Dodia whom it attacked believing it to be a potential threat.”The tracker fell down and tried to save himself with a stick that was in his hand. The lion then left Dodia and started to look for a way out into the open forest.But since centre is has a hight compound wall the lion could not find an opening. Meanwhile, the tracker ran to his cottage nearby and informed others. The 2-3 persons inside the campus who came to help Dodia also informed the 108 emergency ambulance service. The ambulance entered the premises from back gate and took Dodia to the hospital.However, the lion kept moving inside the campus. The veterinary doctor called to tranquillize the lion took nearly two hours reach as he was engaged in similar work far away.The doctor and other foresters came in two vehicles inside the compound and fired the tranquillizer shot on the lion. The wild cat was caged after it got unconscious.In November last year, two lions had killed a forest labourer and injured one other in Devaliya Safari park of Gir forest.
