No lessons learnt from 2002 train carnage

Godhra fire department is plagued with staff shortage and lack of infrastructure

Vadodara: After the death of 59 people in the Sabarmati Express carnage on February 27, 2002, in Godhra, one would have expected the fire brigade there to be prepared for any eventuality, but that hardly seems to be the case.

The fire department of the ground zero of Gujarat riots of 2002 is battling with staff shortage and lack of infrastructure.

The carnage had shocked the state and even the country, but there was no transformation for the fire brigade. The department has only three permanent firemen and the fire superintendent on its rolls. This is against a sanctioned strength that includes the superintendent, 12 firemen and four drivers. The rest of the staff comprises personnel on contract or daily wagers.

The temporary staff includes seven driver-cum-firemen on contract as well as two drivers and one fireman on daily wages, an official said. For the three fire engines that the department has, it would need a staff of at least 18 firemen and six drivers if they were to be rotated in three shifts.

According to officials, the strength was decided several decades ago and hasn’t seen any change thereafter. The population of the town has grown from around a few thousand people then to around 1.5 lakh today.

The fire brigade operates out of an ageing building that is prone to seepage of water during monsoon and does not even have ceiling fans. The fire engines have to struggle while getting out fire station due to traffic as the facility is located near the municipality office that witnesses heavy traffic and parking.

Godhra fire superintendent P F Solanki said that a major hiccup in recruiting full-time staff was the high establishment expenses of the municipality. “According to the rules, the establishment expenses that include salaries should be within 48 per cent and the municipality is already spending much more. As a consequence, we cannot recruit new people,” he said.

Solanki was hopeful that things will change in wake of the Surat incident. “The government is inclined to spruce up fire services,” Solanki said.


