Short-staffed RMH to receive more patients

About 125 people from Thane Mental Hospital are being moved in as that facility goes into the renovation mode



The Regional Mentral Hospital (RMH) at Yerwada has already been grappling with inadequate staffing, which has been telling on the quality of the services and care it provides to its 1,217 inmates. Now the already stretched resources will have to cover another 125 patients, who are being imported temporarily from Thane Mental Hospital, where a new ward is in the making. Reacting to the added burden, the hospital administration has red flagged the urgent need to scale up its personnel, a matter that has been pending for long.



RMH has 954 sanctioned posts across staff profiles — ranging from Class I to Class IV. Of these, 679 posts have been filled out, while the remaining 275 post lie vacant. The vacancies include 11 posts for Class I psychiatrists, two for physiologist, 161 for attendants and 19 for hawaldars.



But even before this strength could be beefed up, 59 patients have already landed at Yerwada, while another 66 will be shifted in soon.



However RMH, which has the space to easily accommodate them, is challenged by its staff shortage. “Our vacancies include certain posts and we’ve asked the authorities to fill them on a priority basis, so we can offer quality treatment to the patients. So far, we’ve been pulling along offering the best we can within our limited resources. But we are really stretched, handling about 200 outdoor patients a day and clocking about five admissions daily,” pointed out Abhijeet Phadnis, medical superintendent of RMH.



Reiterating the dire situation at the hospital he informed, “We’ve sought the immediate government nod for 20 psychiatrists to ramp up our ability to treat the huge number of patients at hand. Besides this, we need hawaldars, other doctors, attendants, social workers and nursing staff.



For his part, the deputy director of health services, Dr Nitin Bilolikar assured that his department has already requesting the government to fill out the vacancies at RMH on a war footing. “In Pune we have a seven psychiatrists in service, which is more than what the other mental hospitals have. The posts of the Class III and IV workers are expected to get filled up in a couple of months, by the Mahabharti or recruitment drive. This should resolve the issue of short staffing at the hospital,” he observed.


