Delhi: Man shoots transgender whom he gave lift after mistaking her for a woman, arrested for attempted murder

he victim is still unconscious and this is why a case of 307 (attempt to murder) of the Indian Penal Code was registered. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

New Delhi: A drug addict gangster was held for shooting a transgender in the national capital. The accused is a resident of Trilokpuri area of Delhi and was a member of the notorious Sunder Bhati gang.

According to a news agency ANI, accused was identified as Sagar alias Lampak. The incident happened on Saturday when the PCR call was made saying that a lady has been shot at near the Barapula Flyover.

Following this, information was received on Monday that the members of the interstate Sunder Bhati Gang armed with firearms were involved in the above firing incident. A case was registered at Hazrat Nizamuddin Police Station under section 307 of the Indian Penal Code.

Meanwhile, a trap was laid on Lala Lajpat Rai Marg near K-Block at about 9:30 PM, one car was seen coming from Barapula Flyover side towards Lajpat Nagar. ANI reported a driver of the car was signalled to stop, but instead of stopping the vehicle the driver hit the barricade and tried to flee. However, he was nabbed later by the police.

Also Read: Greenland's ice sheets are melting much faster than thought, reveals Study

During interrogation, Sagar along with his associate Chandra Kant gave a lift to a transgender dressed up as a woman. They picked up the transgender mistaking that person for a girl from the area of Trilok Puri and drove towards the Barapula Flyover. When they reached near Barapula, they got into an altercation and the accused Sagar whipped out a pistol and shot at her in the abdomen.

Meanwhile, they threw the transgender out of the car near Barapula and fled. Reportedly, accused Sagar had procured two pistols of .32 calibre from Muradnagar in Uttar Pradesh and used to keep them for committing robberies as well as for safety from his enemies.

Speaking to ANI, Deputy Commissioner of Police South East Chinmoy Biswal, the victim is still unconscious and this is why a case of 307 (attempt to murder) of the Indian Penal Code was registered.
