Bengaluru man goes with goons to thrash his fiancee’s ex, but his friends took the beating

When an over-possessive Dinesh and his friends turned up near his fiancee’s ex boyfriend’s house, the latter’s friends questioned them why they were there all armed; they also called up the ex boyfriend and told him not to come there; the accused beat up the friends then; residents of the area called the police

Royal Public School

Indian Penal Code

A month before his marriage, the 28-year-old has been arrested for threatening his fiancee’s ex-boyfriend and attacking his friends.The accused, Dinesh, a private firm employee, who wanted to ensure that nothing was going on still between his fiancee and her former lover, decided to take along a few of his friends and go look for the latter near his house in Whitefield.Dinesh called up the ex-boyfriend Stephen Emmanual, 20, and asked him to come there as there was something he wanted to talk to him about. Emmanual’s friends, who were around at the time, realised that the situation could turn tricky and so they called Emmanual and told him not to come. The friends, Naushad, 22, Kiran, 22, and Ameer Khan, asked why they had come there armed with lethal weapons. The argument turned heated and the accused persons attacked Naushad and Kiran with the weapons and threatened Ameer.Dinesh, a resident of Vannarpet near Halasuru, and three associates have been arrested by the Whitefield police. Four others managed to escape.“Emmanual, a first year BCom student of a city-based private college, is said to have been in love with the girl whom Dinesh is getting married to. The girl is also a resident of Vannarpet where Dinesh stays,” said an officer based on the statements of Emmanual.Dinesh had got Emmanual’s mobile number and used to call him and threaten him. “On Saturday around 11.30 am, Dinesh reportedly called Emmanual asking him where he was. Emmanual who was in Vaarthur asked for some time to reach there. Emmanual’s friends called him asking him not to come near his house as there was a possibility that he could be attacked. Hearing this, Dinesh and his gang attacked them,” the officer added. The assault took place in a public place, so residents of the area reported the matter to the police, who came to the spot and took the custody of Dinesh and three others, while four others escaped. The attack happened near theon the 8th Cross of Gandhipura.The Whitefield police have registered a case of attempt to murder under section 307 of theagainst the accused.
