Netflix says self-regulation in India does not equal censorship

Photo taken on Feb. 7, 2018 shows an electric car exhibited by Indian automaker Mahindra & Mahindra Ltd. in Greater Noida, India. (Kyodo) ==Kyodo (Photo by Kyodo News via Getty Images)

Why Big Tech is racing to bring the internet to India

Farmers are using the sun to help water their crops

Water pours down an irrigation channel from a groundwater pump and well next to a field of rice growing on farmland in the Bhagpat district of Uttar Pradesh, India, on Monday, Sept. 3, 2018. Cumulative rainfall during August and September is forecast to be 95 percent of a 50-year average, according to the India Meteorological Department. The monsoon is critical to the farm sector as it accounts for more than 70 percent of India's annual showers and irrigates more than half the country's farmland. Photographer: Prashanth Vishwanathan/Bloomberg via Getty Images

In this photograph taken on April 6, 2015, smoke billows from two smoke stacks at the coal-based Badarpur Thermal Station in New Delhi. A study by the Centre of Science and Environment in India found the plant which produces 705 MW (Megawatts) is one of the country's most polluting and inefficient power plants. Authorities insist they must focus on meeting the growing needs of its 1.25 billion people, 300 million of whom lack access to electricity. In its action plan for the Paris COP21 meet, India pledges to reduce its carbon intensity -- a measure of a country's emissions relative to its economic output -- by 35 percent by 2030, rather than an absolute cut in emissions. Globally, India is the third largest carbon-emitting country -- though its per capita emissions are only one third of the international average -- according to the World Resources Institute. AFP PHOTO / MONEY SHARMA

Indian Oil's Singh: More oil suppliers is better for trade

He wants to bring a billion people to digital payments

How Big Tech plans to clean up the world's most polluted city

Traffic stretches back in Hero Honda chowk as waterlogging during monsoon downpours causes traffic jams in Gurgaon on July 29, 2016. Thousands of Indians were left stranded overnight July 29, as major traffic gridlock paralysed roads leading to a key business city near New Delhi and authorities struggled to get the situation under control. / AFP / STRINGER (Photo credit should read STRINGER/AFP via Getty Images)

Online dating isn't the norm in India. Bumble wants to change that

Asia's richest man wants to build the next tech giant

India's richest man and oil-to-telecom conglomerate Reliance Industries chairman Mukesh Ambani (R) attends the India Mobile Congress 2018 in New Delhi on October 25, 2018. - The second edition of the India Mobile Congress is taking place in New Delhi from 25-27 October. (Photo by CHANDAN KHANNA / AFP) (Photo credit should read CHANDAN KHANNA/AFP via Getty Images)

LIVE from #IITBombay Virtual Convocation: President of India's Medal for 2020 goes to Sahil Hiral Shah, http://B.Tech in Computer Science & Engineering Check out virtual avatar of the student receiving medal from Chief Guest and Nobel laureate Prof. @FDuncanMHaldane

Google CEO on India's Covid crisis: The worst is yet to come

NEW DELHI, INDIA - MAY 09: An elderly woman wears a oxygen mask and breathes as she arrived to receive free oxygen distributed at a Gurdwara as a service to Covid-19 and other patients in need of Oxygen amid the scarcity of Oxygen in the capital on May 09, 2021 in New Delhi, India. India broke a fresh record on Thursday with over 412,000 new cases of Covid-19 as the total number of those infected according to Health Ministry data neared 20 million. The real figure could be up to ten times higher, many health experts say, due to a lack of widespread testing or reporting, and only patients who succumbed in hospitals being counted. Hospitals have begun turning away people suffering from Covid-19, having run out of space for the crushing number of people seeking help. (Photo by Anindito Mukherjee/Getty Images)

Paytm CEO on IPO: Our business model is new for many investors

New Delhi CNN Business —

Netflix is battling questions of censorship for the second time in three weeks — this time in India.

The company is one of nine streaming platforms that has signed a “code of best practices” that pledges to self-regulate the content they publish online. That includes content that “disrespects the national emblem or national flag” of India, “intends to outrage religious sentiments” and “encourages terrorism or other forms of violence against the State,” according to a copy of the code posted online by Indian tech website MediaNama.

Others who have reportedly signed the code include Hotstar, the country’s top streaming platform that will soon be owned by Disney (DIS), and Jio Cinema, the platform owned by India’s richest man Mukesh Ambani.

CNN Business could not independently verify the code, and the industry body that published it, the Internet and Mobile Association of India (IAMAI), did not respond to a request for comment.

Netlix has ramped up its India content in a bid to capture millions of new users. INDRANIL MUKHERJEE/AFP/Getty Images

Netflix (NFLX) confirmed that it had signed the code, but the company downplayed suggestions that it amounts to censorship.

“The self-regulation code is a set of guiding principles for participating companies like us,” it said in a statement to CNN Business on Friday. “It ensures an environment that protects the artistic vision of content producers so that their work can be seen by their fans.”

Netflix also directed CNN Business to tweets by IAMAI that stressed the code “is not about content censorship,” but about protecting creative freedoms and encourage consumer choices.

“To equate the self-regulation code with censorship is grossly misleading,” the association said.

A spokesperson for Jio declined to comment. Six other platforms reported to have signed the code, including Hotstar, did not respond to requests for comment.

Sony’s (SNE) Indian streaming platform SonyLIV said it was “happy” to be part of the initiative.

“Self-regulation encourages creativity and makes content creators more responsive to their viewers,” Ashok Nambissan, general counsel for Sony Pictures in India, told CNN. “It’s worked well for broadcast media and there’s no reason for it not [to] do so for curated video content.”

A key market

India and its hundreds of millions of current (and potential) internet users present a key market for Netflix, which has more than a dozen Indian original shows and movies in the works.

The global streaming platform came under fire recently for blocking an episode of comedian Hasan Minhaj’s show “Patriot Act” in Saudi Arabia after officials from the Kingdom complained. The incident sparked a debate — and criticism — over the balance between freedom of speech and local laws and regulations.

The code the online streaming platforms have signed in India could set a bad precedent, its critics argue.

“It has an impact on free expression that automatically results in censorship,” said Raman Jit Singh Chima, who is Asia Policy Director at digital advocacy group Access Now and the chairman of India’s Internet Freedom Foundation.

Chima said streaming companies need to be more transparent about the kinds of content they deem harmful and why — particularly in the world’s largest democracy.

“India, despite all of its problems, tends to be the most robust space for free expression,” he added. “[The code] is a step back.”

In a letter to the IAMAI co-authored by Chima, the Internet Freedom Foundation argued earlier this week that the proposed self-regulation is a slippery slope.

“Categories of self-censorship will stretch in future,” the letter said. “We reasonably fear that this is the start of a self-censorship design that will slowly extend.”

Dealing with outrage over online content deemed offensive in India is a reality several global tech companies have had to face recently. Twitter (TWTR) CEO Jack Dorsey sparked controversy in the country during his maiden visit there in November, by posing with a poster deemed insulting to one of Hinduism’s top castes, or social groups.

And Amazon (AMZN), whose Prime Video service also operates in India, was forced to issue a hasty apology in 2017 after protests over some products, including a doormat bearing the Indian flag and flip-flops with an image of iconic freedom fighter Mahatma Gandhi. The products were quickly removed from Amazon’s platforms.

While the online streaming platforms are trying to avoid a similar backlash or statutory regulation, their code “defeats the premise” of a free internet, said Mishi Choudhary, legal director at the New York-based Software Freedom Law Center.

“It’s a pity that these companies have decided to assist in the creation of a nanny state where citizens cannot be trusted to consume content of their choosing,” Choudhary told CNN.

But Netflix insists that the new regulatory code empowers consumers as well as content creators.

“We firmly believe there must be the freedom to create and the freedom to choose,” the company said Friday.
