Katrina Kaif thinks Varun Dhawan would make for a bad chat show host. Here's why

It seems, Katrina Kaif has still not forgiven Varun Dhawan for forming a 'I Hate Katrina Kaif' club with Arjun Kapoor despite the two changing it to 'I Love Katrina Kaif' club recently. The actress, who will next be seen in Bharat opposite Salman Khan, recently appeared on a chat show. On the show, Katrina said that Varun Dhawan would be a bad chat show host.

When asked who does she think would make for a really bad chat show host: Arjun Kapoor or Varun Dhawan, the actress instantly said, "Varun Dhwan."

She added, "Because I don’t think he will let you talk."

Earlier, Varun Dhawan and Katrina Kaif appeared together on Karan Johar's chat show Koffee With Karan. Both of the actors are considered to be most talkative in the industry. For that episode, the show's host was invited by the guests.

It was in this episode, Varun revealed about why they formed the 'I Hate Katrina Kaif' club. Katrina shared how Varun and Arjun Kapoor were a part of the two-member club when they were working on Maine Pyar Kyun Kiya. Katrina used to thinkthat her two co-stars founded the club because she didn’t give them any attention. But sharing the real reason, Varun said that Salman Khan would take them on treks or swimming until Katrina arrived on set and grabbed all the attention.

On the work front, Varun Dhwan is currently busy shooting for Remo D'Souza's dance film Street Dancer 3D in Dubai. The actor practised for his dance tracks with other actors of the film in Mumbai. Varun shared a number of videos from the practise session on his Instagram account. Shraddha Kapoor will also be seen matching her steps with the actor. Earlier, Katrina Kaif was supposed to do the film but the actress opted out of the film since she got Salman Khan's Bharat.

Katrina Kaif, on the other hand, is ready with her film Bharat to be released. The actress has been promoting the film extensively with the leading man of the film, Salman Khan.

ALSO READ | Katrina Kaif on being cordial with Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt: Doing it to make my life easier

ALSO READ | Arjun Kapoor on making relationship with Malaika Arora official: We are not doing anything wrong. We aren't hiding

ALSO READ | Varun Dhawan and his gang of boys are having a blast on Street Dancer set. This video is proof

ALSO READ | Katrina Kaif on break-up with Ranbir Kapoor: My mom said many girls go through this, you're not alone
