Myanmar president lands in Delhi for Modi’s swearing-in as PM: Why India values ties with Myanmar

President of Myanmar, U Win Myint, to attend PM Modi's swearing-in ceremony | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: The relationship between India and Myanmar may not have always been a smooth-sailing one, but over the last few years India has made efforts to improve ties with its neighbouring country with which it shares a 1,600 km-long border.

Myanmar is regarded as a key partner for India in its battle to end insurgency in India's Northeast. As Myanmar is the only Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) country with which India shares a border, the neighbouring country assumes more significance as India's gateway to South East Asia, and an important factor in the Modi government’s ‘Act East’ policy.

With China also making persistent efforts to woo Myanmar, it has become imperative for the Indian government to maintain strong ties with its neighbouring country’s leadership.

In line with Modi government's 'Neighbourhood First' policy, India has invited leaders of the BIMSTEC countries, including Myanmar, to attend the swearing-in ceremony of Narendra Modi as the prime minister in New Delhi on May 30. President of Myanmar, U Win Myint, is landed in New Delhi on Thursday morning to attend the oath-taking ceremony which will be held at 7 am at Rashtrapati Bhavan.

India-Myanmar: Bilateral relationship

India and Myanmar signed a Treaty of Friendship in 1951. The high-level delegtaion visits between the two countries increased after Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi's visit in 1987. However, during the first 10 years of this century, India made a few missteps in reading the mood of Myanmar's domestic politics, with New Delhi maintaining close ties with the generals ruling the country.

That approach did not go down well with Nobel peace prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi, who became a symbol of the country's struggle against the authoritative military regime. When her party came to power in 2016, Suu Kyi, who is Myanmar's de facto leader, chose to visit China's Beijing as her first major foreign visit, instead of New Delhi.

President of Myanmar, U Win Myint, arrives in Delhi. He will attend PM Narendra Modi's oath ceremony at Rashtrapati Bhawan later today. pic.twitter.com/GVNGMdGx21 — ANI (@ANI) May 30, 2019

Nevertheless, Myanmar's State Counsellor Daw Aung San Suu Kyi paid a state visit to India in October 2016 after participating in the BRICS-BIMSTEC Outreach Summit in Goa that year.

PM Narendra Modi attended the 12th ASEAN-India Summit and the 9th East Asia Summit in Myanmar in 2014, during which he called on Myanmar's President U Thein Sein and met Aung San Suu Kyi.

The first ever India-Myanmar bilateral military excercise took place in 2017. Prior to that, India also acted as a signatory witness to Myanmar's Nationwide Ceasefire Agreement ceremonies in October 2015 and February 2018.

Rohingya crisis

PM Modi’s first bilateral visit to Naypyidaw took place in 2017, at a time when Myanmar was subjected to intense scrutiny and criticism over its handling of violence against almost 1.1 million Rohingya Muslims.

India hinted at support to Myanmar over this issue, with a joint statement stating that both sides agreed that "terrorism violates human rights and there should, therefore, be no glorification of terrorists as martyrs." Modi also said that India shared Myanmar's concerns over "extremist violence" in its Rakhine state in connection with the Rohingya issue.

Trade and Commerce

According to the Ministry of External Affairs, India is the fifth largest trading partner of Myanmar, however, trade remains "below potential". As of June 2017, India is Myanmar's tenth largest investor, with 25 Indian companies investing US$ 740.64 million in the neighbouring country. India has also extended $2 billion in soft loans to Myanmar till 2017.

In another crucial project, India is also constructing the Kaladan project, which is a road-river-port cargo transport project which will link Kolkata to Sittwe in Myanmar and then from Myanmar's Kaladan river to India's Northeast.

For India’s 'Act East' policy to be a success and to limit China’s influence in the South Asian region, India has to continue with its efforts of boosting its ties with Myanmar.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
