Hina Khan starts shooting for new film 'Wish List' in Europe; To romance UK-based actor Jitendra Rai!

Reportedly, 'Wish List' revolves around a couple who get to know that they have a very little time together as one of them is suffering from an incurable disease. So, they will go on a trip together and enjoy the remaining time to the fullest. Jitendra Rai (Photo: Instagram) Hina Khan began shooting for 'Wish List' the day she left Cannes. Confirming the same, Hina told the daily that, "It’s a touching film with a strong message, being shot in some of the most beautiful locations in Europe. As someone who loves to travel, it’s a treat as I’m getting to explore the best of Europe." She further told Mumbai Mirror that, "She’s a workaholic who cheers everyone around her with her positivity. The film deals with regular issues and choices but in inspirational ways and offering a new perspective." Prerna to marry Mr. Bajaj in 'Kasautii Zindagii Kay' after Komolika's exit; Here's the REASON! Hina-Erica in a sill from 'Kasautii...' (Photo: Web) The news will surely make her fans happy. On the film front, Hina Khan is all set to make her Bollywood debut with Hussein Khan's women-centric film titled 'Lines'. Hina & her 'Lines' team launched the first look poster of the film at Cannes. Apart from 'Lines', 'Wish List' and Vikram Bhatt's untitled film, Hina reportedly also has an international film in her kitty. Hmm...this is an interesting line-up. Keep watching this space for more updates!

TV actress Hina Khan, who recently made a stunning debut at 'Cannes Film Festival 2019' , moved out of her hit show 'Kasautii Zindagii Kay' due to her film commitments. After winning hearts with her performance as 'Komolika' in Ekta Kapoor's top-rated Star Plus show, Hina Khan was expected to start work on Vikram Bhatt's untitled project. But, the actress is currently in Europe where she has already started shooting for another film titled 'Wish List'. Hina Khan will romance UK-Based actor Jitendra Rai in the film directed by Rahat Kazmi.Hina Khan (Photo: Instagram) After Karan Singh Grover, this popular actor approached to play 'Mr. Bajaj' in 'Kasautii Zindagii Kay'?
