BJP's master strategist Amit Shah to be inducted into Narendra Modi cabinet

BJP's master strategist Amit Shah to be inducted into Narendra Modi cabinet

Amit Shah is speculated to take over either the Home or the Finance ministry – two of the four top ministries in the cabinet.

news Politics

Two-time BJP party president and PM-elect Narendra Modi’s confidante, Amit Shah, will be a part of the government. This was confirmed by Jitu Vaghani, the president of BJP Gujarat in a tweet.

This is the first time that Amit Shah, a man who has been with Modi throughout his journey, will be joining his cabinet. During Modi’s first cabinet, Amit Shah had stayed out and had meticulously planned the BJP’s growth and victory for the next five years – not just in general elections but also in the assembly elections. Amit Shah is speculated to take over either the Home or the Finance ministry – two of the four top ministries in the cabinet.

Amit Shah, who won a massive victory from Gandhinagar in Gujarat, has been BJP’s strategist for a long time now. He was first elected from Gujarat in 1997. And after the 2002 Gujarat elections, he become the youngest minister in the Modi government and handled 12 portfolios. He was also a Rajya Sabha MP from Gujarat from 2017. His Rajya Sabha term came to an end on May 29 following his victory in the recently concluded Lok Sabha polls.

In 2013, after Narendra Modi was declared as the prime ministerial face of the BJP for the 2014 elections, Amit Shah turned his complete attention to national politics. In 2014, he became the national party president of the BJP for the first time and also the chairperson of the BJP-led NDA alliance.

Since there is a rule in the BJP that a person cannot hold more than one post, Amit Shah will have to quit his position as the President of the party if he is being made a union minister. Media is abuzz with reports that former union minister JP Nadda might succeed Amit Shah as the BJP President.

Amit Shah's election management has become part of India's political folklore -- an image that has been resurrected after the BJP's loss in three north Indian states of Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Chattisgarh less than six months ago. The BJP swept the Lok Sabha polls in all these three states staging an emphatic comeback restoring Amit Shah's winning streak and reconfirming the title of master strategist.

Controversies
