As Narendra Modi takes charge for second time, a look at the road ahead for the NDA government in South Asia

Prime Minister Narendra Modi signs the register after taking oath of office and secrecy, May 30. | Photo Credit: PTI

As Narendra Modi starts his second term as Prime Minister, the foreign policy establishments of countries in the region and beyond will have to carefully calibrate their strategies to deal with the Indian leader, who will have an even stronger hold over New Delhi’s foreign policy than in his first term.

Unlike in 2014, Modi is no longer an unknown quantity and South Asian diplomats have no doubt carefully studied both his policies and persona.

Yet, as his decision to order air strikes within Pakistani territory in the aftermath of the Pulwama terrorist attack showed, Modi has the potential to spring a surprise.

Though the mandate of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) is to implement the vision of the Prime Minister, it is widely believed that in his first term Modi along with his chosen bureaucrats and National Security Advisor Ajit Doval ran the show on the foreign policy front, with Sushma Swaraj playing a less prominent role than foreign ministers usually do.

Nevertheless, in the second term, with Modi even more firmly in the saddle, these are some of the issues and challenges his administration faces in the neighbourhood:

Pakistan

Things haven’t been more stressful between India and its western neighbour in years. The Balakot strikes, Pakistan air force’s attempted foray into Jammu and Kashmir, and the dramatic capture and subsequent release of Wing Commander Abhinandan have cast a dark shadow on the ties. The decision to not invite Pakistan’s Imran Khan for the May 30 swearing-in – the then PM Nawaz Sharif was invited in 2014 when Modi took oath as PM in the first term – shows that the Modi government is taking a much more cautious approach. Will Modi take the first step and meet Imran Khan during the Bishkek SCO summit next month? That and talks on the Kartarpur Sahib corridor could provide possible avenues for a thaw in ties.

Bangladesh

If there’s any other leader in the region who won an even bigger mandate than Modi, it is Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina of Bangladesh who together with her allies bagged an astonishing 288 seats in the 300-seat House. Conclusion of the Teesta Treaty and greater coordination over Rohingya refugees are among the issues which the two leaders will be hoping to tackle soon. Bangladesh is critical to India’s ‘Look East’ Policy. Bilateral trade between the two countries, which currently hovers around USD 9 billion, is expected to get a boost in Modi’s second term. The fact that both Hasina and Modi have returned with stronger mandates will give the two leaders more leeway to steer ties to the next level.

Nepal

New Delhi has been annoyed by Beijing's attempt to spread its clout in Nepal over the last 15 years. Despite China’s efforts, however, India and Nepal continue to be closely intertwined historically, culturally, economically and emotionally. Looking ahead, Prime Minister Modi would have to consider an expert report prepared by the Nepal-India Eminent Persons’ Group (EPG) which lists a hosts of suggestions to take ties forward. Strengthening the Bhutan, Bangladesh, Nepal and India Cooperation Initiative would also be on the agenda.

Bhutan

The 2017 Doklam stand-off between India and China threw Bhutan into the spotlight. (The disputed area is near the tri-junction with India). Last year was the golden jubilee of the establishment of formal diplomatic ties between India and Bhutan. In December 2018, PM Modi announced Rs 4,500 crore in financial aid to Bhutan in continuation of New Delhi’s policy towards Thimphu, with a wary eye on China. Narendra Modi will be looking to take his ‘Bharat to Bhutan’ vision, which he first announced in 2014, forward.

Sri Lanka

The gruesome Easter Sunday bombings in Sri Lanka carried out by terrorists with alleged ties to the Islamic State have alarmed India’s security establishment, especially with some reports indicating that the global terrorist network is trying to make inroads in India. Stepped up intelligence sharing and joint counter-terrorism efforts with Sri Lanka will be uppermost on the mind of the new NDA government. Beyond security concerns, China’s looming presence in the Indian Ocean makes the island nation of Sri Lanka vital in the geopolitics of the larger South Asian region.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
