Dangal for Bengal: Amit Shah calls Mamata promoter of murder, TMC says don't be nervous

While BJP president Amit Shah started his party's poll campaign for Lok Sabha poll in West Bengal, the TMC was out defending its fortress. (Photos: Facebook pages of BJP and Mamata Banerjee)

Attacks, counter attacks, blame games and one-upmanship. Reverse. That is what can describe the order of the day in the political spectrum of West Bengal on Tuesday. Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) president Amit Shah launched the party's poll campaign in West Bengal with the 'Ganatanatra Bachao Yatra' (save democracy rally). Whereas, the ruling Trinamool Congress was seen trying to defend its fortress.

In his speech, Amit Shah said the Opposition's coming-together as 'grand alliance' is nothing but driven by "greed for power". He alleged that Trinamool Congress leaders in the state are collecting "syndicate tax" from the helpless people. He said if the TMC remains in power, celebrating Durga Puja will also become difficult.

On its part, the TMC said content of Shah's speech is a reflection of his "nervousness".

5 points from Tuesday's political drama

1) In his address to BJP workers of North Bengal in Malda, Amit Shah said West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's rally in Kolkata last Saturday will not serve any purpose as bringing 20-25 leaders on one stage cannot unseat Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Shah said that out of the 23 leaders, who attended the Brigade Parade Ground rally, nine of them were potential prime ministerial candidates.

2) Amit Shah alleged that the TMC is running a government that "facilitates murder". He also raked up the issue of the Citizenship Bill that has been passed by the Lok Sabha. He asked if Mamata Banerjee will support the bill or not. "I am sure she will not support it. The TMC government has done nothing for the refugees. But we will give citizenship to all Bengali Hindu refugees. I want to assure all Bengali refugees that they will get citizenship," Shah said.

3) The Trinamool Congress was quick to hit back at Shah and said his speech was "low on facts and poor in taste". The party said that it seems the BJP has become nervous and has realised that its days are numbered. "They (BJP) don't understand the ethos of India. They don't understand the ethos of Bengal. They are heading towards one big zero (in West Bengal in the general election)," TMC Rajya Sabha MP Derek O'Brien said.

4) Later in the day, the TMC threatened to file a criminal defamation case against Amit Shah if he fails to withdraw his comments where he alleged that TMC leaders in West Bengal collected "syndicate tax".

5) Responding to Shah's rally, Derek wrote on Twitter: "Mr Amit Shah, Bengal is not UP where you are spreading hate and disharmony. There is peace and harmony here. And, if you do not withdraw your wild allegations on 'syndicate tax', we shall charge you with criminal defamation."

(With inputs from Press Trust of India.)

ALSO READ | Fact Check: Amit Shah's claim about Opposition leaders not raising patriotic slogans incorrect

ALSO READ | BJP misleading people: Mamata takes U-turn on blocking Amit Shah's chopper from landing in Malda

ALSO WATCH | Amit Shah's war cry in Malda: Can BJP make inroads in Bengal?
