India's invitation to BIMSTEC leaders for Modi's swearing-in sparks debate over future of SAARC: Kathmandu Post columnist

The same year, Modi visited Nepal, for a second time, to participate in the 18th SAARC summit.

Pakistan had expressed some reservations about Modi's proposal of SAARC satellite and SAARC Motor Vehicle Agreement.

Two years later, India decided to pull out of the 19th SAARC summit scheduled to be held in November 2016 in Islamabad, blaming Pakistan for a militant attack on the Indian forces in Kashmir.

Pakistan had denied the charges. But the 19th summit was subsequently postponed.

In the months leading up to the Indian elections, another militant attack in Kashmir killed at least 40 Indian soldiers, prompting New Delhi to launch airstrikes in the Pakistani territory.

Since then, relations between India and Pakistan, the two nuclear-armed neighbours, have remained sour.

"It is clear that SAARC will remain stagnant until Modi is ready to invest political capital in normalising relations with Pakistan," Xavier told the Post.

SAARC, since its inception in 1985, has been pulled back by India-Pakistan rivalry.

The secretariat of the regional grouping is based in Kathmandu, and as the current chair, Nepal, has been pushing hard to resume the stalled process.

Even though India has snubbed SAARC, Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli is travelling to New Delhi to attend Modi's oath-taking ceremony, as Nepal has been a member of BIMSTEC since February 2004. Nepal hosted the fourth summit of the grouping last year.

According to officials, Oli will raise the issue of revitalising the regional process while in New Delhi.

"Pressure from other countries like Nepal is rising on India to recommit to SAARC but this is unlikely to change Delhi's position," said Xavier. "In this sense, India's SAARC policy is dependent on its broader Pakistan policy."

The Hindustan Times reported on Tuesday, quoting people familiar with developments, that the decision to shift focus from SAARC to BIMSTEC was made because it was felt this was a more active grouping with greater potential.

The newspaper added: BIMSTEC also has a better fit with several key foreign policy initiatives of the National Democratic Alliance (a coalition of BJP and its allies) government--the "neighbourhood first" policy, the Act East policy focused on India's extended neighbourhood and the Indo-Pacific policy.

Inviting the leaders of BIMSTEC to the inauguration also took care of another tricky issue confronting the National Democratic Alliance(NDA)-how to maintain the focus on India's neighbourhood without having to extend an invitation to Pakistan, given the rocky state of bilateral relations, said the paper.

Pakistan, however, has downplayed India's decision to invite leaders from SAARC members.

Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi told a news channel that "his (Modi's)entire focus (during the election campaign) was on Pakistan-bashing. It was unwise to expect that he can get rid of this narrative (soon)."
