Indo International Premier Kabaddi League: Thrilling win for Pune Pride over Diler Delhi

May 30, 2019

In a thrilling finish to a well-contested league tie, Pune Pride, Zone ‘A’ leaders, helped by some inspiring play by raider Amarjeeth Singh, registered an exciting 37-36 win over a fighting Diler Delhi outfit on the concluding day of the Mysuru leg of the Indo International Premier Kabaddi League played at Chamundi Vihar Indoor Stadium here on Wednesday night.

In the last match of the day, Pune Pride were well-served by attacker Amarjeeth Singh, who secured 9 points from his nine raids. He was well-supported by Jithender Yadav, who scored 5 points. Amarjeeth Singh was chosen as the Player of the Match and the Best Raider of the Match, while Jithender Yadav was given the Best Defender Award. At half-time the winner led 20-13.

For Delhi, Sunil Jaipal as usual excelled by scoring 10 points and was well-supported by Pankaj Singh with 6 points. Pune Pride leads Zone ‘A’ with 16 points (10 played, 8 win, 2 loss) while Diler Delhi topped Zone ‘B’ with 13 points (9 played, 6 win, 2 lost, 1 draw).

Chennai score over Pondicherry

In the first men’s league match of the day, Chennai Challengers scored an emphatic 50-42 win over Pondicherry Predators. At half-time, Pondicherry Predators led 24-23. Rajesh Dhiman was chosen as the Player of the Match. Karunanadhi was chosen as the Best Raiderand Rajesh Dhiman as Best Defender.

Rajesh Dhiman scored 17 points in 7 raids for Chennai and was well-supported by Sunil Kumar with 9 points. For Pondicherry Predators, Karunanadhi with 13 points from 12 raids impressed. R. Suresh Kumar chipped in with 11 points.

Chennai Challengers have secured 11 points and are placed second in Zone ‘B’. (9 played, 5 win, 3 lost, 1 draw) while Pondicherry Predators are placed third in Zone ‘A’ with 6 points ( 9 played, 3 wins, 6 loss).

Women’s match: Bengaluru scores over Mysuru

In a women’s match, Bengaluru girls scored a 54-44 win over Mysuru girls. At half-time, the winner led 28-15. The Mysuru leg concluded on Wednesday. The matches move on to Bengaluru for the final leg (from June 1) where the playoffs and the final are slated to be played at Sree Kanteerava Stadium.
