Continuity with energetic change

The new council of ministers of Prime Minister Narendra Modi is a lot like the ministry it succeeds, except for the important addition of BJP president Amit Shah and the equally prominent omission of Arun Jaitley, who has recused himself on health grounds. Most regions of the country find representation, even Kerala, which failed to elect even a single member from the BJP or the larger National Democratic Alliance. Most allies have been accommodated, although Nitish Kumar has kept his Janata Dal (United) out, bargaining for two ministerial berths, instead of the one on offer. The AIADMK gets a boost in Tamil politics with its lone MP finding a ministerial berth at the Centre.

A surprise addition to the ministry is S Jaishankar, former foreign secretary, who had received a Padmashri from the Modi government. Clearly, the prime minister values specialised skill and knowledge of the kind Jaishankar represents, whose diplomatic exertions were valuable in resolving the Dokalam standoff to India’s advantage. The council of ministers is a combination of political gladiators who have recently proved their mettle in battle, expertise, experience and commitment to the cause championed by Narendra Modi.

Some of the notable omissions from the previous council of ministers are Sushma Swaraj, who did not contest the elections, owing, again, to health reasons, Suresh Prabhu, JP Nadda, Manoj Sinha, who lost his Uttar Pradesh seat, Jayant Sinha and Maneka Gandhi. Giriraj Singh has been promoted as a Cabinet minister. Mahesh Sharma has been dropped. The council includes some fresh faces, including BJP youth leader Anurag Thakur. Some existing Rajya Sabha members having come to the Lok Sabha, Upper House vacancies can accommodate the likes of Jaishankar.

It is to be hoped that PM Modi would choose to fully utilise the ministerial talent at his disposal. As he has pointed out after his electoral success, the people of India have reposed their trust in the government and fulfilling their expectations is a big challenge.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Economic Times.

END OF ARTICLE
