Black day in Kerala’s history: Sabarimala Ayyappa Seva Samajam on women’s entry in Sabarimala

Sabarimala Temple (File image)

New Delhi: The Sabarimala Ayyappa Seva Samajam (SASS), an affiliate of the Sangh outfit, on Wednesday denounced the entry of two women, in their 40s, into Sabarimala shrine and termed January 2, 2019 as a “black day” in the history of Kerala. The SASS, an organisation of Lord Ayyappa devotees, also blamed the Pinarayi Vijayan government in the state for aiding the two women’s entry into the hill shrine in the wee hours of Wednesday.

In a press release, the SASS termed the two women – Bindu (42) and Kanakadurga (42) - as “anti-social, feminist activists”. It also said that crores of Ayyappan devotees “felt cheated” by the communist government for breaking the age old traditions that restricted entry of women of menstruating age in the shrine.

“Crores of devotees of Lord Ayyappa spread all over the world, who have been practicing the traditions at Sabarimala for times immemorial, feel cheated by the communist government of Kerala state by their heinous and deceitful and cowardice action of bringing two anti social and feminist activist ladies to violate the rituals and traditions of holy Sabarimala temple, against the wishes of Lord Ayyappa and deep-rooted belief of devotees,” the release said.

It added, “The State Government of Kerala, lead by Communist Party, notorious for anti – Hindu and anti - Sabarimala activities, in the name of implementing the Supreme Court Judgment in a hurry.... the police force under their command, tried many times to violate and break the age old traditions of Sabarimala.”

The right-wing outfit accused CM Pinarayi Vijayan of executing his “deceitful” plan of bringing in women of menstruating age into the shrine in the “cover of darkness” like a “thief”, with help from his “loyal police officers.” Kerala hartal tomorrow: Pro-Hindutva outfits call for state-wide bandh after 2 women enter Sabarimala Temple

“The first communist government which came in power in 1957 in the name of Lord Ayyappa, cheated Ayyappa and his devotees continuously and this heinous action will be the last death nail of the communism in Kerala, the last remaining state in India and Shri. Pinarayi Vijayan will be the last chief minister for which Lord Ayyappa’s curse will be the reason for it,” it said.

The organisation also slammed the officers of the Kerala police force for helping the two women enter the shrine, in violation of age-old traditions, and offer prayers. It claimed that the “heinous and cowardice action” of “some police officers” had brought disrepute to the Kerala police.

“The day, 2nd January 2019 will be recorded in the history of Kerala as a Black Day and remembered with pain by crores of devotees in their hearts,” the SASS said. The organisation said that it would lend its support to state-wide shutdown or hartal called by various pro-Hindutva outfits on Thursday in Kerala over the Sabarimala issue.

Meanwhile, a Ayyappa devotee named Chandran Unnithaan died in Pandalam after getting injured in the protests during the stone pelting between the Karma Samithi workers and CPM at Pandalam on Wednesday.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.


