Pulwama martyrs kin, ‘victims’ of Bengal political violence attend Modi swearing-in ceremony

NEW DELHI: For Mamata Biswas (51), the photograph of her martyred son in Pulawama attack has been the most valuable possession since she lost him in a suicide bomb attack in the Valley on February 14. On Thursday, she carried the picture of Sudip to the grand swearing-in ceremony of Prime Minister Narendra Modi at Rashtrapati Bhawan.“We received a call from the prime minister’s office that we were invited to attend the swearing-in ceremony. The government has taught a lesson to the enemies and is also honouring us. Soon after the sacrifice by Sudip, the state government had announced to give a job to one in the family. They have taken all details and we are waiting for something to happen,” said Mamata’s son-in-law Sanapata Biswas, who accompanied her.Family members of another Pulawama martyr Bablu Santra also attended the swearing-in event on Thursday. Bablu’s wife Mitali, her daughter and her mother-in-law had travelled to Delhi by Rajdhani Express to be present in the ceremony. Sudip and Bablu were among two of the 40 CRPF personnel killed in the terror strike in Pulwama that fateful day.The BJP also brought kin of another 53 persons who were allegedly killed in political violence to attend the swearing-in ceremony. Chief minister Mamata Banerjee has claimed that these were no political killings.“We are fighting for justice of those who have been brutally killed by the Trinamool Congress workers. We are taking up these cases to the highest level including to the National Human Rights Commission in one case where a party worker Haradhan Medha was killed just 13 days back,” said Kalyan Choubey, who was BJP candidate from Krishnangar parliamentary constituency.Medha’s son Sarajit said he and his uncle came to Delhi to seek justice even as the family was completing the rituals of his dead father. “Political killings must stop and the Centre should take action. We demand justice and strictest punishment for the accused,” said Sarajit’s uncle Sadan.Several kin of the murdered BJP workers who landed at New Delhi railway station on Thursday said they were happy that had come to the national capital to attend the swearing-in ceremony. They said after BJP victory, there is some peace in their areas.
