LankaWeb – FAST REACHING THE THRESHOLD OF BUDDHIST TOLERANCE

FAST REACHING THE THRESHOLD OF BUDDHIST TOLERANCE

Dr. Daya Hewapathirane

Muslim Hostility Since Ancient Times

Those professing Islam have been the biggest enemies of Buddhists and Buddhism throughout history. Buddhists have suffered extreme forms of violence, untold persecution and discrimination from Muslims since the 12th century, with the ruthless Muslim incursions of ancient Buddhist nations in the Central Asian and Himalayan regions. Prior to the arrival of Muslim invaders, all countries/regions associated with the ancient Silk Road, were inhabited by flourishing Buddhist communities. They included Afghanistan, Kashmir, Indus valley, present day Pakistan and Bangladesh. Muslim invasions were marked by widespread killing, torture and persecution of Buddhists and rampant destruction of Buddhist places of worship and learning, monasteries, historic monuments and Buddhist settlements and widespread confiscation of Buddhist properties. There are ample historic records which describe vividly the atrocities committed by Muslims against millions of Buddhists in several countries. Islam destroyed Buddhism not only in India but wherever it went. Before the onslaught of Islam, Buddhism was the religion of almost the whole of Asia – ancient countries/regions such as Bactria, Parthia, Afghanistan, Gandhar, Chinese Turkestan, along with Tibet and Inner Mongolia were Buddhist nations that formed almost the whole of the Asian continent. Buddhism was the dominant religion of the people of this vast area of the Asian continent. Islam destroyed and eliminated Buddhism from almost all these countries. In the late 12 century, Indonesia and Malaysia were Buddhist countries. With Muslim invasions most Buddhists in these countries were either killed or forced to convert to Islam. Most Buddhist shrines and settlements were destroyed.

For five centuries, from the 13th to 17th centuries, most parts of India were under Muslim rule. During this time, over 50 million Buddhists and Hindus were massacred by Islamists in greater India, which in the past included Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan. It is a well known fact that Buddhism disappeared from India under the sword of Islam. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the great Indian Buddhist leader said that there is absolutely no doubt that the fall of Buddhism in India was due to the invasions of the Musalmans or the adherents of Islam. Ruthless Muslim invaders slaughtered thousands of Buddhists including monks in places such as Bihar, India. They destroyed the ancient illustrious Buddhist Universities of Nalanda, Vikramsila, Jagaddala, Odantipur among others. (For further details read my paper in Lankaweb – titled NALANDA: illustrious International Buddhist University 5th century CE to 12 century CE.) At the end of 12th century, Muslim invaders demolished Nalanda university, burnt down its priceless library, and mercilessly massacred its scholars including Buddhist monks. Countless ancient Buddhist monuments were defaced or destroyed, virtually erasing the Buddhist faith from India. Forced conversion of Buddhists and Hindu people to Islam was the order of the day. They razed to the ground many thousands of Buddhist monasteries with which the country was studded. The monks fled away in thousands to Nepal, Tibet and other places outside India. Muslim invaders killed thousands of Buddhists outright. How the Buddhist monkhood perished by the sword of the Muslim invaders has been recorded by Muslim historians themselves. Seen in this light the wanton and heartless destruction of the colossal Bamiyan Buddha statues by the Taliban as recent as in February 2001 does not seem out of place. Smashing the head of Brahma in Thao Maha Brahma or Phra Phrom Erawan Shrine in Bangkok was done by Muslim youth. It reflects the atavistic iconoclastic behaviour of Islam.

Although we proudly claim that Buddhism has survived for some 2300 years in Sri Lanka and founded on Buddhist teachings of non-violence, tolerance and compassion, the Sinhala Buddhist community was able to withstand various threats and challenges and was able to protect Buddhism, we should not overlook the fact that Buddhism was wiped out from many countries and regions in the Asian continent in the not too distant past. The exclusively Buddhist populations of places such as Afghanistan, present day Pakistan, a good part of the Indian sub-continent, Bangladesh, Nepal, Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines and Maldives Islands were either murdered or converted to Islam. Ruthless Muslim invasions changed the Buddhist religious landscape of these places. Buddhist places of worship and reputed places of learning were demolished during Muslim invasions.

More recently in 2001, in the name of Islam, the Taliban destroyed the world renowned monumental Bamiyan Buddha statues built in the 6th century, citing that these were ‘idols’ which are forbidden under Sharia law in Islam. In contemporary times we witness a disastrous hardening of Islam into rigid fundamentalism, in which Muslims are resorting to violent terrorist means to aggressively proclaim their beliefs and zealously proselytizing non-Muslims. A fundamentalist and intolerant stance, taken by any religion, is offensive to followers of other faiths and to those of no faith at all. Disrespect, disregard and sheer indifference towards people of other religions, is a common character trait of Muslims, wherever in the world they live. These negative attitudes have made them resort to crude forms of violence against people and property of other faiths, especially Buddhists. This is well evident today not only in places like Bangladesh, Southern Thailand and Myanmar, but also in our own motherland, the most recent being the bomb blasts in Catholic Churches and in prominent hotels in Colombo, killing and injuring many hundreds of innocent people.

Deceit and Violence in Sri Lanka

Allah based Islam religion argues that they are required according to the word of Allah to propagate their religion by resorting to various means, one being the so-called Holy War” to convert or kill all unbelievers. Intimidation and terrorism are common methods used even in modern times. Threatening and discriminating against unbelievers is a common practice. Muslims believe the Koran is the word of Allah. They believe this because it says so in the Koran. It also says that a good Muslim must make continual war on all unbelievers until the entire world is Islamic. Radical Islamic ideology is being spread all over the Muslim world through schools popularly known as madrasas, also through the media and through mosques. They also resort to organized forms of disinformation and spread lies about other rival beliefs and ways of living. These are psychological blackmail techniques used by them to serve their selfish ends. They demonize other religions by using big lies.

Muslims are trying hard, using cunning and deceitful means to introduce their crude extremist Saudi Arabian cultural norms to our country, thereby undermining our traditional Sinhala Buddhist cultural norms. Their disgusting halal terrorist methods of animal slaughter, their unsightly and repulsive ‘gonibilla’ outfits, their nauseating loadspeaker shouting at odd times of the day disturbing entire neighborhoods, and using internet and other means to insult and discredit our Sangha community are some well known Muslim (Arabian) cultural garbage they are introducing to our land. They disregard the fact that they live in a predominantly Buddhist country and what they are doing is incompatible with the way of life and the social value system of this country.

It is clearly evident in recent years that there have been organized attempts on the part of extremist Muslims, the Wahhabis, to discredit and dishonour the Buddha Sasana and the Sangha Community of Sri Lanka. Their actions show their indifference and sheer disrespect and disregard for Buddhist cultural norms and values of this country. They appear to detest our Buddhist national culture and heritage. In fact they have resorted to the destruction of Buddhist monuments and archeological remains in the island, especially in the East. The Buddhist cultural heritage of this country is being undermined by Muslim extremists.in devious ways. In recent years, the extremist Muslims who have recently adopted the fundamentalist Wahhabi form of Islam imported from Saudi Arabia along with enormous amounts of Saudi funds, have been instrumental in causing serious problems in Sri Lanka having direct negative implications for the mainstream Buddhist community. In general, the Muslims are concerned only of themselves, their religion and their community. This is a reason why they cannot assimilate with mainstream communities in countries where they live or have immigrated to.

It was not long ago that Islamic fundamentalists and armed Muslim extremists were inciting violence against legitimate Buddhist activities in the East in the Pottuvil region. Muslims were encroaching upon and forcibly taking land that rightfully belongs to Buddhist temples on the southeast coast and elsewhere. Muslim illegal encroachment of the Wilpattu national conservation for exclusive Muslim enclaves is well known. Muslims have also demolished some significant Buddhist archeological sites and instrumental in destroying Buddha statues in several places in the East and recently in Mawanella. The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress and several Islamic groups of Sri Lanka had the audacity to oppose the construction of Buddha’s statues on the island’s southeast coastal areas which contain Buddhist historic monuments and important archeological remains as part of the nation’s cultural wealth.

Muslim Proliferation by Reproducing Abundantly

As a means of propagating their believers, a well evident practice in all Muslim societies almost throughout the world is Fecundism or proliferation by reproducing abundantly. Their so-called true believers are encouraged and assisted to breed faster than non-believers. This is an ecologically disastrous population growth situation which can lead to far reaching, highly detrimental consequences affecting overall development of any country. In a deceitfully organized manner Muslim medical professionals have resorted to illegal sterilization of many Sinhala women in view of controlling the growth of Sinhala population. It is reported to be a common practice in popular Muslim business establishments to offer special benefits and privileges to female Sinhala employees who convert to Islam.

The Buddhist Approach of Non-Aggression

Fanaticism and brutality and unethical and confrontational approaches adopted by Islam and other theistic religious establishments, often in the past and Islam most evidently in present times, to promote their religious beliefs provide a stark contrast to the approach in Buddhism. The Buddha Dhamma is described as ‘ehipassiko’, inviting one to come and see for himself. There is no concept of coercion or proselytization in Buddhism. The Buddha taught the importance of patience, tolerance, and non-aggression, providing a splendid ideal of tolerance for Buddhists to follow. There is not a single occasion in the Buddhist scriptures of the Buddha being less than compassionate, not only to those who accepted his teachings but also to the followers of all faiths, not only to the good but also to the wicked, not only to humans but also to animals and to all living beings. In striking contrast to the spread of other world religions, which are replete with unethical and forcible conversions and sectarian strife, the history of Buddhism is remarkable for the complete absence of bloodshed in the name of the teacher.

Spirit of Tolerance and Accommodation of Others

History of our country reveals vividly that this spirit of tolerance and accommodation of others irrespective of their religious or other differences has been a common distinguishing characteristic of Sinhala Buddhists of this country from very early times. Judging from the fanaticism and confrontational attitudes and actions especially of extremist Muslims in recent decades, it appears that this spirit of tolerance and accommodation on the part of Buddhists is not appreciated by them. It is being exploited as a weakness to pursue their self interests of promoting their religions and ways of life at the expense of Buddhism, Buddhist culture and Buddhist way of life

No Claim of Divine Authority in Buddhism

Buddhism does not accept an omnipotent God, a Creator, nor any revealed scripture. Because faith in God or a savior is not an issue for Buddhists, there is no reason for Buddhists to judge others, to condemn them for their beliefs, or to feel compelled to convert them. Buddhism is a religion which has never attempted to propagate itself and exterminate its enemies by war and tyranny. Buddhism recognizes that one of the most destructive delusions is excessive attachment to any view, which will thus appear virtuous and right for all people. The harm that can be done by fundamentalist attachment to ideologies and abstractions is far greater than that caused by attachment to wealth or material objects.

Buddhism does not claim to be the one and only valid spiritual path. It is not based on, or claim divine authority. Gautama Buddha never claimed to be divine or sent by God. Buddhism does not attempt to suppress reason by dogma. Unlike most other religions, Buddhism isn’t so much about things to believe, as things to do. It is a technology of mind improvement. Therefore Buddhists often refer to themselves as practitioners rather than believers. The Buddha told his students to trust their own experience of the effectiveness of the teachings, and not believe things just because he said so. The Buddha’s teachings are to be judged by their effectiveness in promoting peace and spiritual realizations, rather than unverifiable claims to their origin.

Strengthen and Revitalize the Sinhala Buddhist Nation

The present generation of Sinhala nationals has a moral obligation to protect, preserve and promote the greatest of their inheritance, their unique nation, for the survival of their Buddhist cultural heritage and for the benefit of future generations. Concerned Sinhala nationals will under no circumstances allow the sovereignty, the distinct territorial integrity and the all-pervasive Sinhala Buddhist cultural character of the island be subject to any form of disarray or disintegration. They will not permit any force, internal or external, ethnic or religious, to subjugate or undermine the integrity of the Sinhala Buddhist culture of this island nation. Sinhala history is replete with valor and courage in battles against overly superior forces. The struggle against extremism and the looming division of this Sinhala island nation of ours demands our full national strength. Let all Sinhala nationalists rise to the occasion, forgetting for a moment their ‘other’ differences, and swear allegiance to the unity of this country by giving unswerving support to those commendable organizations that have emerged in recent times to save the nation from undesirable elements. The renewed loyalty that is fast emerging among the Sinhala nationals, particularly among the contemporary youth, is most encouraging.

Under the circumstances, a good part of our traditional Buddhist leadership – the Mahasangha has come to the forefront, providing leadership to the growing nationwide movement to counter this undesirable anti-national trend spearheaded by extremist elements of the Muslim community of Sri Lanka. The emergence of and initiatives taken by the Bodu Bala Sena and other Buddhist and patriotic organizations are timely and most admirable. In spite of untold and persistent challenges from various quarters – local and foreign, they are determined to provide necessary leadership to this movement, as a moral obligation to save the nation, the Buddha Sasana and the Buddhist heritage of our country. The courage, forthrightness, fearlessness, determination and foresight of the Bhikkhus of the Bodu Bala Sena and other Buddhist organizations that have sprung up in recent times to counter these undesirable trends are most praiseworthy. It is encouraging to note their rapidly expanding and widespread support base across the country and extending to the Sinhala Buddhist communities living overseas. It is time that all those who care for the survival of our nation, begin supporting this courageous movement, in all possible ways. The highly tolerant nature of the Buddhist community of Sri Lanka should not be taken for granted.They are becoming increasingly aware of the various forms of threats to which they are subject without good reason. As proven repeatedly in their nation’s long history of foreign aggression and misdemeanors, the Sinhala people, especially the Sinhala Buddhists will rise to the occasion when necessary, to save their Buddhist norms and principles which form the foundation of the national culture of their treasured motherland.

Dr. Daya Hewapathirane daya.hewapathirane@gmail.com
