Hidden Gems Film Festival brings Shakespeare to India

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Hidden Gems Film Festival brings Shakespeare to India Calgary

Reviews and recommendations are unbiased and products are independently selected. Postmedia may earn an affiliate commission from purchases made through links on this page.

Article content For its 2019 Indian Auteur Series, Calgary’s Hidden Gems Film Festival is presenting Vishal Bhardwaj’s Shakespearean trilogy.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content In 2003, Bhardwaj took Shakespeare’s Macbeth and set it in the gangster underworld of Mumbai, calling it Maqbool. It quickly became a runaway hit and a critics’ darling, prompting Bhardwaj to later transpose Shakespeare’s Othello and Hamlet into Indian culture. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Hidden Gems Film Festival brings Shakespeare to India Back to video “What better way to introduce Calgarians to Indian cinema than through Shakespeare, the English-speaking world’s most famous and beloved author,” says Niru Bhatia, artistic director of Hidden Gems. “These three films are a way to remind us just how incredible Shakespeare’s contribution to world literature continues to be. His themes and his characters can operate anywhere.” Bhatia stresses that Maqbool is not a translation of Shakespeare’s Macbeth. The characters are not speaking an Indian version of Elizabethan poetry.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content “It’s all colloquial dialogue but anyone familiar with Macbeth will recognize the plot lines. It is the story of the rise and fall of a powerful gang leader. It remains a story of unchecked ambition and fateful consequences.” In Bhardwaj’s version of Macbeth, the weird sisters become a pair of bumbling policemen who dabble in the occult to help one gang wipe out a rival force. The Lady Macbeth character becomes a prostitute who conspires with Maqbool to kill his rival. “I want audiences to watch Maqbool as an Indian gangster film and then stay for the discussion period where they can analyze the heck out of it. It will make the whole experience double the fun,” says Bhatia. Maqbool screens Jan. 27 at 2 p.m. in the amphitheatre at the Alberta University of the Arts (formerly the Alberta College of Art and Design) in the building adjoining the Jubilee Auditorium. For more information, check out hiddengemsfilmfestival.com .

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Calgary Herald Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Calgary Herald, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Calgary Herald Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
