Bhor’s youngsters clean crucial tank to beat water crisis

The effort is led by a 27-year-old, who observed people migrating to Pune for jobs; most of them own farms that are marred by drought



Bhor has been struck with the adversity of the drought, bringing in a migratory situation where youngsters have been venturing out in search of better circumstances. In this desolate scenario, 40 people from Kambre village have taken a veritable task on their home ground, of desilting a 46-year-old tank without waiting for the public works department to lend assistance.



The group of youngsters is led by 27-year-old Sidharth Kondhalkar. They are determined to overturn the situation — as three villages in the taluka reel from worst kind of drought in 50 years — by cleaning the tank so that there is no water scarcity for the next three years.



Kondhalkar and the lot has started cleaning the percolation tank situated over 70-80 acres of land in Bhor. The tank is surrounded by three villages — Kambre, Naigaon, and Degaon — which house 6,000 people of which 90 per cent are farmers with their own land. The agriculture largely depends on this tank, which has been strewn in mud and silt over the last few years. It resulted in the water scarcity, causing the residents to pool in water tankers to meet the requirements. Some of them, who had planted fruit trees, had to also rope in the expensive resource.



Kondhalkar, who then started visiting the colleges and irrigation department to discuss his plan to clean the tank. A group of 40 college students and working professionals showed readiness to work without government aid. They have been using their own vehicles to move the silt to another location.



Kondhalkar told Pune Mirror, “The village is located just 30 km away from Pune. It is painful to see youngsters migrating to the city to work in private companies, despite owning a farm. However, it is the water scarcity that has prompted them to move. Many of them have sold their land and have been working on a poor salary.”



The water scarcity has risen out of the fact that the tank — which would fulfil the villages’ needs — is now full of mud and silt. Kondhalkar believes that if it becomes operational again, the farming operations will revive. Thus, he and his group have set the target to remove silt to fill 700-800 trucks in the next 20 days. Following the cleaning, they plan to plant trees along the side that will it help in maintaining the cleanliness.



“The desilting has revived our hopes. We now hope that nature will bless our efforts and bring abundant monsoon to replenish the tank,” he said.



These efforts were lauded by Balasaheb Abnave, a farmer, who has been struck by the water scarcity. “We have never faced water scarcity in the last 50 years. The present situation got us worried. We are glad that the youth from the village took this initiative. We are looking forward to a positive outcome,” he said.



“This water tank has a large storage capacity marred by mud and silt,” said Bhor’s tehsildar Ajit Patil. He confirmed to youngsters having approached them and thought that this was indeed a great initiative. He added, “We helped them by giving a no-objection certificate and procured the required documents. This will help all the villagers and we would like to help them in the future as well.”


