Another gang war on Delhi streets, 1 criminal, passerby killed

New Delhi:

In yet another a stark reminder of deteriorating law and order situation in Nation Capital, a passerby was killed by some unidentified gunmen during a suspected gang war in Delhi’s Jyoti Nagar area. The shootout took place on Wednesday night. According to a Times of India report, the victim killed in the gang war has been identified as 25-year-old Akash Verma. The report said that the group of five men of one Anil gang had come to the area to kill gangster Govind Bhati. The men ambushed Bhati while he was returning from gym. They stabbed him 20 times and pumped over half dozen rounds of bullets, the TOI report said.

The report said that after killing Bhati, the criminals were about to leave the spot when they saw Verma. They presumed that he was Bhati’s aide. Without asking or probing, they killed him on the spot. The Delhi Police has said that three men have been arrested for the brazen shootout. The enmity between Anil and Bhati dates back to 2016. Bhati had reportedly refused to join Anil’s gang. FIRs and counter FIRs were also lodged by the two groups.

Earlier, Delhi police arrested a 32-year-old Nandu gang member in connection with the murder of Tik Tok star Mohit Mor. The accused, Sandeep Pehalwan was the man who allegedly hired three people, including a teenager to kill Mor. Following a tip-off, Pehalwan was arrested from his residence in Najafgarh on Monday, said Deputy Commissioner of Police (Dwarka) Anto Alphonse.

On May 21, Mohit Mor, a gym trainer who was quite popular on the video-sharing app Tik Tok with over 5 lakh followers, was brutally killed by three people inside a photocopy shop in Najafgarh area over a money dispute with Nandu gang.

According to reports, the Tik Tok star had taken Rs 30 lakh from Mangu, an alleged member of the Nandu gang, to invest in a property. After Mangu's death in gang ware in 2017, members of the Nandu gang asked him to return the money he had taken from him. He, however, allegedly refused to give the money to Mangu’s friends in the gang, which led to his murder.

After receiving threats from the Nandu gang members, Mor reportedly took protection from Pradeep Solanki and Vikas Dalal, alleged members of the Manjeet Mahal gang, the report quoted Sanjeev Kumar Yadav, deputy commissioner of police (special cell).
