Monsoon Receives Fresh Push, But Onset Still Expected Between June 5-8

File photo of monsoon clouds hovering over the miniature model of White House set up at Calicut Expo at Swapnanagari in Kozhikode. (E Gokul / BCCL, Kozhikode)

After stalling over the Andaman Sea for more than a week, the southwest monsoon has started to pick up some pace. On Thursday, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) reported that the Northern Limit of Monsoon (NLM) has advanced into the southern Maldives-Comorin area, around 400km from the Kerala coast.

More: Monsoon Inches Towards Kerala; Below-Normal Rain Forecast in June

The monsoon had reached the south Andaman Sea and the Nicobar Islands on May 18, two days ahead of the normal date (May 20). However, due to weak cross-equatorial flow, the monsoon lacked the necessary push to advance towards the Indian mainland. Forecasts suggest that the monsoon will arrive in Kerala between June 5-8.

Interestingly, last year, the monsoon reached Andaman Sea on May 25—five days later than normal— but the onset over Kerala happened on May 29, 2018, 3 days before its normal date.

Slow and steady, it moves

The sweeping arc of NLM typically crosses Kerala, Tamil Nadu and southern Andhra by June 1. However, the western end of the NLM is currently between Maldives and Kanyakumari, still a good 400 km away from Kerala. The monsoon is also delayed in Sri Lanka, where it normally reaches by May 22. The good news is that the southwesterly winds have now deepened further and increased rainfall is observed over the Andaman Islands, which could indicate that the monsoon has resumed its journey after being stalled in the ocean for more than a week.

Another favourable trend is that the Madden-Jullian Oscillation (MJO) is observed to be moving into the Indian Ocean. Meteorologists are hoping that this will accelerate the arrival of monsoon. MJO is a global low-pressure band of rain and strong winds travelling from west to east. The wet phase of the MJO can provide a fresh push to the monsoon if it moves across the Indian Ocean in the coming days.

Advertisement Dr Todd Crawford, Chief Meteorologist at The Weather Company, says, “Monsoon onset is a good 5+ days behind schedule so far, so would still expect onset in Kerala somewhere around June 5-8. June 1 is the normal onset date, so this will represent a delayed onset, as our seasonal forecasts have suggested.”

Delay elevates summer distress

Kochi residents enjoy the summer showers at Marine Drive walkway. (Jipson Sikhera / BCCL, Kochi)

The delayed arrival of monsoon also means an extended siege of summer heat across the country. Temperatures have crossed 45°C in many parts of the country, especially in central and western regions as well as the northern plains. Parts of the Delhi National Capital Region witnessed the mercury rising close to 47°C on Thursday as against the normal temperatures of 40°C for this time of the year. Similar levels of high, above-normal temperatures are expected to continue throughout the coming week.

Moreover, the rising mercury and deficit pre-monsoon rains have led to acute water shortage in many regions across the country. While India as a whole received 24% less than normal rainfall from March to May, southern states were the worst-hit with 48% deficit. Along with Tamil Nadu and Kerala, many other regions including Vidarbha, Marathwada, Madhya Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and Gujarat are suffering due to the severe water shortage.

At present, weather instability over northeastern India has resulted in extensive rain and thunderstorm across the region. The cyclonic circulation over the region is expected to continue during the next five days. Moreover, due to wind convergence between the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal, rains and thunderstorms are forecast across Kerala, southern Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu. May 31 marks the end of pre-monsoon season and interestingly, any rain from June 1st onwards would be recorded under monsoon rainfall, no matter the official onset.

Stay tuned to The Weather Channel India for regular updates on the monsoon!

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel app (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
