Mumbai Crime Branch yet to find evidence supporting claim of Dr Payal Tadvi being harassed due to her caste

AIPWA, RYA and AISA activists took out a protest march in Patna on Wednesday against murder of Dr. Payal Tadvi | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: Less than a day after taking charge of the investigation into the death of 26-year-old Dr Payal Tadvi, officials with the Mumbai Crime Branch have recorded the statements of as many as 15 people this regard. An investigator privy to the probe has hinted that the statements suggest that the second-year student of gyneacology at BYL Nair Hospital in the city was subjected to brash casteism by three female senior doctors.

Earlier this week, the parents of Payal Tadvi whose body was found hanging in her hostel room on May 22, told media outlets that she was constantly harassed, ragged and even mentally tortured by three senior doctors owing to her tribal background. The daughter of a tribal Muslim family from Jalgaon, Payal had on multiple occassions told her family about how she and one of her friends were hounded by the three female doctors.

(Dr Hema Ahuja, Dr Ankita Khandelwal and Dr Bhakti Mehare lodged inside a jail cell) [Picture Courtesy: Times Now]

Payal's husband, Dr Salman Tadvi, a medical professional employed at RN Cooper Hospital in the city, even indicated that his wife's death could have been a murder and not suicide as per the preliminary investigation. His views were reiterated by the family's lawyer, Nitin Satpute, who told a court of law that injury marks were found on Payal's body. However, the Investigating officer (IO) in this case, claimed that the police are still waiting for the VISCERA report to establish a definitive cause of death.

Mother of Bhakti Mehare (co-accused in Payal Tadvi suicide case): The allegations on them are false. They can't do anything like that...They are innocent, they will definitely get justice. Inquiry should be done so that the truth is revealed. pic.twitter.com/PgBf6C34TJ — ANI (@ANI) May 31, 2019

Meanwhile, the three senior female doctors who have been accused of abetting Dr Payal Tadvi's alleged suicide, are currently in the custody of the Mumbai police. Pictures of Dr Hema Ahuja, Dr Ankita Khandelwal and Dr Bhakti Mehare inside a jail cell are doing rounds on social media with student wing organisations and tribal advocacy groups hailing it as a landmark in their demand for justice for Dr Payal Tadvi.

It has also been established that Dr Hema Ahuja, one of the accused, was very rough with her behaviour towards Payal and one of her friends. However, investigators have not been able to furnish clarity on allegations that Payal was harassed by the accused on the basis of her caste. A preliminary probe has revealed that Payal was targeted over alleged incompetence, delay in work and other professional setbacks.
