PM Narendra Modi Cabinet 2.0 Portfolios out: Meet the key members in the Modi cabinet

Narendra Modi

Amit Shah

Rajnath Singh

Nirmala Sitharaman

Narendra Modi Cabinet Ministers

BJP

Amit Shah

Rajnath Singh With Modi - ANI

Nitin Gadkari

Nitin Gadkari

Nirmal Sitharaman

S Jaishankar

S Jaishankar

President Ram Nath Kovind directed the allocation of portfolios on the advice of Prime Ministeron Friday, May 31.is the new Home Minister replacingwhile Rajnath Singh will be replacingas the Defence Minister. Here's all that you need to know about the key members in the Modi cabinet.The incumbentchief Amit Shah has been allotted Home Ministry. On Thursday, Shah had said that he will put his best efforts to serve the country and thanked Prime Minister Narendra Modi for reposing faith in him. Shah is the most notable inclusion in the government and will serve at the Centre for the first time as a minister. Shah is often hailed as the BJP's most successful president for crafting its way to power states after states.The BJP's 'Chanakya' blazed such a trail that the 'Modi Wave 2.0' surpassed its own original avatar with a much bigger saffron surge. The record tally that he has now delivered for the BJP in the Lok Sabha 2019 elections is already being seen by many as something that would be difficult to repeat, though there are others who believe there is more to come as they point towards further inroads to be made in West Bengal, Odisha and in down South. A man with avowed aim of having the BJP rule from "panchayat to Parliament", Shah has built his party into a formidable army that has been forever marching on since he took charge as its president in July 2014, turning India more saffron than it has ever been.Rajnath Singh is the new Defence Minister replacing Nirmala Sitharaman. The former BJP chief is a man of all seasons who maintains cordial relations with leaders across the political spectrum and enjoys wide acceptability. PM Modi banked heavily on him in the last five years whenever there was a crisis, be it farmers agitation, violence in Jammu and Kashmir or Jat quota stir.His good rapport with opposition leaders like Ghulam Nabi Azad, Mamata Banerjee, Mulayam Singh Yadav, and Omar Abdullah had made him government's pointsman for any discussion with the opposition. The image of the 67-year-old minister carrying on his shoulder the coffin of soldiers killed in February 14 Pulwama terror attack will remain etched in the minds of the people.Nitin Gadkari will continue to be the Minister for Road Transport and Highways, along with Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises. The 62-year-old senior BJP leader, is often dubbed as one of the high performing ministers during the first term of Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led government.Known for his administrative prowess and innovative approach in addressing issues, Gadkari has been instrumental in pushing infrastructure development and reviving projects stuck for many years. He was also at the helm of Rural Development, and Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water and Sanitation ministries from June 4 till November 9, 2014.Former Defence Minister has been given a charge of Finance, and Ministry of Corporate Affairs. The portfolio of Finance was earlier held by Arun Jaitley. However, Jaitley opted out of the ministry due to health issues. Nirmala Sitharaman was the first woman to be appointed full-time Defence Minister of India in September 2017.One of BJP's chief spokespersons before its ascent to power, Sitharaman is an alumnus of Jawaharlal Nehru University and London School of Economics. As the Defence Minister, Sitharaman attempted to strengthen the Army, Navy and the Air Force and was credited for expediting the decision making process relating to defence procurement. However, her biggest moment came when India carried out air strikes on a terrorist training camp in Pakistan's Balakot. She also took on the opposition head on with her fiery defence of the Rafale fighter jet deal in Parliament.Former foreign secretary turned minister S Jaishankar has got the External Affairs ministry, replacing Sushma Swaraj. For Jaishankar, who served as the press secretary for former President Shankar Dayal Sharma, life came full circle when he took oath as a cabinet minister on the the forecourt of the majestic Rashtrapati Bhavan.The former foreign secretary, a surprise pick in the Modi government, carries with him more than three decades of diplomatic experience. Jaishankar, a son of late K Subrahmanyam, one of India's leading strategic analysts, was also a key member of the Indian team which negotiated the landmark Indo-US nuclear deal.The new External Affairs minister's moves will be keenly watched to see whether he brings any changes in India's approach in dealing with a hostile Pakistan. Another challenge for him will be to further strengthen India's ties with China, badly hit by the Doklam standoff in mid 2017. He will also have to deal with overall expectations of expanding India's global influence and stature, particularly in key multilateral forums like G-20, Shanghai Cooperation Organisation and BRICS.- With inputs from PTI
