Amit Shah and S Jaishankar - new faces in CCS which takes key decisions on national security

Amit Shah and S Jaishankar - new faces in CCS which takes key decisions on national security I Photo credit: PTI | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi in an overhaul of the members of the Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS), allocated the charge of Home Ministry to BJP chief Amit Shah and the Defence Ministry to veteran party leader Rajnath Singh. Nirmala Sitharaman was given the Finance Ministry portfolio and former diplomat S Jaishankar made the External Affairs Minister (EAM).

With Amit Shah as the Home Minister, there is speculation that the government might take a strong stand against insurgency in Jammu & Kashmir, Bangladeshi immigrants, Citizenship Amendment Bill and the National Register of Citizens (NRC) as well as Left Wing Extremism (LWE) in the Naxal-hit areas.

In a major irritant for Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who based the Lok Sabha campaign for his Aam Admi Party (AAP) on full statehood for Delhi, Shah will control Delhi Police and manage the centre-state relationship.

In an unexpected move Piyush Goyal, who has stood in for Jaitley during his absence on account of hospitalisation, has been assigned the Ministry of Commerce along with Railways instead of the expected Finance portfolio and on the other hand, Nirmala Sitharman has been made Finance Minister, instead.

The Cabinet Committee on Security is tasked with discussing, debating and decision-making on key appointments in national security apparatus, defence policy and expenditure and largely all matters related to national security.

Here’s a brief look at the new faces in the high-powered CCS:

Narendra Modi: A mass leader who has unified India’s different castes under a single banner of nationalism. He is only the fourth Prime Minister in India to be handed a second consecutive term. Modi has projected a strongman image of mass appeal who has taken a strong stand against Pakistan-sponsored terror.

Rajnath Singh: A BJP veteran who has served as the party president from 2005 to 2009 and 2013 to 2014. He has also served as the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh in 2000.

Amit Shah: The second-in-charge to PM Modi himself, he contested the 2019 Lok Sabha from Gandhinagar constituency in Gujarat. He defeated Congress’s CJ Chavda by a landslide margin of 5.5 over lakh votes. Shah, known for his organizational skills, is credited for the BJP's historic win in 2014 and 2019.

Nirmala Sitharaman: She has been a Rajya Sabha member and also served as the defence minister in the first term of the BJP-led NDA government. Sitharaman has served also as the Minister of State for Finance and Corporate Affairs under the Ministry of Finance and the Minister for Commerce and Industry with independent charge.

S Jaishankar: Subrahmanyam Jaishankar served as the foreign secretary till 2018. He has also served as envoy to China in the past.
