It's Finally Goodbye for Mahesh Sharma as Culture Minister Dropped From Council

New Delhi: On Thursday, Narendra Modi took oath as the prime minister for the second time, while more than 50 NDA leaders took the oath as ministers. The focus was either on new faces such as Amit Shah and S. Jaishankar or the forced absence of Arun Jaitley and Sushma Swaraj (on grounds of health). However, two polarising figures were also absent from the scene.

Mahesh Sharma, who as culture minister repeatedly made communal remarks and even attended the funeral of a man accused in the lynching of Mohammad Akhlaq, was not given a ministerial position. He won from the Gautam Buddh Nagar constituency with a huge margin over the mahagathbandhan.

In September 2015, Sharma first came under the scanner for saying that former President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, “despite being a Muslim“, was a “great nationalist and humanist”. He came under criticism for implying that Indian Muslims are not really Indian.

In May 2016, the former culture minister created another controversy. When a Congolese man was killed in Delhi, Sharma termed the incident “unfortunate”, but also added for good measure, “even Africa is not safe“. He said in an interview, “India is a large country and such incidents will give a bad name to India. It is an unfortunate incident. However, even Africa is not safe.”

Considering that Masonda Ketada Oliver’s killing was not an isolated incident and several African nationals were reportedly attacked around that time, Sharma’s statements did not inspire confidence that the Indian government would ensure safety and protection of international visitors.

A few months later, in October 2016, Sharma was spotted at the funeral of a man accused of lynching Mohammad Akhlaq in Bisada, Dadri. Akhlaq was lynched by a mob, who suspected that he had stored beef. Sharma, under whose constituency the village falls, overtly supported the accused since the incident was reported.

Also Read: Shame on You, Culture Minister Mahesh Sharma

Days after the murder, he reportedly said, “It (the murder) took place as a reaction to that incident (cow slaughter). You must also consider that there was also a 17-year-old daughter in that home. Kisi ne usey ungli nahin lagaayi (nobody touched her).”

When Ravin Sisodia, one of the accused, died in jail, his body was draped in the tricolour. Attending the funeral, Sharma said, “The attitude of the (state) government has been disappointing. It cannot escape the responsibility of this death. If he was unwell, why was he not given medical treatment, why was he not given medical help on time? If there was a scuffle and he was beaten up, there should be an inquiry. They have accepted the demand for a CBI inquiry.”

Met the family of deceased Ravi in Bisara village, Greater Noida. Bisara get settled now pic.twitter.com/RfDzga3ddC — Dr. Mahesh Sharma (@dr_maheshsharma) October 7, 2016

Also missing was Jayant Sinha, who in July last year garlanded eight people convicted in the lynching of Alimuddin Ansari in Jharkhand. The Jharkahnd leader secured a comfortable victory from the Hazaribagh constituency, securing almost 70% of the vote.

When photos of Sinha garlanding the convicts came to light, he did not apologise or backtrack, but said he was “very happy” to see them as they belonged to his constituency and it was his duty to provide them “justice”. He then cast aspersions on the judicial system. “I have repeatedly expressed my misgivings about the fast-track court judgement sentencing each accused to life imprisonment,” he tweeted.

Also Read: Jayant Sinha Is No Different From the Garden Variety, Saffron-Clad Sanghi Bigot

It later emerged that Sinha had been paying for the legal fees of the accused. “They (accused) came from a poor family. Their family members requested us to assist them financially in order to help them in hiring an able advocate. I, along with other members of the party (BJP) helped them in paying for the advocate’s fees,” Sinha was quoted as saying by the Indian Express.
