Smriti Irani, the bahu who rose from Chandni Chowk defeat to rout Rahul Gandhi in Amethi

Smriti Irani emerged as the biggest hero of the 2019 Lok Sabha election for the BJP. She defeated Congress president Rahul Gandhi in his pocket-borough of Amethi. The BJP was confident of return to power but handing over electoral defeat to Rahul Gandhi has hurt the morale of the Congress, the principal Opposition party in Parliament.

Born and brought up in Delhi, Smriti Irani shot to fame with popular TV soap Saas Bhi Kabhi Bahu Thi, in which she played the central character of Tulsi. Her portrayal of Tulsi is still fresh in people's memory. The TV serial was a rage in early 2000s. Her popularity made her entry into the BJP easier.

Chandni Chowk defeat

Smriti Irani joined the BJP in 2003 and contested 2004 Lok Sabha election that the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government had advanced by six months hoping to cash in on "feel good" factor. The BJP lost the election despite high octane "Shining India" campaign and Smriti Irani was humbled by senior Congress leader Kapil Sibal.

She polled only 26 per cent votes against Sibal's 71 per cent from Chandni Chowk Lok Sabha seat. The BJP's gamble to field a popular TV actress failed to impress the voters.

The party had expected that women, thought to be dedicated viewers of saas-bahu television soap operas would support Smriti Irani. But polling percentage of women in Chandni Chowk was 10 per cent lower than that of men - 47 per cent to 57 per cent.

Despite her loss, Smriti Irani was rewarded by the BJP, which nominated her as the executive member of the party's central committee.

The turning point

By the end of the year, she courted controversy during her visit to Surat, where Smriti Irani declared that she would undertake "fast unto death" if Narendra Modi did not step down as Gujarat chief minister.

The comments did not go down well with the BJP, then headed by LK Advani, who conveyed his displeasure to her. Smriti Irani, back in Mumbai, met then Maharashtra BJP president Gopinath Munde and retracted her statement on Modi.

Smriti Irani tendered unconditional apology saying she was a "victim of propaganda". This proved to be a turning point in her political career. She became a disciplined soldier of the party thereafter.

Smriti Irani was among the first politicians to demand capital punishment for rapists. In 2009, while campaigning for Vijay Goel - her cabinet colleague in the previous Modi government, Smriti Irani voiced concerns about safety of women in Delhi while seeking death penalty for rapists as a deterrent.

Rise and rise

Having learnt her lesson in politics, Smriti Irani rose the ladders fast in the BJP becoming national secretary and the president of BJP Mahila Morcha in 2010. A year later, she became a Rajya Sabha MP from Gujarat with the blessings of Narendra Modi, the then Gujarat chief minister.

When Narendra Modi was projected as the prime ministerial candidate for 2014 Lok Sabha polls and Amit Shah was given charge of Uttar Pradesh. Smriti Irani entered electoral fray again but from Uttar Pradesh's Amethi Lok Sabha seat.

Rahul Gandhi had held this seat since 2004. Both Smriti Irani and Rahul Gandhi had made their electoral debut in 2004 albeit on contrasting note.

Smriti Irani lost the Lok Sabha election from Amethi in 2014 but brought down Rahul Gandhi's victory margin from 3.70 lakh in 2009 to 1.07 lakh. Despite her loss to the Congress president, Smriti Irani continued her outreach programme in Amethi.

And, despite her loss, Smriti Irani was made a cabinet rank minister by PM Modi in 2014. She was given key human resource development portfolio. Later, she was shifted to textiles ministry.

By the time, 2019 Lok Sabha election was announced, Smriti Irani had substantially expanded her mass base in Amethi. While Rahul Gandhi was busy in national political drive to revive the Congress, Smriti Irani launched a powerful campaign against him dubbing him as "missing MP" in Amethi.

Smriti Irani's campaign and the BJP's booth-level election strategy worked in her favour. Rahul Gandhi became the first Congress president from Nehru-Gandhi to taste defeat in a Lok Sabha election. He also became only the second Gandhi after Sanjay Gandhi to lose from Amethi Lok Sabha seat. Sanjay Gandhi had lost from Amethi in 1977.

With victory over Rahul Gandhi in Amethi, Smriti Irani has retained her cabinet berth in Modi government-II. In addition to textiles, she has also got the portfolio of women and child development, which was previously held by Maneka Gandhi, the wife of late Sanjay Gandhi and an MP from Sultanpur.
