BJP mocks West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee for not attending Modi’s swearing-in through caricature

Poster of WB CM Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: Twitter

New Delhi: After West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee refused to visit New Delhi for the swearing-in ceremony of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, posters ridiculing the TMC supremo appeared in the national capital.

The posters were placed all over the national capital by BJP Delhi spokesperson Tajinder Pal Singh Bagga.

The poster read: “Mamata's U-turn at the last moment, says sorry Modi ji, I won't come for the swearing-in ceremony. Sorry Modi ji, can't find clean saree.”

In the poster featuring Mamata Banerjee, she can be seen in her trademark white saree with a blue border soaked in the blood of BJP activists who were killed in Bengal before and after polls.

Reason for not coming to Oath Ceremony pic.twitter.com/eVtXLTz8hw — Tajinder Pal Singh Bagga (@TajinderBagga) May 31, 2019

Banerjee declined to attend Modi's swearing-in alleging that the saffron party was using the ceremony "to score political points".

The BJP, however, slammed the CM saying that she was simply looking for "excuses" to avoid attending the event.

"The oath-taking ceremony is an august occasion to celebrate democracy, not one that should be devalued by any political party which uses it as an opportunity to score political points," Banerjee had said in a tweet.

Mamata’s decision to skip the event came after the BJP confirmed that at least 70 family members of party activists killed in West Bengal had been invited to the ceremony as "special guests".

TMC is staring at a political crisis right now as many leaders and local cadres are joining the BJP in droves after the saffron party’s grand entry in the state.

The BJP got 18 seats in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections while the TMC got 22.

Senior BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya had earlier accused Banerjee of practising politics of "terror" in the state and claimed that the people of the state had lost faith in her as well her party.
