Atmosphere of fear prevails in VNSGU, says senator

Surat: A senate member of Veer Narmad South Gujarat University (VNSGU) shot off a letter on Tuesday to the university registrar levelling allegations against those in power. The senator made the allegations while withdrawing his candidature from the election for a seat in the academic council (AC).

Ganpat Dhameliy, an elected senator from ABVP, was pressurized to withdraw his candidature in the AC after which he wrote the letter. He alleged in the letter that from heads of the departments to professors and clerks, everyone in the university was working under threat. He also claimed that casteism was being promoted in the university.

“There was an atmosphere of fear and culture of leg-pulling in the university now while its academic standards were deteriorating rapidly. Only dirty politics gets importance now and thus academic activities have got pushed to the back seat. Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s vision for education is being neglected,” Dhameliya wrote.

He has said, “I feel sad for the university as I am a senator. Instead of achieving academic excellence, the university bigwigs are into political competition to finish each other. A few people have put the university in a bad situation in the name of an organization.” Dhameliya was pointing towards the parent body of a political outfit.

He also expressed anger over letters of senators not being replied by the university. “Nothing is being done for the students benefit. It seems the university is for the benefit of a few people only. Principal, HODs, professors and clerks are being threatened,” he says in the letter.

Dhameliya told TOI, “I withdrew my candidature from the seat of other than dean from computer science and IT faculty in the AC due to objections. I have expressed my thoughts in the letter.”

Vice-chancellor Shivendra Gupta told TOI, “Dhameliya’s allegations are baseless. I refute them. We are open for an inquiry.”

Two professors were made to sit in the office of vice-chancellor from 2pm to 8.45pm on Monday. They were pressurized to convince Dhameliya to withdraw his candidature. Gupta confirmed that the professors were in his office, but said no one was pressurized.

Dhameliya had contested syndicate election in September 2018 but he was not declared ABVP’s official candidate.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
