BIMSTEC cannot replace SAARC: Nepal's PM KP Sharma Oli

Prime Minister of Nepal who is the current chair of SAARC (South Asia Association for Regional Cooperation) has urged for "revival" of the regional grouping which has been dead since 2016 when India suffered terror attacks at the hands of Pakistan based terror groups.

Speaking exclusively to India Today, Nepalese Prime Minister KP Sharma Oli said, "I don't want to talk about regional and other issues. But, as the chair, Nepal wants to revive SAARC and make it effective again. Developing relations in the region is better than anything else."

Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in a major diplomatic move, invited BIMSTEC (Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation) nations, Mauritius and Kyrgyzstan for his swearing-in ceremony to emphasise the importance of neighbourhood in his government's foreign policy framework.

"Modi ji invited BIMSTEC leaders and something from outside for this swearing-in program. It indicates that India wants to work together with the neighbours. PM Modi wants to work with the leaders of the region. It indicates that Modi ji feels that we are facing common problems and share common future. We have to work together to face the challenges of the time and meet our goals", said the Nepalese Prime Minister.

BIMSTEC is being touted as the alternative to SAARC and while most nations feel the need to focus on this grouping that has now been brought to life from the ashes of the South Asian body, many believe that both are independent of each other and one cannot be replaced by the other.

Speaking to the media on Friday, Sri Lankan President Sirisena concurred with Nepal's PM when he said, "Both BIMSTEC and SAARC are significant organisations. Its very important that countries cooperate in terms. Mutual friendship and cooperation."

India and Nepal also had a bilateral meeting on Friday where both sides reviewed bilateral ties. Prime Minister Oli said that detailed discussion would take place when PM Modi visits Nepal.

Earlier, Nepal had extended an invitation to President Kovind to visit Nepal. Similar, invitation was extended Prime Minister Modi during the bilateral meeting.

India and Nepal went through a difficult phase during the blockade period but both nations have resolved matters and normalised ties.

There continue to remain certain issues that the two sides would have to resolve like the demonetised Indian currency that is still deposited in Nepalese banks and India is yet to take them back in exchange for new currency.

Prime Minister Oli expressed confidence in the Modi administration and said that it would be resolved soon. "Those issues are not that huge and serious that it cannot be resolved. These problems can be resolved. We will not discuss it today but will take it up later", he said.

India's new External Affairs Minister Dr. S. Jaishankar has had a difficult relationship with Nepal since he was Foreign Secretary in 2015 when Modi administration had flown him to Kathmandu to deal with the crisis entailing writing of the new constitution of Nepal.

On his appointment as a minister in Modi's cabinet, Prime Minister Oli said, "Friendship of neighbouring countries does not depend on an individual but with the government, with PM Modi and with the people of India. The composition of the government is the business of India entirely. Whoever takes whatever portfolio, our friendly ties are not dependent on such appointments."

Also Read | Nepal PM KP Sharma Oli gifts Rudraksh mala to PM Narendra Modi

Also Watch | PM Narendra Modi to meet BIMSTEC leaders; Shopian encounter, more
