South Delhi: 32-year-old man dies in accidental firing while showing off pistol to friend

A 32-year-old man allegedly shot himself dead in an inebriated state while trying to show his pistol to his friends in South Delhi's Sangam Vihar area on Monday night. Police are investigating the matter as the family members of the deceased has alleged that the friend has shot him dead.

According to the police, the the deceased has been identified as Amit Kumar, a resident of Sangam Vihar.

"A police control room call was received at around 1:30 am from a private hospital informing about admission of a person with gunshot injury in the head who was later referred to AIIMS Trauma Centre. A team rushed to the hospital and found that Kumar was declared brought dead," said Deputy Commissioner of Police (South) Vijay Kumar.

During the course of investigaion, it was revealed that Amit had gone to meet his friend Bablu late night in Gandhi Camp where the two had drinks and later left for Amit's house. On the way, the two stopped at their friend Rajnish's house who saw a pistol concealed in Amit's clothes, said the police.

Rajnish asked Amit about the pistol and he said he keeps it for protection. It was then that he took the pistol in his hand, removed the magazine, and put the pistol on his temple. "Rajnish tried to stop him and Bablu who was standing at a distance also shouted asking to stop but he pressed the trigger and a shot was fired which injured him," Kumar said.

Amit was rushed to a hospital on a scooter by two persons identified as Sumit and Rahul while Bablu took the weapon and rushed to Amit's house to inform the family. He allegedly handed over the weapon to Amit's brother.

The police said that Amit died while being taken to AIIMS Trauma Centre and was declared dead at the hospital. The police have registered a case under section 304 (Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder) of the Indian Penal Code and sections 25 and 27 of the Arms Act.

The police added that they are waiting for the post-mortem report to get a clear picture.

HOW IT HAPPENED
