2 yrs on, clueless CBI comes out with sketches, reward

Ludhiana: Namdharis are disappointed that after more than two-and-a-half years, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has issued sketches of the killers of sect’s matriarch Chand Kaur and announced a reward of Rs 5 lakh for the informer. Sect followers said the fresh release of the sketches — which were earlier released by the state government soon after the matriarch’s killing — indicated that the CBI has failed to find any clue. The followers are now planning to approach sect head Thakur Uday Singh with an appeal to get the National Investigation Agency (NIA) probe the case.

On April 4, 2016, Mata Chand Kaur, 88, wife of former Namdhari head Satguru Jagjit Singh, was gunned down by two motorcycle-borne assailants outside the sect headquarters at Bhaini Sahib village, about 30km from Ludhiana. The followers said in these three years, the investigation agency and the Punjab police kept giving assurances to arrest the accused soon. However, despite sketches and prize money announcement, the agencies have failed to clinch any clue.

The TOI visited the sect headquarters and met followers and ‘sevadars’ who were close to Kaur. Sooba Balwinder Singh Jhalli, 50, manager at headquarters who was associated with the matriarch for 21 years, said, “The pain and grief, which were there on the day Mataji was killed, hasn’t assuaged. For the first five months, Punjab police SIT investigated the case, but with no success. Now, CBI is investigating, but the case has reached a dead end. Releasing sketches again with prize money means the probe agency is in the dark.”

Kesar Singh Laddi, 46, who was a sewadar with the matriarch since 2006, said: “I won’t say that the investigation agency has not given its best. They have been visiting here frequently and cross-checking everything, but the disappointment is that they have not been able to find anything. The entire sect is waiting for the day the accused will be arrested.”

For the followers, Mata Chand Kaur was not only the wife of the former head, but like their mother. She would wake up at 2am, and after offering prayers, would clean the premises, cook food in the langar hall for all workers, serve cows in the gaushala, work at construction sites, purchase clothes for all villagers, and give money to them for their needs, they added.

In charge of the langar hall at headquarters Ranjeet Singh, 34, said: “For 13 long years, I have worked under the guidance of Mataji. At the langar hall, Mataji would come and start chopping vegetables and making chapattis every day. Even today, I feel her absence. Doors of Mata Chand Kaur were open to all, including those out of the sect. Anybody could come to her with their problems and return with a solution. We are waiting for justice now.”

Namdhari sect spokesperson Lakhvir Singh Baddowal said: “In the cases of targeted killings, NIA has done a good job. Now, we are planning to approach Satguru Thakur Uday Singh and ask him to approach the state government for an NIA probe.”

Case file

April 4, 2016: Mata Chand Kaur was gunned down by two turbaned assailants in Bhaini Sahib. Same day, a SIT was formed

April 5, 2016: Police released sketches of two suspects

April 8, 2016: Police announced a reward of Rs 10 lakh for information about the killers

April 10, 2016: Namdhari Darbar announced a reward of Rs 20 lakh for information

September 17, 2016: Case handed over to the Central Bureau of Investigation



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
