Mohali police crack Balongi youths murder case, one arrested

MOHALI: The Mohali police claims to have cracked the Balongi youth murder case. Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Harcharan Singh Bhullar said that the police have arrested one accused in this connection whereas four more are absconding. All the five have been named in the FIR. The arrested man has been identified as Chandan Paswan (26) whereas Dalip Kumar, Amit Tiwari, Daddu and Mass are absconding, he said. Police said that they all are friends and suspects have involvements in petty crimes.Bhullar said, “During investigations we learnt that a total of five accused not just two who killed Sunny. So, the teams were constituted and one out of the five has been arrested.” The local police on Wednesday had booked two persons by name on charges of allegedly murdering their friends in Mohali.The two accused are identified as Amit Tiwari and Dilip Kumar both residents of Ambedkar colony in Balongi Mohali. A day after three more names were added to the FIR, said the police. The victim has been identified as Sunny Paswan was also a resident of Ambedkar Colony in Balongi. He was 19 year old.According to Balongi police station, house officer sub inspector Yogesh Kumar, victim’s father Madhusudhan told police that on the intervening night of Tuesday and Wednesday Amit and Dilip came to their house and asked Sunny to accompany with them. Later they all met near open area in Ambedkar Colony and had liquor.There there was an altercation over some issue which led to murder of Sunny. The post mortem confirmed the cause of death was due to attack with a sharp edged weapon that ruptured the kidney of the victim.Madhusudhan told police that after the two accused took Sunny with them he did not return home. On Wednesday morning, the colony people saw the body of Sunny lying near the fields. Prima facie the body had stab marks said SI Yogesh Kumar and the postmortem was conducted after which the body was handed over to the family members of the victim.
