President's rule in J&K to be extended beyond July 3

New Delhi: President’s rule in Jammu and Kashmir will be extended beyond July 3 for another six months as the Union home ministry has initiated consultation with the state government and agencies on the overall security scenario in the state.The newly sworn-in Narendra Modi government, in its second term, will take up the proposal for the extension of President’s rule before it is sent to the two Houses of the Parliament , ET has learnt. A senior government official told ET, “Once approved, the state will come under Centre’s rule for another six months during which the Centre plans to hold assembly elections.” The Election Commission of India (ECI) has not yet announced schedule for the elections. With central and state governments citing security concerns, it is unlikely that polls in J&K will be held immediately, sources claimed.After 1996, President’s rule in J&K was imposed in the militancy-hit state last year. The gazette notification issued by President Ram Nath Kovind in December last year had referred to a report from Governor Satya Pal Malik . The Governor in his order had stated that he was‘satisfied’ with the President's rule and it was needed in the state. Malik in his report to the Centre had cited the “impossibility of forming a stable government by the coming together of political parties with opposing political ideologies”. The extension of President’s rule for another six months will also give security forces free hand to go after militants and separatists in the Valley.However, as per the records available with the home ministry, local recruitment of youths is on an all-time high. Last year, 217 local youths had taken to militancy. This year till now 45 young people have picked up arms. As many as 86 militants have been killed by security forces till May this year, according to the army.J&K has been without an elected government since the PDPBJP coalition collapsed in June 2018. The state was placed under Governor's Rule, on June 19, 2018 and was brought under President's Rule on 19 December 2018. Unlike the other states of India, the process of imposing President's rule in J&K is more nuanced as it is placed under the Governor’s rule for the first six month.
