City turns a scorcher at 45.1C

Ludhiana: The heat wave further intensified in the city on Friday, as the highest day temperature was recorded in May in the city in the past five years at 45.1 degrees Celsius. The good news for residents on the weather front is that from next week, the day temperature may drop by a few degrees, as easterly winds are approaching the state.

With clear weather being witnessed in Ludhiana on Friday, and the sun shining in all its glory, it impact was visible on the maximum temperature in city, which was five degrees above normal. On 19 May 2016, and 27 May 2018, the maximum temperature was recorded at 44.6 degrees Celsius in the city, but the highest day temperature in May was 46.5 degrees Celsius on 24 May 2013, and on 27 May 2010, which was the highest this decade. The all-time highest temperature for the city in May was recorded at 48.3 degrees on 29 May 1944.

Meanwhile, the minimum temperature in Ludhiana on Friday was recorded at 27.2 degrees (three degrees above normal) and 1.9 degrees more than on Thursday. As residents are grappling with the intense heat wave for the past few days, the Met department’s forecast may sound like music to them. “Though dry weather is likely to continue in Ludhiana in the first week of June, but due to arrival of easterly winds, the day temperature might fall by about two degrees sometime next week. The night temperature is expected to be around normal this time,” said Chandigarh Met department director Surender Paul.

The Met department website predicts the maximum temperature to rise gradually and touch 46 degrees Celsius on Tuesday. The night temperature is also expected to rise and touch 28 degrees Celsius by Monday. Meanwhile, residents continue to battle with the scorching heat in the city. “For the past many days, the heat wave has made our lives difficult. It is impossible to go out during the day, especially around noon, so we do most of our shopping (including daily food items) in the morning and evening hours. During the day, we don’t venture out and spend our days inside air-conditioned rooms, because of the fear of sun-related injuries,” said Manpreet Kaur, a home-maker of BRS Nagar.

Many residents are so disturbed with the sweltering heat in the city that they are even planning to go to hill stations to escape the heat wave. “As it has been very hot for the past many days, and with no chances of immediate respite from such hot weather, we are planning to go to Mashobra near Shimla to escape the heat wave. It is always great to visit the hills during the harsh summer days,” said Ankit Jain, a student of Civil Lines.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
