Varun Dhawan and Sara Ali Khan’s Coolie No 1 remake’s shooting to kick off in Bangkok from August

While remakes of classic films seem to have piqued the interest of Bollywood filmmakers, director David Dhawan has also set in motion the things for re-creating one of his own old films. Starring Varun Dhawan and Sara Ali Khan, Coolie No 1’s remake was announced a while back on the former’s birthday. Now, as per reports, Varun’s father and director, David Dhawan has been scouting for locations to kick off the shoot and his search seems to have come to an end.

As per a report of Mumbai Mirror, Varun and Sara’s film which is a remake of Govinda and Karisma’s classic 1991 movie will be going on the floors in August and the shoot will start in Bangkok. The report also mentioned that after Bangkok, Varun and the crew of the film will be filming in Goa where Sara Ali Khan will join the shoot. The idea behind shooting the film in a foriegn land is to make it appeal to today’s audience. \

Just like in Judwaa 2, Varun’s character moves to London unlike the old film which was shot in India, in Coolie No 1 remake, the main lead will shoot in Bangkok. As per the report, “The idea this time too is the same as filming abroad gives the film a fresh vibe. The basic premise of a coolie caught between two girls remains the same but there are many new changes in the screenplay for it to appeal to today’s audience.”

Also Read: Varun Dhawan announces the release date of his upcoming comedy Coolie no.1; Read details

Also, Coolie No 1 will kick off the revival of the No 1 franchise of David Dhawan for which he was prominently known for. As per the report, Varun will be taking the baton forward for David’s No 1 franchise and the rest of the films like Biwi No, Jodi No 1, Hero No 1 and others will be recreated as per the current scenario. Also, Coolie No 1 will be remade, other films in the franchise will have original stories. Varun and Sara’s film will hit the screens on Labor Day, May 1, 2020.
