From the Pulpit: 'Be my witnesses' — even in the face of danger

"Do I have a witness?" A witness is someone who offers testimony in a court of law. A witness is someone who observes an incident or a happening and then speaks "on the record" about it. Witnessing is all about evidence; noticing and, under oath, reporting.

Jesus proclaimed a promise to his disciples on the occasion of his heavenly ascension: "You shall receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you and you will be my witnesses." Jesus promised his disciples the power of the Holy Spirit for witnessing. The promise is not just a perhaps or a maybe. The promise is full of certainty and God-given purpose.

Perhaps you’ve heard or spoken the phrase, "It’s all Greek to me." Permit me to offer definitions for two very important Greek words found in the Book of Acts, Chapter One. The Greek word for "power" is dunamis, from which we get our English word dynamite. Jesus is promising his disciples an explosive gift.

The Greek word for "witness" is marturion, from which we get our English word martyr. A martyr is someone who lays down their life for their beliefs. The explosive power of the Holy Spirit is for the expressed purpose of sharing the faith of Jesus in human words and deeds.

Jesus commissions his disciples to go and witness to unbelievers everywhere, both next door, around town, and globally. Jesus gives the command and provides the necessary power. The explosive lives of Christ-followers testify to the saving work of God. Christians are called to be observers and keepers of the teachings of Jesus: "Love others as I have loved you!"

ADVERTISEMENT

Someone once asked, "If you were on trial for being a Christian, would there be enough evidence to convict you?" Good question. Will we lay down our lives for the faith of Jesus?

Recently, I was asked by Voice of the Martyrs (VOM) to pray for three Christian brothers in India. Surjan, Kolah and Krishna are members of a village church in eastern India. They prayed for the wife of a friend who was ill. Instead of getting better, the woman died, and the villagers blamed the three Christians who had prayed for her.

The three men were handcuffed and placed in prison awaiting trial. They had no idea if they would ever see their families again. Kolah mostly worried about 27-year-old Krishna. The young man had been a Christian for only a month. What would time in prison do to his young faith?

In prison, the guards called the three men the "Halleluiah people" — followers of a strange religion. Surjan, Kolah and Krishna met every morning for prayer, and to encourage each other.

As the months passed, these three men shared the gospel of Jesus Christ with fellow prisoners. Thirteen prisoners came to know the Lord. A VOM-sponsored lawyer was able to get the three Christians released on bail after 11 months in prison, but they still face a trial.

Surjan, Kolah and Krishna may yet face life in prison for the crime of "murder" by prayer. Prison hasn’t killed the growing love these men have for Jesus. They continue to worship, pray and witness.

You shall be my witnesses! Filled with the Holy Spirit, we are dynamite martyrs for Jesus!
