Rahul Gandhi demonstrated fearless leadership, toiled day and night for Congress: Sonia Gandhi

UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi on Saturday congratulated and thanked her son and Congress president Rahul Gandhi for his valiant and relentless campaign in the Lok Sabha elections 2019, saying that he demonstrated his "fearless leadership" by taking on the Narendra Modi government.

Sonia Gandhi was addressing the Congress Parliamentary Party (CPP) meeting in New Delhi. In the meeting, she was once again elected leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party.

Congratulating Rahul Gandhi, Sonia Gandhi said, "I take this opportunity to whole-heartedly thank Rahul Ji for his valiant and relentless campaign. As Congress president, Rahul Gandhi has given his all and toiled night and day for the Congress party. He demonstrated his fearless leadership, by taking the Modi government head-on."

While addressing the CPP leaders, Sonia Gandhi also said that Rahul rejuvenated the Congress organisation in many states, and most recently "lead us to victory in Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh".

"As Congress president, he earned the respect and love of every worker and crores of voters across the length and breadth of our country," Sonia Gandhi said.

She said that Rahul Gandhi's leadership helped the Congress in highlighting the injustices carried out against farmers and others.

Sonia Gandhi said, "He highlighted the injustices carried out against farmers, workers, traders and small businesses, against the youth, women and the marginalised sections of our society."

She said, "Even as I speak, emotional messages are coming from all corners, vindicating his leadership. We all express our gratitude to him for his sincerity of purpose, his relentless effort, his hard work, and leadership."

Sonia Gandhi also said that the Congress fought bravely to expose the BJP government's misdeeds even with just 44 members in the previous Lok Sabha.

"Even though we were only 44 members in the previous Lok Sabha, and about 55 in the Rajya Sabha, under Rahulji's leadership, the Congress party has fought bravely to expose the government's misdeeds. I want to congratulate all of them for their hard work," she said.

The UPA chairperson said that while in Opposition, the Congress cooperated with the ruling government on a series of reforms, with constructive suggestions. "This time too, we will support progressive and inclusive policies but oppose the government strongly whenever they undertake divisive and regressive actions," Sonia Gandhi said.
