Andhra Pradesh: One dead, four injured after YSRCP, TDP workers clash in Anantapur

One dead & four injured in clashes between YSRCP and TDP workers in Bathalapalli Mandal, Anantapur district. (Photo credit: ANI) | Photo Credit: PTI

Hyderabad: After a bitter battle in the recently-concluded Lok Sabha and State Assembly elections in which Jaganmohan Reddy-led Yuvajana Sramika Raithu Congress Party (YRSCP) routed Chandrababu Naidu’s Telugu Desam Party (TDP), another rivalry unfolded on the streets of Anantapur district.

One person died and four others were injured in clashes between the cadre of two the parites in Bathalapalli Mandal area of Anantapur district in Andhra Pradesh.

"Two were critically injured but are out of danger. FIR registered, case filed under sections 302 & 307 of IPC. Probe underway," Dharmavaram, Rural Circle Inspector told the news agency ANI.

Andhra Pradesh: One dead & four injured in clashes between YSRCP and TDP workers in Bathalapalli Mandal, Anantapur district. Dharmavaram Rural CI says, "Two were critically injured but are out of danger. FIR registered, case filed under sections 302&307 of IPC. Probe underway" pic.twitter.com/VRbvW1lRT4 — ANI (@ANI) June 1, 2019

Workers of the rival parties have often clashed during the voting in the state the worst of which was seen on April 11.

At least two people were killed during the voting in phase one of Lok Sabha after clashes between YSRCP and TDP workers in Veerapuram village in Tadipatri constituency of Anantapur district, Andhra Pradesh.

TDP leader S Bhaskar Reddy was among the two people who died in the clash. Several incidents of arguments and fights were reported in the state on April 11 when Lok Sabha and Legislative Assembly elections were conducted in a single phase.

The police had to resort to lathi charge after a small argument between the TDP and YSRCP workers turned into a violent.

On the same day, in the state’s Narasaraopet, sitting MLA and YSRCP candidate Gopireddy Srinivasa Reddy sustained injuries after his car was allegedly attacked by TDP workers. In Sattenapali constituency of Guntur district, TDP candidate and Assembly Speaker Kodela Sivaprasad fainted after an attempted attack by YSRCP leaders, claimed TDP.

YSRCP swept 23 out of 25 Lok Sabha seats in AP and secured 151 seats in the state assembly. Party chief Jaganmohan Reddy took an oath of office and secrecy on May 30.


