President undecided on contesting for upcoming presidential polls

President Maithripala Sirisena says that he is not in a hurry to make his decision on contesting for the upcoming presidential election.

The President, who is currently in India for the oath-taking ceremony of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, speaking at a press conference held in New Delhi stated that he is waiting for the other political parties to decide their presidential candidates.

Further commenting, President Sirisena said the presidential election is slated to be held on December 7th.

The Elections Commission has made a statement in this regard, the President added.

Speaking on the Easter Sunday attacks by radical Islamic suicide bombers which led to the death of over 250 people, President Sirisena said that Sri Lanka had not received any reports of the attackers visiting India.

Continuing about the terrorist attack, Sirisena said: “It seems an international outfit supported them (the attackers and their accomplices). They travelled to countries abroad. Most of the people in the group, including the suicide bombers, were wealthy people… they are young men and professionals. A few had doctorates. It is possible that they collected money for the activities from within the country.”

The President reiterated his charge that he was kept in the dark about intelligence reports on an impending attack. India had warned Sri Lanka about the attacks three times.

“I was in Singapore at the time of the attacks. A clear report had been sent by Indian intelligence agencies on 4 April to Sri Lanka. Correspondence had taken place between defence chiefs. However, from 4 to 16 April, the day I left to Singapore, none of the chiefs informed me about this. I would have not left the country had I known it. I removed the Defence Secretary and Police Chief because of this grave shortcoming,” Sirisena said.

On the ongoing investigations, the President said: “We have received support of intelligence organisations of friendly countries – India, US and UK – came to help us. Foreign policy of Sri Lanka relies on neutrality – we prefer mediation in resolving differences.”

On the attacks on Muslims following the blasts, Sirisena said: “We assure security for all groups in Sri Lanka. We are a vibrant democracy like India. Security and safety of all citizens will be ensured by my Government and no community will be targeted.”
