Karnataka: RTE rules tweaked, but government schools still lose the education battle

MYSURU: Though the state government has tweaked the Right to Education rules to protect government-run schools, it has failed to provide any lifeline to the struggling schools this year also.According to sources in the department of public instruction, enrolment for Class 1 in most govenment schools is expected to remain in single digit except in Karnataka Public Schools where English medium has been introduced at LKG level this year. In many schools, two to three teachers are asked to manage seven classes. In these schools, classes between 1 and 3 are managed by one teacher under Nali-Kali module while rest four classes are run either by one or two teachers.For example, Shivarampet government higher primary school, started in 1903, is one of the oldest schools in the city. The school celebrated its centenary in 2003. However, this year, only one student has enrolled in Class I even though the school campus has an anganvadi.“At least 25 students are studying in classes between 1 and VII. One teacher is holding classes for students between Class I and III as Nali-Kali module is followed. There are a total of three teachers. If one of the two teachers takes off, another teacher needs to take the classes for Class IV and VII by putting them in a single room. Classrooms are big enough. So the classes can be taken jointly by asking students of one class to write notes while the others can be taught,” said a school teacher.“This year, only one student has been admitted in Class I till now. We are confident of more enrollments,” said a teacher.“The strength is very low. So many a times, classes are clubbed and taken together when teachers go on leave. Many a times one teacher take classes for all students in a single room,” said a parent.According to both parents and teachers, there is no dearth of facilities. “The students get free bags twice in a year. PU college is also on the same campus. The school is in a heritage building. Teachers are good and it is in the heart of the city. Locals are actively involved in school’s work. Still parents are not showing interest,” said Satish P Jain, a local resident.According to Mysuru South BEO Shivarame Gowda, the teachers are trained in taking multiple subjects. “So it is not a problem,” he said.According to DPI authorities, if the students’ strength is above 10, at least 2 teachers are deputed. “Unless and untill we improve the enrollment, it is difficult to find a solution to the problem," he said.
