Caste tensions on campus: ‘Are you from quota?’

Chuni Kotal

Lodha Shabar community

anthropology

The court, on May 31, sent three senior doctors of BYL Nair Hospital, arrested in connection with the suicide of Dr Payal Tadvi, to judicial custody till June 1

Two years ago, during orientation, the head of the SC/ST cell confessed that he had come for the orientation merely as a formality. This left a negative impression about the cell from the start –A student

Nobody, not even some of my closest friends, knows that I am from a Scheduled Caste family. But all around me I hear offensive comments made about us, and that hurts – A student

ByIt all starts with this question when you enter college and the harassment never really ends - Mirror reporters break down how a toxic culture of casteism is plaguing our top institutes.Approximately 1,800 km and three decades separate the deaths ofand Dr Payal Tadvi.Kotal, the first woman graduate from theof West Bengal, which was branded a “criminal tribe” by the British, committed suicide on August 16, 1992, in Kharagpur, after failing for two successive academic years while pursuing a Master’s degree inThe reason: “Attendance shortfall and low scores.”Some 27 years later, 26-year-old Tadvi, a Bhil Muslim pursuing a post-graduate degree in gynaecology at the city’s Topiwala National Medical College and BYL Nair Hospital, was found hanging in her hostel room in Mumbai, on May 22.In her case, the fingers point towards three of her seniors, who have now been arrested.Like Chuni Kotal, Dr Payal Tadvi, too, was breaking barriers, having come from a small town in Jalgaon and become a gynaecologist — something that no woman from her community had ever done before.Transcripts from her WhatsApp chat with a friend, as reported by Mirror, reveal how vulnerable she was in the last few months of her life. So much so that her parents feared she might kill herself. An investigation is currently on, to connect the dots between the alleged discrimination and the suicide. Tadvi’s death has brought large numbers of students in Mumbai on to the streets, calling for justice.Between the deaths of the two women, there have been scores of cases of Dalits, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students, succumbing to alleged exclusionary practices at educational institutes, which have got buried.The caste spectre has, for long, tainted India’s campuses, turning classrooms into graveyards for the oppressed; looming over even premier institutes such as the Indi­an Institutes of Technology; the Indian Institute of Science; the All India Institute of Medical Sciences; as well as a plethora of universities and colleges across the country.A majority of these students are first-generation schoolgoers, coming from homes which, till recently, did not have toilets or even electricity. They have a shaky command over English, and lack a sophistication that singles them out easily in a crowd.Tadvi’s suicide has brought Rohith Vemula’s death, in 2016, back in focus. Rohith’s younger brother Raja, now pursuing a law degree in Guntur, says nothing has changed on the ground as far as rooting out the systemic nature of casteism and discrimination in the classroom go, despite the outrage and national media coverage that followed in the wake of his brother’s death.“The everyday discrimination continues,” says Raja Vemula, over the phone. “The law is there, the commission is there, but the implementation is missing. We are forced to live on the outskirts of Guntur, where we have some community support, but we still can’t escape harassment. Inside the classroom, they [a section of his classmates] avoid talking to us. They keep their distance.”In medical colleges in Mumbai, the line of distinction between the students is drawn on the very first day, with one simple question: “Are you from quota?” This question is easier to field when the student is from a village and is staying in the hostel.“Everything that happens from thereon is based on the response to this question,” says an MD student, from a Scheduled Castes family in Marathwada, who does not wish to be named.Casteism can be subtle. It can be thinly veiled in a joke, expressed in admonishment, or through a casual remark — all serving the purpose of making a person feel inferior.An MBBS student from a Scheduled Tribe family in Gadchiroli reveals how a toxic culture of casteism by fellow teachers and students, pushed her to the brink of quitting in the First Year.“In two viva tests, I was asked my name, surname and the name of my village,” she says. “One professor asked me who I worshipped, and which community I belonged to. None of this was related to the test.”“At my college, I would be called ‘sarkaari mehmaan’ for being a quota student. I was constantly accused of wasting the taxpayers’ money,” says an MBBS student from a Scheduled Caste family in Marathwada. The student had a score of 173 out of 200 in the Common Entrance Test.Around 49 per cent of the students at IIT-Bombay are from the reserved category, but caste-related issues always take a backseat.“Two years ago, during our orientation programme, the head of the SC/ST cell took us aside and confessed that he was there for the orientation merely as a formality. This left an extremely negative impression about the cell from the start,” says a student.Responding to a query by Mirror, IIT-Bombay issued a statement that said: “Over the last three-and-a-half years, no incidents of caste-based harassment or discrimination have been reported, either through the online portal or over email/telephonic communication.”In 2015, three nursing students from Cooper Hospital had complained to the dean about caste harassment by staff members, one of whom has since retired. “We lodged a complaint with the Juhu police station, but the FIR was not registered. We are from Nandurbar. Everything about us was criticised, including the colour of our skin,” says Ankita Gavit, now 25, who belongs to a Scheduled Tribe in Nandurbar’s Navapur taluka.The Cooper Hospital administration claimed an internal inquiry committee was set up but the complainants never deposed. “We didn’t know about any hearing,” Ankita insists.A student Mirror spoke to from a Mumbai-based medical college, who got admission under the Scheduled Caste category, says she counts herself lucky that she never had to reveal her caste to her classmates. Primarily because she is from the city, and didn’t have to stay in a hostel.“Nobody, not even some of my closest friends, knows that I am from a Scheduled Caste family. But all around me I hear offensive comments made about us, and that hurts,” she says. “During the Maratha agitation, one of my seniors wrote on social media, ‘these people have no brains’. I had to force myself to not protest. Arguing with seniors is out of the question. They help during exams. Some of us even have to pretend we are against reservations.”The 2015 National Crime Records Bureau does not list caste-discrimination as a cause for suicide. That statistic hides behind deaths due to failure in examination, career problems and “other causes”. According to the data, the number of student suicides was 8,934, in 2015.In 2016, Maharashtra police records show that out of 279 cases of crimes against Scheduled Tribe members, there were convictions in only 20 cases. The corresponding figures in 2017 show that out of 349 cases, there was convictions in 19. In 2018, out of 287 cases, there were 32 cases of conviction.The statistics further reveal that 400 cases were registered in 2016 under the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, following complaints by members of the ST. This number went up to 467 in 2017, and 527 in 2018.Pratima Murthy, head of the psychiatry department at the National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore, says environmental adversities play a major role in precipitating mental distress. “In our country, there are many sources of religious and caste-oriented stigmatisation,” says Murthy.“They are more likely to be triggers for a person who is otherwise vulnerable. Avoidance, contempt and ill-treatment at the hands of teachers and fellow students, can take a heavy toll.”Educational institutions tend to hide behind the lack of data. They put the blame on one’s inability to manage stress and question the mental capability of the concerned student, as it has been in the case of Dr Payal Tadvi too.Trinamool Congress MP in the Rajya Sabha, Santanu Sen, says these are rare incidents. “There is caste-based reservation in our medical education system, but once a student is admitted, he or she is a doctor.”Sen, however, refuses to comment on the findings of the Thorat committee, set up by the Manmohan Singh-led government in 2007, to probe caste-based discrimination in the premier-most medical college in the country: the All India Institute of Medical Sciences.The Thorat committee found that 72 per cent of students (primarily Dalits) were discriminated against, and more than 90 per cent of them complained about being humiliated during practical and oral examinations.Segregation was being practiced in the hostels too. The Dalit students were socially-isolated and excluded from all sporting and cultural events.In Mumbai’s medical colleges, Dalits and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes students are discouraged from contesting in student elections. No Dalit student has ever won the students union poll. Rewat Kaninde, a former president of Dr Ambedkar Medicos Association, currently associated with JJ Hospital, disagrees with Sen.“This is a blatant lie. In 2012, the UGC had recommended equal opportunity cells in every medical college, to sensitise and counsel students. The medical colleges simply do not have any mechanism to register caste-based offences,” says Kaninde.Redress mechanisms are found wanting. First Year students in medical colleges, for example, cannot directly approach the head of the department, and have to contact the Second Year students instead, who are, in fact, the perpetrators in most cases.“Unlike anti-ragging committees, there are no authoritative bodies where complaints of caste discrimination can be tabled. Proving the crime is even more difficult,” says a student. Economist and Professor Emeritus at Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi, Sukhadeo Thorat, who had submitted the report, says that without reservations only exclusion will remain.“Students draw their views from their family and their community, where opposition to reservations runs deep. Antagonism comes naturally in the caste system. Even if seats are increased, the antagonism will not disappear,” says Thorat. Programmes like academic rehabilitation to help struggling students will remain strong only on paper unless “equality” is practised in campuses in accordance with what BR Ambedkar once said: “When equality is denied, everything is denied.”More than four decades ago, atrocities on Dalits had led to the formation of the Dalit Panthers — inspired by the Black Panthers movement in America — in the 1970s, in Mumbai, which sought to mete out instant justice to perpetrators of attacks on Dalits, advocating self-defence as a right.JV Pawar, 78, one of the founders of the Dalit Panthers, says he receives calls to revive the movement even today. “Behind the highrises, fast cars and the ‘open culture’ of the city, is a sordid history of caste abuse. It was the same 40 years ago, when we started our movement.”
