Forces go after militants, gun down 101 in first five months

editorial@tribune.com

Majid Jahangir

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, June 1

The war against militancy has notched a major success after security forces killed over 100 militants in the first five months of this year.

In the corresponding period last year, security forces had killed 75 militants across Kashmir. In 2017, security forces had killed over 55 militants in the first five months.

Last year, a 10-year record was broken when over 250 militants were killed in operations across Kashmir.

According to the police, the slain militants this year included 25 foreigners and 76 locals belonging to Jaish-e-Mohammed, Lashkar-e-Toiba, Hizbul Mujahideen and Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind.

On the killing of over 100 militants, Lt Gen Kanwal Jeet Singh Dhillon, General Officer Commanding of the Srinagar-based 15 Corps, said the “numbers are not relevant”.

“The most important thing is that the life of a terrorist, once he picks up gun, reduces from a few months to two or three days in some cases. Young boys are losing their lives for no reason. I once again request everyone, especially mothers and elders, to persuade the young Kashmiri boys to surrender and get back to normal life,” Lt General Dhillon told The Tribune.

The success against militants this year has come at a high price as the security forces have lost 60 men, including 40 CRPF personnel, who were killed in a suicide bombing in Pulwama district.

After the February 14 Pulwama suicide bombing that brought India and Pakistan on the brink of war, security forces went all out against the militant outfits, particularly Jaish, which had claimed the responsibility for the attack. Almost all top leadership of the Jaish has been eliminated in Kashmir post the Pulwama bombing. In the first three months, security forces killed over 60 militants.

When the five-phased parliamentary elections started in Kashmir in mid-April, security forces went slow, fearing a law and order situation. As the polls concluded on May 6, forces stepped up operations and killed 22 militants in the next 25 days.

Security forces officers said the interesting thing was that a large number of militants had been killed in the no-go areas, where security forces were unable to operate previously.

“The leadership of terrorists has been targeted and the vintage elements have been eliminated to a large extent,” said Swayam Prakash Pani, Inspector General of Police, Kashmir zone. Pani said the killing of vintage militants had helped in defusing the tension, which had helped in bringing the law and order situation under control.
