Bollywood newsmakers of the week: From celebrities attending PM Modi's oath ceremony to GQ Awards and more

Check out Bollywood newsmakers of this week | Photo Credit: Instagram

With each week, comes a full dose of updates for Bollywood buffs across the world. From film releases and special screenings to fashion looks and biggest bashes, the town of Bollywood and its stars is almost always buzzing. As we end another week, here's a look at everything that happened in the world of Bollywood this week.

The most important event of the week was the oath taking ceremony of Prime Minister Narendra Modi which was attended by Bollywood biggies like Siddharth Roy Kapur, Abhishek Kapoor, Rajinikanth, Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra, Karan Johar, Shahid Kapoor, Kangana Ranaut and many others.

This week also witnessed how the police case was filed against Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif's upcoming release Bharat. A PIL has been moved in Delhi High Court against the Salman Khan film seeking the change in its title. The petitioner says that the title of the film violates Section 3 emblems and names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act. The act states that the word Bharat cannot be used for commercial purposes.



This week the trailer of Ayushmann Khurrana's upcoming cop drama Article 15 was released too and it definitely impressed the fans. Nailing the cop look, in a first, the Badhaai Ho actor looks intimidating in his pretty-darn-serious avatar as IPS officer Ayan Ranjan in the hard-hitting trailer.

Not just the releases but the week was also high on glamour, with Katrina Kaif oozing hotness for the Filmfare magazine cover shoot to celebrities attending GQ Awards, the stars were out there in the brightest and glamorous best.

The stunning Katrina in the messy hair look took it to her social media handle and shared a series of photos where she can be seen donning various sexy outfits and her fans were definitely smitten by her charming aura. Take a look:

While the GQ Awards which took place last night were nothing less than a fashion extravaganza. The whos and who of B-Town graced the red carpet looking like million bucks and we are sure you wouldn't want to miss out on the photos.

This was it for the week, stay tuned to ZoomTv.com for more updates.
