Judge limits access to jury selection in Uber shooter trial, closes courtroom for first day

KALAMAZOO, MI — A Kalamazoo County judge on Wednesday amended a decorum order for the murder trial of Jason Dalton to allow a reporter to sit in on a portion of jury selection, but ruled the courtroom will be closed the first day.

Jason Brian Dalton faces six counts of murder, two counts of attempted murder and several felony firearms charges for a shooting rampage that crossed Kalamazoo County Feb. 20, 2016. Jury selection starts Thursday, Jan. 3, for the trial.

In a decorum order filed Dec. 14, Kalamazoo County Circuit Court Judge Alexander C. Lipsey decided media would not be allowed to be present in the courtroom for jury selection Jan. 3 and Jan. 4. He ruled media would have access to a remote-operated pool video feed on Jan. 4 but decided media would not be allowed in the courtroom Jan. 3, citing space limitations.

MLive submitted a letter to the court in November saying it believes strongly in the importance of allowing media access to the courtroom during jury selection since the media acts as a gatherer of information for the public.

MLive filed a motion Dec. 19 requesting in-person access to jury selection proceedings Jan. 3 and Jan. 4. In a motion hearing Wednesday, Jan. 2, MLive’s attorney, Mark Magyar, argued that courts have recognized space constraints can be a legitimate reason to place some limitations on access, but argued that it is not a basis for total closure.

“Even when there’s a legitimate space restriction constraint, a remedy to deal with that legitimate objective always has to be the most narrowly tailored and least restrictive," Magyar said.

Lipsey denied MLive’s motion to have access to the courtroom during the Jan. 3 jury selection, saying a majority of discussions happening during the proceeding will be held in chambers out of the purview of other potential jurors as potential jurors state why being on the jury would be an undue hardship. Individuals who do not claim hardship will be brought back for voir dire on Friday, Lipsey said. He said he sees no apparent benefit to the public for media to be present that day, and denied the motion.

Magyar argued it should be up the press, and not the court, to determine the news value of public court proceedings.

After being asked to reconsider his ruling by Magyar, Lipsey did say he will allow one member of the media to be present in the courtroom on Friday and said he will make that announcement to the jury pool.

“We are disappointed the judge has decided to close the first day of jury selection but we are pleased he agreed to allow a reporter to observe voir dire on Friday,” said Mickey Ciokajlo, regional news manager for MLive. “Open courts are fundamental to our democracy and the ability of the press to report on proceedings serves the public interest.”

Police say Dalton shot Tiana Carruthers, 25, in the parking lot of the Meadows town home complex, 5066 Meadows Blvd,, just before 6 p.m. on Feb. 20, 2016. Dalton allegedly shot and killed father and son Rich, 53, and Tyler Smith, 17, in the parking lot of Seelye Ford on Stadium Drive just after 10 p.m. that same evening. Police say he then shot four women and a 14-year-old girl in the parking lot of Cracker Barrel, 5581 S. 9th St. in Texas Township.

Mary Lou Nye, 62, of Baroda; Mary Jo Nye, 60, Dorothy “Judy” Brown, 74, and Barbara Hawthorne, 68, all of Battle Creek, were killed and the 14-year-old girl, Abigail Kopf, survived but was critically injured.

Dalton allegedly drove erratically that afternoon, picking up Uber fares between the shootings.
