Doctor’s forgery was part of 1 embezzlement, 2 murders

High Court

bail

fake death certificate

A gang kills an innocent old man to create a death certificate for a property ownerA doctor, MB Kulakarni, who approached thefor, had probably not fathomed the entire spectrum of the crime he had committed when he issued a. However, this may have come to his rescue as the HC did grant him bail.The case around this forgery was also a mystery to the police when they first confronted it.A plot to embezzle property led to two murders. To create a fake death certificate of the owner of the property, an old man was murdered. One of the conspirators then murdered his wife, who disapproved of the crime. The doctor, who had issued the fake death certificate, is now in the dock after the two murders were revealed.The scam and murders came to light when one Venkataswamy approached the Avalahalli police with the complaint that his wife, Sudharani, had committed suicide. The police realised he had murdered his wife. Venkataswamy confessed that he and co-conspirators had murdered Krishnappa and when his wife threatened to reveal this, he had killed her.The gang went to Kolar and found a 60-year-old doing odd jobs and brought him back to Hoskote, promising to get him a job. They gave him liquor laced with purgative (laxative). and then took him to the hospital, but made sure he died. Then they got Dr Kulkarni to issue a certificate that the dead man was Nanjappa.The entire plot was hatched by a realtor Belathur Ramesh to grab a piece of land in Belathur belonging to one Nanjappa. No one knew where Nanjappa was so Ramesh came up with this plan. His realtor friends Shankarappa, M Keshavamurhty and S Krishnamurty joined him in the plot.‘Stamp Vendor Krishnappa’ created fake documents to show that Nanjappa had sold the plot to Krishnappa. The gang got a 90-year-old man, Venkataramanappa, to pose as Nanjappa. Then they needed the death certificate of the original land owner for which they found Krishnappa. Venkataswamy, a security guard, who had helped the realtors, spilled the beans to his wife Sudharani and eventually set her on fire.The HC granted the doctor bail, saying, “It is not the case of the prosecution that petitioner is party to Krishnappa’s murder. The only allegation against him is that he forged the death certificate in Nanjappa’s name. The petitioner is 68 years old. Under these circumstances, it is fit to grant anticipatory bail with conditions.”
