Foreign Minister S Jaishankar takes forward Sushma Swaraj's Twitter legacy

External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar

New Delhi: Days after taking over the post of the Minister of External Affairs from Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Sushma Swaraj, Union minister S Jaishankar seems to be following his predecessor's footsteps by using Twitter to reach out to Indians seeking help from abroad.

In a surprise move, former Foreign Secretary S Jaishankar was inducted into the Narendra Modi Cabinet on May 30 during the grand swearing-in ceremony held at the Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi. He took charge as the new External Affairs Minister on Saturday.

On the day he took charge, Jaishankar lauded the promptness displayed by the Indian Embassy in Riyadh by providing support to a Kolkata-based man stranded in Saudi Arabia.

He retweeted a post by Indian envoy Suhel Ajaz Khan in Riyadh, in which Khan had assured the Indian man of help, on Sunday. In his tweet, the newly-appointed external affairs minister wrote, “Appreciate the prompt action on this Suhel. Pl keep me apprised (sic).”

Our Embassy in Rome/ Consul General in Munich will extend all assistance. Please be in touch with them @IndiainItaly @cgmunich https://t.co/JDGEfdZ5pP — Dr. S. Jaishankar (@DrSJaishankar) June 2, 2019

Our Embassy in Oman is trying to resolve this. Please continue to stay in touch with them @IndEmb_Muscat https://t.co/qnUAoRgt2m — Dr. S. Jaishankar (@DrSJaishankar) June 2, 2019

Meanwhile, Jaishankar has since then responded to a few more tweets of Indians abroad seeking help, assuring them the Indian embassies in the respective countries would help them in their matter.

On Sunday, Jaishankar replied to a tweet of a man who claimed that he was “trapped in Oman with two others.” He said, “Our Embassy in Oman is trying to resolve this. Please continue to stay in touch with them.”

Apart from that, he also assured assistance to a woman whose family lost their passports in Italy on a family vacation. Responding to her distress message, Jaishankar wrote, “Our Embassy in Rome/ Consul General in Munich will extend all assistance. Please be in touch with them.”

The tradition of reaching out to Indians to resolve their issues was started by veteran BJP leader Sushma Swaraj when she served as the minister of external affairs in the first term of the Narendra Modi government.

Her hands-on approach and witty humor while responding to tweets earned her appreciation of all, as she was hailed as one of the most approachable ministers in the Modi government.

Swaraj decided to not contest the 2019 Lok Sabha elections owing to her poor health. Contrary to expectations and speculations, Swaraj was not inducted into the Modi Cabinet, much to the disappointment of many.

Several Twitter users and political leaders took to social media to state that they would miss Swaraj as the foreign minister of the country.

Notably, career diplomat-turned-EAM Jaishankar thanked Swaraj in the very first tweet he posted from his official account on May 31. "My first tweet. Thank you all for the best wishes! Honored to be given this responsibility. Proud to follow on the footsteps of Sushma Swaraj ji."


