Activist’s plea: Rent out Soudha rooms, pay farmers

Right to Information

Vidhana Soudha

Assembly Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar

B S Yeddyurappa

By Y Maheswara Reddy(RTI) activist has shot off a strange letter to the Speaker, seeking space for rent at. The rent, he argued, could be paid to the farmers who are in distress. However, other RTI activists dub the move as a publicity gimmick and opine that such demands would do more damage than good.BS Gowda, an RTI activist, wrote to Karnataka Stateon January 21, requesting him to allocate either Chief Minister’s office or Opposition Leader’s office for rent since he has been looking for a suitable accommodation to carry out social activities. “I have assured the Speaker to pay advance amount as well as the rent for the room to be rented out at Vidhana Soudha. They can use the rent amount to help farmers in distress,’’ said Gowda.“I got an acknowledgement from the Speaker’s office. I do not know what the Speaker will do with my letter,’’ says Gowda.Gowda explained that most rooms in Vidhana Soudha wear a deserted look with Chief Minister, Leader of Opposition and ministers failing to turn up to discharge their official duties. He said they have been busy with personal activities, instead of focusing on welfare measures.“Chief Minister H D Kumaraswamy has been busy promoting his son Nikhil Gowda’s latest Kannada film Seetharama Kalyana. The Chief Minister has been visiting various cities and meeting many people to promote his son’s film whilehas been busy with Operation Lotus. I want to use one of their office during their absence,” he said, in the letter.He claimed that he did not write the letter for publicity purpose. “I am not crazy for publicity. I am serious. I will be happy if my letter to the Speaker reminds the Chief Minister and Leader of Opposition about their responsibilities,“ he said.However, other RTI activists term the letter a publicity gimmick. “There is a limit for RTI activists. They are supposed to seek information on subjects related to public interest and certainly not for vested interest. A RTI activist writing a letter to the Speaker will show RTI activists in bad light,” said Dinesh Kallahalli, an RTI activist.Kalidasa Reddy, another RTI activist, questioned the authority of Gowda to write such a letter to the Assembly Speaker. “Vidhana Soudha is not for a rent. It has its own sanctity. Gowda is indulging in publicity gimmick. He should think twice before indulging in such cheap gimmicks,’’ said Reddy.
