Inclusion and secularism are cornerstones of peace in India

I write in reference to your article Narendra Modi begins second term with India's economy a top priority (May 31).

I truly hope that India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be able to deliver his message of inclusion – “Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, win Sabka Vishwas” – and that people will start adopting this view.

However, there have been repeated incidents of harassment of religious and ethnic minorities under his rule, which he failed to condemn. This makes it all the more difficult for people to take this new credo seriously, and many have questioned the sincerity of Mr Modi’s move towards increased tolerance.

But I believe in this message of inclusion as it will benefit all members of society, especially minorities, whose fundamental rights need to be safeguarded at all costs.

People’s perceptions of India’s minorities must change, and our ministers have to ensure that their coordinated efforts will benefit everyone, no matter what their background or religion.

Secularism is an important Indian value as it allows for various communities to coexist peacefully and is an example for the wider region.

Whatever changes India’s leader wants to make should always be within the framework of the nation’s constitution and never with the intention of hurting the sentiments of ordinary Indian citizens.

Ramachandran Nair, Muscat

We need better regulation of gun sales to stop US tragedies

I write in reference to your article US gunman kills 12 people in government office in Virginia Beach (June 1).

When will this madness stop? What are the motives behind such unwarranted attacks ?

People who are affiliated with extremist groups or who are emotionally unstable must not have access to guns and heavy weaponry. The selling of guns must be more regulated in the US than it is at present to protect lives.

Nazim Hasan Khan, India

It is high time the Trump administration took a stance on gun-related violence.

The US government must devise better laws to prevent such tragedies from ever happening again.

K Ragavan, Bengaluru

Robert Pattinson as Batman: is he truly the best choice?

I write to you in reference to Farah Andrews's article Robert Pattinson has been confirmed as the new Batman (June 1).

If it were up to me, Batman would remain a masked character whose identity is never revealed in the movie.

It would be something different than what we are used to seeing these days.

Nostromov Vladimir, Belgrade
