Unauthorized hawker nabbed from train

SURAT: A 29-year-old hawker was arrested from a train by Railway Protection Force (RPF), leading to massive outrage on the social media.Hundereds of angry twitteratis slammed the arrest of Avdhesh Dubey, a Valsad resident, saying it to be a fallout of the vendor’s mimicking various political leaders while selling toys on the train. Dubey was arrested by a team of RPF cops from a train at Surat railway station on Friday.Dubey was seen mimicking PM Narendra Modi and Congress leader Sonia Gandhi in a video shot on mobile phone by a passenger. The vendor is seen trying to pursue passengers to buy his toys through funny comments and repeating some slogans of the top politicians. The video went viral on social media along with details of his arrest.Following the massive outcry on social media, railway authorities hastily issued a clarification on Sunday claiming that Dubey was arrested for selling goods unathorizedly as he is not a licensed hawker and was creating nuisance for the passengers and not for the manner in which he was selling his ware. “The Railway Magistrate verified the past record of the defaulter and came to know his repeated offences under section 144 of Railway Act (12th time including present case). The defaulter himself confessed to the magistrate that he has been doing unauthorized hawking in trains since 2005,” the railway clarification stated.The arrested vendor was later produced in the court and following his repeated arrest he was awarded jail term of 10 days. Dubey, who was booked under various sections of Railways Act including 144(a) – prohibition on hawking, 145(b) – nuisance, 147 – trespass and refusal to desist from trespass, was sent to Lajpore Central Jail (LCJ) by the court of Railway Magistrate.“Dubeys arrest was unnecessarily creating a controversy on the social media. The video could be old too and it has no relation to his arrest whatsoever,” said Ishwarsinh Yadav, police inspector, RPF, Surat.“As the railway magistrate has been dealing such repeated offenders strongly, he imposed him the punishment of 10 days imprisonment and fine Rs 3,500, while the magistrate has also imposed imprisonment up to 30 days in other similar cases. It is routine action by RPF, Surat against unauthorized vendors and 8 other persons were also arrested during the May drive. Dubey has already been booked for this offence 11 times (7 times by Valsad post and 4 times by Surat post) in the past,” RPF official stated.
