Telangana gets back govt buildings allocated to Andhra in Hyderabad

Telangana gets back govt buildings allocated to Andhra in Hyderabad

The government buildings in Hyderabad were equally allocated to Andhra Pradesh and Telangana following the bifurcation of the state in 2014.

news Politics

Andhra Pradesh and Telangana Governor E S L Narasimhan on Sunday issued orders to hand back to the Telangana government, the buildings given to Andhra Pradesh government for its offices in Hyderabad five years ago.

The Governor issued the orders on the fifth Formation Day celebrations of Telangana and a day after he held joint talks with the Chief Ministers of both states.

Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrasekhar Rao, who along with his Andhra Pradesh counterpart Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy, had met the Governor at Raj Bhavan on Saturday, called on Narasimhan again on Sunday.

The government buildings in Hyderabad were equally allocated to governments of residuary state of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana following the bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh in 2014.

However, as the Andhra Pradesh government had shifted to Amaravati in 2015-16, the buildings were since lying vacant. The buildings were in dilapidated condition as they were not being used, said a statement from the Telangana Chief Minister's Office.

The Telangana government had long been demanding that the buildings be re-allocated to it. Jagan, whose YSRCP stormed to power in Andhra Pradesh last week, agreed to return the buildings. Following this, the Governor issued the order.

On the request of Telangana cabinet, the Governor had allocated one building for Andhra Pradesh government for setting up its police wing and another building for its other offices.

Chandrasekhar Rao welcomed the orders issued by the Governor, saying that it is an auspicious sign that both the state government have decided to move forward with people's welfare in mind and development of both the states as the main aim with mutual good will and fraternity.

He hoped that both the state governments would work in tandem, in a give and take relationship keeping in mind the factual realties on the ground.

He said his aim, ambition and effort would be to see to it that both the states develop with its people living in peace and prosperity and all the issues between the two states would be amicably solved.
