India’s Power Brigade

After a resounding victory in the 2019 Indian Parliamentary elections, the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government led by the dynamic leader Narendra Modi has announced the new Cabinet which has a responsibility to continue India to the path of growth initiated in Modi’s first tenure as Prime Minister. As compared to Modi’s first tenure, there has been a reshuffling of the top posts in the Union Cabinet.

Amit Shah will take charge as the Minister of Home Affairs. Shah is regarded widely for his political acumen and is given the credit by many political analysts for the rise of Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) in the Indian political landscape. However, being the head of the country’s leading political party and taking responsibility as the Home Minister of India are different altogether. Yet, it is expected that Shah will use his experience to effectively address the multifarious challenges facing the Indian State.

S. Jaishankar is an excellent choice as the Minister of External Affairs. He joined Indian Foreign Service in 1977, has served as the Indian Ambassador to the United States (2014–2015), China (2009–2013) and the Czech Republic (2001–04), and as the High Commissioner to Singapore (2007–09). He played a key role in the US-India Civil Nuclear Deal and was an instrumental figure in handling the Doklam dispute with China. Jaishankar is considered an expert on the US-India and India- China relations. Jaishankar has entered the office with high hopes and the onus will be on him to push for India’s permanent membership in the UN Security Council as well as the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG).

Nirmala Sitharaman has been made the Union Minister of Finance. As Defence Minister in Modi’s first term, her performance stood out. The voice of anti-terror operations, she oversaw the Indian Air Force’s strike on terror camps deep inside Pakistani territory in Balakot days after the Pulwama attack. Sitharaman now has the responsibility to implement the visionary economic policies of Modi and ensure that the philosophy of ‘Sabka Saath Sabka Vikas’ continues to fulfil its potential. The immediate challenge before her will be to arrest the recent economic slowdown. All eyes will be on the full Union Budget which will be presented in July 2019.

Rajnath Singh is the new Defence Minister of the country. He did a commendable job as a Home Minister and showed grit and determination to take tough measures in order to ensure the security and stability of the nation. As Home Minister, Singh proved to be an able lieutenant under Modi as the Indian PM took stern measures to negate Pakistan sponsored terrorism, especially in Kashmir. Singh is expected to play tough on territorial aggression of India’s neighbouring country.

Prakash Javdekar has been entrusted with the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change. Although unlike many Western nations, environmental issues have not been a dominant theme in Indian electoral politics, yet the first tenure of PM Modi was a number of initiatives targeted at protection of environment.

Javdekar has the responsibility of ensuring that targets set under schemes such as Namami Gange, Swacha Bharat Mission and National River Conservation Plan continue to be met. India is also playing a leading role in global climate change negotiations which has enhanced India’s standing in the world.

The Ministry of Human Resource Development has been assigned to Ramesh Pokhriyal. One of the priorities of the Modi 1.0 government was the strengthening the two ends of the spectrum, namely, elementary education and higher/technical education and Pokhriyal needs to continue this mission.

Smriti Irani, widely hailed as the giant killer of 2019 Indian elections after her stupendous victory over Congress President Rahul Gandhi in Amethi, has been given the charge of Ministry of Women and Child Development. She is the youngest member of the Modi Cabinet. Modi’ government is committed to the promotion and protection of woman and child development.

The Union Budget for 2019-20 placed a sharp focus on protection and empowerment of women and children. Overall budget of the Ministry has been increased by Rs.4856 crores which is almost 20% higher than the previous year. Smriti Irani looks a perfect choice for this Cabinet portfolio. Smriti has also been given the charge of the Ministry of Textiles.

Nitin Gadkari has retained the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways along with the additional responsibility of handling the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) Ministry. Gadkari was one of the best performing Ministers from 2014 -2019 and oversaw the development of a world class infrastructure in the country.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Like this: Like Loading...
