CM YS Jagan In Goodwill Gesture Reallocates AP Buildings In Secretariat To TS

Hyderabad: In a significant development, Governor ESL Narasimhan on Sunday, ordered re-allocation of all government buildings here that were earmarked for Andhra Pradesh at the time of its bifurcation in 2014, to Telangana government.

The Governor issued the orders on the fifth Formation Day celebrations of Telangana and a day after he held joint talks with the Chief Ministers of both states.

Telangana Chief Minister K. Chandrashekhar Rao, who along with his Andhra Pradesh counterpart YS Jagan Mohan Reddy, had met the Governor at Raj Bhavan on Saturday, called on Narasimhan again on Sunday. The government buildings in Hyderabad were equally allocated to governments of residuary state of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana following the bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh in 2014. However, as the Andhra Pradesh government had shifted to Amaravati in 2015-16, the buildings were since lying vacant. The AP government was paying electricity bills and other maintenance costs of the buildings though it was not utilising them.

The order was issued as per Section 8 of the APRA, 2014, after the two Chief Ministers - YS Jagan Mohan Reddy and K Chandrasekhar Rao consented to the re-allocation of the buildings. Section 8 casts a special responsibility on the Governor with respect of issues of law and order, safety and security of citizenry and vital installations as well as the management and allocation of government buildings in the common capital,” the order reads. Government of Telangana is also requested to waive all outstanding claims of property tax, and public utility charges, imposed on the government of AP in possession/use of the above said buildings,” the Governor said in his order.

Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao welcomed the orders issued by the Governor, saying that it is an auspicious sign that both the state governments have decided to move forward with people's welfare in mind and development of both the states as the main aim with mutual goodwill and fraternity. He hoped that both the state governments would work in tandem, in a give and take relationship keeping in mind the factual realities on the ground. He said his aim, ambition and effort would be to see to it that both the states develop with its people living in peace and prosperity and all the issues between the two states would be amicably solved.

Hyderabad remains the common capital of AP and Telangana till June 1, 2024 as per the APRA, 2014. The Telangana government had long been demanding that the buildings be re-allocated to it. YS Jagan, whose YSR Congress Party stormed to power in Andhra Pradesh last week, agreed to return the buildings. Following which the Governor issued the order. On the request of Telangana cabinet, the Governor had allocated one building for Andhra Pradesh government for setting up its police wing and another building for its other offices.

Also Read: Telangana Farmers Will Receive Rs 1 Lakh Loan Waiver Soon: KCR

Also Read: AP CM YS Jagan Suggests Levy Of ‘Green tax’ To Generate Additional Revenue

Also Read: CRDA Consultants Come Under Scanner

Also Read: Study New Education Policy, Don’t Jump To Conclusions: Vice-President Naidu
