Head Of Kerala’s ISIS Module Killed In Afghanistan

Rashid Abdulla, the leader of the Kerala module of the global terror outfit Islamic State (ISIS) group, has been reportedly killed in air strikes launched by United States of America in Afghanistan more than a month ago, The Times Of India reported.

Rashid, who hailed from Trikkaripura in Kasargod district of Kerala, sent message through social websites about the fact that he had joined ISIS forces, a few months back. However in the last three months, his close ones did not receive any information about him. The Telegram group he reportedly formed, lies dormant.

An engineering graduate, Rashid was the leader of contingent comprising 21 Kerala Muslims who migrated to the IS stronghold in Afghanistan in May-June 2016 along with his wife Ayesha alias Sonia. The contingent travelled from India via UAE and Tehran to reach Afghanistan.

An IS member, in response to a question by a police officer on Telegram chat on the whereabouts of Rashid Abdulla, confirmed that “he is no more”. According to the ISIS operative, Rashid and his family were killed in “random bombings” by US military which were “not targeted”.

He also added that Rashid was killed a month back. As per the IS operative a “total 3 Indian brothers, 2 Indian ladies and 4 kids got killed”.

Rashid was under the radar of NIA (National Investigating Agency) and was even charge-sheeted by the agency.

According to the charge-sheet, Rashid, who once worked as the head of the other cognitive areas department (OCA) of Kozhikode based Peace Foundation, played a pivotal role in hiring young people to join ISIS. This school was set up by Salafi preacher M M Akbar.

The agency said he attempted to turn youths into Jihadis y disseminating videos propagating ISIS ideology and violence.

Rashid, who was employed with the organisation, was drawn towards the IS ideology around 2014.

The NIA charge-sheet was based on a detailed investigation involving Rashid’s colleagues and staff of Peace Foundation as well as students who had participated in a course on Islam at Ad-dur Salaffiya in Sri Lanka. Rashid was reportedly in touch with 40 students, of which 18 were from India.

Rashid assumed the leadership of the Kerala module after the killing of Shajeer Mangalasseri Abdulla, another engineering graduate from Kozhikode. Shajeer too was killed in Afghanistan.
