More rain in Nagpur, Mumbai and Kolhapur, temperatures to ease out slightly

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

The state of Maharashtra would see more rainy days in the coming time and the credit goes to the Trough, which is extending from East Bihar up to South Karnataka across Vidarbha and Telangana. Some rains have already occurred in the last two days, resulting in a marginal drop in the temperatures. Now, favourable conditions are making it possible for the state to experience rains during the next 24 to 48 hours.

Our weathermen predict isolated rain and thundershower activities in parts of Vidarbha, Marathwada and South Madhya Maharashtra, wherein Nagpur, Parbhani, Latur, Kolhapur, Sangli and Satara will be the lucky ones to experience these showers. In fact, there are chances of one or two short spells of intense rains over South Madhya Maharashtra during next 24 hours.

Moreover, another feeble Trough, extending along the Konkan and Goa coast will enhance cloud cover over the coastal districts such as Mumbai, Ratnagiri,Sindhudurg and Raigad . Thus, these places stand a chance to witness isolated light rain during the next two days.

‘Light rains have already commenced over Mumbai. Although, the intensity is very light, these rains were much needed to battle the dry weather conditions’, says our weatherman.

Despite a marginal drop in the temperatures of Vidarbha and Marathwada, isolated pockets of both the region have been reeling under heat wave conditions for the last many days. In fact, temperatures here are still in mid or higher 40s.

On the contrary, most parts of Konkan and Goa are recording their temperatures in lower to mid 30s. Moreover, the residents are continuously battling uneasy and humid weather conditions. However, with the upcoming spell, we expect a marginal drop in the temperatures of all the four meteorological divisions of Maharashtra.

Image Credits – Pinterest

Any information taken from here should be credited to Skymet Weather
