Mamata Banerjee 'recaptures' BJP office in North 24 Parganas district, paints TMC name, symbol on saffron wall

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Monday "recaptured" a BJP office in Naihati area of North 24 Parganas district. Mamata broke open the office and pained her party's name - All India Trinamool Congress (AITC) - and party symbol - flowers and grass - over the saffron coloured walls of the building.

The office was allegedly "captured" by BJP workers and supporters of the newly elected Barrackpore BJP MP Arjun Singh, who defeated the sitting TMC MP Dinesh Trivedi.

This has come days after Mamata herself directed TMC workers to reclaim party offices occupied by the BJP in various parts of the state.

During the same visit, Mamata again lost her cool when some people started chanting "Jai Shri Ram" as her convoy passed by. She stepped out of the vehicle and reprimanded the people chanting the slogan saying that they were all outsiders and BJP people trying to bring instability in the state.

The entire issue of 'capturing' and 'recapturing' party offices has come to fore after many TMC offices at block and village level across the state were found painted saffron. According to reports, the owners of the building have switched sides to join the BJP after the recently held Lok Sabha Election results where BJP won 18 of the 42 parliamentary constituencies.

Meanwhile, Mamata Banerjee has asked the state intelligence agencies to map areas where she could run into people chanting the Jai Shri Ram slogan at her or at her convoy.

Interestingly, it was in the same district that she ran into a crowd of people chanting "Jai Shri Ram" three days back. In a video of the incident, a visibly miffed Mamata can be heard saying, "What do you think of yourself? You will come from other states, stay here and abuse us? I will not tolerate this. How dare you all abuse me? All of your names and details will be noted down."
