National Education Policy 2019 draft: Tamilisai Soundararajan says opposition spreading lies

Chennai: BJP state president Tamilisai Soundararajan slammed the opposition for spreading “false propaganda” about the imposition of Hindi on non-Hindi speakers.

She slammed the opposition leaders for their remarks on the National Education Policy draft which proposes the three-language formula. Tamilisai Soundararajan pointed out that the draft was only a proposal and was not decided or accepted by the Centre.

Also read: National Education Policy 2019 draft: Tamil Nadu opposes 3-language formula

She further went on to say that DMK president MK Stalin, MDMK leader Vaiko, CPI leader Mutharasan and Congress veteran P. Chidambaram jumped the gun and were spreading false propaganda about “imposition” of Hindi.

Soundararajan also said that despite the clarification from the centre, the opposition party leaders were relentless and continued to make statements that were untrue.

She pointed out that the anti-Hindi agitation took place when Congress leader Bhaktavatsalam was the chief minister. She further said that the police at that time opened fire at the protesters. But now the Congress joined with the DMK and was speaking about imposition of Hindi, which she believed was nothing but drama.

Also read: National Education Policy 2019 draft: Prakash Javadekar clarifies, says it is only a draft

Soundararajan also added that Chidambaram headed the committee that looked into ways and means to increase the use of Hindi in government communication.

Union minister Prakash Javadekar had also clarified on the matter that this was just a proposal and was not imposed upon non-Hindi speakers. He had even said that the Centre doesn’t believe in imposing one language on a group of people.

Javadekar’s response came after several people in Tamil Nadu raised their voice against the proposed draft. Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and Foreign Minister S Jaishankar posted identical messages on Twitter. The tweets were in Tamil and it assured that the draft will be reviewed before implementation.

Both, Nirmala Sitharaman and S Jaishankar are ministers are from Tamil Nadu - the state which has been loudest in its
