WATCH - Chennai on high alert after 5 sensational murders in 24 hours

With the spate of crime that the city has seen, police patrols have now been put on high alert with CCTV footage monitoring. | Photo Credit: Getty

Chennai: Police in the state capital was put on high alert after five murders rocked Chennai in a span of 24 hours. Chennai police have fastened their enquiry activities after these murders stunned the city’s residents.

The first murder to have been committed was of 22-year-old Kumaran, a resident of Otteri area. He had come out of jail 15 days ago. It was alleged that he was playing cards with his friends and due to a misunderstanding that snowballed into a fight, his friends killed him with scythe.

Another murder to have been reported was that of an auto driver. Someone had changed the electricity transformer of his house and his family fought with him thinking he was the culprit. In a fit of rage, his own family beat him to death.

In another incident, a resident of Anna Nagar area, identified as 70-year-old Easurajan was poisoned. Police suspect that his daughter-in-law committed the murder and further investigation is going on.

A rowdy from Sulaimedu was killed in after a daring chase by three goons on a busy street near Vaishnav College. In a separate incident, a woman’s body parts were found in the Perungudi garbage area by police. Further investigation is going on to find the girl's identity.

With the spate of crime that the city has seen, police patrols have now been put on high alert with CCTV footage monitoring. Vehicle checks have been intensified after these five murders. As the Republic Day is nearing, there is world traders meet being organised in the capital and police security has been beefed up.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
