We lost in race between Ferrari & cycle: Akhilesh Yadav on poll drubbing

AZAMGARH: Terming the contest of 2019 Lok Sabha elections as “a race between a Ferrari and a bicycle”, SP president Akhilesh Yadav on Monday said that the “BJP did not win elections on the basis of development”.“We have lost the elections, but even today I challenge our adversaries to compare their development record with the Samajwadi development. They will not stand a chance. They have not won the election for development but for other reasons,” said Akhilesh while speaking at his first public meeting after the parliamentary election. Lalganj (Reserve) BSP MP Sangita Azad was also present on the dais.The SP supremo alleged that the saffron party had diverted people’s attention from the real issues. “We were talking about the issues of the poor, farmers and youths. We wanted to make them understand the lies of BJP. But, their attention was diverted by the BJP with strategic propaganda,” he claimed. “However, all the lies and propaganda of the BJP to win the elections are getting exposed with the formation of new government... the US has withdrawn the status of most favoured nation from India, the country’s economy is plunging and unemployment is at 45 years peak,” said the former UP chief minister.Akhilesh admitted that the opposition had failed in countering the BJP propaganda. “It is a different fight. They termed the SP-BSP alliance an alliance of Muslims, Yadavs and Dalits. We could never make people understand our fight as only the BJP has the power to divert people’s attention,” he claimed.Akhilesh also targetted PM Narendra Modi for launching a publicity blitz during the elections. “Tell me who was visible on TV and mobiles all the time,” he questioned the public while alluding to the PM.Akhilesh also warned the officials on the recent killing of SP workers in Jaunpur and Ghazipur . “You (officials) should keep the power of people in mind and also the fact that time will change. When a ruling party (BJP) supporter was killed in Amethi , the entire government machinery worked round the clock to work it out. But everyone should keep in mind that SP has not quit the path of struggle and will rebound.”He also taunted chief minister Yogi Adityanath over the UPPSC LT Grade Exam 2018 paper leak episode. “Though we are out of power, the CM is trying to put the ball in our court for all the wrong reasons. It is shocking to a see ‘Baba Yogi’ telling lies to shift peoples attention.”
