Clash erupts over water in Kutch

RAJKOT: Acute water crisis coupled with blistering heat wave conditions is sending people’s tempers soaring in arid Kutch.Violent clashes broke out in a village near Bhuj on Sunday evening over turns to fetch water, leaving one person battling for life. On Monday, police arrested three people and booked them attempt to murder.The victim was identified as Ramju Jat and police arrested three villagers — Abdul Jat, Dawood Jat and Umar Jat — for the brutal attack.The incident was reported from Takanasar village which has adopted a system in which people living in the northern side and those in the southern take turns to fill water every alternate day. There are are two valves, one supplying water to the north side and other to south side. One valve is opened every alternate day due to severe water shortage.According to the details, Ramju opened the valve of their house tank as it was their turn to fill water on Sunday evening. When his cousin sister Jena Haruns started filling water from the pipeline, the three accused rushed there with an axe and other weapons. They ordered Ramju to shut the valve claiming that it was their turn to fill water and not his.This led to a heated argument which suddenly turned serious as Ramju was attacked with the axe. When Jena rushed to his help, she too was attacked, but she escaped with minor injuries. She also told police that the trio had even threatened them to kill them over fetching water.Ramju was first rushed to G K General Hospital in Bhuj and later shifted to a private hospital in Ahmedabad on Monday.J G Rana, sub-inspector with Mankuva police station said, “It was a dispute over getting water during the peak summer that took a serious turn.”Al talukas of Kutch district have been declared drought-affected by the state government. According to official data, Kutch received just 26.52% of its average annual rainfall last monsoon Takanasar has a population of just about 500 and the main source of water was an underground tank whose level has depleted due to heat. Therefore, the villagers decided to take turns for fetching water from this only source.Sources said that altercations between neighbours over fetching water during summer has become an order of the day due to severe scarcity.
