Astrological ritual leads to detection of 2017 murder

RAJKOT: In a bizarre incident, an astrological ritual led to the detection of a two-year-old murder case where a factory owner and his accomplices had allegedly killed his employee in Patelnagar locality.Police arrested four persons in the case on Sunday night and Monday morning.The factory owner, whose name has not been divulged by cops, had dumped the victim Vrajesh Joshi’s body near Chotila in June 2017. However, the factory owner started incurring heavy losses in business and consulted an astrologer. The astrologer told him that “some deceased youth” was causing an impediment in his business and that he would have to perform the ritual for his salvation. Assuming that the astrologer was hinting at Joshi, the factory owner then went to Chotila and performed the rituals However, performing the ritual did not yield desired results and the factory owner consulted the astrologer again. The astrologer clarified that the rituals were supposed to be performed by the dead youth’s parents and not by him.Confident that Joshi’s family would not suspect him of the murder, he then sent a person to meet the deceased’s uncle and asked them to request Joshi’s parents to perform the ritual. Joshi’s body was found a day after the crime, but remained unidentified till the crime came to light on Sunday.“His family members were under the impression that he was missing. So they got surprised on hearing the request for rituals. They also asked the person as to how did he know that Joshi was dead. They immediately grew suspicious and approached us. We first rounded up the person who had approached the Joshi family, and he led us to other accused who confessed to their crime. However, the factory owner, is still at large,” said H M Gadhvi, inspector with Rajkot crime branch.During his interrogation, the arrested persons told police that the factory owner suspected Joshi of malpractice after his order worth Rs 25 lakh was revoked. His suspicion grew when Joshi went missing since April 24, 2017. When the factory owner came to know that Joshi had returned on June 6, 2017, he called him at his factory to strike a compromise at night. There he and others thrashed him with bats till the morning of June 7, 2017. When they realized that Joshi was dead, they went to Chotila and dumped his body.“Their actual plan was to set Joshi’s body afire, but they could not do so, as they saw several forest vehicles patrolling in the area. Then they dumped his body there and returned to Rajkot,” said Gadhvi.
