Bharat actor Sunil Grover: I would mimic Ajay Devgn and other actors as I was desperate to get noticed

Sunil Grover shot to fame with the role of Gutthi and Dr Mashoor Gulati in The Kapil Sharma Show, however, while Sunil is no longer in the show but he has earned a lot of followers and fans who love this actor. Prior to his stint in television, Sunil Grover appeared in films such as Pyaar Toh Hona Hi Tha, The Legend of Bhagat Singh and Family: Ties of Blood among others. But for Sunil Grover, he always wanted to be associated with films and Bollywood. “I always wanted to be an actor. The screen always fascinated me. I was amazed looking at all the actors. I wanted to be there on the big screen,” said Sunil Grover.

As we all know, 42-year-old actor Sunil Grover does amazing mimicry as he has wowed the audiences with his acting skills in The Kapil Shama Show and while shooting with Ajay Devgn for The Legend of Bhagat Singh, he would mimic Ajay sir and others to get noticed. Sunil shared that the first film he did after coming to Mumbai was 'The Legend of Bhagat Singh' and although he wasnt being paid much, he still I took it up. "I would mimic everyone on the sets, including Ajay Devgn and unit members. For me it was all about experiencing things. I was desperate to get noticed,” Sunil said.

Besides sharing screen space with Salman Khan, Sunil Grover has shared space with actors such as Akshay Kumar, Tiger Shroff and others and when Sunil Grover was quizzed about his stint in Bollywood, he said, “I was born to be here. I had not planned anything. I had established myself on TV. I was getting lot of love and acceptance. But destiny had some other plans for me. Everything in this field happened to me in an unplanned way. This is one of those things. Destiny took me to a place like this where I can contribute more to cinema.” During a recent interview, Sunil Grover was asked the reason why he didn't come with Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif on The Kapil Sharma Show to promote Bharat and to this, Sunil had said that he was not in the mood to come to the show and also that when Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif are in a film, there is no need for anyone else to promote.

ALSO READ: Sunil Grover REVEALS why he did not appear on The Kapil Sharma Show to promote Bharat
