[Photos] From breezy florals to fancy monotones: All of Katrina Kaif’s looks from Bharat promotions

Bollywood actress Katrina Kaif | Photo Credit: Instagram

Be it rocking casual date outfits or acing fancy red carpet looks, no one does it better than Bollywood actress Katrina Kaif. The diva, who has kept us hooked on her sense of style ever since she made her Hindi film debut in 2003, has today become a trendsetter for many. Katrina is currently gearing up for the release of her film, Bharat and has been constantly shelling out major fashion goals with her promotional looks.

During the promotions of her upcoming movie, the 35-year-old actress was either seen donning easy breezy floral prints or solid monotones. When the promotions of the flick kick-started, Katrina was seen wearing a sunshine yellow cut-out dress with petal design. Post that, the diva left the fashion police impressed with her back sari with white floral print.

At one promotional event, Katrina was even seen wearing Sabyasachi's powder pink floral sari with a cape. The actress was also seen acing a blue monotone pantsuit and a stunning red gown which she accessorised with oxidised silver jewellery. Check out all of Katrina's promotional looks for Bharat below.

Meanwhile, Bharat which will hit the screens tomorrow, June 5 has been directed by Ali Abbas Zafar and features Salman Khan as the male lead. The movie is based on the South Korean drama, Ode To My Father and has been co-produced by Salman’s brother-in-law Atul Agnihotri under the banner Reel Life Productions.

Along with Katrina and Salman, Bharat also stars Tabu, Disha Patani, Nora Fatehi, Sunil Grover and Jackie Shroff in supporting roles. Interestingly, actor Varun Dhawan has also done a cameo in the movie. The film will trace the history of India from the perspective of an ordinary man, so it shows the journey of the film's protagonist, Bharat, from the age of 18 to 70.

Apart from this, Katrina will also be starring in Rohit Shetty's cop drama, Sooryavanshi alongside Akshay Kumar. The movie will hit the screens on Eid next year.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates!
