Man goes out with friends to pool, found dead

Steward found dead

NOIDA: A 25-year-old man was found dead under mysterious circumstances after he was called to a swimming pool by some of his friends on Sunday. Krishna Gaur, a resident of Chhalera who drove a car for a Sector 45 resident, had received a call around 12.30pm on Sunday and left his house saying he was going out with friends and would return in some time.His father Rajendra Gaur, who works as a supervisor at the office of The Handicrafts and Handlooms Export Corporation of India Ltd in Sector 2, said they got a call around 7.30pm from one Monty, the elder brother of Krishna’s friend Bharat Singh. Rajendra was told that Krishna was feeling unwell and needed to be taken to hospital.“When I reached Som Bazaar, I saw Bharat sitting in his car and Krishna’s body kept in the back seat. They told me he had drowned in their swimming pool. We immediately took him to the district hospital, where doctors said he was no more,” Rajendra said.According to Rajendra, the pool, located in Sector 94, is owned by Bharat’s father Charan Singh and was being run without a licence. Krishna’s family members have alleged that he was beaten up and possibly drowned in the pool. “His friends could not say who had called my son on Sunday. Bharat told me he had left him in the pool. I confronted him and asked why he was left alone. They did not give any answer,” Krishna’s father alleged.Late on Monday evening, Krishna’s family lodged a complaint at Sector 39 police station. An autopsy, however, has mentioned the cause of death as “uncertain”. Sudhir Singh, a senior sub inspector, said they were investigating the matter and would find out if the pool was being run without a licence.In another case, a 24-year-old steward working with a private hotel chain in Noida Sector 55 was found hanging from the ceiling of his rented accommodation in Chaura village. Police said Rohit Singh (24) was found dead when his roommate Raj, who works as a bartender, arrived around 2.10 am. No suicide note was recovered from the spot, but Rohit’s family members suspect he was upset over a relationship with a girl.
