3 men held for attacking sister over relationship with married man

Three persons were arrested by the Dadri police on Sunday night for attempting to murder their sister over her relationship with a married man in an alleged case of honour killing, in Gulaothi, Bulandshahr (UP).

The suspects have been identified as 27-year-old Irfan, 22-year-old Rizwan and 24-year-old Imran. all residents of Gulaothi town in Bulandshahr district and worked as labourers, the Hindustan Times reported.

The suspects had tried to strangle their sister Salma, Station House Officer Neeraj Malik told media.

Dadri police had registered an FIR.

"They also attacked her with acid and fled, believing she was dead," he said.

The victim received critical injuries on her face and neck and was admitted to Noida's district hospital from where she was later referred to Safdarjung Hospital in Delhi because of her deteriorating condition.

On Sunday night, the police received information about the movement of the suspects near the Dadri railway station. The police raided the spot and nabbed the suspects.

Neeraj Malik said that the suspects confessed to the crime during the investigation. "The suspects said their sister was in a relationship with a married man, who was the son of their landlord in Bulandshahr. The family members were against this relationship. They asked the woman to stay away from the man, but she refused," he said.

Neeraj Malik added that on May 5, the family had visited a relative's house in Aligarh. "Irfan, Rizwan and Salma were returning home on a scooter. But on the way, the two brothers strangled her and also burnt her with acid. They dumped her near Luharli bridge in Dadri, believing she was dead," he added.

Police said while Irfan and Rizwan had committed the crime, Imran was booked for criminal conspiracy in facilitating the crime. After regaining consciousness, the victim told the police that her brothers had attacked her.

"We had already registered a case against them under Sections 307 (attempt to murder), 326A (punishment for acid throwing) and 120B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code. "They were produced in court and sent to judicial custody," Neeraj Malik told Hindustan Times.

The victim is still at Safdarjung Hospital, and she is said to be stable.

"She will remain in the hospital for another month. The victim's family members have refused to stay with her. We have deployed a woman constable in the hospital for her security," Neeraj Malik said.

ALSO READ: Rajasthan: Man held for killing lover's 6-year-old daughter

ALSO WATCH: Ayodhya: Temple's priest arrested for raping woman!
