Sooryavanshi in Thailand! Akshay Kumar zooms through Bangkok streets for Rohit Shetty film

Akshay Kumar, who is currently shooting for Rohit Shetty's Sooryavanshi in Bangkok, shot for a bike stunt in the city. Riding on a red stunt bike, the actor shot for a chasing scene for the film.

Recently, Rohit Shetty gave a sneak peek into the scene by sharing a video of a part of the stunt. The director dedicated the stunt to his guru Veeru Devgan who passed away on May 27. In his Instagram tribute, Rohit Shetty wrote, "It takes real fathers to transform their boys into heroes. Started doing stunts at the age of 16, still going strong at 45. And I know one man who will always be proud of me in Heaven. My Guru, My Father - Veeru Devgan."

He also shared the lessons he received from the late stunt director, Rohit added, "Two most important lessons he taught me: 1. Be honest with your work and work will be honest with you. 2. Before performing any stunt the most important thing is - SAFETY FIRST. (On Location...Bangkok...Stunt Rehearsals before Akshay performs the actual shot...#sooryavanshi) PS: Please do not try this stunt. All the drivers in the cars are stunt Professionals and the stunts are performed in a controlled environment (sic)."

Sooryavanshi is a cop drama starring Akshay Kumar. With the film, Rohit Shetty is expanding his cop universe which already had three cop films - Singham, Singham Returns and Simmba. While Ajay Devgn played the lead in first two films, Ranveer Singh was the lead actor in Simmba.

The director announced the start of the shooting with all the three actors of his films from his cop universe- Akshay Kumar, Ajay Devgn and Akshay Kumar.

The shooting of Sooryavanshi started in May in Mumbai. After the Bangkok schedule, the film will be shot in Hyderabad and Goa.

Apart from Akshay Kumar, the film also stars Katrina Kaif and Neena Gupta in pivotal roles. The makers of Sooryavanshi are looking for a Eid 2020 release.

Akshay Kumar has his kitty full with some big-budget films- Good News, Laxxmi Bomb, Housefull 4. The actor has completed shooting for Raj Mehta's Good News. He will be seen sharing screen space with Kareena Kapoor Khan, Diljit Dosanjh and Kiara Advani in Good News. While in Housefull 4, Akshay Kumar will be seen reincarnating as a tenth century king, in Laxxmi Bomb, he will play a man possessed by the ghost of a transgender.

ALSO READ | Raghava Lawrence returns as Laxmmi Bomb director: Thank you Akshay Kumar for sorting all issues

ALSO READ | Akshay Kumar thanks Kiren Rijiju for supporting him in Canadian citizenship controversy

ALSO READ | Raghava Lawrence steps down as director of Akshay Kumar's Laxmmi Bomb
