Amid war over 'Jai Shri Ram', TMC sends 10K postcards to PM Modi with 'Jai Hind, Jai Bangla' written on them

TMC workers sending postcards to PM Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: Days after the Bharatiya Janata Party vowed to send 10 lakh postcards with 'Jai Shri Ram' message to West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, workers belonging to the Trinamool Congress on Tuesday sent 10,000 postcards with - Vande Mataram, Jai Hind, and Jai Bangla - written on them to Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The slogan "Jai Shri Ram" has stirred a huge controversy in West Bengal with Mamata Banerjee frequently losing her cool, chasing and even daring BJP workers to chant the words in her presence.

Elaborating on why the TMC workers decided to send 10,000 postcards to the PM, a party worker, Debashree Banerjee, said: "BJP workers are coming in front of the vehicle of Chief Minister Banerjee and shouting 'Jai Shri Ram.' Is it fair to do so? Is it right to interrupt and came in front of a person's car? The hooligans are also after our MLAs and MPs and are shouting 'Jai Shri Ram.' We will not do any such mischievous thing and will not stop the way of Prime Minister.”

"But we will send a message. We have sent 10, 000 postcards with Vande Mataram, Jai Hind and Jai Bangla, written on them," he said.

A fight had erupted on Saturday between the police and a group of people who were purportedly shouting 'Jai Shri Ram' slogans outside the residence of TMC leader and Minister for Fire Department Sujit Bose in Kanchrapara.

On Sunday, newly-elected BJP MP Arjun Singh announced that his party workers would send 10 lakh postcards with 'Jai Sri Ram' written on them to Mamata Banerjee and dared her to arrest all the senders.

A day later, the West Bengal CM described the slogan "Jai Shri Ram" as a distortion of the original chant.

"You people write whatever the BJP says. Listen, the slogan 'Jai Siya Ram' is used in Uttar Pradesh. It means glory to Ram and Sita. When (Mahatma) Gandhiji used to sing the 'Ram Dhun', he chanted 'Raghupati Raghav Raja Ram, Patit Pavan Sita Ram'. But the BJP has deleted the name of Sita...Sita Maiya. They have distorted the original chant and are now raising a new slogan," Banerjee told reporters at Nabanna.

"You people are dancing to their (BJP's) tune. But I won't. I'll go by the Quran, Puranas, Veda, Vedanta, Bible, Guru Granth Sahib and Tripitaka. I won't go by the BJP's slogan," she added.
