After taking a dig at Narendra Modi, Hasan Minhaj analyses result of Lok Sabha Election 2019

Hasan Minhaj received backlash after he took a dig at Narendra Modi on Netflix's Patriot Act. However, this didn't deter him from dedicating another episode on Indian Election where he analysed the results. Hasan shared the video on Twitter with a note that said, "Imagine if I didn't do an update on the Indian elections."

In the latest episode of Patriot Act, Hasan Minhaj examines the results of the recent Lok Sabha Election 2019. In the earlier episode, Hasan analysed the state of Indian politics while in this one he takes a look into how BJP managed to pull off such a massive win.

India just wrapped up its general election and Hasan felt he had to talk about it. "Can you imagine if we didn't? Like every white person would be "Is Hasan okay?' And every Indian person would be 'Good. He learned," he said.

Hasan Minhaj also mentioned how he was invited by Navika Kumar to come on her show for a debate and he declined. "Hell no. That show is way too intense. I would get destroyed like King's Landing, " he added.

Hasan also said that BJP winning the general election was not a surprise but what was shocking was the size of their victory. He even went on to explain how BJP managed to lure the voters beyond the Hindi belt. "The BJP took so many seats, they won a majority on their own. They pulled it off by expanding beyond the Hindi belt, which sounds like something Gucci got in trouble for selling. But, the Hindi belt is actually a region that's made up entirely of Hindi speaking states. And, this election, the BJP managed to expand to every part of India. They are now 56 per cent of the lower house of the parliament. But, meanwhile, Congress ended up in this election with just 52 seats. That's not even ten per cent of the lower house."

The BJP dominated the recent Indian elections by expanding beyond the Hindi Belt - no that's not a belt Gucci got in trouble for selling. https://t.co/RO7iHJNJYW pic.twitter.com/bol9PY6a4o Patriot Act with Hasan Minhaj (@patriotact) June 2, 2019





Hasan also mentioned Rahu Gandhi's humiliating defeat in Amethi at the hands of Smriti Irani. "Rahul couldn't even win his own district, which his family held for decades. He lost to a BJP candidate named Smriti Irani who is a former soap opera star. And trust me she does not f*** around."

After mentioning Smriti Irani, he showed a video from Kyunki Saas Bhi Kabhie Bahu Thi where Tulsi (Smriti Irani) is killing Ansh (Akashdeep Saigal).

Hasan Minhaj named some of the controversial BJP candidates like Anantkumar Hegde, Sakshi Maharaj and Pragya Thakur. Hegde said, "As long as we have Islam in the world, there will be no end to terrorism." While Sakshi has 34 criminal cases against him including murder and robbery. But, Hasan termed Pragya as the craziest BJP candidate. "By far the craziest BJP candidate was Pragya Thakur who won in Bhopal. She recently pissed off pretty much all of India (when she called Mahatma Gandhi's assassin Godse a patriot)."

Hasan took a dig at this and said that it was like calling Ted Bundy a ladies man. (Ted Bundy was a serial killer who kidnapped, raped and murdered several American women.)

Hasan gave Narendra Modi the credit for BJP's massive win. "One of the biggest reasons is Narendra Modi himself. Voters wanted him to be the face of India." However, soon he took a dig at his interview with actor Akshay Kumar. "Even though he is known for not taking questions from the press, the stakes of the selection was so high, even he had to sit down for an interview with one of the most feared journalists of India, Bollywood star Akshay Kumar, " he added and showed clippings where Akshay talks to Modi about his fashion statement and his fondness for mangoes.

He also made fun of Modi's spiritual retreat in Himalayan cave and said that he did what Americans think Indians do all the time. He also pointed out the three-camera shoot. Hasan Minhaj even mentioned how he is being trolled by BJP supporters and how they think that he was trying to swing the elections. "Let me make this thing very clear. Comedians can't swing elections," he added.
