Nine-month-old baby is mauled to death by a leopard

A nine-month-old baby boy has been killed by a leopard in western India, police have confirmed.

The infant, Swaraj Gurnule, from Gadbori Village in Maharashtra state, had been sleeping next to his parents in bed when the animal entered the home and dragged him away.

After waking up to find their child missing in the early hours of Sunday, Swaraj's parents raised the alarm with forest officials.

The baby was later found more than one mile away from the family home, according to police authorities in Chandrapur, Maharashtra.

Police confirmed that a nine-month-old baby boy, from Gadbori Village, Chandrapur, Maharashtra, India, was killed by a leopard

Swaraj Gurnule had been sleeping next to his parents in bed when the animal is believed to have entered the family home. Pictured: General view of Gadbori village in Chandrapur, Maharashtra, India

Sindevahi Police Station police officer Sharad Aware told Indo-Asian News Service: 'A leopard sneaked into the home, pounced on the child and fled with him into the deep forests outside the village.

'We recovered only a few mutilated body parts around 2 kms (1.24 miles) away from the family's home.'

Forest official Arun Gond confirmed the tragic incident, telling NDTV: 'The baby boy was sleeping alongside his parents when a leopard possibly sneaked into their house, located close to a forest area, in the wee hours and took him away without anybody noticing it.'

Following the devastating incident, investigators carried out an autopsy on the child.

A funeral for Swaraj, attended by local villages, later took place on Sunday.

Following the leopard attack, cameras have now been set up in the village in an attempt to catch the dangerous creature.

The baby's parents raised the alarm with forest officials after waking up to find their child missing

Chief Conservator of Forests Rama Rao told the Indian Express: 'We are clearing the bushes around the village and will be installing solar lamps there to improve visibility since the leopard appears to have sneaked in stealthily from the thickets.'

This is not the first time leopards have launched sudden attacks on people in India.

In April, a toddler was attacked and killed by an eight-year-old leopard as he and his mother slept outside their home in the state of Gujarat.

While in February, five people were left fighting injuries after a leopard sprinted through narrow streets in their village in the northern state of Punjab.

In 2018, a four-month-old baby was left with serious injuries after being snatched from his mother's arms as she sat on a motorcycle next to her husband.
