Akshay Kumar praises Rohit Shetty as he aces bike stunts on the streets of Bangkok for Sooryavanshi; See Pic

A film that has been the talk of the town is Akshay Kumar and Katrina Kaif starrer Sooryavanshi. From the film Rohit Shetty first introduced Akshay Kumar in his cop universe in the last scene of Ranveer Singh starrer Simmba, fans have been extremely excited to see the Khiladi in action. Last month, Akshay kicked off the shoot of the film in Mumbai after which the crew left for Bangkok to shoot for Akshay’s introduction in the film. Rohit Shetty also teased fans with a video of a stunt a day back.

Amidst this, a photo was shared online in which Akshay appears to be doing a high octane bike stunt. In the photo, Akshay appears to be chasing the bad guys in the streets of Bangkok. Akshay, who began his career in Bangkok by working in a restaurant, couldn’t help but reminisce the good old days. In the picture, Akshay can be seen riding a bike in a black tee and an army green trouser with sneakers. The Kesari actor can be seen sporting shades.

(Also Read: Katrina Kaif on Sooryavanshi: There is a science behind this film and it is meticulously done)

While performing the stunts on the streets of Bangkok, Akshay was reminded of the days when he used to deliver food. Akshay also praised the director Rohit Shetty and mentioned that his stunts are the best. Akshay said, “I always have a lot of fun doing my own stunts. Rohit is anyway a class apart when it comes to action in his films. And doing these bike stunts on the streets of Bangkok was extra special. Many years back I would ride a bike in Bangkok to deliver food. Now I am doing the same all over again, to earn my food. (Laughs)”

Check out the still:

Sooryavamshi revolves around the life of an ATS chief whose wife’s role is played by Katrina Kaif. The film also stars Neena Gupta as Akshay’s mother. Directed by Rohit Shetty, Sooryavanshi is a part of Rohit’s cop universe films including Simmba, and Singham. As per several reports, Ranveer Singh and Ajay Devgn might have a cameo in Sooryavanshi as well. Sooryavanshi is being produced by Karan Johar and will hit the screens on Eid 2020.
