LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

Inequality Is Increasing

AS the richest and most powerful men and women in the world get ready to discuss global issues in Davos, Switzerland, the Oxfam Inequality Report 2019 brings forth the common trend across the world – in the 2018 alone, the wealth of the poorest half of humanity, 3.8 billion people, fell by 11 per cent, while a new billionaire was created every two days between 2017 and 2018 across the globe. The report ignores millions of Indians coming out of poverty, as central and state governments provide them welfare measures, making them idle and dependent on the state largesse. But it does highlight the inequality in India. Although the 100-day job scheme for the poor is solace to some extent, the Oxfam report has said, “It would take around 17.5 days for the best paid executive at a top Indian garment company to earn what a minimum wage worker in rural India will earn in their lifetime (presuming 50 years at work).” To get around this manmade ‘social ill’, the Oxfam report has recommended to the government to make school education free and reduce out-of-pocket expenses on health.

BIDYUT KUMAR CHATTERJEE, FARIDABAD

EWS Quota Challenges Our Constitution

AMENDING the Constitution quickly and unanimously without discussion or public consultation is alarming and disgraceful action by Parliament. Motivated by vote banks, the central government has inserted a clause in the fundamental rights to weaken articles 15 and 16 which deal with non-discrimination and equal opportunity to all. The Constitution envisaged only a certain limited period for reservations for the social empowerment of scheduled caste and scheduled tribes. The quota arrangement has been extended, and now economic criterion has been added with no in-depth study of consequences. This has opened a Pandora’s box vis-à-vis the quotas for SC, ST, OBC and Marathas. The hasty amendment is an unworkable solution to the quota conundrum and is a ripe ground for massive fraud and corruption, pushing merit further into the background. The amendment interferes with the basic structure of the Constitution, and hopefully will be struck down by the Supreme Court.

JOHN ERIC GOMES, PORVORIM

Maintain Hygiene In Buses

WE take great pains in keeping our homes and the surrounding clean in order to prevent spread of infection specially, among children and infants. Citizens may own a private vehicle, but many prefer to travel by public transport specially, those who travel on a regular and even on a daily basis. The question that arises is: how clean and hygienic are the buses that we travel in. Are the interiors of these buses washed regularly? In most of the buses the seats have thick coating of sweat on them as several commuters occupy the seats every single day. It appears that the seat covers made of cloth have not been changed for ages. Commuters, especially children, can unknowingly become victims of skin infection and other diseases. Some buses also have curtains which could be extremely dirty. Cleanliness inside the buses is one aspect which is not given much attention by the authorities. It seems necessary for the authorities concerned to have a regular check on cleanliness and hygiene in the public transport system, which includes buses owned by the state owned public transport system, as is done in foreign counties.

ADELMO FERNANDES, VASCO
