Two detained for murder of ex-journalist at Antop Hill

Friends arrested; dues to one of them believed to be motive

A 38-year-old former journalist was allegedly murdered in his Antop Hill residence in the early hours of Tuesday. The police have detained two of his friends in connection with the murder.

According to police, the victim, Anand Narayan, stayed with his family in Penta Galaxy building at Antop Hill. Police said his family members had gone to their home town and he was alone for the past three days.

The murder came to light when one of the two accused, Selvan Devendra, surrendered to police early on Tuesday saying he had been party to a murder and wanted to confess.

“Mr. Devendra said he had gone to Narayan’s place with another friend, identified as Sarang Pacharkar, late on Monday to share a drink and that during this time, Mr. Pacharkar stabbed Narayan to death. We detained Mr. Devendra and set about verifying his claims,” an officer with the Antop Hill police said.

The officer said a team went to Narayan’s residence and found him in a pool of blood. He was taken to Sion Hospital, where he was declared dead before admission.

Meanwhile, police personnel viewed the footage from closed circuit television cameras in the building as well as around it and began to trace the movements of the accused.

“The three are seen reaching the building on two two-wheelers around midnight and entering the lift, after which they are seen going to Narayan’s seventh floor residence. Around an hour later, Mr. Devendra is seen exiting the flat while gesturing towards Narayan’s door and summoning the lift. As soon as the lift arrives, Mr. Pacharkar is seen hurrying out of the flat and both men get into the lift,” the officer said.

Both the men were then seen leaving on their respective two-wheelers. Based on Mr. Devendra’s questioning, the police sent a team to Pune, where Mr. Pacharkar was believed to be hiding. Sources said he was picked up around 5 p.m. on Tuesday with the assistance of local police, and brought to Mumbai around 10 p.m.

Investigating officers said both the accused will be questioned separately and together to identify discrepancies in their statements and to ascertain the motive for the murder.

“Based on inquiries so far, we know that around two years ago, Narayan quit his job as a journalist with a television news channel and started a hotel in partnership with Mr. Pacharkar. The hotel ran into losses and Narayan owed Mr. Pacharkar a large amount of money. Prima facie, this dispute is believed to be the reason for the murder, although enquiries are under way,” the officer said.

Mumbai Police spokesperson DCP Manjunath Singe said an offence of murder has been registered under the Indian Penal Code.
