Sanatan Sanstha lawyer, aide in judicial custody

Court denies CBI extension, says no fresh progress in probe

A special court on Tuesday sent Sanjeev Punalekar, counsel for the fringe rightwing outfit Sanatan Sanstha, and his aide, Vikram Bhave, to judicial custody in connection with the murder of rationalist Narendra Dabholkar.

Mr. Punalekar and Mr. Bhave, who were arrested by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on May 26, were produced in court on expiry of their CBI custody.

The court of additional sessions judge R.M. Pande denied the CBI further extension of their custody, observing that the agency had not made any fresh progress in its investigation during the time the accused was in their custody.

Probe agencies have claimed that Mr. Punalekar and Mr. Bhave participated in the conspiracy to murder Dabholkar, especially in destroying the evidence and in aiding and abetting Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar, his alleged assailants.

Arguing for a 14-day custodial extension, special public prosecutor Prakash Suryavanshi said the CBI needed time to analyse the data retrieved from Mr. Punalekar’s laptop and mobile phone seized during his arrest.

Mr. Suryavanshi said Mr. Punalekar had harboured one of the accused Sanstha members in the 2009 Madgaon blast in Goa. He said the agency needed more time to probe how Mr. Bhave conducted the reconnaissance before Dabholkar’s murder, and to interrogate him on the details of the getaway motorbike used by the two shooters.

Arguing against the CBI’s plea, defence counsel Virendra Ichalkaranjikar said the agency’s allegation of Mr. Punalekar participating in a conspiracy to murder Dabholkar was “not tenable”.

“The CBI claims that advocate Punalekar had advised Mr. Kalaskar, the alleged shooter, in June 2018 to destroy the pistol used in a crime that occurred in 2013. This vague, ‘post-incident’ allegation does not hold water. Furthermore, despite seizing Mr. Punalekar’s laptop and mobile on May 27, the agency has made no progress to retrieve the data,” he said.

In September last year, seeking an extension of Mr. Kalaskar’s custody, the CBI told the court that in July 2018, the accused had dismantled four country-made pistols and thrown them in the creeks of Greater Mumbai and Thane, suggesting that one of the firearms could be the weapon used to kill Dr. Dabholkar.

In his statement to the CBI last year, Mr. Kalaskar allegedly said that Mr. Punalekar, known for his defamatory statements against Dabholkar, had asked him to destroy the weapons.

According to the CBI, Mr. Kalaskar had allegedly revealed that it was the Thane-based Mr. Bhave who had planned the reconnaissance, pointed out Dabholkar to the assailants and even planned the getaway route for the shooters.

Besides the arrests of Mr. Andure, Mr. Kalaskar and Dr. Virendra Tawde — said to be the alleged mastermind of the murders of Dabholkar and veteran Communist leader Govind Pansare — the CBI has arrested Amol Kale, Amit Digvekar and Rajesh Bangera in connection with the conspiracy to kill the two rationalist thinkers.

Mr. Kale, Mr. Digvekar and Mr. Bangera, who were granted default bail in December last year in the Dabholkar case, are incarcerated in Bengaluru for their suspected roles in the killing of journalist Gauri Lankesh.
