UCC scientists using five iconic images from across the globe to highlight dangers of air pollution

Scientists at University College Cork are using iconic images from across the globe to highlight the need for action on air pollution and climate change.

The initiative is to mark the UN’s World Environment Day tomorrow (June 5) The Centre for Research into Atmospheric Chemistry (CRACLab) at UCC has selected five iconic images, including a Banksy mural and historic Buddha sculpture, to raise awareness about the need to cut down on air pollution among decision makers.

“A solution has been proposed by scientists and that is to keep carbon in the ground,” explained John Sodeau, Emeritus Professor of Chemistry at UCC.

“Unfortunately, this advice has not yet brought politicians or the public on board.

“The only way to proceed is for scientists to raise awareness about air pollution in a user-friendly way to decision makers,” he added.

The Leshan Great Buddha and Acid Rain

The Leshan Great Buddha statue which has been damaged by Acid Rain.

“This statue is located in China’s Sichuan Province where construction started in 713 AD,” said Professor Sodeau.

“It is being renovated at great expense after many years of damage from acid rain but continuing economic growth in China has led to increasing amounts of air pollution from transport and coal-burning.

“As a result, their emissions of sulfuric and nitric acids have continued to attack the calcite (calcium carbonate) mineral of the natural cliff stone that the monument is carved from,” he added.

“The cracks and visual degradation appear because the acids and related acidic ions dissolve the carbonate content.

“The term acid rain was first coined in 1872.

“It increasingly became a serious health problem during the famous London fogs or “peasoupers” up to the mid-1950s.

“Understanding of the detailed chemistry came in the 1960s and 70s.

“In Western Europe, at least, the problem has been much reduced because of this research and the ‘Green’ environmental activism that followed.”

Season’s Greetings and Industrial Pollution

Banksy's take on industrial pollution. Pic: Ben Birchall/PA Wire/PA Images.

“Revealed during Christmas 2018, Banksy’s famous Season’s Greetings mural in Port Talbot, Wales, uses the corner of the garage to convey a chilling message,” Professor Sodeau said.

“When seen from just one side of the building, the art appears to show a boy catching snowflakes on his tongue but, on turning the corner, it becomes clear that the snow is actually ash produced from a fire in a skip.

“This painting is a strong statement on the industrial town's steelworks and the pollution it creates,” he explained.

“Steel plants are known to emit acidic gases like nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide, as well as fine particulate matter which, like the ash shown in the picture, can contain toxic chemicals such as heavy metals and dioxins.

“Studies have shown that people living near steel plants are more likely to suffer from respiratory diseases like asthma and have higher blood pressure and resting heart rates.

“More worryingly, evidence is emerging from several places around the world that residents in steel towns have a higher incidence of several forms of cancer,” added the UCC expert.

“The best way to deal with industrial pollution is for the environmental agencies to impose strict regulations on emissions and perform regular checks to ensure compliance.

Red Sky and Crescent Moon and Volcanic Aerosols

Red Sky and Crescent Moon circa 1818 Joseph Mallord William Turner 1775-1851 Accepted by the nation as part of the Turner Bequest 1856.

“JMW Turner’s ‘Red Sky and Crescent Moon’, housed at the Tate, was painted in about 1818 just three years after the largest volcanic explosion in human history: Mount Tambora on the Island of Sumbawa, Indonesia.

“The eruption released many small sulfate particles into the atmosphere that gradually spread around the planet over the next year,” said Professor Sodeau.

“In fact, there were so many particles that much of the sun’s light and heat was prevented from reaching the Earth’s surface because of reflection and global dimming in the atmosphere.

“This phenomenon led to 1816 becoming known as the year without a summer,” he added.

“It also led to some spectacular red sunsets because the particles scatter blue wavelengths of light more efficiently thereby allowing the red light from the sun to reach our eyes from the horizon.

“This type of behaviour has been captured on many occasions by painters like Monet and Munch (take another look at The Scream).

“Now you can see why many geo-engineers think that seeding our atmosphere with sulfate particles might combat global warming but that’s another story.” Image released under Creative Commons.

Satellite imaging and the ozone ‘hole’

The Ozone 'hole'. Pic: NASA

This satellite image was obtained by the NASA Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS).

It is centred on the South Pole where the so-called ozone ‘hole’ was first observed by the British Antarctic Survey in the mid-1980s.

This was achieved through measurements from the land base at Halley Bay using a device to measure ozone UV absorbance.

“At first, the results were not believed because of the speed of the ozone depletion during October, a month into the Austral Spring,” said Professor Sodeau.

“Associated NASA satellites were originally programmed to ignore “anomalies” and it was not until scientists began to look at all the retrieved data that it was recognised as a real phenomenon.

“All of the ozone is never completely removed and so it is not a hole, but very large decreases - up to 75% - have been observed,” he added.

“The reason for the rapid depletion in springtime was quickly related to the presence of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) in the atmosphere, combined with sunlight, polar stratospheric clouds and a polar vortex.

“The chemistry is more complicated than that happening for global ozone depletion but is now well understood.

“And the good news is that the ozone layer is repairing itself because we have banned CFCs.” Credit: NASA.

New Delhi, photography and smog

New Dehli shrouded in smog, a combination of smoke and fog.

“This photograph was taken in January 2019 at a time when the chief minister of the region called New Delhi a ‘gas chamber’,” said Professor Sodeau.

“Gases like ozone and nitrogen oxides are only part of the story.

“A large part is made of very small solid particles and droplets floating in the atmosphere,” he explained.

“They are often called particulate matter (PM) and are defined by their sizes, which are so small that for some of them more than 100 can sit side by side in the width of a human hair.

“They are readily breathed in and can be toxic, often consisting of acids, carcinogens and heavy metals.

“PM is produced from transport - cars, trucks, buses and ships - and burning solid fuels like coal and wood.

“They can cause death and diseases like diabetes.

“The list of health effects associated with urban smog is becoming increasingly long and the picture above is not pretty.

“Can you imagine it if you were on the bike?” asked Professor Sodeau.

“The most important takeaway message though is that even at very much lower levels of air pollution than depicted here, the PM can be harmful, especially to the young, the old and those suffering from asthma.

“Furthermore, these black, sooty, carbon-containing particles lead to global warming because they take up the heat trying to escape the planet’s surface.

“Reducing smog levels will, therefore, be a win-win scenario in our efforts to combat both air pollution and climate change.”
