International film shot in Edmonton premieres at Indian Film Festival of Alberta Friday

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

International film shot in Edmonton premieres at Indian Film Festival of Alberta Friday Photo by supplied

Reviews and recommendations are unbiased and products are independently selected. Postmedia may earn an affiliate commission from purchases made through links on this page.

Article content An international drama with key Edmonton connections plays opening night at Indian Film Festival of Alberta on Friday. The Malayalam-language film, And the Oscar Goes To …, shot a considerable portion of its footage in the city last fall.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content IFFA executive director Madhan Selvaraj explains how the festival had a hand in helping an Indian production film in Edmonton, the capital city subbing in for Los Angeles. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or International film shot in Edmonton premieres at Indian Film Festival of Alberta Friday Back to video “The festival focuses on the regional film industry — not Bollywood — which produces around 50 per cent of the films in India,” he explains. “For our festival, a lot of regional directors and producers come over to represent their films. So we talk to the local film commissions and take the filmmakers out on a tour of Edmonton, Calgary, the Rockies … “The director, Salim Ahamed, came to our festival in 2016 with (the film) Pathemari, and he really liked it here. He said, ‘I might have a script.’ Of course, we didn’t know if he was serious. “But he was. And he came back last September — and while 70 per cent was shot in India, thirty per cent was shot in Edmonton.”

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content The Malayalam-language drama stars Tovino Thomas and Anu Sithara. Its story centres on a director whose film is India’s Oscar submission to be considered for Best Foreign Film. And in real life, Ahamed’s 2011, award-winning first feature Adaminte Makan Abu was indeed India’s official submission to the Oscars. “The cool thing is it’s coming back to our festival for its world premiere,” says Selvaraj. The international theatrical release is June 21. The director lives in Kerala in southwest India. He, as well as the local cast and crew, will be in attendance Friday night at the 8 p.m. screening at Metro Cinema, 8712 109 St. The film was made with help from the Alberta Screen-based Production Grant, which necessitates local hires. Selvaraj thinks the province should encourage more Indian regional-film productions. “The world’s perception is India is all about Bollywood — but there’s more than that. If we go out of our way, we can start to gold mine, because there’s so much content coming out. Think about it — 2,000 films a year they’re making! And there are lots of stories they want to shoot outside (the country).”

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Getting back to the festival, its 10 features — including dramas, documentaries and comedies — play locally Friday through Sunday at Metro Cinema. With Edmonton Pride Week in mind, two films curated focus on LGBTQ2+ realities: a drama and a doc, which will be followed by panel discussions. Abu is a Canadian documentary by gay Pakistani-Muslim filmmaker Arshad Khan, documenting life with his family in Toronto. Nagarkirtan, meanwhile, is a drama written and directed by Kaushik Ganguly. Selvaraj explains, “This one’s about a trans woman living in a rural village in India. It follows her life and the societal pressures she goes through — she wants to tell the community she’s a woman “Both are top notch, award-winning films,” notes Selvaraj.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Information on the other films, including a drama about water hoarding in the era of climate change, are at indiafilmfestival.ca — where you can also buy tickets and passes. A festival pass is $80, while a five-film combo is $50. Opening night is $20; individual films are $12 — also available at the door. The Edmonton Movie Club is once again presenting IFFA — which over the last five years has expanded to touring its films nationally, including to Calgary, Red Deer, Fort McMurray, Lethbridge, Montreal and Toronto. This year adds Regina, Winnipeg and Grande Prairie to the list. “Growth-wise it’s amazing for us to be able to travel, for example, last year to Cold Lake,” notes Selvaraj. “It’s hard work, great when funding comes, but you can never rely on that. Because of our name — Edmonton Movie Club — it’s hard in other cities,” he laughs. “But we talk to the (Indian) regional filmmakers a lot, so we have a good eye on what the best films are, and hold them for the festival instead of just showing them in our regular monthly screenings. “With And the Oscar Goes To… film, it’s come full circle — he came to our festival, then shot it here, now it’s coming back opening night. It’s really something.” fgriwkowsky@postmedia.com @fisheyefoto

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Edmonton Journal Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Edmonton Journal, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Edmonton Journal Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
