Centre toys with setting up delimitation panel for J&K

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Jammu/New Delhi, June 4

With Jammu and Kashmir topping Home Minister Amit Shah’s agenda, among the many plans on the table is appointment of a delimitation commission, as the BJP has been pushing for getting more seats for Jammu region in the state Assembly.

Shah was on Tuesday given a detailed presentation on the state. The BJP, in its manifesto, had declared that it will work for abrogation of Article 370, which gives special powers to J&K, and annulling Article 35A, that gives special rights to the people of the state.

The BJP is also a strong advocate for redrawing the scope and size of Assembly segments and determining the number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes.

The demand for delimitation was raised by the BJP first in 2008 during the Amarnath land row. The objective is to “correct” the alleged inequity and disparity with Jammu province, and provide representation to all reserved categories.

The Farooq Abdullah government had amended the state Constitution in 2002 under which “until the figures for the first census taken after 2026 have been published, it shall not be necessary to readjust the number of seats in the Assembly”.

According to legal experts, the amendment can be struck down by Governor Satya Pal Malik, but requires the concurrence of Parliament within six months.

The then CM Ghulam Nabi Azad toyed with the idea of setting up a delimitation commission, but could not push it forward.

The NDA government in 2002 had initiated a process of delimitation of Assembly and parliamentary constituencies and set up Kuldip Singh Commission, but had agreed to keep Jammu and Kashmir out of its purview. National Panthers Party chief Bhim Singh welcomed any such move, saying the Congress with the National Conference have “discriminated against” the Jammu region.

The Supreme Court had in 2010 upheld the freeze imposed by the state government on delimitation of Assembly constituencies in the state till 2026 and dismissed the plea that it violated the “basic structure” of the state Constitution.

Of the total 87 Assembly seats, seven are reserved for Scheduled Castes — all in Jammu division, as there is no SC population in the Valley. These haven’t been rotated since 1996 — Chamb, Domana, Ranbir Singh Pura, Samba, Hiranagar, Chenani and Ramban (separate) in Jammu, Kathua and Udhampur district, respectively.

In the 2014 Assembly polls, the BJP had won all seven reserved seats. It had won 25 seats and the PDP, with 28 seats in its kitty, had emerged as the single-largest party. In the recent Lok Sabha elections, the BJP emerged as the single-largest party with 46.2 per cent vote share and a lead in 28 Assembly seats. — Agencies/TNS

The Plan: Larger share for Jammu

BJP has been raising the issue of reorganisation of state so that Jammu gets a larger share of seats in 87-member Assembly. As of now, Kashmir region has 46 seats, Jammu region 37 and Ladakh 4

State BJP has also been suggesting that 13 seats kept vacant for areas of the state under illegal occupation of Pakistan be given to west Pakistan refugees who have settled in Jammu

‘Emotional partition attempt’

Distressed to hear about plan to redraw constituencies. Forced delimitation is an obvious attempt to inflict another emotional partition of the state on communal lines. — Mehbooba Mufti, Ex-CM
