Chennai shocker! Dismembered body parts of woman found in garbage dump yard

Pallikaranai police was immediately informed and investigation into the case was promptly initiated. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: The Pallikaranai police have launched a massive hunt to trace the identity of a woman whose dismembered body parts were found in a garbage dump yard in Pallikaranai near Perungudi on Monday. Only one hand and two legs of that woman were found from which it was assumed that the woman might be around 35-years-old.

Usually some people were involved in collecting scrap products and some plastics from this garbage yard. When a woman came there on Monday, she found a bag which was filled with dismembered parts of a woman. A golden bangle and a butterfly tattoo were found on her hand but the remaining parts of her body were missing.

Pallikaranai police was immediately informed and investigation into the case was promptly initiated. Two special police teams allotted under Assistant Commissioner Maheswari started scanning the CCTV footages from suspected areas like Kodambakkam, Nungambakkam and T Nagar to find a possible clue.

Also Read: WATCH - Chennai on high alert after 5 sensational murders in 24 hours

According to the statements from the police, the garbage collected from these above said areas with high population density are initially dumped at their nearby garbage yard at Valluvar Kottam and later collectively they get transferred to the Pallikaranai yard. Police started interrogations from the garbage truck drivers on the hunch that one among the 30 trucks headed to the Pallikaranai dump yard on that day had carried the dismembered parts of the woman.

Also Pallikaranai police sent information to all other police stations in the city to cross check for a missing woman from last week who was in the same age group and also from the police records. There is suspicion that the woman may be a supporting actress or a software firm employee.

They sent the photocopies of the dismembered parts mentioning the tattoo on her hand for identification to all police stations. The dismembered parts have been sent to the Chromepet government hospital. Also, it was observed that nobody came forward to claim the body. Special teams started investigations to identify the mystery behind the murder.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
