Kashmiris determined to continue mission of their martyrs

Srinagar, January 22, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, Hurriyat leaders and organizations have said that the people of Kashmir are determined to continue the mission of their martyrs despite all odds. The leaders and organizations said this while paying tributes to the martyrs of Gaw Kadal massacre on their martyrdom anniversary. Over 50 innocent people were martyred in Gaw Kadal area of Srinagar on January 21 in 1990 when Indian troops opened indiscriminate fire on peaceful demonstrators who were protesting against the molestation of several women by the troops on the previous night.

The Hurriyat forum led by Mirwaiz Umar Farooq in a statement in Srinagar said that the best tribute to the Kashmiri martyrs was to remain steadfast and carry their mission forward. It said that over the past three decades, many massacres that include Hawal, Gaw Kadal, Bijbehara, Zakoora, Sopore, Handwara, Kupwara, Shopian, Chattisinghpora, Wandhama, Machil, Kunanposhpora and Pathribal are a blot on the Indian democracy and reflect the open aggression of Indian troops against people of occupied Kashmir.

The Jammu and Kashmir Peoples Freedom League in a statement in Srinagar said that the genocide of Kashmiris started by the Indian troops with the Gaw Kadal massacre was still going on unabated. It said that despite killing hundreds of thousands of people, India had failed to suppress the Kashmiris’ just struggle for securing their inalienable right to self-determination.

The Chairman of United Jihad Council, Syed Salahuddin, in a statement issued in Srinagar paid glorious tributes to the martyrs of Gaw Kadal massacre and said that the memories of the carnage were still fresh in the minds and hearts of the Kashmiri people. He also expressed concern over the ill-treatment meted out to the Kashmiri political prisoners lodged in different jails.

On the other hand, the President of Awami Ittehad Party, Engineer Abdul Rasheed, in a statement also paid tributes to the martyrs of Gaw Kadal massacre. He said while Indian media, politicians and a section of pseudo intellectuals with a communal mind-set have been often calling few unfortunate killings of Kashmiri Pandits at the hands of unknown persons as genocide but don’t speak even a word on Gaw Kadal massacre and other worst massacres which took place in every area of occupied Kashmir at the hands of Indian men in uniform. “The huge sacrifices offered by Kashmiris deserve a response within India and at the international level,” he added.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
