World Environment Day 2019 - Walking-the-talk on curbing air pollution in India - Opinion by Vivek Subramanian

The short five-minute walk in the morning today from my apartment to Hyderabad’s bustlingMadhapur metro station leaves me blurry eyed with a stuffy nose. On most days I would have failedto even notice these symptoms, caught up with planning the workday ahead. This mid-weekmorning, however, there is little else I think of. My mind wanders to the constant grey that greetsour eyes when we step out on to city streets, the haze that has become part of Delhi’s landscape,irrespective of whether I visit in summer or winter. Most non-coastal cities in India have started tolook like this. My eyes chance upon a young child whose mother thrusts a mask across his face asshe drops him off to school on her bike – and I wonder, how much longer will we continue to live ourlives in this matter-of-fact manner.Seven million deaths across the globe every single year; with Asia-Pacific accounting for over 4 million ofthese and India losing more than a million lives – the serial killer in this case, according to the UN is‘toxic’ air pollution. 92% of the world’s population does not have access to clean air; Air pollutioncosts the global economy $5 trillion in annual welfare, and still, these statistics are not alarmingenough for us to take immediate stringent action to better the air quality around us?THE WORLD’S SERIAL KILLERSIn tackling air pollution, particulate matter plays the lead antagonist. Smaller particles with PM 2.5can easily penetrate the respiratory tract and cause major health issues. The worst pollutantsinclude nitrogen oxides, ozone, carbon monoxide and sulphur dioxide. Identifying the source ofthese pollutants will help in its targeted curbing.Recently, I was appalled to read a study that hinted at a direct link between polluted air and birth-defects or fatalities during pregnancy. Not surprising at all, that a mother-and-daughter in westernEurope are suing the government for ‘damages over ill-health’ caused by lack of effective measuresagainst air pollution. The WHO also states that 43% of lung-cancer and respiratory deaths, and 25% ofdeaths related to heart-disorders are attributable to air pollution; and it is the urban population oflow and middle-income countries which suffers maximum exposure.LESSONS FROM THE WESTWill India’s air ever become as clean as some of our Western counterparts? The answer is aresounding ‘NO’, unless we are ready to adopt radical measures.Business takes me to London and New York multiple times a year – and what I cannot miss are theconstant efforts taken by their governments to keep personal vehicles off the city’s streets! Drivinginside London or NYC is slowly becoming a luxury.Today, London is contemplating zero emission zones that restrict entry to just EVs and hybrids.ULEZs or Ultra Low Emission Zones, emissions surcharge, hefty peak-time tolls, closure of certainstreets to vehicular traffic are measures that have resulted in improving the air quality index acrossboth cities.Have these measures stirred up criticism and controversy? Does the public often view it as anuisance, especially as both cities are global financial hubs? Yes, of course! But lawmakers arerelentless. A drastic reduction in PM 2.5 levels by 2020 is the London Corporation’s aggressivetarget while New York is already seeing improvement of almost a 28% decrease in PM and 30%decrease in nitrogen oxide levels. Policymakers have provisioned a $1.4 bn fund for renewableenergy, schools are looking to cut down meat from its menus and fashion houses are making clothesfrom recyclable material to save the environment.CURBING POLLUTANTS IN THE AIR, CHINA’s WAYThis year's World Environment Day is being hosted by China with ‘air pollution’ beingthe UN-mandated theme. Our eastern neighbour, despite being a manufacturing-centric economy,has made tremendous strides towards tackling this menace in the last 3 years. One of the mostpolluting countries globally, China’s conscious efforts to go-green has helped improve its air-qualityindex, with its government deciding they cannot sacrifice the environment in exchange for economicgrowth. China’s efforts have borne fruit because it is working hard to reduce its reliance on coal forfuel – emission taxes have been introduced and developing CCT or Clean Coal Technology is priority.Meanwhile, their switch to renewables is on at break-neck speed, with China becoming the world’slargest solar market. The UN indicates it is home to over 50% of the world’s electric vehicles and 90%of the world’s electric buses today, no minor feat. There is a long way to go, but the journey is off toflying start.Can we borrow a leaf and attempt implementation of sweeping policy reforms as these countrieshave done?INDIA’S WAKE-UP CALLIs India doing enough to address air pollution, or are we still hiding behind excuses like populationdensity and being a ‘developing’ nation dependent on manufacturing and industrialisation to boost its economy? It is undoubtedly harder for a country like ours, but there is absolutely no alternativeto cleaning up the air. Are we ready to risk asthma, cancer and other respiratory disorders just to be‘comfortable’? Why is there not a zero-tolerance policy in place, especially when we are home to9 out of 10 of the world’s most polluted cities?We seem to be alright with harming the environment, sacrificing the planet and endangering ourchildren’s future. What we tend to forget is that our choices can result in irreparable damage - asIndians, we cannot waste a moment longer; the time to act is now.Environmental agencies must work in-tandem with the government and corporates to make adifference. More importantly, individuals need to gear up to be inconvenienced as action towardscleaner air will impact everyday routine. India announced a bold vision to adopt of EVs but did notback this up with an air-tight Renewable Energy Policy. Cities like Hyderabad, Lucknow and Delhihave begun trials of e-Buses for intra-city commute; but for EVs to be effective in reducing pollution,the charging infrastructure must depend on renewable energy and not coal.We need to implement comprehensive, strategic and long-term policy changes. A switch torenewable sources of energy is no longer an option, it is imperative.WAKING UP TO A CLEANER, GREENER ENVIRONMENTThe launch of the NCAP or National Clean Air Program is a good initiative. It aims at reducing PM(particulate matter) in air by 20-30% across hundred worst-affected Indian cities by 2024. Effectivesector-wise implementation of key measures, targeted expenditure of its Rs 300 crore corpus andprovision for legal action against non-execution is mandatory.Empowering SPCBs or State Pollution Control Boards is essential. We have to consider emissiontaxes, impounding vehicles that default norms, cordoning off streets, introducing peak-time tolls asmeasures that will yield results.Trees clean the air – we must move beyond symbolism and plant trees instead of flowering shrubs.We cannot allow the encroachment of open green spaces which help purify the toxic city air. It isimperative to improve the cost-effectiveness and reliability of public transport. Businesses can lendtheir support by offering ‘work-from-home’ as an option to employees at least once a week.Restricting the use of wood/kerosene/dung as cooking-fuel and increasing awareness on agriculturalwaste and segregation is crucial. Another simple but effective step is adopting cutting-edgetechnology and eco-friendly measures to reduce cement and concrete dust at construction sites.So much to do! Individuals and organisations like Shweta Narayan’s campaign for clean air inCuddalore, NEERI’s action plan for Nagpur, the Serum Institute’s aid to Pune’s municipality,Umendra Dutt’s ‘Kheti Viraasat’ mission in Punjab are leading this charge towards battling toxic air.A few weeks ago, it was heartening to see that environment and air-pollution had finally emerged aspoll-promises and mainstream electoral issues in the country. The time is now to recognise it as apublic health emergency across India and join the world in trying to ensure the air we breathe istoxin-free.

DISCLAIMER: The views expressed are solely of the author and ETEnergyworld.com does not necessarily subscribe to it. ETEnergyworld.com shall not be responsible for any damage caused to any person/organisation directly or indirectly.
