US Sanctions on Iran, Russia Not Binding for India - Ex-Indian Envoy to UN

The Donald Trump administration also threatened India of "serious implications" under the CAATSA (Countering America's Adversaries Through Sanctions Act) if it goes ahead with $5.43 billion S-400 air defence system deal, which New Delhi has inked with Moscow in October 2018.

"India will comply with UN laws, including sanctions adopted by the UNSC, but not allow the extra-territorial application of another country's domestic laws on India", Mukerji, who is also a distinguished fellow of the Vivekananda International Foundation, an Indian think tank, said.

India is signatory to the UN Charter as a founding member and soon after independence, the Indian legislature adopted a law requiring India to abide by UN Security Council resolutions, required by Article 25 of the UN Charter.

Meanwhile, following the promise made in a meeting with Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif during his visit to New Delhi, the Indian government has started a discussion on US sanctions on the purchase of Iranian oil.

On 4 June, India's Union Home Minister Amit Shah held a wide-ranging discussion with Indian Foreign Minister S. Jaishankar and Petroleum Minister Dharmendra Pradhan.

On 14 May, then Indian External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj had conveyed to her Iranian counterpart that a decision regarding the purchase of Iranian crude will only take place after the country's general elections conclude on 23 May.

READ MORE:India Likely to Resume Iranian Oil Imports Amid US Sanctions — Source

The US had granted exemptions to eight countries, including India, China, Japan, South Korea, and Turkey "to ensure a well-supplied oil market" in November last year for six months after it re-imposed sanctions on Iran from 2 May. India's External Affairs Ministry claimed being in constant touch with the US to seek a further extension of the waiver on oil imports from the Islamic Republic.

Sources said that US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo is expected to arrive in India on 25-26 June to discuss a wide range of trade issues, including sanctions which the US has imposed on Iran and Russia.
