Hyderabad: Coal workers protest as miner dies in mishap

HYDERABAD: Singareni workers staged protest over the death of a coal mine worker in a mishap when the roof slab caved in at the Srirampur underground mine. They have also demanded action against officials for their alleged negligence.A 53-year-old coal mine worker Kanniveni Ramulu died in the incident while another worker Lakkala Sathish suffered injuries when a 4ft by 15ft slab fell on them 3am on Tuesday. Two other workers escaped unhurt. Sathish was admitted to a hospital in Ramakrishnapuram. It was reportedly his first day at work. Sathish who was injured in the mine mishap suffered a leg fracture and also injuries on his face. Ramulu is survived by his wife, a son and three daughters. He had been working in SSCL for the last 32 years.While the Singareni Collieries Company Ltd (SCCL) management has ordered a probe into the mishap, the workers and unions have alleged negligence on the part of the management. In a memorandum submitted to the authorities, BMS state secretary Peram Ramesh pointed out that there were seven lapses on the part of the management.In one of the points, Ramesh mentioned that the extra precaution should have been taken on the night of the mishap during the intervening night of June 2-3 as it was a new moon night (Amavasya). He said that during the new moon and full moon nights (Purnima), the geological conditions in mines were different and there was a certain amount of risk involved in mining. He also said that there had been reports that in the same area where the mishap had occurred, workers had reportedly heard some sounds and also noticed cracks which were also brought to the notice of the authorities."The work that should have been done during the first or second shift was made to do during the night shift by workers which posed a danger to their lives," he said.Coal mine workers who had gathered after the death of Ramulu also demanded that strict action be taken against the officers for their alleged negligence.
