Mumbai: Fake doctor caught prescribing medication to patients on camera

The VVMC would soon approach the Nalla Sopara police to register a criminal case against Tayde (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: A female clinic assistant allegedly pretended to be a doctor by diagnosing patients and prescribing them medicines in Nalla Sopara (east) area of Mumbai. Vasai-Virar Municipal Corporation (VVMC) was informed about the incident by an NGO named Human Rights Parishad after which the clinic was raided and shut down with immediate effect.

The clinic is situated on Link Road. Dr Arvind Kumar Singh, who runs the clinic, is out of town since the past few days, according to a report in Hindustan Times. The 23-year-old untrained assistant, who was identified as Komal Tayde, is has studied till Class 9. Tayde was caught on camera for allegedly pretending to be a medical professional by wearing a doctor's coat and prescribing medicines to patients.

Also Read: Bhopal shocker! Four family members, including 12-day-old newborn, found dead; frothing at mouth

A volunteer of the NGO had recently suffered a hand injury and went to the clinic for its treatment. Tayde prescribed her some medicines due to which she suffered allergic reactions. The volunteer later found out that Tayde was pretending to be Dr Singh while he was away.

Chief medical officer, VVMC, Akruti Wade, said that the medical assistant's work is to dress wounds and administer first-aid to patients. Tayde was not qualified to examine patients and prescribe them medicines, Wade said while adding that the civic body has ordered the closure of the clinic with immediate effect so that no more patients are cheated. They are waiting for Dr Singh to return to take his statement. The VVMC would soon approach the Nalla Sopara police to register a criminal case against Tayde.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
