Special Task Force guns down wanted murderer following fierce gun battle in Pratapgarh

The gunned down criminal had a reward of Rs 1 lakh on his head (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Lucknow: Following an arduous gunbattle between the two, officials with the Special Task Force (STF) gunned down a wanted criminal with several cases against him. The fierce encounter which resulted in the death of history-sheeter Taukir of Pratapgarh took place at Kotwali City area of Pratapgarh district in the early hours of Thursday. Arms and ammunition were also recovered from Taukir who had a reward of Rs 1 lakh on his head.

A team of STF personnel surrounded the wanted criminal in Kotwali City area. What ensued was an engaging exchange of gunfire which led to the death of Taukir. The history-sheeter reportedly had several cases against him, including those of dacoity, extortion, attempt to murder and murder. Two .32 calibre pistols and a .30 caliber carbine was recovered from him, reported sections of the media.

Criminal Taukir of Pratapgarh who was killed in encounter with STF today morning, was wanted in several cases of murder, attempt to murder, dacoity and extortion, and had a reward of Rs 1 lakh on his head. Two .32Cal pistols and .30 Cal carbine recovered from him. https://t.co/VMUduTlxsz — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 6, 2019

Taukir is believed to have carried out the sensational murder of marble trader Rajesh Singh who was shot dead inside his shop in Pratapgarh's Sadar area in January of this year. A resident of Rakha Bazaar area, 50-year-old Singh was last seen engaging in an argument with three masked men before the trio opened fire at him leaving him in a pool of blood before fleeing the scene of the crime. Police had tracked the assailants moving towards Bhaliyapur area but the trail went cold after a few days.

A month before he murdered the marble trader, Taukir killed Hari Narayan Trivedi, the head warden of Pratapgarh district jail. A resident of Pure Ahiya area in Nigoha locality of state capital Lucknow, 55-year-old Trivedi was buying vegetables from a roadside vendor not far from the jail premises when two armed bike-borne assailants opened fire at him.

The deceased history-sheeter carried out a murder as latest as of April of this year when he, along with other unidentified assailants, shot the Pradhan of the Rasulpur Gulerah village dead. Pradhan Dinesh Dubey's death triggered a stir in the area. Police officials familiar with Taukir's death suggest that he had a hand in executing Dubey's murder.
