Father drugs own daughter, has her thrown into canal for 'tarnishing family name' in Uttar Pradesh

The father has been arrested (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Lucknow: Even as police in Aligarh are in the process of investigating the gruesome murder of a two-and-a-half-year-old girl, yet another heinous instance has come to light from Muzaffarnagar district of the state. Reports assert that a 22-year-old woman in the area was drugged and thrown into a canal by her own father and his accomplices.

Officials with the Chapar police station while confirming the incident on Thursday, said that an investigation into the matter is underway. Prima facie the case seems to be one of honour killing, said an official familiar with the probe. As per the latest reports, the victim's father, Virpal and another person have been arrested in connection with her death.

The arrests were made on the basis of a complaint by a 23-year-old man Arjun, who claimed to be in a relationship with the deceased. Station house in-charge (SHO) of Chapar station, H Singh told news agency PTI that the woman's murder took place in Parai village on Wednesday.

Singh further added that Virpal, during the course of the interrogation, confessed to giving his daughter an intoxicant and having her thrown into the canal for "tarnishing the family's name". He also said that investigators are yet to recover the woman's body. Since the case is still open, police officials are yet to state charges of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which the accused will be charged under.

Earlier this week, locals in Aligarh district of Uttar Pradesh staged massive protests and blockades after they discovered the mutilated body of an infant who was reported missing by her parents on May 30. The girl's family members alleged that police negligence led to her death. It was later discovered that the child was abducted by one of her neighbours who owed money to her uncle and grandfather and had recently engaged into an argument with them.
