International competition: U.S. not alone in setting sights on return to lunar surface

MISSION MOON: Nearly 50 years have passed since Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin became the first humans to walk on the moon. Our special Apollo 50 anniversary coverage explores how the country came together to fulfill President John F. Kennedy’s goal of reaching the lunar surface by 1970, NASA's bold missions - and crippling tragedies - since that historic day, and the future of space exploration and Houston as America's "Space City.”

***

As the United States gears up to return to the moon for the first time since 1972, it finds itself among a growing pack of countries attempting the same feat in the modern age.

Just this year, two countries already have tried to leave their mark on the moon. In January, China successfully put a lander on the far side of the moon — a first for humankind — to study the topography and mineralogy of this unexplored area and do an astronomical study of the surface.

And then in April, Israel tried to land a probe on the surface, teaming up with NASA to study the moon’s magnetic fields, but an engine shutdown 500 feet from the surface caused it to crash.

Even countries such as India, Japan and North Korea have plans for heading to the moon, whether it be putting their first probe there or going big with a human mission.

Aiming for the moon A number of countries are hoping to land on the moon in the coming years. Canada: The country's space agency has awarded contracts to companies and universities in an effort to send a rover to the moon in the next five years. India: The Chandrayaan-2 would send a lander and a rover to the lunar surface. It was supposed to launch earlier this year, but the date has now been pushed back to July. Israel: After the crash of its first lunar probe in April, Israeli officials quickly announced they would try again, promising to start work on Beresheet 2 immediately. Japan: The country hopes to put a man on the moon in 2030. North Korea: Officials announced in 2016 they hoped to plant their flag on the moon by 2026. South Korea: The Korean Aerospace Research Institute of South Korea stated that it plans to send the Korea Pathfinder Lunar Orbiter around the moon in 2020 with the help of NASA. See More Collapse

THE FUTURE: Elon Musk injects 'X' factor into space quest with bold vision, mixed track record

It may seem odd that all these projects are happening 50 years after NASA first put men on the moon, but Keith Cowing, editor of NASA Watch, a website devoted to space news, said he doesn’t find it surprising. Going to the moon has become cheaper and easier to do, he said.

“It’s the gold standard of technological accomplishments, to be a nation to send someone or something to the moon,” Cowing said. “I think there’s been a general renaissance in thinking … that space is something you should no longer be afraid of trying to do.”

Still, only three countries have successfully reached the lunar surface. The U.S. is the only country to ever leave bootprints there — 12 men between 1969 and 1972 have been there — and only China and Russia have landed uncrewed probes.

China, in particular, has had an aggressive plan to eventually put humans on the lunar surface. The country put a man into space for the first time in 2003 and landed its first robotic probe on the moon in 2013.

The next lunar trip for China will bring moon rock samples back to Earth for further study. The country hopes to launch that mission later this year, according to Space Policy Online. And in 2016, a Chinese official said the country hopes to put a man on the moon by 2036, according to The Telegraph.

Russia also hopes to put a human on the moon in the 2030s. It would be a first for country; the former Soviet Union landed a probe on the moon in 1959 during the height of the Space Race but didn’t get any further.

LOOKING FOR A MOON VACATION: Billions being invested in burgeoning space tourism industry

The government of India intentionally crashed a probe into the surface of the moon in 2008 — something both the European Space Agency and Japan has done in the past. They have plans to actually land on the surface in July.

If NASA’s plans work out, the U.S. will be up there with them. Since taking office, President Donald Trump has made it clear that returning to the moon for the first time since 1972 is a priority for his administration.

That plan received some urgency in March after Vice President Mike Pence directed NASA to put humans on the moon four years earlier than initially planned — in 2024 instead of 2028 — by “any means necessary.” His announcement came just weeks after the Trump administration proposed a $500 million budget cut for the agency in the coming fiscal year.

NASA still is working on a plan for how to make this happen and how much money it will need. In April, NASA Administration Jim Bridenstine told the Houston Chronicle the plan thus far would involve both the government’s problem-plagued Space Launch System rocket and commercial companies.

alex.stuckey@chron.com
