Pet Rottweiler attacks 12-year-old girl in Chennai's Shri Ramajayam Street area

The girl is currently undergoing medical treatment (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Chennai: A dog owner's momentary lapse of caution (that would have meant not allowing his pet's ferocious nature harm anyone else) led to a 12-year-old girl incurring severe injuries in the Shri Ramajayam Street of Chennai city. The incident occurred on Wednesday morning when the girl, Keerthana, was walking to a provision store near her residence and a pet Rottweiler owned by her next-door neighbour began chasing her. Known as Rottweil butchers' dogs, the animal bit the child on her stomach.

Fortunately, bystanders rushed to the girl's rescue. As they tried to take the girl away from the animal, the owner pulled the dog away from her. Locals then alerted the '108' ambulance service which reached the spot and took her to the KMC hospital where she is currently undergoing treatment. After the neighbours volunteered to pay for the girl's medical expenses, her parents decided not to register a police complaint against the Rottweiler and its owners.

The girl was walking towards the grocery store and the dog's owner stepped out of his house without locking the gate which led to the Rottweiler running out and to the road where Keerthana was, an eyewitness told The New Indian Express. The resident added that the girl panicked and started to run. She even threw stones at the animal but this only infuriated it and resulted in the dog attacking the child, said the resident of Shri Ramajayam Street.

A similar instance had come to light from Chikmagalur area of Karnataka in May of 2017 where a pet Rottweiler attacked and killed the caretaker of a farmhouse in Balheri village of Panipat district in Haryana. Going by reports, it took the police over an hour to pull the animal away from the body of the victim. After they managed to recover the body, police personnel spent another four hours trying to catch the dog.
