Is Imran Khan preparing ground for a date with Narendra Modi in Kyrgyzstan?

Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan will be Kyrgyz capital Bishkek later this month for Shanghai Cooperation Organisation meet. It is not yet clear if the two leaders will hold talks on the sidelines. (Photo: Twitter/MEAIndia)

Two significant developments have happened in Pakistan that indicate that Imran Khan government is doing what Prime Minister Narendra Modi set as a precondition for resumption of talks. These are, curbs on Jamaat-ud Dawa chief Hafiz Saeed and Pakistan Army agreeing to a cut in defence budget.

Hafiz Saeed was not allowed by the government to lead Eid-ul-Fitr prayers at Qaddafi Stadium in Lahore. This has been his favourite venue for giving sermons for several years on Eid-ul-Fitr and Eid-ul-Azha.

He was warned that he would be arrested if he did not comply with the orders. Shunted by Pakistani establishment, Hafiz Saeed offered prayers at a local mosque near his home.

This is a significant step by Pakistan given that Hafiz Saeed was earlier provided foolproof security for leading prayers at Qaddafi Stadium.

In the second major development, the Pakistan Army has agreed to a cut in its budget. Officially, the decision is said to be voluntary, which Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan described as unprecedented in his tweet.

The cut in defence budget for Pakistan Army is significant and in sync with addressing India’s concern. India has maintained that cross-border terrorism in the country has active sponsorship of the Pakistan Army. It has been argued that till the Pakistan Army continues to have the lion’s share in the country’s budget, anti-India terror groups will continue to enjoy aide and patronage.

According to a news report by the Express Tribune, Pakistan’s defence budget was increased by 20 per cent in 2018, when it crossed $1 trillion mark for the first time. Overall, the defence budget of Pakistan increased by 83 per cent over the past five years.

In that sense, a cut in defence budget is expected to translate into less funding of terror groups active in Jammu and Kashmir, one of the key conditions set by India.

There is a context

Post-Pulwama, India went back to the terror and talks can’t go together policy and blunted all attempts from Imran Khan government to keep business as usual on the diplomatic front. Forty jawans were killed in a terror attack in Pulwama on February 14 this year when a suicide bomber targeted a convoy of Central Reserve Police Force on the Jammu-Srinagar highway.

The Modi government responded with an air strike at a training centre of terror outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba, which had owned the attack on CRPF convoy.

An aerial dogfight followed between the Indian and Pakistani air forces the next day, February 27, and diplomatic muscle flexing was on display when Indian pilot crossed the Line of Control and was captured by the Pakistan Army.

Indian Air Force pilot Abinandan Varthaman was released by Pakistan as goodwill gesture announced by Imran Khan in Parliament. India claimed diplomatic victory. This brought bilateral engagement to freeze with India putting onus on Pakistan for making conducive environment for talks.

Imran Khan government, also under pressure from terror financing watchdog Financial Action Task Force (FATF), put restrictions on Hafiz Saeed in March, when he was barred from delivering Friday’s weekly sermons at the Jamia Masjid Qadsia, which also serves as JuD headquarters in Lahore.

He had been delivering Friday sermons here for years and had not been stopped from doing so when the mosque was being managed by the government of Pakistani province Punjab.

JuD is a banned terror outfit. It was blacklisted on December 2008 by the UN Security Council in the aftermath of 26/11 Mumbai attacks in which 166 people were killed.

Now action against Hafiz Saeed and cut in defence budget have come days ahead of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) regional meet in Kyrgyzstan later this month (June 13-14).

There is speculation that Narendra Modi and Imran Khan may have an unscheduled meeting to pave the way for official diplomatic engagement between the two countries. A similar meeting between PM Modi and then Pakistan PM Nawaz Sharif on the sidelines of SCO meet in Kazakhstan in 2017 had led to thaw in bilateral relations.
