Mercian regiment organises Worcester event in honour of war heroes

AN event celebrating the wartime service of the men of the Worcestershire Regiment is coming to Worcester.

The Mercian Regiment Museum has organised a family community event on Saturday, June 15 at St Helen’s church.

The event will be centred around the 75th anniversary of the Worcestershire Regiment’s participation in the WW2 battles in North-West Europe and its actions in India around Kohima and Imphal against the Japanese Forces.

Two of the regiment’s veterans, Alan George and Barry Freeman, from the Burma campaign will be there.

The day will feature short talks on the key battles, children’s activities, display stands, readings by local cadets and re-enactors.

Entry to the event, which runs from 10am till 4pm, is free.

For more information, call 01905 721982 or email: museummercian@bt.com.connect.

Today marks the 75th anniversary of the D-Day landings in Normandy, when Allied forces began the liberation of Europe.

The Worcestershire Regiment was not involved on the day itself, and came in on June 22 when First Battalion landed under the command of Brigadier Hubert Essame.

In support of the first major objective, to take the German-occupied city of Caen, the 43rd (Wessex) Division were ordered to occupy the ground captured at Cheux.

The Worcesters and the 5th Battalion, Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry were given the task, which was completed by mid-morning, on June 27.

The Battalion sustained more than 16 casualties during this action, including all the officers of A Company.

Lieut. David Wye, Capt. Richard Dingley, Major Peter Riddle, Lieut. Pat Hulme and Major Riddle’s Batman were all killed in the attack on Cheux.

The Normandy Landings, codenamed ‘Operation Overlord’ by Allied planners included troops from more than 10 countries, including the United States, Britain and the Commonwealth, France, Poland, The Netherlands and Belgium.

Troops landed on five beaches across the French coast, codenamed Utah, Omaha, Gold, Juno and Sword.

The subsequent campaign to liberate France saw more than 225,000 Allied casualties and between 300,000 and 500,000 German casualties by the time Overlord was declared finished in August 1944.
