Salman Khan’s Inshallah will be Alia Bhatt and Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s first ever EID release

Salman Khan, Alia Bhatt and Sanjay Leela Bhansali's Inshallah to release on Eid 2020

Finally, it has been announced that the official release date for the upcoming Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s directorial venture Inshallah, will be released on Eid next year. The film, which stars Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt will certainly be among the most anticipated Bollywood movies of 2020. After all Sanjay Leela Bhansali and Salman Khan are coming together for the first time in 20 years since Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam while Alia Bhatt and Salman will be starring together for the first time ever.

But these aren’t the only two firsts to come out of this project. It’ll also be Alia Bhatt’s first time ever Eid release. The actress’ movies have never really had a festival release as such, let alone an Eid release. Barring Shaandaar (2015) with Shahid Kapoor, which got a Dussera release. Unfortunately, her only festival release was a colossal flop. However, Inshallah could turn that fact around.

Similarly, for Sanjay Leela Bhansali too, his movies have never really got a festival release. At best, SLB, due to a number of unfortunate controversies and outrage, had to delay the release of his last film, Padmaavat, which starred Deepika Padukone, Shahid Kapoor and Ranveer Singh. And it eventually released during the Republic Day weekend. That is the only time the filmmaker’s got a holiday release for his movie and we all saw how much money Padmaavat made on its opening weekend.

Both Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt are currently busy with separate upcoming projects. While Salman, after concluding the promotions for Bharat, will get back to shooting for his Christmas Day release, Dabangg 3, Alia Bhatt is busy with her next – Brahmastra with Ranbir Kapoor and Sadak 2 with Aditya Roy Kapur, Sanjay Dutt and Pooja Bhatt.

Sanjay Leela Bhansali made one of the biggest budgeted grand films like #BajiraoMastani & #Padmaavat with actor like RanveerSingh then imagine what will he do with THE SALMAN KHAN.



It is guaranteed 2020s biggest movie. You simply can't question SLB's potential. #Inshallah pic.twitter.com/xVxfvh4AX2 — rohan #IAmBharat (@BeingRohan_) March 19, 2019

So far, it has been reported that, unlike SLB’s last few films, which have been period-dramas, Inshallah will be a modern-day love story. Salman Khan reportedly will play a businessman in his 40s while Alia Bhatt will play his love interest in her 20s. Salman is rather excited about the movie and event said in a recent interview that he thinks Alia and him will look great together on the big screen.
