Extortion kingpins hold NCR to ransom

The Gurugram Police were in disbelief as they poured over the pages of two diaries recovered last month from a sharpshooter of gangster Kaushal. They found the names of 300 prominent industrialists, traders, jewellers and shopkeepers identified for extortion - as high as Rs 4 crore a month in one of the cases.

"The diaries mention phone numbers, besides individual pay targets and deadlines. Ranbir Saini, the man who possessed them, confirmed he was transmitting the data to his boss operating from Dubai," said a police official.

"We have learnt that Kaushal is supervising the extortion racket through a set of bookies who identify targets and supply contact details before he makes calls for protection money," he said.

Saini's interrogation also revealed that he and his men used to send extortion money to Kaushal through hawala routes. Saini was hiding in Dehradun before his arrest. He used to come to Gurugram by bus to work on Kaushal's assignments.

"Saini would come in disguise and local contacts would facilitate weapons, vehicles and hideouts before crimes. After every activity, Saini used to brief Kaushal through WhatsApp calls," said another official.

WHO IS KAUSHAL?

Years ago, Kaushal used to fix and sell water pumps in Gurugram's Naharpur Rupa village. He joined the criminal ranks in 2004. In December 2016, he jumped parole when out of Bhondsi jail in Gurugram.

Police records say he and his men have been involved in over 200 cases of murder, attempt to murder and extortion in the last 15 years. Today, the 37-year-old has emerged as Gurugram's underworld face. So much so that even smaller gangs extort money by faking their association with him.

On Monday, a 26-year-old man was arrested in Gurugram for trying to extort Rs 10 lakh from a shopkeeper by impersonating as a Kaushal gang member. The police are looking for his accomplice who allegedly phoned the complainant posing as Kaushal.

"The murders of property grabber Jaydev alias JD and bookie Vijay Batra alias Tantrik in February are prime examples of Kaushal's ruthlessness. An extortion phone call recording was circulated by Batra's wife after his murder. Kaushal had demanded Rs 50 crore from him. He had threatened to kill him if he failed to pay," said a police official.

THE CRACKDOWN

The police say they have launched an all-out battle against Kaushal's gang. "We arrested his 18 dreaded sharpshooters in recent weeks. Most of his associates are in jail," said Gurugram Crime Branch ACP Shamsher Singh.

On June 1, cops booked Kaushal's close aide Sube Singh for making an extortion call to a real estate agent. Two days prior to that, the police arrested another close aide who helped Kaushal get a passport and other relevant travel documents to flee to Dubai six months ago.

On May 25, the Special Task Force (STF) of the Haryana Police arrested two of his men wanted for six murders. They carried a reward of Rs 1 lakh each on their head. This was a day after another associate was held with technical and human intelligence following a week's chase. On Tuesday itself, the police arrested Kaushal's live-in partner for her involvement in cases of murder and extortion.

"After Kaushal fled India, she used to regularly visit him in Dubai," said Rajiv Deswal, DCP (Crime). Gurugram Police Commissioner Muhammad Akil sounded hopeful. "We have also blocked all money channels to Kaushal. Once the flow is stopped, we are sure he will surrender or be arrested," he said.

DELHI IN EXTORTION GRIP TOO

In Delhi, according to intelligence inputs, Chennu Pahalwan, Nasir and Hashim Baba have strongholds in Jafrabad and Seelampur. They have made a verbal commitment to not interfere into their territories. Neeraj Bawana with over 100 criminal cases against him has a stronghold in Rohini, while Jitender Gogi and Ashok Pradhan are active in Delhi's peripheries.

They extort industrialists who have factories in Narela, Bawana and Alipur. Gangster Manjeet Mahal of Mitraon village in Najafgarh has forged a link with Gurugram's dreaded Birender Dayma alias Bindar Gujjar. Mahal is lodged in Tihar jail but Binder is on bail and is running his syndicate.

Krishan Pahalwan of Dhichaon village in Najafgarh and Ravi Gangwal of South Delhi's Khanpur are other gangsters active in extortion, contract killing, land grabbing and robberies.

WHAT CAPITAL COPS SAY

Vijyanta Arya, DCP (Northwest), said: "Our Crime Branch and Special Cell are keeping a close watch on their activities. Besides, our local intelligence also works hard on ground for leads."

Pravir Ranjan, Special Commissioner of Police (Intelligence & Vigilance) claimed that the police have arrested a large number of criminals in recent weeks. "These elements have connections with mobsters and work as eyes and ears for them. Their arrests in large numbers help cut the chain between them. It eventually helps bring the crime graph down."
