Troubles mount for Cong in Telangana and Punjab

PTI

Hyderabad/Chandigarh

In mounting troubles for the Congress after the Lok Sabha debacle, two-thirds of its 18 MLAs in Telangana on Thursday deserted the party and joined the ruling TRS while a defiant Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu fired a fresh salvo at Chief Minister Amarinder Singh and skipped a key cabinet meeting.

As many as 12 of the 18 Congress MLAs were recognised as members of the Telangana Rashtra Samithi by assembly Speaker P Srinivas Reddy on Thursday night, just hours after they moved him seeking merger of their group with the ruling party.

The Congress termed the developments in Telangana as “daylight murder of democracy”.

In Punjab, Sidhu, who is at loggerheads with Amarinder Singh, was divested of the crucial local government department and was given the power and new and renewable energy sources portfolio in a cabinet reshuffle. Sidhu was also stripped of culture and tourism portfolios.

Capping a day of fast paced political developments in Hyderabad, the Speaker acceded to the request

of the 12 MLAs considering the fact they constituted two-thirds of the Congress legislature party, a requirement for merger under the anti-defection law.

A bulletin from the Telangana assembly on Thursday night said seats had been allotted to the 12 MLAs along with the members of the TRS legislature party in the House.

Unless the merger is reversed, the Congress is set to lose its Opposition party status in the assembly as its strength has come down to six.

The Speaker’s decision came after the embattled Congress cried foul, accusing the TRS of purchasing its MLAs and announcing its decision to move the court on Friday.

Congress spokesperson Pawan Khera said this is not a healthy practice for India and it amounted to butchering of people’s mandate, which people will never forgive.

“The way the people’s mandate and democratic norms are being butchered, this is something which India should not get used to. Indians should not get used to this kind of daylight murder of democracy,” he told reporters in Delhi.

The setback to the Congress in Telangana comes at a time when the party has been on the backfoot in several states including Rajasthan and Karnataka following dissidence among its ranks after the Lok Sabha elections drubbing.

With barely few months left for Haryana assembly polls, a rift within the state unit of the Congress also came to the fore as some MLAs loyal to former chief minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda trained their guns at state chief Ashok Tanwar for the poor showing in the state in the parliamentary elections.
