J&K: Two terrorists and two former cops who joined JeM gunned down

Security review in J&K is message to Pak not to use Taliban win in Kashmir

Day after Category A terrorist was killed, 2 more gunned down today in J&K

J&K: Two terrorists and two former cops who joined JeM gunned down

India

oi-Vikas SV

Srinagar, June 07: The security forces on Friday gunned down four terrorists in South Kashmir's Pulwama.

"Two listed terrorists and 2 SPOs who had recently deserted and become members of JeM were killed. They have been identified as Ashiq H Ganaie of Panjran Pulwama, Imran A Bhat of Arihal Pulwama, Mohd Salman Khan of Uthmulla Shopian and Shabir A Dar of Tujan Pulwama," the Jammu and Kashmir Police said.

Reports say all the four bodies, along with two AK 47 rifles, one AKM (Modernized Kalashnikov Automatic Rifle) and one self-loading rifle (SLR) have been recovered by the troops. The gunbattle broke out in Lassipora area of Pulwama on Thursday evening and is underway since.

"Incriminating material including arms & ammunition was recovered from the site of encounter. All these materials have been taken in the case records for the purpose of investigation and to probe their complicity in other terror crimes," the Jammu and Kashmir Police further said.

On June 3, one terrorist was killed in an exchange of fire between security forces and terrorists in Molu-Chitragam area of Shopian.

Over 100 terrorists, including 23 foreigners, have been killed in Kashmir in the first five months of 2019, but what is keeping the security establishment worried is the large number of new recruits.

[J&K: Terrorists shoot at civilians in Pulwama; 1 woman dead, youth injured]

50 youngsters have joined various terror outfits since March and the security establishment needs to find a better way to cut off the supply chain and can even consider educating families on radicalisation of the youth.

The officials said 101 terrorists -- 23 foreigners and 78 local -- were killed in 2019 till May 31. They include top commanders such as Zakir Musa, the chief of so-called Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind, a group affiliated with Al-Qaeda.
