Delhi Police Anti-Terror unit arrests two criminals following fierce exchange of gunfire

No officer was injured during the gun battle, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: Officers with the anti-terror unit of the Delhi Police managed to arrest two wanted criminals in connection with a recent gang-war which erupted on the streets of the national capital earlier this year. The arrests were preceded by a fierce gunbattle between the officials and the miscreants in the late hours of Thursday night in the outskirts of the national capital region (NCR) near the Hiranki village in Burari.

An official statement regarding the identity of the criminals is yet to be issued by the Delhi Police. However, sources suggest that both of those arrested carry a reward of Rs 1.45 lakh on their heads. An eyewitness told media persons that the miscreants also fired at the police officers. Their bullets even hit a head constable who was saved by his bulletproof jacket. More details are awaited.

In recent months, the streets of Delhi have been witnessing multiple instances of enmity between rival gangs opening fire at each other in public places. One such gang-war erupted near Dwarka Mor Metro Station in West Delhi in May of this year. While the exchange of gunfire began with members of rival gangs shooting at each other on a crowded road, it ended with police officials gunning down one criminal and the rival gang members killing another. Reports at the time had asserted that 15 rounds were fired by both the parties.

Delhi: Two miscreants arrested by Special Cell of police after an exchange of fire in Hiranki village, Burari. One of the two arrested miscreants was injured in the operation. pic.twitter.com/8P4DgKSij3 — ANI (@ANI) June 7, 2019

Following the incident, Delhi Police arrested a suspected gangster, 20-year-old Ankit Dabas on May 24. A resident of Sampla village in Haryana, Dabas was involved in the shootout which took place in Dwarka earlier that month. Others who were present at the spot were identified as Parveen Gehlot and Vikas Dalal, both with multiple criminal cases against them. At the time of Dabas' arrest, police also recovered a semi-automatic pistol along with live cartridges and a motorcycle.
