Four Terrorists Killed In Pulwama Encounter, India To Buy 100 Spice 2000 Bombs And Other News

In a major success in the anti-terrorism operations in Jammu and Kashmir, the Indian security forces have eliminated four terrorists in South Kashmir's Pulwama.

The four terrorists were killed on Friday morning in an encounter in Lassipora area. The two sides had been engaging in a fire exchange since Thursday evening after a joint operation was launched by the army, police and CRPF following a tip-off about the presence of terrorists there. Read more

India To Buy 100 Spice 2000 Bombs From Israel, Same Explosives Used By Air Force In Balakot Strike

The Indian Air Force has signed an Rs 300-crore deal with Israeli firm Rafael Advanced Defence Systems to procure around 100 Spice 2000 bombs.

According to ANI, these bombs are an advanced version of the Spice-2000 bombs, which can be used to reduce enemy buildings and bunkers to rubble in no time. Read more

Jagan Mohan Reddy To Set New Record With 5 Deputies, Each From SC, ST, OBC, Minority & Kapu Communities

On Sunday when Andhra Pradesh's new Chief Minister Jagan Mohan Reddy assumes office he will set a new record. His cabinet will have five deputy chief ministers, the highest number so far for any Indian CMs.

According to Jagan the “Five of them will be designated as deputy chief ministers, each of whom will represent, SC (Scheduled Castes), ST (Scheduled Tribes), OBC (Other Backward Classes), minority and Kapu community.” Read more

Water Crisis In Tamil Nadu Takes Deadly Turn As A Man Is Murdered Over Drawing Water From Public Tap

A 33-year-old activist who also operated an overhead tank was beaten to death by four members of a family in Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu.

His only fault was his objection to their drawing water in huge plastic barrels from a public tap. The accused have been arrested by the police and investigations are on. Read more

Bihar BJP Minister's Brother Thrashes Chemist For 'Not Standing Up' And Giving Respect To Him

BJP national vice president and former Bihar minister Renu Devi's brother Pinu was seen thrashing a chemist at a medical shop in Bettiah for allegedly not standing up to show him respect.

In the video of the incident which took place on June 3, Pinu can be seen entering the medical shop to buy something and suddenly asking the chemist to stand up and show him respect. Read more

Chennai's Loyola College Has Opened Its Doors To Transgender Students

Mirthulla, a Bachelor in Multimedia (BMM) student of and Diya a student of BA French have become the first transgenders to be given admission in nearly a century-old Loyola College in Chennai.

Like most members of their community, both Mirthulla and Diya had to go through the stigma and rejections from multiple colleges while they attempted to pursue their dreams. Read more
