Hina Khan to play the LEAD role in Naagin 4? Kasautii Zindagii Kay 2 actress REACTS!

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Hina Khan (@realhinakhan) on May 16, 2019 at 8:39am PDT

Naagmani ko pane ke liye jaari rahegi yeh zehrili dastaan. Jald laut kar aayegi #Naagin. #Naagin4 coming soon on #Colors. Anytime on @justvoot. pic.twitter.com/ptyagrqPQw — COLORS (@ColorsTV) May 27, 2019

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Hina Khan (@realhinakhan) on Jun 7, 2019 at 6:07am PDT

Popular TV actress Hina Khan won the hearts of the viewers with her performance as Komolika in Ekta Kapoor’s ‘Kasautii Zindagii Kay 2’. The romantic saga co-starring Parth Samthaan and Erica Fernandes has become a TRP topper, all thanks to the drama-packed episodes. Hina has already bid adieu to ‘Kasautii 2’ as her character Komolika has been shown dead. The ‘Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai’ actress has taken a break from ‘KZK 2’ to focus on other Bollywood projects. The former Bigg Boss contestant has unveiled the first look of her film ‘Lines’ at Cannes Film Festival 2019 last month. Hina created ripples on social media with her red carpet appearance at Cannes 2019 in French Rivera.Gossip mills have been buzzing with the rumours that Hina Khan might play the lead role in Ekta Kapoor’s ‘Naagin 4’ . The supernatural drama starring Pearl V Puri, Surbhi Jyoti and Anita Hassanandani has gone off air on May 26. Colors channel has released a promo for the fourth installment of ‘Naagin’. The show is expected to go on air later this year. The promo for ‘Naagin’ season 4 didn’t reveal the face of the actress playing the lead role.When Hina was asked if she is playing the lead role in ‘Naagin 4’, the actress didn’t deny nor confirm it.“Ekta Kapoor is the right person to answer this question,” the actress told SpotboyE.After Cannes 2019, Hina had commenced shooting for Rahat Kazmi’s 'Wish List' . The former ‘Khatron Ke Khiladi’ contestant has also Vikram Bhatt's untitled film in her kitty. She will essay the role of an editor of a fashion magazine in the movie. Watch this space for more updates!
