Aligarh case clearly shows, no lessons have been learned and children still go missing: Activist Abha Singh

Even though the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act is strong in the country yet it is not deterring the number of crimes against children. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Lucknow: The Uttar Pradesh police has been widely criticised for its alleged laxity in the Aligarh murder case. On June 7, the apex child rights body has sought an inquiry report from the senior superintendent of police of Aligarh on the alleged killing of a two-year-old girl.

The deceased was found in a garbage dump and the authorities have not yet ruled out sexual harassment of the minor. The

National Commission for Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) chairperson Priyank Kanoongo has asked the authorities to take necessary action in the case.

Even though the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act is strong in the country yet it is not deterring the number of crimes against children. There is a death sentence for child rape convicts, yet the offenders move out with impunity, is it due to lack of effective implementation of the law or the laxity of the police, Mirror Now reported.

#AligarhMurderCase | We need to find what needs to be done to ensure no other baby wind-up in boxes. @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/P1B2ZvVIm5 — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) June 7, 2019

Upon asking about why the police have added the National Security Act in the case or is it due to media pressure, advocate and activist Abha Singh told Mirror Now, that it happened only after the media was awake about the case this has happened. Citing the Esther Anuhya of Mumbai, she added that the girl's parents went to lodge an FIR but the police did not file one, saying that she must have eloped with someone. This clearly shows that no lessons have been learned and the children still go missing. She further added that there has been a 63 percent increase in the number of cases of kidnapping and abduction of children in Uttar Pradesh.

#AligarhMurderCase | Nirbhaya rapists have still not been hanged so the message has gone that you may have the law but, it's never implemented: Advocate & Activist, @Abha_ypsingh to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/4ibT2TYNPj — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) June 7, 2019

Meanwhile, the former member of National Commission of Women Shamina Shafiq told Mirror Now, there is a lot of pressure from the state and the political machinery to ensure that the crime rate goes down and for that matter, authorities think it is easy to shoo away vulnerable people, as they cannot fight for themselves.

She further added that we need to know that a police station is also a public space and we need to actually reclaim that space. Any citizen has all the right to go get their FIR registered.

#AligarhMurderCase | There's a lot of pressure from the state political machinery to ensure that the crime rate goes down & for that matter, they think it's easy to shoo away vulnerable people: Former Member of NCW @shaminaaaa to @fayedsouza pic.twitter.com/5UfoQuleBh — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) June 7, 2019

Editorial -- @fayedsouza reads out the post-mortem report of #AligarhMurderCase and says, those police officers who didn't file the complaint immediately have been suspended but that's not enough. There must be criminal action taken against them. pic.twitter.com/iaumhWBHLq — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) June 7, 2019

In the case, the police on Friday have also formed a Special Investigation Team to nab the accused in the case. However, two accused have been arrested in the case.
