Finally, 2 tribal settlements in Pollachi to get street lights

Coimbatore: Residents of Chinnarpathi and Anbu Nagar tribal settlements in Pollachi have half won their long-drawn fight for electricity supply with the Kottur town panchayat initiating the work to install street lamps in their area. They have to, however, still wait for power connection to their households.

The residents here have been living in fear since two people were killed in elephant attack in Navamalai, a nearby tribal settlement, about two weeks ago. They said with the street lights on, they would now be able to sleep without fearing about elephants.

“We used to leave our huts and take refuge elsewhere at night fearing that elephants would stray into our settlements and attack us. Now, we can sleep in our huts as the panchayat officials have assured to install street lamps. Elephants will not enter the places, where there are lights,” said R Parvathi, a resident.

She said the officials have started works to install the poles and they have assured to provide electricity connection by Saturday. The panchayat would install a total of 21 electric poles and 32 street lamps in the tribal settlements at a cost of Rs 5.20 lakh.

The basic amenity has not come easily for the tribals. V S Paramasivam, district president of Tamil Nadu Tribal People’s Association, said, “Several protests were staged in the past demanding officials to provide them basic facilities like electricity. Once the street lamps are installed, the residents could at least sleep peacefully at their houses without having to worry about the movement of elephants.”

Officials, he said, haven’t so far come forward to provide power connection to the tribal households. When contacted, officials said they had written to the forest department seeking permission to provide the tribal households electricity supply. “The settlement is located in the forest department area and hence we need its nod to go ahead. We are waiting for a reply.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
