June 8. Kazinform's timeline of major events

June 8. Kazinform's timeline of major events

NUR-SULTAN. KAZINFORM - Kazinform's Timeline is the one-stop shop where you can learn about historical events for the 8th of June. See what notable events happened throughout Kazakhstan's history on June 8.

1937 - Semipalatinsk-based Amateur Theatre of Working Youth established in 1924 was transformed into the Fyodor Dostoyevsky Russian Drama Theatre, by a decision of the Municipal Government. The theatre has become a laureate of numerous international festivals and winner of people's choice awards.



1998 - A Monument to the three outstanding sons of the Kazakh nation - Tole Bi, Kazybek Bi and Aiteke Bi - was unveiled in Astana (now Nur-Sultan). The author of the monument is sculptor Murat Mansurov.



1999 - First President of the Republic of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev was awarded the prize Turki alemine sinirgen yenbegi ushin (For merits to the Turkic world). The prize was instituted by the Turkic World Foundation of Writers and Workers of Culture.



2005 - Book "The Versions of Kozy-Korpesh - Bayan Sulu Lyrical Epos" authored by Professor Sultangali Sadyrbayev was released. The history of the epos goes back around 1,500 years.



2010 - At the 3rd Summit of the CICA heads of state and government, held in Istanbul, Kazakhstan handed over the chairmanship in the Organization to Turkey.



2012 - Taraz unveiled a bust to Khalyk Kakharmany, captain of police Gaziz Baitassov who was killed by terrorist M. Kariyev, the follower of Jihad. Seven people including five policemen and two civilians were killed as a result of his crimes. Besides, three policemen were injured. Among the victims is Captain Gaziz Baitassov.



2013 - The Turkish city of Samsun hosted the 16th Festival "TURKSOY Opera Days" held in commemoration of Kazakh composer Mukan Tolebayev (1913-1960), the author of orchestra and chamber works, more than 50 songs and romances. He adapted numerous folk songs and greatly contributed to the development of the Kazakh music.



2015 - First President of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev was presented with the Order of Alexander Nevsky for his contribution to the development of the Russian-Kazakh cooperation and promotion of the Eurasian integration processes. President of Russia Vladimir Putin handed over the award to his Kazakhstani counterpart.



2017 - Astana hosted the SCO Summit during which the participants discussed the current SCO activities and took a decision to grant India and Pakistan the status of full-fledged members.



2018 - First President Nursultan Nazarbayev awarded CEO of CNPC Wang Yilin with Dostyk Order.
