8 from Kerala among 17 killed in Dubai bus crash

(With inputs from Kottayam and Kannur)

KOCHI: Eight men from Kerala , including a father-son duo, were among 17 persons killed when the bus they were travelling smashed into a height barrier over a car-only off-ramp of the Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed Road, a major highway in Dubai on Thursday.Besides the eight Malayalis, four other Indians, too, were killed in the accident, which left seven others injured. They were travelling to Dubai from Oman on a bus operated by Mwasalat , an Omani government-owned company.Jamaludeen Arakkaveettil of Thalikumal, Thrissur, Ummer Chonokadavath and his son Nabil Ummer from Thalassery, Kannur, Vimal Karthikeyan from Pambadi, Kottayam, Deepak Kumar from Valiyathura, Thiruvananthapuram, Kiran John and Vasudev from Thrissur and Rajan Puthanpurayil were the Malayalis killed in the accident. According to information received, Ummer and Nabeel were returning to Dubai after celebrating Eid with Ummer’s daughter in Muscat. Ummar’s friends said he had been running a business in Dubai for many years, while Nabeel was an aeronautical engineer in Dubai airport.Vimal Karthikeyan, son of retired bank employee Karthikeyan Nair, is survived by wife Poornima (ICDS supervisor, Thrissur). Three-year-old Devang is his only son. Vimal was returning to Dubai after a four-day stay with his brother Vinod in Muscat. The accident occurred when he had almost reached his destination. Moments before the accident, he had contacted his friend Praveen, a Puthuppally native, to pick him up from the bus stop. The deceased was a senior accountant in a Dubai-based petroleum firm.Deepak, an accountant, along with his family was returning after spending the Eid holidays with a cousin in Oman. His wife Athira and daughter Athulya, 4, were admitted to Rashid Hospital in Dubai with serious injuries.The bus, carrying 31 passengers, crashed into the height barrier that cut the left side of the bus. The deceased passengers were sitting on that side of the bus.Minister of external affairs S Jaishankar offered condolences to the families of accident victims. The Indian consulate has issued a helpline number, +971-565463903, for queries related to those travelling on the ill-fated bus. Chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said NoRKA has been in touch with the embassy to bring the bodies home at the earliest.
