Aligarh Murder: Accused was earlier arrested for raping his ...

(MENAFN- NewsBytes) Aligarh Murder: Accused was earlier arrested for raping his daughter

08 Jun 2019

As India is demanding justice for a two-and-a-half-year-old girl who was brutally murdered in Uttar Pradesh's Aligarh, a shocking detail related to the case has come to fore.

Five years ago, one of the accused, identified as Aslam, was booked for raping his own daughter. He was granted bail later.

The Aligarh victim was murdered by Aslam and his accomplice Zahid.

Here's more.

Girl went missing last month, body was found later

Context

The murder of the toddler has sent shivers down the country's spine. The girl had gone missing last month, and her badly decomposed body was found from a dumpster by stray dogs.

The killers murdered the child after they had an argument with her father over a loan of Rs. 10,000.

The case is being investigated under stringent National Security Act (NSA), confirmed police.

Aslam's wife complained against him for raping their daughter

Past cases

The previous case against Aslam was confirmed by Aligarh Rural superintendent of police Mahilal Patidar.

Patidar said Aslam's wife complained against him in 2014 for raping their daughter, who was four years old at the time.

Aslam has four cases pending against him. Previously, he was booked under IPC Sections 376 (rape), 354 (assault with intent to outrage the modesty of a woman) and 363 (kidnapping).

The child's mother accused police of not taking case seriously

Tragedy

Unsurprisingly, the family of the toddler wants the strictest punishment against the accused.

Remembering the child, her mother said she was very playful. She was playing right outside the house when the accused picked her up.

The inconsolable mother accused police of not acting soon enough. "Police did not act the way they should have on the first day itself," she told IE.

She had a beautiful smile, said victim's father

Fact

"She was so brilliant that she could identify all the letters on her own. She had a beautiful smile and being our only child, she was the world for me," the girl's father, who is a daily wage laborer, said.

Meanwhile, another test was conducted to get clarity on rape

Rape

The bereaved family maintains the child was raped too, but police ruled out the possibility of a sexual assault.

However, another test is being conducted.

Anand Kumar, Additional Director General, Law, and Order, said the child died due to shock and hemorrhage. "A vaginal sample has been sent to the forensic lab and confirmatory tests are being conducted," Kumar added.

We are all saddened by the crime: Kumar

Fact

"The entire society has been saddened by the crime. An SIT headed by SP Rural has been formed. A team of experts, the circle officer and members of the forensic team are part of it. We will transfer the case to a fast-track court for speedy justice," Kumar added.

Meanwhile, Smriti Irani asked people to not reveal child's identity

Reaction

Further, five police officers have been suspended for laxity in the investigation.

The gruesome murder got the attention of politicians. Women and Child Minister Smriti Irani tweeted that she was in communication with the state government to ensure quick justice.

The Amethi MP also asked everyone to not use the child's name as it violates the law.
