Struggle to free IOK Ramadan’s message

Srinagar, June 04, 2019 (PPI-OT): In occupied Kashmir, the Chairman of All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Gilani has said the best message of Ramadan and Eidul- Fitr is to struggle for liberating the territory from the clutches of forced occupation. Syed Ali Gilani in his message on the eve of Eidul Fitr asked people to remember in their prayers thousands of Kashmiri martyrs and scores of political leaders and workers languishing in Indian jails for demanding their inalienable right to self-determination.

The Chairman of Hurriyat forum, Mirwaiz Umar Farooq while extending Eid greetings to the Muslims worldwide said the people of Kashmir would, this year too, pray that their innumerable sacrifices do not go waste. He reiterated the Kashmiris’ resolve to carry forward the resistance struggle till its logical conclusion.

Thousands of people participated in the funeral prayers of the two martyred youth in their native villages in Kulgam district. The youth, Firdous Ahmad Butt and Sajjad Ahmad, were martyred when Indian troops opened fire on their vehicle in Moolu Chitragam area of Shopian district, yesterday. The martyrs were laid to rest amid pro-freedom, pro-Pakistan and anti-India slogans. Some mujahideen appeared during the funeral of martyr Sajjad and offered him a gun salute.

The Chairman of Jammu and Kashmir Muslim League, Masarrat Aalam Butt, was shifted by National Investigation Agency from Jammu jail to New Delhi’s notorious Tihar jail. APHC Chairman Syed Ali Gilani in a statement strongly condemned the NIA move.

Unknown gunmen shot dead a man in Pantha Chowk area on the outskirts of Srinagar. The deceased was identified as Sameer Ahmed Wani. The High Court of occupied Kashmir quashed detention orders of prominent cleric and Vice President of Jamiat Ahle Hadith, Mushtaq Ahmad Veeri. He was arrested on February 22, this year, and was slapped with draconian Public Safety Act in March.

The Democratic Freedom Party Chairman, Shabbir Ahmad Shah, who is already in the custody of Enforcement Directorate, was today arrested by National Investigation Agency. He was produced before a special court in New Delhi. An NIA official called Shabbir Shah’s wife in Srinagar and informed her about the development.

For more information, contact:

Kashmir Media Service

Phone: +92-51-4435548, +92-51-4435549

Fax: +92-51-4861736

Email: info@kmsnews.org

Website: www.kmsnews.org
