Aligarh murder: After 2 fresh arrests, UP Police declares case solved

Sources in the SIT team probing the murder case said the body might had been hidden in the refrigerator of Zahid's house. (Representational Image)

The Uttar Pradesh Police on Saturday declared that the brutal murder case of a two-year-old girl in Aligarh has been solved with the arrests of all four accused.

"We have arrested all four accused who were part of the conspiracy to kidnap and kill the victim," Aligarh senior superintendent of police (SSP) Akash Kulhari told India Today TV.

The police had first arrested two individuals, identified as Zahid and Aslam, for the murder of the toddler after her decomposed body was found in a garbage dump around 200 metres from her home in Tappal township. The body was discovered on June 2, three days after she was reported missing.

On Saturday, two more accused were arrested including the wife of prime accused Zahid and his younger brother Mehandihasn. The police said Zahid's wife Shahishta and his brother Mehandihasn helped the accused to hide the girl's body.

The police also said Shashishta's clothes were used to drape the victim's body, which was later found in a garbage dump with her eyes gouged out and hands broken.

According to SSP Akash Kulhari, Zahid had borrowed some money from the minor girl's father but could not repay the entire sum. "When the girl's father asked for the money, Zahid threatened him with dire consequences. And finally, with the help of his friend Aslam, Zahid killed the girl," Kulhari said.

Body was hidden in refrigerator, say sources

Sources in the SIT team probing the murder case said the body might had been hidden in the refrigerator of Zahid's house.

Sources said that even as the initial investigation showed the body was hidden in the stubble, the forensic examination showed that body was hidden at a cool place as it had turned darker. A senior police officer, however, refused to comment on the development.

The police have ruled out sexual assault on the victim even though the family alleged rape. The post mortem report revealed that there were multiple causes that led to her death. The report showed signs of strangulation and extreme torture. The SSP said rape has not been proved yet.

Meanwhile, a compensation of Rs 3 lakhs have been given to the family and the district magistrate of Aligarh have ordered an inquiry into the case. "We have given compensation of Rs 3 lakhs to the family looking at their financial condition," DM Aligarh Chandrabhan said.

The incident has triggered massive outrage. Political leaders and celebrities have tweeted their angst and disgust over the crime.

Aligarh city witnessed candlelight protests over the murder. Teachers and students at Aligarh Muslim University have demanded "exemplary and prompt" punishment for the perpetrators.
