Fact Check: Was this man given death penalty for becoming Robin Hood?

Two different incidents have been selectively merged to spread the misinformation. (Picture for representation: Getty)

He hacked 4,000 million US dollars from 217 banks. Gave all the money to poor people of Africa and Palestine and accepted his death sentence with smile. #You_are_great_human."

This is being claimed with a collage of three pictures in which a man with a smiling face is seen hanged.

This emotional post has caught everyone's eye on social media.

India Today Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA) has found the viral post to be misleading. Two different incidents have been selectively merged to spread the misinformation.

Among many, Facebook page 'C O N F U S E D' shared this post on Wednesday (June 5). The post has already been shared more than 4,000 times from different social media profiles. The post was viral in 2017 too. At that time, Facebook page 'Interesting Page' posted this and attracted about 1,40,000 shares.

The post is made by mixing up two different incidents. The viral photo is of an incident that took place in Iran in 2007, which has nothing to do with the hacking of millions of dollars.

The man in the viral photo is Majid Kavousifar who along with his nephew was hanged publically in Iran's capital Tehran for murdering a prominent judge in 2005.

The BBC and several international media covered this case.

The other incident is of a 27-year-old Algerian hacker who was sentenced to 15 years in jail for stealing money via hacking. Hamza Bendelladj was convicted by a US court for stealing money from more than 200 American banks and financial institutions via a computer virus. It was reported that he gave millions of dollars to Palestinian charities.

At that time also, there were rumours online that Hamza was given the death penalty. But as per the BBC report, he was sentenced to 15 years in jail by a US court in 2016.

Hamza was nicknamed the 'happy hacker' because he was seen smiling while officials were taking him into custody.

Hence, it is clear that the claim has nothing to do with the photos of the incidents in the viral post.

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim A hacker stole millions of dollars from 217 banks, donated all the money to the poor people of Africa and Palestine, and accepted his death sentence with a smile. Conclusion An incident almost similar to the claim did take place in the past, but the viral photo collage is from different incidents. In the actual incident, the culprit was not awarded death penalty. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
