BJP holds Mamata Banerjee responsible for Bengal unrest, claims 4 party workers killed by TMC

BJP leader Mukul Roy has blamed West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress chief Mamata Banerjee for the clashes that broke out between BJP and TMC.

On June 8, after exchanging a war of words, the two parties indulged in violence at Najat area. The clashes broke out over taking off party flags in Basirhat's Sandeshkhali.

Workers from both the parties were left injured. The blame game is still on with both the parties claiming that the other opened fire.

After the incident came into limelight, Mukul Roy tweeted that TMC goons attacked BJP workers and four of his workers (Devdas Mondal, Tapas Mandol, Sukant Mandol and Pradeep Mandol) were shot dead in Sandeshkhali, Basirhat. He added that Mamata Banerjee is indulging in a reign of terror and they have sent a message to Home Minister Amit Shah, Kailash Vijayvargiya, and their state leaders.

Although police declined to comment on the deaths, they said a huge contingent has been rushed to the spot to control the situation.

Qayum Mollah - TMC

He also stated that a team of MPs will visit Sandeshkhali today and they will protest against this democratically.

3 BJP workers shot dead by TMC goons in Sandeshkhali, West Bengal. @mamataofficial is directly responsible for unleashing violence against BJP workers.



We will be reaching Union Home Minister Sh @amitshah ji to apprise him of Sandeshkhali killings. June 8, 2019

Mukul Roy said Mamata Banerjee is solely responsible for this type of activities in West Bengal and is provocating her workers to do all this. There is no democracy in West Bengal and the democratic features are at stake, he further added. As per latest reports, Roy will be landing around 10 am at Kolkata airport. He along with Arjun Singh will be visiting the spot today in Sandeshkhali.

Watch video:

On the other hand, Bengal minister and TMC in-charge of North 24 Pargana district blamed the BJP for the death of Qayum Mollah and said that the BJP goons killed him.

Mollah, a TMC worker was seriously injured and taken to the Minakha Gramin Hospital in Basirhat. He later succumbed to his injuries.
