Leopard falls into well in Telangana, officials rescue it

Leopard falls into well in Telangana, officials rescue it

As soon as the leopard emerged out of the well, it fled into the nearby forest after seeing the large number of people who had gathered.

news Wildlife

A leopard accidentally fell into a deep agricultural well in Telangana on Saturday. The incident took place at the outskirts of Rajura village in the state's Khanapur mandal following which locals called the Forest Department. Officials from the department then visited the spot with their equipment and oversaw the animal's rescue.

Thankfully, the well did not have much water. Seeing that the leopard was trapped inside and was attempting to get out, the department staff lowered a ladder into the well, which the animal used, to cautiously climb out of the 30-feet pit. As soon as it emerged out of the well, it fled into the nearby forest after seeing the large number of people who had gathered.

“Its condition is good. However, we will track it with the help of CCTV cameras installed in Pembi Forest Range for two days,” Nirmal District Forest Officer VSNV Prasad was quoted as saying.

A #leopard trapped in an agriculture well in Rajura village in Khanapur mandal in Adilabad in #Telangana was rescued by the officials today @NewIndianXpress pic.twitter.com/kGvvJITWfe June 8, 2019

Telangana is seeing an increase in the number of leopards venturing out of the wild and entering human habitations, mainly to kill and feed on cattle.

In March this year, after eluding officials for over two months, a leopard which was killing cattle in the villages of Kondapally Mandal in Ranga Reddy district in Telangana was finally caught on camera, while it was preying on a calf in Govindapally village. Around the same time, a leopard was also spotted at the campus of International Crops Research Institute (ICRISAT), at the outskirts of Hyderabad, in February.

The Pocharam Wildlife Sanctuary, spread across 130 sq km in Medak and undiveded Nizamabad districts is known for a wide variety of wildlife. Several cases are also reported from here. The rampant hunting of cattle by leopards started in December 2017, according to officials.

Read: ‘I think twice before coming alone’: Fear of leopard attacks halts life along Pocharam
