BJP, TMC workers clash in West Bengal's North 24 Parganas; five killed

BJP leader Mukul Roy I Photo credit: IANS | Photo Credit: IANS

Kolkata: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Mukul Roy blamed the Trinamool Congress (TMC) for the recent clashes with his party’s cadre in West Bengal. He also alleged that four BJP workers were shot dead by TMC workers in the Sandeshkhali area of Basirhat. One TMC worker was reportedly killed in Saturday clashes.

“TMC goons attacked BJP workers and four were shot dead in Sandeshkhali, Basirhat. Their leader & CM is indulging in a reign of terror, we have sent a message to Home Minister Amit Shah ji, Kailash Vijayvargiya ji, and our state leaders,” Roy was quoted by the news agency ANI as saying.

A team of BJP MPs will visit Sandeshkhali and send a report to Home Minister Amit Shah, he added.

The deaths took place during the clashes between the workers of the two parties in North 24 Parganas city after party flags were removed.

Mukul Roy, BJP: A team of MPs will visit Sandeshkhali tomorrow and send a report to the Home Minister, we will protest against this democratically. (8.6.19) https://t.co/GXhVpS9FtA — ANI (@ANI) June 9, 2019

A clash broke out between BJP workers and police officials in Gangarampur area of West Bengal’s South Dinajpur district on Saturday.

The violence triggered after the police allegedly stopped the BJP from carrying out a victory rally along with state party president Dilip Ghosh, citing “lack of permission”.

In the chaos, several police officials and BJP workers also got injured. The injured have been admitted to a hospital.

"We are meeting people to thank them for voting for us and police are not allowing us to meet them. Section 144 has been imposed at places. TMC supporters are attacking us. A few of our supporters and police personnel have been injured," Ghosh said told ANI earlier.

Several police vehicles were also vandalised during the clash.

The police also resorted to firing in the air to disperse the agitated workers who reportedly pelted stone at them.
