Enthusiasm greets Priyanka

Leaders from across the political spectrum welcomed the news of Priyanka Gandhi Vadra making a formal entry into politics with her appointment on Wednesday as the Congress party’s general secretary (eastern Uttar Pradesh).

“Welcome Priyanka Gandhi to the rough and tumble of politics. She brings with her the grace of Gandhi Nehru lineage and her immense personal charm. Wish her the best. Could she become the Xfactor of 2019 poll battle?” People’s Democratic Party leader Mehbooba Mufti tweeted.

Rashtriya Janata Dal leader Tejashwi Yadav said that the move will motivate the 50% of Indian population: women who have been sidelined all this while. “Congratulations to Priyanka Gandhi Ji on her appointment as General Secretary. A good decision by CP Rahul Gandhi Ji. We wholeheartedly welcome her entry in active politics. Her appointment will not only energise youth & cadre but motivate 50% female population of India in politics,” Mr. Yadav tweeted.

Strategist-turned-politician Prashant Kishore tweeted, “One of the most awaited entries in Indian politics is finally here! While people may debate the timing, exact role and position, to me, the real news is that she finally decided to take the plunge! Congratulations and best wishes to Priyanka Gandhi.”

For some their silence on the announcement spoke louder. There was no word from either Samajwadi Party or Bahujan Samaj Party, the two who kept out Congress from their alliance in Uttar Pradesh. Trinamul Congress President Mamata Banerjee who herself is nursing Prime Ministerial ambitions was mum.

Within the Congress, especially from Uttar Pradesh the news was received with much enthusiasm. “As Priyanka Vadra Gandhi takes charge of Uttar Pradesh as AICC general secretar the politics of the Hindi heartland is about to change. With a new general in command each UP Congressman is battle ready,” former UPA minister Jitin Prasada said.

RPN Singh, another leader from UP said that Ms Vadra’s formal entry into politics will strengthen the party in its resolve to fight communal & casteist forces.

The Congress Chief Ministers too heralded the move. Puducherry CM V Narayanaswamy distributed sweets following the announcement. “The party workers are extremely grateful to the AICC leader for the appointment... Priyanka has swung into politics which is a good augury and the party would stage a comeback in the Lok Sabha polls and Rahul Gandhi would be the Prime Minister," Narayanasamy told reporters.

Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot, who lost his post as General Secretary (Organisation) said that the move will “strengthen the agenda of Rahul Gandhi for the country, for ending Modi rule and for sending fascist powers back home”.
