ABP News reporting team attacked by gunmen on Delhi's Barapullah flyover; 3 policemen on duty suspended

In the @abpnewshindi incident on Barapulla, case has been registered immediately and several teams constituted to work on it. 3 policemen on picket duty suspended for lack of prompt response. Investigation transferred to Crime Branch. Senior officers closely supervising the case. — Delhi Police (@DelhiPolice) June 9, 2019

Here's the sketch of one of the gunmen who attacked ABP News team The Barrapulah flyover has been infamous for notorious elements active on it during night. Before the attack on ABP team, a police officer of special cell had died after he was attacked while chasing drug peddlers. He remained in comma for few days. In April, the OSD to health minister JP Nadda was also attacked and his car was robbed.

ABP News’ reporting team was attacked by unknown bike-borne gunmen at wee hours of Sunday. The men opened fire at ABP News vehicle which was carrying its reporter, cameraperson and driver at New Delhi’s Barapullah flyover. Also, what can be termed as a lackadaisical attitude of Delhi police, was witnessed by the team which received a cold shoulder when it reached out to the cops near Delhi Haat. The team had received information about murder of a readymade clothes trader in Delhi’s Prasadnagar, and was heading towards the site via the Barapullah flyover. Hours after the incident took place, Delhi Police took cognisance of matter and stated that a case has been registered immediately. "In the @abpnewshindi incident on Barapulla, case has been registered immediately and several teams constituted to work on it. 3 policemen on picket duty suspended for lack of prompt response. Investigation transferred to Crime Branch. Senior officers closely supervising the case," Delhi Police posted on Twitter.At around 1:30 am, the team which comprised of reporter Siddharth Purohit, and camerperson Arvind Kumar had reached the Paragati Madian cut, when two men riding on a black Pulsar tried to apprehend the unit with a pistol. They asked the team to park the car at a side.
