Wife gets businessman killed, dumps body in drain

The victim's mother told police that she was warned by her daughter-in-law to keep silent. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: After a month month long probe, the Delhi Police has arrested a woman for getting her husband killed with the help of her paramour. The victim businessman was murdered after he found out that his wife was allegedly having an extra-marital affair.

The police have arrested three persons including the woman's lover and his friend. The accused have been identified as 28-year-old Rajender alias Lucky (28) and his friend Tarun. After the murder, the victim's body was dumped in a drain in outer Delhi’s Aman Vihar.

According to a report in Times of India, the victim Munna Lal, who dealt in scrap business, was missing since May 5. His body was found stuffed in a gunny bag when local residents reported foul smell from the drain.

When the police summoned all the local residents whose relatives were missing, the victim's wife refused to identify the body. However, Munna Lal's mother later identified the body from his clothes. Police also took samples from the spot to match DNA of the victim with her mother.

The victim's mother told police that she was warned by her daughter-in-law to keep silent about the regular fights between the couple. Police later summoned Munnalal's wife, who denied her mother-in-law's allegations.

Apart from local residents, police also questioned workers of Munna Lal's scrap unit and found that all employees except Rajendera were working at the unit. Interestingly, Rajendra, who had left the work six months ago, joined back the day after Lal was missing.

The police took all the three accused in custody and interrogated them separately. According to police, the accused confessed to murdering the victim.

The police also said Munna Lal's wife was having an affair with Rajender and Lal got to know about it. Lal sacked Rajendra from his job and stopped giving money to his wife. Later, the woman conspired with Rajender to murder Lal.

On the night of the murder, the woman allowed Rajendra and his friend into the house and strangulate Lal while he was sleeping.
