Terrorism, climate change and stability of the Indo-Pacific crucial to regional security: Modi

Terrorism, climate change and the stability of the Indo-Pacific region are crucial to the security and safety of the Maldives and India, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi told parliamentarians on Saturday.

Speaking at the Maldives Parliament on his first state visit to the country, Modi promised to continue to support efforts to enhance cooperation between the two neighbours.

Modi also called on the international community to renew efforts to combat terrorism.

“I call upon all global institutions and all leading nations to organise a global conference on terrorism within a stipulated timeframe, so that there can be meaningful and result-oriented discussions for plugging the loopholes that terrorists and their supporters exploit.”

On climate change, Modi said that India was already extending support by gifting LED bulbs to the Maldives.

“We should also remember that this home, our earth, is the legacy we hold for our future generations in trust, and it is not a property we own,” he said.

Modi added that India would continue to strive for peace in the Indo-Pacific region.

“I would also like to reiterate that India will use its capabilities and strengths not only for her own prosperity and security. We will also endeavour to develop the capacity of other countries in the region, to reach out to them in the times of disasters with humanitarian assistance, and work for shared security, prosperity and a bright future for all.”

Modi’s speech was attended by 86 of the 87-member body. The only absentee, MP Ahmed Thoriq, who was present for the session, left as soon as the prime minister was invited to deliver his speech. He said he boycotted the session to express his solidarity with Muslims who were being persecuted in India by Hindu nationalists.

Modi became only the second foreign head of state or government to speak at the People’s Majlis in its 86-year history. The first address was delivered by former Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh in 2011 during former president Mohamed Nasheed’s administration.
