In India, ‘It’s a girl!’ is not always good news

“Pay 5,000 rupees today and save 50,000 rupees tomorrow” ran a banner advert at an abortion centre in Amritsar, Punjab in India some 40 years ago.

While the banner message appeared coded, the message therein was bluntly clear. The abortion centre implored mothers to pay 5,000 rupees (about Shs 265,000) to abort the girl child so as to avoid paying 50,000 rupees (about Shs 2.6m as per today’s exchange rate) or more later in dowry when the girl would be getting married.

In India, the girl’s family bears the ‘burden’ of dowry when marriage gets onto the cards. Fast-forward to 2019, and this centuries-old practice of infanticide rages on with no end in sight. While the Indian government has taken on the vice head-on, society is not moving at the same pace.

Just like the colonial government that fought against the same vice in the 1870s and failed, postcolonial governments are also finding the deep- rooted vice a hard nut to crack.

Several campaigns have been launched to tackle the vice, but as several Indian officials acknowledged recently at the Partners’ Forum on Maternal, Newborn and Child Health in New Delhi, India, you don’t expect to tackle a centuries-old tradition in a single day.

The female infanticide problem is even more compounded by the fact that abortion is legal in the country and some societies are not yet ready to openly discuss or even acknowledge the problem.

When India’s union minister for Women and Child Development Maneka Gandhi openly discussed the topic at the Partner’s Forum, there were disapproving murmurs from the Indian attendees questioning why she was discussing such a surreptitious topic before world delegates.

The forum was attended by more than 1,200 delegates from 80 countries and was aimed at finding viable solutions to increase funding towards maternal and child health and reduce mortalities.

The minister said to combat female infanticide, the Indian government has used district administrators to record every pregnancy in the village.

“When the pregnancy [is] hidden from us or the district statistics, it [becomes] much easier to kill. You’re pregnant on Monday and you’re no longer pregnant on Wednesday. And nobody can say anything because abortion is legal in this country; but abortion when it is related [to sex of the baby] is not legal,” Maneka said.

Giving birth outside government hospitals has also been outlawed and so is sex identification under the Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection Act), 1994 (amended in 2003). The Act prohibits sex-selection or disclosure of the sex of the foetus “by words, signs or in any other manner” and also prohibits sale of “any ultrasound machine or imaging machine or scanner or any other equipment capable of detecting the sex of foetus” to persons, laboratories and clinics not registered under the Act.

“Every birth [now] takes place in a government facility. It’s easier to kill a child if you give birth at home because a birth attendant will come and give a little bit of help here and there and the child is dead. So, we made it compulsory for the first time in the 100 districts we chose…that they [mothers] were to go to the hospital. Any birth at home would not be recognized,” Maneka said.

India has 722 districts and local delegates told The Observer that India is a highly patriarchal society where boys are preferred over girls, because of the perceived financial benefits that they bring to their families.

The kanya.life website states that only six out of 500 cities in India have more girls than boys.

“Yes, sex identification is banned in the country but you just have to go the private clinics and [bribe] some officials to identify the sex of the child. In any case, most abortions are carried out in private clinics where the government is hardly ever present.” one female delegate said.

Maneka said at one time, the sex ratios were so embarrassing and weird that a village could have 700 boys and just 20 girls. Indeed, a first-time visitor to the country can’t fail but notice more men at most of the workplaces and social gatherings.

In response, the government over the years in concerted efforts with civil society, local leadership, has deployed baby birth boards at the villages where the birth of every child was appended on the board for all to see.

“We wanted everyone passing everyday [to] really see the embarrassment that there were 700 boys in the village and there were 20 girls. And this had an immediate effect because nobody had realized that the ratios were so weird,” Maneka added.

In those places, the birth of a girl is celebrated as though it were a marriage - with government providing a cake to the family to share with the community. Involving the village in the celebrations, Maneka said, prevents the family from killing the child, because “it meant that the child was now a property of the village”.

Several religious festivals, she said, were converted into the celebration of the girl child. The interventions have seen some visible results with 20 girls on average born (or rather saved from abortions) in villages that always recorded none for several months.

Financial benefit schemes such as the Balika Samridhi Yojana and Dhanalakshmi were also introduced to encourage families to have the girl child. The Hindu Succession (Amendment) Act of 2005 also made it possible for daughters to inherit their father’s property.

A national survey of some 1.1 million Indian households and published in January 2006, found that the female sex ratio was higher in educated families especially the ones that had had a girl as their first child.

Asked if the above interventions, eventually stopped the vice in the country, Preeti Sudan, India’s secretary for Health and chairperson of The Partnership for Maternal Newborn and Child Health (PMCH), said the campaign “is not a perfect system, but a system that sends a message that ‘thou shall not kill’.”

While launching the “Beti Bachao Beti Padhao” (Save girl child, educate girl child) campaign in January 2015, Prime Minister Narendra Modi said: “Our mental illness is responsible for this poor sex ratio. We give a lot of importance to boys. Many women also do this. But for how long will we look at girls as ‘paraya dhan’ (someone else’s property)? For every 1,000 boys born, 1,000 girls should also be born. I want to ask you if girls are not born, where will you get your daughters-in-law from?”

Coupled with the rampant sexual offences, especially rape, against women and girls in India, it is a country where despite the positive strides, women are still trying to find their place.

500,000 baby girls aborted in 20 years

The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) notes that biologically, normal sex ratio at birth (SRB) varies from 102 to 106 males per 100 females. India’s stands at 120 males/100 girls and the rate is among the highest in the world.

The growing surplus of men has dire consequences for the human race, among others for causing trafficking of girls/women in the areas having shortage of women and these trafficked girls/women facing violence and discrimination, notes the Asian Centre for Human Rights in its 2016 report, titled Female Infanticide Worldwide.

A 2011 study conducted by India’s Central Statistics Office under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme said that nearly three million girls went missing due to female infanticide. It’s estimated that 10 million female births (500,000 every year) have been aborted in India in the last 20 years.

fkisakye@observer.ug
