Three BJP Workers, One TMC Activist Killed During Violent Clashes in Bengal

Sandeshkhali: At least four persons were allegedly killed and three others severely injured in clashes that broke out between the TMC and the BJP in Nazat area, about 70 km from Kolkata, on Saturday night, sources in both the parties claimed.

Sources in the TMC and the BJP claimed that the clashes broke out over removing flags of the saffron party in the area.

Although police declined to comment on the deaths, they said a huge contingent has been rushed to the spot to control the situation.

A 26-year-old Trinamool Congress worker, Qayum Mollah, was shot and hacked to death in the clashes.

“When Kayum was on his way to attend a party meeting, he was hacked at first. When he managed to free himself, he was shot dead. The BJP is trying to vitiate the atmosphere and disturb peace in the district,” Mullick, TMC’s North 24 Parganas district president and senior state minister, said.

State BJP general secretary Sayantan Basu states that Three BJP workers – Sukanta Mondal, Pradip Mondal and Shankar Modal- were also killed, one of them shot in the left eye when they stopped TMC supporters from “throwing away” their party flags.

“We have received bodies of three of our workers. We have heard that two more have also died but are yet to receive the bodies. They tried to throw away our party flags and posters and when we protested, our workers were shot from point-blank range,” Basu said.

Senior BJP leader Mukul Roy solely blames the TMC for “unleashing violence against BJP activists in Bengal”. He said the party would apprise Union Home Minister Amit Shah about the incident.

3 BJP workers shot dead by TMC goons in Sandeshkhali, West Bengal. @mamataofficial is directly responsible for unleashing violence against BJP workers. We will be reaching Union Home Minister Sh @amitshah ji to apprise him of Sandeshkhali killings. — Mukul Roy (@MukulR_Official) June 8, 2019

. @mamataofficial’s goons shot 3 BJP workers dead in Basirhat, West Bengal. She is getting desperate with each passing moment as she loses peoples' support. In her bid to retain power at any cost, killing opposition party members is the new normal in Bengal. — BJP Bengal (@BJP4Bengal) June 8, 2019

The area where the clashes took place is part of the Bashirhat Lok Sabha seat. The TMC won the seat but at Hatgacha, the BJP had a 144-vote lead over the Trinamool.
