Aligarh girl’s murder: Mahapanchayat called off, Sadhvi Prachi barred from visiting victim's family

AGRA: Contingents of the Provincial Armed Constabulary (PAC) and Rapid Action Force (RAF) were deployed in view of escalating tension over the brutal murder of a two-and-a-half-year-old girl in Tappal area of Aligarh on Sunday. Forces also conducted a flag march after messages of a ‘ mahapanchayat ’ being called to demand speedy justice for the murdered child went viral on social media.Superintendent of police (rural) Manilal Patidar said prohibitory orders were imposed in the area while three companies of PAC and one of RAF have been stationed in Tappal.The police claimed that the mahapanchayat was called off. “We have talked to prominent people of society and they have expressed their satisfaction over the police action so far. The mahapanchayat has been called off,” Patidar said.Clarifying on reports of migration of a few people belonging to a particular community after the barbaric crime in Tappal, Aligarh SSP Akash Kulhary said, “These are rumours being spread on the social media. I visited the area and found that no one had migrated.” He added that the police were also keeping a close watch on the social media and were taking steps to tackle the menace of rumour-mongering related to the child’s murder.According to local residents, a few miscreants were trying to give a communal colour to the crime. Slogans were raised by some right-wing activists, including those belonging to Bajrang Dal, against a particular community. However, they were not allowed by the police to enter the village. Police also used mild force to disperse an angry crowd gathered in Tappal while a few of them were briefly detained for flouting prohibitory orders.Meanwhile, BJP’s controversial leader Sadhvi Prachi, who was scheduled to visit Tappal, was not allowed to visit the victim’s family members and was stopped at the Jewar toll plaza of the Yamuna Expressway by the district administration in order to maintain law and order.Prachi had arguments with officers from Jewar and Aligarh police at the toll as they asked her not to proceed because of the “tense situation prevailing in the town due to the murder”. A video clip showed Prachi telling the cops sufficient action was not taken. She was forced to return after a couple of hours when police did not budge and made her speak to the family over phone.Meanwhile, Aligarh SSP Akash Kulhary claimed that the case had been solved and all the accused have been arrested. “We are making a water-tight case against them,” he added.Police have arrested four persons, including prime accused Zahid Ali, his wife Shabusta, brother Mehdi Hassan and his associate Aslam, in connection with the brutal killing of the toddler over a financial dispute. The girl’s mutilated body was found on June 2 in a garbage dump, three days after her abduction.The gruesome murder has triggered massive outrage with political leaders and celebrities tweeting their anger and disgust over the heinous crime.
