Fire safety: Coimbatore’s streets remain a challenge

More than 90% of multi-storeyed buildings lack setback area

Two years have passed since a massive fire engulfed a textile showroom in the busy T Nagar area in Chennai. A similar fire was reported at Broadway in Kochi, Kerala, an old market area with continuous buildings, in May this year. Such incidents expose the fire safety risks in congested areas in cities.

Many of the busy pockets of Coimbatore city with continuous buildings lack minimum fire safety requirements, including fire exit in the form of external stairs in the structures. They also lack wide roads for easy access of fire tenders or rescue operation vehicles.

According to Fire and Rescue Services Department, more than 90 % of such multi-storeyed buildings lack setback area and the open space around a building for fire safety purposes. This makes the affected area inaccessible for fire tenders and other fire-fighting equipment.

“As per Part 4 of National building code of India which deals with fire safety, high-rise buildings (18.3 metre and above) with a height upto 30 metres should have a setback area of 7 metre on all sides. The setback area should be increased one metre for every additional height of 6 metre. This basic requirement is strictly enforced for the construction of new buildings. Old buildings constructed in some parts of the city before the legislation lack setback area as they were constructed without much gap between each building,” said S. Vijayasekar, Joint Director (Western Region), Fire and Rescue Services.

Several old buildings near Ukkadam, Oppanakara Street, Raja Street, Variety Hall Road and Sukrawarpet lack these basic fire safety requirements.

“Street hydrant lines were part of town planning during British rule and such lines were found at Wellington area of Coonoor. These pipelines ensure supply of water for fire-fighting in the event of a fire. Such systems have vanished as cities developed,” he said.

Coimbatore District Collector K. Rajamani said that fire safety of such areas was a concern and a meeting will be held with officials of Coimbatore Corporation and Local Planning Authority to keep in place a plan of action to address any eventualities in future.

Consumer rights activist K. Kathirmathiyon pointed that an audit of such structures was not done in Coimbatore. He also wanted the Fire and Rescue Services Department be accorded with powers to seal buildings that do not comply with fire safety norms.

“As of now the Fire and Rescue Services inspect a building and give or reject fire safety compliance certificate for a building based on an application submitted by the building owner requesting the same. But it should be given adequate powers to inspect buildings and seal a building if fire safety compliance is not met. A proposal is there under the consideration of the Chief Secretary on giving such powers to the department. I have also written to the Government seeking the same,” he said.

Apart from ensuring fire safety in old structures, Mr. Kathirmathiyon said that fire safety compliance should also be strictly ensured in commercial complexes, cinema halls, restaurants, textile and jewellery showrooms, malls and supermarkets where large number of people gather.
