Qatar- Centre pulls up West Bengal govt as political violenc...

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) The centre yesterday issued an advisory expressing 'deep concern over the continuing political violence in West Bengal even after the end of the Lok Sabha elections.

'The unabated violence over the past weeks appear to be a failure on the part of the law enforcement machinery of the state to maintain the rule of law and inspire confidence among people, an informed source said, quoting the advisory.

'It is strongly advised to ensure that all necessary measures are taken to maintain law and order, peace and public tranquility, it added.

'It is also requested to take strict action against officials found delinquent in discharge of their duty.

The advisory follows reports that eight persons were allegedly killed on Saturday in post-election clashes in North 24 Parganas district. Earlier too there were incidents of violence involving the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the ruling Trinamool Congress.

Trinamool secretary general Partha Chatterjee yesterday accused the Bharatiya Janata Party of disrupting law and order in the state by resorting to vandalism and murder.

'Let the people see who is resorting to bloodshed, violence and vandalism. In order to gain ground in Bengal, they are disrupting law and order by murdering Trinamool Congress workers and vandalising their houses, state Education Minister Chatterjee said.

He said the party will resist the BJP's attempts to disrupt peace and harmony in a non-violent manner.

Condemning political violence in the state, Chatterjee said: 'Such violence is unusual. One has to understand the reason of such violence. It has not happened in the past seven-and-a-half years.

'Is it possible that our party being in power is deteriorating the law and order on its own. They (BJP) are showcasing their power but Trinamool Congress is still leading with maximum number of seats, he added.

The minister also talked about how the Trinamool Congress maintained peace in Junglemahal and North Bengal Hills.

'The incidents of bloodshed in these places is in control but they (BJP) are trying to revive it. We will tell the people to unitedly and peacefully protest against it. Even in worse situations, (Chief Minister) Mamata Banerjee and the Trinamool Congress have remained unperturbed, he added.

Meanwhile, a BJP delegation, led by the party's state president Dilip Ghosh yesterday visited the troubled Sandeshkhali area in Bengal's North 24 Parganas district where at least eight people were killed in political clashes.

According to local residents, the clashes broke out in Sandeshkhali's Hatgachi area over the forceful removal of BJP flags on Saturday afternoon.

The police has so far confirmed deaths of three political workers - two from BJP and one from Trinamool Congress in the incident, though the two parties claim at least eight deaths.

State BJP sources claimed that five party workers - Pradip Mondal, Tapan Mondal, Sukanta Mondal, Devdas Mondal and Shankar Mondal - were shot dead from point blank range by TMC backed men, while 18 others had gone missing.

The TMC accused the BJP of fomenting unrest and killing at least three of its party workers, 'two of whom were thrown into the river.

The state BJP leaders including Ghosh, Mukul Roy, Locket Chatterjee, Shantanu Thakur, Jagannath Chatterjee met the family members of the slain party workers and also visited the Basirhat Hospital, where the injured BJP activists have been admitted.

'The Basirhat Hospital authorities are deliberately delaying the process of handing over the dead bodies of our workers. We are waiting, Ghosh said.

The BJP leader said his party would demand compensation from the Bengal government for the bereaved family. 'We will continue our protest against this brutality. We will hold a rally here on June 12, he said.

BJP workers also blocked roads and held demonstrations in Bankura, Hoogly, Howrah, Midnapore, Malda, Barackpore, Naihati and North and South Kolkata. A number of BJP men were arrested while holding a protest near the party's state headquarters in central Kolkata.

Meanwhile, a Trinamool Congress (TMC) delegation comprising state Food Minister Jyotipriyo Mullick and senior leaders Tapas Roy and Madan Mitra visited the family of Kayum Mollah, one of the dead party workers.

With graphic images of those slain in the clashes circulating on the social media since Saturday night, internet services were suspended in the Basirhat Lok Sabha constituency.

MENAFN0906201900670000ID1098623282
