Acts of terrorism cannot defeat spirit of Sri Lanka: PM Narendra Modi

Prime Minister Narendra Modi made an unscheduled stop in Colombo, Sri Lanka on Sunday and visited one of the churches hit during the Easter Sunday terror attacks. Paying homage to the victims of the dastardly attacks, PM Modi said, "I am confident Sri Lanka will rise again. Cowardly acts of terror cannot defeat the spirit of Sri Lanka. India stands in solidarity with the people of Sri Lanka." PM Modi is the first foreign leader to visit Sri Lanka after the terror attacks in April. President Maithripala Sirisena held an umbrella to provide cover to himself and PM Modi from rain.

Beginning his second term with tour of two significant countries in the Indian Ocean – Maldives and Sri Lanka – PM Modi has indicated the premium he has put on countering the increasing sway of China in the region.

The visit falls in line with PM Modi's 'Neighbourhood First' policy. Maldives presented PM Modi with its highest honour "Rule of Nishan Izzuddeen" at the Maldivian Parliament. It may be mentioned here that Maldives had a rather 'reserved' and 'cold' approach towards India in the past.

To emerge as a counter to Chinese hegemonistic designs in the Indian Ocean, India needs to take its relations, especially with the island countries to the next level, admit mandarins at the Ministry of External Affairs. The mention of 'Indo Pacific' by PM Modi in the Maldivian Parliament is something that will not go unnoticed in world diplomacy, especially with Beijing, which is very suspicious of the concept. Calling for a "Free and Open Indo Pacific", PM Modi said, "India will not only use its strength to strengthen its own nation but also its neighbours and their bright future." "Maldives will be great partner for India's vision for Indo Pacific region as both are neighbours and friends," he added.

NEIGHBOURHOOD DIPLOMACY New Delhi has called for a 'Free and open Indo Pacific' region, but Beijing is suspicious of this idea



India is wary of China building ports across the south Asian region from Gwadar in Pakistan to Hambantota in Sri Lanka to Kyaukpyu in Myanmar



PM Modi will meet Chinese President Xi Jinping on the sidelines of the SCO summit scheduled to be held on June 13-14 in Kyrgyzstan



Sri Lanka and Maldives had backed India-led boycott of the 2016 SAARC summit in Islamabad in the aftermath of the Uri attack.

Last year too, PM Modi had spoken about Indo Pacific at the Shangri La dialogue in Singapore. The engagement with Maldives and Sri Lanka, and extending it to Seychelles and Mauritius is being considered a must by Indian security establishment to counter the Chinese threat in the Indian Ocean region.

India is already wary of the increased Chinese activity in the region that includes building of ports across the south Asian region from Gwadar in Pakistan to Hambantota in Sri Lanka to Kyaukpyu in Myanmar. Many South Asian countries - Pakistan, Nepal are also part of China's ambitious connectivity project-- the one belt one road initiative.

PM Modi and Maldivian President Ibrahim Mohamed Solih jointly inaugurated two important defence related projects – the coastal surveillance radar system and composite training centre for Maldives National Defence forces (MNDF).

The coastal surveillance radar will have 10 autonomous radar systems across the country. It will help Malé monitor white shipping and preserve its sovereignty in exclusive economic zone.

The two countries also signed six strategically crucial MoUs, which include --Cooperation in the Field of Hydrography between Indian Navy and Maldives National Defence Force, Technical Agreement on Sharing White Shipping Information between the Indian Navy and the Maldives National Defence Force, on the training of civil servants, customs.

India has stepped up its under neighbour first and SAGAR (Security and Growth for All in the Region) doctrine that focusses on regional collaboration and priority to neighbouring countries.

PM's visit is being looked to seek a consensus for Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism or CCIT that was proposed in 1996. It calls for a common definition for terror. It is still in draft stage because of lack of consensus at the United Nations.

During President Solih's India visit in December of 2018, India had announced financial assistance of $1.4 billion. A line of credit of $ 800 million has also been granted for water supply and sewerage for 36 islands, Addu urban development centre and SME development financing project, among several projects.

In the Maldivian Parliament, PM Modi called for an international conference to combat terror. Without mentioning Pakistan PM said, "State sponsorship of terrorism is the biggest threat the world is facing today." He added "People are still making the mistake of distinguishing between good terrorists and bad terrorists." Incidentally, both Sri Lanka and Maldives backed India led boycott of the SAARC summit in Islamabad in 2016 in the aftermath of the Uri attack.
