Mystery shrouds timing of death of theft suspect

SURAT: Police are yet to arrest eight cops charged with murder of a theft suspect, who was in their custody at Khatodara police station. Omprakash Pandey, 23, was admitted to a hospital in a critical condition on May 31 and on the same day, the cops were booked for torture. Doctors declared Pandey dead next day, probably to give enough time for the cops to escape, sources said. There is no major development in the ongoing investigation in the case being conducted by a deputy commissioner of police. Investigating officers are yet to say whether the accused cops had tried to cover-up Pandey’s death for a few hours and received help from a doctor at New Civil Hospital to create doubtful papers.NCH sources said the doctor on duty neither mentioned injuries to Pandey when he was brought to hospital by the cops nor their names when admitting him. A doctor who joined duty in the next shift entered details in the book. Questioned about the suspicious role of a doctor, police commissioner Satish Sharma told TOI, “It is being investigated if there was any criminal negligence on anyone’s part. If found negligent, that person will be arrested.”It is yet to be investigated if the doctor was pressurized by the accused cops. Police are yet find out if private persons, including a home guard jawan, were involved in thrashing and covering up the murder of the theft suspect. Some private persons are actively helping the accused cops, police sources said.Pandey was mysteriously shifted to Unique Hospital from NCH where he was admitted on May 31 afternoon. Police maintained that he was alive. He was declared dead on Saturday night after 24 hours. Mystery remains whether Pandey was alive when he was admitted to hospital since this detail is yet to come out in post-mortem findings.“Police findings say the man was alive and that he died next day. The investigation in the case is still continuing and attempts are on to nab the accused cops,” Sharma added.Mohanlal Bhagwanram Khileri, police inspector; Chirag Pruthviraj Chaudhary, police sub-inspector; and constables Haresh Chaudhary, Kanaksinh Diyol, Paresh Bhukan, Aashish Dihora, Kalpesh Garmabha and Dilu Sangani have been booked for murder and torture.
