Post clashes, drama prevails in West Bengal

A day after massive clashes erupted between Trinamool Congress (TMC) and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) workers in Sandeshkhali, Basirhat located in the North 24 Parganas district of West Bengal, claiming as many as three lives, day-long drama prevailed in the area.

On Sunday, a five-member delegation comprising BJP state leaders led by West Bengal BJP president and MP from Midnapore, Dilip Ghosh, reached Sandeshkhali to meet the family members of the two deceased BJP workers. On the other hand, a delegation comprising TMC leaders met the family members of the deceased TMC worker.

The deceased have been identified as Sukanta Mondal, Pradip Mondal, who were BJP workers, and Kayoom Mollah, a TMC worker.

In view of the tension prevailing in the area, the district administration shut down internet services for an indefinite period in Basirhat.

The Central government took cognisance of the incident and the Union Home Ministry led by Amit Shah has sought a report from the state government. In an advisory to the West Bengal government, the ministry expressed "deep concern" over the continuing violence and asked it to maintain law and order.

"The so-called advisory from MHA to the West Bengal government on the law enforcement machinery in the State is nothing but a political conspiracy. We will respond appropriately," said TMC general secretary Partha Chatterjee.

Meanwhile, the BJP has called a 12-hour bandh on Monday in Basirhat, condemning the incident and also announced that the party will be observing a black day across the state.

While the police carried out massive searches for the missing party workers affiliated to both parties – TMC and BJP, they remained untraceable. Police also deployed reserve force besides deploying armed personnel and Rapid Action Force (RAF) to maintain the law and order situation in the area.

The situation turned more volatile when the BJP delegation leading the hearse carrying the two deceased BJP workers was stopped by the police from taking the dead bodies to Kolkata.

According to sources in the district police, they had prevented the delegation from taking the dead bodies in anticipation that the party might take out a procession with the bodies which may lead to a deterioration of the law and order situation. However, despite assurances from the BJP that they will not take out any procession, police did not allow them to take the bodies to Kolkata.

The party had planned the last rites of the two BJP workers in Kolkata so that party workers could pay their last respects to them at the party headquarters.

Eventually, the party had to drop the idea of performing the last rites in Kolkata and had to return to their village in Sandeshkhali.

"We were stopped at three places. I had assured the police that there will be no marches. We will peacefully take the bodies to the party office so that others can pay their tribute before the cremation. What kind of rule is this? Democracy is being strangulated in this state. I have spoken to Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi, who has assured me that he will speak to senior officials. Police couldn't prevent the murders and are now stopping us from cremating the bodies," said senior BJP leader Rahul Sinha.

The Governor too expressed concerns over the prevailing situation in the state. "Governor Tripathi is very sad at the unfortunate loss of lives and properties of the citizens. He extends his heartfelt sympathy for the families and near and dear ones of the deceased. He appeals to all concerned to see to it that no violent incidents take place and peace and harmony prevail in the state," read a release from Governor's House.

Sources in the TMC and the BJP had claimed on Saturday that the clashes broke out over the removal of saffron party flags in the area.

Local people said several shops and houses were ransacked during the violence, which broke out during a TMC procession.

State BJP general secretary Sayantan Basu on Saturday had claimed that three party workers — Sukanta, Pradip and Shankar Mondal — were shot dead, while state minister Jyotipriyo Mallick maintained that TMC worker Kayoom Mollah was killed in the clash. Shankar and Debdas Mondal of Bhangipara village are missing, local BJP leaders claimed.

Zee Media Newsroom with inputs from PTI
