Rahul Gandhi raises doubts over PM Modi's Kerala is dear to me remark

Rahul on Sunday said that he doesn't expect Modi to treat Kerala like he does Varanasi. (Photo: twitter.com/RahulGandhi)

Congress president Rahul Gandhi continues to unleash his attack against Prime Minister Narendra Modi in Kerala. In a fresh charge, Rahul on Sunday said that he doesn't expect Modi to treat Kerala like he does Varanasi.

The statement came after PM on Saturday had said that Kerala was as much close to his heart as Varanasi. Rahul has been sharply criticising Narendra Modi over the last three days, which he has spent in Kerala. Rahul, the newly-elected

MP from Wayanad constituency arrived here to thank his voters for the victory. Over the last three days, Rahul has held roadshows across the constituency which also included Assembly segments in Malappuram and Calicut districts.

During the last day of his tour, Rahul held roadshows in parts of the Calicut district. While addressing the gathering at the end of the roadshow, Rahul slammed the PM for being "biased".

"I know that the Prime Minister will not treat Kerala the same way he treats Uttar Pradesh. He can come here and say whatever he wants - that Kerala is Varanasi - but I know because the CPI(M) is ruling and wherever the Congress is ruling, the Prime Minister will not treat this as a normal state of the country," said Rahul, referring to Modi's speech at Guruvayur in Kerala on Saturday.

After offering prayers at the famous Sri Krishna temple, Modi on Saturday said the BJP was not working for mere electoral politics, but was working to ensure that India gets its place of pride in the international arena.

"I do not expect the prime minister to safeguard Kerala's interest. I know from my experience that the prime minister views the BJP-ruled states differently from the states ruled by the Congress or other parties," he said.

He accused the Centre under PM Modi of according stepmotherly treatment to states not ruled by the BJP, which he dubbed as a party blinded by hate and anger.

"No country has strengthened by the division of its people. Narendra Modi divides Indians. His is basically the idea of division," Rahul added.

Later in a tweet, he said, "I spent the past few days travelling through Wayanad, Kerala, that I will represent in Parliament as MP. I want to thank the people of Wayanad who showed up in large numbers to greet me. I assure you of my commitment to work with you to solve as many of your problems as I can."

As in the last two days, hundreds of party workers and locals, including women and children, greeted Rahul during roadshows at Engapuzha and Mukkam, many of them wearing T-shirts carrying 'Rahul we need you' slogans.

Rahul, who held over 10 roadshows across three districts of Wayanad, Malappuram and Kozhikode, left for New Delhi on Sunday.

With inputs from PTI
