Ludhiana: Woman kills husband to stay with paramour, booked

LUDHIANA: A woman with the help of her paramour allegedly strangulated her husband to death at Dhanoor village of Machhiwara on Saturday night.Sources said before killing him, the duo made him drink liquor and told neighbours that her husband has died of excessive drinking. However, neigbhours sounded police they saw strangulation marks on the neck of deceased.The deceased has been identified as Satnam Singh, 32, a labourer.The Machhiwara police have registered a case against his wife Paramjit Kaur, 26, and her paramour Gurpreet Singh, 32, also a labourer. Both the accused are absconding.Satnam’s brother Joga Singh claimed that Gurpreet was Satnam’s friend. Once Satnam had invited Gurpreet home where he met Paramjit for the first time. Later Paramjit and Gurpreet developed illicit relationship. Gurpreet would often visit the house in the absence of Satnam, Joga claimed.He said Satnam even caught them red handed. Satnam used to stop Paramjit from meeting Gurpreet, which led to fights in the couple. Later, the duo hatched a conspiracy to eliminate Satnam, he alleged.Inspector Ramaninderjit Singh, SHO, Machhiwara police station, said according to preliminary inquiry, Gurpreet had come to Satnam’s house with liquor on Saturday night. They had drinks together, but Gurpreet deliberately made Satnam drink more. Due to excessive drinking, Satnam lost his senses. It was then the duo strangulated him with a piece of cloth. Strangulation marks were clearly visible on his neck, he added.The official said after killing Satnam, Gurpreet fled the spot immediately. Hours later Paramjit started crying loudly. When neighbours thronged her house, Paramjit told that her husband had died of excessive drinking. But on seeing the marks on Satnam’s neck, neighbours informed the police. Till the time police reached the spot, Paramjit also escaped from the house.The police have registered a case under Sections 302 (murder) of IPC against Paramjit and Gurpreet Singh. The police have launched a manhunt to arrest the accused.
