Centre pulls up Didi govt over violence after LS poll

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, June 9

The Centre on Sunday issued an advisory expressing “deep concern” over the continuing political violence in West Bengal even after the end of the Lok Sabha elections. It asked the state government to “maintain the rule of law” and “inspire confidence among people”.

In its advisory, the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) said, “Latest reports indicated that four persons were killed on June 8 in post-poll clashes at Bhangipara and Hatgacha in North 24 Parganas district. Earlier also, there have been reports of violence in which people lost lives in various parts of West Bengal.”

Claiming that it has “viewed the current situation in West Bengal with deep concern”, the MHA said, “The unabated violence over the past weeks appear to be a failure on the part of the law-enforcement machinery of the state to maintain the rule of law and inspire confidence among people.”

It was “strongly advised” to ensure that all necessary measures are taken to maintain law and order, peace and public tranquility, the advisory said. “It is also requested to take strict action against officials found delinquent in discharge of their duty,” it said.

TMC and BJP workers have been on a spiral of violence as the political battle in the state gains momentum. In the recently held Lok Sabha election, the BJP increased its tally from two to 18 of the state’s 42 seats. The Mamata Banerjee-led TMC was slightly ahead with only 22 seats.

Ahead of PM Meet, Guv appeals for calm

Kolkata: Ahead of his meeting with Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday, West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi has expressed his concern about the incident of political violence in Sandeshkhali. In a statement issued by Raj Bhavan, the Governor appealed to all concerned to keep a check so that violence do not recur and peace and harmony prevail in the state. TNS

BJP to observe ‘Black Day’ today

To protest the killing of their party men in North 24 Parganas, the BJP will observe ‘Black Day’ in the state on Monday. The party has also called for a 12-hour general strike in the Basirhat sub-division on Monday and a ‘condemnation march’ to the Kolkata Police headquarters on June 12.

Earlier, an eight-member BJP delegation was stopped by the police from bringing the bodies of two of its slain workers from Sandeshkhali in North 24 Parganas district to Kolkata, claiming it may cause law and order issues.

On Sunday, the police carried out search operations in Sandeshkhali to trace the persons alleged to have gone missing in the violence. pti/TNS

(With agency inputs)
