Chris Hemsworth reveals the real reason why he named his daughter 'India'

Chris Hemsworth reveals the reason behind daughter India's name | Photo Credit: Instagram

Chris Hemsworth, after basking in the blockbuster success of his last screen outing Avengers: Endgame, is now gearing up for the release of his next Men In Black: International. The Thor actor was in India last year to shoot for his web series in Ahmedabad and Mumbai.

In a recent conversation with IANS, Hemsworth has revealed the real reason behind naming his daughter after India, our country. "My wife (Elsa Pataky) spent a lot of time in India and that was where the name originally came from," Hemsworth told the news agency during a group interaction while promoting his next movie in Bali.

Other than daughter India Rose, Hemsworth also shares twin sons Sasha and Tristan with Pataky. Talking about his love for the country, the 35-year-old star was quoted as saying, "I love the place and the people. Shooting there... There were thousands of people on the streets every day and I have never experienced that on set. It was sort of intimidating as it was exciting because there were so many people."

"After every take (when the director) called 'cut', there was loud cheer. We felt like rock stars in a stadium. But the warmth and support we got while shooting there, no matter how disruptive we were to their daily lives, it was so good. People were so positive. I have huge appreciation to that," he continued. On being asked if he would like to work in Indian movies, "I was talking to a few about that...So maybe" was his response.

Would he ever bring his kids to India, Chris had told Times of India earlier this year, “Yes I'll take my kids to India for sure! I had security and all - but even that was intimidating, you know. I guess I look comfortable (in the posts)... and I am so appreciative of that sort of reception. I have never experienced anything like that -- ever -- like, to that level. But it also kind of made me go -- 'wow, so many people!' If they sort of wanted to swamp that set, they have easily.”

Men In Black: International, co-starring Tessa Thompson, hits the theatres on Friday, i.e. June 14, 2019. Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
