Amidst Darbar's shoot, Rajinikanth gets adorably clicked with grandson Ved Krishna

Rajinikanth gets adorably clicked with grandson Ved Krishna | Photo Credit: Instagram

It goes without saying that superstar Rajinikanth is one of the most sought after actors in the film industry. With his unmatchable performance in movies like Sivaji, Baasha, Kaala, Kabali and more, the star has carved has niched for himself in the heart of his fans. After impressing the audience with his last outing Petta, Rajinikanth will soon be seen starring in the much-awaited film Darbar. Although the actor is busy shooting for his flick in Mumbai, he managed to take some time out for his grandson Ved Krishna.

Cinematographer Santosh Sivan, who is cranking the camera for the Rajinikanth starrer, clicked an adorable photo of the two and shared it on social media. He captioned his post, "Epitome of innocence..withgrand child watching the monitor.. timeless I just managed to capture it during Darbar shoot."

Check out the adorable photo below:

Darbar is being directed by AR Murugadoss and the film will mark the filmmaker and Rajinikanth's first collaboration. Along with the Robot actor, Darbar will also feature Nayanthara, Prateik Babbar, Suniel Shetty, and Dilip Tahil in pivotal roles. While Suniel will essay the role of the antagonist, Prateik will reportedly be seen essaying the role of the villain's son. Mumbai Mirror quoted a source close to the development as saying, "Anna, a corporate giant, will take on Thalaiva’s IPS officer. He joins the team during the second schedule which starts in the next few days in Mumbai and will be there all through."

"The antagonist’s track has an emotional back-story also featuring Rajinikanth, which makes the revenge all the more exciting. There will be several confrontation scenes between the duo in the film which climaxes with a stylized, larger-than-life action scene," the source further added.

Prateik confirmed his role in Darbar with a statement that read, "It has been my aspiration to share screen space with a legend like Rajinikanth sir. I can’t wait to meet him and observe him on set. I have been appreciated for characters with grey shades and I am investing my 200 percent in this role because it’s an opportunity of a lifetime."

Produced by Lyca Productions, Darbar is slated to hit the theatres next year.
