West Bengal: BJP observes 'Black Day' across state, holds protests against Basirhat violence

BJP is observing a 12-hour statewide 'bandh' in West Bengal | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: As political tensions continue to prevail in West Bengal, BJP is observing a 12-hour 'bandh' in the state's Basirhat district and a 'Black Day' in the entire state.

The saffron party is taking out rallies in several parts of the state, with BJP workers supporting black badges and demanding the arrest of the culprits involved in the killings of party workers. Three BJP workers were killed in clashes that broke out in Sandeshkali area of North 24 Parganas district.

"The party has called a 12-hour 'bandh' in Basirhat on Monday. In entire West Bengal, we will observe a black day. BJP will move court over police role. The mortal remains of the deceased BJP workers are being taken to their native places for last rites," Sinha told media on Saturday.

Last night, security forces had stopped BJP cadre at Basanti highway from taking the mortal remains of its party workers to Kolkata where the party had prepared for an elaborate ceremony to pay respects. As the standoff continued on the highway, hundreds of saffron party workers gathered at the spot and started preparing for cremating the bodies on the highway itself.

The decision was reversed following mediation and the party announced several protests and statewide bandh on Monday.

Meanwhile, Mamata Banjeree government has responded to the Ministry of Home Affairs advisory to ensure law and order in the state, saying that the Basirhat violence was planned by the BJP.

"There have been a few stray post-poll clashes in the state perpetrated by some anti-social elements, the law enforcement authorities have been taking firm and appropriate actions in all such cases without any delay," State Chief Secretary Malay Kumar De wrote in the letter to the Ministry of Home Affairs.

After the violence, MHA had issued an advisory to the Mamata Banerjee-led government to take all necessary measures in order to maintain law and order in the state.
