Narendra Modi: WB Governor to meet PM Modi in Delhi today amid unabated killings in Bengal

Kolkata: Post poll violence continues unabated in Bengal with 13 persons— eight BJP workers and five Trinamool Congress workers –– being killed over the past 15 days.The law and order situation in the state has turned so precarious that the union home ministry had to issue an advisory to the state and Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi had to rush to Delhi.Tripathi is scheduled to meet Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Monday at 12 noon and the poll violence is likely to be discussed, sources said. The meeting has been prescheduled as Tripathi’s tenure will come to an end on July 23.“Governor Tripathi is very sad at the unfortunate loss of lives and properties of citizens. He extends his heartfelt sympathy for the families and near and dear ones of the deceased. He appeals to all concerned to see that no violent incidents take place and peace and harmony prevail in the state,” stated a release commenting on the North 24 Parganas killings. At least five people— four BJP workers and a Trinamool Congress worker— were reportedly killed in violence that broke out in Sandeshkhali area of North 24 Parganas late Saturday evening. Although the BJP leaders claimed that four of their workers were shot dead, police officials said only three bodies –– that of two BJP workers and a TMC worker –– were recovered.According to the locals, a group of Trinamool Congress men held a meeting at Kanmari village in Nazat police station area. The area comes under the Basirhat Lok Sabha constituency where Trinamool Congress candidate Nusrat Jahan won with a record margin of almost 3 lakh votes.It has been learnt from police reports that in booth number 56 of the village, where the TMC trailed by around 156 votes, the villagers were allegedly threatened by the ruling party. On Saturday evening, the Trinamool Congress held a meeting in the village before taking out a victory rally in the area.In the process, locals said, a group of TMC workers started ransacking some houses of BJP workers. Bullets were fired and bombs were hurled and a clash broke out. TMC leader Kaiyuum Mollah (26) was killed on the spot when the BJP workers were chasing some of the TMC men. Subsequently, a clash broke out near a fish-pond where more TMC men were waiting. Villagers claim that some bodies were dumped in the pond.Speaking to ET, BJP senior leader Mukul Roy said, “The village was targeted on Saturday because BJP workers from the village were raising their voice against some Rohingya families living there whom the Trinamool Congress wanted to protect. We will write to the union home minister with all this information, explaining the situation.”Minister Jyotipriya Mallick said, “One of our local leaders were killed as BJP goons opened fire when our workers were holding a meeting in the village. Six of our workers are still missing. BJP workers were killed in the factional feud. We do not have any connection with that.”
