Trinamool v/s BJP: What is happening in Bengal

(MENAFN- NewsBytes) Trinamool v/s BJP: What is happening in Bengal

10 Jun 2019

During 2019 Lok Sabha elections, West Bengal (sort of) redefined violence, with clashes between Trinamool and Bharatiya Janata Party workers being reported in all seven phases.

Now, polls may have concluded but bloodbath hasn't. Over the weekend, Bengal witnessed tensions after workers of both the parties lost their lives.

On Sunday, BJP workers also agitated against police.

But what really happened? Let's tell you.

BJP and Trinamool workers clashed over removal of party flags

Beginning

On Saturday, BJP and Trinamool workers clashed in Sandeshkhali area, North 24 Paraganas district, over the removal of party flags. The epicenter of violence is about 70 km away from state capital Kolkata.

BJP said five of its workers were killed and five went missing in the clashes. The saffron party blamed Trinamool for deaths.

Meanwhile, a Trinamool worker also lost his life.

BJP said it lost five workers, police refuted claims

Claims

According to Mukul Roy, BJP national executive member, those who were killed in the violence are Pradip Mondal, Sukanta Mondal, Tapan Mondal, Debarata Mondal, and Shankar Mondal.

However, a police officer contended this count and told HT that only three people died.

Meanwhile, BJP state general secretary Sayantan Basu said two bodies marked as "unidentified" were lying at Basirhat hospital morgue.

Subsequently, MHA under Amit Shah issued an advisory

Advisory

Following the violence, the state BJP unit approached Union Home Ministry, which got a new boss in Amit Shah recently.

The MHA sent an advisory to the state government expressing concern over the prevailing violence.

"It is strongly advised to ensure that all necessary measures are taken to maintain law and order, peace and public tranquility," the advisory read.

The advisory miffed Trinamool for obvious reasons

Reaction

Obviously, Trinamool saw red at MHA's advisory. To recall, Trinamool under Mamata Banerjee fought bitterly with BJP in Lok Sabha polls and it didn't end well.

Trinamool's tally went down to 22 while BJP's swelled to 18.

Partha Chatterjee asked why such advisories were sent to Bengal and not to states like UP and Gujarat. He termed it a conspiracy against Banerjee.

On Sunday, BJP convoy was stopped by state police

Details

While political mudslinging didn't stop, things took a dramatic turn on Sunday. BJP wanted to take bodies of its workers to Kolkata to "pay respects".

The party had planned an elaborate ceremony for Monday but their schemes were foiled by state police.

After police stopped the convoy, agitated BJP workers said they would perform cremation on the Basanti Highway.

In fact, BJP started preparing for pyre but dropped plans

Statement

Further, BJP started preparing for a pyre but dropped the idea later.

"The family members of the deceased have decided to perform last rites in Kolkata. How can the police stop them? It is their duty to stop murderers and criminals and not the dead," asked BJP's Rahul Sinha.

He claimed he had assured police there would be no rallies, but was stopped, nevertheless.

BJP will observe 'Black Day', hold 'condemnation march'

Protest

Though its plans to go to Kolkata went south, BJP didn't stop with the agitation. The saffron party has decided to observe "Black Day" on Monday against the state government.

"Also, there will be a 12-hour general strike across the Basirhat subdivision," Sinha said.

On June 12, the party plans to hold a 'condemnation march' to Kolkata Police headquarters in Lalbazar.
