Hyderabad: Uber driver stabbed by passengers; cops launch manhunt

Balaraju had received a booking from Koti bus stand to the Sanghi temple in Hatyanagar (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Hyderabad: A cab driver was allegedly attacked by a passenger in Hyderabad. The incident came to light on Saturday, June 8. The victim was identified as Y Balaraju. Balaraju is employed as a cab driver with Uber. The alleged incident took place on the outskirts of Hyderabad.

Balaraju had received a booking from Koti bus stand to the Sanghi temple in Hayatnagar. Allegedly, two men entered the vehicle at the Koti bus stand. When the vehicle reached the Sanghi temple, the accused alleged that they were unable to contact a friend they were supposed to meet.

The accused alleged that the mobile phone of their friend was switched off. The accused then asked Balaraju to drop them at Koti. On their way back to Koti, one of the accused allegedly stabbed Balaraju on the head, shoulders and neck. The vehicle had reached the ORR service road near Anjaneya Swami temple when Balaraju was attacked.

Hayatnagar inspector K Satish told Times of India, "Balaraju stopped the car and the accused fled from the scene. Passersby saw the bleeding cab driver and alerted us." Satish added that Balaraju was rushed to a hospital after the incident. Balaraju was later shifted to the Yashoda Hospital in Malakpet.

In an official statement, Uber said, "What’s been described is unacceptable. Our hearts are with the driver partner and we wish for his speedy recovery. Violence has no place on the Uber app or anywhere else and the rider’s access has been removed. We are assisting law enforcement with their investigations.”

Balaraju claimed that he had never met the accused. Allegedly, the accused made no attempts to rob Balaraju or his vehicle. The police lodged a case under Section 307 (attempt to murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) in relation with the incident. Balaraju was stable and was recovering at a private hospital.
