2-year-old and father, 2 youth killed in separate accidents in Hyderabad

2-year-old and father, 2 youth killed in separate accidents in Hyderabad

In the first incident, a father and daughter who were sleeping at their home were killed when a truck ran through the shed they were in.

news Accident

Four people died in two separate accidents in Hyderabad on Saturday. In the first incident, a father and daughter who were sleeping at their home were killed when a truck ran through the shed they were in. In another incident, two college students were killed when their two-wheeler rammed into a metro pillar.

A labourer who was trying to learn to drive a heavy vehicle at a construction site at Metkonghuda in Jeedimetla, on Saturday night accidentally rammed the truck into a shed killing two people and injuring two others.

A Pera Lal, 34, and his two-year-old daughter Saraswathi, died while the wife Sonu Kumari was grievously injured. The fourth person, Deepan received minor injuries. The two injured were shifted to Narayana Mallareddy hospital. The two bodies have been taken to Gandhi hospital. They were natives of Mandya village in Chhattisgarh and were in Hyderabad working as construction labourers.

The incident took place at 11 pm when the family was asleep. The Jeedimetla inspector P Ramana Reddy told Deccan Chronicle that the 20-year-old driver Keerthan, working as a labourer, wanted to learn to drive the heavy vehicle and took it for a joyride. The youth has been taken into custody and a case of death due to negligence has been registered against him.

In another accident that took place in the city on Saturday night, two youth who were overspeeding along the Uppal highway lost control and rammed their two-wheeler into a metro pillar at Nagole. The victims were identified as Gadhe Sanjay 20, a resident of Saroornagar and Jagadeep, 20, from Mansoorabad. The duo was testing out Sanjay's new bike and were not wearing helmets at the time of the accident that took place barely 50 metres from the Nagole metro station.

While Sanjay died on the spot, Jagadeep who was unconscious was rushed to NIMS hospital but succumbed to injuries on Sunday. Uppal police told Deccan Chronicle that doctors found traces of alcohol in their blood.
