Three men sentenced to life in prison over rape and murder of eight-year-old Muslim girl in India

T hree men in India have been sentenced to life in prison after they were convicted of the horrific rape and murder of an eight-year-old Muslim girl.

The girl, from a nomadic Muslim community that roams the forests of Kashmir, was drugged and held captive in a temple in January 2018.

A total of six men were found guilty of being involved after the girl was battered and sexually assaulted for a week before she was strangled and beaten to death.

Prosecutors had been seeking the death penalty for three of the men but a lawyer for the defence confirmed they had been handed down life sentences on Monday instead.

Indian Punjab police personnel stand guard outside Pathankot's court where the verdict was later delivered. / AFP/Getty Images

Three other men convicted in the case were given a five-year prison sentence, lawyer Vinod Mahajan also told reporters outside the courtroom in the northern town of Pathankot.

The case, in the country’s Jammu and Kashmir state last year, sparked outrage and criticism of the country's ruling party after some of its members opposed charges being laid.

The girl was from a nomadic Muslim community that roams Kashmir's forests.

The abduction, rape and killing of the child was part of a plan to remove the minority nomadic community from the area, the 15-page charge sheet said.

Indian Punjab police personnel stand guard outside Pathankot's court / AFP/Getty Images

Among those accused were a Hindu priest and police officers, fanning communal tensions between Hindus and Muslims in the area.

"This is a victory of truth," prosecution lawyer M Farooqi told reporters outside the court on Monday. "The girl and her family has got justice today. We are satisfied with the judgment."

The prosecution also added that they were seeking the death penalty for three men - priest Sanji Ram, Deepak Khajuria and Parvesh Kumar, who were convicted of rape and murder.

However, Mr Mahajan later confirmed that the three men had been handed down life sentences.

Indian Punjab police personnel frisks Indian people accessing Pathankot's court / AFP/Getty Images

Three others, Surinder Kumar, Tilak Raj and Anand Dutta, were convicted of lesser crimes of destroying evidence.

A lawyer leading the legal team representing the accused, AK Sawhney, told reporters earlier they planned to appeal the verdict.

The case shocked India, which has an appalling record for violence against women and girls, and led to the introduction of the death penalty for rapists of girls below the age of 12.

Indian Punjab Police personnel escort a police vehicle carrying the seven accused for the rape and murder / AFP/Getty Images

The trial, held in private, began over a year ago in Pathankot, a town about 70 km (44 miles) from Rasana village in Kathua district, where the incident happened, in the state of Jammu and Kashmir.

India's Supreme Court shifted the trial to the neighbouring state of Punjab after the girl's family and lawyer said they faced death threats.

Local lawyers and Hindu politicians, including some from the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, also held protests against police filing charges in court.

India has long been plagued by violence against women and children. Reported rapes climbed 60 percent to 40,000 from 2012 to 2016, according to government statistics, and many more go unreported, especially in rural areas.

In total there are eight people accused of involvement in the case. The seventh man, named as Vishal, was found not guilty on Monday, Farooqi said, while the eighth, a juvenile, is currently awaiting trial.

Agencies contributed to this report.
