Kathua rape-murder case: A timeline of the brutal case that shook nation

Rapes that shook the nation and their legal status

Kathua rape-murder case: A timeline of the brutal case that shook nation

India

oi-PTI

New Delhi, June 10: A local court here on Monday convicted six people accused in the rape and murder of an eight-year-old nomadic girl in Jammu and Kashmir's Kathua. Following is the timeline of the case that shook the nation:

January 10, 2018: Eight-year-old girl belonging to Bakarwal tribe goes missing in Rasana village of Jammu and Kashmir's Kathua district while grazing cattle.

January 12, 2018: FIR is registered on the complaint of victim's father at Hiranagar police station.

January 17, 2018: Body of the girl is found. Post mortem confirms gang rape and murder.

January 22, 2018: Case is handed over to Jammu and Kashmir crime branch.

February 16, 2018: A right-wing group, Hindu Ekta Manch, holds protests in support of one of the accused.

March 1, 2018: Two ministers of the BJP, part of the state's ruling coalition with the PDP, Chander Prakash Ganga, and Lal Singh, attend a rally organised by the Hindu Ekta Manch after the arrest of nephew of a caretaker of a 'devisathan' (temple) in connection with the kidnapping and rape.

April 9, 2018: The police file the chargesheet before the Kathua court against seven of the eight accused.

April 10, 2018: Charge sheet filed against eighth accused who had claimed to be a juvenile. The police file an FIR against lawyers for protesting and attempting to prevent the crime branch officials from filing the charge sheet in the court on April 9.

April 14, 2018: BJP ministers who attended the Hindu Ekta Manch rally resign from the state Cabinet. UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres terms the crime "horrific" and asks authorities to deliver justice.

April 16, 2018: Trial begins before the Principal Sessions Court judge, Kathua. All accused plead 'not guilty'.

May 7, 2018: The Supreme Court shifts the case from Kathua to Pathankot in Punjab. The apex court directs the trial to be fast-tracked and held in-camera, away from media gaze.

June 3, 2019: Trial concludes.

June 10: Three main convicts in the Kathua rape and murder case, including temple priest have been sentenced to life imprisonment. The three cops who have been convicted in the case have each been sentenced to five years in jail.
