Following minor's murder in Aligarh, Section 144 imposed; heavy police deployed in city

. On Sunday, the authorities struggled with protestors, who were demanding a speedy probe in the case and justice for the victim. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Lucknow: Following the brutal murder of a two-year-old girl in Tappal, Aligarh district of Uttar Pradesh, calmness has prevailed in the city on Monday. Heavy police has been deployed in the town, a day after it witnessed tense moments.

Meanwhile, the district administration has ordered the suspension of Internet services in the Khair area till midnight. News agency PTI reported, the District Magistrate (DM) Chandra Bhushan Singh has ordered a suspension of all Internet services in the entire tehsil.

Section 144 of the CrPc have been promulgated in the area by the authorities. Reportedly, after the brutal murder, rumours and fake video clips are being circulated on social media. Reportedly, adding to it the authorities claim that these posts were likely to inflame communal tensions in the area.

Vijay Bhushan, UP DIG (Law & Order) on Tappal, Aligarh 2.5-year-old murder case: Sanjeev Dikshit has been made Tappal Circle Officer in place of Pankaj Srivastava. pic.twitter.com/UjMIa1NKUj — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 10, 2019

News agency PTI, the DM said that the local has been monitoring these social media posts and strong punitive steps would be taken against all anti-social elements. On Sunday, the authorities struggled with protestors, who were demanding a speedy probe in the case and justice for the victim.

The barbarity of the crime has sparked outrage across the country and questions have been raised regarding law and order situation in the state. Special Superintendent of Police Akash Kulhari told PTI that the situation is currently under control and they will not allow anyone to create discord under the garb of genuine protest.

He said action had been initiated against some persons for allegedly misusing social media platforms to fan communal passions. However, the investigation in the murder case is still underway.
