Celebratory firing: ex-MLA detained, victim brain-dead

Accused were on their way to Bihar when they were nabbed

The Delhi police on Wednesday detained former Bihar MLA Raju Singh and his driver-cum-bodyguard Hari Singh from Uttar Pradesh’s Gorakhpur in connection with the celebratory firing that left a 42-year-old architect battling for life.

The victim, Archana Gupta, who received a bullet injury in the head and was put on life support on Tuesday, has been declared brain-dead, police said.

“Her family is planning to donate her organs,” said a senior officer.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (South) Vijay Kumar said that the accused were on their way to Bihar when they were detained.

“Information was shared with the UP police and they stopped the duo in Kushinagar. Our team then rushed to the place and detained them. They are being brought to Delhi,” he said.

New Year’s Eve party

The officer said that Hari has been arrested because he was also allegedly firing during the New Year’s Eve party at Raju’s farmhouse in south Delhi’s Fatehpur Beri, which was attended by about 60 people.

The two, after the incident, cleaned up the farm and fled the spot.

The victim and her husband Vikas Gupta had gone to attend the New Year’s Eve party where the incident happened around midnight.

Mr. Vikas told the police that Raju started firing in celebration and shot off about five-six rounds, during which a bullet hit the victim.

Investigators searched Raju’s farmhouse on Tuesday where two rifles and about 800 cartridges were found.

The police are yet to ascertain whether the arms are licensed. Sources said that a pistol was found in Raju’s possession when he was detained from Gorakhpur.

Raju is a former Janata Dal (United) MLA who left the party to join the BJP and contested the Assembly elections in 2015, which he lost. The accused has five criminal cases registered against him under the Arms Act, on charges of attempt to murder among others.

He is also a real-estate businessman and contractor due to which he and Mr. Vikas used to earlier work together.

‘Quit JD(U) in 2014’

Reacting to media reports, Janata Dal (United)’s national general secretary Sanjay Jha said that Raju quit the party in 2014 and contested elections against them in 2015, therefore, he has not been associated with the JD(U) for over four years.

The police said that several people who were present at the party have been questioned, including Mr. Vikas, but Raju’s family is not cooperating.

“The sequence of events will become clear once the accused are questioned thoroughly,” Mr. Kumar said.
