Under what conditions can President’s Rule be imposed in a state?

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee | Photo Credit: PTI

The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and the Trinamool Congress (TMC) have been at loggerheads in West Bengal. In continuing post-poll violence, three BJP workers and one TMC worker were killed in a clash that broke out in North 24 Parganas district on June 8. BJP and the TMC workers were allegedly involved in a scuffle over removing flags of the saffron party in the area, triggering the violence.

Could the reports of deteriorating law and order situation in West Bengal be ground enough for the imposition of President's rule in the state? On her part, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has maintained that the situation is “well under control”, and is blaming the BJP for fomenting trouble in the state.

Situations under which President's rule can be imposed

If the state legislature is unable to elect a leader as Chief Minister.

If the ruling party or coalition does not have numbers to prove majority in the Assembly.

If the breakdown of law and order situation takes place in the state.

If elections are postponed due to inevitable reasons.

The Article under which President's rule is imposed

Following the failure of constitutional machinery in the state, the President's rule is imposed under Article 356 of the Constitution. Upon the imposition of the President's rule, the ruling government is dissolved and the Centre appoints the Governor as the chief executive of the state.

The Central government takes control of the state once the President's rule is in place and the Governor heads the proceedings, representing the President of India.

The sanction of both the houses of the Parliament – Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha – is required for the imposition of the rule. Once approved, it can go on for a period of six months. However, the President's rule cannot be extended for more than three years. Even during these three years, it needs to be brought before the two houses every six months for approval.
