16 police teams formed to nab those involved in TV crew attack: Delhi police

By PTI

NEW DELHI: Sixteen police teams have been conducting raids across Delhi-NCR to nab the two bike-borne assailants who reportedly fired at the crew of a news channel when they were going on an assignment in south Delhi, officials said Monday.

A joint team of Crime Branch and Southern Range conducted the raids across the national capital and questioned more than 50 suspects in connection with the case, police said.

"We have alerted the entire network of informers with the details of suspects. The sketch of two suspects have been prepared and circulated for identification. A total of 16 teams are working on the case and multiple raids were conducted in Delhi-NCR area," Ram Gopal Naik, DCP (Crime), said.

ALSO READ | Delhi: Bike-borne miscreants fire at journalists' car on Barapullah flyover

"We have specific leads in the case and our teams are working on the case. We are also verifying the status of robbers who came out on bail from Tihar recently," he said.

In a suspected case of attempt to robbery, two bike-borne assailants opened fire at the news channel crew at the Barapullah flyover on Sunday morning.

A TV journalist, Siddharth Purohit, accused the police of not helping them despite reporting the incident to some officials near the INA metro station.

The personnel, he alleged, removed the barricades instead and left the spot. The police said in the absence of CCTV on the elevated road where the incident took place, they were scanning through multiple CCTV cameras installed across the route.

Devesh Srivastava, Joint Commissioner of Police (Southern range) said more than 50 people have been rounded up for questioning and scanned more than 100 CCTVs installed at possible routes taken by the assailants to enter or exit the elevated road.

The officer said a forensic examination of the vehicle which was attacked has also been conducted. A preliminary inquiry had found that the policemen on duty ignored the complaint of the victim. Three policemen, including an assistant sub-inspector, were later suspended for dereliction of duty.
