Wanted in 15 murder cases, gangster Akshay Pahalwan arrested in Ropar

gspannu7@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

Ropar, June 10

The district police nabbed notorious gangster Akshay Pahalwan alias Kali after a brief exchange of fire at nearby Dhahan village late evening yesterday.

Akshay, who is wanted by Chandigarh, Delhi, Haryana and Rajasthan police in 15 cases of murder beside 20 cases of robberies and extortion, joined Lawrence Bishnoi gang two years ago.

Haryana and Rajasthan police had announced a prize of Rs four lakh and 10,000, respectively on his head.

He along with other notorious gangsters Sampat Nehra and Ankit Bhadu had allegedly killed another rival gangster Ajay Jaitpura in the court complex of Sadulpur town in Churu district of Rajasthan on January 17 last year.

Five months later on May 28, he along with his accomplices shot dead another history-sheeter Vinod Jat alias Jordan in Sriganganagar.

Ropar SSP Swapan Sharma said after the arrests of Lawrence Bishnoi and Sampat Nehra and death of Ankit Bhadu in an encounter with Punjab Police four months ago in Zirakpur, now Pahalwan was finding shortage of arms as well as hideouts.

He had come here to get weapons from some his contacts and in search of new hideouts when the district police got a tip off and he was surrounded by cops near Dhahan village.

The gangster tried to flee the spot and while firing on the police party ran into the fields. While running, he lost his slippers and his feet got injured due to wheat straws in the fields following which the cops overpowered him, he said.

Notorious gangsters Dilpreet Singh Baba and Parminder Singh Pindri belong the village from where Pahalwan was nabbed by police.

While Dilpreet is in jail after he was arrested in July last year, Pindri is on parole these days.

The SSP said the 19-year-old, Pahalwan, committed first murder when he was merely 15 years old in his native Palra village in Sonepat district of Haryana.

Soon, he along with few others killed a father-son duo. He was arrested and being a minor sent to juvenile home for 18 months where he met someone who later introduced him to Raju Basodi, a notorious gangster of Haryana, and they started extortion racket.

During the last two years, they joined Bishnoi gang who deputed them to extort money from the National Capital Region falling in Rohtak and Sonepat districts declaring them area commanders of his gang.

Along with members of this gang, he committed four murders and six highway robberies. After being released from jail in March 2017, he has committed 10 highway robberies and looted nearly 50 lakhs.

The SSP said, “Akshay was planning to kill a person in Sonepat due to an old rivalry. He had already done a recce to execute the killing. He visited Nurpurbedi area of Ropar district to arrange weapons and logistic support. Three pistols of .32 bore and ammunition have been recovered from his possession.
