Unclog payment of subsidy under Swachh mission: Ichipatti residents

Coimbatore: Senthil Kumar , a 49-year-old labourer from Ichipatti village near Palladam in Tirupur district, has been shelling out a considerable portion of his wages as interest for a loan he took last year.Senthil had obtained the Rs 17,000 loan after pledging a gold ornament to construct a toilet in his house. Panchayat officials had promised to get Rs 12,000 as subsidy under the Swachh Bharat mission for its construction.While he has a toilet in his house, the burden of the loan is weighing him down, Senthil told TOI. “Months have passed since I constructed the toilet. But I have not received even a paisa of the government subsidy.”Worse, the panchayat officials had taken Rs 2,000 each from the beneficiaries to ‘facilitate’ the subsidy.While the Rs 1.96 lakh crore nation-wide campaign funded by the union government is under way to put an end to open defecation, more than 100 villagers in Ichipatti are awaiting the reimbursement for the toilets they had constructed.Though the original scheme envisaged funding at various stages of construction, the prospective beneficiaries had to beg and borrow as the officials promised to reimburse the expenditure only after the construction was over.Panchayat officials had visited Ichipatti in 2016, urging everyone to construct toilets. Since the officials promised subsidy, the villagers agreed. Soon, photos were taken with villagers posing at the spot chosen for the toilets. “They collected Rs 2,000 each from us and said the sum would be given along with the subsidy amount,” Senthil said.The scheme envisages funding at various stages of constructionRs Rs 2,735 for constructing up to basement and Rs 9,265 for the remaining work. After the construction was over, panchayat officials wrote on the toilet walls that they were built under the Swachh Bharat Mission during 201617 and took photos of the beneficiaries posing in front of the toilets.“But the officials later told us that they cannot reimburse the money as the toilets were constructed during 2016-17. They suggested that we correct the writing on the toilets to show that they were built during 2017-18. They made the changes on the walls of over 30 toilets,” said M Selvakumar, another villager.After the villagers mounted pressure, some of them were given the Rs 2,000 obtained from them. But the wait for the subsidy continues.When contacted, block development officer (BDO) S Balamurugan said, “The toilets have asbestos roof. The union government no longer provides subsidy for toilets with asbestos sheet. We have asked the villagers to build concrete roofs. But they have not done it so far. Once the roofs are changed, steps would be taken to distribute the subsidy amount.”However, activist K Muthukumaraswamy, who hails from Ichipatti, said the villagers were not informed about the concrete roof norm. “They have already spent thousands of rupees to construct the toilets and are in no position to build concrete roofs.”
