Man killed for paltry sum of Rs 200 in Araria district

PATNA: A 50-year-old man was killed for a paltry sum of Rs 200 in Araria district , close to Indo-Nepal border, on Sunday.Police said that a Mahadalit, Vinod Rishidev, was attacked by one Jharilal when he was returning home from his work. Vinod, a daily wager, reportedly owed Rs 200 to Jharilal, a resident of Jayaprakash Nagar under Araria Town police station. The delay in repayment of loan led to a verbal duel between Jharilal and Vinod, leading to the latter’s killing.Vinod was found in an unconscious state near a pond at Jayaprakash Nagar, a stone’s throw distance from the accused, Jharilal’s house. He was rushed to the sadar hospital where he succumbed to injuries. The deceased’s brother Satto Rishidev told police that Vinod was intercepted by Jharilal when he along with his elder brother was returning home. The two were engaged in a verbal duel when he left the spot for a nearby grocery shop.Vinod was later spotted lying unconscious at an isolated place. Araria Town police station SHO Atulesh Kumar Singh said the deceased’s body bore external injuries. “The postmortem report is awaited which will throw more light on the cause of death,” he added.Another local resident and Mahadalit Kailash Rishidev told police that Jharilal has criminal antecedents. “He has already served a jail term in robbery and theft cases. He often quarrelled with the residents and asked for money. Those who refused to oblige him were badly beaten up. Though the residents had complained against him on several occasions, no action was taken for the reason best known to the police officials,” Kailash said.Araria sub-divisional police officer (SDPO) Devendra Singh on Monday visited the spot and inquired about the shocking incident. He directed the investigating officer (IO) of the case to nab the culprit at the earliest failing which disciplinary action would be taken against him. The deceased’s brother Satto Rishidev also apprehended threat to his life from Jharilal, who is still at large.He alleged that his brother was being harassed by Jharilal despite the fact that he had returned the loan. “ On Sunday, he had asked Vinod to organize a feast for him and his associates which he denied. Infuriated over it, he attacked his brother leading to his death,” Satto said, adding, “We want action against the culprit. Now we will also not sit idle if justice is not delivered to the family.”
