BJP spreading rumours about Bengal violence, says Mamata

(MENAFN- Gulf Times) West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee yesterday alleged that the Bharatiya Janata Party was spreading rumours about violence in the state accused the saffron party of plotting a conspiracy to topple her government.

'There is no point sending me behind bars. If the BJP thinks it can stop me from opposing them by shutting my mouth and plotting a conspiracy to topple my government, it must know an injured tiger is more dangerous than a dead one, Banerjee said in Kolkata.

She alleged that her Trinamool Congress (TMC) leaders have been threatened in the name of Enforcement Directorate (ED) and Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI).

The chief minister said her government in the state was elected by the people and the next assembly elections would be conducted after two years as scheduled.

'Our state is the best. Our performance was the best at the all India level. Rumours about violence in West Bengal have been spread through social media to defame Bengal. There were two-three post-poll incidents due to the BJP, she said at the state Secretariat, Nabanna.

Police said political violence in 24 Parganas' Sandeshkhali district on Saturday claimed the lives of three political workers - two from the BJP and one from TMC. The two parties, however, claim at least seven deaths.

The chief minister said: 'They are also telling lies about the number of deaths. Two (BJP) persons died (in Sandeshkhali), but they claimed five deaths. They also claim that three of their supporters were missing without mentioning details of their identities.

Banerjee alleged the BJP-led central government had issued an advisory to the state in order to prevent her from 'exposing the BJP's game plan in the recently concluded Lok Sabha elections. She claimed that many institutions of democracy had already 'sold out.

Commenting on the general election results in which the TMC bagged 22 Lok Sabha seats, 12 less than in 2014, Banerjee reiterated her doubts on electronic voting machines (EVMs).

'Would you believe that the CPM transferred all its votes (in favour of the BJP)? Can anyone control all the votes? The Election Commission should look into it. I have heard that the CPM got no votes in two booths in Siliguri. Which means even their polling agents did not vote for the party. Is it an outcome of pre-planned programming? Banerjee wondered.

Train services were disrupted and life was affected in Basirhat sub-division yesterday due to a 12-hour strike called by the BJP to protest against the killing of its party workers in Sandeshkhali. The BJP is also observing a ‘Black Day' across the state.

Train services were disrupted in the Sealdah-Hasnabad division as BJP workers squatted on rail tracks at Bhyabla station in North 24 Parganas district and at South 24 Parganas' Taldi railway station.

Markets largely remained shut. While state-owned buses ran, most private buses and auto-rickshaws were off the roads. In a bid to block roads at Nimcha, BJP supporters burnt tyres and stopped vehicles on the Basanti highway.

'The law and order situation has been under control. The strike has affected life partially, police said.

In New Delhi, West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi met Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah yesterday amid the continuing violence in the state.

'I have met the prime minister and the home minister. It was a courtesy call. I informed them about the general situation in the state, Tripathi told reporters after the meetings.

The governor first called on Modi at his residence, and then met Shah for some 20 minutes at the North Block.

Talking to the reporters earlier in the day, Tripathi said his meetings were pre-scheduled.

'I couldn't wish him personally on the swearing-in day, hence this is a courtesy visit, said the governor whose tenure ends on July 23.

Meanwhile, BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya accused Banerjee and her nephew of being behind the 'anarchy and violence in the state.

He said though the central government hadn't interfered in the governance of the state, it may think about imposing President's Rule there if the violence, which began before the general elections, doesn't end.

MENAFN1006201900670000ID1098627852
