Ending suspense, 2010 IAS topper Shah Faesal decides to go solo in politics

Ending suspense, 2010 IAS topper Shah Faesal, who recently quit services in protest against killings and intolerance, has decided to chart "independent political journey" and "stand up for the poor, marginalised and dispossessed" in Jammu and Kashmir.

Speculations were earlier rife that Faesal might join Omar Abdullah's National Conference and contest forthcoming Lok Sabha polls from Baramulla constituency.



"I had never imagined that my small act of defiance to highlight political deadlock in Jammu and Kashmir would evoke such a response across the world. I had never thought that my dream of clean politics and corruption-free administration in J&K would take the shape of a public movement. Respecting the public sentiment, I have decided to chart my independent political journey", Faesal said in Facebook post.



On January 9, the 2010 IAS topper decided to call it a day to protest "unabated killings in Kashmir, lack of any sincere reach-out from the Centre and the marginalisation of Indian Muslims at the hands of Hindutva forces". Later he called for re-imagining the mainstream politics and clarified that he would be representing the sentiment as per the narrative of the people once he joins the politics.



"And now in this new phase of public service, my mission is to support the true cause of humanity, stand up for the poor, marginalised and dispossessed and speak up for injustices, wherever in this world, irrespective of caste, colour, region, and religion. I imagine a politics where youth can lead the change and take charge of their future; I wish to partner with a new generation of young leaders who can stand up for human rights, environment, free speech and rule of law," he said.



Coming from a highly respected and educated family, Faesal suffered a personal tragedy when his father Ghulam Rasool Shah, a revered school teacher, was gunned down by unidentified militants in 2002. Faesal, hailing from remote Sogam-Lolaab in the border district of Kupwara, later migrated to Srinagar where he passed his MBBS from Sher-e-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences Medical College.

Spelling out his plans, Faesal said his idea was to seek help from the people of India, build alliances with the Indian civil society and intellectual class to humanize the narrative around Kashmir conflict so that lasting peace can be achieved in J&K.



Seemingly feeling the need for resources, Faesal decided to adopt the donation model to seek funding from people for his political sojourn.



"This is a people's movement and it will be funded by the people. People are the only agency who will help this succeed. Believe in me, be patient with me in this long and difficult journey and donate for this cause," he said.
