Moderate to Heavy Rain Likely over Kerala, Goa, Coastal Karnataka and Maharashtra

Here’s our latest weather outlook for India

Tuesday

According to the India Meteorological Department (IMD), Northern Limit Monsoon (NLM) has further advanced into the most parts of Kerala and some parts of Tamil Nadu. IMD also announced that some parts of northeastern India such as Mizoram and Manipur has finally been onset.

A cyclonic storm ‘Vayu’ is located over 420 km southwest of Ratnagiri and it is progressing northward at the speed of 11kph. According to The Weather Channel (TWC), the cyclone will intensify into a severe cyclonic storm by Tuesday noon.

Moderate to heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over Kerala, coastal Karnataka, Goa, coastal Maharashtra, Sub-Himalayan West Bengal, Meghalaya, and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.

Southerly winds feeding into the instability of a cyclonic circulation over Bangladesh and West Bengal is likely to bring locally heavy rain, thunderstorms, lightning and gusty winds to the eastern and the northeastern states. Scattered rain and thunderstorms are likely over Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, and Bihar. Snow may mix at the higher reaches of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.

Moving to northern India, a fresh western disturbance (WD) is currently located over Jammu and Kashmir. Also, a cyclonic circulation induced by WD over Pakistan may trigger dust storm over Delhi and NCR.

Scattered snow or rain and thunderstorms is likely over Jammu & Kashmir. Besides, isolated snow or rain and thunderstorms is likely over Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Isolated rain and thunderstorms are also likely over Gangetic West Bengal, Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Gujarat.

Maximum temperatures of 45°C or more are likely over parts of Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, and Madhya Pradesh. Moreover, a few parts of Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu can possibly experience a maximum temperature of 40°C or more, on Tuesday.

Advertisement However, Heat wave conditions over many parts of Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh may ease gradually this week due to onshore winds.

Wednesday and Beyond

Cyclone ‘Vayu’ is expected to make an early landfall by Thursday morning near southwest coast of Gujarat at Diu. High waves of more than 6 metres are forecast along coastal Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat from Tuesday to Thursday. Heavy rainfall can be expected until 6:30 am on Thursday along the coast of Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, and Gujarat with accumulation of up to 150mm.

A cyclonic circulation continues to persist over Bangladesh and West Bengal. It is likely to bring moderate to heavy rain and thunderstorms over Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Andaman & Nicobar Islands. Scattered rain and thunderstorms are also likely over Arunachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Bihar, and Gujarat. Snow may mix in at the higher reaches of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim.

A prevailing WD will continue to bring scattered snow or rain and thunderstorms likely over Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh. Snow accumulation of 15-25 cm will be common. Moreover, a few parts of northern Jammu and Kashmir can possibly receive up to 150 cm of snow until Wednesday night. Snow will abate on Thursday.

Isolated snow or rain and thunderstorms are also likely over Uttarakhand, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Punjab, and Rajasthan.

Maximum temperatures of 45°C or more are likely over Odisha and Madhya Pradesh. While, maximum temperatures of 40°C or more can be expected over parts of Punjab, Chandigarh, Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu.

The air quality will be poor or very poor in northern, central, western, eastern, and northeastern India.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
