19-year-old gangster wanted in 15 murder cases nabbed

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Ropar, June 10

The district police nabbed notorious gangster Akshay Pehalwan, alias Kali, after a brief exchange of fire near Dhahan village here late last evening. Akshay is wanted by the Chandigarh, Delhi, Haryana and Rajasthan police in 15 cases of murder, besides 20 cases of robberies and extortion. He had joined the Lawrence Bishnoi gang two years ago.

The Haryana and Rajasthan police had announced a reward of Rs 4 lakh and Rs 10,000, respectively, for information leading to his arrest.

He along with other notorious gangsters Sampat Nehra and Ankit Bhadu had allegedly killed their rival Ajay Jaitpura in the court complex at Sadulpur town in Churu district of Rajasthan on January 17 last year. On May 28, he along withhis accomplices allegedly shot dead another history-sheeter Vinod Jat alias Jordan in Sriganganagar.

Ropar SSP Swapan Sharma said since the arrest of Bishnoi and Nehra and the death of Ankit Bhadu in an encounter with the Punjab police four months ago in Zirakpur, Pehalwan had been facing a shortage of arms as well as hideouts.

He had come here to get weapons from someone known to him and in search of new hideouts, when the district police, following a tip-off, intercepted him near Dhahan village. The gangster tried to flee the spot and while firing on the police ran towards fields. While running, he lost his footwear and his feet got injured due to wheat straw in the fields following which the police overpowered him, he said.

Notorious gangsters Dilpreet Singh Baba and Parminder Singh Pindri belong to the village from where Pehalwan was arrested. While Dilpreet is in jail after he was arrested in July last year, Pindri is on parole these days.

The SSP said 19-year-old Pehalwan had committed his first murder at his native Palra village in Sonepat district of Haryana. He was just 15 at that time. Soon, he along with few others killed a father-son duo. He was arrested and being a minor sent to a juvenile home for 18 months, where he met someone who later introduced him to Raju Basodi, a notorious gangster of Haryana, and started an extortion racket.

During the last two years, they joined Bishnoi gang who deputed them to extort money from people in the National Capital Region declaring them area commanders of his gang. Along with members of this gang, he committed four murders and six highway robberies. After being released from jail in March, 2017, he committed 10 highway robberies and looted nearly Rs 50 lakh.

The SSP said, “Akshay was planning to kill a person in Sonipat due to an old rivalry. He had already done a survey of the area to execute the killing. He visited Nurpurbedi area of Ropar district to arrange weapons and logistic support. Three pistols of .32 bore and ammunition have been recovered from his possession.”

First murder at 15
