Another death, Bengal on the brink

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Shubhadeep Choudhury

Tribune News Service

Kolkata, June 10

Political violence shows no sign of abating in West Bengal as yet another BJP supporter was killed today.

Samatul Dolui, said to be a BJP member from Chanulia village in Howrah, was beaten to death by alleged TMC workers for chanting "Jai Shri Ram". The murder follows the death of three persons — two from the BJP and one from TMC — in a clash at a village near Sandeshkhali in North 24 Parganah district on Saturday.

The Sandeshkhali murders had prompted the Union Home Ministry to issue an advisory to the state government expressing concern about the political clashes taking place after the Lok Sabha elections.

The clashes also figured in the discussion between West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi and Prime Minister Narendra Modi in New Delhi today. Later, Tripathi also met Home Minister Amit Shah and briefed him about the law and order in the state. Asked about the possibility of imposition of the President’s rule in the state, Tripathi said no such discussion was held during the meeting.

Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, however, claimed that Bengal was a land of peace. Talking to reporters after an administrative review meeting, Banerjee said there were some stray incidents of violence and the BJP was responsible for these. She also accused the BJP of exaggerating the figure of people killed in violence.

Mamata said the BJP had claimed that five persons went missing after the clash (in Sandeshkhali). What were the names and other details of those who purportedly went missing, she asked. Asked if Rohingyas from Myanmar were involved in the violence at Sandeshkhali as claimed by some quarters, Mamata said she had no such information.

On whether the issue of law and order figured in the administrative review meeting, the Chief Minister said police had been asked to take strong action against hooliganism. "Some OCs (Officers in charge) and some SIs are not doing their work properly. We are keeping a watch on them," the Chief Minister said.

“Like the central government, the state government too is an elected government. Election will take place here after two years. The LS elections have no relation with the Assembly elections,” she said.

Don’t play with fire

The Central Government is trying to engineer communal riots in West Bengal with the help of the BJP cadres. They should not play with fire. They should remember that an injured tigress is a dangerous animal. — Mamata Banerjee, West Bengal Chief minister
