Acid attack on tree

peepal tree

oldest and beautiful trees

By Iffath FathimaActivists and residents rescue the 110-yr-old tree which a property owner was trying to killWhen Lakshmi Poornima, a resident of Jaynagar 9th Block, spotted unusually big holes on anear her home, she suspected something amiss. But she did not know what to do or whom to approach for help. Her friend then asked her to approach Vijay Nishanth, widely known in environment circles as ‘tree doctor’. On being alerted, Nishanth rushed to the spot.When Nishanth inspected the tree, he noticed that altogether five holes were drilled — a deliberate act to kill the tree, said to be 110 years old. On closer inspection, he also found that acid was poured through the holes to kill the tree. “The drilling of holes must have happened recently. It was still reeking of acid. It’s an attempt to poison the tree slowly. It is quite ridiculous to see people use every method to kill trees in the city for purely personal gains,” said Nishanth.Residents allege this could be the handiwork of a person who stays close to the tree.“Earlier too, a man named Prakash had tried to prune its branches and residents warned him. It is one of thewe have in this locality. We definitely want to save it.The moment we saw the tree drilled with holes we knew it was Prakash, but he hasn’t come here from a long time to question him about it as he doesn’t reside here,” said Lakshmi.A Forest Officer from Jayanagar division also came to the spot to inspect the tree. “We will not tolerate such violations. Nobody can cut trees unless they have required permission from the jurisdictional tree officers. Many residents blame Prakash and we will talk to him. We will also file an FIR against him under violation of Preservation of Trees Act 1976,” the officer said.Nishanth then tried his best to undo the damage. “After cleaning up the holes, a coconut base was applied inside the holes. I also fixed the holes with Plaster of Paris. If left open, chances of fungal infection are huge. I am highly hopeful about its speedy recovery,” said the tree doctor.
