Mamata Banerjee hits out at Governor suggestion on President's rule, says plot to turn Bengal into Gujarat

Mamata Banerjee had said that it would be wrong to think that the TMC government in the state can be toppled easily. (Photo: ANI)

West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee has expressed her displeasure over state Governor Kesari Nath Tripathi presenting a report on the law and order situation in the state to Union Home Minister Amit Shah.

Amid spiralling post-poll violence in the state, West Bengal Governor Kesari Nath Tripathi met Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union minister Amit Shah in Delhi on Monday and apprised them of the situation in the state.

"I respect the post but not what he's saying about the post-poll casualties in Bengal," Mamata Banerjee said today at an event to unveil the statue and bust of Bengali social reformer Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar at a school in Kolkata.

Mamata Banerjee said that the state of West Bengal was being defamed. She urged people to come together to save the culture of Bengal.

"I respect the Governor but every post has its constitutional limit. Bengal is being defamed. If you want to save Bengal and its culture come together. A plan is being hatched to turn Bengal into Gujarat. Bengal is not Gujarat," said Mamata Banerjee.

She also accused the BJP of trying to impose Hindi on regional languages. "Every state has its own heritage and language. It's our India. But BJP will not decide the fate of the state," said Mamata Banerjee.

On her way to set up Vidyasagar's bust, Mamata Banerjee once again faced faint slogans of Jai Shree Ram from the school premises. She walked for an odd one kilometre along with ministers and intellectuals for setting up Vidyasagar's bust, which was being carried in a special car. Exactly 27 days ago, the bust of Vidyasagar, Bengali social reformer was vandalised during BJP chief Amit Shah's roadshow in Kolkata.

Earlier in the morning, the state police cordoned off the entire stretch of one kilometre and even the college premises was secured from early morning by barring college students and teachers from attending the programme.

Governor KN Tripathi had met Amit Shah yesterday and had given an update on the post-poll violence and the situation in Bengal, especially in the North 24 Parganas district, where two BJP local leaders were killed and one went missing.

To a question on whether the Centre was mulling Article 356 (President's rule) for West Bengal, Mamata Banerjee thundered that it would be wrong to assume that they are sitting idle wearing bangles.

Yesterday, too, Mamata Banerjee had said that it would be wrong to think that the TMC government in the state can be toppled easily.

Meanwhile, BJP leader Mukul Roy had said at a press conference that the BJP will not allow Mamata Banerjee to play a martyr and win the sympathy of the people. "The situation has reached such a state that the government will crumble on its own," he had said.
