Monsoon reaches NE, first Assam shower this week

GUWAHATI: The Southwest monsoon arrived on Monday, covering most parts of Mizoram and some parts of Manipur in the first leg.The India Meteorological Department (IMD) warned that heavy rain is very likely to occur at isolated places over Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura from Tuesday morning. The arrival of the monsoon in the region is likely to cause heavy rain in isolated places in Assam and Meghalaya from Wednesday onwards, the forecast said.Officials at the Guwahati-based Regional Meteorological Centre of the IMD said the advancement of the monsoon towards Assam may be delayed by a couple of days. Several areas in Assam have been reeling from hot and humid conditions over the last one week. But moderate rain, accompanied by thunder-showers is very likely to occur at many places over Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura on Tuesday. Arunachal Pradesh will also experience light to moderate rain in the next 24 hours."The Southwest monsoon will further advance to other northeastern states in the coming days. Climatologically, monsoon arrives in some parts of northeast on June 1 and covers the entire region by June 5. But this year, the arrival was delayed by about 10 days. Usually, it takes five days for the rains to cover the entire region. So it will take some more time before the rains cover the whole of the region," RMC deputy director general of meteorology Sanjay O'Neill Shaw told TOI.Met officials said, till the monsoon covers the entire region, mercury will keep going up. Assam recorded the highest temperature of 36.4 degree Celsius in Guwahati on Monday, followed by Agartala at 36.3 degree Celsius.The IMD evening weather bulletin on Monday stated that the SW monsoon has further advanced into the remaining parts of the south Arabian Sea and Lakshadweep, most parts of Kerala, some more parts of Tamil Nadu and Bay of Bengal, most parts of Mizoram and some parts of Manipur.Weathermen said the arrival of the monsoon is heartening for the region as most of the states here received deficit rainfall during the pre-monsoon season. Except for Assam and Meghalaya-the only two states in NE which received 2% and 9% rain above normal in the pre-monsoon season-the rest of the five states of Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura-experienced deficit rainfall in the pre-monsoon season.
