Triple murder shocks Patna: Businessman commits suicide after shooting wife, daughter; son critical

New Delhi:

A top textile trader with several showrooms and retail stores across Patna allegedly committed suicide after shooting his wife and daughter on Tuesday morning. His four-year-old son is critical and battling for life at a local hospital in Bihar state capital. According to initial probe, the businessman identified as Nishant Sarraf. The 38-year-old businessman, his wife Alka Sarraf (35) and daughter Ananya (1) were found dead in the plush home located in Patna’s Kidwai Nagar area on Tuesday morning. Son Ishant is the only surviving member. Doctors say he has suffered grievous injuries. The family had just returned home after a four-day trip. Sarraf owned a big store in Patna’s Khaitan Market.

IG Sunil Kumar told News Nation that a special team has reached the spot and investigating the matter. The police say that a licensed gun was used in the murder. At around 9 am, the other family members had opened the house using a master key had discovered the Sarrafs lying in a poll of blood.

According to a report by Dainik Jagran, Bollywood star Amisha Patel had come for the launch of Sarraf’s textile mega store in Khaitan Market. The family also owned some jewellery stores and shopping complexes in Patna. There are conflicting reports on exactly what happened on Tuesday morning. While one version says that the other family members used master key to open the house, another version says that neighbours had barged into the house after nobody opened the door. The police says that a suicide note ahs also been recovered from the spot, in which Nishant Sarraf has taken the responsibility of the extreme step.

There is yet another version in which the milk vendor, who came to house at around 8 am says he saw the all family members alive and well. The police is looking at all angles including role on any outsider or any kind of foul play. While Nishant and his family lived on third floor, his brother and other relatives lived on lower floors.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
