Bengal’s political violence is an oddity in India

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

Political violence has ebbed in much of India but not in Bengal. The past few days of bloodletting solidifies the perception of Bengal as the most politically restive state in India. Bengal’s history of political violence goes back decades, if not a century if we go back to the pre-Independence era. The many Bengal revolutionaries and the Chittagong armoury raid are fabled fixtures in our glorious national movement. Yet there is also the horrendous Direct Action Day that established the Muslim League as antithetical to the idea of India.

But political violence kept scripting fresh chapters in the post-Independence phase in Bengal. Partition, Naxalbari, the Congress brutality on the Left during Sidharth Shankar Ray’s tenure, CPM paying back Congress in the same coin, the conflicts with Trinamool Congress which culminated in CPM’s eclipse after the Singur-Nandigram violence, the violent takeover of CPM party offices by TMC and now the rise of BJP which is seeing two evenly matched outfits fight pitched battles—there is no end in sight to Bengal’s tryst with violence.

In other parts of India, much has changed. Bihar’s ugly caste violence has receded. Maoists who infiltrated into the tribal heartland are being marginalised. The North-East is much more peaceful today with the separatist insurgencies losing popular support.

In contrast, the use of violence as a political tool has rarely been censured by the Bengal electorate. It is as though the citizens have been inured to the presence of violence in their lives. In contrast, look at the left bastion, Kerala where CPM lost all the seats in the Malabar region due to voter anger over the killing of two Youth Congress workers. CPM has repeatedly paid a price for violence, forcing it to significantly eschew such tactics in Kerala. But in Bengal,BJP’s anti-immigrant rhetoric and Mamata’s provocative slogans that implicitly talk of smothering BJP are creating fresh cycles of violence that threaten to engulf the state.

With two years left in power, TMC must decide whether it wants to govern or politick. BJP has a 3% voteshare deficit and it can easily bridge the gap given Mamata Banerjee’s explosive temper, undemocratic impulses and inability to rein in cadres. But irrespective of who takes power, what is striking is the use of cadre as cannon fodder to feed the violence that has no end in sight.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
