Lance Naik Nazir Ahmad Wani, a terrorist-turned-soldier, to be awarded Ashok Chakra posthumously

Lance Naik Nazir Ahmad Wani | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi/Srinagar: Lance Naik Nazir Ahmad Wani will be awarded India’s highest peacetime gallantry award, the Ashok Chakra, posthumously at this year’s Republic Day Parade, news agency ANI reported quoting sources. Wani was once a terrorist but had later turned in and joined the 162 Battalion of the Territorial Army in Jammu and Kashmir. Wani had laid down his life during an anti-terror operation in South Kashmir’s Shopian in November last year. He had received the Sena medal twice during his lifetime.

Wani, who was a native of Ashmuji village in Kulgam, is being awarded the Ashok Chakra for killing two terrorists in the operation and also helping in the evacuation of an injured jawan. A total of six terrorists were killed in the incident.

“Lance Naik Nazir Ahmad Wani exhibited the most conspicuous gallantry in personality eliminating two terrorists and assisting in the evacuation of his wounded colleagues and made supreme sacrifice in the highest traditions of the Indian Army,” the President’s Secretariat said in a press release, as per the Indian Express.

Wani, who was operating as a terrorist, had surrendered before the Army in Kashmir and went on to join counter-insurgency operations. He was also recognised as a highly-decorated soldier. He had given up militancy after realising that violence was futile.

When Wani was martyred, his battalion was attached with the 34 Rashtriya Rifles. The unit had received a tip-off about the presence of six heavily-armed terrorists at Batagund village. Wani and his unit were given the responsibility to block the likely escape path of the ultras.

“Sensing danger, the terrorists attempted breaching the inner cordon, firing indiscriminately and lobbing grenades. Undeterred by the situation, Wani held ground and eliminated one terrorist in a fierce exchange at close range,” the release said.

The 38-year-old then moved to a nearby house from where another terrorist was engaging the forces. The terrorist tried to escape but Wani grabbed him and eliminated him in hand-to-hand combat. Wani was injured in the operation and later succumbed to his injuries at a hospital.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
