ACB smells political patronage in J&K Bank fraud case, raids continue

SRINAGAR: The investigation by the state Anti-Corruption Bureau into the Jammu and Kashmir bank case has seen the seizure of about 300 files pertaining to allegations of illegal and fraudulent appointments that were also seen to be linked to political patronage when the PDP-led government was in office.The decisions under scrutiny relate to Parvez Ahmad Negroo 's tenure as J&K Bank chairman and are being probed under the Prevention of Corruption Act as per an FIR registered on June 8. Also in focus are some of the board directors of the bank, which is seen to comprise persons who were close to the PDP dispensation.The ACB team that raided the bank premises on Sunday sealed the HR department and chairman's office on the first day. On Tuesday, the team raided the bank headquarters to get some more information regarding alleged misuse of official position by sacked chairman Parvez Ahmad .All the action followed removal of Negroo who was appointed in October 2016. It is understood that a large number of persons related to PDP workers were appointed without following due procedure .According to the official sources, the bank's affairs are also being scanned with regard to loans of around Rs 10 crore that were given to relatives of very senior PDP leaders. A loan was granted to Showkat Ahmad, brother-in-law of former CM Mehbooba Mufti. Loans were granted to Sharief Travels and Sharief Cargo in Chennai and some Valley-based businessmen on inadequate mortgage .The ACB, headed by director Anand Jain, conducted raids in presence of top bureaucrats, including state home commissioner and finance commissioner. The bank had suffered losses and the state government invested Rs 532 crore and retained 60% shares. Earlier the state government had 51% stakes in the bank, sources said.In a significant decision, Jammu and Kashmir Bank Limited was recently designated as a PSU. The provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Right to Information Act, 2009 were made applicable and the bank now has to adhere to CVC guidelines, an official statement said.As the state is a major shareholder in the J&K Bank Ltd, a need was felt that it should have a character of a PSU which is subject to general supervision and access for enhanced transparency.However, the employees' union of the bank as also the bank management tried to resist the move. In the background of the latest developments, the state administration is likely to implement the earlier order and bring the bank under purview of the RTI Act and appoint senior most official of the bank as managing director.
