Big breakthrough! Maharashtra Police arrest Maoist couple responsible for death of 150 cops in last 20 years

The Maoist couple is said to be responsible for several attacks on security forces since 1994 | Screengrab from video | Photo Credit: Times Now

Mumbai: The Maharashtra Police have arrested senior Maoist cadre Kiran Kumar alias Kiran dada and his wife Alluri Krishna Kumari alias Narmadaakko, who are responsible for the death of almost 150 policemen in the last 20 years. The couple was arrested from Hyderabad.

The Maharashtra Police conducted the operation to catch the most wanted Maoist couple, who had Rs 20 lakh reward each on them, on Sunday. The 'deadly' couple is said to be responsible for several attacks on security forces since 1994.

It is being said that the couple was the mastermind of the landmine blast, which took place on May 1 in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli. Fifteen police commandos and a civilian were killed in the attack. They are also believed to have orchestrated the April 9 deadly attack in which BJP MLA Bhima Mandavi and four police personnel were killed in Chhattisgarh's Dantewada.

On Tuesday, a Telangana Special Intelligence Bureau team interrogated both the CPI (Maoist) State Committee members. Reports, though not confirmed, suggest that the couple has now been brought to Maharashtra’s Gadchiroli.

Krishna Kumari (aged about 60) hails from Gudivada in Andhra Pradesh’s Krishna district. She had been in the wind for the last 22 years.

Said to be highly-educated Maoist leader, Krishna had been the head of the operations in the Gadchiroli division of CPI (Maoist) for over 10 years. However, due to her worsening health condition, she was relieved of her task in Gadchiroli around eight months ago.

Her husband Kiran Kumar is a member of CPI (Maoist)’s Dandakaranya Special Zonal Committee (DKSZC). The 57-year-old native of Vijayawada reportedly supervised Prabhat magazine, a political organ of Maoist’s DKSZC. He also took care of press, propaganda unit, and education.
