Pakistan wants to hold talks with India only to score ‘global brownie points’, writes Husain Haqqani

Pakistan PM Imran Khan | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Former Pakistani ambassador to Sri Lanka and the United States, Husain Haqqani in his recent article has said that Imran Khan’s appeal to India for peace talks is eyewash only to earn “global brownie points.”

This comes after the Ministry of External Affairs clarified that there won’t be any meeting between PM Modi and his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan on the sidelines of Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) summit set to held in Bishkek this week.

Writing for The Print Haqqani further says, "Based on the history of Indo-Pakistan relations, Modi has good reason to think that Pakistan tends to engage in talks with India for global respectability."

PM Modi will hold bilateral meetings with Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Xi Jinping during the SCO summit.

Writing a letter to PM Modi, Khan congratulated him for the massive mandate and said that Islamabad wants to settle all the disputes with New Delhi including Kashmir. He also stressed that talks between both the countries were the only solution to combat poverty and to work for regional development.

Calling for peace and stability in the South Asian region Khan said it was important for the two nations to move forward.

Looking at the history of bilateral ties between both the countries one can safely say that Islamabad in the guise of holding talks with India has not done anything to curb terrorism.

After the Tashkent declaration of January 1966, brokered by the Soviet Union to resolve the 1965 Indo-Pakistani War, both the countries went to war over atrocities committed by the Pakistani Army in Bangladesh which was then known as East Pakistan. Bangladesh was liberated and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman served as the first President of Bangladesh.

After 1971, Kargil War broke out between the two neighbours in May 1999.

It should also be remembered that before Kargil, then-PM Atal Bihari Vajpayee reached out to Pakistan through Lahore bus yatra but this bilateral warmth in ties was short lived as Pakistani soldiers disguised as Kashmiri terrorists occupied positions on the Indian side of the LOC just two months after Vajpayee's visit.

From 2001 Parliament attacks to Pulwama attacks, history is replete with examples of political grandstanding by Pakistan which shows that it cannot be trusted as the power in the country resides in the all-powerful Army, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and not the PM.
