Drama at Delhi Jal Board office; BJP leaders stage protest over water paucity, raise anti-Kejriwal slogans

BJP leaders staged protest outside DJB office in New Delhi | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leaders on Wednesday gheraoed the Delhi Jal Board CEO office in Jhandelwalan in the national capital, agitating over the water scarcity in the city.

BJP MP Vijay Goel along with other BJP leaders including MLA OP Sharma and former Mayor Ravinder Gupta staged a protest outside the DJB CEO’s office in New Delhi today. The protesters also raised anti-Arvind Kejriwal slogans.

The BJP leaders launched the protest outside the Delhi Jal Board office after the officials failed to give them surety of continuous water supply in the region as well as did not provide reasons for water paucity. The saffron party leaders had also sat on a dharna outside the DJB office on Tuesday as well.

At present, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal holds the Water portfolio in the Aam Aadmi Party government. The protestors threatened that they might continue the sit-in at the DJB CEO office if the DJB officials did not provide a deadline to fix the water-related problems in the city.

The Kejriwal government in the national capital has been under fire from all political parties over the issue of water scarcity in the region. On Tuesday, BJP MP Manoj Tiwari wrote a letter to the Delhi CM alleging that power outages and acute water crisis were crippling the city.

In his letter, Tiwari wrote, “With Delhi temperature touching 48 degree Celsius, it is appalling to learn that the government led by you does not have the summer action plan in place till date. The government is clueless about power arrangements to meet the ever-growing electricity demand of the city which is constantly over the 7000 MW mark."

He added, “It is not just the power cuts but also severe water crisis that speaks volumes of your government's failure to address the basic needs of Delhiites. People, particularly women, are forced to stand in queues for 7-8 hours every day to fill their buckets from water tankers."

On the other hand, AAP's national spokesperson Raghav Chadha dismissed Tiwari's allegations, calling them "baseless and factually incorrect."

Meanwhile, DJB vice-chairman Dinesh Mohania has denied that Delhi was facing a water crisis and said that that water was being produced at full capacity at all treatment plants. He said, "There is no water crisis in Delhi. There might have been some issues in supply due to exceptionally high-temperature yesterday, which will be resolved soon."

On the other hand, former Delhi CM and Delhi Congress chief Sheila Dikshit is scheduled to meet Kejriwal today to discuss the power and water issues of the city.
