Ankit Saxena murder: Kin await compensation from AAP; 'punished for promoting communal harmony?’ asks father

Ankit Saxena was murdered by her Muslim girlfriend's family in February 2018 in New Delhi | Photo Credit: Facebook

New Delhi: In a case of disappointing lack of apathy, the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) government has till now not paid the compensation amount promised to the family of Ankit Saxena, who was murdered in an 'honour killing' case in Delhi last year, his father has claimed.

The victim's father, Yashpal Saxena, has alleged that the family was yet to receive Rs 5 lakh that the Arvind Kejriwal government had promised as compensation after the killing of 23-year-old Anikt Saxena had sparked outrage.

"We have yet not received any compensation. We repeatedly reminded the Delhi government, but they did not pay heed to it. The government has not fulfilled its promise,” a dejected Saxena told news agency ANI.

Ankit was bludgeoned to death by the family of his Muslim girlfriend in broad daylight in the national capital in February last year. The murder had taken a communal angle, pitting the two communities against each other.

However, Yashpal Saxena had emerged as a beacon of Hindu-Muslim unity after his son’s murder, requesting both sides to not indulge in a communal fight over the issue.

Four months after his only son’s murder, 60-year-old Yashpal had organised an Iftar feast with his Hindu, Muslim and Sikh neighbours during the holy month of Ramzan, when Muslims observe day-long fasts for 30 days.

"Am I not being compensated because I did not allow the incident to become communal? I wanted love and harmony to prevail between the two communities. Am I being punished for it?” Yashpal questioned.

Disappointed with the neglect shown to his family by the government, Saxena asked, "Would the rift between the two communities have resulted in early compensation?"

In 2018, the police had registered a case under sections 302 (murder), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt) and 34 (common intention) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against Akbar Ali, the father of the victim's girlfriend, mother Shahnaaz, a juvenile younger brother and uncle Mohammad Salim.

In its charge sheet, the Delhi Police had alleged that the murder was “premeditated.”


