Chandrayaan-2: ISRO unveils first photos at Bengaluru facility ahead of mission launch

Chandrayaan-1 | Image credit: ISRO]

India's ambitious space mission to land a rover on Moon, Chandrayaan-2, is scheduled to launch between July 9 and July 16 from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota. And ahead of its launch, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) has finally unveiled the launch vehicle of the lunar mission today.

The Chandrayaan-2 mission will see indigenously made GSLV Mk III carry three modules into space -- an orbiter, a lander and a rover. The lander has been named Vikram while the rover is called Pragyan. Rover Pragyan will be housed inside lander Vikram and will be deployed after Vikram lands on the lunar surface.

Also read: Chandrayaan-2 will look for specific minerals on Moon: Former ISRO chairman G Madhavan Nair

As per the information revealed by ISRO, the orbiter is scheduled to orbit the moon while on the mission and then perform a soft landing at a site close to the lunar South Pole. Later when it reaches the surface, the six-wheeled Pragyan is planned to be deployed on the Moon's surface where it is expected to carry out experiments -- all the while being controlled by ISRO scientists back at Earth.

Also read: Chandrayaan-2 to be launched in July with 13 payloads, including one from NASA: Details here

Interestingly, this is the second time in 10 years that India is planning to send a lunar mission into space. Chandrayaan-2 comes 10 years after ISRO launched Chandrayaan-1 in 2009. Although, unlike Chandrayan-2, the first mission didn't include a rover. Chandrayaan-1 was sent to the moon only equipped with an orbiter and an 'impactor' that crashed into the Moon's surface near the South Pole.

Pictures of the modules of India's second lunar mission Chandrayaan-2 that is scheduled to be launched between July 9 and 16. pic.twitter.com/9wLXQruJWX — ANI (@ANI) June 12, 2019

Apart from taking forward India's lunar mission, Chandrayaan-2 would also be carrying payloads from international space agencies. From what is known, Chandrayaan-w will carry 13 payloads and one passive experiment from American space agency NASA. ISRO had also revealed earlier that eight payloads on Orbiter, three on lander and two on Rover and one passive experiment from NASA would be carried on Chandrayaan-2.
