YS Jagan Attack Case: NIA Submits Final Chargesheet

Amaravati: The National Investigation Agency (NIA) team investigating the murder attempt on Leader of the Opposition in Andhra Pradesh legislative assembly and YSR Congress party president, YS Jagan Mohan Reddy, at Visakhapatnam airport on October 25, 2018 submitted its final chargesheet to the NIA Special Court on Wednesday. The NIA officials also submitted several documents to the court, it is learnt. The NIA Special Public Prosecutor is learnt to have told the presiding judge that more evidence would be submitted after further inquiry.

The court postponed further hearing on two memos submitted by the accused Srinivasa Rao's advocates to Friday, 25th. The attacker's lawyers submitted a memo stating that the NIA had in its possession a 22 page letter written by the accused, Srinivasa Rao and wanted it to be given to them, it is learnt. They sought court orders to this effect. They further told the NIA court that they were not informed. They submitted a separate memo stating that interrogation conducted in their absence should be taken into account, it is said.

The NIA Special Public Prosecutor reportedly submitted to the Court that the investigating agency was conducting the questioning as per its directions and that the accusations of the advocates representing the attacker were baseless. The NIA team kept the advocate representing the accused, Saleem informed on exactly when and where he was being taken, the time and location of the questioning, among other details, on a regular basis. The NIA Special Public Prosecutor is also learnt to have submitted screen shots to the Court to this effect.

The NIA Special Court adjourned further hearing in this matter to Friday, 25th. Meanwhile, advocates representing Srinivasa Rao submitted another memo seeking access to documents on which the accused is being prosecuted claiming that neither NIA nor SIT, are connducting an impartial probe into this case. The Court directed the NIA Public Prosecutor to submit his response to this plea.

Also Read: NIA Grills Vizag Airport Restaurant Owner Harshavardhan
