NRS Hospital patients left in lurch as junior doctors strike work

NRS Hospital patients left in lurch as junior doctors strike work Services hit at NRS hospital

| Calcutta | Published 11.06.19, 11:56 PM

Hundreds of patients were denied treatment as the emergency ward and the out-patient department of NRS hospital remained shut on Tuesday as junior doctors went on a ceasework. Since morning, agitating junior doctors kept one of the two gates along APC Road closed. They did not allow anyone to enter the hospital through the gate and told everyone to use the gate near the emergency ward. In the afternoon, they shut the second gate along APC Road for more than an hour.

Advertisement

Several relatives of patients admitted to the hospital said only those with cards were allowed to enter the premises. Some said they had food for patients with them. Many said pathology and radiology tests were not conducted at the OPD throughout the day. Services were hit because junior doctors form the backbone of hospitals, family members of patients admitted to the hospital said. Since morning, health department officials, minister of state for health Chandrima Bhattacharya and city police commissioner Anuj Sharma, along with officers, visited the hospital at various times. A large police contingent, including senior officers, remained present in the hospital throughout the day.

Prodyut Banerjee, 68, had taken a 3.30am train from Diamond Harbour to reach NRS hospital for some blood tests. “My first test was done at 10.45am when the men in the pathological department were still working,” he said. “Suddenly some doctors came and asked them to stop all operations.” Banerjee said he was diabetic and had cardiac ailments. He stood outside the pathological test counters around noon when everything was shut. “No one is even making an announcement that they will not work today,” he said. Patients undergoing treatment in the wards were partially hit. Balikanta Pal, 70, admitted to the Fraser ward with a hip fracture, was supposed to undergo an X-ray on Tuesday. “He underwent surgery on Monday. There were no doctors in the ward today. Only nurses looked after him. The X-ray could not be done,” Manikul Islam, a relative, said.

Natabar Naik, whose son Soumen is admitted to the UNB Building, said doctors had attended to his son. “There were doctors in the ward,” he said. As the agitation continued, health department officials and police held several rounds of meetings with the agitating doctors and the NRS authorities. “We will take necessary measures to increase security in the hospital. We have requested the doctors to withdraw their ceasework,” minister Bhattacharya said while leaving the hospital in the afternoon. Pradip Mitra, the director of medical education in Bengal, said he had appealed to the junior doctors of NRS to send representatives to Swasthya Bhavan on Wednesday to discuss the matter with officials.
