How an intern doctor's fractured skull has Kolkata up in arms as BJP blames Trinamool

Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, a junior doctor at the NRS Medical College, received deep injuries on his skull during the clashes. (Image: Facebook)

Doctors and medical professionals in Kolkata have launched a massive protest after an intern doctor at a government medical college and hospital in the city was beaten up and left with a fractured skull over the death of a 75-year-old patient.

On Monday night, Mohammed Shahid, a resident of Tangra, passed away at the NRS Medical College and Hospital. Soon after, family members of the deceased reached the hospital around 11 pm and clashed with the junior doctors on duty.

The violent clashes turned the hospital premises into a battleground on Monday night and the morning after as doctors claimed that over 200 people landed up at the facility.

Family members of the deceased patient were upset over his death and alleged that Shahid died due to medical negligence. They also said that the body was not handed over to them on time.

Two junior doctors, who were facing protests by the patient's family, were left injured in the violent clashes.

Courtesy: Getty Images

Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, one of the two doctors, suffered a skull fracture when a brick hurled by the protesters landed on his head. Medical reports suggest Mukopadhyay suffered a deep injury on his head but is stable at the moment.

"His brain showed no abnormality and repeat CT scan of the brain showed no further deterioration," the hospital said in a statement late on Tuesday night.

Mukhopadhyay underwent a small surgery for wound debridement and elevation of frontal depressed fracture, it said, adding that his condition was "fine".

Meanwhile, Bengal BJP leader Mukul Roy said members of a "particular community" are behind the attack on the doctors and these people are workers of the Trinamool Congress, reported The Telegraph. The report quoted Mukul Roy as blaming Trinamool for the attack.

At least 50 junior doctors shut the gates of the NRS hospital on Tuesday to protest the assault on doctors and demanded that West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee intervenes in the matter and provides security to the medical professionals.

Protests have now entered the second day and patients have been left in the lurch as junior doctors continue with the strike.

Speaking to ANI, a patient waiting outside the NRS hospital said, "My patient is not receiving any treatment for the last three days. I am not allowed to enter the hospital."

On Tuesday, the agitation of junior doctors at the NRS Medical College and Hospital later spread to other medical colleges and hospital in the city, leading to disruption of regular services.

All departments, including pathological laboratories, out-patient department stopped working following the agitation of the junior doctors.

West Bengal Medical Council (WBMC) president and Trinamool Congress MLA Nirmal Maji told PTI officials were trying to persuade the doctors to resume work.

(With PTI inputs)
