Mumbai: ‘Friend’ dices man into small pieces over not paying back loan

All the body parts of the deceased are yet to be recovered (Representative image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: After chopped off human body parts were found in a septic tank in Virar on Tuesday, Arnala police arrested a 42-year-old man for the brutal murder. The incident was reported from Bachraj Paradise residential building in Virar of Palghar district of Maharashtra on Tuesday. The accused man, who killed his friend for non-repayment of a loan, would be produced in Vasai court.

Jayant Bajbale, Deputy Superintendent of Police (Dy SP) said that the police found fingers and a ring in the tank. To initiate the investigation, the police checked the empty flats in the building. Some clues were found in one of those flats. When the owner of the flat was called for interrogation, he confessed to having committed the crime, Bajbale said.

A 42 yr old man murdered his friend & chopped his body parts into a hundred pieces over non repayment of loan in #Mumbai. The accused has now been arrested & will be produced in Vasai Court. pic.twitter.com/en04WHPyIM — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) January 24, 2019

The accused told the police that the victim was his friend and he had taken a loan of Rs 1 lakh from him. When his friend failed to repay the borrowed money, the accused brutally murdered him and chopped off his body parts before them disposing of. The accused man also revealed the deceased's identity to the police.

The residents had complained of a foul smell and choked washrooms after which sanitation workers were called to clean the septic tank. The cleaning of the duct by the labourers led to the gruesome discovery on Tuesday.

Further investigation revealed that a missing complaint of the deceased had been filed on at Naya Nagar police station on January 20. A murder case has been filed against the accused at Arnala police station. All the body parts of the deceased are yet to be recovered.

Also Read: NOIDA SHOCKER! Intoxicated husband cuts off wife's ear lobes on being denied money for alcohol

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
