Digvijaya, Scindia's supporters approached me to oust Kamal Nath govt, claims BJP’s Kailash Vijayvargiya

File picture: BJP national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya | Photo Credit: IANS

Indore: In a shocking claim, BJP national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya on Wednesday alleged that the supporters of senior Congress leaders have approached him to oust Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath-led state government.

While addressing farmers’ agitation rally in Indore, Vijayvargiya alleged: “The representatives of Digvijaya Singh, Jyotiaditya Scindia and Suresh Pachouri approached me and said that Kailash ji the government will fall if you wish. I said I do not want to topple the government.”

“Scindia ji's supporters said that they want to bring down the government run by a liar like Kamal Nath. He is a fraudster, they said. We are with you. Then Suresh Pachouri's people approached me to topple the government...," the BJP leader added.

Vijayvargiya further slammed Kamal Nath for purportedly supporting corruption and attempting to promote his son as the next leader.

"Kamal Nath has caused harm to himself by promoting his son Nakul Nath and ignoring other leaders. All the OSDs of Kamal Nath have note counting machines. One of the police officials narrated his ordeal and said that he has given Rs 25 lakh for his transfer but was denied transfer as the government got another official who was willing to pay Rs 50 lakh," news agency ANI mentioned Vijayvargiya as saying.

Elaborating on BJP's performance in West Bengal, Vijayvargiya said that the BJP has destroyed the “fort” of Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee.

"I had told Amit Shah that for expansion in Bengal, BJP will need 15 years. However, under the leadership of Amit Shah and Prime Minister Narendra Modi, we won the battle only in five years. We have destroyed the fort of Mamata Banerjee."

The BJP won 18 out of 42 Lok Sabha seats in West Bengal. In the 2014 general elections, the party had won just two seats.
