West Bengal Governor calls all-party meet after BJP march in Kolkata over post-poll violence turns rowdy

In a major retaliation to the post-poll violence allegedly instigated by Trinamool Congress (TMC), the BJP workers were protesting on Kolkata streets to denounce the killing of several BJP workers. The protest, however, resulted in chaos as the police had to deploy water cannons and tear gas to control the situation.

The Trinamool Congress versus BJP face off doesn’t seem to end anytime soon as the latter has taken to streets to protest against post-poll violence allegedly propagated by TMC.

This has come after several BJP workers were allegedly mobbed and killed at the hands of TMC workers post the result of 2019 Lok Sabha elections were announced.

The BJP this general election won 18 of 40 seats in West Bengal which was an unprecedented number given the dominance of TMC in the state. Meanwhile, amid escalating animosity between both the parties, West Bengal Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi has called for an all-party meeting tomorrow at Raj Bhavan

The BJP workers have been protesting on streets against West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee since yesterday but the situation went out of hands this morning when the same people jammed the police station as well. The outrage, in fact, left Police, battling to control the crowd. Water cannons were deployed to halt the furious party workers while simultaneously the police also resorted to shelling tear gas.

On Monday, BJP workers had observed Black Day to protest against the killing of their party men in West Bengal and also called a 12 hour Bandh (strike) in Basirhat district where the attacks on BJP workers happened.

The BJP wanted to pay last respects to their party workers by bringing their mortal remains to Kolkata on Monday but were stopped by the police authorities midway.

The Bengal BJP had approached home minister Amit Shah, regarding the killing of their three party workers by Trinamool Congress (TMC) workers in the North 24 Parganas. Political violence in Bengal took a massive turn when hundreds of agitated workers gathered at the spot and preparations had started for a funeral pyre. But the party ultimately reversed its decision midway, announcing a series of protests, including a statewide “Black Day”

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
