Mumbai: Man's decomposed, mutilated body found in tank; investigation underway

Mumbai: In a shocking incident, an unidentified man's chopped off body parts were found inside a tank of a residential building on Tuesday. The incident was reported from 'C' wing of Bachraj Paradise Evershine Avenue in Global City in Virar of Palghar district of Maharashtra. The police is probing the case.

Investigation so far has revealed that the man was killed about five to six ago. The body was found in a completely decomposed form. The police is also trying to verify the identity of the deceased man. After residents of the building complained of choked washrooms, sanitation workers entered the tank and found the body parts floating in it.

Also Read: WATCH - Chennai on high alert after 5 sensational murders in 24 hour

When the sanitation workers informed the residents of the gruesome discovery, they immediately called up the police who rushed to the spot. The police seized the chopped off tiny body parts after collecting them in plastic bags, according to a report in The Times of India. On searching the area around the society for evidence, the cops found more body parts, including that of a thumb and a finger with a ring, in a nullah behind the residential society. It is suspected that the victim was killed in one of the empty flats in the building. Reportedly, at least three to four flats in the 'C' wing building are locked.

To initiate the investigation, the police has started to search the vacant flats. A case of murder has been filed against the unidentified accused at Arnala police station. Missing persons' records are being examined to establish the identity of the deceased man.

Times Network - India's Leading Broadcasting Network, uniquely offering English Entertainment, best in class News channels & Bollywood Masala, available at a Value pack (7 channels) of Rs 13/- per month.

Please contact your cable/DTH service provider now and ensure that your TV viewing experience is complete. To know more click here.
