Major blow to Maoists, top commanders arrested in interstate operation

In a major blow to Maoist operations in the country, two top commanders were arrested by the Maharashtra police in Hyderabad. The arrested Maoist cadres were identified as Narmada alias Aluri Krishna Kumari alias Sujatakka, (61), and her husband Kiran Kumar alias Kiran Dada.

Narmada has been named in the FIR registered of the IED attack on May 1 which killed 15 QRT commandos along with a civilian in Maharashtra's Gadchiroli.

With rewards of Rs 25 lakh declared by the Maharashtra police and various other states affected by Maoism and wanted in around 52 cases, Narmada had remained underground for over 22 years. She was said to be one of the top guerrilla commander of the Maoists and also the most important links between the underground and overground cadres of Maoists.

Narmada, a member of the state committee and one of the top commanders of the Dandakaranya Special Zonal Committee (DKSZC) of the Communist Party of India (Maoist). She headed operations against security forces and government in Gadchiroli for around a decade.



Wanted for various attacks on security forces in Sukma, Dantewada and Gadchiroli, she was the brain behind the attack that killed Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA Bheema Madavi in April this year along with five other people.

Narmada was also named in the case where Delhi University professor GN Saibaba and some JNU students were arrested and wanted in several cases across Maharashtra, Chhattisgarh and Telangana. Her name was closely associated with Maoist cadres arrested in the urban Naxals case registered by Pune Police.

Her husband Kiran Kumar remained underground for around thirty years. He is also a member of the state committee and DKSZC, which looks after Maoist propaganda magazine Prabhat and press-related activities and is also said to be one of top political strategists of the banned outfit.

According to sources, Narmada handed over responsibilities of the Gadchiroli district to Prabhakar, another senior cadre after the encounters in April 2018 by security forces where 40 Maoist cadres were killed by Gadchiroli police.

Her failing health condition after being diagnosed with cancer was another major reason that she and her husband were forced to step out of the jungles for her treatment.

With the help of Telangana police, a team from Gadchiroli police laid a trap at a hospital where Narmada and Kiran were expected for a chemotherapy session. As the two arrived, the police team after confirming their identities nabbed them.

The two have been brought to Gadchiroli and were interrogated in connection with the May 1 IED attack in which Prabhakar has been named as the prime accused along with several top Maoist cadres.

A senior officer with Maharashtra police said that the IED attack of May 1 in Gadchiroli was planned by Narmada and then executed on her behalf by Prabhakar, Milind Teltumde and other cadres. A native of Guntur, Narmada's name was on the list of most wanted released by Maharashtra police last year.
