Briefing

SRINAGAR

In a surprising development, the State’s premier financial institution got a new intern chairman when the bank was on holiday last week. RK Chibber replaced Pervez Ahmad five months ahead of the completion of his three years term as the chairman of the J&K Bank. He was appointed as chairman and CEO of J&K bank in October 2016 for the term of three years. Chibber is Executive Director of the bank.

PULWAMA

Encounters have become a routine in Kashmir. But last week the casualties included two special police officers (SPOs), Shabir Ahmad of Tuna, Pulwama and Salman Khan of Uthmulla Shopian, who were killed barely twenty-four hours after going missing from their office along with their service rifles. The encounter took place in Panjran, Lassipora. The other two slain militants were identified as Irfan Ahmad Bhat of Arihal, Pulwama and Ashiq Hussain Ganie of Panjran.

URI

In a tragic incident, five out of seven members of Chalkoo family were killed when a gas cylinder exploded on May 27, at their house in Laghama, Uri. Initially mother ParveenaAkhter, 35, and a daughter Shaista Bano, 14, succumbed to their injures after battling for five days in SKIMS hospital, then two more daughters SabeenaBano, 16 and Saima Bano, 18, succumbed, and on Saturday the family’s son Ubaid Ahmad, 6, succumbed at AIIMS Delhi. He was shifted to Delhi on the directions of state Governor.

AMERICA

Kashmiri talent pool has never remained limited to the mountains of the valley. Last week an American Geriatrics Society (MAGS) has granted prestigious membership to a local doctor DrZubairSaleem, who is currently an in-charge department of Geriatric Medicine, JLNM Hospital. He has treated more than 12 thousand senior citizens during last one year under Exclusive Geriatric Treatment Protocol in the valley. He was recently commended by Director Health Services, Kashmir for this membership.

NEW DELHI

Set in Kashmir, the latest web series Kaafir- a ZEE5 Original starring Dia Mirza and Mohit Raina, is set to premiere on June 15, 2019. This eight-episode series is based on a true story written by Bhavani-Iyer, helmed by Sonam Nair and produced by Siddharth Malhotra, is a tale of a young Pakistani woman who comes into India through a strange series of circumstances and is unable to go back home. The show revolves around the relationship between this woman, who is accused of militancy, and her lawyer who makes her justice his sole objective.

RAJOURI

In a bizarre incident, a video of a female patient being examined by a doctor has gone viral on social networking sites. Taking the video as proof, the local police in Rajouri arrested four doctors for allegedly filming the female patient in district hospital Rajouri, who reported the incident to police and lodged a formal complaint. She has alleged that the video was forged and edited before it was released which aims at outraging the modesty of a woman.

BATAMALOO

For the first time in the recent history of Muslim dominated Kashmir, five teachers were suspended for their unauthorised absence from the schools on the second day of Eid. They were suspended after a surprise visit by the office of chief education officer, Srinagar in Shalteng Middle School in Batamaloo constituency. On the eve of Arafah, a day before Eid, more than half-a dozen teachers, who were officially on leave, were also suspended in three government-run schools in Habak area by the Director School Education Kashmir, Muhammad Younis Malik.
