Pakistan’s Army chief hails 'befitting response' to India during Feb standoff

RAWALPINDI – Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General Qamar Javed Bajwa on Wednesday hailed the befitting response Pakistan’s military gave to the neighbouring country during the February standoff, according to a statement issued by the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR).

Presiding over the two-day-long Annual Formation Commanders’ Conference at the GHQ, General Bajwa said that the armed forces remain fully capable and ready to respond to any threat for defence of motherland

“All general officers of Pakistan Army attended,” it added.

Annual Formation Commanders’ Conference held at GHQ. Forum reviewed geo-strategic and national security environment. Internal security landscape of the country, challenges being confronted and responses were discussed in detail.

(1 of 2). pic.twitter.com/eHWT9TFzse — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) June 12, 2019

The forum reviewed geo-strategic and national security environment. Internal security landscape of the country, challenges being confronted and responses were discussed in detail, the military’s media wing said.

Fmn Comds’ Conf. COAS hailed befitting response during Feb stand off with India. “Pak Army remains fully capable & ready to respond to any threat for def of motherland. Successes of Op RuF will carry fwd the gains made so far towards enduring peace & stability”, COAS. (2 of 2). pic.twitter.com/V82xxTfHfG — Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor (@OfficialDGISPR) June 12, 2019

ISPR chief Maj-Gen Asif Ghafoor, in his tweets, said the army chief also appreciated the successes being achieved in ongoing operation Raddul Fasaad to carry forward the gains made thus far towards enduring peace and stability in the country.

The forum pledged to continue all its efforts to serve the country.

On Feb 27th, Pakistan Air Force (PAF) had shot down two Indian fighter jets over the disputed border region of Kashmir, in a significant escalation of the crisis between the two nuclear-armed powers developed in the drawback of a deadly suicide attack on Indian paramilitary forces in Pulwama district, killing at least 44 soldiers.

Following the Feb 27 strikes, India confirmed the loss of one plane (MiG-21 Bison) and said it shot down a Pakistani jet (F-16) as it responded to the incident. However, the Indian claim was later debunked by US officials who said that they have counted the number of Pakistan Air Force F-16s in service and can say that none were lost to the Indian Air Force on Feb 27 this year.

PAF announces to remember its response against ... 02:22 PM | 1 May, 2019 ISLAMABAD – Pakistan Air Force (PAF) has announced to remember in history its response on February 27 this year ...

Pakistan also captured an Indian pilot, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman, and to India’s fury, published a video of him. He was later handed over to India authorities.
