Youngsters share their feelings

Majority of protesters are young people under 30 years old. Some took part in the Occupy movement, while the younger ones said the 2014 protest made them start following the news.

"Of course I am afraid!" said a university student who boycotted class to join the protest. "Especially with riot police looking so horrible. They might just beat us with batons any time, so I can't let women and secondary students sit at the front."

He said both Carrie Lam's reaction to the 1.03 million-strong march and the law amendment itself drove him to the protest site.

"You saw her face - the arrogance. How can anyone stand that? As for the law itself, I might be extradited to the mainland just for saying 'Winnie the Pooh' online," he said.

A Secondary Five student skipped his exams to join protesters on Harcourt Road.

"All these people who came out today want to safeguard Hong Kong for the next generation - for me," he said. "I also want to play a part."

He added: "I was too young when Occupy Central broke out in 2014, but that's when I started paying attention to current affairs and politics."

Another protester, in his 20s, said he arrived at Tamar on Tuesday night.

"My boss said he would respect my decision if I go on strike," he said. "This is the only thing I can do for Hong Kong."

He added: "It angers me to see Carrie Lam's response after the Sunday march. We really have to step up the protest to let her see our determination."

He said he was heartbroken to see young protesters being suppressed by police after midnight on Monday.

"It was painful to see these young people being hit by police, just because they care for our city," he said.

"After the umbrella movement, I thought Hongkongers had given up but it seems that we still haven't lost faith in ourselves. We need to stand up."

A protester in his 40s sat on Lung Wo Road with his wife and two sons.

"Both my wife and I went on a strike today and we decided to bring our sons here with us, so they would know what is happening to our city," he said.

He added that his two sons, aged five and eight, did not go to school.

"It's time for Hong Kong people to wake up. We have to tell the government clearly about our opposition," he said.

"If we have to take a more radical approach, my wife will take the children home and I'll stay here with the other protesters. We're in the endgame now, there's no way back."

A Sikh protester, who came from Kashmir, India, said: "I'd rather be killed than be humiliated."

He and his local friend, who went on strike, came to the frontline to slam Carrie Lam for "flattering Beijing and sacrificing Hong Kong by ignoring public opinion."

jane.cheung@singtaonewscorp.com
