Selena Gomez Proves She, Not Ariana Grande, Is The Instagram Queen After All

Ariana Grande may have earned the title “Instagram Queen” earlier this year after dethroning Selena Gomez as the most followed woman on Instagram, but that doesn’t make Gomez any less of a queen on the social media platform. Just recently, Gomez was hailed as the top Instagram celebrity in the world, toppling the likes of Grande, Beyonce, Justin Bieber, Kate Middleton and a lot more.

Earlier this week, social media monitoring site Hype Auditor crowned Gomez as the top Instagram celebrity for having an average of 3.6 million likes per post. Currently, Gomez has at least 151.8 million followers on Instagram. Despite having fewer followers than Grande, Gomez proves to be the most liked celebrity of all on the popular social media site. Hype Auditor also found that 58 percent of Gomez’s likers are women, and 14 percent of them come from India.

Since rising to fame more than a decade ago, Selena Gomez has been one of the most popular celebrities in the world. Before Grande earned her Instagram Queen title last February, Gomez had held the title for years. However, she took a break from social media for months starting last year after her tumultuous breakup from Justin Bieber and her battle with lupus and anxiety. Now that she is back to social media activity, she has proven yet again that her star hasn’t dimmed after all.

Tailing after Gomez in the survey is Kylie Jenner, who also has 3.6 million likes per post from her 137 million Instagram followers. Coming in third is “Juventus” star Cristiano Ronaldo, who has 170.1 million Instagram fans and whose engagement is 2.8 million.

Other internationally renowned stars who made it to the top 10 include Lionel Messi with 2.4 million likes per post, as well as Beyonce with 2.3 million likes per post. Kim Kardashian gets the 6th spot with 1.6 million likes per post, while Grande is only on the 8th spot with 1.1 million likes per post. Currently, Grande has 156.9 million Instagram followers, 24 percent of which live in the U.S. Gomez’s ex-boyfriend Justin Bieber also made it to the top 10 with 113.9 million followers and 1.5 million likes per post.

Jeff Kravitz/AMA2016/FilmMagic
