5 CRPF men killed in terror attack in J&K

Attack took place on busy road used by Amarnath pilgrims in Anantnag; one terrorist gunned down



ANANTNAG A head of the commencement of the annual Amaranth yatra on July 1, three terrorists attacked a CRPF vehicle on a busy road in Anantnag district of South Kashmir on Wednesday killing five CRPF personnel and injuring several others including a Station house officer of Anantnag police station.



SHO Arshad Ahmed is said to be critical and will be airlifted to AIIMS, Delhi for treatment.



Sources told Mirror that the armed terrorists attacked a patrol party of the CRPF’s 116Bn with automatic rifles and grenades near Oxford School on KP road. “Three jawans died on the spot, while two died on way to the hospital. An SHO and a woman were also injured in the attack,” a source said.



One terrorist was killed in the ensuing firing, while search for the other two was being carried out by forces.



The killed CRPF jawans were identified as ASI Neeru Sharma, Const. Santender, Cont. MK Kushwa, ASI Ramesh Kumar and Const. Mahesh Kumar.



Though Al-Umar Mujahideen, a defunct terror group, has claimed responsibility for the strike, officials, however, said that it was a handiwork of Jaish-e-Mohammed. Intelligence agencies believe that ever since Jaish chief Masood Azhar was declared a global terrorist, cross-border terror outfits are using local groups as fronts to further their agenda in the Valley while maintaining alow profile.



Pilgrims travelling to the cave shrine have to pass through the stretch where Wednesday’s attack took place. The yatra is scheduled to begin on July 1 and culminate on August 15.





President’s rule in J&K extended by 6 months



The Union Cabinet on Wednesday approved the extension of President’s rule in Jammu and Kashmir for another six months, beginning from June 20. Union Minister Prakash Javadekar made the announcement at a press briefing in New Delhi.



J&K has been under President’s rule since December 19, 2018. Assembly elections in J&K will be held later this year.



The Commission had said, “Election Commission, under Article 324 of the Constitution and other extant laws/rules etc. have unanimously decided that holding of Assembly elections in Jammu and Kashmir shall be considered later in this year. The Commission will keep on regularly and on real-time basis monitoring the situation, taking inputs from all necessary quarters and after the conclusion of Amarnath Yatra will announce the election schedule.”


