First female president of Uttar Pradesh Bar Council shot dead over 'festering relationship, jealousy': Nephew

Yadav was shot dead at a lawyer's chamber by a colleague on Wednesday (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Agra: Police have launched an investigation into the disquieting murder of Darwesh Yadav, the first female president of the Uttar Pradesh Bar Council, who was shot dead in the chambers of another lawyer at the Allahabad High Court on Wednesday. Yadav succumbed to the bullets fired at her by another lawyer, Manish Sharma who then aimed the gun at his own temple and pulled the trigger.

While Yadav breathed her last at a local hospital, Sharma was rushed to the Medanta hospital in Gurugram where his condition is believed to be critical. Eyewitnesses told investigators that Sharma walked into the chambers of lawyer Arvind Kumar Misra where Yadav was sitting with her colleagues and said to her, 'You have won'. He then fired a bullet at her nephew Sunny Yadav who managed to dodge it before he fired three bullets at the UP Bar Council president. Three bullets hit her, finding their mark in her head and chest, resulting in her falling down in a pool of blood.

Ajay Anand, ADG, Agra: President of UP Bar Council Darvesh Yadav was shot dead by her associate Manish Sharma during an event in Agra court premises today. He came&shot 3 bullets at her. She was taken to hospital where she died. Manish is critically injured;admitted to hospital pic.twitter.com/jV5zkmZ9i0 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 12, 2019

In his complaint to the police, the victim's nephew has named two other people apart from Manish Sharma in connection with the murder in broad daylight. Sunny Yadav has named Sharma's wife Vandana and another lawyer Vineet Gulecha, who he claims orchestrated the attack.

A preliminary investigation has also hinted that the attacker was likely in a relationship with Yadav and shot at her after things went sour between the two. Both Darwesh and Manish began their practice in 2004 and even shared the same chamber in court. The nephew further alleged that the victim lent Sharma money and even jewellery to help him out. However, when she asked him to return what he had borrowed, Sharma's wife threatened Darwesh with severe consequences.

Yadav also told police officials probing the matter that lawyer Vineet Gulecha 'used' Sharma to attack Darwesh because he was jealous of her. Darwesh was elected as the first female president of the Uttar Pradesh Bar Council on Monday, two days before she was shot dead.
