Brothers beaten in Uttarakhand hotel, allege racial attack; FIR lodged

As per the wedding invitation, the duo arrived at the Sapphire Inn hotel, in Bhowali Road of Bhimtal

New Delhi: In yet another case of the racial attack reported from Uttarakhand, two brothers were allegedly beaten up by the staff members of a hotel in Bhowali town of Uttarakhand on Saturday. “We had no idea why we were being beaten up,” said 26-year-old, Somit Pangtey, a private sector employee in the national capital.

Somit narrated his ordeal on social media platform Facebook, where he claimed that while returning from his home town in Munsiyari in Uttarakhand, along with his 25-year-old brother - Divesh Pangety - they were allegedly attacked for belonging to a certain community at a hotel. Divesh is a research fellow with the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing.

The duo arrived at the Sapphire Inn hotel, in Bhowali Road of Bhimtal district at around 7 pm on June 8 to freshen up for a wedding celebration, which was being conducted at a nearby hotel. “Around 9 pm, my brother went downstairs to receive another friend, who was coming for freshening up before we all could head towards the wedding venue. When he did not return for a few minutes, I went downstairs to check on him and I saw him profusely bleeding from the ear. Initially, I thought he had got into a heated argument with the hotel staff but when I intervened, to calmly discuss what led to this, the man immediately began pushing and abusing me," Somit told Mirror Now.

Initially, Somit thought the man who was shoving him was another guest at the hotel, but little did he know that he was the hotel’s owner. By this time, the duo had no clue why were they being beaten up. He told the receptionist to call the police, to which the receptionist responded in a harsh tone that he will call.

Minutes later, while the duo was waiting outside the hotel for the police, they saw several bikes coming towards them and the men riding them stopped the vehicles in front of them and began brutally thrashing the brothers. Somit added, we heard four gunshots, but by then we were badly injured and we couldn’t figure it out that if these gunshots were targeted on us or were fired in the air. “I heard them saying you cannot stay here and one of them called us Bhotias,” Somit told Mirror Now.

The gunshots led to commotion in the area and the other guests in the hotel came out of their respective rooms to check what happened. Meanwhile, their friends who were also staying at the hotel rushed them to a nearby hospital.

Somit said, “I have got five stitches and my brother has got 17 stitches on his forehead. My jaw has been dislocated and further surgeries are required, which I cannot get done in the city.”

However, on June 11 when Somit’s father - Manohar Singh Pangtey went to lodge an FIR at the Bhimtal police station, the officer allegedly tried to convince them not to lodge the complaint claiming, that the hotel’s owner is a rich man and has strong political connections in the area. They also warned them that filing an FIR in the matter would escalate it further. But after further discussion, the FIR was lodged against the hotel’s owner, manager and other employees under the section 323, section 504, Section 506 of the Indian Penal Code and SC/ST Atrocities Act.

Upon asking for the CCTV footage of the hotel’s reception area, Somit’s relatives were denied and the hotel authorities said that the cameras have not been working for a week now. The hotel Sapphire Inn has been registered at several hotel aggregator apps like Goibibo, Make My Trip and OYO, whose official rules claim that all the CCTVs have to be functional.

Mirror Now tried contacting Make My Trip- the travel aggregator but could not get an official statement on the matter.

However, despite repeated attempts Mirror Now could not reach the hotel owner.




