Kashmir: 5 CRPF Jawans Martyred, 1 Terrorist Killed In Anantnag Attack

Five CRPF jawans were martyred, and three others were injured in a shootout with terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag district on June 12. During the crossfire, a terrorist was also killed.

The attack took place in the primary market area of Anantnag at 5:15 pm. Two bike-borne terrorists opened fired at CRPF personnel of 116 battalions stationed in a vehicle on the busy Khanabal-Pahalgham Road.

The killed jawans were identified as ASIs Ramesh Kumar, Neeru Sharma, constables Santender, MK Kushwa, and Mahesh Kumar.

The Pro-Pakistan terrorist group AI-Umar Mujahideen has claimed responsibility for the attack. The group issued a press release to all the local news agency. However, the intelligence agencies have rubbished the claims and said that Al-Umar Mujahideen is a non-functioning terror outfit. However, the agencies believe it is the handiwork of Jaish-e-Mohammed.

A CRPF statement was released shortly after the attack which read: “Motor cycle-borne terrorists fired upon troops of B/116Bn and JKP who were on L/O duty at 1655 hrs in which 03 CRPF jawan attained martyrdom, 03 others injured and evacuated to Janglad Mandi Hospital. 01 militant neutralised, and the area cordoned off, re-inforcement reached. Firing on.”

According to the initial reports, three jawans were killed, and later the death toll rose as two more injured jawans succumbed to their injuries.

Station House Officer of Anantnag Police Station who rushed to the spot along with the police party after hearing the bullet shots, was also injured. He is currently being treated in a hospital with another woman.

Former Jammu & Kashmir Chief Minister Omar Abdullah took to Twitter to condemn the attack. He said he would pray for the souls of martyred.

Very sorry to hear about the attack on the CRPF personnel in Anantnag today. I unreservedly condemn this attack & pray for the souls of the departed. May the injured make a speedy & complete recovery. # — Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) June 12, 2019

The shooting comes less than three weeks before the commencement of the annual Amarnath Yatra. Earlier, in 2017, eight pilgrims were killed by Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) terrorist when they open fire on a bus. This attack also comes months after the Pulwama attack which claimed the lives of more than 40 CRPF personnel and led to an aerial dogfight between India and Pakistan.

Also Read: 18 Terrorists Killed In 21 Days After Pulwama Attack, War On Terror Continues
