MeToo: Cops close sexual harassment case against Nana Patekar, Tanushree Dutta's lawyer responds

Tanushree Dutta, Nana Patekar | Photo Credit: Twitter

The MeToo movement that was ignited last year after Tanushree Dutta’s sexual harassment allegations against Bollywood veteran actor Nana Patekar, has witnessed a setback today. The investigation by the police for the year-long legal battle that was being fought between Tanushree and Nana Patekar after the former accused the actor of sexual misconduct on the sets of Horn Ok Pleassss in 2008, has come to a close.

In the latest development of the case, the cops have closed the case on grounds that it is a ‘no prima facie case against Patekar.’ In an exclusive quote by lawyer Sujay Kantawala with Time Now, there has been no evidence to corroborate the charges. “Under the criminal jurisdiction, the investigating agency is the police. Now we have a closure report, the complainant can file a protest report to challenge the closure report. if in any case the police files closure reports but, the complainant can still pursue this whole thing and take it to a logical conclusion. It will show as to how convinced she's of her own case and if she wants to pursue this,” he told the channel.

#Breaking | Setback for #MeToo Movement: Sexual harassment case filed against actor Nana Patekar (@nanagpatekar) closed by cops on grounds that ‘no prima facie case against Patekar.’ | #MeToo pic.twitter.com/lguEWxyaMc — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) June 13, 2019

This is no setback, the complainant can still pursue and appeal: @sujay_kantawala, Lawyer, tells TIMES NOW after police close the sexual harassment case against Nana Patekar (@nanagpatekar). | #MeToo pic.twitter.com/hZw50E14UA — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) June 13, 2019

Besides this, in response to the investigation by the police, sources have shared that Tanushree will come out with a statement. In an official statement by ANI, "The Mumbai Police files a B Summary report in this case. A 'B summary' report is when the police cannot find evidence in support of the complaint and are unable to continue the investigation."

Tanushree Dutta alleged harassment case against Nana Patekar: Mumbai Police files a B Summary report in the case. A 'B summary' report is filed when police can not find evidence in support of the complaint and are unable to continue the investigation. pic.twitter.com/tVOof7WTX0 — ANI (@ANI) June 13, 2019

According to the Aashiq Banaya Aapne actress, the lawyer hasn't received any information yet. Talking to Times Now, Tanushree's lawyer Nitin Satpute said, "We haven’t yet received any official communication from the Police yet. However, we will challenge the closure report."

#Exclusive #Breaking 1st on TIMES NOW | We haven’t yet received any official communication from the Police yet. However, we will challenge the closure report: Nitin Satpute, Tanushree Dutta’s Lawyer tells TIMES NOW’s @Kajal_Iyer. | #MeToo Movement pic.twitter.com/NClHg8flY9 — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) June 13, 2019

Last year, Tanushree became the torchbearer of MeToo movement when the actress returned from the US. The actress who was shooting for an item song in March 2008, claimed that she was sexually harassed by Nana Patekar on the sets of the movie Horn Ok Pleasss and underwent through mental instability post the incident. After coming out with the allegations, several famous Bollywood personalities were also put under the radar including Alok Nath, Rajat Kapoor, Vikas Bahl and Kailash Kher.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates.
