Pakistan's Role In Anantnag Terror Attack Exposed; Little-known Group That Claimed Responsibility A Fig Leaf For LeT, Suspect Agencies

Minutes before Prime Minister Modi comes face-to-face with Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan at the SCO Summit in Kyrgyzstan, Pakistan has been unmasked yet again on the terror front as Republic TV sources have confirmed the neighbour's complicity in the Anantnag terror attack on Wednesday.

While, Al Umar Mujahideen, a small terror outfit based in Pakistan occupied Kashmir claimed responsibility for the terror attack, the agencies contradicting the claim have suspected the role of Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) in the attack.

In another attempt to shield terror organisations based in Pakistan, the country reportedly used Al Umar Mujahideen's name as a fig leaf for a terror attack perpetrated by LeT, that martyred 5 CRPF Jawans in South Kashmir.

READ| Pakistan PM Imran Khan Calls Kashmir The 'only' Issue Between India-Pak, Doesn’t Mention Terrorism On Soil

Founded by 26/11 mastermind and UN-designated terrorist Hafiz Saeed, Lashkar-e-Taiba was founded in 1987 and was funded by Al Qaeda former chief and once, a most wanted man in the world, Osama bin Laden.

In December 2018, Saeed openly addressed a rally in Pakistan's Lahore, further threatened to wage a war against India. He stated that war will be fought in Indian 'cities and not on borders'

The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has notified Pakistan in the 'Grey List' pertaining to their persistent terror funding, including those proscribed in the United Nations including LeT, Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) and Falah-i-Insaniyat.

According to the CRPF statement, the incident occurred at KP Chowk as motorcycle-borne terrorists opened fire with automatic rifles followed by the hurling of grenades on security forces deployed at the location.

The Station House Officer (SHO) was also critically injured, along with the civilian who sustained foot injuries.

Soon after the attack, the whole area was cordoned off by the additional reinforcement of police, SOG, army, and CRPF.

Pakistan has taken some "important" steps against terror groups post-Pulwama attack but they are still reversible, a top US official said on Wednesday, urging the Pakistani leadership to take sustained actions against terrorists operating in the country.

Pakistan-based terror outfits LeT and Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) will continue to pose a grave risk to international peace as long as they are able to operate freely in Pakistan, Alice G Wells, Senior State Department Official for South and Central Asian Affairs, told the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee for Asia, the Pacific and Nonproliferation.

READ| "Isolate Pakistan If It Harbours Terrorism," Says US Congressman Scott Perry

Pakistan's intimacy with terror

Pakistan's love affair with terror has been an age-old tale, with the country's history of fostering varied terror outfits, here are some of them are:
