New Thai Chili 2 Go locations in Phoenix to continue offering affordable, casual dining fare

Georgann Yara

Special to the Republic

In his native New Delhi, India, Akshat Sethi had very little exposure to Thai food. Actually, he had none.

But when he had his first Thai meal — a spicy basil dish — about 12 years ago at a Tempe restaurant that no longer exists, it was love at first bite.

“I was like, wow. The way the sauce married with the protein and vegetables, and the side of white jasmine rice … It was perfect,” Sethi said, voicing his words slowly as if savoring the recollection of every flavorful nuance.

At the time, Sethi, 37, owned a successful financial services company, a business he still owns today. But this experience was a feeling he couldn’t ignore.

Addressing it led to the opening of Thai Chili 2 Go, Sethi’s fast-casual Thai eatery that’s about to open its ninth location in the Valley.

Currently, there are locations in Chandler, Gilbert, Mesa, Queen Creek, Scottsdale and Phoenix. One in Tempe is slated to open this summer, and another on Fifth and Roosevelt streets in a buzzy spot of downtown Phoenix will be serving up dishes by the end of the year.

“People ask, ‘Why don’t you open an Indian restaurant?’” said Sethi, who opened his first Thai Chili 2 Go in 2014. “Because I love Thai food and want to share it.”

What he shares, by design, is easy for his team to prepare and simple and affordable for regular customers to purchase. All items are $10 and under. No tip option pops up on credit card orders.

An average of 200 orders are placed, and 400 entrées are served each day, Sethi said.

Thai Chili 2 Go’s executive chef is Thai, and all ingredients, including the sauces, are made from scratch in the corporate kitchen located at the San Tan Village location in Gilbert and delivered to all locations to maintain consistency. They use non-GMO rice bran oil and do not use canola or soy in their recipes.

“The integrity of the ingredients is important. Food is an intimate relationship with someone eating your food, so I take it personal,” Sethi said.

The most popular dish is the pad thai with the Drunken Noodles and bamboo shoots; vegetables and chili garlic sauce a close second, Sethi said. The Thai fried rice and yellow and red curries are also big sellers.

For longtime regular Jeremy Jones, the spicy basil and tom kha gai — a hot and sour soup with chicken and herbs in a light coconut milk broth — have been his go-to favorites for years.

Jones owns fitness studios in Gilbert and Phoenix and appreciates that he can rely on getting a healthy and delicious meal here.

“It’s the ingredients they use, from the oils to the real coconut milk in the curries. They’re all made with clean ingredients. And the concept is fast-casual yet still tasty and healthy and cooked to order,” said Jones. He has been a Thai food lover since first trying the cuisine in the seventh grade. “I’m a huge fan.”

Sethi’s career in the financial industry was the reason for his move from India to Denver, where he set up a call center for a mortgage bank. Having family who lives in the Valley inspired his move to Gilbert.

After that life-changing introduction to Thai cuisine, Sethi opened Thai Chili — his full-service, sit-down restaurant in Gilbert that offers the traditional lengthy menu along with beer and wine — about 10 years ago. After a few years, he wanted to expand yet looked to simplify the concept.

“Thai food is complex and diverse. I’m a big fan of simplicity,” he said.

At the time, Sethi frequented a popular fast-casual franchise and developed Thai Chili 2 Go’s model after it. He pulled data from his sit-down restaurant, determined which items were ordered most and featured the 12 highest-selling entrées on his fast-casual eatery’s menu.

MORE:12 restaurants for healthy fast food around Phoenix

Sethi’s quest to simplify put him in a fast-casual restaurant market that has experienced 6 percent annual growth over the past five years. It is the only restaurant segment to experience growth over the time frame, according to market research company The NPD Group.

Sethi opted to open his first restaurants near his home around the southeast Valley. Success has allowed him to slowly branch out west. He’s had requests from customers wanting him to open one in the West Valley and franchise inquiries from Tucson and Flagstaff.

Clientele range from Thai food newbies to veterans. Spice levels run from mild to Thai hot, which Sethi described as, “All bets are off. It burns but only for a little while.”

About 70 percent of orders are consumed off site, although all locations offer some seating. To cater to contemporary customers, an app allows them to order ahead and avoid the line that comes with the territory of made-to-order dishes. The model is set up so to-go orders may be ready before dine-in ones.

But more than a decade after he took that first spicy basil bite, the recollection of that experience continues to drive Sethi and the objective for the venture it sparked.

“Every single bite should make them feel that it’s going to nourish their body, comfort them. That’s my goal, to leave one happy memory with an explosion in their mouth,” he said. “Every single time, I want customers to feel this way.”

Thai Chili 2 Go

Where: Chandler, Gilbert, Mesa, Queen Creek, Phoenix and Scottsdale

Employees: 100

Interesting stat: Restaurant industry sales generated a record high of nearly $800 billion in 2018, according to the National Restaurant Association.

Details: tc2go.com
