JK Police rallies behind its brave officer battling life and death

An unlucky Jammu and Kashmir police inspector Arshad Ahmed Khan was injured as soon as he stepped out of his armoured vehicle when a bullet fired by a terrorist ricocheted from his service rifle hitting his liver and duodenum during Wednesday's shootout at Anantnag in South Kashmir, officials said Thursday.

Khan, battling for his life at an Army hospital, received praise from senior officials for his prompt and courageous response after the terrorist struck.

On analysing events of the Wednesday shootout, the officials said the lone JeM terrorist started firing at a CRPF patrol party at 1651 hours.

Within five minutes Khan, the SHO of Saddar Police station in Anantnag, reached the site showing exemplary courage, they said.

The moment he stepped out of his official bulletproof vehicle along with his service rifle, a barrage of bullets were fired by the terrorist. One ricocheted from the butt of his service rifle and hit his liver and duodenum.

Even in this condition, the officer kept firing bullets at the terrorist before he collapsed, they said.

Five CRPF personnel were killed in the terror attack when a militant, belonging to Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), fired a patrol party at KP road in Anantnag's South Kashmir on Wednesday.

Known for his professional brilliance, Khan is at present undergoing a treatment at the 92 Base Hospital located inside well-fortified XV Corps cantonment. The officer's popularity could be gauged from the fact that around 70 locals from his area of posting gathered there to inquire about his health.

Khan, 40, is a father of two boys aged four and one and has been posted in the volatile South Kashmir for some years now. "He is a brilliant operational officer," recalled one of his senior officers in choked voice and prayed for his early recovery.

Since morning many senior officers have visited the officer at the Army hospital and he could be airlifted to Delhi, in case the doctors allow it, they said, adding that the next 72 hours are crucial.

"He is a fighter and I'm sure he will win the battle for life as well. The entire fraternity of Jammu and Kashmir Police is praying for Khan's recovery," said another senior officer after visiting him.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
