Encephalitis Kills 50 Children In Bihar, India's Own Space Station + More Top News

In a shocking incident, more than 50 children have died in Bihar's Muzaffarpur district after they developed brain infections which were caused by a toxic substance in the lychee fruit. Read more

Here's more top news of the day:

1) India Planning To Have Its Own Space Station By 2030, Confirms ISRO Chief

In what’s India’s one of the most ambitious projects, the country’s space agency is planning to launch its own space station. Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) chief K Sivan made the announcement today. Read more

2) Brutal Murders And Mass Rapes Reported As Sudanese Militia Attack Pro-Democracy Protesters

AFP





In April, the picture of a woman leading calls for a revolution in Sudan's capital Khartoum protest went viral on social media. The female activist was hailed as a symbol of revolution and her photo was shared on Twitter millions of times. Read more

3) Slow Job Growth & Rising Fuel Prices Have Resulted In Millions Of Unsold Bikes & Cars In India

BCCL

Slow employment growth rate and a steady rise in fuel prices has affected India’s automobile industry adversely. The drop in sales is so high that automobile makers have been forced to temporarily shut down their production plants for several days and give forced leaves to workers. Read more

4) No Survivors From AN-32 Crash In Arunachal Pradesh Says IAF After Rescue Team Reach Wreckage Site

All 13 people on board the ill-fated AN-32 aircraft of the Indian Air Force (IAF) that went down in Arunachal Pradesh on June 3 were killed in the crash. IAF confirmed that there are no survivors from the crash after a team of eight members of the rescue team reached the crash site in the morning. Read more

5) Delhi Metro Proposes Pink Tokens, Separate Entry For Women To Implement Government's Free Ride Scheme

BCCL





The metro will issue pink tokens from separate counters for women to implement Delhi government’s free-ride scheme. It will also keep separate gates for them at the entrance but the exit gates will continue to be common for all. Read more
