Opposition condemns UP bar Council Chairperson's murder, Congress says Yogi Adityanath should step down

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav blamed Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and said that the state's law and order has gone to the dogs. (File Photo)

After the first woman president of the Uttar Pradesh Bar Council, Darwesh Yadav, was shot dead in Agra Civil courts on Wednesday, the Opposition on Thursday criticised Yogi Adityanath-led UP government for failing to control law and order in the state.

Darwesh Yadav, was shot dead in Agra Civil courts on Wednesday, allegedly by her own colleague Manish Sharma. Sharma pumped three bullets, and later shot himself. The two were rushed to Pushpanjli hospital, where doctors declared her dead. The condition of Sharma remains critical.

Reacting to the incident, Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav blamed Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath and said that the state's law and order has gone to the dogs.

"CM Yogi Adityanath is doing meetings after meetings, while the criminals are freely committing crimes and running away. The situation is going out of control and even those who are supposed to be the preservers of law and order are not safe in this state," Akhilesh Yadav said.

Bahujan Samaj Party supremo Mayawati also issued a statement condoling the death of Darvesh Singh Yadav and said crime and anarchy have shot to the peak in Uttar Pradesh.

Mayawati also condemned the incident where a journalist in western Uttar Pradesh's Shamli was beaten up by UP cops allegedly for covering the derailment of a goods train. "This proves that nobody is safe in BJP's rile," she said.

Uttar Pradesh Congress president Raj Babbar also criticised Yogi Adityanath and said he should step down as the chief minister. He went to say that Yogi Adityanth is in no position to control the law and order situation in the state.

"The way people are being killed in broad daylight in Uttar Pradesh and young girls are being raped and butchered, it clearly indicates that the BJP is in no position to control the state's law and order. Yogi Adityanath should immediately step down," Raj Babbar said.

Meanwhile, Hindustani Biradari vice-chairman Vishal Sharma said that it's a "misfortune" that such a bright star of Agra was killed.

Vishal Sharma said that it "was an honour for Agra when Darvesh Singh Yadav was elected the UP Bar Council chairperson after she defeated over 200 male candidates, thereby, becoming the only female chairperson in the history of UP Bar Council."

He also said that Darvesh's murder should not be seen in a political light. "Darvesh's murder was a crime and nobody should try to politicise this crime," Sharma said.

Meanwhile, accused Manish Sharma has been shifted to a Delhi hospital where he remains in coma. The UP Police is keeping a strict eye on his condition as he is the only person who could throw light on the reason why he shot Darvesh, with whom he was associated for 15 years.
