Virendra Dev Dixit charged for raping a minor by CBI

Virendra Dev Dixit's Adhyatmik Vishwa Vidyalaya was in news in December 2017, when Delhi Police along with Delhi Commission for Women rescued 40 women from the ashram.

Self-styled Godman Virendra Dev Dixit, who is absconding for over a year, has been charged for raping a minor girl by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). The CBI, in its chargesheet against Dixit, which was filed today before the Rouse Avenue Court, Delhi, has pressed stringent charges of rape and criminal intimidation against him.

According to agency sources, chargesheet against Virendra Dev Dixit of Adhyatmik Vishwa Vidyalaya has been filed under section 376 (2) (f) (I)( k)( N) and 506 of Indian Penal Code. The CBI during its investigation found that while Dixit was heading the ashram, complainant was a minor that time. Dixit committed rape in Uttar Pradesh and Vijay Vihar, Delhi during May-June 1999 and threatened her for life if she tells anyone.

In an attempt to nab self-styled godman Virendra Dev Dixit, the CBI had earlier this year issued a reward of Rs 5 lakh for providing any information regarding the location of the godman.

In February 2018, a lookout circular was issued against him by the agency.

Virendra Dev Dixit's Adhyatmik Vishwa Vidyalaya was in news in December 2017, when Delhi Police along with Delhi Commission for Women rescued 40 women from the ashram.

The ashram, which is situated in Delhi's Rohini, was owned by Virendra Dev Dixit.

A number of complaints were filed against Virendra Dev Dixit by a group of parents who alleged that he was sexually exploiting minor girls in his ashram. After receiving the complaints, the authorities raided the ashram and found that the girls were kept in inhumane conditions. They were confined to small rooms with no sunlight and metal bars blocking the exit.

According to sources, the girls were forcefully kept inside the ashram. When they turned 18, they were forced to sign a document stating that they're willingly to live in the ashram.

The case came to light in June 2017 when two complainants approached the Delhi Police for sexual and physical abuse of women at Adhyatamik Vishwa Vidyalaya in Vijay Vihar area of North Delhi. Over a period of time, the Delhi Police registered three FIRs.

A month later, on the directions of Delhi High Court, 67 minor girls were rescued from the ashram of self-styled godman Virender Dev Dixit. A court-appointed committee which went to rescue the girl informed the court that women were kept in cages and fed like animals.

CBI had taken the case from Delhi Police on the directions of Delhi High Court. The high court, in December 2017, had ordered a CBI probe.

In January 2018 three FIRs of sexual assault, physical abuse and wrongful confinement of women inmates at his ashram were re-registered by CBI. A special team was set up by the agency to probe the case. CBI, in a status report submitted in March 2018, said he could have fled to Nepal. A lookout notice has been issued twice and a blue notice has been issued by Interpol and given to Nepal.
