Delhi Police target international drug-dealing syndicate, seize drugs worth Rs 90 crore

The arrest helped the police recover huge quantity of the party drug from a godown at Hari Nagar. (Representational image)

Delhi Police's special cell in a targeted raid, arrested five members of an international drug syndicate, including an NRI, for allegedly smuggling party drugs and contraband. Drugs worth Rs 90 crore were seized by the police.

The accused, who were arrested, have been identified as 33-year-old Sunil Kumar, Lokesh Mehta (25), Satish Sahu (45), Neeraj Arora (43) and Rajesh Dutta (45). Dutta is a British citizen.

Around 13.5 lakh tablets of drugs, 10.2 kg of tramadol powder and 500 gm of katamine have been recovered. Drug tablets and contraband drugs were collected from Mumbai and Delhi by the members of this syndicate and exported to London, UK, Nepal and Malaysia.

The kingpins of this gang have been identified as Mazhar, a Pakistan national, and Amarjeet Bains both based in London, UK and Jaspreet Singh Dhillon, based in Nepal.

The members of this gang were involved in procuring narcotic and psychotropic substance from various places in India to supply to the local traffickers and also to export it to various countries. In order to identify the gang, informers were deployed and technical surveillance was mounted.

The technical surveillance revealed that Sunil Kumar and his associate Lokesh Mehta have procured a large consignment of narcotic/psychotropic drugs. Further, it was ascertained that their counterpart Satish had arrived in Delhi from Mumbai to procure the consignment for exporting them.

Sunil Kumar and Lokesh Mehta used to pack and store the contraband. It was revealed that the drug consignment would be handed over to one of the gang members on the intervening night of January 15 and 16 near Bharati College in Janakpuri. Two people namely Sunil Kumar and Lokesh Mehta were apprehended by the police.

5.275 kgs of party drug tramadol powder was recovered from their possession. The arrest helped the police recover huge quantity of the party drug from a godown at Hari Nagar.

Earlier on January 17, Satish Sahu was arrested and 5.1 kg of tramadol powder, known as ''meow meow'' was recovered from his possession. Upon interrogation, two more accused Neeraj Arora and Rajesh Dutta were arrested on January 20 and 480 gm of Ketamine drug was recovered from their possession.
