A Deluded, Delusional Bengal

Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar was one of India’s greatest reformers. A polymath, he rationalised Bengali grammar and script, educated thousands as a teacher, and though Brahmin, he fought conservative Brahminism. Most importantly, he won the battle to ensure widows could marry again — despite opposition from the vast majority of upper caste Hindu males.

He died 128 years ago. On Tuesday, June 11, chief minister Mamata Banerjee ceremonially unveiled a bust of Vidyasagar. It is a replacement for an earlier one that was vandalised during clashes between BJP and Trinamool Congress (TMC) supporters at BJP president Amit Shah’s road show in Kolkata on May 14.

Ceremony over, Banerjee spoke. She said that West Bengal governor Keshari Nath Tripathi, a BJP veteran and five-time legislator in Uttar Pradesh, had misled everyone by saying around adozen people had been killed in postelection violence in Bengal. “Ten people lost their lives in post-poll violence.

Eight were from our party [Trinamool Congress], two were from BJP… all families will be compensated and all cases investigated.”

This reminded me of Eugène Ionesco’s 1959 absurdist play, ‘Rhinoceros’, where gradually all but one very ordinary person in a French village turn into rhinos and nobody but this lone everyman notices or cares. Here, it’s not theatre but real life, where people get killed for partisan reasons and leaders argue about body count: 12 or 10.

The underlying factor is a growth in BJP’s vote share from 17% and two seats in 2014, to 40% and 18 of 42 seats in 2019 in Bengal. Both Left and Congress have withered. In 2014, their combined vote share was 39%, in 2019, it’s 13%. It’s uncanny — the Left-Congress has lost 26 percentage points of vote, BJP has gained 23 points. TMC vote share is steady.

Banerjee and TMC believed they had complete control of West Bengal, after decimating the Left in 2011. Congress was already in terminal decline, thanks to factional squabbles among leaders like Subrata Mukherjee (now with TMC), Somen Mitra, the late Priya Ranjan Dasmunsi and Ajit Panja. Patriarchs like the late Ghani Khan Choudhury had their bastions and worked at will. The chronicle of Congress’ death in Bengal was foretold.

Out of power since 1977, what credibility, cadre or funds could this bitterly divided party have to make a comeback? The Left, which monopolised state politics after 1977 for 34 long years, was progressive to begin with. It dissed caste and religion from the political vocabulary.

Once, when Jyoti Basu, then-chief minister, met Bindeshwari Prasad Mandal, best known as the head of the Mandal Commission in the 1980s, the latter asked Basu about the caste system in Bengal. Basu was abhadralok in every sense, including cutting sarcasm when required. He replied, “Bengal has two castes. The rich and the poor.” Religion as a divider was similarly dismissed.

But in the last 10 years or so of Left rule, it tried to became what Siddhartha Shankar Ray’s Congress regime was: a remover of all opposition. Coming into her own out of this charged scenario, Banerjee came to power in 2011and inherited the entire Left goonda infrastructure. She had enough experience herself — being beaten, arrested, manhandled — to learn the methods too.

After the 2016 assembly polls, when TMC won 211of 295 seats with 45% of votes, far ahead of Left’s 26% and Congress’ pathetic 12%, Banerjee thought herself invincible, with nothing to oppose her. But politics, like nature, abhors a vacuum. Enter BJP.

BJP’s strategy is alien to Bengal politics. Instead of talking of farm income or the public health system or industry or jobs, it managed to turn ‘Jai Sri Ram’ into an anti-TMC, anti-incumbency slogan. It has accumulated a sizeable cadre who go around on motorcycles wearing saffron headbands on Ram Navami, something that was absent from the Bengali calendar till recently.

It plays up the bogey of ‘Muslim illegal migrants’ — in a state where 28% of Bengalis are Muslim. Where the Left and, to some extent, TMC had not prioritised caste, BJP has jumped on the scheduled caste-scheduled tribe (SC-ST) communities. Data from Ashoka University’s Trivedi Centre shows that in seats with negligible SC-ST people, BJP gained around 23% votes with no loss to TMC; where this population was significant, BJP gained 40% or more, denting TMC’s vote share.

Therefore, BJP is playing politics in Bengal that has not been witnessed since, probably, Partition. It has brought religion and caste into play. In the 2019 Lok Sabha polls, this formula paid off: a gain of 16 Lok Sabha seats.

BJP has also shown Banerjee it can give as good as it gets. Well, nearly so. Napoleon Bonaparte had once said, “In order to have good soldiers, a nation must always be at war.” Bengal has always been at war. West Bengal doesn’t need soldiers, it needs investment, jobs, income, farm prices, education, hospitals. Banerjee, an aggressive BJP opposition, have all turned into rhinoceroses, and only the village idiot, bereft of everything, has noticed it.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.

END OF ARTICLE
