CRPF attacked again: Anantnag strike shows Pakistan-based terror continues to be a challenge

In a fresh terror attack, five CRPF personnel who were deployed on picket duty were killed in south Kashmir’s Anantnag district, marking the first attack on the force since the February 14 suicide bombing in Pulwama. A Pakistani terrorist was also killed in the latest incident as the security personnel retaliated. Additionally, five persons, including the SHO of Anantnag Sadar police station, were injured in the attack. And although a lesser-known terror outfit called Al Umar Mujahedeen has claimed responsibility, there is a possibility it was a Jaish-e-Muhammed operation.

It’s well known that Pakistan-based terror groups adopt new aliases in order to evade international sanctions. For example, Lashkar-e-Taiba, Jamaat-ud-Dawa and Falah-i-Insaniat Foundation are all the same organisation headed by proscribed terrorist Hafiz Saeed. But every time a new alias is created, much bureaucratic effort is expended on establishing its link to the original terror group. This not only provides the terror outfit room to continue its operations under the new name, but also gives the Pakistani establishment reason to legally withhold action against the group. Not that they needed much justification in the first place, given the military-ISI complex’s use of terror as an instrument of state policy.

The Anantnag attack shows that despite the surgical strike carried out by the Indian Air Force to avenge Pulwama, eliminating terrorism emanating from Pakistan will be a long-drawn battle. There are multiple terror channels through which Pakistan can strike, and India has to continuously remain on guard. After all, terror has become transnational today with multiple forces at play. The NIA arrest of a suspected Islamic State operative in Tamil Nadu with links to the Sri Lankan Easter Sunday bombing mastermind exemplifies this point. And Pakistan serves as a catalyst for terror networks in South Asia. Thus, there should be no let-up in intelligence-based counterterror operations to tackle the menace.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
