Storm cools down the night, more rain likely tomorrow

Ludhiana: A day after thunderstorm and rain lashed the city, the maximum temperature started to rise again in the city on Thursday. The good news for residents on the weather front is that the meteorological department predicts rainfall from Saturday. As 2.3mm rainfall was recorded in the city from 8.30am on Wednesday to the same time on Thursday, its impact was witnessed on the minimum temperature, which was recorded at 19.6 degrees (6 degrees below normal). On Wednesday, the minimum temperature recorded in Ludhiana was 30.6 degrees (5 degrees above normal).

Meanwhile, as the sun came out and shone brightly through the day, its impact was visible on the maximum temperature in the city on Thursday, recording at 40.2 degrees (2 degrees above normal). The maximum temperature in the city on Wednesday was 43.4 degrees (5 degrees above normal). As the maximum temperature started increasing after the wet spell, the Met department prediction may cheer residents up.

“Until Saturday morning, the weather is likely to remain dry, and during this period, temperatures — especially in the day — may increase. However, later on Saturday, there are chances of light to moderate rainfall in the city that may bring down the temperatures, especially the day temperature. On Saturday and Sunday, thunderstorm and winds of 50 to 60kmph may also blow in the city,” said Chandigarh Met department director Surender Paul. He added that after that, the weather is likely to remain dry for a few days.

Meanwhile, city residents are gearing up to battle the hot weather after the rain. “After days of hot weather, the conditions turned pleasant because of the rain and winds in the city on Wednesday evening. However, the joy was shortlived for us, as the weather started to get hot again. We didn’t use air conditioners last night, as we didn’t feel the need for the same, but as it got hot today, we started using ACs to avoid the heat,” said Suresh Kumar, a trader from Civil Lines.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
