‘Professional rivalry’ led to Bar council chief’s murder

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Shahira Naim

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, June 13

The FIR in the sensational murder of newly elected Uttar Pradesh Bar Council president Darvesh Yadav yesterday has also named main accused Manish Sharma’s wife as well as another advocate, Gulecha Vineet, for hatching the conspiracy.

The FIR, filed by Yadav’s nephew Sunny Yadav, brings out the fact that for the last few days, Sharma’s wife Vandana had been threatening his aunt.

According to the FIR, professional rivalry and jealously appeared to be the reason for the murder as both Sharma and Yadav had started their practice together in 2004 and even shared the same chamber. However, due to Yadav’s mercurial rise in the profession, she had lent money and even parted with jewellery to Sharma who, till recently, was her close associate. But for some reason, the two fell out a few months ago, a fact known to all in the Agra court.

Following this, Sharma had “forcibly” taken over the chamber, forcing Yadav to share the chamber of another advocate, Arvind Mishra, where she was shot at.

Sunny alleged when his aunt asked Sharma to return the money and jewellery a few days ago, Vandana started threatening her. He alleged that ahead of the welcome function, other accused Gulecha brought Sharma along so that they could execute their plan to kill his aunt. Sharma, who had subsequently shot himself, is in coma and has been shifted to a hospital in Gurugram.

Protesting the murder, the Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court as well as many district courts across western UP decided to cease work on Thursday. The association has also requested the authorities to provide security to senior members of the Bar council.

Meanwhile, the Allahabad High Court today directed the state government to ensure foolproof security in all court premises in the state. In a statement, the High Court’s Registrar General said the “Chief Justice had taken a serious view of the incident”.

Condoling Yadav’s death and conveying his condolences to her family, Chief Justice Govind Mathur assured the state’s legal fraternity that the High Court was taking all necessary steps to strengthen security in all courts.

Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav on Thursday visited the victim’s ancestral village of Chandpur in Etah to offer his condolences to the bereaved family.
