Resident doctors at AIIMS join 'cease-work' protest, demand protection for medical professionals

Junior doctors protesting at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata on Tuesday | Photo Credit: BCCL

Mumbai: As the junior doctors' protest at the NRS Hospital in Kolkata enters its fourth day, resident doctors in Mumbai also joined in the protest on Friday. Junior doctors in the state capital of Maharashtra will observe a silent protest with the aim of expressing their solidarity with the doctors' protest which has gripped the state of West Bengal over the past week, a senior member of the Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) told media persons.

President of MARD, Prashant Choudhary said that the resident doctors association has taken cognizance of the brutal attack on a junior doctor at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata. "When a targeted attack like this happens, it becomes a law and order issue," said Choudhary.

On Thursday, doctors with the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi also joined in the protest. To express their solidarity with the protesting doctors, residents at India's premier medical institution wore helmets and used bandages to demonstrate their displeasure with the attack on medicos. Junior doctors in Chandigarh, Hyderabad and other cities also allied with the protest to demand protection for medical professionals.

West Bengal: Doctors at North Bengal Medical College, Siliguri observe strike over violence against doctors at NRS Medical College & Hospital pic.twitter.com/qZvMkUEX0X — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

The announcement comes a day after West Bengal Chief Minister Mamta Bannerjee warned doctors to put an end to their 'cease-work' protest. Addressing junior doctors at the Nilratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital, the Trinamool Congress (TRS) chief told the protesters that stringent action will be initiated against them if they fail to call off the strike. The principal of the NRS Medical College and Hospital, Professor Saibal Kumar Mukherjee stepped down from his post on Thursday citing 'regret for failing to overcome the crisis'.

Delhi: Doctors at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) prepare to observe strike over violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/pza71njjum — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

Dr Pradip Kumar Mitra, Director of Medical Education also wrote to the principal and directors of all medical college hospitals in the state asking them to resume work immediately. In his letter, Dr Mitra stressed on the need to ensure smooth functioning of Emergencies and Out Patient Department at once. Those found refraining to discharge their duties in OPDs will be subjected to severe action, added the Director.
