Woman, paramour shoot themselves with country-made pistols after 'failing in love'

Bodies of the deceased being transported to a local hospital | Photo Credit: Times Now

Jaipur: Pictures, videos of a man and woman who allegedly shot themselves dead at Barmer district of Rajasthan on Thursday have emerged on social media. The deceased have been identified as Anju Suthar and Shamkar Chaudhary, both 21-year-old. A police official familiar with the matter said that the woman was romantically involved with Chaudhary despite having taken wedding vows with another man only a few months ago.

Prima facie the case seems to be one of a 'suicide pact'. However, police are waiting for the reports of the post-mortem to establish the exact cause of death. Two country-made pistols were recovered from the spot under the Chohtan police station limits of Barmer. Reports also suggest that their bodies were found near a cremation ground in the area. The bodies were later sent to a hospital mortuary after being discovered by locals.

Superintendent of police (SP) of Barmer, Rashi Dogra told media persons that investigators did not recover a suicide note but found an audio clip on one of their cell phones which suggests that they decided to take the extreme step because of "failing in love". More details in this regard are awaited as this is a developing story.

A similar instance had come to light from Karnataka just this week where a couple committed suicide in Ramanagara district. Initial reports indicated that a local priest clicked intimate pictures of the woman and sent it to her husband with the intention of blackmailing them. The act, however, upset the couple to the extent where they took their own lives. Later, disgruntled kin of the deceased committed arson by setting fire to the suspected priest's car, house and tractor.

A couple had also taken their own lives in Etah district of Uttar Pradesh earlier this month. Bodies of the two were found hanging from a tree in the region. A senior police official familiar with the matter said that the two bodies have been sent for post-mortem and the cause of death can be established only after the release of the autopsy report.
