Didi vs Doctors: Face-off set to intensify as medical practitioners across country join WB doctors' protests

Nagpur: Doctors with 'Save the Saviour' & 'Stand with NRSMCH' posters at Government Medical College, hold protest over violence against doctors in West Bengal. | Photo Credit: ANI

Kolkata: The face-off between doctors, who are currently on a strike in West Bengal, and Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee is set to intensify as the agitation continues on day four since the crisis began.

Doctors from Delhi, Mumbai, Chandigarh, Hyderabad and now Cuttack joined the going strike, a day after 53 agitating doctors in Bengal quit en masse irked by Didi’s ultimatum directing them to return to work.

Junior doctors in state-run and private hospitals in Bengal have been on strike since Tuesday to protest the vicious assault of one of their colleagues sparked by the death of an 82-year-old at Kolkata’s Nil Ratan Sarkar Medical College and Hospital (NRS) on Monday.

As medical practitioners from across the country join their comrades in the eastern state, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan reacted to the incident calling it “unfortunate”.

Doctors at Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences held protest march after the violence against doctors. In Siliguri, doctors at the North Bengal Medical College observed a strike. Protests were also reported from Cuttack.

As a result of the agitation by the Resident Doctors Association (RDA) of AIIMS, patients faced severe difficulties. "My mother's dialysis was scheduled for today, we were told to go & get it done from somewhere else," the relative of a patient outside AIIMS, New Delhi, told the news agency ANI.

#WATCH Resident Doctors at Raipur's Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Memorial Hospital raise slogans of 'We Want Justice' as they protest over violence against doctors in West Bengal. #Chhattisgarh pic.twitter.com/70BsCTmGLN — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

The flashpoint between the doctors and the state government was triggered on Monday night when grieving relatives of an 82-year-old man, who had died at the NRS Hospital, attacked a junior doctor at the hospital. Paribaha Mukherjee, the doctor who was assaulted, sustained a head injury and was admitted to an intensive care unit at the Kolkata's Institute of Neuroscience.

After the incident prompted the doctors to go on strike, demanding round the clock security at all hospitals and that the assaulters should be arrested.

As a result, outpatients' departments at all state-run hospitals in Kolkata and many of the major hospitals in the state remained closed on Wednesday.

On Thursday, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee visited SSKM Hospital in Kolkata, where she directed protesting doctors to resume work by 2 pm and warned that the state government would take stern action if the doctors ignored her orders.

As many as 53 junior doctors resigned in protest after Banerjee’s ultimatum.
