All India Doctors' Strike: Key developments in nation-wide stir after Kolkata doctors beaten up

The Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan has also condemned the violence against doctors in Kolkata. He has urged patients and their attendants to exercise restraint. | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: In the light of the recent assault on doctors in Kolkata, resident doctors across the country are standing in solidarity and staging protests on Friday. Resident doctors associations in Delhi, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Chandigarh, West Bengal, Hyderabad, Siliguri, Raipur and Cuttack are holding protests to demand "doctors' safety". Prashant Chaudhary, President of Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) at Scion hospital, told news agency ANI that the incident was clearly a targeted assault and this has now become a law and order issue.

They have expressed solidarity to the injured doctors and they have decided to abstain from providing routine services from 8 am to 5 pm on Friday.

Kerala: Members of Indian Medical Association, Trivandrum hold protest over violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/aOWGbqXxlx — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

#WATCH Resident Doctors at Raipur's Dr. Bhimrao Ambedkar Memorial Hospital raise slogans of 'We Want Justice' as they protest over violence against doctors in West Bengal. #Chhattisgarh pic.twitter.com/70BsCTmGLN — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

The five key developments of the strike.

1. The doctors claimed that the Outpatient Department treatment (OPD), routine Operation Theatres (OT) and wards will witness a complete shutdown. Meanwhile, the emergency services in the hospitals will be functioning as regular.

Nagpur: Doctors with 'Save the Saviour' & 'Stand with NRSMCH' posters at Government Medical College, hold protest over violence against doctors in West Bengal. #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/0jRGeW5qyF — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

2. The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has asked members of all its state branches to stage protests and wear black badges on Friday to express solidarity with their protesting doctors across the country. The Delhi Medical Association observed a 'Black Day' on Thursday against the brutal attack on doctors in Bengal.

3. The West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee made attempts to politicise the issue by alleging that opposition Bharatiya Janata Party and Communist Party of India(M) for instigating the protesters as part of a "conspiracy" and giving communal colour to the issue. Banerjee condemned the agitation and directed the police to clear the premises. Despite her ultimatum, the doctors across the state continued the protest.

Delhi: Patients and their relatives outside the OPD at All India Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS). Resident Doctors Association (RDA) of AIIMS is on strike today over violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/rRCeZqDfxr — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

4. The Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan has also condemned the violence against doctors in Kolkata. He has urged patients and their attendants to exercise restraint. He further added that he will take up the matter of doctors' security with all chief ministers and asked the doctors to ensure that essential services to the people are not disrupted.

Jaipur: Doctors at Jaipuria hospital carry out their duties wearing black bands as a mark of protest over violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/1fDLPco7po — ANI (@ANI) June 14, 2019

5. Several residents doctors at AIIMS Delhi, Jaipuria hospital, Jaipur, Safdarjung area carrying out their duties by wearing black bands to mark the protest.

6. Latest inputs indicate that a new-born child died in Agarpara area of North 24 Parganas due to breathing problems after his parents were unable to find a doctor willing to treat him owing to the protest.
