Tracing the rich history of Kerala’s traditional white and gold kasavu saris

In a country full of myriad patterns and bold colours, Kerala’s traditional kasavu sari stands out for its elegance and visual restraint. But beneath its simple appearance lies a cultural legacy and unique aesthetic. Worn by the Malayali community to temples, wedding and funerals alike, today, this age-old woven craft is in need of a design intervention. Vogue spoke to Sreejith Jeevan, founder and designer of clothing label ROUKA, to understand the intricacies of the kasavu weaves.

What is a kasavu sari?

The term kasavu actually refers to the zari used in the border of the Kerala sari and not the sari itself. It is the name of a material used in the manufacturing process. Thus, when kasavu becomes a part of the mundu (dhoti), it’s called a kasavu mundu.

Kerala kasavu embellished sari with zari border, Ajio

In Kerala, traditional attire like saris, mundus (which are sarongs worn by men) and settu mundus (a two-piece sarong sari) are generally called kaithari, translating to handloom. And the identity of the sari generally comes from the cluster they are associated with. Kerala has three clusters that have been given a Geographical Indication (GI) tag by the Indian government, and all of them make what are widely known as kasavu saris, as well as the white Kerala saris that swap the kasavu border with a coloured iteration (called kara). These three famous clusters are Balaramapuram, Chendamangalam and Kuthampully.

The Balaramapuram cluster is based near Trivandrum and the artisans here are from the Shaliar clan. They were originally from Tamil Nadu and were brought down to Kerala by the Travancore royal family. Balaramapuram is famous for its use of pure zari (silver thread plated in gold), and very fine thread counts like 120s. The second cluster called Chendamangalam is famous for saris and mundus that are normally woven using half-fine zari and 80s-100s thread counts, but without too many motifs. They had the patronage of an aristocratic family called Paliam. Finally, the Kuthampully cluster also makes white saris with zari, but includes patterned and jacquard borders featuring human figure motifs. The artisan community here is called Devanga, and they were brought down by the king of Kochi.

What are the origins of the Kerala cotton sari?

Traditionally, there was actually no concept of a sari at all in Kerala. Instead there was the mundu. Everyone wore a mundu from the waist downwards, and there was no upper garment for men or women, neither was required to cover their upper body. On the contrary, in a lot of places women were not allowed to cover their upper bodies, and had to pay a tax to do so.
