Indian troops martyr three more Kashmiri youth in Occupied Kashmir

F.P. Report

ISLAMABAD: In occupied Kashmir, Indian troops in their fresh act of state terrorism martyred three more Kashmiri youth in Shopian district, on Friday.

The troops martyred the youth during a cordon and search operation in Dragad Sugan area of the district.

Forceful anti-India demonstrations erupted in the area as people took to the streets against the killing of the youth.

Indian police and troops fired pellets and teargas shells to disperse the protesters, triggering clashes between the demonstrators and the forces’ personnel.

The occupation authorities have snapped mobile internet service in the district.

Meanwhile, complete shutdown is being observed in Sopore area of Baramulla district, today, against the killing of two youth by Indian troops.

The youth, Aasif Ahmed War and Naseer Ahmed Mir, were martyred by the troops during a cordon and search operation in Dangarpora area of Sopore town, yesterday. All shops and other business establishments are closed while traffic is off the road in Sopore and its adjoining areas to protest against the killing of the youth.

Also on Friday, Kashmir Day and Al-Quds Day, today, was marked by forceful anti-India and anti-Israel demonstrations and rallies were held across the territory. Indian troops injured and arrested several people after using brute force against the protesters.

The call for observance of the day was given by Syed Ali Gilani and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq.

People took to the streets in Srinagar, Badgam, Magam, Ganderbal, Shopian, Islamabad, Kokernag, Pulwama, Kulgam, Kupwara, Bandipora, Baramulla and other areas raising high-pitched pro-freedom, anti-India and anti-Israel slogans. The demonstrations were led by Hurriyat leaders including Maulana Masroor Abbas, Shabbir Ahmed Dar, Imtiyaz Ahmed Reshi, Bashir Qureshi and Ghulam Nabi Waseem. Indian police and troops fired pellets and teargas shells to disperse the protesters at different places.

A resolution drafted by Joint Resistance Leadership was read out and passed during Juma congregations at different mosques, shrines and imambargahs across the territory that called for an end to military occupations in Kashmir and Palestine.
