Homeless rag picker invites lover for drinks at graveyard, smashes her head with boulder

The victim's body was found between two graves (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Hyderabad: A 42-year-old man was arrested by RGI airport police on Thursday for allegedly murdering a woman he had been romantically seeing for the past couple of years. Identified as Vallepu Srinu, the accused is a homeless man who works as a ragpicker in Shamshabad and hails from Velijaral village in Renga Reddy district.

Police officials familiar with the matter said that Srinu had been seeing the woman for the past six years after he separated from his wife and began living away from her and their three children. The victim, 40-year-old Padmamma was separated from her previous husband and lived alone. Her body was found at a graveyard in the city.

According to a report in the Deccan Chronicle, Srinu grew suspicious of Padmamma's loyalty. This led to a fight between the two after which the victim stopped giving the accused money that he was given to regularly 'borrowing' from her. He saw her sleeping next to a stranger on a footpath. This enraged Srinu and he decided to kill her. On Tuesday, he took Padmamma into the bushes near a local graveyard. The two then consumed alcohol which led to the victim falling unconscious. Once she did, Srinu picked up a boulder and smashed her head.

Padmamma's body was found between two graves where police believe the two were sitting and talking before Srinu murdered her. The accused then fled to his native village from where he was arrested on Thursday and remanded to judicial custody. More details in this regard are awaited as the matter is currently being investigated by police. As per the latest reports, the accused has been charged with relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on charges of murder.

A similar incident had come to light from Delhi in May of this year where a man strangled his wife to death after suspecting her of infidelity. The incident took place in Narela area. The victim's decomposed body was found locked inside her residence. Police suspected the role of the husband and launched a search which led them to Bhola. The 31-year-old husband was arrested from Prayagraj station and confessed to murdering his wife. He also told investigators that he tied her limbs, wrapped her body in a blanket and locked it in their home before fleeing.
