SC upholds freedom of Press by ordering release of free-lance Journalist

SC upholds freedom of Press by ordering release of free-lance Journalist

The Supreme Court may order the immediate release of a free-lance journalist, by the Chief Judicial Magistrate of Lucknow, but is it possible for the highest court of the land to ensure that its diktat is delivered at the destination before the lower court receives the order before the end of the day? That is not the job of the Court, but of the appellant to collect the order before the Registry of the Supreme Court closes for the day and the appellant to deliver the certified copy at the other end. This was impossible at the week-end of Saturday, June 9.

He invited arrest, initially for two weeks, for a "defamatory video" about one of India's toughest rulers, Yogi Adityanath, Chief Minister of U.P. and write about a celibate, who happens to be the saffron-robed Mahant of one of the largest and wealthier temples of the country, the Gorakhpur Math, and propose matrimony by a mythical woman.

The Yogi wears a vermilion mark on the forehead and often wears beads. To mess with him is sure to invite trouble and it did arrive at the tweet writer's door on June 9. Marriage is blasphemy, not a joke, who prays, wakes, sleeps, takes food with God's name and love on his mind, day and night. The U.P. Police chief and the Yogi sat at a high table at Lucknow to record a First Information Report, both men looking stern and outraged. Within hours, the journalist, was arrested, if not handcuffed and taken to Lucknow from his home, in Delhi.

Has Mr. I. Prashant Kanojia, the video editor, was arrested by the Uttar Pradesh Police for "defamatory video" on the Chief Minister,Yogi Adityanath. The Supreme Court commented that it is "not murder". The top court was hearing a petition by Kanojia's wife, challenging his arrest on Saturday, June 9. Questioning the basis of the arrest, the Supreme Court said, "Opinions may vary, he probably should not have published or written that tweet, but on what basis was he arrested."

The apex court observed that the "liberty of a citizen is sacrosanct and non-negotiable". "It is guaranteed by the Constitution and it cannot be infringed". It asked the Uttar Pradesh government to "show magnanimity in releasing" the journalist.

Five people, including three media persons, were arrested in a span of two days for allegedly uploading "defamatory" post on the Chief Minister, Yogi Adityanath. A freelance journalist, an editor of a TV channel, and its owner were arrested on Saturday, June 9, over contents that were considered objectionable against the Chief Minister. Another man from Gorakhpur and a woman were arrested on Sunday, June10.

Prashant Kanojia, a freelance Noida-based journalist and the editor and head of a Noida-based television channel, Nation Live, Ishita Singh and Anuj Shukla - were arrested by the U.P. Police. Kanojia had last week shared a video of a Kanpur-based woman making allegations against Yogi Adityanath. The woman was also arrested, according to reports.

A Hindustan Times report commented: "The police action has sparked outrage in media circles on the issue of freedom of expression." The Editors' Guild has described the police action as "high-handed, arbitrary and authoritarian misuse of laws".

At the same time, an acrimonious debate has arisen between the Centre, the West Bengal Governor on one side and Ms. Mamta Banerjee over violence in during the recent Lok Sabha elections in West Bengal. Ms Banerjee has expressed displeasure over state Governor Kesari Nath Tripathi sending a report on the law and order situation in the state to Union Home Minister, Mr.Amit Shah.

Amid continuing post-election violence in West Bengal, Governor Tripathi met Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Union minister Amit Shah in Delhi on Monday, June11 and reported to them on the situation in the state. "I respect the post but not what he's saying about the post-poll casualties in Bengal," Ms Banerjee said today at an event to unveil the statue and bust of Bengali social reformer, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, at a school in Kolkata.

She said that the state of West Bengal was being defamed. She urged people to come together to save the culture of Bengal.

"I respect the Governor but every office has its constitutional limits. Bengal is being defamed. If you want to save Bengal and its culture,come together. A plan is being hatched to turn Bengal into Gujarat. Bengal is not Gujarat," she said.

She accused the BJP of trying to impose Hindi on regional languages. "Every State has its own heritage and language. It's our India. But BJP will not decide the fate of the State," she added. Yet on her way to unveil Vidyasagar's bust, she faced slogans of Jai Shree Ram from the school premises. She walked for one kilometre along with Ministers and intellectuals to the site of Vidyasagar's bust, which was being carried in a special car. Twemty-seven days ago, the bust of Vidyasagar, Bengali social reformer was vandalised during BJP chief, Mr. Amit Shah's road show in Kolkata.

Earlier in the morning, the state police cordoned off the entire stretch of one kilometre and even the college premises was secured from early morning by barring college students and teachers from attending the programme.

Governor Tripathi had met Amit Shah and had given an update on the post-poll violence and the situation in Bengal, especially in the North 24 Parganas district, where two BJP local leaders were killed and one more is missing.

To a question on whether the Centre was mulling Article 356 (President's Rule) for West Bengal, Ms. Banerjee said it would be incorrect to assume that they are sitting idle or wearing bangles. She had said a day earlier that it would be wrong to think that the TMC government in the state can be toppled easily.

Meanwhile, BJP leader, Mukul Roy, had said at a press conference that the BJP will not allow Mamata Banerjee to play a martyr and win the sympathy of the people. "The situation is so bad in the State that it's the government will crumble on its own," he had said.

- (IFS)

*(Lalit Sethi is a Journalist of long standing and a commentator on Political and Social Issues.)
