Guv blames Pak for Anantnag attack

Guv blames Pak for Anantnag attack

SRINAGAR, Jun 13: Day after five CRPF personal lost their lives in a Fidayeen attack in south Kashmir’s Anantnag, Governor Satyapal Malik today blamed Pakistan for orchestrating such attacks being ‘obstinate’ on disrupting peace in the valley.

Malik said it was a Fidayeen attack and not any ordinary act; however he quickly added that such acts will not deter India’s resolve and those involved in the attack will be sorted out.

“My heart goes with the slain soldiers and I express my heartfelt condolences with their families. These attacks take place whenever peace prevails in the valley. You see as soon as elections concluded Pulwama episode happened, so whenever there is upper hand of forces directions comes from the other side to carryout Fidayeen attacks. This was Pakistan’s ploy,” Malik told reporters on the sidelines of a function at SKICC here.

Motorcycle-borne militants gunned down five CRPF personnel in an attack on one of the busiest roads in south Kashmir’s Anantnag town last evening the first major militant strike since the killing of 40 soldiers by a suicide bomber in Pulwama along national highway earlier this year.

Station House Officer (SHO) Anantnag, three CRPF personnel and a local woman were also injured in the attack that took place on KP Road.

Two motorcycle-borne militants drove down KP Road and opened fire at a contingent of CRPF personnel belonging to the 161 Battalion that was deployed at the spot. The CRPF personnel were on law-and-order duty and part of the Road Opening Party (ROP).

Governor said the militants who carried attack on CRPF patrol leaving five personals killed did not provide any room to them to retaliate. The Governor said these attacks take place at the behest of neighboring country.

“They (Jawan’s) were out on duty when a militant on motorcycle carry attack, they (forces) were not provided any chance for retaliation, this was a Fidayeen attack and not any ordinary act and such acts won’t deter our resolve. Those involved in this attack will be sorted out,” he added.

When asked that the attack took place en-route to Amarnath yatra which begins roughly in next three weeks, he said the government will ensure foolproof security during pilgrimage so as no one musters courage to get closer to it.

“Since Yatra was not started, security arrangements too were frail, but we will make foolproof arrangements of security for Amarnath Yatra so that no one musters courage to get closer to it,” Malik said.
