In Alia Bhatt, Ranbir Kapoor’s Brahmastra, Varanasi is the most important location, reveals Ayan Mukerji

Alia Bhatt and Ranbir Kapoor will be seen together in Brahmastra | Photo Credit: Instagram

For the last couple of weeks, photos of Alia Bhatt and Ranbir Kapoor have been dropping on the web, every now and then. We already know that the two lead actors of the upcoming film, Brahmastra have been shooting for the film, along with director Ayan Mukerji. However, in the last few days, we have also seen the likes of Nagarjuna, Mouni Roy and others, who have also been photographed on shooting locations from Brahmastra in Varanasi.

Now we have learnt why the entire cast of the movie is in that town, which has immense religious and historical significance. We already know that Brahmastra will be a science-fiction/superhero franchise. From the logo launch we already know that the story will inculcate magical weapons from Indian mythology. Now, Ayan Mukerji has revealed why Varanasi is so important in his upcoming film.

“In the film, Varanasi is that place where all the characters meet for the first time and the actual adventure begins from there. So far, we have shot a song and an action sequence and hopefully we will be able to present it well.” – Ayan Mukerji revealed in a press conference.

Well, now it makes a lot of sence. After all, if Indian mythological weapons will be used to set up the film’s premise, then what better place for the characters to conglamorate than Varanasi, one of India’s oldest cities, that goes back to a time thousands of years back.

Originally, Brahmastra was supposed to be released on December this year. However, because of reshoots and extensive VFX work that is needed on the movie, producer Karan Johar of Dharma Productions and director Ayan Mukerji, announced last month, that the film is being pushed for a Summer 2020 release.

Instead of Brahmastra, the December release date has now been replaced with Salman Khan’s upcoming action-drama, Dabangg 3, the third film from the Dabangg franchise. While, a lot of written when Salman had announced his movie’s official release date, but later, both KJo and Ayan issued a statement, which clarified that the film was far from being complete and that is the reason for pushing its release date.
