Doctors' strike: Mamata's nephew comes out in agitating doctors' support, says stop treating them like dogs

Abesh Banerjee (L) holding a placard | Photo Credit: Twitter

Kolkata: West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's nephew Abesh Banerjee on Friday came out in support of the striking doctors at the government-run hospitals. Abesh, who is a medical student and the president of KPC Medical College and Hospital, was seen at a rally holding a placard that read: “You say we are Gods!! Why Treat us like Dogs?”

Doctors all over the country have joined the protest in solidarity with the brutal attack on medical interns in Kolkata.

Speaking on the country-wide protest by medicos, Union Minister for Health and Family Welfare Harsh Vardhan condemned the recent incidents of violence and urged patients and relatives to exercise restraints.

Meanwhile, Kolkata Mayor and West Bengal minister Firhad Hakim's daughter, who herself is a doctor, launched a scathing attack on Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for not taking any action against the handling of the ongoing doctors' protest and said that they have the right to protest peacefully. She also demanded safety in the workplace.

In a Facebook post, Shabba Hakim asked people to come forward and question why “goons were still surrounding hospitals and beating up doctors”. Referring to Mamata Banerjee, she further said that being a Trinamool Congress supporter she is “deeply ashamed at the inaction and the silence of our leader.”

Hakim also said that people who are saying “what is the fault of the other patients” should actually question the state government as to why the police officers posted in government hospitals did nothing to stop the attack on the doctors.

"Please question them that when 2 truckloads of goons showed up and why wasn't a back-up sent immediately? Please question why goons are still surrounding hospitals and beating up doctors?" IANS quoted Hakim as saying.

Doctors launched a massive protest in West Bengal since Tuesday after junior doctors at the Nil Ratan Sarkar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata were brutally attacked by the relative of a patient who died due to heart attack on June 10.


