Women In TN Are Being Given Illegal Pills To Make Them Work On Their Periods

While half of the world advocates menstrual leave policy, the other half is still doing all that they can to suck out the maximum work out of women, even as they suffer from period cramps. In a shocking revelation by Thomson Reuters Foundation, it has recently been known that female workers in Tamil Nadu are being given illegal pills in generous doses to “help” them with menstrual pain so that it doesn’t come in the way of their efficiency.

After an in-depth investigation based on interviews with over 100 women from the state’s multi-billion dollar garment industry, what surfaced, was frightening, to say the least. During their period cycles, women who complained of discomfort were offered unlabelled drugs at work, ones which had adverse effects on their health. These pills were seldom provided by qualified medical persons – a major violation of the labour laws in our country and the study further revealed that those who consumed it took a good while to realise the toll it was taking on their bodies. From depression and anxiety to urinary tract infections, fibroids, and miscarriages--more than half the female garment workers stated that these brandless tablets, with no expiry date on them, had dangerous side-effects.

Sudha, one of the women who refused to reveal her last name to protect her identity, said that she took these pills to ease her pain during tiring 10-hour-long shifts as a seamstress. She didn’t see an alternative or a reason to refuse, since missing a day at work would result in a pay cut – something she couldn’t afford to do. Hence, her only way out was to request the factory supervisor to aid her with this medicine. She said, “They were depressing days and the pills helped. Though later, I realized that this was making my menstrual cycle go haywire.” Post a health check-up, doctors told Sudha that she had fibroids, which are non-cancerous growths that develop in or around the uterus.

Further explaining how this turned out to be a nightmare for her, given that she would now have to spend her money on frequent visits to clinics, she said: “Half my salary of Rs 6,000 rupees was going on paying off a loan, and a big amount on my trips to the doctor. It became a cycle I was not able to break, and even though my health became worse, I needed to keep working to pay the bills.” Even though doctors advised her to take rest, the monetary weight on her shoulders didn’t allow her to. The 17-year-old said, “I simply learned to ignore those aches and pains, and continue with my work.”





While Sudha is merely one member of the illiterate and marginalized communities in India, it’s scary to think just how many young workers like her are falling prey to these global retailer giants, who evidently, are relentless about business growth, not paying any heed to all those who are being exploited and harmed, in the bargain. As demand increases, so does the pressure to supply. This is where girls like Sudha come to use. While activists, doctors, and academics have raised red flags, urging action to be taken against the situation, it is, quite likely, a long shot.





*All images are representative


