HMT Rohna attack: Film uncovers secrets of WWII ship disaster

It was a box of yellowed letters that caught Jack Ballo's attention.

Moving things around the attic to make room, Ballo found them in his wife's great-aunt's boxes. Pauline Pisinski had died a few weeks before on Jan. 4, 2018 at the age of 99. And her things had been stored — like so many others — in the attic.

Ballo's wife's family lived in the same house on Obert Street in South River for more than 100 years, with he and his wife Barbara in residence for eight. Generation after generation lived in the modest single-family home. A World War II veteran, Lt. Pauline Pisinski lived there until the former Army nurse went to live in the Menlo Park Veterans Home in Edison. As she "kept everything," it was not a surprise that the attic had accumulated a lot of items.

What was a surprise were the secrets those yellowed letters unfurled.

The letters — 23 of them — were from Sgt. Joseph Pisinski, Pauline Pisinski's brother and Barbara Ballo's great-uncle. Most were written to his mother, Mary Pisinski, 75 years ago, during his service in World War II.

Ballo began reading the letters, getting to know the young man and learning of his life as a solder — of war, of training camp, of deployment and of missing home. A home to which he would never return.

"When you read these letters from somebody, especially from somebody in the situation he was in, being away from home, being homesick, just wanting to be in touch with his family," Ballo said. "His thoughts in the writing of those letters was just so personal. I was just really impressed by what he was saying in his letters. His letters were so real."

Pisinski died in the attack on the HMT Rohna on Nov. 26, 1943. He was 23 years old. It was his second official day of war.

That day, the United States experienced its greatest loss of life at sea by enemy action — 1,105 soldiers killed. But no one knew of the loss until about half a century later. And it was only last year — 75 years later — that Ballo discovered Pisinski had been on the ship.

Pisinski's family was not alone in their ignorance. Seventy-five years after the attack, and still, many loved ones of those lost on the ship do not know what happened that day.

The Rohna, a British transport ship, left North Africa on Nov. 25, 1943 with 1,981 American soldiers on board. They were heading to the China-Burma-India Theater to support the allied war efforts against Japan. The ship was venturing down "Suicide Alley," a stretch of the Mediterranean Sea known for German attacks, Ballo said.

The Rohna was a British India Steam Navigation Company passenger and cargo liner that was built on Tyneside in 1926 as SS Rohna and requisitioned as a troop ship in 1940. The "HMT" stands for "His Majesty's Transport."

Two days after the Rohna set sail, 21 German bombers carrying one of Hitler’s secret weapons — radio-guided missiles — attacked the convoy in two separate waves without any successful hits. Then, one last Luftwaffe bomber plane returned and launched the last radio-guided missile of the attack straight into the side of the Rohna.

The attack killed 1,015 U.S. soldiers — 77 from New Jersey and six, like Pisinski, from Middlesex County. There were 966 survivors.

The U.S. War Department swiftly classified the attack.

The family never knew

Like much of his wife's family, Ballo knew nothing of Pisinski's death. Barbara Ballo had only known that her great-uncle died.

"I was trying to figure out where he was and what happened," Ballo said. "It was interesting. When I found these letters — I've been in my wife's family for over 30 years and I remember hearing that my wife's great-uncle died in World War II — I knew that this happened, but nobody ever talked about it."

Even Pauline Pisinski, who was the last owner of the letters, never spoke of Pisinski and his death. A graduate of St. Peter's Nursing School in New Brunswick, she enlisted in the U.S. Army before her brother and rose to the ranks of First Lieutenant.

"She survived," Ballo said. "She came back, and she wouldn't talk about her time in World War II and she wouldn't talk about her brother who died in World War II. That's how painful it is for these people who came back. They kept that all in. And that's how come this story took so long to come out. Because the survivors on the ship kept the story deep inside them. Some did of course, but for the most part, most didn't say anything when they came home."

When Barbara Ballo found out her great-uncle died on the Rohna, she was shocked.

"There's a big part of me that was just heartbroken that this poor guy — he just sort of disappeared off the face of the earth," Barbara Ballo said. "He had no funeral service. None of that. I think maybe it was just the day and age. You know, there's a Purple Heart somewhere that he received, but we have no idea where that is. There is just so much sadness to me. In reading these letters and seeing what kind of person he was like — I would love to have met him. I start to get a little choked up."

Shortly before Pisinski's death, Mary Pisinski also lost her husband and years before that, her 3-year-old died of influenza during the epidemic.

"What my great-grandmother must have gone through — how hard that must have been for her, and then, to lose another child," Barbara Ballo said.

A mission to 'tell the truth'

In his search that first day, Ballo came across a book called "Rohna Memories," written by Michael Walsh. On Google, Pisinski's name was linked to it. Ballo added Walsh's book to his Kindle and started reading. In it, Walsh interviewed survivors and through the survivor interviews, told the story of the Rohna attack.

Ballo said he "started to understand what happened."

In his book, Walsh also listed the casualties of the Rohna attack. That's where Ballo found Pisinski's name — on the list of casualties. That was how his family found out where Pisinski died — nearly 75 years after his actual death.

READ:'Royal Archie': Hunterdon County WWII veteran to be honored for Memorial Day

Ballo also found a group of Rohna survivors. Called the Rohna Survivors Memorial Association, Ballo went on their website and learned even more.

By the end of that day of discovery, Ballo knew this was a story he had to tell. Pisinski and the rest of the soldiers — the dead and the survivors — needed to be honored. Uncovering the truth and sharing it has become a mission for Ballo.

Already an accomplished filmmaker, he decided a documentary would be the appropriate route.

During Walsh's own research for his book and its follow-up, "Rohna Memories II," Walsh made videos of survivors' first-hand accounts of that day at the annual reunions. It was one of these that caught Ballo's attention and sparked the documentray, "Rohna: Classified." Ballo and Walsh have since teamed up with Walsh signing onto the project as producer/story consultant.

For Walsh, the spark that led him to write the books were the soldier survivors and their families, whom he first met at a reunion in 2001. He had wanted to do his own documentary, but the medium was beyond his scope at the time.

"I felt compelled to preserve their stories," Walsh said. "By making transcripts of their personal memories, I was able to dedicate one chapter to each man and let each one tell their story unedited and exactly how they remembered the events."

A deep dive

The discovery of the letters began a deep dive into uncovering the secrets of the Rohna attack for Ballo. He started his own research and this soon led him down a rabbit hole of cover-ups, classified documents and survivors.

Now, Ballo's home office is covered with Rohna-related documents, photos, notes, books, artifacts and memorabilia, including the yellowed letters that started it all.

"This was the greatest loss of life at sea by enemy action in U.S. war history," Ballo said. "And it was covered up. The U.S. classified it. And the British classified it. And even when the war was over they never declassified it. This is a huge historical event that nobody knows about."

Ballo found that even though the attack involved the first guided missiles ever used against the United States and it was the greatest loss of troops at sea by enemy action in U.S. history, it was never mentioned in World War II history books.

The families of those who were killed in the Rohna attack were never told what happened to their loved ones. There were no War Department phone calls, letters, or visits made providing information that would bring closure to the families.

Most of the bodies of the soldiers were never recovered. In most cases, there were no funeral services or burials for the forgotten soldiers Six months after the attack, the Gold Star families back home received one short paragraph confirming the demise of their loved one in a telegram that also stated that there was no information available.

That was it — the boys just never came home. The War Department kept the Rohna attack classified indefinitely — even after the war was over, Ballo said.

This also meant that the Gold Star families of those 1,015 men who lost their lives on the Rohna never knew it.

"The attack was on Nov. 26, 1943. On Jan. 1, 1944, Joseph's mother and his wife received telegrams saying he was missing in action," Ballo said. "It wasn't until May, that they received a telegram saying he was dead and that he died Nov. 27, 1943. It never said how or where. No details were ever given."

As for the survivors, after the attack, several of them have said they were ordered to remain silent under the threat of court martial. By the time the war was over, the 966 went home with their stories buried deep inside. Most of them never talked about the incident again. Some, 50 years later, started sharing their story. And 75 years after the attack, several are helping with the "Rohna: Classified" project.

"It’s time to tell the truth," Ballo said. "The next-of-kin of the Rohna heroes need to know the truth."

The documentary

Since the discovery of the letters, Ballo has assembled a crew to research the attack, the casualties and work on the documentary. He hopes it will expose the story and garner the respect deserved by the survivors and victims, as well as provide closure to the families.

"When we started making this documentary, I thought it was going to be about a World War II cover-up scandal," Ballo said. "Then as I learned that the life boats were inoperable and that everyone had to jump off the ship, it started to seem more like the Titanic. But now that I understand the pain that the 1,015 families went through trying to find out the truth, I realized that we are making a film about war, fate, love and triumph."

READ:English namesake meets NJ WWII veteran for the first time

Most of the members of the film's crew have a personal connection to the attack, with a personal relation to either a survivor or victim. The crew includes Ballo as Producer/Director/Writer. Ballo, who founded Ultravision Films in 2007 after working in video production for 20 years, has produced several award-winning humanitarian films and documentaries. Joining him as Producer/Story Consultant is Walsh, who penned "Rohna Memories I" and "Rohna Memories II," and is a video producer with more than 35 years of experience in producing award-winning programs.

The film’s Outreach Program includes a team of researchers who are searching for the Gold Star families of the soldiers killed in the attack. Its research has led to the creation of the Rohna Casualty database and has discovered the unidentified remains of 23 soldiers in North Africa who were killed in the attack.

The film's website lists the hometowns of all the casualties organized by state and county. It also has a database form that next-of-kin can use to submit information.

"We’re using today’s technology to finish the job that a group of Rohna survivors vowed to do — that is to reach the families of every Rohna casualty and tell them what happened," said team member Tracey Bannon.

More:HMT Rohna: Remembering the 77 NJ men who died in the WWII attack

More:HMT Rhona: The story of Sgt. Joseph Pisinski

Uncovering the secret

According to Ballo, it took 50 years for the attack information to become declassified.

In the 1990s, survivor John Fievet Sr. wrote a letter to American History magazine. It's editor at the time, Ed Helm, wrote a corresponding piece noting that he thought there was nothing left to learn about World War II — but he had never heard of the attack on the Rohna and its catastrophic loss of life.

"And he wrote of what took place, and that people need to know the story," Ballo said. "It was quite long — it was the first time anybody ever brought this attack up. Until then, it had never been brought to light."

Other survivors began writing their local newspapers of their experience. One caught the attention of radio and television commentator/writer Charles Osgood in 1993. He dedicated one of his weekly Sunday morning broadcasts to the Rohna.

"Could you imagine 50 years not a word is said and then one guy writes an article," Ballo said. "Then, Charles Osgood talks about the attack. And then what happened was — and I've read this so many different places and heard from people say — that people were going about their day to day on a Sunday and they were doing whatever and the radio was on. And they said they heard the story."

According to Ballo, more survivors started talking, telling their families the Rohna was the ship they were on. It became very emotional.

"That is what triggered the survivors to start talking to each other and talking to their families," Ballo said. "These guys wouldn't even tell their wives. They didn't tell their mothers or fathers. They just wanted to forget it. But, after this, they started having reunions and created the Rohna Survivors Memorial Association. That got things going."

The subject also has been a segment on The History Channel and other authors besides Walsh had written books on Rohna. But, according to Ballo, the attack on the Rohna was still not a household name, like the attack on the USS Arizona at Pearl Harbor or the USS Indianapolis in the Philippine Sea.

"For some reason, I guess it was too little too late," he said. "And it just didn't pick up the traction that that it needed for people to acknowledge it."

Why the cover up?

After the Osgood program aired, documents on Rohna were quietly declassified. Because of the Freedom of Information Act in 1967, once Rohna was declassified, it became an opportunity for families to get more information. But since many never even knew where or how their loved one died, they did not ask questions.

Since his discovery, Ballo has been to the National Archives three times to conduct research for his film. He also has attended Rohna reunions and met with survivors.

Ballo found he has more questions than answers.

"One is they classify the attack, which wasn't unusual because they tended to classify any attack immediately because they did not want the enemy to know how successful they actually were," Ballo said. "In this case they were extremely successful. The other thing is they didn't want to panic civilians about how many were killed. Imagine the headlines of 1,000 U.S. soldiers killed. It was decided not to tell the families what happened."

In the first week of January that year, families of the casualties received telegrams stating their loved one was missing since Nov. 26, 1943. For the Pisinskis, they thought Joseph Pisinski was fine over Christmas. They had even received a holiday card from him — not knowing it was mailed about two weeks before the attack. They received their first telegram from the War Department on Jan. 1, 1944.

"So first, they think he is fine," Ballo said. "Then, they think he is missing in North Africa. That's all they know. Just one sentence. The government, the military — they are well aware that these men are dead. Then, months later in May, the families receive a telegram saying that their loved one has been killed."

The film, an Ultravision Films production, is expected to be completed in late 2020. A Kickstarter campaign to raise funds for the film began Memorial Day weekend. It can be found online at rohnaclassified.com/kickstarter. The campaign ends June 24, Ballo said.

The Ballos are gratified that in telling the story of the Rohna, they can "help more people find out" about it. Ballo hopes his documentary will ignite the respect and attention both the Rohna dead and survivors deserve.

"That's what I'm happy about," Ballo said. "We have made so much progress already. People are filling out the form. They're writing comments and notes to go to our Facebook page. We're putting this out to the families of these casualties. That's our goal. And we're just getting started. That's what's exciting about it. We are going to bring these men home."

For more information, go to www.RohnaClassified.com.

Cheryl Makin has been a reporter for more than two decades - the last eight with the USAToday Network. She enjoys sharing stories that inspire, instill hope and encourage smiles. An award-winning journalist, she specializes in articles that tell the human story. She is secretly a princess. Contact her at cmakin@gannettnj.com, 732-565-7256 or follow her @cherylmakin
