Tanushree Dutta's complaint against Nana Patekar looks malicious and fake: Oshiwara police in report

Yesterday, the Mumbai police gave Nana Patekar a clean chit in the Tanushree Dutta sexual harassment case, as they said they could not find any evidence against him. The B- Summary report filed by the Oshiwara police in Mumbai said that Tanushree's complaint could have been filed to seek revenge and it seems "malicious and fake". The report accessed exclusively by India Today states that no evidence of any incident of sexual harassment was found.

In 2008, Tanushree had filed a complaint against Nana Patekar, saying that he had behaved inappropriately with her on the sets of Horn Ok Pleassss (2008), while shooting a special sequence. She had also lodged a complaint with CINTAA (Cine and TV Arts Association).

In October last year, Tanushree filed an FIR against Nana. Director Rakesh Sarang, choreographer Ganesh Acharya, producer Sami Siddiqui were also named in the case. Following this, police interrogated the witnesses, who were present during the incident in 2008.

In 2008, producer Sami Siddiqui had told Tanushree that he would claim for the losses that he had suffered, as she had walked out of the film.

The conclusion and findings of the report state that after much investigation, there has been no solid piece of evidence against Nana Patekar, Sarang, Ganesh Acharya, and Siddiqui.

The conclusion of the report cites two major points:

1. On March 26 2008, Tanushree Dutta filed a complaint with the Goregaon police station. However, the witnesses haven't mentioned anything about the sexual harassment incident on the sets in this complaint.

2. When the said incident happened, the 13 witnesses present have recorded their statements, which say that Tanushree was not molested or sexually harassed by Nana, so the complaint could be out of revenge and that it seems malicious and fake.

The 13 witnesses, which include the choreographer Daisy Shah, Tanushree’s hair dresser, the spot boy, claimed in their statements that they did not see or witness any such act or incident wherein Nana had tried to sexually harass Tanushree.

In her complaint, she alleged that the producer and director had said that her song sequence would be solo, but Nana entered the set and harassed her.

According to the complaint, Tanushree also alleged that Nana had just a one-line sequence in the song, but he tried harassing her while she was rehearsing.

In their report, the police said that while they were going through the contract and statements of witnesses, they understood that Tanushree had been informed about a male dancer would be shooting with her.

Witness statements state that Nana didn't harass or even touch Tanushree.

In his statement to the police, Nana Patekar said, "On 26th March 2008, while shooting the song sequence for the film Horn OK Pleassss, choreographer Ganesh Acharya was trying to teach me the dance steps. I don't know how to dance, so for each step it would take at least 25 to 30 takes and despite that, I was unable to perform properly. On the other side of the set, around 30 to 35 feet away, Acharya and his assistant were also trying to help Tanushree Dutta with dance steps. After some time, Tanushree completed her sequence and left for her vanity van. Around 1 pm, everyone left for lunch. After returning from lunch, shooting started again.

"Now Tanushree and I were shooting together and both were at some distance from each other. Suddenly Tanushree left from the set and I couldn't understand what had happened. Shooting stopped, no one knew what had happened. It was found later that Tanushree was sitting in her vanity van and had locked it from inside. Ganesh Acharya, his assistants and the producer tried convincing Tanushree to come back to the set but she didn't come back. The shooting was called off and we were told to pack up.

"It was later that director Rakesh Sarang told me that Tanushree had alleged that I tried to sexually harass her. Later while speaking to media persons, I told them that no such incident had happened as Tanushree was like my daughter and that I don't know anything about the allegations. The song sequence was then shot with anotheractress, Rakhi Sawant, two days later. After this I met Tanushree at Goa during a film festival and she smiled at me after which I also responded with a smile. I haven't met her after that.

"I have to say this that Tanushree and I were dancing at separate places and there was a lot of distance between us. Despite that, Tanushree left from the set. I don't know till date, why she left and also why she made allegations of sexual harassment against me. I am a senior artist, who has been awarded with National Awards thrice for films like Agnisakshi, Parinda and Krantiveer. The Indian government felicitated my work by awarding me a Padmashree. The allegations made by Tanushree has defamed me and led to a lot of mental stress."

Tanushree's accusations against Nana Patekar sparked off the #MeToo movement in India last year. Women came forward to call out powerful men for inappropriate behaviour, sexual harassment and molestation.

ALSO READ | Nana Patekar on Tanushree Dutta's allegations: Will see what I can do legally

ALSO READ | Tanushree Dutta calls Ajay Devgn show-off and hypocrite for working with Alok Nath in De De Pyaar De
