Taming the problem child: Few ways Pakistan can be held accountable for aiding, abetting terrorism

People burning pictures of Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, Jamaat-ud-Dawa chief Hafiz Saeed and Pakistan flag as they protest against suicide attack on a CRPF bus in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district. | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi in a veiled attack on Pakistan said that nations aiding and abetting terrorism must be held accountable for their actions and called for a global conference to combat the menace.

Addressing the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) summit in Bishkek, Modi sought cooperation in the fight against terrorism. In the presence of Pakistan PM Imran Khan, the prime minister said that countries need to come together and unite to combat threats posed by terrorism.

India has not engaged with Pakistan after the 2016 Pathankot terror attack saying that talks and terror cannot go together.

Tensions between the two nuclear-armed neighbours escalated in February this year after a suicide bomber of Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) killed 44 CRPF personnel in Kashmir's Pulwama district.

In retaliation, India ordered a pre-emptive airstrike by the Indian Air Force on JeM training camps in Pakistan’s Balakot on February 26. Under pressure to save its face, the Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed an MiG-21 in aerial combat and captured Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman who was later handed over to India as a “peace gesture”.

Here are the steps India can take to force Pakistan to stop terrorism:

Global isolation

After Pulwama terror attack, India’s diplomatic machinery helped it to get Pakistan isolated on the international stage. As a result, JeM chief Masood Azhar was blacklisted by the United Nations. However, this victory was symbolic at best given the fact that Islamabad has no dearth of operatives and terror outfits which are ready to do its bidding.

The recent terrorist attack at security forces in South Kashmir's Anantnag carried out by little-known Pakistan-based terrorist outfit Al-Umar Mujahideen is an example in this regard.

While China remains an all-weather friend of Pakistan, the immense international pressure forced it to drop opposition to the blacklisting of Azhar in the UN.

Trade and sanctions

Pakistan is facing a major economic crisis with national debt standing at $205 billion according to PM Imran Khan. Its foreign exchange is facing a record low with tax revenue of $22.7 billion, most of which is used for paying off debt accrued under China–Pakistan Economic Corridor projects to Beijing.

The suspension of American aid only compounded Pakistan's problems.

While Pakistan has signed a $6 billion loan agreement with the International Monetary Fund, it can be cancelled if Islamabad is blacklisted by the FATF. The country is already facing an estimated loss of $10 billion annually by being in the greylist and with its economy already in a fragile state, India should not leave any stone unturned in getting it blacklisted.

It’s not only India which is accusing Pakistan of promoting state-sponsored terrorism. Islamabad has also been accused by other neighbouring countries like Afghanistan and Iran for its involvement in promoting terrorist activities in the region. A concrete collective action against Pakistan is the need of the hour.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
