Nationwide Doctors Protest, Two Terrorists Killed In Pulwama Encounter And Other News

Medical services across India is set to come to a standstill as doctors responding to a call by the Indian Medical Association's all India protest day to express solidarity with the striking doctors.

Doctors in some of the biggest hospitals in India like the AIIMS in New Delhi and the Safdarjung Hospital have boycotted OPDs for the day as a mark of protest. Read more

Two Days After 5 CRPF Personnel Were Killed In Anantnag, Two Terrorists Gunned Down In Pulwama

Two terrorists were killed by the Indian security forces in an encounter in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district.

The encounter broke out on Friday, police said after the security forces launched a cordon and search operation in Braw Bandina area of Awantipora in the district in south Kashmir following an intelligence input about the presence of the terrorists. Read more

It Is Mid-June And Delhi Is Yet To See Onset Of Monsoon While Other States Have Received Pre-Monsoon Showers

National Capital Delhi is in the grip of an acute heatwave and an unusually long dry spell. While it is not limited to Delhi as most of central and northern India are experiencing the hot sizzling summer, the national capital seems to be the worst affected.

We are two weeks into June, which also is the beginning of the annual monsoon season in the country. Read more

Two Elderly Citizens Die In Their Delhi Home Due To Extreme Heat And Lack Of Food

In a tragic incident, two elderly persons in Rana Pratap Bagh under Bharat Nagar in the national capital were found dead, police said, adding the deceased could have died due to lack of food and extreme heat.

Bodies of Chaman Lal Khosla (95) and his sister Raj Kumari (77) were found in in a decomposed stage inside their residence. Police have sent the bodies for post-mortem to find out the actual cause of death. Read more

Karnataka Woman Tied To Pole And Harassed For Not Repaying Loan Of Rs. 50,000

There are several instances of people being harassed over non payment of loans taken by them and in another incident reported from Kodigehalli in Bengaluru, a woman was allegedly tied to a rope.

Seven people have been arrested in connection with a case where a woman was allegedly tied to a pole in for not repaying a loan, police said. The matter came to the fore after a video of the incident went viral. Read more

801 Workers Died Cleaning Sewers In India Since 1993 As Many Safai Karamcharis Still Await Safety Gears

The sight of safai karamcharis cleaning the dirty sewers is not pleasing to our naked eyes. Imagine what goes on when they step into the sewers without any protective gears. The calls for safety equipment being provided to these safai karamcharis have been on the rise. However, several states in the country are yet to implement it.

A new report has revealed that around 801 sanitation workers have died while cleaning sewers in the country since 1993, Manhar Valjibhai Zala, chairperson, National Commission for Safai Karamcharis said. Read more
