Didi vs doctors: Kolkata doctors seek apology from Mamata as nationwide protest begins | 12 points

Hundreds of senior doctors in various state-run hospitals across the state resigned from their services to show solidarity with the agitators.

Doctors in Kolkata have managed to get the doctors from all over the country to stand with them in solidarity over attacks against doctors. The doctors have been protesting for the past four days after two junior doctors were attacked by the kin of a patient who died on Monday.

Hundreds of senior doctors in various state-run hospitals across the state resigned from their services to show solidarity with the agitators.

Mamata Banerjee on Thursday afternoon had visited Kolkata's SSKM Hospital where she gave the agitating doctors a four-hour ultimatum to withdraw their ongoing strike and warned of "strong action" if the situation was not normalised within the deadline.

This led to a stand off between the doctors and the state government, making them all the more determined to carry on the protest.

In Delhi, scores of doctors at some government and private hospitals held demonstrations by marching and raising slogans to express solidarity with their Kolkata colleagues.

Junior doctors in Odisha staged dharna with bandages on their foreheads, besides staying away from duty. Around 4,500 resident doctors in Maharashtra, including some 2,800 in Mumbai, went on a one-day strike.

Here are 10 points about the doctors' protest and what has happened so far:

The Indian Medical Association (IMA) has launched a three-day nationwide protest from Friday to express solidarity with the doctors agitating against the attack on their colleagues in West Bengal. It has also called for a strike on June 17 with withdrawal of non-essential health services. The apex body of doctors in the country also renewed its demand for a central law to check violence against health care workers in hospitals. It said it should have a provision for a minimum of seven-year jail sentence to violators.

The IMA also wrote to Union Home Minister Amit Shah demanding enactment of a central law to check violence against health care workers in hospitals. In a letter to Amit Shah, the IMA requested him "to bring a central legislation in the form of special law against violence on doctors and health care establishments". Condemning any form of violence especially against medical professionals in the country, the apex body of doctors said the protest will continue on Saturday and Sunday as well, which will include wearing black badges, dharnas and peace marches, and called for a strike on June 17 with withdrawal of non-essential health services.

Agitating Kolkata doctors have demanded Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's unconditional apology for her statements and set six conditions to the adminstration for withdrawal of their stir. "We want unconditional apology of Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for the manner in which she had addressed us at the SSKM Hospital yesterday. She should not have said what she had," a spokesperson of the joint forum of junior doctors, Dr Arindam Dutta, said. While visiting the SSKM Hospital, Mamata Banerjee had contended that "outsiders" had entered medical colleges to create disturbances and the agitation was a conspiracy by the CPI(M) and the BJP.

Listing the six conditions, the agitators said Mamata Banerjee will have to visit the injured doctors at the hospital and her office should release a statement condemning the attack on them. "We also want immediate intervention of the chief minister. Documentary evidence of judicial inquiry against the inactivity of the police to provide protection to the doctors at the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital on Monday night should also be provided," Dutta said. "We demand documentary evidence and details of action taken against those who had attacked us," Dutta said.

West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee met senior doctors and later invited the agitators for talks on Saturday but they declined the offer. Mamata Banerjee also wrote a letter to protesting doctors and assured necessary action and full co-operation in the issue regarding the hospital violence. In the letter, Mamata Banerjee requested the doctors "to withdraw the agitation as people are not getting treatment." Five people have been arrested and their bail prayers were rejected, Mamata Banerjee said. She also said that an enquiry has been started to look into the issue from all sides.

As the medical fraternity from across the country began to rally behind their Bengal counterparts, Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan urged Mamata Banerjee not to make this sensitive matter a "prestige issue" but ensure an "amicable end" to the stir, which entered the fourth day on Friday. He also asked the government to pass a law to make attacks on doctors a non-bailable offence with minimum 12-year jail term.

Governor Keshari Nath Tripathi said he called up Mamata Banerjee to discuss the issue but is yet to get a response from her. "I have tried to contact the chief minister. I have called her up. Till this moment, there is no response from her. If she calls me, we will discuss the matter," he told reporters after visiting injured junior doctor Paribaha Mukherjee at the hospital. Paribaha Mukherjee is one of the two junior doctors attacked by relatives of a patient, who died at the NRS Medical College and Hospital here on Monday night, triggering the ongoing agitation by medicos across the state.

A senior state health department official said over 200 doctors, including heads of departments of medical colleges and hospitals in Kolkata, Burdwan, Darjeeling and North 24 Parganas districts, sent their resignation letters to the state director of medical education. "We express fullest solidarity to the current movement of NRS Medical College and Hospital and other government hospitals agitating to protest the brutal attack on them while on duty," Dr P Kundu, director of the Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, said in the resignation letter. "We strongly stand by the demands of security and protection for all healthcare personnel and we have tried our best to continue life saving services in the interest of our patients till now," Prof (Dr) Dipanjan Bandyopadhyay, Head of Medicine department at North Bengal Medical College and Hospital, wrote in the resignation letter which contained the signature of 34 other senior doctors.

The principal and the medical superintendent of the NRS Medical College and Hospital submitted their resignations on Thursday night. Two junior doctors of the NRS Medical College and Hospital were seriously injured in an attack by family members of a patient who died on Monday night, triggering the stir. 10. Earlier in the day, several prominent personalities like filmmaker Aparna Sen, rights activist Binayak Sen, actor and theatre personality Kaushik Sen, film director Kamaleshwar Mukherjee and musician Debojyoti Mishra along with senior doctors, visited the agitators at NRS Medical College and Hospital showing solidarity towards the junior doctors. They later participated in a rally holding placards with a message "No more violence, enough is enough".

Meanwhile, the Calcutta High Court refused to pass any interim order on the strike. It also asked the state government to resolve the issue so that patients can get health services. The Chief Justice, during the hearing of a Public Interest Litigation (PIL), reminded the striking doctors of the 'Hippocratic Oath' they take to ensure the welfare of all patients.
