Neighbourhood issues

It appears as though one more opportunity to resolve differences between India and Pakistan is going to be missed at the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) summit at Bishkek as no bilateral talks have been scheduled between Prime Ministers Narendra Modi and Imran Khan (“Navigations in Bishkek”, June 13). This is a pity. Dialogue is the only way of resolving issues and it must be initiated with a sense of urgency. There is nothing to lose and everything to gain with a friendly, peaceful neighbourhood.

D.B.N. Murthy,

Bengaluru

The Prime Minister’s well-thought-out visit to the Maldives and Sri Lanka is a signal that India will balance out China’s presence in the Indian Ocean Region and counteract its String of Pearls diplomatic policy (“The importance of being neighbourly,” June 12). Apart from focusing on nations that China is trying to woo, India must concentrate on the neighbourhood in general as events happening in the neighbourhood have a direct impact on India.

Vrinda Rajvanshi,

New Delhi

A secular India

I cannot agree more with the writer that a second term for Prime Minister Narendra Modi indicates that a significant number of Hindus endorse the Hindu supremacist ideology of the RSS (“A summary of fears and possibilities”, June 13). Gone are the days of secularism. Most Indians nowadays think along communal lines. The reasons why Opposition parties did not raise issues such as mob lynching and violence against Muslims are not far to seek. In my cynical view, they are fully aware that the very mention of the word ‘Muslims’ will bring about accusations of appeasement and result in a loss of votes. It is not without reason that Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Kamal Nath invoked the National Security Act in a case of alleged cow slaughter, though he regretted it later. However, the transition to a Hindu state will not be as smooth as the re-installation of a Hindutva government; it will be marked by internal conflict. The possibility of people getting disenchanted with the politics of hate in the long run cannot be ruled out either. Indians will come to their own conclusions only if they experience something directly, not through public discourse.

Abdul Assis P.A.,

Kochi

Instead of writing objective articles by stating facts, some of The Hindu’s columnists engage in rhetoric and speak as though Indians at large have been made gullible fools by the BJP’s propaganda. Words like toxic masculinity and hyper-nationalism are frequently bandied about. While I highly appreciate and value the newspaper’s journalistic endeavours in unravelling the truth and holding the government accountable (such as in the Rafale series), publishing biased columns does no good for the newspaper.

Saumyadip Moitra,

Vasco da Gama

Caste in everyday life

A government employee being rejected by the local people because of her Scheduled Caste status does not square with India’s claim of being a fast-developing nation (“Caste Hindus say ‘no’ to anganwadi workers at Valayapatti”, June 14). If one begins to probe the caste identities of all the service providers of the country, one cannot eat in hotels, travel in buses, trains and flights, or do anything for that matter. This country has a Constitution that was framed by a Dalit icon. People should be taught to shed their casteist outlook. I have one other request to The Hindu: please say ‘so-called upper castes’ or ‘caste perpetrators’ in your reports instead of saying ‘caste Hindus’ just as the word ‘Dalit’ has been widely accepted for describing the SCs. ‘Caste Hindus’ sends out a wrong message that caste is relevant only to the so-called upper castes and not to the Dalits.

A. Clement,

Chennai
