Doctors protest increasing violence on fraternity

‘Take stringent action’

HUBBALLI: More than 200 doctors under the banner of Indian Medical Association ’s city unit protested against increasing cases of violence on doctors, at the tahsildar’s here on Friday.In a recent incident, Dr Paribha Mukherjee, a young doctor was attacked by a violent mob at NRS Medical College, Kolkata. He is critical and fighting for his life, said IMA members.IMA Hubballi president Dr Abhay Matkar and secretary Dr Sachin Revankar said IMA has been demanding a law against hospital violence. “The organization has declared a zero-tolerance policy against violence on doctors and healthcare establishments. The World Medical Association has also passed a resolution against violence on healthcare establishments and urged to bring stronger legislation against this menace,” they said.“As per the law, those found guilty of assaulting doctors must be imprisoned for seven years. Hospitals should be declared as special zones and provision of appropriate security should be the responsibility of the state,” they said.“Increases violence on doctors will adversely affect public health at large. Threat of violence increases stress levels of health care workers. Sound judgment regarding patient care will be compromised in such situations. As part of the protest all doctors in the city have worn black badges,” they added.Later, protesters submitted a memorandum urging government to look into their demands. IMA past presidents Dr K H Jituri, Dr Ashok V Kalamdani, Dr K V Aradhyamath, Dr Azhar Kittur, Dr G B Sattur, senior doctors Dr Ramesh Babu, Dr Vivek Yalmali, Dr Arvind Yalmali, doctors and PG students from SDM Medical College and KIMS took part in the protest.Members of Ballari unit of the Indian Medical Association wore black badges on Friday against increasing cases of violence on doctors. They took out a procession from the IMA building to the deputy commissioner’s office and submitted a memorandum requesting both the state and central governments to take stringent action against those who carry out attacks on doctors.
