Hold countries sponsoring terror accountable: Modi

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Bishkek, June 14

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday lashed out at countries “sponsoring, aiding and funding” terrorism and told top leaders at the SCO Summit that such states must be held accountable, in a veiled reference to Pakistan, whose premier Imran Khan was among the audience.

Also read: India declines to endorse China’s BRI at SCO meet

Addressing the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Summit here, Modi also called for a global conference to combat the scourge of terrorism.

India advocates a terrorism-free society, he said.

To combat the menace of terrorism, countries will have to come out of their narrow purview to unite against it, Modi said in the presence of Russian President Vladimir Putin, Chinese President Xi Jinping, Pakistan PM Imran Khan and Iran President Hassan Rouhani, among others.

“Countries sponsoring, aiding and funding terrorism must be held accountable,” he said.

Prime Minister Modi also called on the SCO member states to cooperate under the SCO Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) against terrorism. A peaceful, united, safe and prosperous Afghanistan is vital for the stability and security in the SCO, he said. “We are happy that a further roadmap has been prepared at the SCO Afghanistan Contact Group.”

The SCO is a China-led eight-member economic and security bloc with India and Pakistan being admitted to the grouping in 2017. — PTI

Modi, Imran exchange greetings

Bishkek: Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his Pakistani counterpart Imran Khan exchanged pleasantries on the sidelines of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation Summit here when the two met in the Leaders’ Lounge, sources said. This is the first such interaction between the two PMs amid the chill in the bilateral ties triggered by the Pulwama attack in February. IANS

Visas denied to Sikh pilgrims, India protests

New Delhi: India has lodged a strong protest with Pakistan over its refusal to grant visa to 87 Indian pilgrims who wanted to visit the neighbouring country to observe the death anniversary of fifth Sikh Guru Arjan Dev, official sources said. They were part of the official jatha (group), sources said, adding that restrictive visa was granted to a private group of Indian pilgrims. TNS
