[PICS] Shraddha Kapoor ups her airport style file as she pairs a turquoise green pantsuit with white sneakers

Shraddha Kapoor makes a splash at the airport | Photo Credit: Instagram

Bollywood actor Shraddha Kapoor last graced the big screen in Shree Narayan Singh's Batti Gul Meter Chalu co-starring Shahid Kapoor last year. But the actor, who is busy shooting for her next film Saaho, is making sure to keep her fashion choices up to date.

The actor was snapped at the Mumbai airport on Friday night. Ditching the regular colour palette, Shraddha chose a stylish pantsuit in the shade of turquoise green. To up her fashion game, Shraddha paired her pantsuit with a pair of white sneakers, in sync with her white tee.

The actor looked every bit stylish as she made a splash at the airport. She left her hair open and finished off her look with a pretty lip shade.

Here, check out Shraddha Kapoor's latest photographs:

The actor was returning from a film's shoot. Shraddha will next be seen in Saaho alongside Prabhas. The teaser of the film released almost two days back and ever since, the fans can't stop raving about the Shraddha, Prabhas-starrer.

Shraddha, in fact, recently treated fans to a video of fans celebrating Saaho teaser and it was pure madness! Shraddha also shared that it's been a dream to work with Prabhas and the film's director Sujeeth. Overwhelmed by the audience reaction, Shraddha captioned the video as, "#PrabhasFans madness!!! It’s been a dream to work with @actorprabhas @sujeethsign & the entire team! Over 2 years of hard work by the entire team of Saaho... overwhelmed by this reaction already!Thank you, thank you, thank you! #SAAHO #15thaugwithsaaho @actorprabhas @sujeethsign @uvcreationsofficial." Saaho co-stars Neil Nitin Mukesh and Jackie Shroff in key roles.

The actor will also star in Remo D'Souza's Street Dancer 3D alongside Varun Dhawan. The film co-stars Prabhu Deva, Punit Pathak, Dharmesh Yelande, Raghav Jural, Nora Fatehi and Shakti Mohan in lead roles.
