Arjun Reddy actor Vijay Deverakonda wants Shahid Kapoor's Kabir Singh to be a massive blockbuster

Vijay Deverakonda wants Kabir Singh to be a blockbuster | Photo Credit: Instagram

Vijay Deverakonda’s Arjun Reddy became one of the most popular films down South and even earned himself a huge female fan following. The film is being remade in Bollywood as Kabir Singh and has Shahid Kapoor, Kiara Advani playing the leads in it. Both Shahid and Vijay fans are pretty excited for the film. Speaking about Kabir Singh, Vijay told Deccan Chronicle, “My dear friend Sandeep, who directed me in Arjun Reddy, is now done with its Hindi remake, and I can’t wait to see how it has turned out. Knowing Sandeep, he has probably altered the original script — amazing as it was — to begin on an exciting, new note.”

He added, “I’ve known Shahid to be a good actor since Ishq Vishq, and I’m sure he’s done an exceptional job in Kabir Singh, too. I want the film to be a massive blockbuster.” The actor also said that he will watch Kabir Singh the moment he lands in Hyderabad since he is shooting in France right now. The Geetha Govindham star is also gearing up for the release of his next film, Dear Comrade, which has been getting postponed for a long time now. The teaser and songs from the film are already out.

In an exclusive interview with ZoomTV, Shahid said, “I never feel I'm perfect for any role. When you have to play a character, you have to be very realistic about it, you have to know your own strengths and weaknesses. Every actor comes with his own strengths and weaknesses. It was Vijay's first film so that had its own pros and cons. It's my 28th or 29th or 30th film which comes with its own pros and cons. So we are in different places and we've played similar characters. Yes, Sandeep was somebody who told me that he felt I was right for the character and to me that is the most important thing. The film maker has to believe that the actor can play the part.” Stay tuned with us for more updates.
