Doctors' protest: Mamata Banerjee cancels meeting with injured doctor Paribaha Mukhopadhyay

Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, a junior doctor at the NRS Medical College, received deep injuries on his skull. (Photo: Facebook)

After the protesting Kolkata doctors refused to blink and go back to their duties, West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee cancelled her meeting with the injured doctor, Paribaha Mukhopadhyay, on Saturday.

She was likely to visit Mukhopadhyay who was injured on Monday night in clashes between junior doctors and relatives of a 75-year-old patient who died due to alleged medical negligence.

Paribaha Mukhopadhyay sustained a serious skull injury in the attack and was admitted in the intensive care unit of the Institute of Neurosciences in Kolkata's Park Circus area.

According to the reports, the doctors treating Paribaha Mukhopadhyay will brief Mamata Banerjee about the junior doctor's health condition.

The attack happened on Monday at the NRS Medical College and Hospital after a 75-year-old patient passed away and his family members reached the hospital around 11 pm and clashed with the junior doctors on duty, alleging medical negligence.

Two junior doctors - Paribaha Mukhopadhyay and Yash Tekwani - were allegedly beaten up by the relatives of the deceased patient.

Soon after, the junior doctors locked up the hospital gates, stopped work at the OPD and started a 'dharna' to protest against the attack. A large police contingent had to be deployed at the hospital to avoid any untoward incident.

The tension spilled onto other state-run hospitals in the city and districts, including the Calcutta Medical College and R.G. Kar Medical College and Hospital.

Several hospitals in Delhi, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana went on a strike in solidarity with the protesting doctors of West Bengal, demanding safe environment for the practitioners.

Earlier in the day, AIIMS Delhi and Safdarjung hospital called off their strikes, with the previous giving a 48-hour ultimatum to Mamata Banerjee to meet the demands of the protesting doctors in Kolkata.

The doctors said that if the demands of the Kolkata doctors are not met within 48 hours, the AIIMS doctors would be forced to resort to an indefinite strike at the Delhi hospital.
