Prakash Raj shares unpleasant encounter with fan's husband in Kashmir: Why hurt the ones we love?

On June 15, Prakash Raj took to Twitter to share an unpleasant incident that took place when a woman and her daughter wanted to take a photo with him in Gulmarg, Kashmir. He revealed that the encounter has made him think about a lot of things.

A lady and her daughter had approached Prakash Raj for a photo and he obliged. The woman's husband barged in and abused her for taking a picture with the actor, because he has criticised Prime Minister Narendra Modi on several occasions. Taken aback by the reason, Prakash Raj advised the husband about the situation.

His tweet read, "As I walked out of my hotel in Gulmarg..Kashmir..a lady n her young daughter asked me for a selfie.. I obliged.. they were so happy. But suddenly her husband barged in abusing and asked them to delete it..since I differed with Modi..the tourists around were watching this..this women were in tears..I took him aside and spoke. "Dear sir.. Mr Modi or me are not the reason your wife married you..gave you this wonderful daughter and shared a life with you. Please respect their views as they respect yours..enjoy your vacation" As he stood without an answer..i walked away with a heavy heart..wondering.. He may or may not delete my photograph.. But Will he..heal their wound. (sic)"

Here is his tweet:

A moment in Kashmir... Why do we HURT the ones we LOVE for someone else ?? Why do we HATE because we differ ?? #justasking pic.twitter.com/RurmY369Kd Prakash Raj (@prakashraaj) June 15, 2019

Prakash Raj is quite critical of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and the current government and has expressed his views several times.

His interest in politics made him contest in the recently-concluded Lok Sabha Elections as an independent candidate. Unfortunately, he lost the elections by a huge margin.

Regarding his loss, Prakash Raj tweeted, "a SOLID SLAP on my face ..as More ABUSE..TROLL..and HUMILIATION come my way..I WILL STAND MY GROUND ..My RESOLVE to FIGHT for SECULAR INDIA will continue..A TOUGH JOURNEY AHEAD HAS JUST BEGUN ..THANK YOU EVERYONE WHO WERE WITH ME IN THIS JOURNEY. .... JAI HIND (sic)"

The actor is currently in Kashmir shooting for a film. He has taken his family along with him to spend the summer with them. He also took to Twitter to share photos of his family enjoying their time in Gulmarg, Kashmir.

On the work front, Prakash Raj was last seen in Mahesh Babu's Maharshi. He has a handful of projects including Nerkonda Paarvai, Azhiyatha Kolangal, Agni Siragugal and Akashganga 2 in different stages of production.

ALSO SEE | After contesting in Lok Sabha Elections, Prakash Raj hangs out with his family in Kashmir. See pics

ALSO SEE | Solid slap on my face, says Prakash Raj as he trails behind BJP, Congress in Bengaluru Central
