Gold finance company employee shot dead by armed men for thwarting dacoity in Nashik

Nashik police have detained two people in connection with the murder, attempted dacoity (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Nashik: A 29-year-old IT engineer foiled a dacoity attempt at the Untawadi branch of a gold financing company in Nashik, Maharashtra. Unfortunately, Saju Samuel had to pay for having the courage to stand up to armed robbers, with his life. Police officials confirmed that six men, armed with country-made pistols attempted to rob the Untawadi branch of Muthoot Finance on Friday morning.

Eyewitness accounts suggest that six armed men arrived at the commercial complex which houses the finance company's office in Nashik on three motorcycles around 11.30 am on Friday morning. They barged into the branch of Muthoot Finance and cornered seven employees and a few customers present inside the office. The robbers then dragged Samuel and branch auditor Kailash Jayan out from a back office of the branch. However, Samuel used up the little time he could get to press the burglar alarm alerting local police about the dacoity.

Samuel then rushed to the rescue of branch manager Chandrashekhar Deshpande when he was being repeatedly thrashed with the butt of a revolver by the robbers who were asking Deshpande to hand over the keys of the strong room where the cash was kept. Samuel's decision to rescue Deshpande coupled with the fact that he pressed the burglar alarm before he could be captured enraged the armed assailants. This led to one of the dacoits pumping three bullets into Samuel at point-blank range. After gunshots were heard from inside the branch, the robbers fled the scene of the crime without any cash or gold.

Nashik Police Commissioner Vishwas Nangare-Patil told mediapersons that two people have been detained in connection with the dacoity attempt and murder that followed. The top cop added that CCTV footage retrieved from inside the branch has enabled police to identify all of the six armed robbers. Patil also said that such an attempt could not have been carried out without local support.

Samuel, the 29-year-old IT engineer who lost his life while trying to do the right thing is survived by a mother, wife and ten-month-old son. Originally from Kerala, Samuel moved to Nerul area of Navi Mumbai some time back.
