Biggs Blast Dems For “Travesty Of Inaction,” Coyotes Force Families To Cross Desert

WASHINGTON, D.C. – This week, as House Democrats blocked over a dozen requests to consider $4.5 billion in supplemental funding to deal with the humanitarian crisis at the U.S. Mexico border, the body of a 7-year-old girl from India was retrieved by U.S. Border Patrol agents 17 miles west of Lukeville.

According to U.S. Customs and Border Protection, the girl had reportedly been traveling with four other Indian Nationals, who were dropped near the international boundary by human smugglers who ordered the group to cross in the dangerous and austere location.

Arizona Congressman Biggs joined Congressman Chip Roy to call attention to what they describe as a “travesty of inaction on the part of Democrats as they started floor consideration of H.R. 2740 – Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act.”

“America’s southern border is in a state of chaos. The Border Patrol encounters tens of thousands of illegal aliens every month, and agents are running out of resources to process and to care for them,” said Biggs in a press release. “If Democrats have the compassion they habitually claim to have for women and children, they should join Republicans in supporting appropriations for resources to house, care for, and feed these individuals. Unfortunately, Democrats won’t allow a vote for President Trump’s request. I call on my colleagues from across the aisle to unite with Republicans to confront this humanitarian crisis at the border and approve this vital funding.”

“If we choose to do nothing, we have the blood of migrants — suffering at the hands of cartels — on our hands,” Roy wrote in a recent opinion piece for FOX News.

A positive update to this sad situation from yesterday—the missing mom & daughter were located by Border Patrol when they crossed the border again into the US & surrendered to agents. They were taken to a hospital for treatment of dehydration. I’m thankful they were found okay. https://t.co/Y5a0F9uAIR — Acting Comm. John Sanders (@CBPSanders) June 14, 2019

A deceased child, believed to be a seven-year-old citizen of India, was discovered 17 miles west of Lukeville by U.S. Border Patrol yesterday morning. Bi-national search for anyone associated continues. @CBP #TucsonSector Details: https://t.co/tQAxifezk5 pic.twitter.com/XBJkDpJH02 — CBP Arizona (@CBPArizona) June 13, 2019

Border Patrol agents have rescued more than 3,000 people this fiscal year, including 514 people in water-related rescues. There has been a dramatic increase in water rescues as many underestimate the water depth & speed of the current. This is a crisis. We need Congress to act. https://t.co/JQUvT4XxTc — Acting Comm. John Sanders (@CBPSanders) June 13, 2019



[metaslider id=65385]

Border Patrol agents rescued 7 illegal aliens during 3 separate incidents over the last 2 days in Yuma Sector, including an adult male and a 3-year-old child who could not get out of the Salinity Canal. More details: https://t.co/OHAgSZPdOG pic.twitter.com/pxjICYoNBa — CBP (@CBP) June 12, 2019
