Indian Medical Association protests violence on doctors in West Bengal

A Correspondent

Tezpur: Indian Medical Association has observed nationwide protest against violence on doctors on Friday. The organization has moved into agitation mode following increasing incidences of violence against doctors and healthcare establishments. In a recent incident in West Bengal, Dr. Paribaha Mukherjee, a young doctor was brutally attacked by a violent mob at NRS Medical College, Kolkata. He is critical and fighting for his life.

Indian Medical Association, Tezpur chapter also observed All India Protest Day today vehemently protesting and strongly condemning the heinous attacks on doctors in West Bengal. IMA Tezpur Branch doctors wore black badges during work from 10am to 2pm.

IMA Tezpur Branch and its MSN wing submitted a memorandum to Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah through the Deputy Commissioner of Sonitpur.

While taking to this correspondent, Dr Atul Kalita and Dr Angarag Bhagawati, president and secretary of IMA, Tezpur Branch said that Indian Medical Association has been demanding a national law against hospital violence. The organization has declared a zero-tolerance policy against violence on doctors and healthcare establishments. World Medical Association has also passed a resolution against violence on healthcare establishments and urged to bring stronger legislation against this menace.

National law against violence on hospitals has to be brought in urgently. The law should provide a minimum of seven years imprisonment for hospital violence. To ensure that the cases are registered, culprits are arrested and conviction is necessitated, appropriate mandatory provisions as provided in the POCSO act has to be instituted. Hospitals should be declared as special zones and the provision of appropriate security should be the responsibility of the State.

Also read: Medical Students in Assam protest against attack & brutalization on Doctors in Kolkata
