Kangana Ranaut attacks Karan Johar again: 'His gang started smear campaign against me by paying reviewers'

Kangana Ranaut has often been in news for calling out Karan Johar. She had termed the filmmaker 'flag bearer of nepotism' on his chat show 'Koffee With Karan' and maintains the same stand even today. The actress however in a recent interview made some shocking revelations related to the same.

In an interview with Mumbai Mirror, Kangana Ranaut went on to speak about how the nepotism gang was jealous and hence released the video of her riding a mechanical horse on the sets of Manikarnika: The Queen Of Jhansi. She mentioned that the gang was present, also shooting on the horse but did not turn up after a day.

The actress, when asked about the video, exposed, "I know who released that video. Two other actors of the nepotism gang were also learning horse-riding at the same place as me. They practised for one day and got so sore that they didn’t return. I was galloping and doing all sorts of stunts. The wooden horse was only used for close-up shots. Just because they cannot ride a horse they got jealous of me and released the video."

Talking about her co-actors Mishti Chakraborty and ex co-star Sonu Sood making negative comments about her, Kangana added, "I rode a horse in Rangoon too, it’s not new for me. Mishti said she was asked to speak up, but who is making her speak? It’s all about ganging up against me. Sonu and I share a personal trainer. Again, situations were manipulated to force people to speak against me."

Talking about Karan Johar also manipulating people against her, Kangana mentioned, "Some trade experts were forced to show our film’s collections as half of the actual numbers. All the people who pretend that they don’t have PRs send the maximum number of mails against others. One smear campaign was started by Karan Johar’s gang against me by paying reviewers. When I talk about it, people think I sound like a loony character, but what option am I left with?"

Furthermore, concluding about her unnoticed acts, Kangana said, "Rangoli says that though I have helped people build hospitals and gifted a Rs two-and-halfcrore flat to my yoga teacher, nobody knows about these things as I don’t talk about it."
