Islamabad will hold talks with New Delhi but with dignity and equality: Pak FM Shah Qureshi puts onus on India

Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi. | File image

Bishkek: Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi on Saturday put the ball in India’s court for talks on peace between the two countries, saying that the Islamic nation will deliberate with India on the basis of “equality” and with “dignity”. He put the onus on India and said that New Delhi must engage with Islamabad to solve issues pertaining to the region.

Qureshi also accused India of continuing with an “election mindset” to maintain “vote bank”. “India has to take the call... neither are we in a haste, nor are we troubled. India will find us prepared when it prepares itself, but we will carry out talks based on equality and with dignity,” the foreign minister said.

“India hasn’t emerged out of their election mindset... They are still confined in that...to maintain their vote bank,” he said.

In Kyrgyzstan’s capital Bishkek during the 19th Shanghai Cooperation Organisation summit, Qureshi claimed that Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan and Prime Minister Narendra Modi exchanged pleasantaries on Friday on the sidelines of the event, news agency PTI reported.

“Pakistan said what it wanted to... We do not have to chase anyone or demonstrate our stubborness. Our approach is absolutely realistic and thought-out,” he was quoted as saying.

India has snubbed Pakistan for any bilateral talks ever since terrorist organisations based out of Pakistan attacked the Pathankot Air Force base in January 2016, with the then External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj strongly stating that terror and talks cannot go hand-in-hand.

The same year, Pakistan-based terror group Lashkar-e-Taiba carried out another attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Uri, unleashing a carnage that left 19 security forces martyred. In February this year, over 40 CRPF jawans were killed in a dastardly terror attack by Hafiz Saeed-led terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed, just two months before the 17th Lok Sabha elections.

The Pakistan PM rang up PM Modi on May 26 to extend his greetings after Modi was re-elected as the PM, also seeking talks for the betterment of both countries. However, Modi told him that a violence-free environment was a prerequisite for any bilateral talks.
