3 more killed as Bengal violence continues; MHA seeks report

As political blood-letting continued in West Bengal with three Trinamool workers being killed in Murshidabad district on Saturday, the Centre has sought a report from the state government on the measures taken to contain political violence, and another on the ongoing strike by doctors, senior officials who did not want to be named said.

In its communication on political violence, the Centre said: “Unabated violence over the years is evidently a matter of deep concern.” It also pointed to the growing number of incidents of election-related and political violence and casualties during 2016-2019. “The number of incidents of political violence in West Bengal increased from 509 in 2016 to 1,035 in 2018 while 26 people have been killed in 2019 in poll-related issues,” the Centre said.

“It is requested that a report may be sent to this Ministry on the steps taken by the state government and its law enforcement machinery to investigate the incidents of violence to bring the culprits to book as also the measures taken to contain and curb violence,” it added.

In the second advisory, the Centre sought a report urgently on the ongoing doctors’ strike.

The killing of three more persons has taken to 14 the death count since Lok Sabha election results were declared on May 23.

The ruling Trinamool Congress claimed all three workers were party activists who were allegedly shot dead by rival Bharatiya Janata Party cadres. The BJP, however, attributed the killings to infighting in the TMC. Both parties have been locked in battle since the BJP bagged 18 of Bengal’s 42 Lok Sabha seats in the general elections, restricting the TMC to 22.

The clashes erupted in Halshanapara village, about 230 km to the north of Kolkata.

“So far, three persons have been killed in the clash. Senior officers are conducting raids in search of the assailants. A few persons have been detained for questioning,” said additional superintendent of police, Lalbagh-Murshidabad, Angshuman Roy. Those killed have been identified as Khairuddin Sheikh (40) and his nephews, Sohel Rana (22) and Rahidul Sheikh (32). The deputy pradhan of Garaimari gram panchayat, Sabbir Sheikh (40), was admitted to hospital with a bullet injury.

Villagers said the sound of gunshots and of “hundreds of bombs” being hurled could be heard during the clashes. The TMC claimed the killings were in retaliation to the murder of a man before the elections.

On March 18 this year, Altab Sheikh, the official in charge of fishery affairs in the TMC-run Domkal panchayat samiti, was killed. A few persons accused in that murder recently got bail and returned to the village.

“Goons backed by the Congress and Left Front killed Altab before the general election. But now they are in the BJP camp. Today, BJP-backed goons killed three of our men after failing to perform well in the Lok Sabha election,” alleged Soumik Hossain, the chairman of TMC-run Domkal municipality.

Refuting the TMC allegation, Humayun Kabir, the vice-president of the BJP’s Murshidabad (south) unit, said, “The murders on Saturday took place as a result of faction fights within the TMC. A CID probe will reveal it.”
