Kangana Ranaut’s sister launches fresh attack on Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt, calls them ‘pappus galloping’

Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt learning horse riding | Photo Credit: Twitter

Kangana Ranaut sister is back! Rangoli Chandel, who is known for her vicious attacks on Twitter on the ‘nepotism gang’ has launched a fresh attack on Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt. A fan had tweeted photos of Ranbir and Alia, horse riding on Twitter. Rangoli replied to that tweet stating that the two Bollywood stars couldn’t learn the sport but her sister Kangana had aced it in no time. Incidentally, when Kangana was learning horse riding for her then upcoming film, Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi, Alia and Ranbir too were learning the skill for their upcoming film, presumably Brahmastra.

However, while Kangana aced the art in just a few days, Ranbir and Alia came for a single day and never returned. It is being infered that they gave up on learning the sport just after a day. Although, we haven’t heard any revelations that there are any horse riding scenes in Ayan Mukerji’s Brahmastra, so take this piece of news with a grain of salt.

“These two pappus had to learn riding for their upcoming love story, they went for one day got so sore never came back again, Kangana fell from horse 3 times after various injuries and invested whole year of hard work to get galloping and action right on a horse back, this is a proof, pappus can never work as hard as hungry bhukhhad outsiders, abhi tunhari jalti hai toh main kya karoon, pls prove me wrong show me one vidoe of pappus galloping,” Rangoli Chandel wrote on her Twitter account.

These two pappus had to learn riding for their upcoming love story, they went for one day got so sore never came back again, Kangana fell from horse 3 times after various injuries and invested whole year of hard work to get galloping...(contd) https://t.co/1uZaVjDzLv — Rangoli Chandel (@Rangoli_A) June 15, 2019

(Contd)....and action right on a horse back, this is a proof, pappus can never work as hard as hungry bhukhhad outsiders, abhi tunhari jalti hai toh main kya karoon , pls prove me wrong show me one vidoe of pappus galloping — Rangoli Chandel (@Rangoli_A) June 15, 2019

Earlier this month, Kangana Ranaut too had made similar claims as Rangoli’s tweets about Ranbir and Alia learning horse riding at the same venue as her and failing miserably while she was exceptionally good. Add to that, a video of Kangana Ranaut riding a wooden horse too was leaked on the web and Kangana had blamed the ‘nepotism gang’ for it. Check out her quotes below:

“I know who released that video. Two other actors of the nepotism gang were also learning horse-riding at the same place as me. They practised for one day and got so sore that they didn’t return. I was galloping and doing all sorts of stunts. The wooden horse was only used for close-up shots. Just because they cannot ride a horse they got jealous of me and released the video. I rode a horse in Rangoon too, it’s not new for me. Mishti said she was asked to speak up, but who is making her speak? It’s all about ganging up against me. Sonu and I share a personal trainer. Again, situations were manipulated to force people to speak against me. Some trade experts were forced to show our film’s collections as half of the actual numbers. All the people who pretend that they don’t have PRs send the maximum number of mails against others. One smear campaign was started by Karan Johar’s gang against me by paying reviewers. When I talk about it, people think I sound like a loony character, but what option am I left with?” – Kangana Ranaut had told Mumbai Mirror.



This year has been all about Kangana Ranaut vs Ranbir Kapoor and Alia Bhatt. Both Kangana and her sister Rangoli have time and again taken sly digs at the two Bollywood stars, however, while Ranbir has refused to respond, Alia has, on numerous times reacted to Kangana’s attacks with a classy comeback.
