Final Rites of Martyred CRPF Cobra Regiment Jawan Sunil Kalita performed in Rangia

Nalbari/Rangia: The Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Jawan Sunil Kalita's final rites were performed at his native place in Palara located in Rangia in Kamrup Rural district of Assam on Saturday morning.

The mortal remains of the martyred jawan reached Rangia at around 7 am in the morning.

Sunil Kalita was the Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Jawan who succumbed to injury on June 13 at the All India Institutes of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in New Delhi.

The CRPF 209 Cobra Battalion Jawan was injured after Maoist rebels exploded a series of IEDs in Seraikela-Kharswan district of Jharkhand state on May 28 this year. Since then he was undergoing medical treatment at the AIIMS.

The mortal remains of the CRPF Jawan Sunil Kalita reached Lokpriya Gopinath Bordoloi International Airport (LGBI) in Guwahati on Friday.

Speaking to media, Kamrup (R) Deputy Commissioner, Birendra Baishya informed that the Government of Assam had announced to provide financial assistance of Rs 20 lakh to the family members of the martyred jawan.

Martyred jawan Sunil Kalita tied his knot two months back.

It is to be noted that around 26 CRPF jawans and Jharkhand Armed Police (JAP) personnel were injured in the Maoist attack where altogether 15 IEDs were exploded.

The explosion occurred when the security personnel was patrolling in a hilly forested area lying between Riding and Rar Sindri villages of Jharkhand.

The gunfights between the Maoists and the security forces continued for almost an hour on May 29, 2019, later the injured security personnel were flown to Ranchi in helicopters for better medical treatment.

Earlier, Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) ASI Nirod Sharma from Assam who died in South Kashmir’s Anantnag District in South Kashmir on last Wednesday afternoon.

Around Five CRPF personnel, including two officers, who were deployed on picketing duty, were killed in south Kashmir’s Anantnag district when terrorists attacked them while they were checking vehicles.

Also Read: AN-32 Aircraft Crash: IAF pays tribute to the Brave Air-Warriors who lost their Life in the Line of Duty
