Why is Mamata playing with lives?

Freelance journalist Ashali Varma has authored the biography of her father late Lt. Gen. PS Bhagat — ‘The Victoria Cross: A Love Story’. She was executive producer with the International Commentary Service Inc, New York in 1990. She was the executive publisher of The Earth Times, New York (1992- 98). She has also worked as the editor of Choices Magazine, United Nations Development Programme. She writes on various issues including human rights, population and sustainable development. LESS ... MORE

No chief minister in a democracy can be totally unaccountable. During the Panchayat Elections and again during the Indian Elections, more workers from opposition parties were harassed and even killed in West Bengal under chief minister Mamata Banerjee than in any other state of India. Even after the elections the winners of the opposition parties are beaten up and killed only because they won a seat in the election.

Today, we have an even more serious condition where junior doctors have been attacked in a major government hospital in Bengal and seriously injured because they could not save the life of a 75-year-old man in Emergency even though they tried.

The relatives of the man got together 200 people shipped in trucks to the hospital to beat up the doctors in charge and threaten the staff. There was no security and one of the doctors got clubbed in the head and had to have an emergency operation of the brain to save his life.

The chief minister, instead of taking charge and bringing the mob to justice blamed the doctors. It suddenly became a communal incident as the mob it seems were Muslims and Mamata insisted the whole incident was part of a BJP conspiracy! She declared that the BJP did not want Muslims treated by doctors, which was so absurd that even the left- wing media did not fall for it.

How could an unplanned death and mob violence be a political party instigated event?

What has she to say about the violence and deaths that have taken place before, during and after the Lok Sabha elections?

Why did she not punish the 200 hundred strong mob that attacked the doctors instead of blaming the doctors and asking them to report to duty or else they would be fired and have to vacate their government accommodations overnight?

How can any chief minister encourage and condone violence as Mamata has? Does she not know that even the minorities of her state have become scared of her tantrums and violent behaviour? Does she not know that the doctors that are striking for protection are from every religion and are only wanting her to safeguard them from angry relatives and mobs when they can’t save a life?

Apparently not. Today, she asked the doctors to meet with her in her secretariat but they refused as they said they were scared about what would happen behind closed doors. This is what she has brought her state to. People are scared to meet with her and her goons.

As of now the 15th of June, Mamata has tried after five days of threats to doctors to appease them but they want a full apology in the environs of the hospital, total protection from mobs and relatives and reinstatement of all the doctors she arbitrarily fired when the incident took place.

It seems Mamata will do anything to stay in power and has lost the very essence of governance without brute force. She should realize that in a democracy as vibrant as India’s brute force can only work sometimes. It could be perpetuated in the past for a decade or two but not in a free country with a free press and internet. No wonder doctors all over India have joined the protest with the doctors in her state.

I hope she will see reason soon but sometimes her temper and arrogance get the better of her.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
