Woman hires contract killers for Rs 7,000 to murder husband

Suresh Kumar used to indulge in gambling at home to which Anju had objected many times.(Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: The Delhi Police have arrested a woman and her paramour for hiring contract killers to murder her husband in New Delhi's South Avenue area. Police say the killers were hired for Rs 7,000. The accused woman has been identified Anju.

The 57-year-old Suresh Kumar was killed at his residence by one Aman and his juvenile accomplice. The victim was sleeping alone at his home when his throat was allegedly slit by Aman. While, the juvenile has been arrested by the police, Aman is still on the run.

According to a report in PTI, Aman is a friend of the woman's 21-year-old paramour Shivam Thakur. Reports say the woman was not on good terms with her husband, who was 16-years elder to her.

The couple stayed at servants' quarters at MPs' flats in South Avenue. Suresh Kumar used to indulge in gambling at home to which Anju had objected many times.

"During investigation, the police learnt that Anju used to often visit her family and friends in Meerut without her husband. This raised suspicion about her involvement and the police zeroed in on Thakur, her relative and paramour," the news agency quoted Deputy Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Madhur Verma as saying.

Anju also attempted to consume poison a month before the murder. When asked about the reason for suicide attempt, Anju told Shivam that either she wants to die or wants to see her husband dead. Later, they both hatched a conspiracy to kill Suresh Kumar.

According to DCP Verma, Anju disclosed that she was not happy with her conjugal life. Her husband indulged in gambling at home and several people came to her house, to which she objected. He forced her to make tea and food for them at odd hours."

The police arrested Shivam Thakur from his relative's house in Delhi's Burari. Police said Thakur had developed closeness with the woman, who is a relative of her.
