Doctors refuse Mamata’s appeal to resume services, ask West Bengal CM to visit NRS Hospital for talks

Doctors at AIIMS in New Delhi wear bandages on their heads in solidarity to the junior doctor who was attacked in West Bengal. | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: The doctors’ agitation in Kolkata following the brutal assault of a junior doctor at the hands of relatives of a deceased patient earlier this week has triggered a massive uproar across the country, with medicos taking out rallies in solidarity with their brethren and voicing angst against the system that makes them vulnerable.

Five days after their agitation crippled medical services across West Bengal, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee on Saturday told media persons that her government had agreed to all the demands doctors posed before them in wake of the incident. She also said that the doctors’ delegation refused to meet state government officials who had approached them to resolve the matter.

However, the agitating junior doctors later in the day denied Mamata’s claim that the state administration had approached them for reconciliation and turned down Mamata’s appeal to end the agitation and resume their duties citing no real intent on the CM’s part.

“We too are eager to resume our duties but there has not been any real initiative from the CM’s side to broker a solution,” news agency PTI quoted a spokesperson from the joint forum of junior doctors as saying.

They also rebuffed the West Bengal CM’s claims that some doctors had visited state officials at the secretariat.

“What Mamata said at the press meet is not true at all. No junior doctor went to meet her. She claimed that our community is against any conversation, but we demand her visit to the Nil Ratan Sircar Medical College and Hospital, hear us and then take adequate measures to serve patients,” the spokesperson stated.

Mamata on Saturday issued an appeal to all doctors to resume services. “I appeal to all doctors to resume work as thousands of people are waiting for medical attention. We have accepted all of their demands. I had sent my ministers and principal secretary to meet the doctors... They waited for five hours to meet the doctors’ delegations yesterday and even today, but they did not come. You have to give respect to the constitutional body,” she told reporters.

The agitation began after the relatives of a patient allegedly attacked two junior doctors at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata after the patient died on June 11.
