The dawn of Poson and the significance of Thanthirimale

The dawn of Poson and the significance of Thanthirimale By Chris Edirisinghe View(s): View(s):

On Poson Poya we commemorate the introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka centuries ago.

Some historians record that King Ashoka of India after his battle at Kalinga met a young Buddhist prelate and was so impressed by his tranquil demeanour, that he embraced this new doctrine. Keen to spread this to countries in the region, he sent his son to preach the new religion to his friend, King Devanampiyatissa in the adjoining kingdom of Thambapanni, as Sri Lanka was then known. It was on a Poson Poya day that Arahat Mahinda had a momentous encounter with the King at Mihintale. This is the story of Poson we celebrate today.

Religious observances at Poson were traditionally centered in Mihintale and in Anuradhapura. This year these will be held on a larger scale according to reports, since Vesak could not be observed as planned due to the problems that the country experienced recently.

In recent years Thanthirimale too has gained prominence during Poson celebrations. Thanthirimale has been known for centuries as the village honoured by Sangamitta Theri when she brought the sacred Bo sapling to the kingdom of Anuradhapura on Unduwap Poya. Theri Sangamitta was the youngest child of King Ashoka and the sister of Arahat Mahinda. She and her entourage, as well as King Devanampiyatissa had to stop for the night at Thanthirimale on their journey to Anuradhapura.

In grateful remembrance of this event the 8th shoot of this sacred Bo sapling was presented to Thanthirimale at the time as a gift.

Many pilgrims visit Thanthirimale after their religious observances in Mihintale and Anuradhapura.

Aloka Pooja for the 16th time With the Aloka Pooja conducted by Wijeya Newspapers, Thanthirimale has today become an important place of worship for Buddhists. This year the Aloka Pooja is being held for the 16th time on June 15, 16 and 17. The facilities provided for pilgrims have been enhanced and Chief Incumbent Ven. Thanthirimale Chandrarathana Thera along with his staff have made all arrangements to help the devotees participate in the religious ceremonies. Dhamma and observance of Sil programmes have been organised during the three days, and devotees can experience a weekend of religious observances. Hand in hand with the Aloka Pooja programme there will be the usual distribution of uniform material and stationery to the staff and children of the Sangamitta Daham Pasala of Thanthirimale. When the Aloka Pooja was begun in 2004, there were many dangers due to the LTTE conflict and devotees faced difficulties in getting to the temple premises including passing through many security checkpoints. Transport was difficult and except for a few shops and Poson dansal, food was hard to come by and drinking water scarce. Fortunately pilgrims today can travel without any fear or hindrance. The temple authorities have provided drinking water and many other amenities including pilgrims’ rests. The roads from Anuradhapura and in the direction of Mannar have been redone to ensure a comfortable journey.
