Crime of passion? Cop dies after colleague attacks, sets her on fire

Ajas tried to force Soumya to stay with him

ALAPPUZHA: In what appears to be a crime of passion, a 37-year-old woman civil police officer was knocked down by a car, hacked with a sword and set afire by her jilted lover, a cop himself. Soumya Pushpakaran, who was working at Vallikunnam police station, was murdered by N A Ajas, 33, a civil police officer attached to Aluva traffic police station, on Saturday afternoon as she was returning home after her day shift. Soumya was a mother of three, whose husband works in the Gulf.“We don’t know the exact cause of the murder. Our information is that they first met at Kerala Police Academy. We have started a detailed probe led by two DySPs,’’ Alappuzha SP K M Tomy said.According to police, Soumya left Vallikunnam police station around 2.30pm after her duty with student police cadet members in a nearby school and had almost reached home at Thekkemuri on her twowheeler, when Ajas, who was waiting in a rented car, rammed her scooter and knocked her down. Seeing Ajas alight from the car, Soumya tried to flee but he attacked her with a sword. Soumya managed to run to a neighbour’s house. Ajas chased her, poured petrol over her body and set her on fire using a cigarette lighter.Hearing Soumya’s screams, local people rushed to the spot and apprehended Ajas. Soumya reportedly tried to resist Ajas as he set her ablaze, and the latter suffered above 40% burns. He has been admitted to ICU in Alappuzha Medical College Hospital.“Soumya, a graduate, was selected to Kerala Police and joined the 11th batch of women civil police officers at Kerala Police Academy, Thrissur on June 16, 2014. She completed her training in March 2015. During the last session of training, the accused Ajas came as havildar for imparting training. He trained the team for around two to three months. Their friendship started during this training,” a friend of Soumya told TOI.An investigation officer told TOI that after Soumya’s husband went abroad, Ajas tried to force Soumya to stay with him. “But she refused and kept her distance from him. That might have forced him to kill her. However, we have not collected the statements of the accused and we need to crosscheck details,’’ the investigation officer said.Soumya’s husband Sajeev is working in the Gulf and was here a month ago for vacation. The couple have two sons and one daughter. Soumya leaves behind Rishikesh, a seventh standard student, Adhisesh, in fifth standard, and her three-and-ahalf-year-old daughter Ridhika.At the time of the murder, her two sons were at a tuition centre. Her daughter was with Soumya’s parents at Valiyakulangara. “As Soumya needed to go for duty daily, her daughter was staying with Soumya’s parents,’’ Soumya’s neighbours said.
