Pulwama-like terror attack being planned in Awantipora to avenge Zakir Musa's death; alert sounded in J&K

Pulwama-like terror attack being planned in Awantipora | Photo Credit: PTI

Jammu: High alert has been sounded in Jammu and Kashmir after India received information regarding possible Pulwama-like terror attack in Awantipora area of South Kashmir’s Pulwama district.

Pakistan shared the Intel warning about the threat of probable terror attack to the Indian High Commission in Islamabad ahead of the recent SCO summit in Bishkek, said media reports. The United States was also apprised about the possible terror threat.

As per the intelligence inputs, an IED-laden vehicle would be used to carry out the possible terror attack.

The February 14 Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 Central Reserve Police Force personnel was also carried out in the same manner. The dastardly attack was carried out by Pakistan-based suicide bomber who rammed a convoy of vehicles carrying CRPF personnel on the Jammu Srinagar National Highway in the Pulwama district.

After the warning, the security agencies across the state have been put on high alert while a close vigil is also being kept on highways by state police.

According to media reports, the possible terror attack is being planned by terror outfit Al-Qaeda to avenge the killing of dreaded terrorist Zakir Musa.

Musa, who was the chief of Jammu and Kashmir-based Ansar Gazwatul Hind, an Al-Qaeda cell, was gunned down in an encounter with security officials in Tral area of Pulwama on May 23.

The possible terror strike is likely to be conducted before or during the Amarnath Yatra beginning on July 1, news agency IANS reported.

"The input has been shared with all security forces engaged in counter-insurgency operations in the state. A high alert has been sounded, although security is already on maximum alert because of the upcoming Amarnath Yatra," the agency quoted an official as saying.

In the lieu of the terror threat, nearly 450 additional companies of central armed police forces (CAPF) are being deployed for the overall security of the upcoming Amarnath Yatra.

"The input says Al Qaeda is planning the attack to avenge the killing of Zakir Musa, chief of AGH, a proclaimed affiliate of the global terror network. There is no question of any lowering of the guard even if the input hadn't been there," added the official.
