TN doctors to strike on Monday for 24 hours in solidarity with Kolkata medico

TN doctors to strike on Monday for 24 hours in solidarity with Kolkata medico

However, emergency services will be attended to.

Health Strike

The Tamil Nadu branch of the Indian Medical Association (IMA) has announced a 24-hour statewide strike on Monday in solidarity with medical professionals across the country who have been protesting against violence unleashed upon doctors. The protests came after a doctor from Kolkata was brutally attacked by relatives of a deceased patient the hospital had been treating.

According to one report in The New Indian Express, Dr S Kanagasabapathy, State President of the IMA stated, “We will go on strike for 24 hours on Monday, and only emergency services will be attended to. All our 4,500 member hospitals in the State, will participate in the same.”

Quoting the Tamil Nadu Government Doctors Association, the newspaper said, “All government doctors will stop their private practice for 24 hours on June 17, except emergencies.” (sic)

On Tuesday, a student doctor interning at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata was allegedly attacked by the relatives of a recently deceased patient at the hospital. Dr Paribaha Mukharjee was allegedly hit with a brick on his head, leaving him with a fractured skull. Within hours, social media was flooded with messages of outrage and solidarity with the doctor. Doctors and other members of the medical community tweeted with the hashtag #SaveTheDoctors, stating that they will be boycotting work and standing in support of the young doctor who was attacked and that the protests will continue until action is taken.

The incident sparked massive outrage among the medical community, with several doctors from the state of West Bengal’s healthcare sector threatening mass resignation if proper action was not taken to ensure the security and safety of doctors.

On Friday, the IMA called for a nationwide protest against the rising number of violent attacks against doctors in the country.
