Didi vs Doctors: How Mamata Banerjee reacted to her own nephew participating in the protests

Didi vs Doctors: How Mamata Banerjee reacted to her own nephew participating in the protests

Amid the doctor stir in Kolkata, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee was left red-faced after several relatives of TMC leaders participated in the protest.

Amid the doctor stir in Kolkata, West Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee was left red-faced after several relatives of TMC leaders participated in the protest.

Many relatives of the TMC leaders too backed the doctors stir. They included Mamata Banerjee's nephew Abesh Banerjee, state Urban Development Minister Firhad Hakim's daughter Shabba and son of TMC MP Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar.

Reacting to their involvement, Banerjee said they were doctors and have to ‘stay with their community’.

She also claimed that some of them were wrongly quoted and they were thinking of issuing rejoinder.

Kolkata Mayor Firhad ‘Bobby’ Hakim’s daughter wrote an angry Facebook post wondering why the police was quiet even as truckloads of goons attacked doctors.

She wrote, “For those who do not know doctors in government and most private hospitals are boycotting OPD but are still working in emergency.

For those saying, ‘Ono rugider ki dosh’ meaning what is the fault of patients, please question the government as in why the police officers posted in government hospitals do little to nothing to protect doctors.”

Adding, “Please question why goons are still surrounding hospitals and beating up doctors? We have a right to peaceful protest. We have a right to safety at work.”

But even if that wasn’t rebellious enough, Mamata’s own kin could be seen leading the protest.

Abesh, who is the son of Mamata’s brother Kartick Banerjee, is a doctor with KPC Medical College and Hospital. Sources say Abesh led a protest rally on Wednesday from KPC hospital to the NRS hospital.

Mamata’s nephew Abesh Banerjee seen leading protest march against TMC govt



Didi vs Doctors: Rage spreads from Kolkata to Delhi, Mumbai and other cities, medical services hit



Mass Resignations continue, HC asks Bengal govt to reply

‘Docs should stop treating cannibals’: Koena Mitra lashes out Mamata for saying protesting docs will be 'thrown out'
