Security Forces Deserve Our Salutes For Finally Making Baramulla A Terrorist-Free Place

Jammu and Kashmir has been reeling under terrorism for decades. Armed Forces Special Powers Act was imposed in the valley in 1990 and has been implemented ever since.

Over the years, war and terrorism has eroded the valley of its peace and normal life. Stone pelting, firing and teargas shells have claimed a thousand lives. Certain districts of the region are more vulnerable to terrorism such as Pulwama, Rajouri, Shopian and others where regular encounters between terrorists and security personnel take place.

Photo: AP

On Wednesday the police said that Baramulla district in the north of Jammu and Kashmir became the first region to eliminate all surviving militants, as reported by news agency ANI. This comes a day after three terrorists were gunned down in Binner area of the district.

Jammu and Kashmir DGP Dilbagh Singh: Yesterday's operation in Baramulla district in which 3 militants were killed makes Baramulla the first district of Kashmir with no surviving militant, as on date. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/dhU1B1r0CC — ANI (@ANI) January 24, 2019

Director General of Police, Jammu and Kashmir Dilbag Singh told ANI, “Baramulla has become the first district of Kashmir with no surviving militant as on date. Jammu and Kashmir Police extends its thanks to the local population for all their support in providing a better security environment in the district.”

A district is declared militant free when no militant in that particular region is listed as active as per police records. However, while speaking to Indian Express Baramulla SSP Imtiyaz Hussain said that they couldn't rule out the possibility that militants from neighbouring towns could enter Baramulla. As per media reports, 18 militants were active in the district at the beginning of 2018 out of which 13 were killed in encounters and a few others were forced out of the district.

Meanwhile, local media in Kashmir reported that a shutdown was observed in the district for two consecutive days following the killing of the three Lashkar militants. Local residents held a demonstration and raised pro-militant slogans.

The terrorists were identified as Suhaib Farooq Akhoon, Mohsin Mushtaq Bhat, residents of Baramulla and Nasir Ahmad Darzi from Sopore, who were active in Baramulla since 2017. Arms and ammunition were also recovered from the militants.

India has accused Pakistan of fomenting trouble, political unrest and terrorism in parts of Kashmir.
