Intellectuals raise voice against post-poll violence: Elections were held across country, why violence only in Bengal

Eminent personalities and city-based intellectuals have decided to raise their voice against the post-poll violence in the state. After holding a meeting on Saturday, the eminent personalities have decided to organise a convention on Tuesday at Rabindra Sadan. Sources said the members are contemplating floating a cultural platform to address their issues.

“The election was held across the country but why violence is taking place only here? The common people have so many things to do and they are greatly inconvenienced due to this violence. I don’t know whether the people are spontaneous in taking part in violent activities or there is a design which is forcing them to do so. These are some of the questions which need to be answered,” said theatre actor Rudraprasad Sengupta.

Explained Intellectuals and their importance in Bengal politics

Poet Shankha Ghosh, veteran actor Soumitra Chatterjee, writer Nabaneeta Deb Sen, theatre personalities Rudraprasad Sengupta, Bibhas Chakrabarty, Koushik Sen, Debshankar Haldar, professor Sukanta Choudhuri and others are likely to participate in the convention.

“Why is religion getting mixed with politics? Why are politicians referring to religion at every instance? Flexing of muscles by political parties is nothing new here. It has been there for a long time. But the violence has reached an alarming stage in the state and people want to get some relief. I think this is the reason why so many eminent personalities have come together,” said Bibhas Chakrabarty.

It may be noted that actor-director Aparna Sen, social activist Bolan Ganguly, actor Kaushik Sen and others recently held a rally in Kolkata expressing solidarity with the doctors’ protest across medical facilities in the state. They had criticised the state government for not listening to the demands of the doctors and not resolving the crisis. Since then more intellectuals have come out in support of the doctors.
