Shershaah: THIS is when Sidharth Malhotra & Kiara Advani will head to Kargil to shoot for the film

A film that has been the talk of the town from the past few months is Sidharth Malhotra and Kiara Advani starrer Shershaah. The film is based on the life of Captain Vikram Batra, who fought valiantly in the India Pakistan war back in 1999 and was posthumously awarded the Paramvir Chakra. It was a while back that Sidharth and Kiara had commenced the shoot for the film from Captain Vikram Batra’s hometown Chandigarh. There, Sidharth and Kiara met with the family of the war hero and also saw the old photo albums to get more insights about the character.

Post that, Sidharth and Kiara had gone to Dharamshala where they shot the next portion of the film. Kiara will be seen playing the role of Captain Vikram Batra’s girlfriend, Dimple Cheema while Sidharth will play the hero. As per a report in Mumbai Mirror, now Sidharth, Kiara and the crew of Shershaah will be heading to Kargil to shoot the next schedule of the film where they will be celebrating the Kargil Vijay Diwas as well on June 26. As per the report, Sidharth will be staying on in Kargi for a month while Kiara will shoot her portions and return.

(Also Read: Kiara Advani bids adieu to ‘legit friend’ Sidharth Malhotra as she wraps up the first schedule of Shershaah)

As per the report, “Sidharth and Kiara will kick off the shoot after the celebrations and will also spend some time with the soldiers. While Sidharth will stay on for at least a month to film war sequences, Kiara’s portions will be wrapped up earlier.” The celebration this year marks the 20th Anniversary of the Kargil War and hence, it will be a special occasion for everyone. Sidharth will meet up with the soldiers and will spend time with them. Kargil Vijay Diwas is celebrated to honour the war heroes who died fighting for their country in Operation Vijay. The celebrations will take place between July 25 and July 27.

Shershaah is a film which is helmed by Vishnu Varadhan and is being produced by Karan Johar’s Dharma Productions. For the film, Sidharth has also undergone military and weapons training. It is slated to release by 2020.
