Ex-serviceman yet to be arrested in wife’s murder case

Ludhiana: A day after an ex-serviceman shot his wife in Khandoor village of Jodhan, police are yet to arrest him. Many teams have been constituted to nab him.

On Saturday morning, an ex-serviceman Sukhdev Singh had shot his 60-year-old wife Gurmit Kaur after a heated argument in Khandour village of Jodhan on Saturday morning. Police had booked the accused for murder and also under sections of Arms Act. They had also initiated a manhunt for him as he had run away from home after the incident.

DSP, Investigation, Ludhiana Rural Police, Dilbagh Singh, said they have formed three teams, including Crime Investigating Agency (CIA), Dakha police and Jodhan Police, to arrest the accused.

Police officials said the accused had switched off his mobile phone after the incident and has not switched it on which makes the job of tracking him down even more difficult. They added that the information about the accused gathered by police suggests that he might not have gone out of Ludhiana district.

DSP said the motive for the accused to commit such a crime will be known only after his arrest. He added that the post-mortem examination of the deceased was done by doctors at Sudhar Civil hospital and her body was handed over to her family for last rites.

Police officer said the two sons of the deceased, who work in Indian Army and are posted in Rajasthan and Assam, arrived at their native village after they came to know about their mother’s murder.

What had happened on Saturday morning?

Police officials said the accused Sukhdev Singh lived with his wife and daughter-in-law Jaspreet Kaur in the village, whereas his elder son, who works in Army in Rajasthan, lived separately with his family in Ludhiana. His younger son Bhupinder Singh (husband of Jaspreet) is posted in army in Assam. They added that on Saturday morning, Sukhdev and Gurmit Kaur, went to their room, while Jaspreet went for a bath.

Jaspreet told cops that after she some time she heard the couple talking loudly in their room and rushed there. She added that the door was not opened despite her repeated requests and shortly gun shots were heard after which she ran to a distant relative’s place in the neighbourhood.

Jaspreet told cops that even as the relative asked the accused to open the door, he told them to leave his house. She added that he escaped on his scooter before he could be caught and her mother-in-law was found lying in a pool of blood.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
