Infosys: Panaya is back in business at Infosys with fresh push

BENGALURU: More than a year afterput automation software company Panaya up for sale and failed to find a buyer, the Bengaluru based software services exporter has begun to invest in the Israel-based company again as it looks to make the Vishal Sikka-era acquisition successful.Over the past three months, Infosys has appointed a new CEO at Panaya, brought in executives from outside and is looking to hire a slew of salespeople in the US.The Panaya buyout was the main flashpoint for the corporate governance battle between former CEO Sikka and Infosys founder NR Narayana Murthy. Questions were asked over whether there were conflicts of interest in the buyout and whether the company had overpaid. Infosys paid $200 million to buy Panaya in February 2015.One of the first moves by Infosys CEO Salil Parekh in April 2018 was to put Panaya and another acquisition, Kallidus, up for sale. The company also took a slew of writedowns on their value. In January, Infosys said it had failed to find buyers and would refocus on Panaya’s products.Last month, David Binny, the former chief product officer of Panaya’s software-as-a-service platform, took over as CEO of the company, replacing Jake Klein.The company has also appointed a global sales enablement director, who joined from HP, and a business development and regional sales manager, a person familiar with the development said.“When Infosys couldn’t find a buyer, it had to make use of the asset and Panaya can fit into the automation strategy. But there needed to be new salespeople, the company has started hiring for the business and appointed a new CEO,” a source with knowledge of Infosys’ plans said.Infosys did not respond to an email seeking comment, sent last Wednesday.A search of professional networking website LinkedIn shows a number of job openings for business development managers, strategic account managers in the US and Europe.“The aim is to integrate Panaya and cross-sell those services. Currently, the revenue is small because there was a hangover about who would buy it. But now the goal is to grow the business,” the person said.IT experts say the price buyers had offered for Panaya undercut the strategic value of the business, even though Panaya lost sales momentum when it was on the block.Buyers also tried to beat the price down because they felt Infosys simply wanted to be rid of the business.Infosys had already written down Panaya’s value to under Rs 589 crore, a 60% discount to what it paid in 2015.“In the end, the long-term strategic value exceeded the price they were offered. By doubling down, they are attempting to repair an asset which does, in fact, fit well into their digital direction. They still have the significant learning curve to come down on how to run a product company next to a services company,” said Peter Bendor-Samuel, CEO of IT consultancy Everest Research.“However, with the stability Salil (Parekh) has established they now have the time as well as the investor backing.”Analysts also said that Panaya had always been a good acquisition and would fit into Infosys’ current strategy.“Panaya was a smart acquisition. They use math and science AI to find patterns to help with upgrades and migrations which revolutionised the ability to save money and improve efficiency. This improved testing,” Ray Wang, CEO, Constellation Research, said.“Panaya is a good fit as robotic process automation ramps up and cloud migrations take shape.”
