Private vehicles to be banned at Karnataka’s highest peak, Mullayanagiri Hills

Karnataka’s highest peak

Bannerghatta National Park

Tourism Development Corporation

wildlife

By Reya MehrotraMullayyanagiri,, will soon be out of bounds for cars and two-wheelers. Currently, this bio-diversity hotspot records one of the maximum number of vehicles, especially during weekend where the traffic jams runs up to half-a-kilometre. Now, the Forest Department has decided to follow themodel of only allowing passengers through forest department vehicles.Mullayyanagiri Hills is situated at an altitude of 1,925 m (MSL) and will soon be part of a conservation reserve. As this peak (which has a temple at the summit point) is covered in mist for at least half the year; it draws a huge crowd. However, driving to Mullayyanagiri is very difficult as the road becomes narrower and the mist, especially after one crosses Seethalayanagiri mountain peak. The traffic jam, coupled with bad roads has turned the Mullayyangiri into a ‘road of hell’.Speaking to Bangalore Mirror, forest department officials said that they were in talks with both the KSRTC and Karnataka State(KSTDC) to avail their bus services. DFO (Chikkamagaluru Division) Kumar said, “We want to introduce KSTDC buses to ferry passengers from the foothill to the tourist destinations like the temple and other locations. We are also restricting trekkers and conduct a thorough security check at the foothill to not to allow trekkers to go venture into forbidden areas around the hills. Currently, we have successful models in Gopalaswamy Betta and Bannerghatta National Park (where tourists are allowed only through forest department vehicles) which will help in the reduction of footprint, helping reduce the pollution.”In the stateboard meeting conducted in January, Mullayyanagiri was one of the 10 areas proposed to be declared as a ‘Conservation Reserve.’ This was due to Mullayyanagiri is a grassland ecosystems which is a shelter to many small animals, land orchids, Kurinji plants and many endangered birds. While many of the proposed areas like Kolar Leaf Nosed Bat Conservation Reserve, Bukkapattana Chinkara Wildlife Sanctuary, Sharavathi Valley Lion Tailed Macaque Sanctuary, Kappatagudda Wildlife Sanctuary and Kammasandra Wildlife sanctuary were notified in May, Mullayyanagiri Reserve is still awaiting notification.The hill is also known to be a trekker’s paradise. However, owing to the large crowds drawn to the hill adding to the vehicular population, the forest department is planning to restrict the entry of vehicles further up the hill. “It is very important to control crowds at Mullayyanagiri. Though it is dangerous, there is literally no regulation. It is high time the forest department ensures the tough rules and save the hills,” said Bhaskar Rao, a techie who had been to Mullayyanagiri recently.
