Man gets 5-year RI for attempt to murder

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a person to five years rigorous imprisonment in an attempt to murder case. The court of Sessions Judge Gurbir Singh also imposed a fine of Rs 10,000 on the convict and in default of payment of fine he will have to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months.On September 5, 2015, Meherban police had booked Harnek Singh of Chuharwal village for attempting to murder Roshan Singh of the same village.As per the prosecution, Roshan Singh told police that on September 2, 2015, he was coming from Ludhiana to his village in Chuharwal. At about 9.30 pm, Harnek Singh, along with two unknown persons, was standing in the main chowk of the village. Harnek Singh, drunk at that time, was carrying iron rod and other two persons were empty handed. He struck Roshan Singh with the iron rod on his head and then struck him again. The other accomplices fled the spot.After being beaten up, Roshan Singh raised an alarm upon which his brother Jasvir Singh and uncle Satnam Singh came at the spot and rescued him. Harnek Singh ran away from the spot after leaving the iron rod there. His brother rushed him to the civil hospital from where he was discharged later. He added that Harnek Singh generally picks up fight with people without any reason.After registering a case against the accused, police arrested him on September 7, 2015. Later, police produced a chargesheet against the accused in the court. The additional public prosecutor for the state pleaded for punishment to the accused on the basis of prosecution evidence, including statement of the complainants— former Sarpanch Joginder Singh among other prosecution witnesses.Defence counsel argued that prosecution has miserably failed to prove the charges against the accused and the accused has been falsely implicated in the case. Defence witness Jasbir Singh, who is the real brother of complainant Roshan Singh, stepped into the witness box and deposed that accused Harnek Singh never caused any injury to Roshan Singh on September 2, 2015, he suffered injuries due to a roadside accident. He added that due to the political rivalry in the village, Harnek Singh was falsely implicated in the case. Another defence witness Satnam Singh, another relative of Roshan Singh, deposed on similar lines.The court turned down the plea of the defence about the false implication and injuries suffered by the complainant in road accident. “Since the accused did not produce any evidence that Roshan Singh met with an accident on the said date and there is nothing on the file proving that Roshan Singh suffered injuries in the accident,” the court held.The convict is a labourer and is about thirty five years old.
