Wet Weather in Many Parts of India; Temperatures Likely to Drop

Here’s our latest weather outlook for India.

Monday

The cyclonic storm Vayu is weakening rapidly and is expected to make landfall over north Gujarat as a depression on Monday night. During the Landfall rainfall in Gujarat will intensify along with gale winds, thunderstorms and lightning.

From Monday to Wednesday, the 48-hours rainfall accumulation may reach up to 40 mm locally in Gujarat, Rajasthan, coastal Maharashtra, Goa, and Coastal Karnataka. The possibility of flash floods cannot be ruled out. As the landfall nears gale winds of more than 60 kmph and wave height of up to 5m are possible along coastal Gujarat.

According to IMD, the Northern Limit Monsoon (NLM) has advanced further into many southern parts of Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and some parts of West Bengal and Sikkim. The monsoon, coupled with a cyclonic circulation that persists over Bangladesh, is likely to bring heavy rain and thunderstorms over Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, and Tripura on Monday. Substantial rainfall is expected over Assam and Meghalaya, with possible accumulation of up to 100 mm rain in 12-hours from Monday night to Tuesday morning locally.

The eastern parts of India including Chhattisgarh and Odisha may also experience fairly widespread rain and thunderstorms due to the moist air provided by a cyclonic circulation over the northern Bay of Bengal.

The advancement of monsoons, coupled with the impact of the cyclone Vayu, is likely to cause isolated to scattered rain and thunderstorms over Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa and Karnataka. Other regions like Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana may also witness isolated to scattered rain and thunderstorms during this week.

The remnants of the Western Disturbance (WD) are also likely to cause isolated snow or rain and thunderstorms over Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Isolated or scattered rain and thunderstorms are also possible over Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, NCR, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan due to similar weather anomalies.

Advertisement The TWC forecast also suggests possible dust storms over Rajasthan, Delhi and NCR. Meanwhile, heat wave conditions will slowly start to subside over most parts of the country.

Tuesday and beyond

After Vayu weakens into a depression and makes landfall, the rainband will advance inland. Not only Gujarat, but inland parts of northern India such as Rajasthan and the Delhi NCR may witness strong winds and thundershower from Tuesday onward.

The cyclonic circulation over Bangladesh coupled with the monsoon brings heavy rain and thunderstorms over Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, and Tripura this week. Snow may mix in with the rain in Sikkim. Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, West Bengal, and Jharkhand are also likely to experience isolated or scattered rain and thunderstorms owing to the prevalence of the cyclonic circulation over the northern Bay of Bengal.

Monsoon clouds will also lead to isolated to scattered rain and thunderstorms over Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu.

The feeble Western Disturbance (WD) over north India will cause isolated snow or rain and thunderstorms over Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh are also likely to experience isolated to scattered rain and thunderstorms during this week.

Dust storms are possible over Rajasthan, Delhi, and NCR. Maximum temperatures of 40°C or more likely over Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, and Tamil Nadu. The air quality will be very poor in cities across the country, especially in the northwest region, including Delhi, owing to dust storms.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel app (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
