All-India doctors' strike: Protests against assault on doctors in West Bengal intensify: Key Developments

Protests are being staged at the Indian Medical Association's headquarters in the national capital on Monday morning.

New Delhi: The apex medical body, Indian Medical Association (IMA) has announced a nation-wide strike of doctors to support their colleagues in Kolkata on Monday. The healthcare services across the country will be hit as hundreds of doctors will boycott work.

IMA had given a strike call for the withdrawal of the elective surgeries, outpatient department and ward visits. The state-run hospitals in the capital which will stage protest include, Safdarjung Hospital, GTB Hospital, Lady Hardinge Hospital, RML Hospital, Sanjay Gandhi Hospital, Dr Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital and All India Institute of Medical Sciences. Here are the key developments of the nation-wide stir.

1. The Resident Doctors'Association of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences told ANI that the medicos will go on strike from 12 noon today till 6 AM tomorrow. This is to support agitating doctors over violence against them in West Bengal. The emergency services including Casualty, ICU and Labour room will be continued. And the elective surgeries, outpatient department and ward visits will be boycotted.

Delhi: Resident Doctors' Assoc of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (#AIIMS) to go on strike from 12 noon today till 6 am tomorrow,in support of doctors strike over violence against them in West Bengal. Emergency services including Casualty,ICU & Labour room to be continued pic.twitter.com/l1V8w7NGej — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019





Delhi: Resident Doctors' Association of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (#AIIMS) holds protest march against violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/A2TyjiM8PO — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

2. Protests are being staged at the Indian Medical Association's headquarters in the national capital on Monday morning.

3. The Supreme Court agrees to hear the petition seeking the security of the government doctors on Tuesday. The decision has been announced amid nation-wide strike of medicos on Monday.

Supreme Court to hear tomorrow the petition seeking safety and security to government doctors across the country. pic.twitter.com/GJaLnqVv7o — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

4. Junior resident doctors agree to meet the West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee. They have asked the authorities that it should be open for media coverage.
