Real story of Manikarnika movie: Who was Rani Lakshmi Bai the queen of Jhansi & all about the Indian Revolt of 1857

Manikarnika: The Queen of Jhansi, starring Kangana Ranaut as the eponymous lead, is set to hit the screens this Friday. Looking at the trailer, we can surely expect glorious sets, gory battles, a lot of bone-chilling moments, accompanied with Ranaut's legendary acting chops. A lot is riding on this film for the actress, not only because this film could prove to break the string of flops she has delivered lately (Simran and Rangoon) but also because this is first time Kangana is co-directing a film.

Talking about the movie itself, from the trailer it looks like it will focus on Manikarnika's life from her childhood till her death in the battle near Kotah-Ki-Serai in Gwalior. As it is with all historical period dramas, this film has already begun facing flack from some political outfits in the country. Kangana, being the absolute badass that she is in IRL, has shown in true Jhansi Ki Rani fashion that she will not be subdued.

But for those of you who are curious about the legend of this brave woman that lives on even a century after she passed, we are here to tell you the real story of Manikarnika or as she is better known, Rani Laxmibai.

Who was Manikarnika?

On November 1835, Manikarnika was born to a Marathi Karhade Brahim, Moropant Tambe and his wife Bhagirathi Sapre, in Varanasi. Her father worked in the court of the Peshwa of Bithoor, which is why Manikarnika spent most of her childhood in a palace. When she turned four, tragedy struck the Tambe family, as Bhagirathi Sapre passed away, and the task of bringing up her daughter was left to Moropant. In addition to her studies, Moropant thought it was fitting to also teach his daughter about the art of sword fighting and horse riding, traditionally considered manly skills. And this proved to be fruitful, because Manikarnika excelled at both these skills. She could swing a sword like a deadly warrior and had a knack of identifying the best of horses. Her favourites were Sarangi, Pavan and Baadal, who she famously rode while escaping in 1858 (but more about this later).

Her childhood was spent going on adventures with her cousin Nana Sahib and her friend Tatya Tope, who were both elder than her. Ever since she was a child, Manu as she was lovingly called, was fierce and independent.

At the age of 14, Manu was wed to the Maharaja of the princely state of Jhansi, Raja Gangadhar Rao Newalkar. After their marriage, as per traditions, her name was changed to Laxmibai, and became the Rani of Jhansi. In 1851, Laxmibai gave birth to her a son, Damodar Rao, but sadly, he passed away after only four months. Raja Gangadhar Rao wanted to safeguard the future of Jhansi and desperately needed a heir for that, which is why he adopted his cousin's son, Anand Rao and renamed him, Damodar Rao. Shortly after this, the king passed away, leaving his kingdom to Laxmibai and his infant heir.
