India has no right to celebrate R’Day in Jammu Kashmir: Geelani – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR: India has no right to celebrate its Republic Day in Jammu Kashmir as they have occupied our land with its military might and its presence has tormented all ethics of human and international norms, said All Parties Hurriyat Conference chairman, Syed Ali Geelani.

Hurriyat chairman said that India claims to be a large democracy in world but virtually stand exposed in Jammu and Kashmir and is trampling all basic and fundamental rights since last seven decades.

The very existence of this kind of ruthless state-craft has resulted in gross violations of human rights in the every nook and corner of Jammu and Kashmir. People are left at the mercy of occupational military regime, which kills common people in the broad day light and in the custody, showers of bullets and pellets on the peaceful protest marches, leaving thousands of people, irrespective of gender and age, maimed, disabled, blind and half dead, has become a routine matter.

We have no animosity with India or its people and they have every right to celebrate their Republic Day within its states, but despite their being rhetoric about democracy they have no moral and legal right to celebrate it in world recognized disputed land of Jammu and Kashmir.

Hurriyat chairman while referring to UN charter, said that they guarantee the basic and fundamental rights and this institution has obviously called to seek the people’s verdict through plebiscite & has asked to ascertain their wish with regards to political destiny of state and even India in its pledge has confirmed to honour and seek the people’s verdict through plebiscite. Despite being signatory to these resolutions, India backtracked from its commitment and not providing this opportunity to people of Jammu and Kashmir, he said.

Pro-freedom leader stressed, school going children, their parents and teachers to stay away from all these celebrations and asked to realize their obligations towards nation.

Hurriyat chairman strongly condemned the arrest of pro-freedom leaders, activists and youth including Molvi bashir Irfani, Bilal Sidiqui, Shakeel Ahmad Bhat, Ab. Rashid Lone, Hakeem Javed, Bilal Ahmad Shah,Abdul Rouf a head of 26 January, said that Indian republic day comes with the miseries for the Kashmiri people. (PTK)

Journalists barred from covering funeral of Militants in Baramulla

Thousands participated in funeral procession

SRINAGAR, JUN 24 (PTK): Journalists were barred from covering the funerals of three militants who were killed in an encounter with security forces in North Kashmir area of Baramulla yesterday.

In order to prevent people and journalists to reach Khanpora to prevent them from reaching the funeral of Lashkar commander Suhaib Akhoon, forces had sealed the area bridge. According to reports that a few journalists managed to reach Khanpora where the funeral was held for Akhoon by using boats to cross the Jhelum River.

Meanwhile several journalists from Srinagar were asked to return to the capital city by the police. Restrictions were placed on the movement of mourners to limit the funeral gatherings. Journalists said that the Station House Officer Baramulla ensured that the journalists did not cover the funeral. “We were stopped at Khanpora near pandit mandir and asked to go back,” he said.

Meanwhile a photojournalist Bilal Bahadur has suffered grievous injuries while covering the funeral prayers of two slain militants in Old Town Baramulla.

Bahadur, reports said, fell down from a truck that he had mounted on to click the pictures of the funeral. Khan said that Bahadur has suffered severe injuries and has been rushed to district hospital Baramulla for treatment.

Despite restrictions, thousands managed to attend the last rites of the killed militants. Internet remained suspended for the second consecutive day in the district while restrictions were placed on the movement of people, especially mourners.

People’s Democratic Party (PDP) president Mehbooba Mufti had said that stopping the crowd to participate in the funeral prayer of a local militant was an interference in the religious affairs that would lead to further anger and alienation.

Calling the use of force on mourners during the funeral procession of Zeenat as “un-Islamic and undemocratic”, Hurriyat (M) chairman Mirwaiz Umar Farooq had said the ‘forces action’ was ‘contrary to the human values.’

Meanwhile thousands participated in the funerals of the three militants killed in a gunfight in Baramulla. Reports said that the forces had sealed several roads in Khanpora and Old town areas to limit the number of mourners.

Despite the restrictions, reports said, a huge number of men and women gathered in the funeral prayers of Akhoon in Khanpora area. In Old town Baramulla, thousands of people marched with the bodies of Mosin Mushtaq of Qazi Hamam and Nisar Darzi of Jamia Mohalla. The mourners were raising pro-freedom slogans as they marched with the bodies of the duo.

A spontaneous shutdown is being observed in the district to mourn the killings. (PTK)

Geelani Pays tributes to militants killed in Baramulla

SRINAGAR, JAN 24 (PTK): Paying glowing tributes to the youth martyred in Baramulla gunfight, All Parties Hurriyat Conference chairman, Syed Ali Geelani said that the youth are sacrificing their precious lives for a greater cause to serve the nation and we are duty-bound to carry their mission to its logical end.

Blaming stubborn attitude of Indian leadership for continuous bloodshed, Hurriyat chairman said that their denial and unconcern is the sole reason for this unabated bloodshed in Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile Remembering the Handwara and Kupwara massacres, chairman All Parties Hurriyat Conference, Syed Ali Geelani said that Indian occupational forces have left their brutal footprints in every nook & corner of the state, where armed forces yet again de-shaped and molested the already bloated face of the so-called Indian democracy. People were peacefully protesting against the highhandedness of forces when they were showered with bullets from all around.

He said that history may have not witnessed such heinous acts of barbarism when peaceful protests were suddenly trapped in a pool of bullets.

Hailing the courageous determination of the families of victims, Hurriyat chairman said that we can never afford to distance from the sacred mission of martyrs and need to try our best to get rid of this humiliated slavery.

Hurriyat chairman further said that the best way to pay homage to our beloved hero’s is that we should not fall prey to the nefarious designs of our oppressor and their stooges. We should take pledge that we will fight this oppression tooth & nail till our last breath and wishfully will render any sacrifice to achieve our goal, he said.

While commemorating the 23 slain minority community members of Wandhama killed on 25th January in 1998, Hurriyat chairman expressed his solidarity and sympathy with the grieved families.

He said that during past 30 years the Indian forces brutally killed thousands of innocents and demanded impartial investigation into this massacre so that the involved forces personnel are held strictly accountable, so it becomes the responsibility of the world community to come forward and fulfill their duties in giving justice to the oppressed and suppressed nation. (PTK)
