Jodhpur blackbuck case: Salman Khan acquitted of charge of submitting fake affidavit

A Jodhpur court has acquitted Bollywood actor Salman Khan of charge of submitting fake affidavit in blackbuck poaching case of 1991, reports ANI. The actor reportedly told the court that he lost the license documents of his weapons whereas it was sent for renewal.

ANI tweeted, "Jodhpur Court acquits Salman Khan in case against him for submitting fake affidavit in the black buck poaching case that he lost the license documents of his weapons, though the license were sent for renewal. Salman's counsel argued his intention wasn't to submit false affidavit"

Jodhpur Court acquits Salman Khan in case against him for submitting fake affidavit in the black buck poaching case that he lost the license documents of his weapons, though the license were sent for renewal. Salman's counsel argued his intention wasn't to submit false affidavit pic.twitter.com/KtduJXhTyq — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

Salman’s lawyer Hastimal Sarswat had recently told media that actor did not provide false information or file a false affidavit intentionally after the court asked him to deposit the same during trial for Blackbuck poaching case. “Hence it is not expedient in the interest of justice to proceed against Salman as it is a bonafide mistake of his client. Licence was submitted to the Police Commissioner in Mumbai, and Deputy Commissioner of Police has made the statement in the court also,” added the lawyer then.

Notably, in October 1998, total three cases in connection with poaching and one under the Arms Act were registered against Salman. The 52-year-old actor allegedly shot two blackbucks in Bhagoda ki Dhani in Kankani village near Jodhpur during the shooting of 'Hum Saath Saath Hain'.

Saif Ali Khan, Tabu, Neelam and Sonali Bendre were also present in the vehicle Salman allegedly used for hunting the endangered species protected under Schedule 1 of the Indian Wildlife Act. Salman was charged under Section 51 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act and others under Section 51 read with Section 149 (unlawful assembly) of the Indian Penal Code.
