Doctors’ strike: Bengal doctors call off week-long strike after Mamata Banerjee accepts all demands

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has accepted the proposal of doctors to set up grievance redressal cells in government hospitals across the state. She also said five people involved in NRS hospital incident have been arrested. However, she urged the doctors to frame a package to set up reinforced gates at emergency departments.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee mellowed down and agreed to meet the agitating doctors today. She also agreed to the doctors’ demand of a televised meet after they summarily rejected her offer of closed-door talks. While the agitating doctors have assured to withdraw the protest in Bengal after CM Mamata Banerjee accepted all demands. The state government has made all arrangements for live transmission of the meeting as media persons are not allowed inside the state secretariat. Police haven’t arrested a single doctor for protesting against the state government. During the meeting, Mamata Banerjee said that no one has targetted the young doctors adding that no false cases have been registered against doctors. However, Mamata Banerjee suggested protesting doctors at the meeting that there should be dedicated PR persons at district-level hospitals to interact with patients’ relatives instead of doctors. While reacting over the incident, she urged doctors to frame a package to set up reinforced gates at emergency departments and allow only two relatives inside an emergency. During the meeting, health secretary Rajiv Sinha said that the government will deploy an additional 125 police personnel inside the NRS hospital to enhance security in the hospitals. The meeting between West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee and senior doctors from 14 state-run hospitals was held at the state secretariat in Nabanna. Sukumar Mukherjee, Makhan Lal Saha, Abhijit Choudhury, Alakendu Ghosh along with Nirmal Majhi were part of the delegation, reports said. Earlier, the doctors had made a six-point demand including better security, action against those who assaulted the junior doctor and an apology from Mamata Banerjee for terming the striking doctors “outsiders” in media presence.

Doctors, who are members of the Indian Medical Association (IMA), are staging a protest in New Delhi against the assault on two female and a male intern in the medicine ward of NRS Medical College and Hospital around 5.45 pm on Monday (Jun 10, 2019), reports said. Dr Ranjan Sharma, president of the doctors’ national body, said that they are demanding for the enactment of protection law for the doctors and amendment in the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC).

In a similar manner, Resident Doctors’ Association of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) went go on strike from 12 noon today (Monday, June 17, 2019) till 6 am on Tuesday, in support of doctors strike over violence against their West Bengal counterparts. However, the Resident Doctors’ Association has made it clear that emergency services including Casualty, the ICU and Labour room will continue. Doctors at the NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata also called for a nationwide withdrawal of non-essential medical services for 24 hours on Monday.

West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has accepted the proposal of doctors to set up Grievance Redressal Cell in Government Hospitals. https://t.co/h3mGR0s5cB — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

West Bengal: CM Mamata Banerjee arrives for meeting with representatives of doctors at Nabanna. pic.twitter.com/ebcD15p026 — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

The IMA is demanding a national policy law and 7 years of minimum imprisonment for those committing violence against doctors in hospitals. Hospitals need to be safe zones and they are demanding that there should be adequate security provided to them, in case of any misadventure. It must be the responsibility of the state to ensure the safety of medical professionals, the doctors said.

AIIMS doctors have decided to meet Union Health Minister Dr Harshavardhan regarding the safety of doctors. A delegation of doctors is also meeting West Bengal Chief Minister Mamta Banerjee today. The meeting is likely to take place in the state secretariat, although doctors are demanding that it should be held in open in full view of media and not behind the closed doors.

Delhi: Resident Doctors' Assoc of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (#AIIMS) to go on strike from 12 noon today till 6 am tomorrow,in support of doctors strike over violence against them in West Bengal. Emergency services including Casualty,ICU & Labour room to be continued pic.twitter.com/l1V8w7NGej — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

Doctors have demanded comprehensive law for their safety and want its effective implementation to be carried out. The Kolkata violence incident has this time united the medical professionals from across the country and the protests are being carried out in different parts of the country, demanding safety in hospitals workspace.

Currently, doctors at the following hospitals in the country are staging protests/ sit-ins against the brutal attack on their West Bengal counterparts. They are demanding safety at workplaces.

– Doctors at Guwahati Medical College in Assam are holding protest against violence against doctors in West Bengal.

Assam: Doctors at Guwahati Medical College hold protest against violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/hniRAAUab2 — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

– Doctors at King George’s Medical University (KGMU) in Lucknow (UP) are on strike in wake of violence against doctors in West Bengal.

Lucknow: Doctors at King George's Medical University (KGMU) are on strike in wake of violence against against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/MY8WFfTyhE — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 17, 2019

– Doctors holding protest in Bhubaneshwar in solidarity with the nation wide protests of doctors.

Bhubaneswar: Doctors continue to hold protest at All India Institutes of Medical Sciences, in the wake of violence against doctors in West Bengal. #Odisha pic.twitter.com/Z90aV8owDz — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

– Resident Doctors’ Association of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) holding march against violence against doctors in West Bengal.

Delhi: Resident Doctors' Association of All India Institute of Medical Sciences (#AIIMS) holds protest march against violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/A2TyjiM8PO — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

– Doctors’ strike at Sir Sunderlal Hospital in Banaras Hindu University (BHU) at Varanasi against violence faced by doctors in West Bengal.

Varanasi: Doctors on strike at Sir Sunderlal Hospital in Banaras Hindu University in the wake of violence against doctors in West Bengal pic.twitter.com/TD20TZFVzp — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 17, 2019

– Doctors in Jharkhand at Ranchi Institute Of Medical Sciences sitting on protest to express solidarity with their counterparts in West Bengal.

Jharkhand: Doctors at Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), Ranchi hold protest against violence against doctors in West Bengal. pic.twitter.com/sgBIdvkqUH — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

– Doctors protest at Bengaluru’s Victoria Hospital in solidarity with their West Bengal counterparts

– Doctors at AIIMS Bhopal (MP) comes in protest to support the doctors of West Bengal.

Madhya Pradesh: Doctors at AIIMS Bhopal hold protest in support of doctors of West Bengal. #DoctorsStrike pic.twitter.com/r5R5r6xoRa — ANI (@ANI) June 17, 2019

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
