RAF chef's exotic travels inspire new Welsh sweet shop

We have more newsletters

Thank you for subscribing

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Serve the food you really want to eat by signing up for our tips and recipes and never be bored by your cooking again

As an RAF chef, James Price travelled the world, from Burma to India, gathering scores of recipes and culinary techniques along the way.

Traditional sweets were his favourite: in Paris he learned how to make Petit Fours and in Cyprus he perfected his Turkish Delights.

All his notes and recipes were dutifully recorded in a notebook which, in his dotage, was stored in his attic.

Decades later, whilst rummaging in the attic, the book was unearthed by grandson Jeff Barry, hidden away in a small box.

Inspired by what he found, Jeff went to realise his ambition of launching a confectionery business.

Last week the firm, Cymru Confectionery, moved into its first high street premises in Cardiff.

It was a bitter-sweet moment for Jeff, whose late grandfather would have celebrated his 100th birthday this year.

“I never really knew my grandfather as he passed away when I was young,” said Jeff.

“But I had heard of the fond memories shared by the family and especially the goodies he would make for Christmas .

“We knew he was a pastry chef, but we didn’t know about his recipe book until after he had died.”

Already a regular at food festivals and markets, Cymru Confectionery’s first retail foray has come as pop-up unit in the heart of Cardiff.

Based at The Castle Emporium, a converted 1920s cinema that’s now a hub of independent businesses, the shop offers traditional sweets based on James’ recipes, from Peanut Butter Fudge to Turkish Delight.

As a further tribute to his grandfather, Jeff is planning to frame his old recipe book and chef’s whites, and display them alongside a photo of the man himself.

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now

For the fledgling business to get this far, Jeff said he was indebted to Cywain , a support initiative for start-up food and drink producers.

As well as sourcing grants, it provided test trading, helped with branding and dispatched Jeff to trade shows.

Bethan Williams, Cywain’s development manager, said Cymru Confectionery had made great strides in a short space of time.

“It was evident, when I first met Jeff last November, that there was strong desire and determination to ensure his grandfather’s legacy lived on,” she added.
