'Mission UP': Rahul Gandhi sets target for Priyanka, Scindia to win next assembly polls in Uttar Pradesh

Follow us on File

In mission to conquer Uttar Pradesh, Congress President Rahul Gandhi has set target for Priyanka Gandhi and Jyotiraditya Scindia to form the next government in the state. Ending years of fevered speculation, Gandhi family scion Priyanka Gandhi Vadra formally entered politics on Wednesday with her brother and Congress president Rahul Gandhi appointing her as general secretary for Uttar Pradesh East, which also comprises Lok Sabha seats of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and state chief minister Yogi Adityanath. Rahul Gandhi also appointed senior party leader Jyotiraditya Scindia as AICC general secretary for Uttar Pradesh West.

The Congress will also fight the coming Lok Sabha polls with “full strength”, Gandhi said during his visit to Amethi on Thursday.

"Priyanka and Scindia have been given a target. That is to form a Congress government in Uttar Pradesh in the next election by defeating and wiping out the BJP,” the Congress president said.

“Unlike PM Modi, I do not talk of a 'BJP-mukt Bharat' but speak with respect," Gandhi said, referring to Narendra Modi’s call to “free” India of the Congress.

Whether it is Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh or Tamil Nadu, everywhere the Congress will fight with full might on the front foot, and you will see that after the Vidhan Sabha elections there will be a Congress government in the state,” he said.

“In the Lok Sabha polls, we will contest with full strength, without taking a backward step," he said, referring to the election just months away.

Also Read: 'Not a challenge': Rajnath Singh dismisses Priyanka Gandhi's appointment as 'internal matter' of Congress

He criticised the Centre government over the Rafale aircraft deal and accused the prime minister of “waiving” industrialists’ loans, charges countered earlier by the government.

“The watchman proved to be a thief," he said, and repeated the slogan, "Gali gali mein shor hai, chowkidar chor hai."

Earlier in the morning, Gandhi visited a local Shiva temple after meeting party workers at a guesthouse.

Addressing a public meeting in Salon area, he termed himself, his sister and mother Sonia Gandhi as “soldiers” for the people of the constituency.

While Rahul Gandhi won the 2014 parliamentary elections from Amethi, Sonia Gandhi is an MP from adjacent Rae Bareli.

Both fall under the turf carved out for Priyanka Gandhi. Narendra Modi’s Varanasi constituency and Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s bastion Gorakhpur are also in eastern UP.

Rahul Gandhi reiterated he has full respect for leaders like Bahujan Samaj Party president Mayawati and Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav and his father Mulayam Singh Yadav.

Also Read: Priyanka Gandhi can't bring about major change in Congress in short time span: Prashant Kishor

The SP and the BSP recently forged an alliance for UP in the coming Lok Sabha polls, keeping the Congress out of the pact.

The Congress president said the prime minister had not kept his poll promise on creating jobs, and suggested that the Bharatiya Janata Party government had slowed development in his constituency.

"You will get your food park back, not 99 per cent but 101 per cent. All development projects that have been stalled by Narendra Modi and Yogiji to hurt you will be back," he said.

"The BJP people are spreading hatred in the name of religion, caste and region. They get people of UP and Bihar thrown out of Gujarat, get Hindus and Muslims fight each other,’” he charged.

“Narendra Modi means hatred, he is the symbol of hatred,” he said. “We will remove Modi in 2019 and no one can stop this."

FULL VIDEO:

(With PTI inputs)
