Wedding Of Martyr Garud Commando's Sister Turns Emotional As 50 IAF Commandos Perform Rituals

The family values are deeply integrated in the Indian armed forces and the soldiers treat each other’s families as their own. Recently this belief got real when 50 Indian Air Force (IAF) commandos arrived at the wedding ceremony of Shashikala, the sister of martyred Air Force Garud unit commando Jyoti Prakash Nirala and her 50 brother gave her an emotional bidayee.

Social Media

Garud Commando Jyoti Prakash Nirala was martyred fighting militants at Bandipora in Jammu and Kashmir on November 18, 2017. The commandos not only arrived at the wedding, they performed all the ritual, the martyred commando would have performed.

Commando Nirala had gunned down Ubaid alias Osama, who was the nephew of Lashkar commander Lakhvi who lives in Pakistan and he died saving loves of his injured fellow commandos.

The martyred commando was awarded the Ashok Chakra, the highest peacetime gallantry award on Republic Day, 2018 and the award was given to his mother Malti Devi and wife Sushma from president Ram Nath Kovind.

Commando Nirala was the only son of her parents and had three sisters, his father, Tej Narayan Singh, marginal farmer who belonged to Badiladih village of Rohtas district, Bihar.

After fixing marriage of her third daughter Shashikala, father of the bride and the martyr sent an invitation to Air Chief Marshall and the Garud Commando Unit. And the family was surprised by the arrival of 50 commandos of the Garud unit and they contributed Rs 5 lakh as wedding and participated as brother in various rituals of the marriage such as Merava, Lava Chhatra, Dharayee and other rituals of marriage.

The bridge said her brothers had come from all across the country.

File Photo

The parents spoke to Hindustan Times, and they expressed their happiness as they felt they got 50 sons, “We lost one son, but got 50 sons today. These sons filled us with love and respect and assured us that we are not alone and helpless. Today, the entire nation is with us. God bless you, my children.”

Bride Shashikala got married to Sujit Kumar of Dehri who works as a loco pilot in Bengaluru and his father Uma Shankar Yadav is also a railway employee and they also felt honour after receiving the blessings from the commandos
