How Canadian SkyPower Global combat challenges to contribute to Modi’s foreign Investment Initiative

By Dr. Ankit Srivastava, Chief Editor

With India choosing development and progress instead of divisive politics in the just concluded general elections, the nations’ mood for growth and its trust in its leader for the same is well-stated by the results of the election.

India is moving with steady steps to establish itself among the global powers so that its voice could be heard and respected on international front.

The vision and role played by Prime Minister Narendra Modi have anchored the ship of development to embark on a journey of sustainability and enhancement on global level.

The amiable foreign policies and the vision of a co-operative and co-ordinated world order of the charismatic leader of India has benefitted the nation at large, especially in terms of foreign investment that has positively impacted all spheres of development. One such vision of Mr. Modi that aims at establishing a sustainable order in terms of energy requirement is materialized by the SkyPower Global.

The modern world and the requirement of energy can’t be segregated as the civilizational attainments have surpassed the limits of primitiveness.

With the impending dearth of non-renewable sources of energy in the coming years it has become imperative to think of ways to fight the lack and for a developing nation like India the sustainability of the energy sector is the pre-requisite for development. Now the globe at large is moving ahead in terms of clean energy, thus the role played by companies and organization realizing the full potential of renewable sources is vital.

SkyPower Global, a Canadian renewable energy company, is one such name that has established fame for itself for being one of the largest and most successful developers and owners of utility-scale solar energy projects that has been aiding the world strategically with clean energy requirements.

India has an abundance of solar energy because of its geography and it is with the vision of India’s progressive Prime Minister Narendra Modi that the nation has witnessed a progress in terms of solar energy enhancement.

The innate potential of solar energy has never taken a back seat in the progressive history of the renewable sources of energy and in the contemporary world nations have progressed enough in the solar sector to harness the potential of solar energy so as to become an important source of clean energy.

The experienced and innovative approach of the SkyPower Global has truly transformed the clean and sustainable energy goals of India that goes hand in hand with Prime Minister Modi’s vision of bringing India to the top-notch position in terms of clean and sustainable energy production. By emphasising on technology and innovation, the Modi Government has shown full faith in the experienced and innovative approach of the SkyPower Global back in 2015 when the company won the bid for the construction of three solar projects in Madhya Pradesh of 50 MW in June 2015 and four projects of 50 MW each in Telangana in August the same year.

With its strenuous efforts the company managed to challenge the status quo of the hierarchical order of the energy sector as it significantly dropped the price of renewable power by approximately 20%.

With the commitment and strategic investment of the SkyPower Global the price of solar energy dropped below the price of domestic coal (INR 5.45/kWh) that has been dominating the energy sector of India for too long.

Not just the contribution of the company made solar energy a feasible and reliable source of energy but it glued itself with Mr. Modi’s dream of connecting the nation at large on energy platform as it did in Canada with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s vision of clean energy.

Mr. Modi’s amiable foreign policies have definitely attracted foreign direct investment for the country.

Canadian Investor SkyPower Global despite making tremendous investment into the development of the country has to face troubled water in the country that made their journey not a smooth run.

Becoming the target of the divisive and mud-slinging politics of its subordinate companies that it trusted for the fulfilment of its commitment, SkyPower Global has crossed significant hurdles in order to save its integrity and name on global platforms.

SkyPower Global while investing in India has not just transformed the country’s energy sector by providing the nation with green energy solutions but have even generated ample job opportunities to benefit the economically backward classes of the nation so as to aid the country’s government to eradicate the evils of poverty.

Despite being engaged in a law-suit with the EPC contractor Sterling & Wilson that was responsible to fulfil the commitment of the solar projects in Madhya Pradesh and Telangana on turn key basis and which failed to fulfil its commitment, SkyPower has continued with its services for the greater good of the nation.

The company’s commitment goes along with the Government of India’s 100 GW solar target for 2022 and SkyPower being a part of this exemplary program of the state and federal governments of India under Modi’s leadership has been setting a distinguished example.

With Modi’s vision and SkyPower’s commitment, India has become a world leader in deploying solar power not only with the country’s targets but through its actions as well.

The difficulties faced by the Canadian company could impact the progress and foreign policies of the country in the adverse.

While witnessing the hitches faced by SkyPower, other Canadian companies that see India as a potential market for investment could take a step back. This could affect the country’s reputation as well as economy in the adverse.

The troubles faced by a globally reputed foreign company that has invested hundreds of millions of both financial and Human Capital in the country posits an impending threat for the nation’s foreign policies.

The matter requires closer scrutiny as it is clearly discouraging for other foreign investors to see a company like SkyPower that is well known and respected globally having to face such turmoil in a country which is constantly seeking foreign direct investment but has yet to build in necessary protection or measures to protect or be able to assist FDIs like SkyPower.

Photo Credit : Shutterstock

Email: ankits@newdelhitimes.com

Twitter: @ankitndt

Like this: Like Loading...
