Healthcare services hit as doctors go on 24-hour strike

OP consultations suspended while emergency wings work as usual

The 24-hour strike observed by doctors at hospitals in the city on Monday, protesting the attack on their brethren in Kolkata hit the healthcare service hard, much to the inconvenience of the patients, especially those who came for far-off places seeking treatment. The doctors boycotted their duty in the non-emergency wings in response to the strike call given by the Indian Medical Association (IMA).

Patients suffer

With no services available at the out-patient (OP) blocks of hospitals, patients and their attendants were seen waiting for consultations. Scores of patients who came from different parts of north Andhra districts had a tough time. M. Appalanaidu, a differently-abled man, who came all the way to the city from Padmanabham mandal was seen standing with the support of walking sticks at the OP Block of King George Hospital (KGH), the largest referral hospital for the entire north Andhra region. An elderly man who developed severe swelling on his legs and a pregnant woman were among those waiting.

No OP token was issued at KGH. “We closed the OP block, but emergency services such as casualty and in-patient services functioned as usual,” KGH Superintendent G. Arjuna said.

‘Stringent laws needed’

Demanding stringent laws to deal with the recurring assaults on doctors, IMA vice-president (Visakhapatnam) Dr. P.A. Ramani demanded that the Centre brought out legislations to ensure safety of doctors and hospital staff.

Recalling that during the tenure of the Chief Ministerial tenure of Y.S. Rajesekhara Reddy, she said an ordinance was promulgated warranting three years imprisonment for attacking doctors and medical staff on duty. She demanded that the punishment be increased to seven years of imprisonment and issuing of Non-Bailable Warrant (NBW) for such offences.

Grievance cells sought

“We want a safe working environment for doctors. Grievance cells should be opened at hospitals for patients to register complaints,” she said.

A.P. Medical and Sales Representatives Union State secretary K.V.P. Chandamouli and Praja Arogya Vedika convener T. Kameswara Rao also extended their solidarity to the agitation.
