Why Agra shoe industry is celebrating Priyanka Gandhi's entry in politics

Priyanka Gandhi was given the formal post of AICC general secretary in a surprise move on Jan 23. (Image: PTI)

A large section of the population in Agra is involved in the footwear industry that faced a major setback during the demonetisation days and also with the introduction of GST. Many in this community breathed a sigh of relief on Wednesday, as soon as Congress announced Priyanka Gandhi's entry in politics.

The poor and middle-class citizens of Agra linked with the footwear industry are not happy with the Modi government and have been warming up to the BSP-SP alliance in Uttar Pradesh.

However, as soon as the news broke that Priyanka Gandhi has been appointed the general secretary of AICC and given the charge of eastern Uttar Pradesh, the sense of relief among the masses was palpable.

It appears that the appointment of Priyanka could very well be the masterstroke that Congress needed for the 2019 Lok Sabha elections.

Talking to India Today TV, Mohd Shareef Kale, who is part of the footwear industry in Agra, said, "Congress is the only national-level political party that can combat the BJP."

Workers and factory owners had earlier decided to vote for the SP-BSP alliance because they wanted to be rid of the Modi government, but now, as Priyanka Gandhi has entered the political fray, the consensus is leaning towards the Congress again.

Academician Vinod Bansal said that Priyanka Gandhi's entry into active politics has breathed life to Congress's hopes to defeat BJP.

Bansal said that not only the people, but the Congress workers also wanted Priyanka to enter politics and they are happy that she finally granted their wish.

From February onwards, Priyanka will be taking charge of Congress campaign in Uttar Pradesh and this will certainly bring back the lifeblood that had seeped away from the Congress.

Social activist Amir Qureshi said that senior citizens and intellectuals have always given greater weight to Priyanka over Rahul Gandhi in the Congress and they want Priyanka to take over charge of the party so that the Congress can effectively combat the sectarian and divisive political thought being spread in the country by the BJP.

He said that the ordinary man of India does not care if there is a temple or a mosque in Ayodhya. "His first priority is to buy bread for his family and under the Modi government everything from basic necessities to luxury items have become expensive making it difficult for the poor to survive."
