Hina Khan flaunts her post workout glow after a rigorous gym session; WATCH

Staying healthy and fit is a way of life that most actors adopt in order to endure long hours of the shoot. For television actors, the work schedule is much more hectic due to late night shoot calls and even longer sessions. Thus, most actors like to work out regularly to keep their strength up. Speaking of this, Hina Khan is the star whose consistency and regularity at the gym is unparalleled. The Kasautii Zindagii Kay star never ceases to amaze her fans while working hard at the gym and sweating at the gym.

After yesterday’s lazy Sunday and Father’s Day celebrations, today, Hina seemed to be in a joyous mood as she hit the gym. While walking towards the gym, the talented actress flaunted her million dollar smile. However, once she was inside, Hina hit the workout session like a pro and kicked off the week with some heavy weight training. In the videos, we can see Hina working on her biceps and doing pull-ups. Her gym style was a combination of chic and sporty as she clubbed a pink pair of shorts with a black top and a pair of neon sneakers.

(Also Read: Kasautii Zindagii Kay stars Hina Khan & Parth Samthaan’s chat about the monsoon is bound to make you smile)

Post her workout session, Hina clicked a ‘gymfie’ to flaunt her post workout glow. In the videos, Hina looked every bit of a determined diva who wanted to nail her workout session like a pro.

Check out the videos and gymfie:

Hina isn’t just a popular name in India but after her global appearance at Cannes 2019 last month, the Kasautii actress left a mark internationally as well. Her gorgeous looks at the red carpet earned her a lot of praises. At the same fest, Hina also released the poster of her upcoming film, Lines. In the film, Hina will be seen as a girl next door who is caught in the war between India and Pakistan. Based on the Kargil War, the film also stars Rishi Bhutani and Farida Jalal and is directed by Hussein Khan. Lines is expected to release in August 2019. Hina also managed to bag a role in Vikram Bhatt’s upcoming film and expressed her excitement about the same as well.
