Srinagar SSP breaks down as he carries martyred cop's son at wreath-laying ceremony

The picture was taken during the wreath-laying ceremony shows the officer breaking down while carrying the 4-year-old son of inspector Arshad Khan. (Photo:Twitter/Jammu and Kashmir Police)

A heart-rending photo of a senior police officer breaking down while carrying the son of inspector Arshad Khan, who was killed in a terror attack in Anantnag, has gone viral on social media.

The photo, taken during the wreath-laying ceremony at district police lines Srinagar on Monday, shows Srinagar Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Haseeb Mughal breaking down while carrying Uhbaan, the 4-year-old son of inspector Arshad Khan.

The son of Martyr #ArshadKhan in the lap of SSP Srinagar Dr.M.Haseeb Mughal JKPS during the wreath laying ceremony at District Police Lines Srinagar. pic.twitter.com/EqGApa82Rh J&K Police (@JmuKmrPolice) June 17, 2019

Inspector Arshad Khan died in AIIMS Delhi where he was critically injured on last Wednesday during a fidayeen attack by a militant in KP Road of Anantnag in Jammu and Kashmir. Five CRPF troopers and militant were killed on the spot in the attack.

Arshan Khan was posted as the Station House Officer (SHO) in Sadar police station in Anantnag. He is survived by his wife, two sons, parents and a younger brother. He belonged to Karan Nagar in Srinagar and had been recruited in the Jammu and Kashmir Police in 2002.

Governor Satya Pal Malik also expressed grief over the demise of Arshad Khan. In his message, governor paid tributes to SHO Khan for attaining martyrdom and described Arshad Khan's death a big loss to the police department.

Mentioning that SHO Khan's bravery saved many lives, Jammu and Kashmir governor said, "We are all grateful to such brave hearts who are sacrificing their lives for security of the nation".

READ | Anantnag terror attack: SHO Arshad Khan, who took bullet to chest, succumbs to injury

WATCH | Five CRPF jawans killed in militant attack in Anantnag
