Runaway bride leaves wedding to meet Vikrant Massey in Delhi's Saket. Actor is stumped

Many Bollywood celebrities have faced crazy fan encounters and this time it was Chhapaak actor Vikrant Massey who was witness to it. A crazy fan disrupted the shooting of his film in Delhi. The woman left her wedding and rushed to Saket in Delhi, where Vikrant was shooting, just to meet the actor.

According to a report in Mid-Day, when the bride was barred from meeting the actor, she created a scene and didn't leave the sets of the film till she got to meet him.

A unit hand told the daily, "While the team had taken adequate security measures for the evening shoot, a woman - dressed in bridal finery - broke into the set. She created a scene as she cried inconsolably and insisted on meeting Vikrant. Initially, the unit barred her from meeting the actor, but she refused to budge and threw a ruckus about how she doesn't want to get married. When she held her ground for over an hour, Vikrant sat down with her for a chat and tried to pursue her to return to her wedding venue. However, his words fell on deaf ears. Finally, the security team had to intervene and cops were called on set."

The daily stated that the film's shooting had to be stalled for four hours due to the incident. Talking to the daily, Vikrant said, "Initially, I didn't know how to react. Although I was humbled, the fact was that I couldn't let her leave her wedding functions and had to ensure that she returned safely to her family," he said.

He added, "I will always be grateful for people loving my work and admiring me, but sometimes we are left in situations that throw us off balance. This was a bizarre incident."

Vikrant Massey recently wrapped up shooting of Meghna Gulzar's Chhapaak. The film, based on the life of acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal, stars Deepika Padukone in the lead role.

Vikrant stepped into show business with television. The actor caught everyone's eyes with his role in TV serial Balika Vadhu. He came into limelight with his role in Konkona Sensharma's A Death In The Gunj. Vikrant was lauded for his performance in the film. He is also known for his supporting role in Ranveer Singh and Sonakshi Sinha's 2013 film Lootera.

ALSO READ | Meghna Gulzar reveals how Deepika Padukone prepared for her role in Chhapaak

Also Read | Meghna Gulzar shares pics from last day of Chhapaak, Deepika Padukone looks unrecognisable

ALSO READ | Deepika Padukone wraps up Chhapaak: The most precious film of my career

ALSO READ | Deepika Padukone as Malti from Chhapaak is all smiles on film set. See pic

ALSO READ | Chhapaak first look: Deepika Padukone transforms into acid attack survivor Laxmi Agarwal
