Army kills Jaish commander whose car was used in Pulwama attack

Jaish commander Sajjad Bhat was the owner of the vehicle used on February 14 to launch the attack on a CRPF convoy

In a major victory for the Indian Army, the last surviving attacker in the Pulwama terror strike, Jaish-e-Mohammed commander Sajjad Bhat was killed on Monday evening. With this, all terrorists responsible for the Pulwama terror attack have now been eliminated.

Jaish commander Sajjad Bhat was the owner of the vehicle used on February 14 to launch the attack on a CRPF convoy.

He was killed in an encounter with security forces at Marhama village in Bijbehara tehsil, along with another Jaish militant.

He had joined the Jaish-e-Mohammed terror outfit days before the Pulwama attack.

The terrorist was killed a day after another Pulwama-like attack was carried out in the same region on Monday, targeting an army vehicle, claiming the lives of two army soldiers and gravely injuring four. The information this time came from an unlikely source -- Pakistan.

India Today TV breaks down for you the main terrorists who were involved in the February 14 attack.

Adil Ahmed Dar, the suicide bomber, the man who drove into the CRPF convoy. (Status: Killed along with CRPF soldiers)

Suicide attacker Adil Ahmed Dar (in pic) was in constant touch with Mudasir Ahmed Khan

Mudassir Khan, senior Jaish member who was working closely and was a key player in plotting and executing the terror attack. (Status: Killed)

Kamran alias Rasheed Ghazi a Pakistani national and top commander of the Jaish (Status Killed on February 18, 2019)

Ghazi Rasheed had knowledge of Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs)

Sajjad Bhat, was the one who brought the Eeco Maruti van used by the suicide bomber. (Status: Killed on June 18, 2019)

Sajjad Bhat

Mudassir Khan, senior Jaish member who was working closely with Kamran alias Rasheed Ghazi, was a key player in plotting and executing the terror attack.

Meanwhile Sajjad Bhat, was the one who brought the Eeco Maruti van used by the suicide bomber. However, the mastermind Masood Azhar continues to be safe in Pakistan. The Jaish-e-Mohammed leader has been listed as global terrorist by UN after China's nod in United Nation Security Council.

The case is being currently investigated by the National Investigation Agency.

ALSO READ: Pakistan extends airspace ban along its eastern border with India till June 28

ALSO WATCH: Terrorists target forces in Pulwama
