‘Mera sher beta kahan gaya’: A mother weeps as terrorism claims another Army Major’s life in J&K

Family of Major Ketan Sharma mourns his demise, at their residence in Kanker Khera, Meerut | Photo Credit: ANI

Anantnag (Jammu and Kashmir): India lost another braveheart on Monday when Army Major Ketan Sharma lost his life during a gunfight in Jammu and Kashmir’s Anantnag district. A terrorist was also killed in the encounter that took place in Achabal area in Anantnag district in South Kashmir.

The Army Major had sustained injuries during the gunfight with terrorists and succumbed to his injuries later at the hospital where he was rushed. Major Sharma belonged to 19 Rashtriya Rifles and hailed from Uttar Pradesh’s Meerut.

Army officers arrived at late Major Sharma’s residence at Kanker Khera in Meerut today to offer their condolences to the bereaved family. News agency ANI reported that when Army personnel were consoling the family, the only question his mother asked was: "Mujhe bata do mera sher beta kahan gaya (please tell me where my brave son has gone)?"

#WATCH Army personnel console family members of Army Major Ketan Sharma who lost his life in Anantnag encounter yesterday. His mother says, "Mujhe batado mera sher beta kahan gaya? " #Meerut pic.twitter.com/Rl3wnpQ5gd — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 18, 2019

Meanwhile, the last rites of Army Major Ketan Sharma were performed at his residence in Meerut. Earlier, his mortal remains were brought to the Army Cantonment area in Meerut. Defence Minister Rajnath Singh and Army Chief General Bipin Rawat earlier paid their homage to the deceased Major in Delhi today.

The encounter in Anantnag’s Achabal area had started after the Rashtriya Rifles received an input about the presence of terrorists there. Acting on the intelligence, security forces launched a cordon and search operation.

(Late) Army Major Ketan Sharma | Pic courtesy: PTI

The gunfight started after the terrorists opened fire at the forces. It was during the exchange of fire that the Major and another jawan sustained injuries. The other soldier is undergoing treatment at the hospital.

Meanwhile, in a separate encounter in Anantnag’s Bijbehara area today, a jawan lost his life while two terrorists, involved in the February 14 Pulwama terror attack, were eliminated.
