1600 cops have laid down lives for peace: Kumar

1600 cops have laid down lives for peace: Kumar

Wreath laying ceremony of Arshid

SRINAGAR, June 17: Advisor to the Governor K Vijay Kumar while paying tributes to slain SHO Arshid Khan today claimed that 1600 odd SPO’s and policemen have laid down their lives to restore peace and tranquility in state and this ‘attrition’ will only steel their resolve.

The Advisor was speaking to media at District Police Lines (DPL) Srinagar here on the sidelines of wreath laying ceremony of SHO Arshid Ahmad Khan who was critically injured in a Fidayeen attack in Anantnag last week and later succumbed to his injuries at AIIMS New Delhi.

Khan was among three paramilitary CRPF men injured in a Fidayeen Attack near busy KP road in Anantnag on June 13.

Five CRPF troopers including two Assistant Sub Inspector (ASI) rank officers were also killed in the attack. Later one of the two militant was gunned down by the joint team of government forces. A teenage girl was also injured in the incident.

“JK police and all of our security forces have made enormous sacrifices. This attrition will only steel our resolve. More than 1600 Special Police Officers (SPO’s) and policeman of Jammu and Kashmir police alone have laid their lives, so we will be at it with all resolve,” said Kumar.

Showering all praises on the slain SHO Arshid Khan, Kumar said the slain barely within three or four minutes of the attack rushed to the spot to rescue his fellow men. He said the combined power of different security agencies have deep admiration in the state and at the centre as well.

The Advisor to the Governor said there is no difference between the CRPF, ITBP, SSB, Army, BSF and the local police. As all are the limbs of the same organ.

“So this is part of J-K synergy. We have deep admiration for it and in fact in New Delhi, the ceremony was organized by the DG CRPF and all the representatives of all the other paramilitary forces took part which itself signifies the kind of mutual affection and the kind of synergy there is," Kumar added.
