Alleging 'Police Inaction', UP Rape Victim Kills Herself

New Delhi: A 24-year-old gangrape victim has reportedly died by suicide after accusing the police of not registering her complaint in a village under the Dataganj police station in Uttar Pradesh.

In a suicide note, the victim accused the local police of inaction and also mentioned her ordeal. The victim allegedly reported her ordeal to the local police station on June 15 but the SHO did not register an FIR.

The Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Badaun, Ashok Kumar Tripathi suspended the SHO of Dataganj police station Amrit Lal on charges of dereliction of duty. The Senior Superintendent of Police also told PTI that the woman was directed by the local police to file a complaint in Secunderabad as the crime was committed there.

According to the Indian Express, the police had registered an FIR against the accused just hours before the victim’s body was found. A police team that visited the victim’s house on Sunday found her body hanging from a hook in a room. An autopsy report confirmed that her death had occurred due to hanging.

According to the Hindustan Times, a family member of the victim claimed that she had complained to the Bareilly zone Additional Director General of police Avinash Chandra but no action had still been taken by the local police.

Also read: India, a Killer Country for the Girl Child

According to police officials, the victim, who had gotten married a few years ago, had been staying at her parents’ residence for the past few months due to some differences with her husband. In her suicide note, the victim alleged that on May 15, three distant relatives approached her at a nearby market and took her to Secunderabad in Telangana on the false pretext of her husband being unwell. She claimed that she was sexually assaulted repeatedly for a week before she managed to contact her father and inform him that she was being taken to Delhi.

She also claimed that she managed to escape when the accused, upon seeing her father at the railway station in Delhi, fled the scene.

The police have now lodged an FIR against three people in connection with the gangrape. “The accused are the residents of Meaow area of Badaun and are relatives of the woman,” the SSP told Hindustan Times. The SSP also added that police raids were underway to arrest the culprits who were distant relatives of the victim.

Additional Superintendent of Police, City (Badaun), Jitendra Kumar Srivastava said a probe was on.

If you know someone – friend or family member – at risk of suicide, please reach out to them. The Suicide Prevention India Foundation maintains a list of telephone numbers (www.spif.in/seek-help/) they can call to speak in confidence. You could also accompany them to the nearest hospital.
