Telangana: Donald Trump ‘bhakt’ Bussa Krishna installs 6-ft statue of US President, performs 'puja' with milk

Telangana farmer Bussa Krishna installs Donald Trump statue

Hyderabad: Bussa Krishna, a farmer in Telangana who is often regarded as US President Donald Trump’s ‘biggest fan’ in India, has taken his devotion to the businessman-turned-politician a notch higher. Krishna installed a six-foot statue of US President Trump on the latter’s birthday on June 14.

The Telangana farmer also performed an abhishek of the Trump statue with milk.

Krishna came into the spotlight as a Trump fan in India last year when pictures of him offering prayers to the photo of Donald Trump went viral on social media.

Bussa Krishna, a resident of Konne village in Jangaon district of Telangana, attained fame as a 'devotee' of the Republican leader, who had installed a photograph of Trump in his puja room. The farmer claimed that he worshipped Trump's photograph every day along with other Hindu gods and goddesses.

Telangana: Janagam-based Bussa Krishna installed a 6-feet statue of US President Donald Trump on the latter's birthday on June 14. He also performed 'abhishek' of the statue with milk. Krishna said, "I will offer prayers to the statue everyday" pic.twitter.com/LJsddXUmfD — ANI (@ANI) June 18, 2019

As part of his morning ritual, he applied vermillion to the US President's photo, and offered turmeric, flowers and performed aarti of the photo, the Hindustan Times reported.

The Telangana farmer had told the daily that he decided to pray to Trump after a Telangana software engineer, Srinivas Kuchibhotla, was killed by a US Navy veteran at a bar in Kansas in a hate crime in February 2017.

“I was very much pained at the incident. I thought the only way the US President and his people could understand the greatness of Indians is to display our love and affection towards them. That is why I started worshipping Trump with a hope that the prayers would reach him one day,” Krishna had told the daily.

Dismissing allegations that his bhakti for Trump was a mere publicity stunt, Krishna has often insisted that he undertook the task to pray to the US President in a bid to improve the US-India relations.

Meanwhile, talking about his Trump statue, Krishna told news agency ANI, "I will offer prayers to the statue every day."
