Watch: Day after Kolkata doctors' strike ends, ruckus at Delhi hospital over rape of 4-yr-old

A day after the Kolkata doctors ended their strike over violence against doctors, some locals in New Delhi's Maharishi Valmiki Hospital created ruckus in the hospital premises. According to police, some people gathered and created ruckus over rape of a minor girl. "Situation is peaceful now," police said.

A 4-year-old girl was admitted to the hospital for medical treatment after she was allegedly raped by a 45-year-old man in Bawana area earlier on Tuesday.

A video, purportedly of the hospital, shows a group of people engaging in an altercation with security staff and later ransacking the facility, causing damage to furniture and other objects.

#WATCH Delhi: Locals create ruckus at Maharishi Valmiki Hospital.Police says,"Some ppl gathered&created ruckus over rape of a girl.Situation peaceful now." 4-yr-old girl was admitted in the hospital for medical treatment after she was allegedly raped in Bawana area earlier today. pic.twitter.com/fru63aVeN7 ANI (@ANI) June 18, 2019

The incident came to light after a passerby claimed that he saw the girl being "inappropriately touched" by the man in his 40's. The girl was playing in her locality just a few miles away from her house when he approached her, they said.

The victim's parents approached the Bawana police station and reported about the incident, police said.

According to Rajiv Sagar, the medial superintendent of Maharshi Valmiki Hospital in Kingsway Camp area, the altercation among the villagers and security and medical staff of the hospital broke out around 6 pm.

"A man was first brought to our hospital with multiple injuries, and he was being attended to. After some time, a six-year-old girl, a victim of sexual assault, was then brought to our facility. We did everything as per protocol to get her examined, and she was sent to the labour room," Rajiv Sagar said.

"However, some more detailed tests were needed to conduct her medical examination. But, after 4 pm our emergency services are closed, we referred the patient to a Dr BSA Hospital, about 8-10 km from here, after which the crowd went berserk and ransacked the furniture and other properties. Our staff also ran to escape the angry mob of villagers," Rajiv Sagar claimed.

The medical superintendent also claimed that some people in the mob tried to beat the man. Rajiv Sagar said a call to police was made and a senior official was also informed about the incident. "We will file a formal complaint tomorrow," he said.

A case has been registered under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (POSCO) and other relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code, a senior police officer said.

A medical examination of the victim has been done. The medical reports awaited will confirm if the minor was raped or not, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Outer-North) Gaurav Sharma said.

The accused man has been arrested, police said, adding that they are trying to establish the sequence of events.

This comes right after the junior doctors called off their week-long strike on Monday night after meeting Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee, who assured them of steps to scale up security at the government hospitals in the state.

The medics were on strike since last Tuesday, protesting against the assault on two of their colleagues by the kin of a patient who died at the NRS Hospital and Medical College.

All the 14 medical college and hospitals in the state have now started functioning, with normal work resuming at outdoor facilities, pathological units and other departments.
