Asus 6z to launch today in India at 12pm: How to watch live stream, specs, features, and more

Asus 6Z

Taiwanese smartphone maker Asus is all set to launch its latest smartphone, the Asus 6Z in India today. The phone was first launched in Europe last month and has since been reported to make way to India.

Before the launch, Asus had given select Indian journalists a chance to try the device during which we at Times Now had also put out our first impressions of it. However, back then the device was called the Asus Zenfone 6 and not 6Z -- a name adopted after the company ran into legal trouble over a long fought trademark battle.

The new flagship from Asus brings with it impressive hardware and equally impressive design courtesy of the presence of a glass and metal sandwich design as well as an all-new dual camera system housed on an innovative flip mechanism.

While these core elements of the phone are expected to stay the same, Asus could bring the phone to India in slightly different RAM and storage configurations as well as a more aggressive price point than it was unveiled in Valencia, Spain last month.

For those interested in getting the information fastest, the launch can be viewed live below.

Asus 6Z Specifications

In terms of specifications, Asus' new flagship comes hiding beneath the hood a powerful Snapdragon 855 SoC that has been built by Qualcomm using the latest 7nm architecture. The chipset has been paired with either 6/64, 6/128 or 8/256 GB variants of RAM and storage -- further expandable by using a MicroSD card because of the presence of a dual sim+MicroSD card slot.

The phone brings with it a 6.4-inch Full HD+ NanoEdge display with 600nits brightness. The display comes with no notch and has very minimal bezels and chin.

The device features a glass-metal sandwich design with 3d rear corning gorilla glass that also houses the Zenfone 6's fingerprint scanner and a dual camera setup housed on a flip mechanism that rotates to turn into the device's selfie camera too. The lenses on board this mechanism are IMX586 48-Megapixel f/1.79 lens paired with another 13-Megapixel 125-degree Wide angle, Laser AF assist shooter.

The phone also gets a customisable smart key as well as a dual 5-magnet stereo speaker with dual NxP smartamps and dual mic along with 3.5mm headphone jack. Powering the whole package is a massive 5000mAh battery that brings with it support for QuickCharge 4.0 backed 18W charging.
