Federal elder fraud strike force in Houston targets international telemarketers who prey on seniors

Federal prosecutors in the Houston region will join a national effort to thwart elder fraud by foreign-based scammers targeting seniors, Justice Department officials said this month.

The Transnational Elder Fraud Strike Force will combine the efforts of federal prosecutors and data analysts from the agency’s consumer protection unit to pursue foreign-based fraud schemes involving telemarketing, mass mailings and tech support, according to a news release from the DOJ. The project is being spearheaded by the 43-county southern Texas region, which is headquartered in Houston, and five other U.S. attorneys’ offices in California, Florida, Georgia and New York.

“Elder fraud comes in many variations — through the mail, online and even in person,” U.S. Attorney Ryan K. Patrick said in a written statement. “By focusing on these cases, we hope to send a message from the low-level hucksters to the sophisticated international organizations that when we find you, we will prosecute you.”

Other agencies contributing to the effort include multiple law enforcement units, FBI agents, postal inspectors and the Federal Trade Commission.

Since 2018, the Justice Department has brought criminal and civil actions against more than 500 defendants on allegations they took more than $1.5 billion from at least 3 million victims based on fraudulent premises.

Under former U.S. Attorney Ken Magidson, the Houston region brought a massive criminal indictment against more than 60 people — including three in the Houston area — alleging that a network of call centers in India bilked 15,000 U.S. residents, mostly immigrants and seniors, out of $300 million through a network of call centers based in India.

The callers from overseas stated they were from the IRS, or agents with immigration or homeland security. They demanded their targets immediately pay thousands of dollars in unpaid fines or face dire consequences, such as arrest, public humiliation and deportation.

In all, 21 defendants in that case, all from India, have been convicted. They entered guilty pleas and were sentenced to prison time in the call center scheme. The alleged kingpin of the scheme, Hitesh Madhubhai Patel, has a trial set for Jan. 6, 2020, before U.S. District Judge David Hittner.

Mary Conn, who represents Patel, said her client contends he is innocent. Dozens of other defendants remain at large. A government source with knowledge of the case indicated there could be thousands of others involved in the scheme.

Gabrielle Banks covers federal court for the Houston Chronicle. Follow her on Twitter and send her tips at gabrielle.banks@chron.com.
