Not only Arjun Kapoor! 5 Bollywood celebs who tackled body weight issues like a boss

These actors tackled body weight issues like a boss | Photo Credit: Instagram

Bollywood actor Arjun Kapoor, who has time and again impressed the audience with his roles in movies like India's Most Wanted, Half Girlfriend, Ishaqzaade and Gunday has come a long way in his film career. With his phenominal acting prowess, not only has he carved a niche for himself but has also given his peers a run for their money.

Recently, the actor took to his social media account to pen-down a post relating to his battle with obesity. The actor, who is currently working on Ashutosh Gowariker's Panipat, revealed that he lost 50 kilos in three years. Arjun's tweet read, "It's been a tough journey for me ever since I was a kid when it comes to my battle with obesity... efforts will pay off eventually if not today then in a week, month or even a year... I started training this January and slowly and steadily we have managed to at least lay a foundation during our prep for Panipat."

Further talking about his weight loss, the actor wrote, "I vowed never to give up in the three years it took me to lose 50 kilos when I was 20-years-old and I sure as hell won't be giving up and letting go now... keeping the belief is key, you've got to keep at it and one day you will reap the benefits... we all have got to keep the faith and keep at it because what we do today will echo in time and reflect within us eventually."

Take a look at the post below:

Apart from Arjun, several Bollywood celebrities have opened up about their battle with obesity and revealed their ways of tackling fat-shammers.

When Sonakshi Sinha was asked about the issue of body shaming in the film industry, she was quoted as saying, "It’s absolutely shameful. Today if anybody has been targeted for being a certain way, it’s me. But I don’t let it get to me. I know what is more important is that I project a healthy body image for girls who look up to me. Tomorrow if I become skinny, what’s the point? I won’t be able to work well.

Actress Huma Qureshi, who is best known for her roles in movies like Badlapur, Jolly LLB 2, Gangs of Wasseypur and more, spoke about fat shaming and bullies in an interview. She said, "Bullies will be bullies and I think body shaming is something that people all over the world are condoning and condemning because it’s not cool. We need to set better role models for young women."

Parineeti Chopra too had an apt answer for all the body shammers out there. "This (body shaming) will soon become a past. Everything comes in phases. If you yourself are not comfortable about your body, do something about it. If you are comfortable, let it be. Other people have no right to comment anyway," she said.

Another actress who embraces her body weight wholeheartedly and feels confident in her own skin is Vidya Balan. In a previous interview, the actress opened up about the same and was quoted as saying, "I love to work out but I am not trying to defy my body structure anymore. I can’t change my body type. But I can change the way I feel about my body. And most days I feel absolutely sexy… of course, if I am not having a bad hair day!"

Meanwhile, along with Arjun, Panipat will also star Kriti Sanon, Sanjay Dutt, and Mohnish Bahl in pivotal roles. The film is slated for a December 13 release this year.
