Dance India Dance: Kareena Kapoor Khan reveals she loves grooving to Ranveer Singh’s THIS song from Gully Boy

Kareena kapoor Khan is a true blue diva and from her film choices to her sartorial picks, she never fails to win our hearts. Nowadays, this stunning actress is vacationing in London with hubby Saif Ali Khan, sister Karisma Kapoor and other family members. From her pictures with her girl gang to photos of her cutie patootie Taimur Ali Khan, social media is buzzing with posts of their London vacay and we absolutely love it. Besides films, what’s new this year is that Bebo has made her television debut as a judge on the dance reality show Dance India Dance and prior to coming to London, Bebo shot for a couple of episodes too.



Now during an interview, Kareena Kapoor Khan has revealed that she loves to groove to Ranveer Singh’s song from Gully Boy. During a quiz, Kareena revealed that the latest Bollywood song that she is grooving to is from Zoya Akhtar’s Gully Boy and the song is titled Apna Time Aayega. Well, we quite like Bebo’a choice of songs because everyone loves this song and it has become an anthem of sorts but we wonder if Taimur too grooves with mommy to this song.



Titled as Dance India Dance 7: Battle of the Champions, the show is judged by Kareena Kapoor Khan, choreographer Bosco Martis, rapper and Dancer Raftaar. Moreover, when Bebo was asked as to what will be her signature dance move, this Chameli actress said, “I think it’d be the disco move.” According to latest reports, Bebo will be reuniting with hubby Saif Ali Khan on screen in Jawaani Jaaneman and the two will be seen as exes in the film. Also, Kareena will kick start the shoot of Homi Adajania’s Angrezi Medium in London soon and in the film, Kareena will be playing the role of a cop for the first time on screen. Interestingly, Kareena will soon be sharing screen space with Gully Boy aka Ranveer Singh in Karan Johar's period drama Takht co-starring Bhumi Pednekar, Janhvi Kapoor, Anil Kapoor and Vicky Kaushal.
