John Abraham all set to return to Anil Kapoor and Ileana D’Cruz starrer Pagalpanti’s shooting post his injury

While working on a film, Bollywood actors often sustain injuries which might but them out of work for a while. Speaking of this, John Abraham was injured while shooting for an action sequence for Pagalpanti which stars Anil Kapoor, Illeana D’cruz and others. The injury had put the star out of action for a while and he was seen with a sling attached to his arm when he visited Ajay Devgn’s house a while back. However, now, it seems the Parmanu actor is hail and hearty to get back to shoot.

As per a report in Mumbai Mirror, John is totally fine now and can return to shoot. The action master PK will be planning the leftover action scenes keeping in mind John’s recent injury. The Satyamev Jayate actor will return to shoot on June 30 and will wrap up the leftover portions of the film in a span of next 15 days. A song also will be shot in the same time frame and a couple of action stunts will be done by the star.

(Also Read: John Abraham gets injured while shooting an action sequence for Pagalpanti; Details Inside)

As per the report, “He is feeling better now and will start training for the remaining action sequences with fight master PK, who has planned it keeping John’s injury in mind. The team will be shooting across Mumbai, with one major song sequence also part of the schedule.” A bank sequence is also going to be shot as per the report. Pagalpanti is being helmed by Anees Bazmee and stars Kriti Kharbanda, Pulkit Samrat and Arshad Warsi apart from Anil, John and Ileana. Pagalpanti has also been shot in London. But due to John’s injury, the shoot was on hold. Now, the shoot will commence and the film will be wrapped up soon.

Aside to this, John also will be seen in Batla House which is based on the infamous Batla House encounter. In the film, John will be seen playing a cop. Helmed by Nikkhil Advani, Batla House will be releasing on August 15, 2019. John also has Sanjay Gupta’s Mumbai Saga which also stars Suniel Shetty and Emraan Hashmi. The film will release in 2020.
