Bear vs tiger! Tree-dwelling cub fights off ambitious big cat that tries to have it for dinner

This is the fight-or-flight moment a sloth bear being stalked up a tree by a tiger turns to confront the predator which it scares off with a ferocious growl.

While the black furry animal perches between the branches and rubs itself clean, the tiger quietly sneaks up to the base of the trunk before pouncing up close to its target.

But the normally fierce cat quickly scarpers with its tail between its legs when the bear spots the tiger and chases it down the tree.

The extraordinary clash between these two big beasts of the animal kingdom gripped tourists who watched the drama unfold in Ranthambore National Park in Sawai Madhopur, north west India.

The young tiger stalks the unsuspecting black sloth bear up a tree in Ranthambore National Park in Sawai Madhopur, north west India

While the bear sits high up in the tree rubbing itself clean, a tiger lurks at the base of the trunk before leaping up to on to a branch

The 44-second clip filmed last week shows the jet black sloth bear frolicking among the branches of leafless tree in a patch of dry grassland.

On the ground below, a tiger lurks before quickly leaping up the trunk and sinking its claws into the bark and positioning itself on one of the lower branches.

The bear seems oblivious to its potential predator yet as it continues to merrily rub its head and straddle the branch.

Meanwhile, the tiger slowly edges its way up the trunk and into a position where it can pounce on the unsuspecting bear.

The tiger slowly edges its way up the branches to close in on its target, which seems oblivious to the predator

The bear continues to merrily rub its head and straddle the branch while the tiger prepares to pounce

But the bear looks down, spots the tiger and suddenly twists its whole body around to face its would-be attacker.

It barks loudly which spooks the tiger which jumps back off the tree and on to the ground.

The bear chases it down the trunk but the tiger has already scampered off into the bushes where it continues to lurk.

The enthralled onlookers, whose cameras have been snapping throughout, let out gasps as the bear faces down its stalker.
