This Is How 20,000 Women Revived A Dry River In Tamil Nadu

Tamil Nadu is reeling under drought but the district of Vellore has enough water for its population’s drinking and agricultural needs. This miracle was not performed by a supernatural power, but a group of 20,000 women.

This coalition has revived Naganadhi, a seasonal river which was the primary source of water for the district but dried up some 15 years ago. According to a TOI report, 20,000 women spent four years to build 3,500 recharge tanks and multiple boulder checks, and in 2018 Naganadhi came to life again.





You may ask why was the project undertaken by women? It is because in rural India, women are often the worst hit by drought. In the last decade, much of Vellore’s agricultural labour migrated to cities, as the drought brought the district’s agrarian economy to a standstill. As the menfolk migrated in search of work, most households were made up entirely of women.

“A river flows above the surface only after the groundwater has been replenished. Therefore, reviving a river isn’t just about its flow, but getting enough water to seep into the ground. In other words, letting rainwater infiltrate the soil by slowing it down. Once it rains this year, the river will be in full spate,” said Chandrasekaran Kuppan, director of Naganadhi Rejuvenation Project.

In 2014, the Naganadhi Revival Project started as a collaboration between the organisation Art Of Living and the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act. As the women were registered under MGNREGA, they also got a daily wage for the work they were doing.

Large parts of our nation are currently reeling under drought, with Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, being some of the worst hit states. Women, who still do not have as much mobility as men, are the ones who are unable to migrate from the driest parts of the country. We all read about the “water wives of Maharashtra”--women who were married by men just so that they could walk many kilometres every day to fetch water from the nearest source of water.

Perhaps, that is why women have always led from the front, when it comes to environmental activism in India, be it the Chipko movement or the many farmer’s protests in Maharashtra. From Uttarakhand to Tamil Nadu, women are responding to the clarion call to combat climate change.






