Briefing

SRINAGAR

A five-day visual storytelling workshop ‘Jhelum Fables’ was held last week at picturesque Roots houseboat, situated on river Jhelum in Srinagar. The first of its kind workshop aimed to enhance creativity among the youth through writing and photography. The workshop was conducted by Dr Tabeenah Anjum Qureshi, a Kashmiri origin journalist working in Jaipur. She is the recipient of national award in photography conferred by I & B ministry, Government of India.

AUSTRALIA

The Kashmiri preparations of Rogan Josh, Yakhni, Muji Chetin, Dhungar, Kahwa, Kabargah and Tehr have left the international judges Gary Mehigan, George Calombaris and Matt Preston of the show ‘MasterChef Australia’ impressed, which were prepared by Sandeep Pandit, a contestant on ‘MasterChef Australia’.

Sandeep was born in Kashmir in the early 1980s and spent eight years in his uptown home in Abad Basti, Natipora, and then the family shifted to Bengaluru in 1990.

RAJOURI

Last week, Kartar Chand was arrested for allegedly murdering his wife Neelam Devi and injuring his daughter Anita Devi in Kharak village in Rajouri. The initial investigation of police revealed that the accused used to beat his wife and daughter inside the house. He used a water supply pipe to beat his wife to death.

SUMBAL

Last week, five people including one woman were arrested by Sumbal police for allegedly gang raping and blackmailing a 22-years-old girl. The incident came to light after victim’s parents by chance detected that their daughter was pregnant for last eight-months. The victim has accused that the culprit had recorded her on a video and were blackmailing her later. The report reveals it was during the course of the blackmail that she became pregnant. A case has been registered against the culprits.

SAUDI ARABIA

In a bizarre incident uncle has allegedly killed his nephew in Saudi Arabia. A resident of Banola-Mendhar in Poonch, Zaffar Iqbal, 23, was killed on the night of Shab-e- Qadr at Taif Haqeeq, where he was working as a labourer, allegedly by his maternal uncle Sirajdin, 42. The accused has been arrested and the family of Zafar has appealed to the Union External Affairs Minister, S J Shanker, to help them in bringing back his body.

ANANTNAG

Initially mistaken as an encounter, the firing incident reported last week turned out to be an attack on CRPF vehicle deployed near Oxford school at KP road. At least six people, including five CRPF men were killed in the attack, while three policemen including SHO Police Station Sadder Arshad Ahmad Khan were injured. Also a civilian named Snobar sustained a bullet wound in her leg. The slain CRPF personnel were identified as ASI Neeru Sharma, Constable Santinder Kumar, Constable M K Kushwa, ASI Ramesh Kumar and Constable Mahesh Kumar.

RAJASTHAN

After Congress ousted BJP’s government in state assembly elections a few months back, it was time for undoing former Chief Minister Vasundhara Raje’s controversial interventions.

Under Raje, the Rajasthan Board of Secondary Education (RBSE) textbooks, were rewritten. One of its chapters read: “Special status of Kashmir” and “basis for removal of Article 370”. It termed Article 370 of the Indian constitution a subject of controversy since its implementation. Now Congress has ordered the revision of textbooks to weed out Raje’s imprints.
