SAPS (South African Police Service)

Media Statement

South African Police Service

Office of the Provincial Commissioner Mpumalanga NELSPRUIT – Members of the South African Police Service at Vosman, near Witbank are looking for unknown men who murdered three men in separate incidents that took place on one day, Monday 17 June 2019. Except for one, the men were found dead in different places around Vosman. It is reported that at about 17:20, police received a complaint of an injured man who had been abandoned at the clinic by unknown men. On arrival, they found a nurse who directed them to the man who was already dead and his body had stab wounds. At about 18:00, police received another complaint of a man who was found lying in a pool of blood on the pavement in front of a house belonging to the complainant. Police rushed to the scene and found the man with stab wounds on his body, already dead. The last complaint was received at around 23:00, of a man who was also found lying dead in a pool of blood with gunshot wounds, at Ackerville outside the hostel. The motive behind the killings is still unknown and no arrest has been made as yet. Anyone with information that may assist police in their investigation is urged to contact Constable Ouma Nkambule on 083 519 8344 or Crime Stop on 08600 10111. Meanwhile, at Calcutta, a 40-year-old man was found burnt to ashes in his one-roomed shack by community members. The cause of the fire is unknown at the moment and an inquest docket was opened for investigation. Another man believed to be a foreign national, who was reported as missing on 16 June 2019, was found dead inside a pit toilet in the yard where his business was operating the following day. It is believed he may have been kidnapped before being murdered and thrown into the toilet. Two suspects, Ellias Mphambo aged 32 and Happy Mnisi aged 40 have been arrested and appeared today at the Mkhuhlu Magistrates’ Court facing murder and kidnaping charges. They were remanded in custody and will be back at the same court on 02 July 2019 for a formal bail application. Police are making an appeal to the community for anyone with information that could shed light in the above-mentioned cases to contact Lieutenant Colonel Dudu Shabangu at 082 469 2569 or Crime Stop at 08600 10111. Ends Enquiries:

Colonel Mtsholi Bhembe

082 556 5356 Twitter: https://twitter.com/SAPoliceService

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/SAPoliceService

Instagram: https://instagram.com/sapoliceservice_za/

YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/user/SAPoliceService

Website: www.saps.gov.za
