Salman Khan & Alia Bhatt’s Inshallah to be filmed in the sunny state of Florida; SLB goes on a location hunt

From the day of the announcement, Salman Khan and Alia Bhatt starrer Inshallah has been in the news. Be it for the unusual casting or Salman and Sanjay Leela Bhansali teaming up after almost 2 decades, Inshallah has already become the topic of interest for fans. Now, it seems that the director, Sanjay is on the hunt for a perfect location to shoot the new-age love story and his hunt has landed him in the official Sunshine State of the US. While Salman and Alia both are looking forward to working with each other, SLB and his team are on a recce for locations.

A report in Mumbai Mirror states that the Padmaavat director had been looking for the perfect location to shoot the love story and that has landed him in Florida. As per the report, Sanjay and his team will be searching for perfect places to shoot the Salman and Alia starrer in Florida for the next three weeks. Also, it stated that Salman will be playing a 40-ish businessman and will be styled with dashing jackets and sunglasses. In India, Sanjay and his team have been to cities like Varanasi, Rishikesh and Haridwar to pick locations to shoot for Alia’s background.

(Also Read: EXCLUSIVE: Salman Khan says, 'Of course, Alia Bhatt & I will really look good together in Inshallah')

As per Mumbai Mirror, “The prime spots on their wish-list are the streets of Orlando and the beaches of Miami. It’s a character that’s young at heart and Salman will sport a stylish look, complete with designer jackets and sunglasses. Alia’s character (of an aspiring actress in her mid-20s) is from a place that is situated near the river Ganga, which is why Bhansali is contemplating on these locations.”

As Bhansali had mentioned earlier, the film is a young and new age love story which will be different from the intense love stories he has worked on before. For Salman, it will be a break from the Hero-like roles and in Inshallah, he will be seen playing a chilled out character. Meanwhile, Salman is shooting for his next, Dabangg 3 with Sonakshi Sinha, Arbaaz Khan and Sudeep. Inshallah will be going on the floor by August-end. Alia is shooting for Brahmastra with Ranbir Kapoor. Salman’s Dabangg 3 will hit the screens on December 21, 2019, while Brahmastra is slated to release in the Summer of 2020.
