Rajasthan man dies of torture, case registered

By Gunwanti Paraste



21-yr-old came to city to work as a carpenter, but employer made him do household chores



A 21-year-old man, who was brought to Pune from Rajasthan in March 2019 on the pretext of making him do carpentry work, was allegedly made to do household chores. When he denied doing so, his employers locked him in a room and brutally assaulted him. He was later sent back to his native town in Degana, Rajasthan, where he was undergoing treatment. He succumbed to his injuries 15 days later due to the physical assault meted out to him. A case has been registered in this regard in Chandannagar police station.



Identified as Ramswaroop, the deceased was residing in Kharadi in Pune. A complaint has been lodged against Pushpram, Jagdish and Hajariram, all originally hailing from Rajasthan, in Chandannagar police station by Charandas, father of the deceased. The accused have a furniture shop in Pune and had been running the store for quite some time now.



Charandas had sent his son to Pune with the accused to work as a carpenter. However, instead of engaging him in carpentry work, Ramswaroop was made to do menial household chores. After obliging to do the household chores for a couple of days, Ramswaroop refused to continue to do the same. On May 5, the three accused of them locked Ramswaroop in a room in the shop and beat him up mercilessly, which left him seriously injured.



However, after a while, he was sent back to Rajasthan while he was still seriously injured. In Rajasthan, Ramswaroop was admitted to a private hospital on May 11. He died on June 3 while still undergoing treatment. On June 6, his family filed a complaint with Degana police in Rajasthan. Accordingly, a case was registered by Degana police against the three miscreants, and the case was later transferred to Chandannagar police on charges of murder. No post-mortem was conducted by the cops in Rajasthan. Therefore, the exact reason of Ramswaroop’s death remains to be further investigated. He died a month after the incident took place, senior inspector (Chandannagar) Krishna Indulkar said.



ACP Shivaji Pawar told Mirror, “We are investigating the case. After this incident had taken place, all three accused also fled to their home towns in Rajasthan. The case was transferred by Rajasthan police, under sections 342, 302, 34 and Atrocity 3 (1) (2) (5) of the Indian Penal Code.”




