DID 7 judge Kareena Kapoor Khan on competition with other stars: It’s between the shows rather than the judges

Kareena Kapoor Khan is all set to make her small screen debut on Dance India Dance 7 as a judge with RaftaaR and Bosco Martis. While the star has revealed that she is pretty stoked go make her TV debut, Bebo even addressed questions of being compared to other celebrity judges on different reality shows. From Madhuri Dixit to Urmila Matondkar, many celebs have judged dance reality shows. At the launch event, Kareena looked every bit of a diva in a purple pantsuit and managed to steal the show. Now, ahead of the show going on air, Kareena spoke about comparisons and competition with other judges.

In a chat with Mid-Day, Kareena revealed that she is only on the show to have fun and comparisons with stars are not possible as it is majorly between reality shows. Bebo even mentioned that since she is going to be herself on the show, there is not going to be any competition with other celeb judges. Kareena even mentioned that she is making it a point to have fun on the show and will leave the strictness and technicalities to ace choreographer, Bosco Martis.

(Also Read: EXCLUSIVE: Kareena Kapoor Khan to make a 12 hour trip from London to Mumbai for THIS reason; details inside)

Kareena said, “There is no competition because I am coming the way I am. Competition is great, but I think it is between the shows rather than the judges. I am going to work with them with my heart. I have done that with my performances and succeeded, so hopefully, this goes the same way. I am looking to have fun rather than be too strict.” The show is all set to go on air this weekend on Zee TV.

Meanwhile, Kareena will be returning from her vacation from London to shoot for another episode of Dance India Dance 7. The show was to be hosted by Kundali Bhagya actor, Dheeraj Dhoopar. However, the star quit as the host as he was unable to juggle between his daily soap and the reality show. Dance India Dance 7 promo featured Kareena, Bosco and RaftaaR shaking a leg on the title song. On the first show, Kareena will be seen making a grand entry and will shake a leg on her numbers from Jab We Met. Dance India Dance is all set to go on air on June 22, 2019.
