This is an Accidental Government: Prakash Javadekar

The BJP reacted strongly on Thursday on the controversial statement of Medical and Health Minister Raghu Sharma over Swine Flu. BJP state election in-charge and Union minister Prakash Javadekar said that the minister should be sacked by the chief minister Ashok Gehlot.

The Union minister was referring to a statement made by Sharma in an interview with a Hindi newspaper that the people were not dying for the first time from swine flu in the state. Javadekar targeted the state government over this statement of Sharma. During this, he instructed the BJP leaders to initiate a big movement across the state against the failures of Congress government.

While addressing the meeting of BJP Lok Sabha Election Sanchalan Committee on Thursday in the city, Javadekar targeted Ashok Gehlot government on swine flu, farmer’s bank loan waiver and law and order. “If chief minister Ashok Gehlot has some shame, then he should take resign from Raghu Sharma. In the state, 56 deaths have been reported from swine flu in January, but the state’s medical minister is busy in the Ramgarh assembly elections.

Now, I read the statement of Raghu Sharma in a newspaper in which Raghu Sharma says that deaths are not happening for the first time and I will visit the state after hoisting the flag on January 26,” said Javadekar.

“For the government, winning the election is the priority rather than public’s life, it is the character of the Congress here too”, he targeted Congress. Javadekar also gave an example of Maharashtra saying that when terrorists were attacked in Mumbai, then the Home Minister of Maharashtra had said that such incidents happen in such a large state. It is clear that it is common for Congress to make such statements. The then Home Minister of Maharashtra had to leave.

The party representatives from all the 25 Lok Sabha seats of Rajasthan were included in the meeting of BJP Lok Sabha Election Sanchalan committee. In the meeting, Union Minister said, “Crime in the state is on the extreme level, there is no fear in criminals. The Gehlot government seems a failure on all fronts. There will be a movement against the failures of Congress. Like the Accidental Prime Minister, this is an Accidental Government.

He said, “the government could not protect the girl going to school in Ramgarh. In Congress Raj, there were crimes in Jaipur, Pali, Tonk, Alwar, Dhaulpur, Banswara but the accused did not get caught”.
