High alert in Rajasthan as more cases surface

The state is on a high alert for swine flu as the year 2018 ended with 2,375 positive cases and 221 deaths due to swine flu in the state.

Meanwhile the first death due to swine flu in the year 2019 occurred on Wednesday as health department official confirmed that a swine flu patient in Jodhpur died on Wednesday while fresh cases of H1N1 positive cases continue to come in the hospitals. During the initial two days of this year so far total 44 people have been tested positive for H1N1 virus in the state. On the very first day of New Year, total 12 cases were registered.

As per official data of the state health department on January 2, total 32 people tested positive for swine flu. In Jodhpur, where three deaths occurred in the last week of the year, maximum 17 people have been found swine flu positive. Jaipur, the worst affected city registered 9 positive cases, 5 cases have been registered in Udaipur while Dausa and Sikar each registered one positive case.

It is worth mentioning here that January and February have always been challenging months for health department while combating swine flu.

Last year in January 2018, total 705 people were tested positive for swine flu while 53 deaths occurred. For the month of February the figure was 383 positive cases and 43 deaths.

In the wake of ongoing winter season, the health department conducted a video conference on swine flu directing the officials to take preventive measures in which swine flu situation in the state was reviewed. The department now has focussed on early detection and spreading awareness about swine flu to prevent spread of H1N1 virus.

Directions have been given to all chief medical health officers of all the districts to send rapid response team for survey of 50 houses in neighbourhood of swine flu patient and health department will conduct cross verification of surveys conducted by rapid response team by visiting at least 5% of places which were inspected by rapid response teams.
