Bhubaneswar municipal body to educate traders on plastic ban

BHUBANESWAR: The Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC) has decided to launch training and awareness camps to educate traders on the polythene ban. The move comes after the BMC's squads implementing the no-plastic rule faced protests from traders while conducting raids on shops.The awareness drive will be conducted in the BMC office in phases. Its objective will be to ensure that traders don't argue with members of the enforcement squads during raids on shops."The traders are still not aware of why the raids are being conducted and which type of polythene can be used and which can't. They (traders) think we are seizing all varieties of polythene bags from them, which is not the case," said BMC deputy commissioner Prabir Khillar.According to the guideline of the Central Pollution Control Board, the manufacture, sale and use of polythene bags of thickness below 50 micron is not allowed. Khillar said very few traders understood the guideline and almost none stocked carry-bags of thickness of 50 micron or more. "The awareness camp will make our work easy and the traders won't have to pay penalty," he added.The BMC has so far seized 3.5 quintal of the banned polythene and collected Rs 40,000 in fine.The BMC's commissioner Samarth Verma has directed the zonal deputy commissioners of the three zones to conduct raids on fish, meat and fruit markets every Wednesday. Vendors at these markets mostly use very thin carry-bags to sell their items. Thin polythene is hazardous to the environment.The BMC has also started a process to identify polythene bag manufacturers by getting information from wholesalers and traders. At present, the BMC doesn't have comprehensive data on polythene-makers.On October 2, 2018, the state imposed a ban on the sale, use and manufacture of plastic bags with less than 50 micron thickness in Bhubaneswar, Cuttack Sambalpur and Berhampur. Raids were conducted on shops for some days but then they petered out.
