Andhra Pradesh: No vote, no road: Andhra political battle gets bizarre

Political workers dig up cement road

VIJAYAWADA: The rivalry between YSR Congress and Telugu Desam Party in Andhra Pradesh has taken a bizarre turn in two villages.On Wednesday, YSRCP workers in a village in Guntur constructed a wall across a road to prevent TDP workers from using it. In another incident, YSRCP workers in Prakasam district dug up a cement road laid by the previous TDP government about 10 months ago alleging that the people using the road had not voted for YSRCP in the assembly polls.The police had to intervene in both villages to maintain law and order.A picket was posted at Ponugupadu village of Phirangipuram mandal in Guntur district where a three-feet wall was raised blocking the village thoroughfare. Since incident has a caste angle, the police held a peace meeting between the rival TDP and YSRCP groups. A majority of TDP supporters are from an upper caste, while YSRC supporters belong to Scheduled Castes.YSRC supporters have claimed the wall was built to prevent encroachment by TDP men as the land used for the road was on private property, but TDP supporters maintained the road belonged to revenue department and was been used for the last 80 years. Phirangipuram SI D Srihari said the claims have been referred to the revenue department and in the meantime the area has been kept out of bounds for public.Earlier, there have been incidents of demolition of flag posts and party arches and attacks on political opponents in Narasaraopet, Sattenapalli, Macherla and Gurazala assembly constituencies in Guntur. These constituencies fall under Palnadu region, once known for its faction feuds.In the other incident at Uppalapadu village in Kanigiri assembly constituency in Prakasam district, a cement road was dug up with an excavator. The road was laid at Muslim Colony around 10 months ago. The road was dug up as the residents allegedly supported the TDP candidate in the just-concluded assembly elections. A complaint has been lodged with the police.Meanwhile, the situation at Manchikallu, Pinnelli, Machavaram Mutyalampadu and Tangeda villages turned serious as local TDP leaders fled fearing attacks. About 70 families in Pinnelli supported the TDP in the recent elections.They are taking shelter at Gamalapadu near Dachepalli. They met Guntur rural SP seeking protection. As many as 15 cases have been registered in Narasaraopet, Sattenapalli and Gurazala police sub-divisions since election results. A little over 40 people were injured in clashes after the polls.
