Violence erupts in Bengal's Bhatpara, one dead

Bhatpara: A crude bomb lies at the site where violence erupted at Bhatpara in West Bengal's North 24 Parganas district, on June 20, 2019. One person was killed in the incident. Prior to the inauguration of a new police station, violence broke out in Image Source: IANS News

Bhatpara: Rapid Action Force personnel deployed after a man was killed as violence erupted at Bhatpara in West Bengal's North 24 Parganas district, on June 20, 2019. Prior to the inauguration of a new police station, violence broke out in the area as Image Source: IANS News

Bhatpara: One of the persons who sustained injuries during violence that erupted at Bhatpara in West Bengal's North 24 Parganas district, being taken for treatment on June 20, 2019. One person was killed in the incident. Prior to the inauguration of Image Source: IANS News

Kolkata, June 20 : A man was killed as violence erupted in North 24 Parganas district's Bhatpara on Thursday following which police opened fire and deployed the Rapid Action Force amid the ongoing post-poll violence in West Bengal.

BJP MP Arjun Singh claimed that the victim was shot in the head, while six others also received bullet injuries.

None of the police officers including Barrackpore Police Commissioner Tanmay Roychowdhury could be contacted by IANS despite repeated efforts.

Some of the injured are reportedly in a very critical condition.

"My husband went out of the house on hearing about a disruption. He was hit by a bullet on his head," the victim's wife said.

On Thursday a new police station was to be inaugurated as per a directive of the state government.

Prior the this, violence broke out in the area as miscreants resorted to bombings and also fired at each other. The police had to open fire and use tear gas to control the situation.

Police have recovered some arms and crude bombs from the area.

Singh blamed the local police and officers of the Barrackpore Police Commissionerate for the violence.

"Since I am in Delhi, the police has allowed some Trinamool activists to do all this. They are mute witness to looting and violence over the last three days. They are giving free hand to them (Trinamool activists) and the total game-plan has been hatched by the police. Seven people have been shot and the deceased was shot in his head," Singh said.

On the other hand, Trinamool leader Madan Mitra pointed out that Bhatpara has been witnessing violence for over a month.

"It is sad that Arjun Singh said that the person died after being shot by the police while the officers have said that they fired the bullets in the air," Mitra said.

"BJP is surrounded by the politics of violence. Even if the administration tries to control the situation, they are targeting those officers who are risking their lives to restore peace in the area."
