Brutal attack that shook the state

editorial@tribune.com

Ruchika M Khanna

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, January 24

The plot was perfect. Sukhwinder Singh alias Mithu, was attacked near Narike village and left for dead on the night intervening June 8 and 9, 2000. The love of his life, Jaswinder Kaur alias Jassi, had been bundled in a car by contract killers and whisked away.

She was kept in custody at a at a farmhouse near Bulara and Sangowal villages by her assailants from where they made her speak to her mother Malkiat Kaur in Canada. It was upon her refusal to return to Canada that hermother and maternal uncle (Surjit Singh) allegedly asked the hired men to eliminate her. Her throat was slit and her body was thrown away in a water channel.

Had Sukhwinder Singh not survived the murderous attack and photographs of Jassi’s body not recognised by Sukhwinder’s friend and family members, the case would never have been solved.

Recalling the investigation by the Ludhiana Sadar police, Maninder Singh Bedi, DSP, Bureau of Investigation, then posted as SHO, says inter-district exchange of notes was rare in those days.

“Jaswinder’s body was found in the jurisdiction of the Ludhiana police, while the crime took place in Sangrur, and Sukhwinder Singh too was found injured in the area under the Sangrur police. At that time exchange of information was slow, the recovery of a body would have just entailed initiating inquest proceedings. But it was the brutality of the attack on the girl that led me to launch a probe and get her pictures published in newspapers to identify her, which too was a rarity in those days,” he recalls.

Once the girl was identified and Sukhwinder Singh (who was recuperating at CMC Hospital, Ludhiana) and his friend, narrated the matter, the police launched a full-scale investigation. Within a month, the police identified the contract killers.

The accused had been introduced to Surjit Singh and Darshan Singh (whose daughter was engaged to Surjit Singh’s son) through Joginder Singh, who was then incharge of CIA, Ludhiana. The car used in the crime, which was provided to the killers by Joginder Singh, was traced. Within six months, accused were arrested.

Looking back
