Motorola One Vision launched in India: Specifications, India price, colours and everything you need to know

After beginning the year with the rather average G7 series of phones, Motorola has introduced the first offering in 2019 to the Motorola One series. It's called the One Vision and it only comes in a single variant. The One Vision is aimed at those who want a premium camera experience with a unique display meant for content consumption at an affordable price. The One Vision will go on sale from June 27 on Flipkart and will be available in two colour variants.

The One Vision is priced at Rs 19,999 in India. At this price, the One Vision directly competes with the Samsung Galaxy A50 and Galaxy M40. Consumers also get the option to opt for the Poco F1 that offers 2018 flagship grade specifications. Compared to the others, Motorola brings a new 21:9 wide display that's meant to support the cinema format. Also, the phone boasts of a 48-megapixel camera at the rear and a 25-megapixel front camera.

If you are interested in the Motorola One Vision, then here's all you need to know about it.

Motorola One Vision: What you need to know about it

Display: The One Vision introduces a new 21:9 CinemaVision display. It measures 6.3-inches and a hole-punch camera cutout on the top-left corner. Motorola has gone for an IPS LCD panel.

Rear Camera: The Motorola One Vision is meant to be camera-centric smartphone. Hence, it uses a combination of a Samsung-made 48-megapixel primary camera with F1.7 lens and a secondary 5-megapixel camera for depth data. Motorola says the cameras rely on AI algorithms to get good shots in low-light situations.

Front Camera: The front camera relies on a 25-megapixel sensor that uses Pixel Binning to capture more light data. By default, it tackles photos in 6-megapixel resolution to capture more details and light.

Chipset: The Motorola One Vision is the first Motorola smartphone to use a Samsung-made Exynos 9610 chipset. This SoC is closely based on the Exynos 9610 used in the Samsung Galaxy A50.

RAM and Storage: The One Vision comes as standard with 4GB RAM and 128GB storage.

Battery: The One Vision is kept alive by a 3500mAh battery. It also comes with a 15W TurboPower charger out-of-the-box.

Software: The Motorola One Vision is part of the Android One program and comes with Android 9 Pie. Motorola says the phone will get the Android Q and Android R updates as and when they are released by Google.

What's unique in the Motorola One Vision

--The Motorola One series phones won't be generation upgrades like the Moto G series phones. Motorola says the One lineup will come up with phones catering to the latest technology trends in the market. The One Vision is the latest example offering a 48-megapixel camera and a modern 21:9 display with a hole-punch front camera cutout.

--Motorola is using a Samsung chipset for the first time instead of a Qualcomm chipset. The One Vision uses an Exynos 9609 chipset, which is a slightly underclocked version of the Exynos 9610 chipset used in the Samsung Galaxy A50. This chipset uses a Mali-G72 MP3 GPU that lest players play games like PUBG MOBILE in high graphics.

--The One Vision, like the One Power, belong to Android One program. Therefore, it comes with a completely stock Android UI. However, Motorola has added its smart additions such as a unique getsure navigation system, an advanced camera app and Moto Actions. The Moto Display also makes a return and it shows up a minimalist interface on the lockscreen when it receives notifications.

--With a 3500mAh battery, Motorola is claiming an entire day's battery life. It also comes with support for 15W fast charging system.

--The Motorola One Vision uses a Samsung-made 48-megapixel primary camera that takes photos in 12-megapixels by default through the Pixel Binning technology . The camera relies on AI optimisations to tune the camera settings accordingly to get the best results. It also comes with a dedicated Night Mode to take brighter pictures at night.

--The One Vision comes in two gradient colours - Sapphire Blue and Bronze. Both the variants have a black shade in the center while the colours can be seen on the edges. The rear panel is made of 4D glass with curved edges to enhance in-hand comfort.

How much does the Motorola One Vision cost?

The Motorola One Vision is priced at Rs 19,999 in India. The phone will selling exclusively on Flipkart from June 27. Motorola is also hosting some launch offers with various telecom operators as well easy EMI options.
