Dalit Deputy Sarpanch Thrashed to Death 'by Upper Caste Men' in Gujarat

New Delhi: A Dalit deputy sarpanch of a village in Gujarat was murdered on Wednesday, allegedly by a group of men from the ‘upper’ castes.

Tushar, the son of the victim Manji Solanki, said that his father was riding his motorcycle when he was stooped by a car. The occupants of the car who were men from the upper caste Kshatriya community then thrashed him. Solanki had applied for police security over two weeks ago and was waiting for it to be approved.

This is the third incident in less than a month where a Dalit has been allegedly murdered by Kshatriyas in the Saurashtra region.

According to the police, the deceased was the husband of Geeta Solanki, the sarpanch of Jalia village of Ranpur taluka of Botad.

The Superintendent of Police of Botad division confirmed to the Indian Express that Solanki had requested his office for police protection and that the family had not been granted any by the time the incident took place. “He had approached us with a request to give him personal security officers. As part of the due process, the police station concerned was undertaking a threat assessment,” he said.

Manji Solanki’s family also claimed that the police did not respond to his repeated requests for protection with a positive response. Manji’s son claimed that his father had been attacked four times previously and had been provided police protection briefly after the attack on March 3, 2018.

Manji’s son also told the Indian Express that “for the last 20 years, persons from my family are being elected sarpanch of the village. Presently, my mother, Geeta is serving as sarpanch while my father was deputy sarpanch. There was a tussle between the Darbars and my father ever since 2010. The Darbars (Kshatriyas) cannot stand the fact that Dalits get elected sarpanch.”

Also read: Wardha: Caste Hindu Strips Dalit Boy, Forces Him to Sit on Hot Tiles for Entering Temple

Manji’s family claim to have a video clip, in which he narrates his ordeal and names the accused, shot while he was being taken to the hospital. His family is also in possession of a memorandum, that included the details of the previous attacks on him, that he had submitted to the police last year.

“During the Ranpur taluka panchayat election which my wife was contesting as a BJP candidate, Kathi Darbars from this village had attacked me during polling and the matter is pending with a court. In 2011, I was attacked at my home with dangerous weapons and this matter is also pending with a court and then in 2016 (by sword) and that case is also pending with a court. Recently, on the night of March 3, 2018, I was attacked with a knife in Barwala and I was injured. In connection with this incident, we, the applicant, had filed a complaint at Barwala police station… Thus, there was an attempt on my life four times,” Manji had stated in his memorandum.

Botad Superintendent of Police Harshad Mehta confirmed that Manji had been attacked on four occasions previously and that the police had registered cases in connection with the incidents and the accused had been the same as the one named by the family.

According to TOI, the Solanki had helped several members of the Dalit community fight instances of caste atrocities which had incensed some upper caste members who had threatened to harm him. Solanki had also applied for a weapons license and had sought help from the home minister and DGP.

Dalit rights activist and independent MLA Jignesh Mevani blamed the Gujarat government for Solanki’s death.

“Had he been given protection and authorities paid heed to his demand, Solanki would have been alive today. I wanted to address such issues in the state monitoring cell meeting today but the CM neither wanted to listen to me nor the issues of Dalits,” he was quoted as saying by TOI.
