Tamil Nadu rejects 20 lakh litre water offered by Kerala despite acute crisis

Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan on Thursday claimed that Tamil Nadu has rejected an offer of 20 lakh litres of drinking water despite an acute shortage in the state.

CM Pinarayi Vijayan said that his government had offered to send the drinking water via train to Tamil Nadu to help the neighbouring state tackle drought-like conditions, but Tamil Nadu Chief Minister's Office rejected the offer.

"Tamil Nadu is facing a severe water crisis and state Govt had agreed to provide drinking water to [via] the railways. Our office contacted Tamil Nadu Chief Minister's Office and received a reply that it wasn't necessary," Kerala CM Pinarayi Vijayan said on Thursday.

Tamil Nadu is currently battling drought-like conditions. Water shortage has thrown normal life out of gear in the state. Several restaurants have shut down or have put down signs for water conservation. Schools and colleges have shortened their hours to battle lack of water in the facilities. Construction has been suspended at several projects due to lack of water.

The reservoirs -- Cholavaram (full capacity 1,081 mcft) and Redhills (3,300 mcft) -- which cater to Chennai's water needs are dry while the storage at Poondi reservoir is 24 mcft as against the full capacity of 3,231 mcft, according to the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Chennai Metro). The Chembarambakkam lake (full capacity 3,645 mcft) has a water level of a mere 1 mcft.

But Tamil Nadu CM K Palaniswami claimed that media was creating an "illusion" of water scarcity. "The media should not create an illusion of water scarcity using some stray incidents," Palaniswami said. He said though lakes feeding Chennai have dried up, steps were being taken to ensure supply of drinking water, with efforts to augment it from Veeranam lake in Cuddalore district.

Deficit rainfall during the 2017 northeast monsoon and failed monsoon in 2018 has resulted in depletion of ground water levels and near drying up of major waterbodies, and has pushed residents at the mercy of water-tanker operators. With borewells and wells going dry in parts of Tamil Nadu, the demand for water has gone up manifold here prompting people to depend on private water tanker operators for their needs.

Moderate rains of the outskirts of state capital Chennai brought some relief but they are not likely to solve the problem.


