Bhatpara unrest: Two killed, five injured in clashes

West Bengal

Bhatpara

Amit Shah

Mamata Banerjee

BJP

Trinamool Congress

Two persons were killed while five were critically injured as’sturned into warzone following bombing, exchange of bullets and clashes between two groups of miscreants. A central team is scheduled to visit Bhatpara on Friday and report about the situation to Union Home MinisterRambabu Shaw (17), who originally hails from Bihar, was a golgappa seller in the area. “Rambabu had gone out to bring some ingredients for his business. He was killed in police firing. There was heavy bombing in the area. He was returning home when he was shot in the head. Immense violence and unrest prevails in the area for the last one month,” Rambabu’s uncle claimed. Police, however, claimed they had only fired in the air.Eyewitnesses in Kakinada market also claimed the Rambabu died in police firing. Another deceased is identified as Dharamveer Shaw.“We want peace. The area has witnessed too much of violence. There was heavy bombing for two hours and firing also took place. We closed the shops and stayed terrified behind closed doors," said a shopkeeper Amit Shaw.According to reports, bombs were hurled and several rounds of bullets fired on Thursday in Bhatpara’s Kakinada.A police station was scheduled to be opened in Bhatpara on Thursday morning but Director General of Police Virendra could not reach the spot as trouble erupted in the area. Bhatpara’s Kakinada and Jagaddal have witnessed several deaths, clashes and violence post Lok Sabha polls in the area on May 19. A huge police force and Rapid Action Force have been deployed in the area.West Bengal CMhas called a high-level meeting with Chief Secretary Malay De, Home Secretary Alapan Bandopadhyay and ADG-Law and Order to analyse the situation in Bhatpara."We have reviewed the situation. We are investigating the matter. Police had fired in the air. Six policemen injured in the incident," Virendra said.In a bid to bring the situation under control, the government decided to impose Section 144 in Bhatpara and Jagatdal areas of North 24 Parganas district. DG Virendra visited the area in the evening following Chief Minister’s direction."Section 144 has been imposed in Bhatpara. Some anti-socials and criminals have been active in Bhatpara for some time. Some outsiders have also joined hands to disrupt peace in the area," Home Secretary Alapan Bandyopadhyay said.He also added that Additional Director General (ADG)-South Bengal Sanjay Singh has been appointed the new Commissioner of Barrackpore Commissionarate and he will rush to the spot to bring the situation under control.national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya said, “After Lok Sabha polls, violence dominated the Barrackpore area. I have heard two people have died today and one of them died in police firing. Many people have died in political violence in Bengal. We will send a central team to Bengal.”Meanwhile, Madan Mitra,leader, said that BJP is behind the trouble in Bhatpara.
