Two dead in clashes at West Bengal's Bhatpara, Section 144 imposed

Massive clashes erupted in North 24 Parganas district's Bhatpara leaving two dead and several others injured on Thursday.

Ahead of the inauguration of Bhatpara police station on Thursday, miscreants resorted to hurling of crude bombs and even opening fire. The inaugural ceremony was to be held at 11am and the West Bengal Police's Director General, Virendra was supposed to attend the ceremony. However, the ceremony was cut short and DGP returned to Kolkata.

At least two people were dead and four others seriously injured in the clashes on Thursday. The two deceased have been identified as Rambabu Shaw and Dharambir Shaw – both said to be locals. The two suffered bullet injuries and were declared brought dead when rushed to the hospital. Four others are undergoing treatment at the local hospital.

BOMBS HURLED Ahead of the inauguration of Bhatpara police station on Thursday, miscreants resorted to hurling of crude bombs and even opening fire.

Soon, Bhatpara turned into a warzone with miscreants clashing with the police. Police had to rush RAF and combat force to bring the situation under control.

The West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee asked the Chief Secretary, Home Secretary and ADG Law and Order to chair a high level meeting and bring the situation under control immediately.

Addressing reporters, the state's home secretary Alapan Bandyapadhyay said, "Government is taking serious view of law and order situation in Bhatpara and other parts of Barrackpore. ADG South Bengal Sanjay Singh has been rushed to the spot," said Bandyapadhyay.

The local administration imposed section 144 CrPC in the tensed area of Bhatpara, Jaggatdal and other parts of Barrackpore.

As many as five persons were arrested till the last reports came in.

Taking cognisance of the matter, the West Bengal government shunted out the Barrackpore Police Commissioner.

Former Barrackpore Police Commissioner Tanmay Roy Chowdhury was replaced by Manoj Verma who was earlier posted as IG Darjeeling.
