Eight arrested for Dalit deputy sarpanch’s murder in Botad

Solanki’s family refuses to take body

RAJKOT: Eight members of the upper caste Kathi Darbar community were arrested Thursday for murder of Manji Jetha Solanki (55), the Dalit deputy sarpanch of Jalila village in Botad district, who was brutally beaten to death after being rammed by a SUV on Wednesday.Political rivalry between Solanki and the upper caste members over several years had resulted in the crime, said police.Those arrested include Ashok Khachar (51), Vanraj Khachar (42), Pratap Khachar (38), Ruturaj Khachar (22), Raviraj Khachar (25), Bhagirath Khachar (24), Kishor Khachar (30) and Hardeep Khachar (21). The main accused Jilu Khachar, is still on the run and will be nabbed soon said, Z R Desai, deputy superintendent of police, ST/SC cell, Botad, who is investigating the case.The accused who were travelling a SUV rammed into Solanki riding a bike on the outskirts of Jalila village Wednesday morning. After Solanki fell by the roadside, the accused attacked him with bats and iron pipes, inflicting critical injuries on his head, hands and legs. They continued to abuse Solanki while thrashing him. As Solanki passed out the accused fled from the spot.Solanki was returning from Barwada after collecting the papers of four cases pertaining to attacks on him and his family members.Solanki’s son Tushar received a call from a villager that his father was lying in pool of blood outside the village. He rushed to the spot took with is cousin and they took Solanki to Dhandhuka Civil Hospital, from there he was referred to Ahmedabad Civil Hospital after first aid, where he was declared brought dead.Solanki’s son Tushar had made a video of Solanki describing who attacked him while on their way to hospital.“All the accused are from the same family. Besides Jilu, all other accused have been arrested. They were trying to escape in the SUV used in the crime to Bhavnagar. They were nabbed from Barvala crossroads,” said Desai.Desai said that all the accused were booked for murder, rioting, loot and under SC/ST (Prevention) of Atrocities Act. He added that the accused had also looted case papers that Solanki was carrying.The murder was the result of a political rivalry between Solanki and the Khachar family. Since 2010, either Solanki or his wife Geeta had been elected to the post of sarpanch and deputy sarpanch and the members of the Khachar family, who had contested against them always lost.Currently, Geeta is the sarpanch of Jalila village panchayat, while Solanki was the deputy sarpanch.The Khachar family had carried out four attacks against Solanki and his family members since 2010.Jalila village has the population of 5,000 including 35 Dalit families. While Kolis constitute the majority community, the second largest community is of Kathi Darbars to which the Khachars belong. The village also has the population of the pastoral communities of Bharwads and Rabaris.Meanwhile, Jalila village has turned into a fortress with Botad police deploying heavy security in the to avert any untoward incidences and maintain law and order.Deceased Manji Solanki’s family on Thursday refused to take his body, demanding immediate arrests of the accused. The family members also put forward a slew of demands with include providing police protection to other family members, speedy trial of the four cases pending in the court, issuing firearm licenses to the Dalit families for protection and giving assurance of ending atrocities against Dalits.On Thursday, the deceased deputy sarpanch’s kin along with a group of Dalit rights activist met with government officials and police officials with slew of demands in Ahmedabad.“Solanki had sought police protection from the superintendent of police in Botad, which he never got. Had he be give protection, he would not be dead,” said Dalit rights activits Kaushik Parmar in Ahmedabad who was with the family at the Ahmedabad Civil Hospital.“We have given a list of demands to the government and unless they are accepted; Solanki’s family will not accept the body,” said Parmar.Beside seeking immediate arrest of accused, Solanki’s kin has sought strict action against the police for negligence by not giving the deceased timely protection.“The cases of atrocities that have been ongoing in a court in Botad must be shifted to Ahmedabad. The victim’s family must have the right to choose the public prosecutor. We have also sought permanent police protection for Solanki’s family and also that a revolver’s license be issued to them for self protection. We demand that all Dalits who have sought police protection must be given,” said Parmar.A list of demands was also given to the chief minister in addition to other state government officers, including the additional secretary for Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Parmar added.
