Suleman Usman Bakery case: Trial resumes after two months with a cop’s testimony

Suleman Usman Bakery case

1992-93 Mumbai riots

Ram Deo Tyagi

Mohammed Ali Road

Srikrishna Commission Report

Assistant police inspector Amrut Ingle was wireless operator in the main control room in 2001 when the case was filed.After a gap of more than two months, the trial in theof theresumed on Thursday with a policeman testifying. Assistant police inspector Amrut Ingle, currently on deputation with VIP protection, was on duty as head constable and wireless operator in the main wireless control room in 2001, when the case againstand 17 others was filed by the Special Task Force (STF). Of the 18 policemen, seven are currently facing trial for murder. Two have died.The case concerns the January 9, 1993, raid led by Tyagi, then joint commissioner of police, on the premises of the Suleman Usman Bakery and the madarsa adjacent to it on. The raid left eight inmates of the bakery and madarsa dead. None of them had a criminal record. The police claimed terrorists had been firing on them from the rooftop of the bakery. However, no terrorist or firearm was recovered from the bakery or madarsa.Tyagi and 17 other policemen were charged with murder in 2001, after the Maharashtra government set up an STF to act on theof Inquiry into the Mumbai riots. However, in 2003, Tyagi and eight others were discharged.On Thursday, API Amrut Ingle told the court that on May 28, 2001, as instructed by his officer in charge, he handed over five articles to ACP Sonawane (the Investigating Officer in the current case) at the STF office. He was asked to remain present while the panchnama of the articles was being prepared. In the presence of two unknown eyewitnesses, the panchnama began being prepared at 6.05 pm and was over by 8.15 pm.The five articles consisted of two audio cassettes wrapped in plastic, numbered 29 and 30; two transcripts of their contents covering 33 and 40 pages respectively; and one log book containing messages noted by the wireless operators. The cassettes were played and the recording was heard in the presence of the panchas and Ingle. Ingle’s statement was also recorded and read out to him. Ingle left the STF office at 9.30 pm.Ingle told the court that the police kept two log books: one for odd days and one for even days. He had been given the odd day log book to deliver to the STF. Ingle identified these five articles in court.These audio cassettes, which could not be traced for long, have been one of reasons that this trial has witnessed an unprecedented delay. After they were traced, a functional tape recorder could not be found for them to be played. After they were played in the Sessions Court Registrar’s office, they had to be played again in court. Again, the hunt for a functioning tape recorder delayed the proceedings.Ingle, whose testimony was detailed and precise, is the fourth witness to testify in the case. The first witness, a pancha, testified in February.Ingle himself appeared in court on March 1, ready to testify, but the original log book could not be traced. He came to court again on April 8, when Additional Sessions Judge UM Padwad had fixed three consecutive days for hearing the case. But it was heard only on two days as the defence counsel failed to turn up on the first day. Ingle’s turn did not come during those two days either.
