BJP to take out protest march in Kolkata against Bengal violence that killed 2

Day after two people were killed in violent clashes in Bengal's Bhatpara and BJP and Trinamool Congress blamed each other, BJP will be conducting a protest march in Kolkata against the violence.

Meanwhile, Barrackpore BJP MP Arjun Singh will be attending the funeral of two persons who died in the violence in Bhatpara on Thursday.

A BJP delegation is likely to visit the area in Bhatpara on Saturday. The entire Bengal BJP leadership, including state president Dilip Ghosh and Mukul Roy, Mahila Morcha chief Locket Chatterjee and others are in Delhi for Yoga Day celebrations.

Two people were killed and 11 others injured Thursday after clashes broke out between two groups suspected to be affiliated to the TMC and the BJP in Bhatpara area of West Bengal's North 24 Parganas district, police said.

The authorities have imposed Section 144 of the CrPC in and around the area following the violence.

The ruling Trinamool Congress and the BJP blamed each other for the clash, which is seen as an attempt to establish dominance in Bhatpara, which comes under the Barrackpore Lok Sabha constituency.

Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee has directed senior police officers to take stringent action against those involved in the incident "irrespective of their political colour", state government sources said.

Five people have been arrested in connection with the clash, a police officer said.

The state government has removed Barrackpore Police Commissioner Tanmay Ray Chaudhuri and appointed Manoj Kumar Verma, who was the IGP of Darjeeling.

Of the 11 injured, six were police personnel who suffered injuries while trying to contain the violence, Director General of Police Virendra said after visiting the spot.

According to reports, bombs were hurled and several rounds of bullets fired in the air by members of the two warring groups near the newly-constructed Bhatpara Police Station, which was made operational earlier in the day.

Several country-made bombs and revolvers had been recovered from the area, police said.
