Tamil Nadu water crisis: Minister says Kerala’s water offer too little, will manage 20 lakh litre

This comes after the Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan's office posted a statement on Facebook that Tamil Nadu had rejected its offer to supply water. (File Photo)

Hours after Kerala claimed that Tamil Nadu government had rejected its offer of 20 lakh litres of water, Tamil Nadu municipal administration minister SP Velumani on Thursday denied the claims.

In a tweet, SP Velumani denied reports of rejecting the offer made by Kerala.

Explaining the sequence of events, the minister said Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan’ s secretary contacted his Tamil Nadu counterpart and discussed the proposal to send 20 lakh litres water on a train from Thiruvananthapuram to Chennai.

As Tamil Nadu Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami had gone for medical treatment, his secretary took up the matter with local administration minister.

Edappadi K Palaniswami will chair a high-level meeting on Friday in the Secretariat to discuss Kerala's offer to supply 20 lakh litres of water, added SP Velumani.



Chief Minister Edappadi K Palaniswami is expected to interact with all district officials through video conferencing to take stock of the acute water crisis in Tamil Nadu.

SP Velumani, in a statement, thanked the Pinarayi Vijayan-led Kerala government for the offer.

"Chennai’s minimum water need is 525 MLD [million litres per day]. But Kerala’s offer was 2 MLD. We have communicated that we can manage the 2 MLD water on our own," the statement read.

"Officials in Tamil Nadu feel that if Kerala can supply 2 MLD water every day, it would be useful, the statement further said.

However, in the statement, he indirectly said the offer made by Kerala is nominal and it can be managed by Tamil Nadu.

This comes after the Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan's office posted a statement on Facebook that Tamil Nadu had rejected its offer to supply water.

Tamil Nadu is currently battling acute water crisis, affecting normal life in the state. Schools and colleges have shortened their hours due to lack of water.

Several restaurants have shut down or have put out signs asking patrons to save water. The situation in Chennai has worsened as its four main sources of water have dried up.

The groundwater levels in many parts of the city have also declined substantially.
