"Condition Of Lady Advocates Vulnerable"; Lawyer Approaches SC Seeking CBI Enquiry In Advocate Darvesh Yadav Murder Case [Read Petition]

A woman lawyer has approached the Supreme Court seeking CBI enquiry in the murder case of Darvesh Yadav, the newly elected President of UP Bar Council who was shot dead in Agra Civil Court last week. In her PIL, Advocate Indu Kaul has also sought a direction to Bar Council of India to formulate a scheme towards the Social Security Measures for lady advocates and also for providing...

A woman lawyer has approached the Supreme Court seeking CBI enquiry in the murder case of Darvesh Yadav, the newly elected President of UP Bar Council who was shot dead in Agra Civil Court last week.

In her PIL, Advocate Indu Kaul has also sought a direction to Bar Council of India to formulate a scheme towards the Social Security Measures for lady advocates and also for providing police security to lady advocates in court premises and its amenities beyond court working hours throughout the country.



The Supreme Court has agreed to hear the matter on 25th June.

In her petition, Advocate Indu submitted that the condition of lady advocates is vulnerable in all courts across the country. About the murder case, she submitted that the male insecurity has been a common feature from women placed at a higher position and in many instances this becomes a constant threat for successful women.

The petition reads:

The common psyche of men in general and male advocates in particular is a lady advocate working late hours and/or wearing modern dresses is an easy going person and often lewd comments are passed against her. ......

A lady advocate has to find her illness, old age, family conditions throughout her life as there is no social security measures in provided by the bar councils or bar associations. ....

If a lady advocate breaks the stereotype of being meek and that she can break the glass ceiling all circumstances start working against her such as hostility from male colleagues, insecurity in the court premises, lack of social security measures and family expectations. She has to fight it all alone.

Other prayers in the PIL are

To direct the State of U.P to update about the progress of investigation in Darvesh Yadav murder case,

To direct U.P. Bar Council, through BCI to pay the family of deceased Darvesh Yadav a compensation of Rs 25 lakhs;

To direct Delhi Bar Council to publish the scheme for disbursement of the sum Rs. 50 lakhs received from Delhi Government towards Social Security Measure.





Read Petition




