Vande Mataram, new India! Tide is turning in Parliament

Change, it is blowing in the wind. It is a New India, a Naya Bharat. There is a new government in saddle with 256 first time members of Lok Sabha. There is new rhetoric like however minuscule the opposition, its chirp will not get the drowned in the din of overwhelming drum beating of the arrogant majority. And there are new dharma gurus with newly-prescribed must-read scriptures and new testament, 20th century Upanishads to understand principles and practices of current dispensation.

“Chinese thinkers must study Pandit Upadhyaya and Mookherjee to understand new changes in India,” pontificated BJP demagogue Tarun Vijay at the Institute of South Asian Studies (ISAS) of Sichuan University in Chengdu city of south China. He promised to send literature of Upadhyay and Mukherjee to ISAS director Lee Tao because “so far they have read history written by leftist writers only”.

Incidentally “Upadhyaya” and ‘MukhoUpadhyaya” (correct word for Mookherji) both surnames literally translate into something relating to teaching and studies. Hence, it is historical and logical that the philosophy and teaching of these two should form the basis of intellectual foundation of present militant Hindutva.

Now that the new scriptures have been consecrated and new prophets anointed, it is the time to identify the priests and poojaris of the temples of Bharat Mata. The two houses of Parliament are, of course, the Mandir of democratic faith. Many a neophyte before entering the new abode have taken off their shoes and placed their forehead at the steps of this temple. To many this might look like a retrograde blind fall ritual performed without understanding or maybe a new show for photo op and 15 seconds of TV time but in reality, it’s a sign of new India’s new generation, new religion, the politics of religion or religious politics.

The priestess of this sect Mahamandaleshwar Poorna Chetnanand Giri aka Pragya Singh Thakur has been chosen and appointed, oops I mean anointed by “The Chief” himself. This daughter of mother India has taken a solemn oath at the altar of House (mandir) to protect the youth and ended her declamation with chanting the new mantra “Bharat Mata ki Jai”. Before her, no BJP MP taking the oath not even PM and his ministers raised any such slogan but after her, all BJP newbies ended their oath taking ceremony with this new war cry. Neophytes always show more zeal passion and commitment.

However, the chief priest of this religion is more seasoned and has larger ambition to extend his reach and is ready to reach out to allies he doesn’t need and be condescending to rivals he does not care about. Of late he has started practicing tenets of Theodore Roosevelt i.e. – speak softly and carry a big stick. He has recruited a gang which fights the proxy war for him. They chant mantra like “Jo Ram ke nahi hamare kaam ke nahi” meaning those who don’t worship Ram are of no use and similar shlokas. Their tongue is like a slicer which cuts and divides the polity into two. The chief priest distributes Prasadam i.e. rewards like chief ministership or central Minister to such Bhakts.

The chief Pujari has his Bhakts use another gong in the temple. Does it ring a bell? When in response like Pavlov’s experiment the faithful bark spontaneously and simultaneously when a newly-elected member takes oath but does not belong to their religious sect. The new mantra they chant is Vande Mataram, in Sanskrit language which some use in oath making oops taking! For a mother who has such devout children I will say Inquilab Zindabad, the tide is turning!

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
