Choking the strait: Here’s how US-Iran war can affect India

War between Iran and US has the potential to disrupt the entire world | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: The US-Iran tensions are on a knife edge with war drums beating louder than ever after Iran shot down a US drone, claiming that it violated its airspace on Thursday this week. In retaliation, President Trump had approved military strikes on Tehran only to call them off at the last moment, a report in the New York Times claimed.

The standoff between the two countries was triggered by Trump's decision to withdraw from the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action nuclear deal and re-imposition of sanctions, after accusing Iran of non-compliance. Now Tehran has threatened to breach its stockpile of enriched uranium set under the deal.

Under the 2015 deal, Iran had agreed to limit its nuclear activities and allow international inspections against the lifting of economic sanctions.

Why the war between US-Iran is a cause of worry for the World?

While any war comes with catastrophic consequences, the war between Iran and the US has the potential to disrupt the entire world. This is due to the geographic location of Iran as the conflict will most likely choke the Strait of Hormuz, from where the world's 20% of oil travels through every day. The waterway is only 21 miles wide at its narrowest and the width of the shipping lane in either direction is just 2 miles, according to Encyclopedia Britannica.

How will it affect India?

The bulk of traffic from the Strait of Hormuz heads for Asia, including India. What is worrisome is the fact that more than 50 per cent of India's imported oil passes through the strait. According to data released by Directorate General of Commercial Intelligence and Statistics (DGCI&S), out of the total 207.3 MT (Metric Tons) of crude oil imported in 2018-19, 46.61 million tonnes was imported from Iraq, 40.33 million tonnes from Saudi Arabia and 29.9 million tonnes from Iran. The rest of the imports are from the UAE, Venezuela, Nigeria and the United States.

If the strait is chocked and trade is stopped, tankers carrying oil to India might be forced to navigate via the longer and dangerous Gulf of Aden route, raising the cost of imports considerably.

Apart from the oil prices, another major concern is the Indian investment into the region. India has developed Iran's Chabahar port as a transit hub for Afghanistan and for its strategic proximity to China's Gwadar Port, investing more than USD $500 million in the port. It also has plans to develop it further as part of the International North-South Transport Corridor (INSTC). India further has plans to acquire two gas fields in Iran, Farzad-B gas field located in Tehran and the South Pars field located between Iran and Qatar.

The future of these investments will be in jeopardy if the US-Iran war breaks out.

India has officially refused to take a side in the conflict, maintaining its evergreen stand of urging countries to resolve issues "peacefully and through dialogue". If a war breaks out, then the priority for New Delhi will be its over 8 million migrants that currently work and live in the middle east. During the Israel-Lebanon conflict in 2006, India carried out evacuation operations and brought back around 2,300 people.

However, the scale of rescue operations will be much larger and in turn more dangerous than any previous operations by India in case of a US-Iran war.
