Anubhav Sinha's Mulk saw intense love and strong hate. Why Article 15 will be no different

Anubhav Sinha has a unique filmography, ranging from action-thrillers to romantic comedies. However, his 2018 film Mulk, which addressed the combustible issue of religion and terrorism, surprised the audience because it's not often that Bollywood chooses to walk down the road rarely travelled.

But Sinha did. And that road was not easy. Undaunted, Sinha has now returned with the film

Article 15.

ARTICLE 15

Ayushmann Khurrana's Article 15 revolves around the ever-corrosive problem of caste discrimination in the country. In the film, Ayushmann plays the role of a police officer who has the task of investigating a brutal rape and murder of two women in Uttar Pradesh. The film is inspired by the infamous 2014 Badaun gang rape and murder, where two girls were found hanging from a tree. However, the case has seen many twists and turns as the local police and CBI said that there was no sexual assault and that the girls committed suicide. The girls' families did not agree with the report and said that the CBI had given a false report, on orders of the upper-caste Yadavs, who were initially accused of raping these two girls.

And even before the film has released, Article 15 has already come under fire from the Brahmin community in Uttar Pradesh. Brahmins were upset that the film had been "tweaked", as it shows the accused men as Brahmins, and that "could defame the entire community".

"If the film is based on the Badaun incident, where was the need to turn the accused into Brahmins? It is obvious that the intention is to malign the Brahmin community. We have started creating awareness about the issue and we will not allow the film to release here," said Kushal Tiwari, a young student leader, who is a member of the Parshuram Sena, a Brahmin outfit.

Ayushmann had to clarify that the film does not take any sides and does not showcase any community in a bad light.

Yet, if there is one thing that can be learnt from the anger that such pertinent films receive, is that no matter how many times the actors, filmmakers and producers give clarifications, they will receive hate regardless. They will be called anti-national, or anti-Hindu, anti-Brahmin or anti-anything, because that's the current sad state of affairs in the country. So it's no surprise then that most of the time Bollywood goes ahead with its streak of chest-thumping and nauseatingly patriotic films, to just play it easy and safe. It's better than starting a conversation and scraping the issue of the very real problems plaguing the country, isn't it?

THE CASE OF MULK

Mulk told the story of the plight of a Muslim family, who had been accused of treason after their son got involved in a terrorist plot. Mulk raised the sensitive questions of religion, morality and ethics in the form of a courtroom drama. It did what Bollywood films usually fear to do -- it attempted to articulate the deep-seated prejudices of those who condemn an entire community due to the monstrous actions of a few. It showed the constant questions that are often thrown at Muslims just because of their religion.

Sinha tried to discuss a layered and complicated subject, though he ended up simplifying it at times. Yet, the film received much praise from many as it addressed the massive elephant in the room and brought the troubling issues of the current times to the fore.

THE ANTI-NATIONAL LABEL

Anti-national is the word of the hour and Anubhav Sinha's Mulk could not escape the tag during the promotions of Mulk last year.

Just hours after the Mulk trailer, not even the film mind you, was released, Sinha was attacked and labelled an anti-national. He was accused of running propaganda to get support for Muslims. He was even called 'anti-Hindu'.

In this day and age of social media, brutal trolling is inevitable. Sinha had to hit out at the naysayers in a scathing letter and clarify his stand. He told the trolls that they "were lost under heaps and heaps of hate posts."

He wrote, "Mulk'... No it is not funded by Dawood Ibrahim. You can ask him. Not even Congress. You can ask Rahul (Gandhi). Not even the RSS. You can check with Mohan Bhagwatji. It is funded by Mr Deepak Mukut and his father Kamal Mukut [the producers of Mulk], a veteran in this business."

Taapsee Pannu, who plays the role of the lawyer in the film, had defended the film staunchly and said that she was shocked to see how disturbing it was for her to see a religion being targeted. "If somebody has to stand up to address the issue, then I would love to take the responsibility. Doing this movie was a way of venting out how disturbed I felt because of how Muslims are treated," she had said.

The actors had to constantly assert that the film represented true patriotism and nationalism and in no way criticised any community. They tried to explain that there are so many layers about community, religion and caste and that the film raised questions about the conditioning that has been done over the years. Not completely different from what Article 15 makers are doing now.

But it was not just all hate and negativity pouring down on Mulk. Critics and many sections of the audience strongly appreciated the film for bravely entering dangerous territory and questioning the deeply institutionalised Islamophobia in the country. It was worth marvelling at what Mulk wished to do. Rather than portraying Muslims as gun-toting and bearded individuals as Bollywood usually does, it turned the focus on the real threat of fear-mongering that is playing out on the national stage today.

So kudos to Anubhav Sinha for making such poignant films that make people introspect about the horrors threatening the very fabric of society, something that the privileged choose to ignore. His films at least bring about a conversation, or a debate, and that's something that we all need right now.

With Article 15, he is all set to replicate the same love and same hate as Mulk received, if not stronger. Because in 2019, while religion is still talked about, caste runs deep in India. So deep, that if you cut open a vein, you will find the person's caste on the blood cells too.

WATCH THE TRAILER OF ARTICLE 15 HERE

ALSO SEE | Article 15: Ayushmann Khurrana shares hard-hitting video in the spirit of India Vs Pakistan World Cup 2019 match
