Man who attacked 4 in SE Portland told cops to kill him before fatal police shooting, transcripts show

A man fatally shot by police in a Southeast Portland home in April was high on meth, holding a woman at knifepoint while her baby cried nearby, and yelling for officers to kill him, witnesses told authorities.

The woman and the two officers who fired their guns were among 16 people who recounted to a grand jury the bloody scene before the killing of Jeb Brock, who had already stabbed three of his relatives inside a Powellhurst-Gilbert neighborhood home when police arrived.

The woman, a family friend, testified that screams woke her about 4:15 a.m. on April 29. She said her partner left her and their baby in the bedroom to investigate what was happening. She called 911.

Brock barged in, sexually assaulted her and threatened to kill her. Brock stabbed her partner in the neck and hit him with a sledgehammer when he tried to reenter the room.

“He had the knife to my throat to the point where I could feel the blade,” the woman said. “It was on my throat, and he was slowly trying to press into it.”

The woman is not being identified because The Oregonian/OregonLive does not typically name victims of sexual assault.

The woman’s 911 call dropped sometime after Brock entered the room.

Residents Delbert and Betty Littlejohn, who had been in other bedrooms, also called 911. The three callers each conveyed a chaotic episode, which unfolded over the course of 10 minutes in the 13100 block of Southeast Center Street.

Delbert Littlejohn called 911 saying he’d been stabbed in the leg, hit in the head with a hammer and needed help. He repeatedly pleaded with the dispatcher to get aid to him quickly and frantically relayed his injuries, that a family member had been stabbed in the neck and that he saw blood all over the floor.

Delbert Littlejohn identified Brock, his cousin, by name as the assailant. He told the dispatcher that Brock hit him with a 5-pound mini sledgehammer “and then he started stabbing.”

The woman who first called 911 repeatedly mentioned during the call that her baby was in the midst of the violence, but it’s unclear from the transcript if she was talking to the dispatcher or someone else.

She wasn’t able to give much more information before the call ended.

“Please, the baby is right here. Please,” the woman said during the call. “Please, my baby is right here.”

A man identified in the transcripts as Brock can be heard during the woman’s call saying, “I’m about to die.”

Detective Travis Law, the lead investigator in the case, described to the jury that police arrived about two and a half minutes into Betty Littlejohn’s 911 call.

Police arrived to find Brock in a blood-splattered bedroom along with the woman and her baby. Officers testified that Brock was lying in bed with the woman, appearing to use her as a shield, while holding a knife to her throat.

One of the officers in the room fired at least two non-lethal rounds — one of which the woman said inadvertently struck her in the stomach. An officer yelled “drop the knife or you’ll be shot,” a little more than six and a half minutes into the 911 call.

Another non-lethal round was shot a little before the seven-minute mark. Two gunshots were heard a minute later.

Sgt. James Mooney, one of the two officers who fired their guns, said he believed Brock was going to kill the woman because he’d already stabbed other people in the home. He hoped Brock would let the woman go after the non-lethal rounds were fired but said nothing changed.

“He knows I have a weapon pointed at him. I have no way to stop this guy, no way,” Mooney said. “You cannot believe what that feeling is like.”

Officer Michael Gonzalez, the other officer who fired his gun, described the woman lifting Brock’s arm above her head and shimmying away from him toward the foot of the bed. Gonzalez said he then fired his handgun once and hit Brock above his left eye.

Gonzalez said if he didn’t shoot when the woman made her move, he believed she, his colleagues or himself would have been seriously hurt or killed. He said he felt he could only fire one round.

“It was a small window of opportunity to take the shot and if it closed and I continued to shoot and ended up shooting her, I wouldn’t have been able to sleep,” Gonzalez said.

Brock was killed by two gunshots, one to the head and another to the chest, Michele Stauffenberg, a deputy medical examiner with the state, testified.

Either shot could have been fatal, she said, but death was likely instant from the shot to the head.

Brock was also found to have both methamphetamine and trace amounts of alcohol in his system, Stauffenberg said.

The four people Brock attacked were treated for their injuries at hospitals.

The incident was one of three fatal Portland Police Bureau shootings this year.

Most recently, a Portland police officer fatally shot a man after authorities say he threatened a woman with a knife earlier this month in Portland’s Pearl District. The man had been holding the woman at knifepoint, according to police.

An officer also fatally shot 36-year-old Andre Gladen, a legally blind man, in a stranger’s home in early January.

An officer fired his weapon after responding to a reported domestic disturbance earlier that month, as well. No one was hurt in that case.

The grand jury found Mooney and Gonzalez lawfully used deadly force against Brock. The duo acted in self-defense or in defense of a third person, jurors determined.

-- Jim Ryan, Shane Dixon Kavanaugh, Everton Bailey Jr. and Kale Williams

Visit subscription.oregonlive.com/newsletters to get Oregonian/OregonLive journalism delivered to your email inbox.
