Pradhan dials Saudi oil minister as crude spikes on Iran tension

Had a telephonic conversation with HE @Khalid_AlFalih, Min. Of Energy, Industry & Mineral Resources, Saudi Arabia a… https://t.co/K2K1LLeZLt — Dharmendra Pradhan (@dpradhanbjp) 1561129490000

NEW DELHI: Oil minister Dharmendra Pradhan on Friday expressed concern over developments in the Strait of Hormuz bumping up oil prices and sought Saudi Arabia ’s active role in keeping oil prices at reasonable levels.Pradhan discussed the situation in the Persian Gulf with his Saudi counterpart Khalid Al-Falih over telephone. “Expressed concern on the developments in the Strait of Hormuz leading to rising crude oil price. Reiterated the sensitivity of Indian consumers to prevailing oil price volatility. Sought active role of #SaudiArabia within OPEC & OPEC Plus for keeping oil prices at reasonable levels,” Pradhan tweeted. Brent crude on Thursday had jumped 5%, the highest since January but stabilized around $65 a barrel on Friday. The price spiked in the wake of escalating tension between Iran and the US after Tehran said it had shot down a US drone. On Friday, US media reports said president Donald Trump approved and then later called off military strikes against Iran.These developments have a major impact on oil prices as 20% of global oil supplies and 25% of liquefied natural gas pass through the Strait of Hormuz. India depends on imports to meet 83% of its oil demand.India has been steadfast in its demand for a stable and sustainable oil market. New Delhi, along with Washington, has been constantly pushing producer countries to check volatility arguing high crude prices hurt global economic growth – which in turn depress demand and hurt producers.Pradhan also discussed proposed Saudi investments in India. Saudi Aramco proposes to invest in a stalled Rs 40,000 crore mega refinery being planned by India’s state-run oil majors. Aramco is also in talks for stake Reliance Industries Ltd’s refining and petrochemicals business.“Discussed about Saudi interests in energy sector in India to further bolster our bilateral ties. Also reviewed with HE @Khalid_AlFalih the progress of Saudi investments in India's refining & petrochemical sectors.”Earlier this week, Pradhan spoke to his UAE counterpart Sultan Ahmed Al Jaber, who is also the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company Group CEO, on the Persian Gulf situation. Al Jaber assured India of uninterrupted supply of oil and LPG despite disruptions in the Strait of Hormuz.
