Woman in Rajasthan runs from pillar to post seeking justice in her brother's murder case

The police managed to nab two of the associates of main accused | REUTERS image for representation

A young woman has been running from pillar to post in Jaipur, Rajasthan hoping to get justice in the murder case of her brother.

The woman, Neetu Sharma, has been seeking the arrest of the main accused in the murder case of her 36-year-old brother Manoj.

Neetu Sharma claimed that the police have so far not taken into custody and questioned the mother and other family members of the main accused Pawan.

"The police should take family members of Pawan into custody and interrogate them," Neetu Sharma, sister of deceased Manoj, said.

Neetu's brother was allegedly kidnaped from Sardarshahar in Rajasthan's Churu district on June 5.

After that Neetu, who stays in Assam's Tejpur, filed an FIR in Churu district with regard to the kidnap.

Later, the police managed to nab two of the associates of Pawan - Randhir Chaudhary and Sandeep Meena.

During their interrogation, one of the accused claimed that the three had murdered Manoj and buried his body in a field.

"Neetu Sharma had filed the FIR 307/19 at Sardarshahar station. The police, in this case, have arrested two - Sandy Meena alias Sandeep Meena and Randhir Chaudhary. Both are on remand. We are searching continuously for the main accused Pawan Sharma. Action regarding arrest will be taken soon," Rajendra Kumar, Churu SP, said.

"There was good friendship between Manoj and Pawan earlier. Later, there was some dispute between them with regard to money. That dispute caused enmity. In that enmity, Pawan Sharma, Sandeep and Randhir Chaudhary together murdered him. Two accused have been arrested. Pawan Sharma will also be arrested soon. During interrogation, the two accused who have been nabbed, mentioned that thety had murdered Manoj and buried his body in a field. Their associate, Pawan, will also be soon arrested," Rajendra Kumar added.

Neetu has alleged that Pawan's father was involved in the cover-up and that his family members should be interrogated.

She mentioned that this can help in revealing the whereabouts of Pawan who has been absconding.
