Day after violence, Bengal on the edge

Bhatpara in North 24 Pargana district continued to remain tense a day after two youth were shot dead during violence at Kankinara bazaar on Thursday. While senior police officers, including state DGP Virendra, reviewed the situation on ground, prohibitory orders under CrPC Section 144 remained imposed in areas under two police stations - Bhatpara and Jagaddal on Saturday.

The district administration has also barred mobile Internet services. Barrackpore BJP MP Arjun Singh visited the residence of the deceased and blamed the police for the deteriorating law and order situation in the area.

"The police, especially the DC, is leading this fabricated incident. The criminals are hired from outside. Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee and her police are responsible for the incident. Police shot both the youth," Singh alleged.

On Friday, the BJP took out a protest rally in Kolkata, while Singh led a funeral procession in Bhatpara despite prohibitory orders. A section of angry crowd reportedly pelted stones at policemen following which the police had to fire tear gas shells and lathicharge. Meanwhile, Bengal minister Jyotipriya Mallick and TMC incharge, North 24 Parganas, has claimed that the two men were TMC supporters.

"It is a handiwork of the BJP. The BJP is indulging in violence as per a plan. They are even attacking the police. The one who died today is our party worker. Those who have died in the last few days were also TMC workers. The administration is trying its best to control the situation. Police are combating it. We have told the police to arrest those involved, no matter how big he is. None from the TMC is involved here. No one has died in police firing. These are clashes between two BJP groups," Mallick alleged.

DGP Virendra confirmed that the police opened fire in the air, however, it is not clear if the two deaths were a result of police firing. "Bengal government has taken the incident very seriously. Some antisocial elements are active in the area, along with some outsiders. CrPC Section 144 has been imposed in Bhatpara. Senior officers, police reinforcement and RAF are deployed in the area," informed state home secretary Alapan Bandopadhyay.

IG Darjeeling Manoj Verma replaced Barrackpore Police Commissioner Tanmoy Roychowdhury. CM Banerjee has given an ultimatum of three days to the police, to bring the situation under control. A high-level inquiry has also been ordered in Thursday's violence.

BJP state-in-charge Kailash Vijayvargiya said that a central delegation of party leaders, led by party MP SS Ahluwalia, will visit Bhatpara on Saturday and submit its report to the BJP president.

BJP DEMANDS A CBI INQUIRY

The BJP on Friday accused the Bengal police administration of acting as TMC cadres, and demanded a CBI inquiry into the firing incident at Bhatpara, which the party leaders said, left two dead and several injured. Clashes broke out between two groups, suspected to be affiliated to the TMC and the BJP, in the area on Thursday, with locals alleging that the deaths were because of police firing.

BJP national general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya held a meeting with state BJP leaders during the day to discuss the next course of action following the incident.

"CM Mamata Banerjee and her party goons along with police have turned Bengal into killing fields just because the BJP won 18 Lok Sabha seats in the state. The kind of terror they have let loose is unprecedented. They are trying to wipe out BJP cadres and voters from the Bhatpara area. But this will not yield any result," he said.

Meanwhile, BJP national secretary Rahul Sinha said that the saffron party would seek a CBI inquiry into the incident to bring out the truth.
