Confirmed! Kareena Kapoor Khan to play the female lead in Aamir Khan's 'Laal Singh Chaddha'

Since the time Aamir Khan announced that he will be starring in the Hindi remake of Hollywood blockbuster Forrest Gump, the excitement of the fans reached another level. The original film had Tom Hanks in the titular role and his incredible performance bagged him the Best Actor Award at the Oscars 1995. Talking about the Hindi remake, it's titled as Laal Singh Chaddha and will be directed by Advait Chandan of Secret Superstar fame.

Earlier there were several reports making the rounds that Kareena Kapoor Khan has been roped in to play the female lead in Aamir's film. Talking about it, a source had said to a portal, "Aamir wants Kareena to play the part. She is in London till August, shooting for Angrezi Medium. She will make a pit stop in Mumbai next month for her TV commitments. The final call on the casting will be taken then." Now as per reports in Bombay Times, Bebo is indeed a part of the project and it will be her third outing with Aamir.

Kareena has worked with the Dangal actor before in films namely 3 Idiots and Talaash: The Answer Lies Within.

Ajit Andhare, the COO of Viacom18 Studios also expressed his happiness on backing Laal Singh Chaddha. He stated to the daily, "It gives me immense pleasure to announce our upcoming venture with Aamir Khan. For every cinephile out there, their must-watch list of films would be incomplete without Forrest Gump. To be able to adapt the classic for Indian audiences is a long-cherished dream for many of us. Knowing Aamir’s burning passion for this subject for many years, he is the perfect partner to bring to life this dream."

He concluded by saying, "I also want to thank Jim Gianopulos and Andrew Gumpert (from Paramount Pictures) and their team for believing in our vision and continuously supporting all endeavours to bring some of their best content to the Indian markets."

Laal Singh Chaddha is slated to release during Christmas 2020.
