UP minister gets govt employee to tie his shoelaces at Yoga Day event, says ‘it should be appreciated'

UP Minister Laxmi Narayan drew flak after a government employee ties his shoelaces for him | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: On a day when India celebrated the International Yoga Day on Friday, Uttar Pradesh Minister Laxmi Narayan waded into a controversy after he got a government employee make him wear shoes at a Yoga event in Shahjahanpur in the state.

In a video, the state minister can be seen surrounded by his aides as a government employee squats before him and ties his shoelaces for him.

The incident took place at the Yoga event at the Ordinance Clothing Factory (OCF) in Shahjahanpur, where Narayan was the chief guest. As the BJP leader faced flak for abusing his power to make a government employee perform such menial tasks, Narayan defended his move and even evoked “Indian culture and traditions” to justifiy his actions.

Speaking to reporters, the Uttar Pradesh minister said, “Agar koi bhaiya, bhatija ya parivaar ka vyakti humein yadi joota pehna de, toh ye toh hamara vo desh hai jahan Bhagwan Ram ke khadau rakh ke Bharat ji ne 14 saal raj kiya tha, aapko toh is baat ki tareef karni chahiye. (If a brother or a family member helps me wear my shoes, then remember this is our country where Bharat had ruled for 14 years by placing Rama’s ‘Khadau’. You should appreciate it.)”

#WATCH: UP Minister Laxmi Narayan gets his shoelace tied by a government employee at a yoga event in Shahjahanpur, yesterday. pic.twitter.com/QbVxiQM7bI — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) June 22, 2019

Laxmi Narayan is the minister of minority affairs and dairy development in the Yogi Adityanath government.

Several Union Ministers and foreign dignitaries participated in the fifth International Yoga Day celebrations across the country by performing various yoga asanas or postures during the events. Prime Minister Narendra Modi also participated in the Yoga Day event at Ranchi on Friday morning.

Notably, it is not yet clear whether the video of the government employee tying the minister's shoelaces was shot before or after the event.

Previously, Odisha cabinet minister Jogendra Behera had been criticised after his personal security officer (PSO) was seen tying his shoelaces during the Independence Day celebration in Keonjhar, reports said.

When he was questioned by the media regarding the controversy, the Odisha minister told local news channels, "I am a VIP. I have hoisted the flag, he (PSO) has not done it."

In the past as well, Laxmi Narayan has hogged the limelight for all the wrong reasons. In 2018, he had claimed that Lord Rama had helped India become a global superpower. He made the comment while participating in the Deepotsav festival. The BJP leader had also contributed to the ridiculous debate on the 'caste' of Lord Hanuman last year. He had asserted that Lord Hanuman was a 'jat' because the Hindu god had "similar traits to that of the Jat community."


