Private tuition teacher murders wife, three children at family home in Delhi's Mehrauli

Delhi Police personnel outside the scene of the crime | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Residents of Mehrauli, an area in southwest Delhi woke up on Saturday morning to the horror of four murders in their neigbourhood. The matter came to light when the Deputy Commissioner of Police (South Delhi) informed media outlets that a man has stabbed his wife and three children at the family home in Mehrauli. The accused has confessed to the murders, added the DCP.

A preliminary investigation revealed that the man admitted to killing his wife and three children of ages two months, five years and six years in a written note. He has been identified as one Upendra Shukla. Officials familiar with the matter told mediapersons that the accused used to give private tuitions and lived with his family of five in Mehrauli.

DCP South Delhi: The man who murdered his wife and three children in Mehrauli today, has been arrested. pic.twitter.com/epujQwepCb — ANI (@ANI) June 22, 2019

While police arrested Upendra this morning and also recovered the knife he used to slit the throats of his wife and three children, the motive for the crime is still unclear. Reports suggest that Shukla was facing mental illness issues and was going through depression, however, the claims are yet to be confirmed by investigating officials.

Prima facie the incident took place between 1am and 2am last night, said police adding that Shukla's mother was the one who alerted police. The mother lives in the same house as the deceased and checked in on the children and Shukla early Saturday morning and informed local police officials when no one answered the door.

More details are awaited as this is a developing story and a police investigation into the matter is still underway.

The incident reminds one of the mass family suicide which rocked the national capital about a year ago on July 1 of 2018 when locals and police officials found the bodies of eleven members of the same family at their residence in Burari. The victims included the family's 77-year-old matriarch, three women, two men and four children. It was later revealed that the deaths were a pre-meditated case of 'mass suicide'. Officials with the psychology division of the Forensic Science Laboratory (FSL) which was formed after the 'Burari deaths' suggested that this was a case of 'shared psychosis'.
