Bengaluru: 1-year-old cancer patient made to 'wait outside hospital' thanks to CM Kumaraswamy's 'photo-op'

HD Kumaraswamy inaugurated five operation theatres at Kidwai Hospital in Bengaluru | Photo Credit: Times Now

Bengaluru: In a case of glaring VVIP apathy, a one-year-old cancer patient was made to wait outside a hospital in Bengaluru in Karnataka for CM HD Kumaraswamy’s convoy to pass through.

The patient’s father, Hassan Mia, hails from Haveri district. However, for the past year, he has been staying in Bengaluru in order to ensure that his toddler is able to get the required necessary treatment.

On Friday, several cancer patients were reportedly inconvenienced due to the VVIP movement of CM Kumaraswamy’s convoy at the Kidwai Hospital. As per reports, Kumaraswamy was greeted and garlanded at the hospital on his visit even as many patients had to wait outside.

Recounting the ordeal, the young cancer patient’s father said that they had to wait outside the hospital for nearly 30 minutes as the security officials refused to allow him to meet Chief Minister Kumaraswamy who was on a visit there, citing protocol.

CM Kumaraswamy was at the Kidwai hospital to inaugurate five operation theatres on Friday morning. However, he had arrived at the venue half an hour late. During this time, traffic near the hospital was held up for almost an hour and many cancer patients who were coming to the hospital were not allowed to enter from the main gate of the hospital.

Speaking about this, Hassan Mia said, “I wanted to make my son meet Chief Minister Kumaraswamy. But they didn't allow us. I was told that CM's convoy is coming. So I was made to wait at the roadside for half an hour. I was angry. I use this road every day. You see the condition of my son. Every guard and doctor knows me. But they said since it is CM's convoy so we cannot move.”

Meanwhile, CM Kumaraswamy kicked off his village stay campaign 'Grama Vastavya 2.0' on Friday from Gurmitkal in Yadgir district. The Janata Dal (Secular) had declared that he would be starting his village stay programme after the party suffered a humiliating rout in the Lok Sabha elections.

Speaking to reporters, Kumaraswamy said, "Grama Vastavya is not a political gimmick. I had started this programme 12 years ago in a bid to develop rural areas by obtaining information from the people itself. This is not just a one-night stay at a village for me. This is a way for me to learn about the problems people in Gurmitkal are facing. The district officials and gram panchayat officials have briefed me about the problems in Gurmitkal."

Kumaraswamy announced a slew of developmental projects for Yadgir district, including better infrastructure for government schools and construction of a 300-bed district hospital.


