Odisha Governor Urges WTC to showcase SHG products in International Markets

Bhubaneswar: World Trade Centre Bhubaneswar (WTCB) observed World Trade Day on 22 June 2019 at the Hotel Swosti Premium. His Excellency Governor Dr. Ganeshi Lal inaugurated the trade day celebration and exhorted to the group and members to make the optimum utilization of the WTC’s global network present in more than 100 countries and create win-win situations between the producers, consumers and facilitators. The thematic focus was on International Trade to unravel the challenges and opportunities for India and Odisha.

Hon’ble Governor of Odisha Ganeshi Lal said that, “With food we can take control of any country of the world, be it USA or China or any other one. I request WTC to please showcase the product of SHG in Shanghai and other international cities. For Industry there should be focus, vision and principle. We never take world as market but as a family. We need qualitative and innovative products.”

MSME minister of Odisha Captain Divya Sankar Mishra said that, “We are committed for business friendly and small business friendly environment. We have single window clearance system. We have everything for business from resources to skill development and so on. Odisha is excellent in Odisha. State is now export friendly.”

Capt. Somesh Batra, the Chairman, World Trade Centre Bhubaneswar & Vice Chairman, World Trade Centre Mumbai delivered the welcome address. Dr. Nitin Jawale, IAS, Managing Director, Industrial Promotion & Investment Corporation of Odisha, Government of Odisha, Shri. L.N. Gupta, IAS, Additional Chief Secretary, Department of MSMEs, Government of Odisha and Ms. Rupa Naik, Senior Director, World Trade Centre Mumbai and Director, World Trade Centre Bhubaneswar addressed the members and delegates.

Awards were presented to Members of WTCB who are doing inspiring work in trade promotion and facilitation. WTCB signed three MoUs with Industry partners. Sectoral Think Tanks which were designed last year has been revamped to add new conveners, co-conveners and members.

Leaders from different think tanks at WTCB like Shri. J.K. Mohanty, Convener, Tourism Think Tank, Shri. Ashwini Rath, Convener, Start-up, Innovation & Technology Think Tank, Shri. Mahendra Gupta, Convener, Smart City & Infrastructure, Think Tank, Shri. Pradipta Mohanty, Convener, Agriculture & Food Processing Think Tank, and Ms. Sanghamitra Jena, Convener, Women Forum, presented their detailed account of activities and shared their plan for near future.

Ms. Nimeshika Natarajan, Assistant Director of WTCB presented the annual report and encouraged a discussion among think tanks and members to suggest activities in the forthcoming year of 2019-20. Many members felt the urgent need for a full-fledged office which will strengthen Odisha’s place in global trade. Member appreciated the WTC Mumbai, the parent body of WTC Bhubaneswar, which has recently donatd Rs. 51 lakhs to Odisha’s Chief Minister’s Relief Fund for the post- Cyclone Fani restoration work.
