US govt report red-flags attacks on minorities especially Muslims in India during 2018

United States Secretary of State Mike Pompeo | Photo Credit: AP

New Delhi: A US State Department report red-flagged the attacks on minority communities especially Muslim in India during 2018 amid rumours that victims traded or killed cows for beef.

The report titled ‘India 2018 International Religious Freedom Report’ said the Indian government failed to act against mob attacks on religious and marginalised minorities and “critics of the government”.

It says mentions that “some senior officials of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) made inflammatory speeches against minority communities”.

The report states that at least 24 out of the 29 states in the country either partially or fully have instated a ban on cow slaughter.

"The ban mostly affects Muslims and members of other Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. In the majority of the 24 States where bovine slaughter is banned, punishments include imprisonment for six months to two years and a fine of 1,000 to 10,000 rupees," the report says.

The report claims that there is "religiously motivated killings, assaults, riots, discrimination, vandalism, and actions restricting the right of individuals to practice their religion, beliefs and proselytize."

“In cases involving mobs killing an individual based on false accusations of cow slaughter or forced conversion, police investigations and prosecutions often were not adequately pursued. Rules on the registration of foreign-funded nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were discriminatorily implemented against religious minority groups.

Religious freedom conditions varied dramatically from state to state, with some states continuing to be relatively open and free for religious minorities, while others—if taken on their own—had “systematic, ongoing, egregious” violations of religious freedom,” the report released by US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo says.

The report also cites the Kathua rape case in Kashmir the report says “While many decried the young (eight-year-old) girl’s rape and murder, several others organized in support of the men charged, including members of the BJP”.
