Postal votes fail to reach many Nadigar Sangam members in time

Rajini fails to cast vote; Bhagyaraj unsure if polls will be free and fair

The war of words between the two opposing factions — Pandavar Ani and Swami Sankardas Ani — continued on Saturday as they prepared to face the Nadigar Sangam polls on June 23.

This time around, the elections are being held under a cloud of uncertainty. The venue wasn’t confirmed till the evening and there were reports that the postal votes didn’t reach the members even after 5 p.m., the closing time on Saturday.

Actor Rajinikanth, who is currently shooting for his film, Darbar, in Mumbai, tweeted, “I am currently shooting in Mumbai. I received my postal vote for Nadigar Sangam elections only at 6.45 p.m. despite my best efforts I took to receive it earlier. I regret that I was unable to cast my vote because of this delay. It is strange and unfortunate. This should not have happened.”

‘Swami Sankardas’ faction led by veteran actor and filmmaker K. Bhagyaraj and producer Ishari K. Ganesh on Saturday said that holding elections in such a short time after it was suspended resulted in confusion among members.

‘A lot of confusion’

Speaking to the media, Mr. Bhagyaraj said that though their faction was upbeat about facing the elections, he wasn’t sure that the elections would be conducted in a free and a fair manner. “Our only demand is that the election should be held in a free and fair manner. The venue wasn’t confirmed until late. We weren’t able to tell our members about the status. There is a lot of confusion related to postal votes. How will they send in their postal votes before 5 p.m. on Saturday when many have not even received it? We are, however, confident of victory.” Bhagyaraj said that many artistes had cancelled their tickets after news broke that the elections were cancelled.

Ishari Ganesh reiterated the importance of holding free and fair elections. “Around 250 people have planned to vote in person. But they don’t know when and where they should come,” he said. He added that there are allegations that postal votes have been taken over by fan clubs of actors in Pandavar ani.

General secretary Vishal Krishna said the Madras High Court’s order allowing the elections vindicated their stand that they had not violated any rule or regulation. He said postal votes did not reach the members in time despite the administration posting them. “The postal votes have been closed at 5 p.m. today but it is true that it has not reached many members in other States despite us posting it on time. We have taken it up with the postal department,” he said.
