3separate murders in city within 24 hrs

Crime seems to be thriving in Pune, with three different murder cases coming to light in the city within 24 hours. FIRs were filed by the Chinchwad, Sahakar Nagar and Kondhwa police stations in the separate cases.



In Pimpri-Chinchwad, an 18-year-old woman was murdered by her cousin after she married an alleged criminal. Rutuja Vicky Wagh had married a man with a criminal record which did not fit in well with her family. Her grandmother objected to her bringing her husband to their house which would frequently lead to heated quarrels.



However, the matter escalated when Rutuja raised a hand on her grandmother and started physically abusing her. The grandmother then called the accused, Santosh Rohidas Bhondve, for help. Bhondve rushed to the house where he allegedly strangulated Wagh and murdered her. The accused has now been arrested by the Chinchwad police.



Talking to Mirror, senior police inspector Bhimrao Shingade said, "Wagh had married a criminal few days back and would come to visit her mother once in a while. But she used to get her husband along too which would infuriate the grandmother. Wagh even beat up her mother and grandmother when they argued with her."



In another incident, Ramdas Shamrao Shilimkar (38), a resident of Dhankawadi, was allegedly murdered after a minor argument over a plastic bag with the accused Dnyaneshwar Wankhede. Sahakar Nagar police have filed a case against Wankhede and two other.



According to the cops, Wankhede is a vegetable seller and Shilimkar would frequently buy items from him. On Friday, Shilimkar got into an argument with Wankhede about giving him a plastic bag. Later in the evening, Shilimkar was confronted by Wankhede and his relatives who started abusing him. The accused then stabbed Shilimkar in the stomach and chest. Senior police inspector Anil Shewale from Sahakar Nagar police station informed that the accused have been arrested.



Meanwhile, the third murder came to light after some Kondhwa residents spotted a body in the area early on Saturday morning. Police immediately rushed to the spot and found that the person was strangulated and his body dumped in the area.



Upon investigation, the deceased was identified as 52-year-old Sunil Ragunath Shashtri, who was reportedly missing according to a report filed at the Viman Nagar police station.



Talking to Mirror about the murder, senior police inspector Anil Patil said, "There are three accused in this case. The deceased was a car driver and the accused had taken a lift from him with an intention to rob him. The accused killed Shashtri and dumped his body in Kondhwa and absconded to Gujarat. All the three accused are from Rajasthan and Gujarat police have already detained two while one is still at large."


