Defense news on: 2019 January 25 (acquisition and contracts)

Americas

The Air Force tapped Gulfstream Aerospace Corp. with a $80.6 million contract modification for C-20/C-35 fleet sustainment. The company is an American subsidiary of General Dynamics that designs, develops, manufactures, markets and services business jet aircraft. The C-20 aircraft are military modifications of the commercial Gulfstream aircraft. The C-20 provides distinguished visitor (DV) airlift for military and government officials. It supports the long range/low passenger load DV airlift niche, offering worldwide access while including a communications suite which supports worldwide secure voice and data communications for the DV and staff. Smilar to the C-20, the C-37A is the military version of the civilian Gulfstram V and is used primarily for transporting government and Defense Department officials and their staffs. The two aircraft are used by the Air Force, Army, Navy, Marines and Coast Guard. The contract modifies a previous award under the terms of a firm-fixed-price contract with a five-year option period in support of the C-37 and C-20 aircraft. Work is scheduled to be completed by end of January 2020.

General Atomics won a $19.7 million contract to manufacture, test, and deliver Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch Systems (EMALS) spare parts to support the US Navy’s CVN-78 aircraft carrier prior to the Advanced Arresting Gear and EMALS material support dates. The CVN-78, dubbed the USS Gerald R. Ford is the lead ship of its class and the first aircraft carrier design in 40 years. The aircraft is expected to leave on its first deployment in 2022. The CVN-78 is the world’s largest aircraft carrier, and the largest warship ever constructed in terms of displacement. The Electromagnetic Aircraft Launch System, developed by General Atomics, launches carrier-based aircraft rather than the conventional steam piston. It was developed especially for the Navy’s Gerald R. Ford aircraft carriers. Work is expected to be completed in January 2023.

Middle East & Africa

The first of 16 Airbus Helicopter H125 training platforms arrived Qatar, Jane’s reports. The Ministry of Defense ordered the platforms in 2018. Footage released on January 23rd shows two helicopters painted in the livery of the Qatar Armed Forces Academy. The H125 is a single-engine light utility helicopter formally known as the Eurocopter AS350 Ecureuil. Ordered to replace the secondary training role of the Aerospatiale SA 342L Gazelle that has been in service since 1983, the H125 has been procured as part of a wider deal that also includes 28 NHIndustries NH90 helicopters.

Europe

A Su-27 fighter jet of Russian Aerospace Forces intercepted a Swedish Gulfstream reconnaissance plane over the Baltic Sea. The Su-27 is a twin-engine super maneuverable fighter aircraft designed by Sukhoi, a major Russian aircraft manufacturer. It was designed for air superiority missions, and subsequent variants are able to perform almost all aerial warfare operations. The Russian military regularly make public how often Russian fighter jets intercept or accompany foreign military aircraft near Russian borders. According to the Russian Ministry of Defense, the Russian fighter jet approached the object at a safe distance, identified it as a Gulfstream reconnaissance plane from the Swedish Air Force that was conducting a flight with its transponder switched off. Afterwards the Swedish plane flew away from the Russian state border, while the Su-27 jet returned to its base.

The Swedish Armed Forces awarded German Defense Contractor Rheinmetall a contract for vehicles to transport Patriot missile systems. Under the contract, Rheinmetall MAN Military Vehicles will supply 40 high-mobility trucks including 16 tractor trucks and 24 transport vehicles. Deliveries will begin in the first quarter of 2021. The contract is for the HX2 family of vehicles. These trucks are versatile and can be operated in rugged terrain. The vehicles’ flexible design allows the integration of additional force protection solutions for improved crew protection. Previously, the Swedish Procurement Agency, FWV, made orders HX-model logistic corps vehicles, making it one of the most widely used military trucks in the world.

Asia-Pacific

On 23 January, Trade Unions representing about 400,000 of workers employed by state-owned defense enterprises in India started a three-day strike against the privatization of the country’s Defense Industry. The All India Defense Employees Federation (AIDEF), the Indian National Defense Workers’ Federation (INDWF), and Bharatiya Pratiraksha Mazdoor Sangh (BPMS) take part in the protests. The strike mainly affects the state-run Ordnance Factory Board, naval dockyards as well as the Defense Research and Development Organization.

Today’s Video

Watch: Flying Lightning! Next-generation European attack-helicopters taking shape
