Indore: 17-year-old shoots sister for marrying outside caste

Shooter in custody

INDORE: A pregnant woman was shot dead by her younger brother, a 17-year-old, in a village in Betma on Saturday afternoon for marrying a man outside her caste and against the wishes of her family. Now in police custody, he has told cops that he killed his sister because he could no longer take the taunts from community members.The 21-year-old victim and her husband had met at a common workplace in Pithampur industrial area 11 months ago and decided to marry. Facing severe opposition in the family, she eloped and they married on August 23. "Her parents took her back by force and she had to live with them for four months. I went to court to get my wife back," he said. "After she came to my home, her brother threatened to kill her. We did not take it seriously," said the husband, numb with shock. Police have found that the teenager had bought a countrymade pistol and was looking for an opportunity.On Saturday, her husband was away, visiting his uncle, when her brother barged in with a gun. "Two of our neighbours belong to the same community as my wife. They tipped off her brother that I am not at home," the husband said.The pregnant woman was in her living room, speaking with her mother-in-law, when the juvenile burst in with a pistol, put it against her head and shot her.The victim’s brother-inlaw came running on hearing the gunshot but she had collapsed in a pool of blood and the shooter had fled. Neighbours helped take her to a local hospital from where she was shifted to Indore but was declared dead when she arrived at night.The alleged shooter was already in custody by then. ASP Dharmraj Meena said a case has been registered against him. “We are investigating the involvement of two other people accused by the victim’s family,” he said. The teenager has told police that his family was suffering because of his sister’s decision to marry outside the caste, and he was frustrated by the constant taunts from community members.
