Girl Found Dead With A 'Suicide Note' At Kolkata School Where Students Were Allegedly Molested

Mystery shrouds the death of a class 10 student was found dead inside the washroom at GD Birla School in Kolkata.

According to reports, the wrist of the student was slit and a plastic bag was found wrapped around her head, police have sent dead body for the post-mortem.

A three page suicide note was also recovered from the spot in which the student had written that she was suffering from depression due to which she hadn’t slept for the last three months.

Kolkata police joint commissioner Muralidhar Sharma reached to school and questioned the school authorities as well as the parents of the student.

Sharma spoke to News18 where he told that the student left her classroom around 1:30 pm and went to the washroom and when her absence was noticed by the teacher, a search was initiated and she was found dead inside the bathroom.

“She was rushed to a nearby hospital where she was declared brought dead. We have seized a suicide note and blades. Her face was covered with a plastic sheet. It is too early to comment on the matter. All the seized items were sent for a postmortem examination. We are also examining the CCTV footage,” he said.

The forensic team also reached school and collected samples.

“The blades were found inside a plastic container, while one of them was lying outside. We are waiting for the postmortem report to ascertain the facts,” said A Reza, who was one of the members of the forensic expert team.

In the preliminary inquiry, police have found that student was bright in studies and she was also preparing for Indian Statistical Institute entrance examination.

The Parent’s forum spokesperson, demanded an in-depth investigation and raised questions of the alleged lack of security in the school.

Tanmoy Ghosh, spokesperson of a parent’s forum, demanded an in-depth investigation and questioned the alleged lack of security on the school premises.

“Why didn’t the school authorities notice that the girl was missing from her classroom for 45 minutes? Where is the security?” he asked.

In 2017, the school was in news for large-scale protests where parents were protesting amid allegations of a student being sexually molested. Two physical training teachers were arrested under POSCO Act.
