Ride-hailing enters new growth lane as bike mobility takes off

(This story originally appeared in on Jun 23, 2019)

On April 2, entrepreneur Raj Subramaniam tweeted a picture of a damaged scooter owned by two-wheeler rental startup Bounce; it was parked in an alleyway near his office in Bengaluru. He requested the firm to remove the scooter as it was blocking the way.“Ask your customers to be a little responsible. The area’s residents’ association wants the garbage guy to take it away,” Subramaniam wrote. Bounce responded quickly, saying it would clear the obstruction. But on April 4, he again found two abandoned Bounce scooters, which cost about Rs 50,000 apiece, parked on the street. A few weeks later, one of them was wrecked by an annoyed motorist.Instances of vandalism to rented rides and even theft of their parts have become common in the country’s startup capital amid a surge in interest for the two-wheelers. Many people in Bengaluru now hire them for short trips instead of calling a cab, and poor conduct by some users is, for the moment, a minor concern for Bounce and its investors as the company chases market domination and growth.Bounce, the most well-funded two-wheeler startup in India, is competing with Ola-backed Vogo , an aggressive player in the segment.“Because our scooters are branded, they get more attention. More than vandalism, theft is an issue of concern if there is a second-hand market value to it,” Bounce co-founder Vivekanand Hallekare told STOI. “We are working on our custom models (which won’t have second-hand market value).”Many of the firm’s rides have been abandoned on flyovers or carelessly left in the middle of the road and its yellow helmets have been nicked by people for personal use. One estimate pegged the loss of helmets at a few lakh rupees a week. Hallekare is not losing sleep over it. He believes there’s an upside to the problem: helmets contribute to brand building. And their theft can be perhaps viewed as marketing cost.Bounce offers dockless scooters. Users can book one closest to their location and drop it off at any parking site convenient to them. But the service comes with the extra cost of rebalancing scooters to areas where the demand is high. Vogo uses a designated substation model, from where people can hire a bike. The vehicle can be returned to a substation nearest to the point where the trip ends.Vogo’s model may not seem as convenient as Bounce’s, but it helps prevent theft and abandonment. Currently, Bounce operates only in Bangalore, whereas Vogo also has a presence in Hyderabad.While the two startups are betting on the self-drive model, another player, Rapido, is building a bike taxi business, which will compete with Ola and Uber once there is regulatory clarity in the segment. There’s also Yulu, which focuses on environment-friendly bicycles and low-speed electric scooters, which people can rent from designated parking areas in Bengaluru, Pune, Bhubaneswar, and Navi Mumbai for short hops. Recently, Uber entered a pilot to allow people to use its app for booking Yulu rides, indicating its interest in the sector.Ola and Uber made booking cabs simpler and quicker to build a following. The new mobility players, in contrast, are betting on the ubiquity of two-wheelers and the opportunity to appeal to a larger market because of a lower price point. The proportion of car-owning households in the country stands at around 11%, lower than that of twowheeler-owning ones (36%), according to ICE 360° Survey 2016. There are over 210 million people with two-wheeler licences in India.“The bike-sharing and bike taxi market will gain popularity over a period. In terms of the number of rides, the market size will be bigger compared to cabs and car rental market,” said Jaspal Singh of Valoriser Consultants, which tracks the urban mobility space. “However, the ticket size [revenue per trip] will be smaller in comparison.”Vogo and Bounce charge about Rs 4-5 per km, while a Rapido ride costs Rs 10-11 per km as it must pay drivers, apart from maintenance and fuel costs. Yulu e-scooters cost about Rs 5-6 per km. Cab fares are typically over Rs 15 per km.All four firms are scaling up as India’s app-based, ridehailing business moves into a new phase beyond cabs. The number of cab rides in India stand at around 3.65 million a day, a growth of only 4-5% from last year, according to one estimate.Two-wheeler startups are witnessing a huge jump in demand. Bounce says its daily rides have shot up from 500 in September 2018 to over 35,000. Vogo says it has seen similar growth — from 10,000 rides a day in January to 35,000-40,000 rides a day. Both firms expect to have 1,00,000 scooters by year end. Each vehicle is likely to be used for 4-6 rides daily, potentially pushing the market to over 1 million rides a day.Investors tracking the space say these companies are maturing much faster than the players in the cab space.“The demand for affordable transport options is unlimited in a country like India. Companies are constrained by how rapidly they can add supply and manage asset quality,” said Tarun Davda, MD at Matrix Partners India, an early investor in Ola and Vogo. “When we invested in Ola, it was doing 1,000-1,500 rides a day. Companies like Vogo at that stage were already doing ten times the number of rides.”Rapido says it’s doing about 1,00,000 rides a day and is looking to hit the 1-million daily mark by year end. Thanks to its lower price, Rapido, which is present in 40 cities, has seen a faster pickup in small towns. For instance, it reached 1,000 rides a day in Mysuru in just eight months. In Bengaluru, it needed 14 months to arrive at that figure.“Income gap is more pronounced in a market like India and transportation options are not available in every area. We form a bridge between convenience and affordability,” said Rapido co-founder Pavan Guntupalli. “Cabs are a top 5% market, but bikes can appeal to top 35% of the market.”But platforms like Rapido face regulatory hurdles as rules for the bike taxi business are not clear yet. Recently, the Karnataka government seized the firm’s vehicles and ordered it to stop operations. Ola faced a fine of Rs 15 lakh earlier this year for running a bike taxi service in Bengaluru. Despite the challenges, companies are drawing investors.The players in the micromobility market are aware customers’ conduct is an area which requires attention. “The inherent scale challenge is the customer behaviour because you are giving an asset which is worth much more than the deposit or fees the customer is paying,” said Vogo CEO Anand Ayyadurai. The firms are tackling vandalism and theft by making hardware tweaks, imposing fines, threatening service bans, and filing police complaints.The rapid expansion of these platforms comes at a time when the Narendra Modi government is pushing two-wheeler manufacturers to shift to electric vehicles (EVs).“India’s mobility moving to electric is inevitable and twowheelers will rule the cities as 80% of the vehicles in India are two-wheelers. Another global phenomenon is moving from asset ownership to shared mobility,” said Yulu CEO Amit Gupta.Bounce and Vogo have started trialling EV models. Ayyadurai of Vogo said the cost of operating EVs could be Rs 3 per km as against Rs 4-5 per for operating regular scooters. But setting up charging stations and sourcing components for EVs will be a challenge.
