New year celebrations: Two youth killed in drunken brawl

Meanwhile, on Tuesday night Yuvaraj was found lying in a pool of blood near a temple at Murugesan street at Irumbuliyur.

CHENNAI: Two youngsters were killed in a drunken brawl during the New Year celebration in two different incidents at Tambaram and Minjur.

The deceased identified as S Yuvaraj (20) a resident of Irumbuliyur near East Tambaram was the son of Siva, a local Congress functionary. Yuvaraj was pursuing polytechnic second year, said sources.

According to the police, on the early hours of Tuesday, Yuvaraj and his friends were celebrating New Year boozing in the locality when an argument broke out between Yuvaraj and another gang in the same locality. However, the residents sorted the issue and dispersed the crowd.

Meanwhile, on Tuesday night Yuvaraj was found lying in a pool of blood near a temple at Murugesan street at Irumbuliyur. He was rushed to the Chromepet government hospital where he was declared dead on arrival. Hunt is on for the murderers. Inspector Vijayaragavan said Yuvaraj’s father Siva runs many businesses like real estate, marriage hall and shopping complex. Some rivals in the business had planned this murder.

Meanwhile, on Wednesday police arrested four men in connection with the murder. The arrested men were identified as S Mani (25), M Lenin Billa (27), N Raji (25) and A Mukesh (24) from Peerkankaranai. Similarly, a 25-year-old man was murdered in Minjur on Wednesday.

The deceased identified as M Viji (25) a resident of Vannipakkam near Minjur was working in a private company.

“On Monday midnight he had gone to Munichampedu village to celebrate New Year with his friends. During the celebration, his friends picked an argument with a few others from Anuppampattu and the argument ended in a fight when Viji was assaulted by the gang.

He was rushed to the Stanley Government Hospital where he succumbed to injuries on Wednesday morning.

Minjur police registered a case and arrested Palani, Kaviyamathan, Karthik, Saranraj, Arun, Udhayakumar and Deepak all from Chinna Colony.
