Mamata celebrates Syama Prasad Mookerjee, not his vision: BJP mocks West Bengal CM

Senior BJP leader Kailash Vijayvargiya said TMC chief Mamata Banerjee should not only celebrate SP Mookerjee's death anniversary, but also follow his ideologies. (Photo: PTI/Collage)

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya on Sunday mocked West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee for observing the death anniversary of Syama Prasad Mookerjee and claimed that her ideology is not in line with the late political stalwart's thinking.

Vijayvargiya said, "Observing the death anniversary and following his thinking are 2 different things. Mamata ji is observing his death anniversary, I thank her. But she should also follow his thinking so that violence, especially political violence, ends in WB."

He went on to criticise the West Bengal chief minister for the "manner in which she is getting BJP workers killed for vendetta".

BJP general secretary Kailash Vijayvargiya: The manner in which she is getting BJP workers killed for vendetta, is not in line with Dr Shyama Prasad Mukherjee's thinking. His politics was one which unites the nation. Mamata ji's politics is one which divides the nation. https://t.co/C0ebtQNJEl ANI (@ANI) June 23, 2019

"This is not in line with Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee's thinking. His politics was one which unites the nation. Mamata ji's politics is one which divides the nation," Vijayvargiya added.

Vijayvargiya's criticism for Mamata Banerjee comes at a time when the state has been witnessing frequent bouts of violence, resulting in the death of a number of party workers. On June 22, a BJP worker was killed in Bengal's Bishnupur and members of the saffron party blamed TMC members for the killing.

On Saturday, a BJP delegation led by former Union minister and Bardhaman-Durgapur MP SS Aluwalia, visited the violence-affected Bhatpara region and blamed the police in the region for the death of 2 people.

"We spoke to the family members and locals. We got portions of spent self-loading rifle (SLR) bullets used by the police on Thursday to shoot the BJP workers," SS Alhuwalia said.

"The police is saying they fired in the air. If they had done that, how can it hit humans?" he asked. "We will submit our detailed report to party president and Union Home Minister Amit Shah. He is concerned with the ongoing violence in the area," he said.

However, the police and the TMC party members from the region called the observation baseless.

Earlier in the day, BJP working president JP Nadda also questioned Jawaharlal Nehru's decision of not ordering an inquiry into Syama Prasad Mookerjee's death.

He said, "The whole country demanded an inquiry into Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee's death, but Pandit Nehru did not order an inquiry. History is witness to this. Dr. Mookerjee's sacrifice will never go in vain; BJP is committed to this cause."

Many BJP leaders including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Union Home Minister Amit Shah and other prominent figures from the party paid tributes to Mookerjee on his death anniversary.

Bengal BJP chief Dilip Ghosh also paid his respects at the Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee memorial at Keoratala crematorium. While he was happy that even the TMC had recognised the legacy of Mookerjee, his own party colleague Vijayvargiya slammed Mamata for not following the ideology of the Bharatiya Jan Sangh founder.

Meanwhile, TMC minister Sovandeb Chatterjee lashed out the BJP and said Mookerjee would have committed suicide if he had been alive to witness the saffron party's politics today.

Speaking to India Today TV, Chatterjee said, "BJP was trying to project Dr Mookerjee as a parochial communal leader to suit its own divisive politics. Mookerjee was a great son of Bengal who had introduced Islamic Studies as VC of Calcutta University and therefore his real legacy should be projected among the people. If Mookerjee had been alive he would have been ashamed of BJPs politics."

"Syama Prasad Mookherjee would have been extremely hurt; he would have perhaps committed suicide had he witnessed the kind of divisive politics that BJP propagates today. He never wanted such politics in India. He wanted to take everybody along. The Hinduism that Mookerjee spoke of embodies everyone. No believer of Hinduism can indulge BJPs parochial politics," he said.
