Capt hosts Sikh Regiment to mark his family’s 100-yr association with it

kavishakohli@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, June 23

Celebrating his family’s bonds with the Sikh Regiment, Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh on Saturday evening hosted the regiment’s jawans, JCOs and officers to mark 100 years of the Patiala family’s association with the battalion and the Indian Army.

The evening included a cultural programme, which saw the Capt cheering on the jawans and even briefly joining them in a Bhangra performance. He visited the JCO’s Mess, and later joined the regiment officers and guests for dinner at the Officers mess.

The CM met with the families and children of the second battalion of the Sikh regiment (erstwhile 15 Ludhiana Sikhs).

Singh said that it was a matter of “pride and honour” for him and his family to have served the nation as a soldier of the Indian Army.

He said the Army had always been his “first love” and would always remain so.

The Indian Army continued to inspire him to do whatever he could to serve his people, in whichever way he could, Captain Amarinder added.

Capt had served in the 2nd battalion of the Sikh Regiment from 1963 to 1969. Though he left for a short period in between, to take over his family’s responsibilities, his love for the Army brought him back as the Indo-Pak war broke out in 1965.

Before him, his father, Lt. Gen Maharaja Yadvinder Singh served in the regiment in 1935 and was the Colonel of the 2/11 Royal Sikhs and the 2 Sikhs from 1938 to 1950 and 1950-1971 respectively.

Captain Amarinder’s grandfather, Maj Gen Maharaja Bhupinder Singh was the colonel of the 15th Ludhiana Sikhs from 1918-1922 and then of the 2/11 Royal Sikhs from 1922-1938.

On the occasion, the Chief Minster presented a silver memento —a replica of a Sikh regiment soldier in full battle attire, to the battalion —which will be displayed in the Officers Mess.

Capt. Amarinder Singh was accompanied by his family, including his brother, Malwinder Singh, his sisters and brothers-in-law, Heminder Kaur, her husband, K. Natwar Singh and Roopinder Kaur, her husband, Major KS Dhillon from the Armoured Corps. Captain Amarinder’s son, Raninder Singh, his daughter, Jai Inder Kaur, and his grandson, Nirvan Singh was also present.
