Athlete Dutee Chand Wants Kangana Ranaut To Play Her Role In The Biopic, Says She’d Be Perfect!

100m record holder and winner of two Asian Games silver medals Dutee Chand, recently made waves when she revealed that she is in a same-sex relationship. She was lauded by one and all including Ellen DeGeneres. She is, after all, the first Indian sportsperson to openly acknowledge her sexual orientation.

therahnuma.com

As per the reports, several filmmakers are eyeing to make a biopic on Olympic sprinter Dutee Chand. She even revealed Anil Kapoor and filmmaker Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra have approached her for the rights. While she is yet to give her nod of consent, she already has the lead actress in mind, she revealed.

“I think Priyanka Chopra did a very good job in Mary Kom. While I don’t know who will eventually be selected, I think Kangana Ranaut can portray me perfectly on screen, I like her as an actress,” she was quoted as saying by Times Of India.

When Kangana was asked about the same, here’s what she said. “That’s very kind of Duteeji. I am humbled that she feels I am worthy of playing her,” she was quoted as saying by India.com.

Twitter

Acknowledging her same-sex relationship, Dutee Chand had earlier told The Indian Express, "I have found someone who is my soulmate. I believe everyone should have the freedom to be with whoever they decide they want to be with. I have always supported the rights of those who want to be in a same-sex relationship. It is an individual person’s choice."

Dutee Chand was encouraged to open up about her relationship after the decriminalisation of section 377.

"I have always believed that everyone should have the freedom to love. There is no greater emotion than love and it should not be denied. The Supreme Court of India has also struck down the old law. I believe nobody has the right to judge me as an athlete because of my decision to be with who I want. It is a personal decision, which should be respected. I will continue to strive to win medals for India at international meets," Dutee said.

Do you agree with Dutee Chand’s choice (Kangana Ranaut)? Tell us in the comments section below.
