Jassi murder: Punjab cops get mom, uncle’s custody

PATIALA: The Punjab police got the custody of Malkit Kaur Sidhu and Surjit Singh Badesha, the key conspirators in the Jassi murder case, from a five-member Royal Canadian Police team at New Delhi’s Indira Gandhi Airport on Thursday morning and then secured their transit remand after producing them before Patiala House courts in New Delhi. The police will now produce the two accused before the Malerkotla court on Friday.Malkit along with her brother Surjit have has accused of hiring contract killers to eliminate her Canadian-born daughter Jaswinder Kaur Jassi and brutally thrashing her husband, Sukhwinder Singh Mithu in 2000.The Sangrur SSP, Dr Sandeep Garg said a team led by SP (investigations) Gurmeet Singh had the custody of the two Canadian citizens. The team applied for and got their transit remand as there were a number of formalities to be completed before the accused could be brought to Punjab. The two accused will be produced in the court on Friday morning, Dr Garg added.Before being produced before the Delhi court, both Malkit and Surjit underwent a medical examination.The extradition comes 18 years after an FIR was filed about Jassi’s murder at Amargarh police station. Jassi and her husband, who had married secretly in 1999, had been kidnapped from Narike village of Malerkotla in Sangrur on June 8, 2000 and tortured. Jassi’s body was found dumped in a water channel a day later.The Punjab police had arrested contract killers who revealed that they had been hired by Jassi’s mother and uncle to eliminate the two. The Indian authorities had sought extradition of the sister-brother duo from Canada in May 2002, but in 2006 the move was stalled by a Canadian court. The Canadian apex court in 2017 ordered their extradition to India to face murder charges. The decision was again put on hold after the two accused sought judicial review of the decision. Their plea was finally rejected in December 2018, following which they were put on a plane to India on Wednesday.
