Arvind Kejriwal and Delhi Police spar over increased crime rate in capital, Atishi blames BJP

Whose door should be knocked for safety and security of Delhiites?" asked Arvind Kejriwal (left). "We have given 24 hours time to BJP to explain the responsibilities of Home Ministry, LG and Delhi MPs," said Atishi. (Photos: PTI)

Hours after an elderly couple was found murdered along with their maid in the national capital on Sunday, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and the Delhi Police traded barbs over the crime situation in the city.

Arvind Kejriwal slammed the Delhi Police saying that with nine murders reported in 24 hours there has been a "dangerous spurt" in serious crimes in the city.

"Delhi is witnessing a dangerous spurt in serious crimes. An elderly couple and their domestic help murdered in Vasant Vihar. Nine murders reported in the last 24 hours across the city. Whose door should be knocked for the safety and security of Delhiites?" Kejriwal tweeted.

Delhi is witnessing a dangerous spurt in serious crimes. An elderly couple and their domestic help murdered in Vasant Vihar. Nine murders reported in last 24 hours across the city. Whose door should be knocked for safety & security of Delhiites ? Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) June 23, 2019

The Aam Aadmi Party chief's remarks came after an elderly couple who had retired from government service were found murdered in their house along with their maid in south Delhi's Vasant Vihar area. Earlier on Saturday, a tutor murdered his wife and three children in Mehrauli. Another double murder was reported from Dwarka area an hour later.

Responding to the Chief Minister, the Delhi Police on its official Twitter account said: "No such increase in crime in Delhi. Overall heinous crimes down by 10 per cent this year compared to 2018. Similarly heinous crime committed against senior citizens also down by 22 per cent due to preventive efforts of Delhi Police."

No such increase in crime in Delhi. Overall heinous crimes down by 10 % this year compared to 2018. Similarly

heinous crime committed against senior citizens also down by 22% due to preventive efforts of Delhi police. @ArvindKejriwal pic.twitter.com/FaAA5PvLnK Delhi Police (@DelhiPolice) June 23, 2019

"Also, two of the three incidents of murder which Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal is referring have been committed by family members or persons living in the house. Both cases are solved and accused arrested. In the Vasant Vihar case also entry is friendly and police has vital leads," the police said referring to the recent murder cases.

Also two of the three incidents of murder which Hon’ble CM @ArvindKejriwal is referring have been committed by family members or persons living in the house. Both cases are solved & accused arrested. In the Vasant Vihar case also entry is friendly and police has vital leads. Delhi Police (@DelhiPolice) June 23, 2019

Atishi blames BJP

Meanwhile, Aam Aadmi Party member Atishi blamed the BJP and sought its reply over the rising crime rates in Delhi.

"Law and order situation has dropped to a very pathetic level in Delhi. Nine murders have taken place in the past 24 hours. Also, close to 200 gunshots have been reported in the last 30 days. The BJP and all its elected MPs in Delhi are responsible for this," Atishi said.

Talking about the ultimatum given to the BJP, Atishi said, "We have given 24 hours time to BJP to explain the responsibilities of Home Ministry, LG and Delhi MPs. Criminals know that they easily can escape after committing a crime. Now people are afraid of their safety even inside their houses," she further added.

AAP once again played the tune of full statehood for Delhi and demanded the police forces be put under the authority of the state government.

"Home Ministry cannot look everywhere in Delhi. It will have its eye only on Kashmir. Therefore, state police must be accountable to state police," Atishi said.

(input from agencies)
