TMC accuses BJP of acting like 'terrorist organisation', BJP hits back with 'Mamata turning Bengal into Pak'

West Bengal violence | Photo Credit: PTI

Kolkata: With the state reeling under political violence since the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, the ruling Trinamool Congress has accused the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) of acting like a "terrorist organisation" and "importing goons" from other states to spread unrest in West Bengal.

Reacting strongly to the TMC charge, BJP has claimed that the TMC is trying to "convert Bengal into Pakistan".

Claiming that the saffron party was great hurry to capture power, TMC minister and Kolkata Mayor Firhad Hakim said that BJP was importing goons from Bihar and Uttar Pradesh to create unrest in the state.

"The state administration is not at all willing to solve the crisis in Bhatpara. There is a complete lawless situation in the state. They want to convert it into Pakistan, where you are not allowed to chant 'Jai Shri Ram'," BJP state president Dilip Ghosh responded to Firhad Hakim.

The war of words has been triggered after Bhatpara violence where two people died last week when workers believed to be affiliated to the TMC and the saffron party clashed with each other and hurled country-made bombs and stones at each other. Then in the same week again clashes were reported from the same area after a visit by a BJP delegation consisting of Union Minister SS Ahluwalia.

After two people were killed on Thursday last week, BJP president and Home Minister Amit Shah asked the team to visit the area and submit a ground report from the area. However, the moment the team left the area, violent clashes were reported.

Notably, before the saffron party team, a joint delegation of CPI(M) and Congress headed by Leader of Opposition Abdul Mannan and CPI(M) leader Sujan Chakraborty visited the area, demanding a CBI inquiry into the Thursday clashes.

The area has witnessed sporadic violence since the Lok Sabha elections as the local TMC MLA Arjun Singh got elected from BJP's ticket from Barrackpore parliamentary constituency, under which Bhatpara comes falls.
