Want death sentence for her killers: Sukhwinder Singh Mithu

LUDHIANA: Former kabaddi player Sukhwinder Singh Mithu (41) of Kaunke Khosa in Jagraon is happy to know that the two main accused in the murder of his wife have finally been extradited to India.TOI caught up with Mithu on Thursday, when he was on his way to Sangrur to meet his advocate. “I am very happy with the extradition of the two main accused in the murder of my wife, that too after more than 18 years of her killing. I heard that they were extradited from Vancouver yesterday and reached Delhi airport at 4.45am today. I am hopeful that their trial will begin soon in the Sangrur court and want them to be handed capital punishment. Even if it is not capital punishment, they should rot in jail and shouldn’t be given parole so that they know my pain and agony,” he said.Jaswinder Kaur Jassi was daughter of a blueberry orchard owners in Canada and had married Mithu against the wishes of her family in 1999. Jassi, then 25, and Mithu were reportedly attacked by contract killers at Narike village in Sangrur on June 8, 2000. While Jassi was kidnapped and her body dumped in a drain with her throat slit, Mithu was attacked and left to die.The Punjab Police had registered a case in this connection in July 2000 and named Jassi’s mother Malkit Kaur Sidhu and uncle Surjeet Singh Badesha in the FIR for allegedly conspiring to kill her. Seven persons, including then sub-inspector Joginder Singh, were handed life sentence by a Sangrur court. The sentence was upheld by Punjab and Haryana high court and then the Supreme Court.“I’ll not rest till the culprits of my wife’s murder are brought to book. I have received tremendous support from my near and dear ones and from (case) investigating officer Swaran Singh Khanna,” said Mithu. However, he added that he still feared being dragged into false cases “as the accused have tremendous clout”.Mithu, who has thrice been a member of the panchayat, said that he had to sell one-and-a-half acres of land and even take a loan to meet the expenses of his legal battle.“We had earlier sought capital punishment for the duo, but will see what action is taken in such cases in Canada apart from punishment in such cases in India. We have already submitted a chargesheet in the case.... Hopefully the duo will be produced in Sangrur court tomorrow (by police) to seek their police custody,” said IO Swaran Singh Khanna, who is now SP investigation Bathinda and inspector at Amargarh police station where the case was registered. “We have more than sufficient evidence against them (Malkit and Badesha) and expect that they will get life imprisonment for the offence under sections 302 (murder) and 120 (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC,” he added.The IO said Jassi had also filed an affidavit that she had sent to the police by post in which she had alleged her parents would kill her and her husband.
