Attack on hospitals: CM urged to launch awareness campaigns

Will make a representation to the government soon, says doctors’ association

The Andhra Pradesh Government Doctors ’ Association (APGDA) sought Chief Minister Y.S. Jagan Mohan Reddy to launch public campaigns to create awareness against attacking government hospitals, medical and paramedical staff a regular feature with government support.

Speaking to the media here on Sunday, the APGDA State council member and secretary of the Chittoor district division P. Ravi Raju said that the attacks on government hospitals were the result of lack of awareness on the medical emergencies. Though the staff of the government hospitals moot educating the public against this growing trend of attacking hospitals by mobs whenever a casualty takes place, it would not auger well without the direct intervention of the government.

A memorandum with features as to how the government could initiate steps in this direction would be submitted to the State government soon, he said.

‘Lack of facilities’

Referring to the overwhelming response from the medical faculty of both government and private hospitals all over the country against the Kolkata incident, Dr Ravi Raju said that barring super-speciality hospitals and district headquarters hospitals, most of the area hospitals and primary health centres were only equipped with facilities for general ailments.

“During emergencies such as deliveries, road mishap cases, critical cases due to old age and multiple health complications, and suicide attempts, the rural hospitals might come under stress due to lack of facilities to treat them. Whenever a casualty takes place during transportation to speciality hospitals, the family members and relatives of the victims level baseless allegations against the staff and resort to vandalism at the hospitals. This can be effectively avoided with public awareness camps. The government can take steps to form the committees at the mandal levels to undertake these camps,” he said.

‘Fear psychosis’

The APDGA member maintained that the hospitals at village and mandal headquarters should be equipped with some of the advanced facilities such as ventilators, blood banks, separate ambulances and vehicle facility to the duty doctor.

“Attacks on government hospitals and doctors will only create fear psychosis among them. This in turn would prompt them to avoid institutional deliveries and giving first aid in critical cases,” Dr. Ravi Raju said.
