After dry Sunday, rain to return today

Monsoon to hit city by Tuesday, bring moderate showers says Skymet

Mumbaikars can expect rainfall in the next 48 hours due to a cyclonic circulation over Chhattisgarh. Central Maharashtra and Marathwada will also receive rainfall in this period.

Monsoon has advanced in many parts of the State and conditions are favourable for its further advance in the next two days.

After the passage of Cyclone Vayu, Mumbaikars have been sweating it out once again with warm days and nights. On Sunday, Mumbai recorded maximum temperature of 33.6 degrees Celsius and minimum temperature of 28.6 degrees, both two degrees above normal. There was no rain.

Monsoon is running behind schedule by 13 days in the city; its normal date of arrival is June 10. According to private forecaster Skymet, monsoon will arrive in Mumbai by Tuesday. This is the longest wait for monsoon since 2009, when it arrived on June 27. Last year, the onset was on June 9.

On Sunday, the southwest monsoon advanced into some more parts of central Maharashtra and Vidarbha and most parts of Marathwada. Conditions are becoming favourable for advance into remaining parts of Konkan (which includes Mumbai), central Maharashtra, Marathwada and Vidarbha during the next 48 hours.

There is a low pressure area over north Chhattisgarh and neighbourhood that has become less marked, but there is an associated cyclonic circulation. “With the northwestward movement of cyclonic circulation over Chhattisgarh and neighbourhood, enhanced rainfall activity is expected over west coast including Mumbai, central Maharashtra nd Marathwada over next 48 hours,” said a press release issued by the India Meteorological Department.

Skymet has made a similar forecast. “Mumbai rains would increase Monday onwards and we can expect light to moderate rain in Mumbai, which would mark the onset of [monsoon in city] by June 25,” an article on the Skymet website said. It also said that monsoon would not make a thumping start but would bring moderate showers.

So far, the city has received 165mm rainfall, a deficit of 167mm. Last year by June 22, Mumbai had received 408mm rainfall.

Meanwhile, on Sunday, Ratnagiri, Kolhapur, Sangli, Ahmednagar, Aurangabad received good rainfall.
