Elderly couple, help killed in Delhi's Vasant Vihar

Couple likely killed in sleep

NEW DELHI: Residents of Vasant Apartments in south Delhi’s upscale Vasant Vihar woke up to a horrific triple murder on Sunday morning. In what is being seen as a robbery bid gone awry, an elderly couple and their 20-year-old medical attendant were found brutally killed in their flat, with multiple injuries from sharp-edged weapons.The couple was identified as Vishnu Mathur, 79 and his wife Shashi Mathur, 75, while the attendant was Khushbu Nautiyal. They were found dead in two rooms, with Khushbu having been stabbed at least four-five times. The assailants appear to have strangled the couple before slitting their throats.One of Khushbu’s male friends was detained on Sunday evening but police refused to reveal whether he was being treated as a suspect. Cops are scanning their mobile communication.The murders were discovered around 8.35am, when the couple’s domestic help, Babli, came to work but found the main door of their first floor flat open. The second wooden door was latched from outside. When the maid stepped in, she found all the lights switched off and Khushbu lying on the floor.The maid raised an alarm and alerted the neighbours, who called up the cops. The couple was found in a pool of blood on their bed indicating that they were killed in their sleep.Inspection of the crime scene revealed that cupboards in the couple’s room had been opened. The murders are suspected to have taken between 10pm and 5am. Half-empty bottles of cold drinks and water were found, indicating that a person known to either the attendant or the couple could be involved. The bodies were later shifted to a hospital where an autopsy will be conducted to ascertain the exact cause of death. The police have interviewed the Mathurs’ daughter, Anita Bhatnagar, 52, for clues.Investigating teams are focusing on identifying and questioning people known to the three victims. CCTV footage from cameras inside the housing society are also being analysed to track down the suspect.Cops also aim to establish the escape route taken by the suspects as there are four entry and exit points in the locality. A team of forensic experts also visited the scene of crime and has collected samples such as footprints, hair strands and other biological evidence.
