Taj Mahal monkey menace: CISF men resort to using ‘Gulels’

To battle the increasing monkey menace at the Taj Mahal, CISF jawans will carry catapults (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Agra: An addition to the weaponry of personnel from Central Industrial Security Forces (CISF) will be made as they will now be provided with catapults to fight against monkeys. To ward off monkeys at the Taj Mahal, the personnel will now be armed with catapults or slingshots to deal with the monkeys efficiently.

According to reports, a team of twelve jawans from the CISF have been provided with catapults or 'gulels' at the east and the west gates of the Taj Mahal. Unwanted visitors, the monkeys have resulted in quite a few menacing incidents at the monument which has resulted in the aforementioned decision.

Also Read: Mumbai: 'Killed her after she turned down demand for sex', says accused who killed 20-year-old model

Some of the recent incidents highlighted an increasing rate of menace caused by monkeys. On July 2018, a monkey attacked Australian tourist inside the monument, causing him injuries. Another incident took place on May 22 when two French tourists were bitten by monkeys on their way to the main crypt.

CISF commandant Brij Mohan told the Times of India that the decision has been prompted by constant attacks on tourists. He also said that because the tourists are not allowed to enter the monument with food, they dump it in the dustbins which attracts the attention of the monkeys. He later added that the slingshots will be used only to scare the animals away.

The Wildlife Act prohibits any attack or rounding up on monkeys without sufficient precautions. A senior official of Archaeological Society of India (ASI) said their initial idea of deploying langurs in the monument to catch the monkeys failed after which they came up with this plan.

Rajiv Saxena, Secretary of Tourism Guild Association appreciated the decision and encouraged the same. He added that similar incidents have been reported in the past. He recalled an incident that happened in August 2016 when a monkey snatched a tourist's bag and tore the currency notes that were in it. He laid emphasis on safety and hoped to prevent similar incidents in the past.
