Delhi: Woman shot at by man who had eloped with her granddaughter

A 55-year-old woman enjoying bonfire outside her house was shot at allegedly by a youth in the Uttam Nagar area during the New year eve. Police said that the entire incident has been captured in a CCTV installed in the vicinity of the house.

According to the police, the incident was reported late on Monday night at around 12.30 am when the victim, Shama Devi, was sitting with her daughter-in-law and other relatives near a bonfire outside her house.

The accused parked his bike near the victim's house and walked towards her holding a pistol behind his back. He shot at her from the point-blank range and fled.

"The suspect seen in the CCTV has been identified as Zafar alias Peetal, a resident of the same locality. He is absconding after the incident. He was previously involved in several criminal cases including an attempt-to-murder case,'' said a senior police officer.

A PCR call was received at 12.30 am from the Uttam Nagar main market area regarding a woman who was shot at by a youth. A PCR reached the spot and the injured was taken to Tarak Hospital located in the vicinity.

"The injured woman was shot in the abdomen. She is in a critical condition and undergoing treatment," added the police officer.

During the investigation, it was found that around three years ago Shama Devi's granddaughter eloped with Zafar. The couple was traced by the girl's family members and separated. Around a year back, the girl was married to another man.

"When the girl was traced along with Zafar, the family members had thrashed Zafar and blamed him for misguiding their daughter. He might be looking for revenge as he thought Shama Devi was responsible for his break-up and marrying her granddaughter to some other man," said a police officer.

Police said that neither Zafar nor Shama's family members reported any incident or threat from any person at the local police station.

"We have registered an FIR under IPC section 307(attempt to murder) and Arms Act at Uttam Nagar police station. The suspect has been identified with the help of CCTV footage. He will be arrested soon," said a police officer.

INVESTIGATION DETAILS

During the investigation, it was found that around three years ago Shama Devi’s granddaughter eloped with Zafar. The couple was traced by the girl’s family members and separated. Around a year back, the girl was married to another man.
