Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray shoots 'warning' to those with CM ambitions

With fresh sniping over the chief minister's chair after the Assembly elections, Shiv Sena has resumed a blow-hot, blow-cold attitude towards its ally, the Bharatiya Janata Party.

Party president Uddhav Thackeray, while speaking at a function at Shrirampur in Ahmednagar district on Sunday, warned that farmers would teach a lesson to those with a burning aspiration to become the chief minister. He was, however, quick to stress the Sena-BJP relationship was still going strong.

Dismissing media reports about which party's candidate would be perched on the coveted seat, he said he "was not bothered about this", as he was "committed to you (the people)."

"I will tell those who have chief ministerial ambitions that if the anger and fire in their (peoples') minds are not tackled, it will assume such proportions that it may burn down positions of power (satteche asan) and reduce them to ashes," he roared. He added that rulers who failed to address the issues troubling farmers, women and citizens at large are "nalayak (useless)." "Everyone feels I am criticising the government, " he said, to tone down the barb almost immediately, "I am not talking against the government.

"Now, we are together. The Shiv Sena and BJP have joined hands. You all have voted for this alliance... I am not criticising unnecessarily. When we formed an alliance, one point put forth by me, was of loan waivers." He then went on to assure that he would ensure the construction of a Ram temple at Ayodhya.

On Sunday, Uddhav also inducted Dushyant, the son of former Congress minister from Nagpur, Satish Chaturvedi, into the party.

After the two parties overcame their differences to announce an alliance for the Lok Sabha, Shiv Sena leaders claimed they would be the senior ally and occupy the chief ministerial seat after the Assembly polls. However, BJP leaders made it clear that they did not agree. Adding fuel to fire, Yuva Sena leader Varun Sardesai, a cousin of Yuva Sena chief Aaditya Thackeray, claimed the two parties would share the post for two-and-a-half years.

Senior BJP ministers, such as Water Resources and Medical Education minister Girish Mahajan, have stressed that the BJP will retain the post.
