Always in favour of talks as means of resolution, Hurriyat (M) reacts to J-K Governor's statement

New Delhi:

Hurriyat Conference (M) led by senior separatist Mirwaiz Umar Farooq on Sunday said the Hurriyat has always been in favour of talks "as means of resolution." This came after Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik last week said the Hurriyat Conference was willing to enter into a dialogue with the government.



“We have not said anything (new), we have always been saying this,” Hurriyat (M) said in a statement to a local daily Greater Kashmir. “Kashmiris’ being the most affected party for the past 72 years, naturally want its resolution. Since its inception when all parties came together under one umbrella, the Hurriyat has maintained and reiterated that engagement and dialogue among stakeholders is the best and most peaceful means of resolution of Kashmir issue and not force,” it said.



ALSO READ | For 21 days, Indian Navy hunted for Pakistani submarine after Balakot strike



Earlier, the Governor had said, "The Hurriyat Conference was not willing to talk. Ram Vilas Paswan was standing at their door (in 2016), but they were not ready to talk, Malik said. "Today, they are ready for talks and want to hold dialogue. There is a change in everyone."



"I feel good that the temperature (of the situation) has come down significantly since the day I arrived here," he said while speaking at a function in Srinagar during the distribution of free-to-air Doordarshan set-top boxes to border residents.

"We do not feel good when a youth is killed, we want to bring him back. There is a lot of thought being given as to what kind of scheme is needed to bring them back. But when someone opens fire, the security forces will fire back. They would not present a bouquet of flowers," Malik said.

He also emphasised that it was not easy to assess the situation of Kashmir while sitting elsewhere in the country.



"When I visit Delhi, there are so many people who claim to be Kashmir hand. I ask them when were you in Kashmir. They say 15 years ago," he said.



ALSO READ | Encounter breaks out in Jammu and Kashmir’s Shopian, 4 terrorists killed

"I am in touch with around 200 people and from them I have come to know about the problems. The diseases have been diagnosed; the diseases are plenty but these can be cured. The narrative can be changed, the prerequisite is that the intentions are good and sincere on both sides," he added.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
