Agitated residents of Classic Paradise Layout protest pathetic state of roads

Classic Paradise Layout

BWSSB

Bengaluru

By Bejoy SebastianAgitated by the year-long digging at, residents take to the roadsAgitated by the year-long road digging at Classic Paradise Layout, residents demonstrated their anger, blocking the Begur Road for two hours, on June 7. The road has been dug inside-out for an entire year by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (), for the pipe-laying work. Despite various news reports and repeated complaints by the residents, no action was taken to expedite the work.However, the protest seemed to have jolted authorities and invoked some reaction to the cause. Corporator M Anjanappa and other officials of BruhatMahanagara Palike (BBMP), BWSSB and the contractors arrived on the spot of the protest and promised speeding up of the work. They also assured water will be pumped through the pipes, on experimental basis, with July 10 as the deadline.Earlier, BWSSB has assured completion of the pipe-laying work by May-end. BWSSB Assistant Engineer, Vinaya Kumari had promised residents that the entire layout will be completed with the water line and the UGD (Underground) line completed in all respects, including the removal and compaction of excess earth, by the end of May 2019. They failed to keep up with their promises, forcing residents to take to the streets.The roadblock affected traffic in Hosur Road, Electronic City Flyover and all the cross-roads leading to it. Aroud 10 police personnel came to the spot. L & T company officials, who have the contract for the pipi-laying work, also came to the location to pacify the agitated residents. Videos of the authorities giving assurances were also shot by the residents as a proof.“Three years ago, the authorities promised to fix the Cauvery water and sanitary lines. They only began the work two years later and have brought the entire area to a standstill. Water-logging is regular feature of the area. Vehicles are frequently get stuck here, we have to walk through muck. We have tried every way of bringing notice to this area, but our efforts were all in vain. The only way to get them to notice this was to take to the roads. Now, the corporator and other authorities have promised to speed-up for the restoration of the road,” said Kiran Kumar, a resident of the layout.
