New deputy commissioner’s office in Mysuru waits for its occupants

MYSURU: It has been more than 15 months since former chief minister Siddaramaiah inaugurated the new office for the Mysuru deputy commissioner in Siddarthanagar, but the new building continues to wait for its official occupants. The new DC office was among the most ambitious projects launched by the Siddaramaiah-led government in Mysuru. A 15-acre plot in Siddarthanagar was chosen as the site for the structure that would house those entrusted with the administration of the district.Pune-based Shirke Construction Technologies was awarded the contract to complete the new structure, which was completed at the cost of Rs 67 crore. The state government’s decision to construct a new building for the district administration motivated by a need to de-clutter the old deputy commissioner’s office, which is a centre for a wide range of services, including Aadhaar. With two offices, the idea was to divide the many departments under the umbrella of the district administration. The idea is to have the district registrar’s office, the chambers of the muzrai or the endowment department on the ground floor, while housing the deputy commissioner’s room on the first floor. The second floor of the building will house the offices of the backward and minorities’ welfare, mines and geology, fisheries and excise departments.Mysuru district in-charge minister GT Devegowda , on being informed about the issue, said that there were certain problems involving shifting of equipment and machines. “I have spoken to DC Sankar about occupying the new office, besides discussing the issue with the secretary concerned. We will make sure that the new office is occupied by the officials in a phased manner,” Devegowda told TOI.Sankar confirmed that construction of the first phase of the new building had been completed. “The additional deputy commissioner Anuradha had held a meeting with the officials in the district administration about shifting our offices, but she was transferred when the discussions were still under way. People will have to move into the new office at some point in time. We are hoping to shift offices of two or three departments to the new building by the end of the month. Those departments presently working out of rented offices will be moved to the new building first, besides those to which public appeal to on a regular basis such as the social welfare department. Once the building is completed entirely, all the departments, and the DC’s chambers will move into the new structure,” he added.However, what is troubling to see is the state that the premises of the new DC office has fallen into. Negligence of the officials concerned has resulted in the building’s surroundings getting infested with feeds, and rodents. Residents have also complained of the premises turning into a den for miscreants, who are often spotted here drinking and indulging in other nefarious activities.The total constructed area of the building comes up to 23,000sqm, with a basement sprawling across 9,150sqm. The ground floor is spread across 4,720sqm, the constructed area of both the first floor and second floor is 4,500sqm.
