Arvind Kejriwal says 'dangerous spurt' in serious crimes in Delhi – Here’s how police responded

File picture: Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: A war of words erupted between Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal and the Delhi Police on Sunday over the crime situation in the national capital.

“Delhi is witnessing a dangerous spurt in serious crimes,” said Kejriwal, hours after an elderly couple was found killed along with their maid in South Delhi's Vasant Vihar area yesterday.

All three victims - Vishnu Mathur (78), Shashi Mathur (75), and Khushbu (20) - had their throats slit.

Saying that nine murders were reported in the last 24 hours across the city, Kejriwal asked: “Whose door should be knocked for safety and security of Delhiites?”

Here is his tweet:

Delhi is witnessing a dangerous spurt in serious crimes. An elderly couple and their domestic help murdered in Vasant Vihar. Nine murders reported in last 24 hours across the city. Whose door should be knocked for safety & security of Delhiites ? — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) June 23, 2019

Responding to the Aam Aadmi Party chief, the Delhi Police alleged that “overall heinous crimes were down by 10 per cent in 2019 compared to 2018.”

Asserting that there was no rise in crime in Delhi, police further tweeted that “heinous crime committed against senior citizens also down by 22% due to preventive efforts of Delhi police”.

No such increase in crime in Delhi. Overall heinous crimes down by 10 % this year compared to 2018. Similarly

heinous crime committed against senior citizens also down by 22% due to preventive efforts of Delhi police. — Delhi Police (@DelhiPolice) June 23, 2019

Also two of the three incidents of murder which Hon’ble CM @ArvindKejriwal is referring have been committed by family members or persons living in the house. Both cases are solved & accused arrested. In the Vasant Vihar case also entry is friendly and police has vital leads. — Delhi Police (@DelhiPolice) June 23, 2019

Since taking charge in 2015, Delhi CM Kejriwal has been embroiled in a bitter power tussle with the Centre as well as the Lieutenant-Governor over control of Delhi Police in the national capital.

Meanwhile, AAP leader Atishi on Sunday blamed the BJP for the rising crime rate in Delhi.

"Law and order situation has dropped to a very pathetic level in Delhi. Nine murders have taken place in the past 24 hours. Also, close to 200 gunshots have been reported in the last 30 days. The BJP and all its elected MPs in Delhi are responsible for this," Atishi told news agency ANI.

She added: "We have given 24 hours' time to BJP to explain the responsibilities of Home Ministry, L-G and Delhi MPs. Criminals know that they easily can escape after committing a crime. Now people are afraid of their safety even inside their houses."
