Indian Air Force recreates ‘Tiger Hill attack’ at Gwalior Air Base to mark 20 years of Kargil War - WATCH

IAF recreates ‘Tiger Hill attack’ at Gwalior Air Base | Photo Credit: ANI

Gwalior: Marking the 20 years of the Kargil War, the Indian Air Force on Monday recreated the ‘Tiger Hill attack’ at the Gwalior Air Base in Madhya Pradesh and displayed aircraft used during 'Operation Vijay'.

"As part of the commemorative event at Gwalior, several activities have been planned. There will be symbolic recreation of the Tiger Hill attack that took place during the Kargil War in 1999. And, there would be a static display of Mirage-2000 and other aerial assets used during the war," a senior IAF official had said on Sunday.

The event was attended by several gallantry award winners, both serving and retired, who had participated in ‘Operation Vijay’.

#WATCH Commemorating 20 years of #KargilWar, Indian Air Force at Gwalior Air Base recreates Tiger Hill attack and display aircraft used during 'Operation Vijay'. #MadhyaPradesh pic.twitter.com/K3kh4FPnXW — ANI (@ANI) June 24, 2019

A function has also been planned at the strategic base next month where Air Chief Marshal B S Dhanoa will be the Chief Guest.

According to an official statement from IAF, this year, the 20th anniversary of victory in ‘Operation VIJAY’ is being celebrated with the theme ‘Remember, Rejoice and Renew’.

“This year, We ‘remember’ our martyrs, by revisiting the sacrifices and instilling pride and respect among us, we ‘rejoice’ by celebrating the victory in Kargil and we ‘renew’ our resolve to safeguard the honour of the Tricolour,” the statement said.

In 1999, the Indian armed forces successfully dislodged the Pakistani soldiers from the strategic hill in the Drass-Kargil area, displaying exceptional valour.

Indian Air Force’s Mirage-2000 also helped the armed forces defeat the enemy in the India-Pakistan war by attacking the enemy targets bunkered in at the Tiger Hills.

Several events are also planned in Delhi and Dras in Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian Army for the anniversary celebrations which will be spread over three days from July 25 to 27.

"However, as part of the build up to the main event, numerous activities have been planned to be organised all over the country from the first week of July," an official said, news agency PTI reported.

The celebrations will begin from Delhi on July 14 with the illumination of a ''Victory Flame'' from the National War Memorial here, which would traverse through 11 towns and cities to finally culminate at Dras where it will be merged with the eternal flame at the ‘Kargil War Memorial’.

The celebrations are being planned with an aim to evoke a feeling of patriotism through nationwide campaigns especially amongst youth and to pay tribute to the soldiers.

"The Kargil War will always be remembered for its strategic and tactical surprises, the self-imposed national strategy of restraint in keeping the war limited to Kargil-Siachen sectors, and the swiftly executed tri-services military strategy and plans," the Army had said.
