Pakistan did not cross India’s airspace after Balakot strike: IAF chief BS Dhanoa

IAF chief BS Dhanoa speaking on Balakot air strike | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Indian Air chief Marshal BS Dhanoa on Monday asserted that Pakistan “did not come into our airspace” after the Balakot air strike and that “none of them crossed the Line of Control.”

Addressing reporters on the occasion of the 20th anniversary of the Kargil War, Dhanoa said that Pakistan also failed in its objective to target India’s Army bases after the Balakot airstrike while India had managed to achieve its military goal of striking the terror camps in Pakistani territory.

He said, “On Balakot let me tell you, Pakistan didn't come into our airspace. Our objective was to strike terror camps and theirs was to target our Army bases. We achieved our military objective. None of them crossed the Line of Control."

#WATCH BS Dhanoa, Indian Air Chief Marshal says,"On Balakot let me tell you, Pakistan didn't come into our airspace. Our objective was to strike terror camps & their's was to target our army bases. We achieved our military objective. None of them crossed the Line of Control." pic.twitter.com/l5pt3xFcqa — ANI (@ANI) June 24, 2019

On February 26, Indian Air Force aircrafts had targeted terror camps of the Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror groups, resulting in the deaths of several terrorists. The air strike had been executed after a JeM operative had rammed an explosive-laden vehicle into a CRPF convoy in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14, killing at least 40 security personnel.

A day later, on February 27, a couple of Pakistani Air Force jets, including F-16 aircrafts, had tried to breach the Indian air space in a bid to target military bases in Indian territory. However, they were chased out by IAF jets.

Speaking on the issue of Pakistan closing down its air space following the February 27 incident, Dhanoa highlighted that Indian Air Force had "never stopped" the country's civil air traffic.

“They (Pakistan) have closed their airspace that is their problem. Our economy is vibrant and air traffic is a very important part and you have noticed that the Air Force has never stopped our civil air traffic,” the IAF Air chief Marshal said.

He added, "Only on 27 February (2019) we had stopped Srinagar airspace for 2-3 hours, rest of the days, we didn't allow tension with Pakistan to dictate our civil aviation because our economy is much bigger and much stronger than Pakistan."

The IAF chief also said that the An-32 aircraft will continue to fly the mountains and "there was no other option," news agency IANS quoted him as saying.

His statement came almost 20 days after an An-32 aircraft, flying from Jorhat in Assam to Menchuka in Arunachal Pradesh, crashed on the hills in Arunachal Pradesh. All 13 Indian Air Force (IAF) onboard the plane were killed in the crash on June 3.

Meanwhile, speaking on the anniversary of the Kargil War, Dhanoa said, "Purpose of our attack has always been to show our resolve and capability, and the message has been given to the person who is being hit."

Gwalior Air Base recreated the Kargil War on Monday and constructed models of the mountain peaks which the Indian Army recaptured in the historic battle, on occasion of the 20th anniversary of the Kargil War.
