27-year-old Hyderabad man killed in road accident in San Francisco

27-year-old Hyderabad man killed in road accident in San Francisco

Investigating officials said that Waseem died on the spot after a speeding car hit the vehicle he was travelling in.

news Death

A Hyderabad youth was killed in a road accident in the United States on Sunday after another vehicle collided with the car he was travelling in. The incident took place in San Francisco’s Bayview district. The deceased has been identified as 27-year-old Syed Waseem Ali.

The accident took place on June 23 at 1.15 am local time at the intersection of Third Street and Paul Avenue. Investigating officials said that Waseem died on the spot after a speeding car hit the vehicle he was travelling in. Another woman who was also injured in the accident succumbed to her injuries at a local hospital.

Waseem’s family and Majlis Bachao Tehreek (MBT) leader Amjed Ullah Khan requested Dr S Jaishankar, Union Minister for External Affairs, Government of India, for necessary help in shifting the mortal remains of Waseem back to Hyderabad.

They also asked the Centre to provide help in expediting the visa process for family members who planned to travel to the US to finish legal formalities. They have requested Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrasekhar Rao and the US Consulate in Hyderabad to help them.

This is far from the first such case to be reported this year, as just last month a young man from Hyderabad died in the US after a hit-and-run accident in North Carolina state in the early hours of May 11. The man, identified as 25-year-old Gongalla Sahith Reddy, was pursuing his higher education and had moved to the US around two-and-a-half years ago.

In March this year, a man from Telangana who was pursuing an orthodontics course in the US was killed in a multi-vehicle crash in Chicago on the Veterans Memorial Tollway. The deceased was identified as 32-year-old Arshad Mohammed hailing from Vikarabad. He was reported to be pursuing an advanced medical course at the University of Illinois and was staying with his sister at Bloomingdale.
