Ganga and ganda naali: Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury on motion of thanks, dares Modi govt to jail Rahul and Sonia

Congress leader in the Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury launched a counter-offensive on the government in the Lok Sabha today with jibes on Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Replying to the motion of thanks moved by Pratap Singh Sarangi, Chowdhury said the government has turned blind eye to the issues like the water crisis in the country and deaths of children due to encephalitis in Bihar.

Chowdhury targeted Pratap Singh Sarangi for saying that not much was done before the Modi government came to power. He said Sarangi is a good leader and good speaker but he went overboard in praising Narendra Modi. "I also respect Narendra Modi for being the prime minister of the country," said Chowdhury but Sarangi and other went on to worship him.

The Congress leader’s remark led to sharp comeback from the leaders on the treasury benches with some throwing a jibe of "Indira is India" slogan by a Congress leader during 1970s. Chowdhury responded by saying, "No, they did not say something like Indira is India and India is Indira" but the comparison was made with Vivekananda for sharing name "Narendra".

Chowdhury said, "Ganga and ganda naali (dirty drainage) can’t be compared" to which ruling party members objected and demanded that the words be expunged. The chair calmed down the agitating ruling party members saying if any unparliamentary word was used by Chowdhury it would be expunged from the record.

During his reply on the motion of thanks, Chowdhury dared the government to take action against Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi. He said the Congress is sitting in the Opposition due to 2G and other things.

"Did you manage to catch anybody in 2G and coal allocation scam? Did you manage to send Sonia Gandhiji and Rahul Gandhiji behind the bars? You came to power by calling them thieves, then how are they sitting in Parliament? Why are not they in jail," Chowdhury said.
