Lynchings Continue In 2019 As Well, This Is Not The 'New India' Most Of Us Want To See

The 24-year-old Tabrez Ansari was assaulted by a mob in Jharkhand on suspicion of theft on June 18. He succumbed to injuries on June 22 at a local hospital. The attack had a clear communal tone as the victim was forced to say "Jai Shri Ram" and "Jai Hanuman".

The state police should also be held accountable for his death because despite being thrashed badly by a mob which incurred injuries to Ansari, police didn’t take him to hospital and only took to hospital on June 22 when his condition deteriorated.

Seldom has a month passed in last five years when we didn’t get to read the news of any individual being lynched and whether it’s the whatsapp and social media videos spreading rumours about child lifting or cow vigilantes giving justice on the spot, the victims have been killed by mob high of either religious frenzy or blind fear cum love for their children.

22 killed in just two months

The mob frenzy had gone berserk last year when 22 people were killed between May 10 and July 2 last in 16 different cases and most of the cases were related to child lifting rumours where the mob decided to do on the spot justice and one major cases came from Maharashtra on July 1, 2018 where five people who were suspected to be part of child lifter gang were killed by village in Dhule district of Maharashtra.

reuters

The social media has a buzz that a child lifting gang was active in the area and there the villagers took law and order in their hand.

The ferocity of the public can be fathomed by a single incident in Assam that took place in July 1, where a mentally disturbed woman was tied to a pole and tortured by a mob in suspicion of being a child lifter. IndiaToday had reported.

The cow-vigilantes running riot

Mohammed Akhlaw, Pehlu Khan, Rakhbar Khan and many more- the list is quite big and we are certain a few name even if we compile it with full alertness. Majority of the lynching that have been happening in India are related to cow-vigilantes and their knack to doing quick justice.

AFP/Representational Image

The video of Pehlu Khan, a dairy farmer from Mewat, Haryana, thrashed by these self-proclaimed gau-rakshaks in Alwar district shook the nation. The victim died days later in hospital and police due to media pressure arrested some people and gave them clean chit later and removed their names from the FIR.

Pehlu Khan, video screenshot

According to IndiaSpend factchecker, since 2014, there have a total of 124 incidents of violence where cow-vigilantes were involved in which out of 302 victims, 47 people were killed in the violence while 172 received serious injuries in the assault inflicted upon them by the cow vigilantes.

PTI

Last year in Bulandshahr, UP, a police inspector was also killed in the violence where violence erupted after cow slaughter of reportedly seen by villagers in the fields.

Muslims are the main victims

Though the mobs are often called blind as they can’t who’s who, what’s right and wrong, while majority of the victims of lynching in cases where social media and whatsapp rumours of child lifting led to killings of the people were Hindus, the Muslims have been on the receiving of mob wrath in majority of the cases in cow-vigilantes related violence followed by the Dalits.

bccl

According to the factchecker, 56 percent of the victims where cow-vigilantes were involved were Muslims where as the religious affiliation of 18 percent of the victims were unknown which is again a surprise, the Dalits were victims in 9 percent of the cases followed by other Hindus (9 percent), Adivasi (2 percent), Christians (2 percent), Tribal (1 percent), Sikh (1 percent) and others (1 percent).
