[WATCH] Kareena Kapoor Khan takes a dip with her hair stylist and crew in BTS photo from new commercial

Kareena Kapoor Khan takes a dip with her stylist in BTS pic | Photo Credit: Instagram

It has been a year since we saw Kareena Kapoor Khan on the big screen. Thankfully enough, she recently made her small screen debut by joining Dance India Dance: Battle of the Champions as one of the judges on the dance reality television series.

While there's a lot of time to go for the release of her next Bollywood project Good News, her restless fans may find respite in this new television commercial for a soap brand that she endorses.

The Veere Di Wedding actress' hairstylist Yianni Tsapatori recently took to social media to share a behind-the-scenes click from the ad shoot, as well as a video of the advertisement. In the picture, Bebo can be seen taking a dip with her crew and the stylist. He captioned the Instagram post, "And that’s how it’s done #bts #kareenakapoor #yiannitsapatori #lux #luxindia #behindthescenes." Here, without further ado, check out the post in question below.

He also shared the new television commercial video on the photo-sharing platform, check out the same below.

Beautiful, isn't it? Well, talking about the movies, the 38-year-old actress has in her pipeline, Good News, wherein she would be seen sharing screen space with Akshay Kumar, Kiara Advani and Diljit Dosanjh, is slated to hit the theatres on December 27, 2019.

She would then go on to play a cop in Irrfan Khan and Radhika Madan's Angrezi Medium, which is a sequel to the 2017 movie Hindi Medium being helmed by Homi Adajania. Talking about her role in the film, Kareena had told Rajeev Masand, "It's going to be quite a surreal experience. It's not a romantic pairing. It's a small but interesting part and also I think that I just wanted to get out of my comfort zone and do a movie that would throw me into a different milieu and I'd see how it goes. Whether it's Homi or it's Irrfan and Deepak, I think it's all a different world for me to be a part of so that's going to be interesting."

She recently also bagged the role of the Aamir Khan's leading lady in Advait Chandan's Lal Singh Chaddha, the official Hindi remake of Tom Hanks' Oscar-winning 1994 movie Forrest Gump. She would also be seen in Karan Johar's Takht alongside Janhi Kapoor, Bhumi Pednekar, Anil Kapoor, Vicky Kaushal, Alia Bhatt and Ranveer Singh. Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
