Cost of animosity: 10 lives in 12 years

JALANDHAR/BATHINDA: Mahinderpal Bittu was not the first casualty of the tension between Sikhs and Sirsa-based Dera Sacha Sauda . This animosity started after dera head Gurmeet Ram Rahim allegedly imitated 10th Sikh master Guru Gobind Singh and offered 'Jam-e-insan' at Salabatpura branch of the sect in Bathinda in May 2007. People have lost lives on both sides, apart from several Sikhs facing cases for "planning to kill Sirsa Dera chief".In 12 years, many clashes took place between dera followers and Sikh bodies. The heartburn among Sikhs increased after a police investigation found that some sect followers were behind three incidents of sacrilege in 2015, each at Bargari, Mallke and Gurusar villages. These three incidents happened over a few days.The first casualty of the dispute between Sikhs and the dera was reported in May 2007, when Sikh activist Kamaljeet Singh of Sunam was shot dead in a clash in Sunam. At the time, 16 dera followers were booked. While one accused died during trial and another was declared proclaimed offender, 14 of them faced the trial and all were acquitted in September 2013. Harminder Singh Dabwali, a Sikh, was killed in a clash in May 2008 in Dabwali. Police booked five dera followers, but all of them were acquitted on October 10, 2013, by a Sirsa court.Meanwhile, seven Sikhs were booked for damaging properties of dera followers and all seven were convicted and sentenced to 10 years in jail in July 2013. One Balkar Singh was killed allegedly by bodyguards of the Sirsa dera chief and the act was even caught in a video later handed over by SGPC to then Maharashtra deputy CM, R R Patil. The video clip showed Balkar inside a car when he was shot. SGPC pointed that Balkar was not even part of any "alleged demonstration or rioting", but was inside a car when he was killed in the "unprovoked firing" and had demanded a case against Sirsa dera chief. Later, 13 accused were acquitted. Balkar's family had demanded a CBI inquiry but to no avail.Advocate Jaspal Singh Manjhpur said that one Gurdev Singh of village Mansur Deva near Ferozepur was injured in police firing during a clash in 2007 and he later succumbed to injuries. Lilly Kumar Alampur Mandra was the first sect follower to be killed. He was attacked by four persons on July 29, 2009, when he was returning home on his bike, after appearing in court in a clash case.Dera follower Amritpal was killed in clashes after Lily's murder. Two dera men, a father-son duo, were shot dead when they were closing the canteen at 'Naam Charcha Ghar' at Jagera village, Khanna, on February 25, 2017. Dera follower Gurdev Singh was killed at Burj Jawahar Singh Wala village, Faridkot, on June 13, 2016, and Gurdev, who owned a grocery shop near the village gurdwara from where a Bir of Guru Granth Sahib was stolen on June 1, 2015, was shot at his shop.
