J’khand lynching: 2 cops suspended, 4 more held

Two Jharkhand police officers were on Monday placed under suspension and a probe was initiated against a third official in connection with an alleged mob lynching incident in Seraikela-Kharsawan district, a senior police officer said.

Md Tabrez Alam, 24, died at Seraikela Sadar Hospital on June 22, four days after he was allegedly beaten up by a group of villagers at Dhatkidih. The mob accused him of theft and allegedly forced him to say, “Jai Sri Ram”, according to a report submitted by the district administration to the state home secretary.

The police also arrested four more accused in connection with the case. The main accused, Pappu Mandal, was nabbed on Sunday. The two police personnel, both officers-in-charge (OCs), have been suspended for their alleged failure to report the incident to higher officials on time and lodge an FIR on the day of the incident itself, top police officials said on Monday.

A special investigation team (SIT), headed by inspector TN Singh, has been constituted to probe the case. “We have arrested four more accused in connection with the beating of the victim and efforts are on to identify other persons involved. Raids are on to nab them. Kharsawan OC Chandra Mohaon Oraon and Sini OC Bipin Behari Singh have been suspended...while I am personally investigating the alleged lapses and negligence on the part of Seraikela OC,” Kartik S, Seraikela-Kharsawan SP said.

Seraikela-Kharsawan deputy commissioner (DC) Chhabi Ranjan has also formed a separate team, headed by Seraikela sub-divisional officer, for an overall inquiry into the entire incident.

According to the SP, the four persons arrested on Monday were: Kamal Mahato, Premchand Mahali, Bheem Mandal and Sonmau Pradhan. “We are still awaiting the postmortem report which can pinpoint the actual cause of death,” SP added.

The police are, however, still not able to trace two of Tabrez Alam’s missing associates, Numair Ali and Seikh Irfan who could throw more light on the incident. In a video that was circulated on social media, Tabrez was heard pleading with the mob that he didn’t know anything and was asked by his two friends to wait there for them.

According to the DC’s report to the state home secretary, the probe committee headed by the SDO Deepak Kumar has been asked to submit a report on the entire incident — from June 17 night to death of victim on June 22 — in the next 48 hours.

“Tabrez, hailing from Kadamdiha village under Kharsawan PS, was caught by the villagers of Dhatkidih under Seraikela PS on June 17 when he was attempting burglary along with his two associates... Both managed to escape but Tabrez was caught and beaten up,” the DC’s report to the state home secretary, a copy of which is with HT, reads.

The report further said that police got information of the incident at 5 am on June 18 and rescued Tabrez from angry villagers and got him treated. “Police also recovered a stolen motorcycle and other materials from his house. Meanwhile, villagers of Dhatkidih lodged [an] FIR against Tabrez and two others. Tabrez was sent to judicial custody. On June 22, Tabrez fell sick in jail and was shifted to Sadar Hospital where doctors declared him dead...,” the report adds.

Also read | Jharkhand man thrashed by mob, forced to chant ‘Jai Sri Ram’, dies

SHARE THIS ARTICLE ON
