Iran, Pakistan airspace closed. Got a flight from India? Here's how it will affect you

Iran shot down a US military surveillance drone on June 20. Ever since, major airlines across the world have changed their routes, avoiding Iranian airspace and the areas around the Strait of Hormuz. The new routes kicked in because of the fear of being attacked by Iran by mistake. The Strait of Hormuz, that lies between the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman, is currently a no-go zone for several major airlines all over the world, including flights from India.

Soon after its surveillance drone was shot down by Iran, the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) issued an emergency order banning all US airlines from approaching or flying in Iranian airspace.

WHAT DOES IT MEAN?

US aircrafts cannot fly in an overwater area of Tehran-controlled airspace - over the Strait of Hormuz and Gulf of Oman. With rerouted flights, travelling to the West, especially from India, will be difficult considering the fact that the Iranian airspace has to be avoided.

If you're travelling to countries in Europe or farther West, the US, Canada, etc., it will mean longer flights. And needless to mention, more expensive tickets.

United Airlines was among the first US airlines to suspend flights between New Jersey's Newark airport and Mumbai as the aircrafts would have to fly through Iranian airspace, reported Reuters. United suspended its flights even before the FAA order came in.

British Airways, which offers flights from Mumbai to New York, has already changed its route, taking it away from the Strait of Hormuz.

Lufthansa Airlines and KLM Royal Dutch, which also offer flights from Mumbai to New York, will avoid the strait while the former will additionally steer clear of adjoining areas, said a Guardian report. On the other hand, Qantas Airlines will reroute its flights to London to avoid the strait as well as the Gulf of Oman. The Strait of Hormuz is one of the world's most strategic shipping routes.

A spokesperson for Etihad Airways told Khaleej Times that it had "contingency plans" in place, adding that the decision on further action will be taken after "carefully evaluating the FAA directive to US carriers".

Emirates is also rerouting flights "from areas of possible conflict". A spokesperson from the airline told Khaleej Times that the airline is taking "precautionary measures" to ensure the safety of their passengers. The airline will make further changes in operations if required.

Screenshot: Flightradar24

Emirates also said that the arrival and departure of some of their flights were affected "minimally" due to the detour. Emirates also offers flights from Mumbai to New York.

American Airlines and Delta Air Lines are also avoiding flying over Iran as is Japan Airlines Co Ltd.

While the East and West deal with these new air routes, Gulf-based long-haul carriers may suffer financially because of limited travel in the backdrop of the challenges that they have already been seeing under US President Donald Trump's travel bans.

The drone that Iran shot down on Thursday is a RQ-4A Global Hawk High-Altitude, Long, Endurance (HALE) Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS), CNN reports. Speaking of the incident, Iran's Revolutionary Guard said that an "intruding American spy drone" was shot down following its entry into the country's territory.

DOUBLE WHAMMY FOR FLIGHTS FROM EUROPE AND SOUTHEAST ASIA

With the Iranian airspace also closed, flights to the West from India are going to be even more expensive and long. The Pakistan airspace has been shut for Indian carriers since February 26, after the Indian Air Force carried out surgical airstrikes on a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror camp in Balakot in Pakistan. After the airstrike and Pakistan and India's retaliatory strikes, Pakistan placed a ban on Indian flights from entering its airspace.

Screenshot: Flightradar24

The neighbouring country has extended the ban on flights from India till June 28.

Flights from Europe and Southeast Asia have been most affected by the ban. In the coming days, till the Pakistan and Iranian airspace is open, brace yourself for longer and more expensive flights.

ALSO READ: US bars airlines to fly to India using Iranian airspace after Iran shoots down drone
