Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury wants Abhinandan's handlebar mustache to be declared as 'National Mustache'

Chowdhury stoked a controversy on Monday with his "naali" (drain) remark against Prime Minister Narendra Modi in the Lok Sabha, with the BJP launching a scathing attack on him and his party, saying this 'arrogance' will finish them. However, later on the Congress leader apologised for his remark saying that his statements were taken out of context. He also said he is ready to apologise PM Modi personally if he felt offended.

Congress leader in Lok Sabha, Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury on Monday proposed in the Lower House that mustache of Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman should be given the status of national mustache in the country. Speaking at the lower house of Parliament earlier in the day, Chowdhury said, "Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman should be awarded and his moustache should be made 'national moustache'." Abhinandan Varthaman's mustache became talk of the town and one of the most talked about topics on social media after Indian Air Force (IAF) brave pilot returned to India after being held captive by Pakistan post the MiG-21 crashed in Pakistan-Occupied-Kashmir (PoK) earlier this year. A day after IAF conducted Balakot airstrikes on February 27, Varthaman in his MiG-21 Bison chased Pakistani F-16 fighter jets which had transgressed into Indian airspace. During the chase, Varthaman's plane crossed over to the Pakistani side and was shot down. He, however, ejected safety from the plane but was taken into custody by the Pakistani Army upon landing. Before his plane was shot, he had hit a Pakistani F-16. After his arrest, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had announced the release of Varthaman, calling it a 'peace gesture'. The IAF pilot was handed over to the Indian authorities through the Wagah-Attari border at around 9:20 pm on March 1. After Varthaman's returned to India, his swashbuckling gunsliger moustache and equally suave hairstyle have become the new fad among men across the country. A hair cutting saloon in Bengaluru had even started giving free Wing Commander Abhinandan like moustaches and hairstyle to its customer.
