Delhi Triple Murder: Duo known to elderly couple's househelp could have murdered them all

New Delhi:

The Delhi Police on Monday said there could be an insider’s hand in the triple murder case in southwest Delhi’s Vasant Vihar. An elderly couple --- Vishnu Mathur (78) and Shashi Mathur (75) --- and their attendant Khushbu Nautiyal (24) were found murdered on Sunday morning. The police said that the act could have been carried out by a man and a woman known to Khushbu. It is also suspected that the accused had come with an intention to harm the nursing attendant, but ended up killing the couple to eliminate witnesses, they said.

Since there were no signs of forced entry into the house, the police are trying to ascertain if the accused are believed to be acquaintances of the nursing attendant and she facilitated their entry into the house.

“We have very strong clues that the friendly entry was facilitated from the side of the nursing attendant,” a senior police officer said. The CCTV camera captures the movement of a man and a woman close to midnight.

While Vishnu was retired a Central Government Health Scheme official, his wife Shashi was a former NDMC employee. The couple is survived by a daughter. Recently, they had lost their son in a road accident. The assailants killed the couple and their help by slitting their throats. Khushbu belonged to Uttarakhand and her body was handed over to her family after the post-mortem examination. The daughter of the elderly couple has not raised any suspicion on anyone so far, the police said.

Blood samples have been sent for forensic examination. Police have ruled out robbery as a motive. No alcohol bottles were found in the room but a half empty glass with leftover liquid, suspected to be alcohol, was found from the crime scene, he said.

Call record details of Nautiyal have been accessed. Dump data of cellphones active in the vicinity of the house have also been accessed, police said.

As many as 15 teams have been formed to trace the accused involved in the killing. So far, four suspects have been detained and are being questioned, the officer said.

Joint Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Anand Mohan said the investigation is in progress. “We are working on it and various teams have been formed which are working on the leads,” he said.

(With PTI inputs)

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
