‘Where’s my loan waiver?’ Rajasthan farmer names Ashok Gehlot, Sachin Pilot in suicide note

Rajasthan Deputy CM Sachin Pilot with CM Ashok Gehlot (File image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Jaipur: The loan waiver promise made during the Rajasthan Assembly election campaign appears to have come back to haunt the party. A 45-year-old farmer allegedly committed suicide at Thakri village in Sri Ganganagar district on Sunday. He left behind a farewell video and a two-page suicide note accusing Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and Deputy CM Sachin Piot for failing to honour their pre-poll promises of waiving off farm loans.

The farmer, Sohan Lal Kadel, had shot the video on his mobile phone and then uploaded it on his Facebook profile, which alerted his neighbours about his tragic plan to end his life.

However, by the time they were able to reach him, Sohan Lal Kadel had already consumed poison and later passed away on his way to the hospital, reports said.

In his suicide note, Sohan Kadel named Gehlot and Pilot in his suicide note, alleging that he was forced to take the drastic step as the Congress government in Rajasthan did not keep its promise of waiving off bank loans to farmers.

Kadel also blamed the chief minister and the deputy chief minister for his situation in the video that he purportedly shot before committing suicide.

As per reports, Kadel was a resident of Sri Ganganagar district and owned six ‘bighas’ of land. Reports suggested that he had owed Rs 1.23 lakh to Syndicate Bank as farm loan.

The Rahul Gandhi-led Congress party, in the run-up to the Assembly polls in Rajasthan last year, had vowed to waive off farm loans within ten days of coming to power.

The Ashok Gehlot government, with 99 seats in the state legislature, has initiated the process of waiving off loans by cooperative banks.

However, farm loans given by nationalized banks – such as Syndicate Bank – cannot be waived off by the state governments as these banks fall under the purview of the Centre.

Speaking on the incident, a villager told reporters, “One farmer committed suicide. Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot and Deputy CM Sachin Pilot had promised to waive loans but didn't do. He also mentioned that unless farmers get justice, nobody should move his body. He had released a video before dying and wrote a suicide note. The suicide note is with the police. We want the police should help in getting as it was promised to us."
