44th anniversary of Emergency: BJP leaders recall killing of democracy, Mamata calls last 5 years super emergency

On the 44th of the Emergency, Prime Minister Narendra Modi and several BJP leaders recalled the period as "one of the darkest chapters in India's history" and marked the day as when "democracy was strangulated".

"India salutes all those greats who fiercely and fearlessly resisted the Emergency. India's democratic ethos successfully prevailed over an authoritarian mindset," PM Modi said in a tweet on Tuesday.

India salutes all those greats who fiercely and fearlessly resisted the Emergency.



India’s democratic ethos successfully prevailed over an authoritarian mindset. pic.twitter.com/vUS6HYPbT5 Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) June 25, 2019

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) chief and Home Minister Amit Shah, tweeted on same lines, saying, "On this day in 1975, the country's democracy was killed for political interests. Basic rights were stripped from the countrymen, newspapers were locked up. Millions of nationalists have faced many tortures to restore democracy. I bow to all those fighters. (sic)"

Defence Minister Rajanth Singh followed suit and said, "The declaration of Emergency on June 25, 1975 and the incidents that followed, mark as one of the darkest chapters in India's history. On this day, we the people of India should always remember the importance of upholding the integrity our institutions and the Constitution."

The declaration of Emergency on June 25, 1975 and the incidents that followed, mark as one of the darkest chapters in India’s history.



On this day, we the people of India should always remember the importance of upholding the integrity our institutions and the Constitution. Rajnath Singh (@rajnathsingh) June 25, 2019

BJP minister Kiren Rijiju said on Tuesday morning that at midnight, he would be devoting his time to freedom as on June 25, 1975, Emergency was imposed in India at midnight, the moment democracy was killed.

Recalling the day as the country's "black day", Rijiju added, "Democracy was strangulated on 25th June 1975. The Congress Govt led by Indira Gandhi subverted the Constitution to remain in power by jailing POLITICAL OPPONENTS, suppressing the PRESS, intimidating the JUDICIARY."

June 25 is considered India's "Black Day". Democracy was strangulated on 25th June 1975. The Congress Govt led by Indira Gandhi subverted the Constitution to remain in power by jailing POLITICAL OPPONENTS, suppressing the PRESS, intimidating the JUDICIARY. https://t.co/WIb5ApP3dL Kiren Rijiju (@KirenRijiju) June 25, 2019

Meanwhile, Trinamool Congress (TMC) chief and West Bengal Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee took the opportunity to target the Modi government saying that "for the last five years, the country went through a Super Emergency".

Today is the anniversary of the #Emergency declared in 1975. For the last five years, the country went through a Super Emergency’. We must learn our lessons from history and fight to safeguard the democratic institutions in the country Mamata Banerjee (@MamataOfficial) June 25, 2019

The Emergency refers to a period from 1975 to 1977, when former PM Indira Gandhi had imposed a state of emergency across the country.
