Delhi: TikTok user arrested for shootout with rival gang

Delhi Police have arrested a TikTok enthusiast on Monday in connection with a shooting incident on June 1 in which two members of his rival gang had sustained bullet injuries in southwest Delhi's Vikas Nagar near Ranhola, according to a report by Hindustan Times.

The shootout was the consequences of a rivalry between two criminal gangs over establishing extortion money from people running betting rackets in Ranhola, police said.

The members of the said groups had been threatening members of each other's group and looking for opportunities to kill their rivals, they added.

According to the police, the suspect, Aakash alias Monu is a resident of west Delhi's Vikaspuri. They also said that Monu is the same person who featured in a widely shared video that showed Aakash and his friend Shahzad brandishing a pistol in March this year.

The two suspects were arrested by Dwarka district police. While interrogating, they had disclosed that they had posted the video with the illegal gun on social media to become famous in Delhi's crime world.

According to Additional commissioner of police Ajit Kumar Singla (Crime Branch), a shootout took place in Vikas Nagar on the intervening night of June 1 and 2 in which several rounds were fired by six members of Jasmit alias Jimmy gang at members of their rival Suraf Fighter's gang.



Suraj Fighter's associates, Suraj and Manoj, were injured in the firing. While Manoj, a former judo player, was hit by a bullet in his head, Suraj was shot in his legs. At least half a dozen bullets were fired.

A case was registered at the Ranhola police station and crime branch was also roped in. On Friday, the crime branch team received information that one of the attackers would come in Vikaspuri to meet his associate with illegal firearms.

"Accordingly, a trap was laid and Monu was caught. One country made pistol and four cartridges were recovered from him," said Ajit Kumar Singla, adding that Monu was previously involved in three cases.

Police said Monu initially worked in a Hukka parlour in Vikaspuri. He also started making TikTok videos and uploading them on social media. His videos made him a TikTok star in his neighbourhood. Around a year ago, Monu left the Hukka parlour job and began working as an accountant of a betting operator, Jasmit alias Jimmy.

The police officer added that as Jimmy started collecting protection money from other betting operators, Suraj fighter's gang became his rival as both wanted to establish their supremacy in the illegal business.

Also Read | Andhra Pradesh lecturer commits suicide, police cites love affair as reason

Also Watch | Dera Sacha Sauda follower murdered in Patiala's Nabha jail
