Telugu actor Ram Pothineni slapped with a fine for smoking in public

Ram Pothineni | Photo Credit: Instagram

Ram Pothineni was recently fined for smoking in a public place. The Telugu star was slapped with a fine of Rs 200 by the Hyderabad police who was reportedly seen with a cigarette near the historic Charminar monument. The actor was shooting for his upcoming movie iSmart Shankar and lit a cigarette as part of his role while shooting for a scene, when the police fined him immediately. The actor had, apparently, smoked at a no-smoking zone.

Earlier, during the month, the Charminar police had launched an anti-smoking drive in the city where public smoking would be fined under their jurisdiction. The Telugu actor was fined under the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products Act (COPTA) 2003 and he paid the fine. “During the shooting of the movie sequence, the actor was smoking a cigarette. We booked a case under Section 4 of the COTPA Act 2003 against him and levied a fine of Rs 200. The actor paid the fine amount,” ACP Charminar B Anjaiah told Telangana Today.

Talking about how strict the police is about smoking in public, sub-inspector B Pandary said, "So far 20 persons were caught and fined for smoking at the Charminar. We intend to continue the drive because it helps in spreading awareness about the ill effects of tobacco."

Meanwhile, Ram Pothineni's upcoming film iSmarth Shankar, is being directed by Puri Jagganadh, and also stars Nabha Natesh and Nidhhi Agerwal in lead roles, besides Brahmanandam, Rao Ramesh, Tanikella Bharani and Pavithra Lokesh among others in supporting roles. Apart from this, Mani Sharma is composing music with Raj Thota cranking the camera and Junaid Siddiqui who is in charge of the editing.

Shaik Jonny is the art director of iSmart Shankar with stunts choreographed by Real Satheesh. Ram’s look in the film has been unveiled and Ram will be sporting a spikey hairdo with beard along with jeans, a shirt and wielding a gun. The shooting for the film went on floors in January this year and the third schedule is going underway. The team completed the second schedule in Goa and returned to Hyderabad where the third schedule started.




