Bihar govt sinks deeper into apathy as 39 parents booked for protesting against encephalitis, water shortage

People said the local representative has not been taking their complaints over water scarcity. | File image | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Parents had blocked roads in protest against the apathy of politicians in wake of the encephalitis outbreak. Locals said they were forced to protest as they had no access to even a drop of water for over two months. Over 180 children have died in Bihar over the past two weeks due to encephalitis.

Patna: Even as Bihar grapples with the chilling deaths of over 100 children due to the Acute Encephalitis Syndrome for over two weeks, the state police on Tuesday registered a case against 39 parents for protesting against the Nitish Kumar government over the deaths in the state.

Parents had blocked roads in protest against the apathy of politicians in wake of the encephalitis outbreak. As many as 131 people have died to AES in Muzaffarpur district of Bihar, with 111 of them breathing their last at the Sri Krishna Medical College and Hospital, which is at the centre of the uproar, while 20 others died at Kejriwal Hospital.

According to a Times Now report, the people were forced to take such a step after they had been apparently pushed into a corner. Not just AES, the people in Muzaffarpur and Vaishali have been dealing with acute water shortage for over two months.

Though Bihar experienced the first spell of monsoon last week, they have been facing acute water shortage. While nature might be gracious now, the state went through extremely dry weather conditions in the past two months.

The locals said they were forced to take such a step as they have been calling the local area representative to complain about the water scarcity. They claimed that they had no access to even a drop of water for the past two months and the local representative has not been receiving their calls or taking their complaints. During this period, they have been forced to walk for hours for water.

Earlier today, doctors in Muzaffarpur pooled in money to hire Quick Response Teams (QRT) for their security following the massive protests due to AES. “Around 60 doctors have set up this QRT for their safety owing to violence... We have been deployed at 3 locations in the city with 15-20 motorbikes among us,” a QRT member told news agency ANI.

Bihar: Doctors in Muzaffarpur pool money to hire Quick Response Team (QRT) for their security. A member of the QRT says, "Around 60 doctors have set up this QRT for their safety and to stop violence. We have been deployed at 3 places in the city, we have 15-20 motorbikes." pic.twitter.com/Na0wEyShXO — ANI (@ANI) June 25, 2019

In wake of the deaths of over 180 children due to AES in Bihar, Muzaffarpur Chief Judicial Magistrate Suryakant Tiwari yesterday initiated an investigation against Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan and Bihar Health Minister Mangal Pandey.

The Supreme Court of India has also given the Centre and Bihar government a seven-day deadline to send their response on the deaths following the Acute Encephalitis Syndrome outbreak.
