Jharkhand lynching heinous crime, embrace people to chant 'Jai Shri Ram': Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi

New Delhi:

Union Minority Affairs Minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi on Tuesday termed the lynching of a 24-year-old man in Jharkhand a “heinous crime” and said “Jai Shri Ram” can be chanted by embracing people and not by throttling them. “Jai Shri Ram can be chanted by embracing people and not after throttling them. Such incidents cannot be justified. We have committed that we won’t let the destructive agenda dominate the development agenda,” Naqvi said.

Naqvi called for stern action against those involved in such incidents. "People who are involved in such incidents have only one motive—to spoil the positive atmosphere created by the government. These are isolated cases and we are completely against them,” he said, adding that stern action should be taken against people who commit such heinous crimes.



ALSO READ | RAC jawan posted outside Finance Ministry in Delhi shoots himself

On June 18, Ansari and two others had entered a house in Seraikela village at night allegedly with an intention to commit theft. Meanwhile, the occupants of the house woke up and raised an alarm, following which villagers caught hold of Ansari and "manhandled" him, while his accomplices managed to flee.

Ansari was found to be in possession of valuables, which he and his associates had allegedly stolen from other villages. However, Tabrez, in the purported video clip, is heard denying the charges till the very end, saying the two other men still those stuffs and he did not know anything about the same.

Tied to an electricity pole, Tabrez, was beaten up mercilessly with wooden sticks for over 18 hours and was later handed over to police. He had been in the judicial custody since June 18 and was taken to a hospital on June 22 after his condition deteriorated. At the Sadar Hospital, he was diagnosed with multiple injuries and was subsequently referred to the Tata Main Hospital in Jamshedpur.



ALSO READ | Rajiv Gandhi assassination: HC allows Nalini to appear in person to argue on plea for leave

The video in question, circulated widely on social media platforms, was handed over to the police by Ansari's family members and it was being investigated. Ansari's wife, Shaista Praveen, has accused the police of taking the deceased to jail first, instead of a hospital.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
