Modi govt to launch crackdown on illegal Cow Protection Committees

In Question Hour today I asked Minister GirirajSingh about the GauRakshak Samitis (Cow Protection Committees) indulging in vigilantism & goondaism. Could Govt frame a policy whereby only those GRS authorised through the Animal Welfare Board would be recognised by GOI? Vague reply — Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) June 25, 2019

BIG- Modi Govt assures to act against Illegal/Unrecognized Cow Protection Committees. Min Giriraj Singh assures Lok Sabha on question raised by @ShashiTharoor arguing those running such unrecognized committees are found instigating Violence/Lynchings @abpnewstv — Ashish/Aashu (ABP News) (@AshishSinghLIVE) June 25, 2019 According to police sources, initially Ansari tried to save himself by calling himself "Sonu". However, he was forced to reveal his real name after the mob asked him to chant "Jai Shri Ram". After the thrashing, the mob handed him over to the police, which took him to a police post. However, he had to be admitted to a hospital after his condition worsened and he died at the hospital on Sunday. Ansari's wife has questioned the role of the police in her husband's death alleging that he was not given timely medical treatment. Seraikela Superintendent of Police Kartik met Ansari's family and made the arrest based on his wife's FIR. Political parties in the state have condemned the incident. (With additional information from Agencies)

New Delhi: Union Minister Giriraj Singh on Tuesday said the government will launch a crackdown on illegal Cow Protection Committees operating in the country after Congress MP Shashi Tharoor argued in the lower house of parliament that such unrecognized committees are found instigating communal violence and mob lynching. The matter was brought up for discussion in the Parliament after a Muslim youth was lynched by a group of people in Jharkhand on suspicion of stealing a bike. In a video that went viral, Tabrez Ansari was being forced to chant "Jai Shri Ram" and "Jai Hanuman “after being tied to a pole. He was beaten up with sticks through the night, reports say. AIMIM MP Asaduddin Owaisi was also quoted by news agency ANI as criticizing the BJP and the RSS for having "successfully created a mindset where Muslims are seen as terrorists, anti-nationals & cow slaughters". "This is the pattern with almost all lynchings. First, a Muslim is murdered by cow lovers. Then the most ridiculous excuses begin: a ‘suspicion’ of beef possession, theft, smuggling & love jihad So much for sabka vishwas when we can be killed over mere ‘suspicions’," Owaisi had tweeted.
