After Mumbai, Monsoon set to kiss Gujarat, North and East India

In Gujarat, Ahmedabad and adjoining regions are expected to receive monsoon showers during the next 48 hours. (Photo: Reuters)

It's good news for people living in north, west, east and northeastern regions of the country that have been reeling under a scorching sun with scant or no rain in the past few months. The India Meteorological Department (IMD) has forecast that the south-west monsoon will reach these regions in the next few days.

In Gujarat, Ahmedabad and adjoining regions are expected to receive monsoon showers during the next 48 hours.

"Heavy rainfall is expected in northern, central and southern regions of Gujarat, whereas light to moderate showers are predicted for the Saurashtra region," the Meteorological Department was quoted as saying by news agency IANS.

In its latest weather bulletin, IMD said south-west monsoon has further advanced into remaining parts of central Arabian Sea, Konkan and Maharashtra, some parts of north Arabian Sea and south Gujarat and some more parts of Madhya Pradesh.

"Active to vigorous monsoon conditions resulting in widespread rainfall with isolated heavy to very heavy and extremely heavy falls are very likely over sub-Himalayan West Bengal and Sikkim and Assam and Meghalaya and widespread rainfall with isolated heavy to very heavy falls over Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura during next 2-3 days," the IMD said.

Progress of the monsoon has been slow this year. Generally the south-west reaches Gujarat by the second week of June. The monsoon hits the Kerala coast on June 1 but this time it was delayed by nearly a week. Cyclone Vayu that generated over the Arabia Sea in the second week of June further delayed the monsoon by some days.

Source: IMD

"However, the present weather conditions are extremely favourable for the onset and advancement of monsoon season coupled with heavy rains in Gujarat within 48 hours. Even though other parts of Gujarat might receive a good amount of rainfall, Saurashtra region is predicted to be in a state of deprivation with scarce amount of rainfall this monsoon," IMD officials in Gujarat told reporters.

Meanwhile, Delhi witnessed a humid morning on Tuesday with partially overcast conditions. "The minimum temperature at 8.30 am was 27.8 degrees Celsius while the humidity level was 72 per cent," the Met department said.

In the Northeaster state of Mizoram, people are facing acute shortage of drinking water due to delayed monsoon. News agency IANS said due to rain deficit and severe heat wave conditions, normal life across the north-eastern region has been severely affected.

According to IMD officials, since June 1, 40 per cent less rain has been recorded in seven Northeastern states, excluding Sikkim.

"The NE states since June 1 have recorded 167 mm rainfall against the average rainfall of 281 mm," the official said, adding since March 1, the states also recorded 38 per cent less pre-monsoon (March-May) rain in five of the eight N-E states.

The June-September is the normal monsoon period in the region.

"The southwest monsoon arrived late in the region and the progress is very slow," IMD Director Dilip Saha told IANS.

However, speaking about the country-level scenario, monsoon rains have covered most parts of cane, cotton, and soybean fields in western India and some parts of rice-sowing areas in central and northern India, Reuters said in a report on Tuesday.

"A shortfall in monsoon rains has narrowed to 37 per cent of the long-term average against 44 per cent between June 1 and June 19," Reuters said quoting IMD.

Conditions are now favourable for the southwest monsoon to further advance into Gujarat, and a few more parts of Madhya Pradesh and northern states of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand, the weather office said.

Monsoon rains are crucial for farmers who plant cane, corn, cotton, rice and soybean in June and July, with harvests from October.

Nearly half of India's farmland lacks irrigation and the monsoon season delivers about 70% of the country's annual rainfall - key to the success of the farm sector in Asia's third-biggest economy.

The agriculture sector accounts for about 15% of the country's $2.6 trillion economy, but employs nearly half of India's 1.3 billion people.

The India Meteorological Department defines average or normal rainfall as between 96% and 104% of a 50-year average of 89 centimetres for the entire four-month season beginning June.

Poor rains have delayed planting of summer-sown crops, but experts say crop yields could be robust if rains pick up in the next two weeks.

Meanwhile, the water resources minister on Monday warned that a water shortage could cut food exports from India, which has emerged as a leading supplier of a number of food products to the world.

(With input from agencies.)

ALSO READ | Monsoon finally arrives in Mumbai, covers entire Maharashtra

ALSO READ | Chennai's water woes as seen from 700-km above the parched ground

ALSO READ | Monsoon likely to arrive in Delhi around June 29

ALSO WATCH | Chennai runs dry: Who to blame for water crisis, EPS govt or monsoon failures?
