'733 Terrorists Killed In Jammu And Kashmir In 3 Years': MHA Reveals Details Of Its Crackdown On Terror

The Centre listed its crackdown on terror in Lok Sabha on Tuesday. Speaking about its zero-tolerance policy, the Minister of State for Home G Kishen Reddy said gave out the details of its crackdown from 2016 to 2019.

Reddy said that 733 terrorists have been killed in Jammu and Kashmir in the last three years. He said that 113 terrorists were killed in 2019 till June 16, and that 18 civilians also killed in the same period. He said that 257 terrorists were killed in 2018, 213 in 2017 and 150 in 2016. Reddy while giving out the details of crackdown added saying, "The government has adopted a policy of zero tolerance towards terrorism. The security forces are taking effective and continuous action in countering terrorism. This has resulted in a corresponding change in the number of such incidents, including casualties. The security forces are also keeping a close watch on persons who attempt to provide support to terrorists and initiate action against them."

The MHA also said that Left Wing Extremism has come down during the NDA regime in last few years as compared to UPA regime.

Among one such important victories against terror for India was on June 18 when security forces gunned down terrorist Sajjad Bhat, who was key conspirator of the horrific Pulwama terror attack which killed over 50 CRPF men.

WATCH | MASSIVE WIN: Forces Gun Down Key Terror Conspirator Whose Vehicle Was Used In The Horrific Feb 14 Pulwama Attack In Which 40 CRPF Jawans Were Martyred

PM Narendra Modi during his visit to Bishkek in Kyrgyzstan made a strong statement against terror in the presence of Pakistan PM Imran Khan. PM Modi said that countries sponsoring terror must be held accountable.

In a reference to Pakistan-sponsored terrorism, PM Modi gave a strong statement:

"Countries shielding terrorists, encouraging terrorism and providing safe havens to them must be held responsible. In order to curb terrorism, SCO members can use the combined power of all SCO members and march ahead in their fight against terrorism. In order to tackle terrorism, India is proposing an international summit."

WATCH THIS: PM Modi Exposes Pakistan In Front Of Imran Khan, Talks Tough On Terrorism At SCO Session Plenary
