PM Modi taunts Congress in Lok Sabha with an Emergency reminder

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday launched a counter-offensive against the Congress in the Lok Sabha reminding the main Opposition party of imposition of Emergency 44 years ago. The prime minister was responding to the Congress’s repeated charge that the Modi government is trying to crush the voices of dissent.

PM Narendra Modi said, "A few people were constantly asking during the debate- Who did it? Who did it? I want to ask themToday is 25th June. Who imposed the Emergency? Who trampled over the spirit of the Constitution, gagged the media and bullied the judiciary? We can't forget those dark days."

"The entire country had been turned into a prison cell just to save someone’s chair," said PM Modi.

The prime minister was referring to the proclamation of Emergency by then Indira Gandhi government in 1975. In his reply to the motion of thanks to the President’s Address to the joint session of Parliament, PM Narendra Modi said, "Democracy did not arise from the pages of the Constitution but it has been our soul for centuries."

Congress leader in the Lok Sabha Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, on Monday, had targeted the BJP and the Modi government alleging that the ruling party claims that everything good happened only after the Modi government came to power.

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury listed nuclear power plants, power projects, dams including Sardar Sarovar Dam and other projects including IITs among the accomplishments of the previous Congress governments.

Responding to Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury’s charge, PM Narendra Modi said, "There are some people who feel only a few names contributed to national progress. They only want to hear those few names and ignore the others. We think differently, we feel each and every citizen has worked for India's progress."

Sardar Sarovar Dam was the brainchild of Sardar Patel. But, work on this dam kept getting delayed. As Chief Minister of Gujarat, I had to embark on a fast for this project. After NDA took office, the pace of work increased significantly and it is benefiting many people, said PM Narendra Modi returning the jibe to the Congress leader.

PM Narendra Modi’s reply on the motion of thanks was his first address to Parliament after being voted to power for the second consecutive term last month. He emphasised the need to move together to fulfill the dream of a strong, safe, developed and inclusive nation.

"I think beyond winning and losing elections. I strive for the welfare of the countrymen. For me, what is satisfying is the opportunity to serve 130 crore Indians and do work that has made a positive difference in the lives of our citizens," said PM Narendra Modi.

Chowdhury in his speech dared the Modi government of putting Congress president Rahul Gandhi and UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi behind the bars. Why Rahulji is not in jail? Why Soniaji is not in jail, Chowdhury had said in response to the BJP leaders’ charge that the Congress leadership was involved in corruption.

Responding to Chowdhury, PM Modi said, We are being nudged... some members asked- why is Person A not in jail or Person B not in jail. That is the job of the court. If someone is on bail, they should enjoy. We will not work with the intention of vendetta.

I want to tell them- this is not the Emergency where Governments jailed people as they felt like. These decisions are taken by the Courts. Courts will decide on jail and bail, he said.

"India became jailhouse during emergency," PM Modi said.

PM Modi also said the fight against corruption will continue.

Also read: Emergency anniversary: PM Modi hails democracy as Opposition says greater emergency now

ALSO WATCH| 44th anniversary of Emergency: Mamata attacks Modi, says super Emergency for last 5 years
