Fact Check: Viral post warning Mumbai residents of robbers is a hoax

AFWA searched the Internet to find incidents in Malad or Dahisar where a group of 15-20 armed people, including women, robbed houses using crying children as baits. (Representational Image)

Have Mumbai police issued an advisory against a gang of robbers for residents between Malad and Dahisar?

A viral social media post claims that a group of 15-20 miscreants are on the loose in these parts of the megapolis, and asks residents not to open their doors at night if they hear a baby crying outside. The post claims that the message has been received from Dahisar senior police inspector Ramkant Patil.

India Today’s Anti Fake News War Room (AFWA), however, has found it to be a hoax. In fact, there is no officer by the name of Ramkant Patil posted at Dahisar police station.

On June 24, Facebook user Pooja Mehta uploaded a post that says, A group of 15-20 people, including women and children, are active between Malad and Dahisar. They are armed. Please do not open the door at night or any other time if you hear a baby crying outside.

The archived version of this post can be seen here.

Other Facebook users have shared the post along with videos. One such post by Arpan Kothari shows CCTV footage and a press conference by a police officer. While the CCTV footage shows a few men and women talking and climbing the stairs of a building, the police officer speaks about some arrests. The archived version of the post can be seen here.

Facebook user Jigna Dhanak uploaded another video containing CCTV footage different from the earlier video. This post too had the same claim of the message being forwarded by Ramkant Patil. CCTV footage in this video shows a woman being attacked by a man.

AFWA searched the Internet to find incidents in Malad or Dahisar where a group of 15-20 armed people, including women, robbed houses using crying children as baits. But we could not find even one such incident.

AFWA then looked through the website of Mumbai police. There is a list of senior police inspectors in charge of every police station. The name of senior police inspector of Dahisar police station is Vasant Narayan Pingle.

AFWA spoke to Pingle who said, This post has been viral for the last one-and-a-half years. People keep asking me and I keep telling them it’s fake. I have been posted in Dahisar police station since August 4, 2017. Before me, there was an officer named Subhash Sawant in my position. He was here for one-and-a-half years. Before him, another officer named Prakash Jadhav served here for two years in this position. No one here has heard of a senior police inspector named Ramkant Patil in several years.

AFWA also checked the videos that have been posted along with the viral claims. The post with CCTV footage and press conference by a police officer is actually about an incident unrelated to the viral claim.

Dahisar police had arrested 13 people, including two women, who had raided the house of a real estate agent by posing as income tax officers. News about the incident can be seen here.

CCTV footage in the other post shows a man following a woman into a building lift and subsequently attacking her when she tries to get out. Neighbours come to the rescue of the woman and the attacker is caught. This clearly has nothing to do with the viral claim of a group of 15-20 people robbing a house with weapons.

(With inputs from Shivshankar Tiwari)

INDIA TODAY FACT CHECK





Claim A group of 15-20 armed people are on the loose in certain Mumbai localities. Police have asked residents not to open doors if they hear babies crying outside, particularly around midnight. Conclusion It is a hoax. JHOOTH BOLE KAUVA KAATE The number of crows determines the intensity of the lie. 1 Crow: Half True

2 Crows: Mostly lies

3 Crows: Absolutely false
