Michael Jackson death anniversary: Top 5 songs of the King of Pop that broke barriers and made him an icon

Today (June 25), the world mourns the demise of one of the best artists that ever lived. The one who broke barriers and redefined what it is to be your true self. Yes, ten years have flown past since the passing away of the legendary and iconic Michael Jackson. Michael glided smoothly across the stage performing the moonwalk, stealing hearts with his breathtaking dance moves. His songs gave a voice to an entire generation. He remains, to date a source of inspiration for many. On that note, here are top 5 songs of his that you all must’ve heard growing up

1) Smooth Criminal- Definitely one of the fans’ favourites, and the seventh single from his album Bad, Smooth Criminal made news as it featured Michael’s anti-gravity lean. Apart from the moonwalk and the toe-stand; the one move that stood out the most was MJ’s anti-gravity lean.

2) Beat it- Beat it was the first song from MJ’s album Thriller that established him as a pop icon. Though released in 1983, this song still holds a strong resonance, with the message that violence is not the solution to problems.

3) Thriller- Flinty guitars and scary-movie synths kept the mood creepy, Thriller had become a worldwide phenomenon. Love it or not, Thriller is one of pop’s greatest and most important songs. Did you too dance your heart out to this when you all were kids?

4) Billie Jean- Michael’s chronicle of a woman who claims he’s the father of her son, was played almost everywhere. A lesser-known fact, Billie Jean, was almost going to be called Not My Lover! Also, the singer had a perception that this song would be huge. And it definitely was!

5) Man In the Mirror- The gospel-tinged mantra of self-betterment transformed into a song, Man in the Mirror remains an inspirational touchstone of Jackson’s catalogue. This song can bring you to tears.

Here’s celebrating Michael Jackson’s life and legacy that’s inspired people around the world. MJ lives on. Stay tuned to CineBlitz.
