Jharkhand lynching: Will the negligent police officers be jailed?

The 22-year-old man was forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' before he was beaten to death.

New Delhi: The mob frenzy has once again gripped the country with the lynching of Tabriz Ansari on suspicion of theft in Saraikela-Kharsawa district of Jharkhand. So, what is driving people to indulge in lynching and mob frenzy. Is this the lack of action and interest by our police force which are pushing people to take law into their own hands.

Speaking to Mirror Now on The Urban debate, social activist Yogita Bhayana said, "The people just find reasons to kill people of particular religion and this will create a lot of issues in our country. This has to be taken very seriously by the authorities."

They find reasons to kill people of particular religion & this will create a lot of issues in our country. This has to be taken very seriously by the law & order authorities: Social Activist, @BhayanaYogita to @tanvishukla #JharkhandLynching #MobViolence pic.twitter.com/CFvcoC73r1 — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) June 25, 2019

The video of Ansari being lynched has sent shock waves across the country. The 22-year-old man was forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' before he was beaten to death.

Meanwhile, BJP leader Sudhanshu Mittal termed the Jharkhand lynching as more of a matter of law and order than a communal issue.

He said, "This issue can be easily politicise and communalise, but a serious problem like this should not be dealt with in such a casual manner. Mob lynching is not only related to gender issues or communal issues, there are other kinds of lynching incidents in this country. These are fundamentally law and order issues."

Earlier, ten persons were arrested and two police officers were suspended in connection with the lynching of Tabrez Ansari.

Advocate and activist Sanjay Hegde said, "The larger problem is that we, as a society must recognise that when a mob gets together and tries to punish someone by beating him to death, the mob has taken over the function of the administering law and justice. And that's dangerous precedent. "

The larger problem is that we, as a society must recognise that when a mob gets together and tries to punish someone by beating him to death, the mob has taken over the function of the administering law & justice. And that's dangerous: Advocate, @sanjayuvacha#JharkhandLynching pic.twitter.com/RPW6fVBBVo — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) June 25, 2019

One of the main accused in the Tabriz Ansari lynching case has been identified as Pappu Mandal, who was taken into custody after the death of the victim.

Speaking to Mirror Now, senior journalist, Javed Ansari said, "The reason why these incidents keep happening is because no real action is ever taken."
