Modi forced to quote Nehru: Congress claims moral victory despite PM's scathing remarks

Congress leaders reacted to PM Modi's comment that the party never recognised efforts of anyone but only the members from the Gandhi-Nehru family.

Congress was at the centre of PM Narendra Modi's maiden speech in the Parliament after coming back to power. The prime minister, in his speech, fired salvo after salvo at the Congress as he replied to the motion of thanks to the President's address in the Lok Sabha.

In his speech, PM Modi accused the Congress of not appreciating the accomplishments of others. "There are some people who feel only a few names contributed to national progress. They only want to hear those few names and ignore the others. We think differently, we feel each and every citizen has worked for India's progress," said PM Modi on Tuesday.

The Congress, however, was quick to react when PM Modi flanked the opposition from all sides.

Reacting to PM Modi's comment that the BJP doesn't believe in negating the contributions of other parties, Congress chief Rahul Gandhi, who was present in Lok Sabha on Tuesday, said that the reality was evident to all.

Speaking to media persons, Rahul Gandhi said, "You all are seeing what is happening, you know better," on PM Modi's 'no vendetta politics' claim.

Congress MP from Thiruvananthapuram, Shashi Tharoor, also said PM Modi was not accurate in his criticism. "Mr Modi, whose party and he himself has rarely given credit to the Congress, today, chose to say that we aren't giving credit to some people, the truth is that I don't believe that's an entirely accurate criticism," said Tharoor.

However, the most scathing remark came from Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury, who was recently appointed the leader of Congress in the Lok Sabha.

"Prime Minister in his own reply has disappointed the people of our country by not taking up issues concerning the people, right from agriculture to industry to unemployment and last but not the least Bihar's encephalitis situation where hundreds of children have lost their lives," Chowdhury told reporters.

"He resorted to old evading tactics to hoodwink the common people as if he was still in election mode. We expected that he would rise above partisan issues and would be conciliatory in taking all along," he said.

He said that at least PM Modi had finally acknowledged the contributions made by Congress.

"We also noted that Prime Minister was drawn into our incisive argument, and had to quote Jawahar Lal Nehru ji at the fag end of his speech. I think that is a great victory for us!" Chowdhury said.

Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury also went on to say that prime minister's speech was like one heard in a poll rally. "It seems that PM is still in election mode. I think he is a good speaker and speaks of many things but we need to wait for the result," he said.

In his hour-long reply on a two-day debate on the motion of thanks to the President's Address in the House, which was later passed by a voice vote, PM Modi also called upon lawmakers to rise above partisan politics to build a new and modern India, saying the country was more important than politics.

He was, however, unsparing in his criticism of the Congress, targeting the party for not recognising the contributions of leaders outside its ruling Gandhi-Nehru family, missing opportunities to empower Muslim women and "crushing India's soul" by imposing Emergency, which was declared 44 years ago on this day.
