WATCH: Hours before committing suicide, ex-Jaish jihadist reveals truth about Balakot terror camp

New Delhi:

In a big blow to Pakistan, one of its netizens, has recently revealed some ill-lit details on how the country is encouraging, supporting, funding and spreading terrorism across world, including in India. Rana Jawed, the Pakistani national, uploaded a live video on Facebook, hours before he committed suicide on Monday, according to a report published by Oneindia. Rana, an ex-Army man and Jaish-e-Mohammed jihadist, in the 42-second-long video, explained how the Pakistani Army is instigating youth for jihad.

In the hard-hitting Facebook post, Rana also gave a mention of the infamous Balakot airstrike, carried out by the Indian Air Force (IAF) along the Line of Control (LoC) on February 26. Ruling out Pakistan's claim that there was no Jaish terror camp in Balakot, the Pakistani national said the JeM had its training centre in the region, from where they used to send terrorists to India and elsewhere in the world to carry out attacks.

"I left terrorism and returned to the mainstream life in request of my father," Jawed said in his last Facebook post before death. He also disclosed how the Army has been spreading poison in the name of Islam in the country and appealed to the international communities to help restore democracy in Pakistan.

A young Pakistani activist Rana Jawed goes live on Facebook before he commits suicide.



He is an Ex Pakistan Army Personnel and a Jaish e Muhammad Jihadist, in his live he mentions the #PakistanArmy involvement in global terrorism including #India.pic.twitter.com/nJffaJD6L5 — Saleem Bakhtiar (@saleembakhtair) June 24, 2019

It has been a quite long time that Pakistan is denying India's claim that the IAF had targeted an alleged Jaish training camp near Balakot, wiping out over 300 terrorists in the area. In the wake of the pre-dawn strike by the IAF, the Pakistan Army had allegedly cordoned off the entire area and were busy clearing away evidences so that it can deny India's claim. They also barred media to enter the spot citing security, weather and organisational reasons.

On February 26, the Indian Air Force (IAF)'s Mirage 2000 fighters armed with SPICE 2000 satellite-guided bombs had struck the Jaish-e-Mohammed's Balakot training camp in response to the gruesome terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama district on February 14.

Being touted as the Surgical Strike 2.0, the airstrike killed "a very large number of Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists, trainers, senior commanders, and groups of jihadis" at the alleged terror camp in Balakot, India’s foreign secretary Vijay Gokhale said. However, the government is yet to release the final number of casualties in the strike.

For all the Latest World News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
