Prowling man-eater in Yala

An unfortunate incident was reported four days after Sri Lanka celebrated the Sinhala and Hindu New Year.

On April 18, the news went around that a leopard had attacked a casual employee working on road construction in the Yala East National park. On this day, they were working on the Babaragasthalawa road on the Bagura Plains.

After a hard day’s work at about 4.30 pm in the evening, four workers with the victim had taken a break, resting in the shade of a tree when a leopard sprang on him. Typical of a leopard, the victim was dragged away from the spot into the bush.

A brave jeep driver had driven up to the spot to offer assistance and attacked by the leopard which caused severe injuries to him as well.

It is not at all a normal situation for a leopard to attack a human. They usually avoid human confrontation in case they are in the same territory at the same time. Old Sri Lankan folklore says “Kotiyata dawas hathak una enawa minihek dakkama” - a leopard gets fever for seven days if it sees a human being at close quarters. These stories have been told by ancient people who lived in the forest-covered villages in our country. They had come to terms and understood the behaviour of all living beings including leopard.

I am not an expert on leopards, but a keen enthusiast of their behaviour and habits. One can learn a lot by reading the books, My India, The Man-Eatersof Kumoanand Leopard of Rudraprayag written by the famous Englishman, Jim Corbett who rid the poor villages of fear by shooting down some notorious man-eaters in some affected villages in India. His notes on some of his experience with man-eating tigers and leopards are a good guideline to anyone handling a situation or studying a trouble-creating member of the cat family, especially a possible man-eater. Who can turn out to be a man-eater? We have also had our own man-eaters, the most famous being from Poonani in the eastern jungles of Sri Lanka. After a long period of terror, during which it accounted for many human lives, this notorious beast was to be destroyed by a brave man Shelton Egar.

He wrote in his book, Man-Eater of Poonani a detailed description of what a dangerous beast a leopard could turn out to be in the role of a man-eater. It is difficult for one to believe how an animal could have the type of intelligence and understanding to adapt its skills when it has to attack human targets instead of the usual prey like deer, sambur or a boar. Sometimes, the reason for a leopard to attack humans is its disability to hunt. This may well be due to an injury. Wounded paws or limbs, damaged claw nails and infected and festering wounds are critical for leopards. Hunting porcupine may well be a reason. In situations like these, leopards depend on leftover carcasses, small mammals which are easy prey and refrain from their habits of attacking bigger animals. In cases like these, they would definitely attack a human at the first given chance.

In this particular incident, we do not know the condition of the Bambaragasthalawa leopard – whether it was suffering from an injury and unable to hunt or whether it was reacting to learnt lessons. It is necessary to investigate and find out the cause for such an attack. Leopards can change territories and adapt to new conditions very quickly, even when close to human habitats. It may be injured or repeating its experience from a previous incident. They become very wise and tend to use their intelligence and adopt shrewd cunning systems to attack a human being, which is very different from other prey. A human will not put up the resistance or a fight back like a full-grown deer, sambur a wild boar. A human target is an easy kill which they will learn from the first experience itself. Given the chance to repeat, a leopard would not let the chance go a begging.

According to information so far on this unfortunate incident at Bambaragasthalawa, it does not look like a mistake or an accident at all. The leopard would have watched his target carefully and targeted him before it sprang on him. So bold was the beast that no respect was paid to the presence of three other men. The attack on the jeep driver immediately after that shows it has no fear of humans and ready to attack having been given the opportunity. It is reported that the rescue team had to shoot the leopard with rubber bullets to chase it away from the kill in their efforts to recover the body of the victim. This shows the leopard is losing fear of human presence very fast.

If the Wildlife Department is to ignore this or take it as an isolated incident, it might be at the cost of a critical situation in the future. Having a fearless leopard which dares to attack humans in a National Park is very much of a concern. It will affect all operational aspects of the park’s management. Will the Park Warden risk the life of his staff and detail field work such as repairs to roads and tank bunds and hope for things to work out smoothly?

The festival of the Ruhunu Maha Kataragama Dewale will begin soon and thousands of pilgrims will walk through this terrain in the pada yathra. Department staff will have to be placed inside the park for essential duties. They will be joined by personnel from the Forces. How does any officer guarantee the safety to anyone under these conditions?

Three years ago, we learnt about the attack on a lady school teacher who came along in the pada yathra and died on the banks of the Menik at Kosgasmankada. She had walked with her group of pilgrims all the way, even passed through the Yala East National Park and come to the boarders of block 2 when this incident happened. Having spent the night at Kosgasmankada, she had gone down to the river for a wash and was resting under a tree before they started the journey that morning. The leopard broke cover through the scrubs and pounced on her causing deadly injuries to which she succumbed later. This may well be the same leopard. If any identification or information is available it will be useful to study this case. The reason behind these types of incidents has to be investigated for future reference.

Leopard incidents

In the later part of the 1980s, a very few people visited the National Parks. This was due to the prevailing youth unrest and the not-very-safe conditions in the country. Lal Anthonis was a consultant to the Wildlife Department who had spent most of his time in the jungles during this period. The then Wildlife Director Dr. Shelton Atapattu wanted him to study some issues concerning the development of infrastructure in the National Parks. I was lucky to be asked to accompany him on some of these trips. During this period, one incident was off our records. The strange behaviour of a leopard caused concern at Heenwewa in the Yala NP block 1. Anthonis was asked to investigate and report on some incidents that had already taken place.

Incident 1

Guide Sumanadasa had just retired to his quarters after a full day’s tour in Yala with his visitors staying at the Heenwewa Bungalow. The department tractor that does the routine rounds of supplies to the bungalows in the park had brought a letter for Sumanadasa which came to the Palatupana office by post. He, on his camp bed, started reading the letter which brought him all the news from home far away.

The leopard boldly entered Sumanadasa’s quarters through the front door. He quickly saw the moving shadow with the lit kerosene oil lamp. Shocked by the sudden confrontation, the leopard pounced on Sumandasa. He put up a fight and chased away the leopard, but not before he received brutal injuries. He was rushed to hospital with the help of the visitors occupying the Heenwewa bungalow at the time.

Incident 2

Another incident happened at the Heenwewa bungalow when a Chairman of a leading mercantile firm in Colombo occupied this bungalow during his vacation. He had a habit of wearing shoes, while he was on rounds in the park. He always removed them when back from the evening round and left it on the steps to the verandah of the bungalow. Having shared his day’s happenings with the rest of his crew, he had dinner and went to sleep just before 10 pm. In the morning, he realises one shoe was missing. They had sufficient evidence that it was taken away by a leopard as they clearly saw the imprints of the pug marks of a full grown male on the sandy lawn of the bungalow. So, the leopard had come right up to the gate of the surrounding half wall of the bungalow. There was sufficient evidence to believe that it lay down on the steps biting the shoe before taking it away. The badly-chewed up shoe was later recovered from the forest later.

With these two incidents, the Park Warden decided to close Heenwewa for visitors. I joined Lal on one of his investigating trips to Heenwewa. I have been with him on many occasions to the jungles, but this was the first time in an operating area of a fearless leopard. We spent some sleepless nights at the Heenwewa bungalow during this period. During the day, we investigated on the movements of leopards following their pug marks trying to establish recognition from one leopard to the other. We found the prints of a mother and a cub seemed to be roaming the area, but had no signs of the character that we wanted. Sometimes you feel that you are very close to it, taking cover under a bush and then fear gets into you with that ghostly feeling. There were moments that I felt that I was foolish to have come on such a journey. The fear that can get into you is hard to turn into words. In dead silence, you wait for something to happen with the feeling that the beast may appear from anywhere and then the surroundings once again become lively and then the tension moves away.

The movements of the leopard were becoming unaware as weeks and months passed till one day we had news from some people living around the area that a leopard had attacked a foreign nun who was meditating close to the caves of the Magul Maha Viharaya. The incident had caused substantial injuries to the nun. The department staff set up a special team to investigate. It was later reported that a partly-decomposed carcass of a full grown male leopard was found in close proximity to the viharaya. They also found that his right paw was badly infected with wounds caused by three porcupine squalls having pierced right across the pads of the right paw through the flesh. However, thereafter no more incidents were reported from the area. Then, it was assumed that it was the same leopard that was involved in all these incidents.

Incident 3

Several years earlier, the bungalow keeper at the New Butthuwa bungalow was attacked while he was walking up to the new bungalow from the old bungalow, only several metres away. Incidents like these may happen especially in a case where you are confronted unexpectedly at close proximity. The leopard vanished from the area and no incidents were reported thereafter.

There have been other incidents in the park.

Once Lal and I were at the Yala bungalow near the Kosgasmankada campsite. Another frequent visitor to the park, Dr. Walter Goonerathne had set up a camp there. We met him on his way out of the park. He told us that there was a bold male leopard that came very close to the campsite at night. They had heard the growling very close to the camp. They had kept watch on all three nights and taken precautions by lighting a campfire.

On the night that Dr. Goonerathna left the park, Lal and I were at the old Yala bungalow (The old Yala bungalow by the banks of the Menik was the best bungalow for keen wildlife enthusiasts). I was suddenly awakened just passed midnight by the loud growling of a leopard. I got out of bed and looked down from the balcony. The Yala Plains was lit by very scuttle moonlight. I saw a huge male leopard seated on the pavement of the bungalow. I flashed the spot lamp on the beast and held him on it. It turned its head up and seemed totally unafraid and undisturbed by us.

Then it put its head down and took a deep breath and started growling. It was so loud that it may have been heard a mile or so further. Then he quieted down and seemed to listen carefully to the sounds of the jungle. Soon we realised what it was looking for and the growl of the female returned from somewhere in the jungle towards Suduwelimulla. Then, he started his gentle walk towards his mate. Later, in the early hours of the day, we heard them both growling in turns, may possibly be the mating calls. Some visitors had been lucky to have spotted this couple on the Yala Plains a day or two later.

The Wildlife Department should find a competent person or team to take up this challenge and provide the infrastructure to expedite this matter.


