7 ‘encounters’ in 24 hours: 1 criminal killed, six arrested in Uttar Pradesh

The SHO of Mirapur police station in Muzaffarnagar said Aadesh Baliyan (38), killed in the encounter, was wanted in cases in the district and neighbouring Baghpat.

IN THE past 24 hours, Uttar Pradesh Police conducted operations in at least seven places, leading to shoot-outs and encounters in which a wanted criminal was killed and six more history-sheeters arrested.

In late night operations, police in Muzaffarnagar district claimed to have killed a criminal carrying a reward of Rs 1 lakh. In the same district, three more such encounters took place, leading to the arrest of three others.

Similar operations were also carried out in Gorakhpur, Kanpur and Saharanpur districts, police said.

SHO of Mirapur police station in Muzaffarnagar, Pankaj Tyagi, claimed that Aadesh Baliyan (38), killed in the encounter, was wanted in cases in the district and neighbouring Baghpat. He was wanted in over 30 cases, including those of murder, loot and dacoity, and carried a reward of Rs 1 lakh, police said. On Monday night, they were tipped off about his presence in Sambhalheda locality. “Joint teams of the police and STF laid a trap and tried to nab him when he fired at us,” claimed the SHO.

He added that the police returned fire and Baliyan suffered a gunshot injury on the chest. He was taken to the nearby community health centre where he was declared dead on arrival. “We are yet to identify an aide of Aadesh, who escaped from the spot. A .9 mm and a .32 bore pistols were recovered from the possession of Baliyan,” he added.

Explained Triggering controversy, with fresh ‘encounters’

Deputy SP, Special Task Force (STF), Brijesh Kumar Singh said the its Muzzafarnagar unit had got inputs that Baliyan and an unidentified accomplice were planning to kill someone on Roorkee Road area, following which the STF team and the local police located them. “We challenged the criminals but they opened fire and we fired back .A bullet hit Baliyan on the chest while his accomplice has managed to escape. We have launched a manhunt to trace his accomplice,” said Singh.

In Kakrauli police station area of the district, 24-year-old Shaan Mohammad was arrested following an alleged exchange of fire with a police team in which he suffered a gunshot injury on a leg. He was wanted since March this year in a case of loot and carried a reward of Rs 25,000 on his head. He was admitted to the district hospital and was out of danger, claimed circle officer (CO) of Bhopa area, Ram Mohan Sharma.

In another incident in Khatauli police station area, 32-year-old Jamaluddin was arrested after he suffered a gunshot injury on the left leg in an exchange of fire.

“Jamaluddin was wanted in more then 10 cases in Muzaffarnagar that include murder, loot, Cow Slaughter Act and dacoity. During a vehicle checking drive, we tried to stop a motorcycle around 8:30 pm Monday. The man on the vehicle opened fire at the police team and sped away. A police team chased him and in retaliatory firing he suffered a gunshot injury. He was arrested after primary medical treatment,” saidHarsaran Sharma, SHO of the Khatauli police station.

Santosh Kumar Singh, SHO of Nai Mandi police station, said Mohammad Imran (30) was arrested after an exchange of fire in which he was injured. He was wanted in cases of loot, theft and carried a reward of Rs 25,000, the SHO said.

In Gorakhpur, one Vaibhav Andrews alias Golu, who was wanted in a murder case, was arrested after he was injured in an alleged exchange of fire with the police in Chiluatal police station area. Vaibhav carried a reward of Rs 25,000, said SHO Suryabhan Singh.

In Kanpur’s Sajeti police station area, Kailash Kumar Nishad, who carried a reward of Rs 25,000 and has 13 cases of attempt to murder, theft, loot, Gangster Act and Arms Act lodged against him, was arrested after he was injured in alleged exchange of fire with the police Monday.
