4 Neo Jamaat-ul Mujahideen Bangladesh terrorists, 3 of them from Bangladesh, held in Kolkata

KOLKATA: Four members of a terror outfit, Neo Jamaat-ul Mujahideen Bangladesh (Neo-JMB), were arrested by Kolkata Police’s special task force during night-long raids since Monday. Neo-JMB, an affiliate of Islamic State, is an offshoot of JMB , which was aligned with Al Qaeda.Three of the arrested are Bangladeshi nationals and the fourth hails from Birbhum. They were involved in “recruiting men and collecting money” to carry out terror attacks in both Bengal and Bangladesh, police said. The are likely to be questioned by National Investigating Agency (NIA) and Bangladesh police.The arrested men had IS-related literature and audio and video recordings of speeches by Jaish-e-Muhammed chief and Kandahar hijack mastermind Masood Azhar on their mobiles, cops said, adding that they had formed closed groups on popular social networking platforms to circulate jihadi literature. Since 2017, the STF has arrested 14 Neo-JMB operatives in Bengal.The two Bangladeshi nationals, Md Jiaur Rahman (44), a resident of Nawabgunj, and Mamonur Rashid (33), a resident of Rangpur, were picked up from the parking lot of Sealdah station. Based on inputs from them, two other members of the outfit — Md Sahin Alam alias Alamin (23) of Rajshahi in Bangladesh and Rabiul Islam (35) from Nayagram in Birbhumarrested — were nabbed near Howrah station on Tuesday morning.“Mobiles recovered from them had photos, videos and jihadi literature in the form of leaflets and books,” joint CP (STF) Subhankar Sinha Sarkar. The accused were remanded in police custody till July 9. They were charged under sections pertaining to waging war against the nation, spreading hatred, forgery and specific sections of the Foreigners Act.According to Sarkar, the three arrested Bangladeshi nationals had taken shelter in India to escape arrest in their country. “The Indian, Rabiul, also a member of the outfit, was providing them shelter and helping them in recruiting and collecting funds in India.“This is similar to the Khagragarh model of 2014 when JMB men from Bangladesh hid in both Burdwan and Birbhum,” a senior officer said.Neo-JMB, with presence in both Bangladesh and India, has the highest number of indirect Islamic State recruits in the subcontinent. It’s avowed aim is to overthrow the democratic governments in Bengal and Assam and Bangladesh and establish Sharia law under a caliphate. The biggest IS catch for the state CID was Mohammad Moisuddin alias Musa in 2019. Musa was later questioned by the FBI in jail.Cops said they are questioning Rabiul, who had last visited home on June 13 and claimed he was going to Kolkata to work as a mason, to ascertain if he had like Musa contacted other IS operatives. Musa had used the online platforms to get in touch with like-minded people in the region. He had established contacts with Bengal resident Shafi Armar, a former Indian Mujahideen operative seen as the Islamic State’s predominant ‘recruiter’ for India. The cops believe the four arrested men might have had contacts with Armar.“Musa had also got in touch with Abu Sulaiman, a former JMB member who had steered JMB towards IS. Hence, all these connections are bound to be investigated,” a police source said.Initial communications in this case, the sources said, took place via Facebook and then switched to other platforms like Nimbuzz, Surespot and Trillian. A few social suspicious media communication are being monitored to nab other members of the module.
