IMD: Expect ample rains through week

After a delay of 15 days, the Southwest Monsoon has finally arrived in Mumbai, declared India Meteorological Department (IMD) on Tuesday. However, contesting the claims of IMD, a few private weather forecasting groups said that that as per their weather observations, monsoons will most probably arrive in the city today. Even as social media was flooded with the announcement of the arrival of the much eagerly awaited monsoon on Tuesday, it was an irony of sorts as per several Mumbaikars, with the city not witnessing much rainfall and weather conditions continuing to be extremely humid.

As per IMD, the southwest monsoon has now covered the entire state of Maharashtra as it has further advanced into remaining parts of central Arabian Sea, Konkan and Madhya Maharashtra, some parts of north Arabian Sea and even south Gujarat along with parts of Madhya Pradesh.

While the normal date for the onset of monsoon over Mumbai was June 10, the impact of cyclone Vayu delayed it by around two weeks. This year, so far, the onset of monsoon has been the most in 10 years.

Expect rains till this weekend:

As per the weather predictions Mumbai is likely to receive good rains starting today and tomorrow, which may continue till the weekend after which there could be a brief phase of lull. Skymet, a private weather forecasting agency stated that the intensity of rains in the city is likely to increase from July 26 onwards and the city can expect over 200 mm rainfall between June 26 and 30. However, these spells would not be heavy and thus would not disrupt life.

Don't agree with IMD:

Meanwhile Rajesh Kapadia, a Mahalaxmi-based weather enthusiast who has been in the field of weather forecasting for over 45 years and also runs the popular blog Vagaries of Weather said that his calculations with IMD over the arrival of monsoon differed by 24 hours."In the last three days there has been no change in the weather pattern and the city continues to be hot and humid. Also, there is no offshore trough and the upper winds continue to remain easterly. Hence, we do not agree with IMD jumping its gun and announcing the arrival on Tuesday," he said, adding by Wednesday the situation is likely to change and become more conducive for the arrival of monsoon in Mumbai.

According to Kapadia, the city will experience very strong winds from this evening. "From tomorrow, the city will receive steady rains. Thursday might witness around 25 to 35 mm while Friday is likely to receive 45 to 55 mm of rains. Some places in north Konkan may even get 80-100 mm," he informed.

Picking Up Pace
