Blind murder case solved, victim’s husband arrested

Ludhiana: The Meharban police have solved a month-old blind murder case of a 22-year-old woman whose body was found in a field of Kaneja village of Meharban. The police in this case have arrested the husband of the woman from Jharkhand. According to the police, the accused is also the husband of the elder sister of the deceased.

The arrested accused has been identified as Chandan Kumar, 24, a hosiery worker of Jaspal Colony of Meharban.

On May 17, the body of an unidentified woman was found from the fields of Sunil Kumar Ahuja. One of his workers Walait Singh was the first to see the body and raised an alarm. Initially, the police could not identify the body and cremated it after 72 hours. The autopsy report had ascertained strangulation as the cause of death of the woman.

The SHO at Meharban police station, inspector Jagdev Singh, said that the deceased had been identified as Reshma. The accused, Chandan, had also got married to Sandhya, who is the elder sister of Reshma. The entire family hails from Jharkhand.

“The trio has been living in the city for the last couple of years. Last year, Sandhya went back to her native place and that time Chandan solemnised his love marriage secretly with Reshma. The entire family knows about it now and even Sandhya had approved their relation. However, Chandan and Reshma’s relations got strained and they used to fight over small issues,” added the inspector.

The police official further said, “A few days before the murder of Reshma she told Chandan that she wants to go to her native place. She also demanded Rs 50,000 from him. However, Chandan did not give her money. On May 16, the duo had a fight over the same issue and Chandan allegedly strangulated Reshma. Thereafter, he dumped the body in a field and escaped.”

When asked how did the police identified Reshma and nabbed Chandan, inspector Jagdev replied that, “For identification of the body the police had circulated a picture of Reshma. Meanwhile, the police reached Jaspal Colony and there the residents confirmed that Reshma had been living there with Chandan. However, nobody had seen them for the past some time. Thereafter, the police started searching for them at their native place. Meanwhile, Chandan reached his native place, where he told his family that he had killed Reshma. Then Reshma’s father Ramjeet Yadav reached the city and got his statement recorded with the police.”

The city police on June 21 reached Jharkhand and arrested the accused. He was brought to Ludhiana on June 24 and has been sent on police remand.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
