Huda Beauty announces Jacqueline Fernandez collaboration for new eyelash launch

In recent years Huda Beauty has become known for stunning high-pigment palettes and impossible-to-smudge liquid lipsticks, but cast your mind back just six years and you may remember the product that launched Huda into cult beauty status in the first place - lashes.

Named after women who Huda claims are ‘beautiful, strong and inspiring’, the collection has been a staple of the brand’s offerings and is well loved in the beauty community. It has now been announced that generation number two will be hitting our shopping carts very soon, featuring a number of collaborations who will no doubt include some bad-ass boss ladies.

Image credit: Francesca Thompson-Smith

The news of the new collection dropped on Thursday 17th January on the official Huda Beauty website, but with details of the first collaboration released only three days later, it looks like we might not be waiting too long for more information, or even the release itself.

The first look teased a sneak peak of the ‘Jacqueline’ lash, a fluttery, classic lash inspired by Bollywood actress Jacqueline Fernandez:

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Huda Kattan (@hudabeauty) on Jan 20, 2019 at 7:01am PST

The Sri Lankan-born beauty began as a television presenter and model before breaking her way into acting, contributing to an impressive amount of charitable work along the way. In 2014, PETA India awarded Fernandez ‘Woman of The Year’ for her animal rights activism, before honouring her with their first ever ‘Digital Activism Award’ in 2018. The former Miss Universe Sri Lanka has also been recognised for her work alongside Habitat for Humanity, a global charity combating poverty. It was this work that saw her gain the International Humanitarian Award at the Asian Voice Charity Awards in 2017. Earlier this year, Fernandez was spotted building homes for those affected by floods in Aluva, India, as part of her ‘Jacqueline Builds’ campaign. She expressed her enthusiasm for being involved the night before on her Instagram page, urging followers to donate to the cause, claiming her previous building efforts ‘would not have been possible’ without all the love and support of her followers.

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Jacqueline Fernandez (@jacquelinef143) on Jan 10, 2019 at 9:38pm PST

It’s clear that Jacqueline Fernandez is a humble, pure soul and it’s exactly this kind of inner beauty (as well as her obvious stunning looks) that makes her exactly the kind of muse Huda Beauty needs. If this preview of the collection is anything to go by, we’re about to be inspired by some truly fierce women in 2019!
