Vasant Vihar triple murder: Police arrest two suspects using CCTV footage

Police had earlier suspected that the killings were carried out by a man and a woman known to the attendant. (Picture for representation)

The Delhi Police Crime Branch on Wednesday arrested the main suspects, a woman and her lover, who were allegedly behind the murders an elderly couple and their attendant in southwest Delhi's Vasant Vihar.

The duo was arrested from Gurugram with the help of the CCTV footage, which captured the movement of a man and a woman.

Police said the motive behind the triple murder was robbery. The man arrested on Wednesday had served a five-year jail term for the murder of his wife.



Police had earlier suspected that the killings were carried out by a man and a woman known to the attendant.

It was also suspected that the accused had come with an intention to harm the nursing attendant, but ended up killing the couple to eliminate witnesses, police said.

The bodies of the elderly couple, Vishnu Mathur (78) and Shashi Mathur (75), and their nursing attendant, Khushbu Nautiyal (24), were found with their throats slit on Sunday morning.

According to police, the accused are believed to be acquaintances of the nursing attendant and she facilitated their entry into the house.

"We have very strong clues that the friendly entry was facilitated from the side of the nursing attendant," a senior police officer said.

Fifteen teams were formed to trace the accused involved in the killing. "We are working on it and various teams have been formed which are working on the leads," Joint Commissioner of Police (New Delhi) Anand Mohan said.

Post-mortem examination of the three bodies has been done. Nautiyal hailed from Uttarakhand and her body was handed over to her family after the autopsy, police said.

The daughter of the elderly couple had not raised any suspicion on anyone, the officer said.

No alcohol bottles were found in the room but a half-empty glass with leftover liquid, suspected to be alcohol, was found from the crime scene, he said.

Call record details of Nautiyal were accessed. Dump data of mobile phones active in the vicinity of the house were also accessed, police said.

(With inputs from Chirag Gothi and PTI)
