UP: 7 encounters in less than 24 hours; 1 killed, 6 arrested

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh police has increased its vigilance and conducted operations in the past 24 hours at seven different places killing a wanted criminal and arresting six others.

The overnight operation in Muzaffarpur led to the killing of a criminal who carried a reward of Rs one lakh. Three more arrests were made in three different operations in Muzaffarpur.

According to police, Gorakhpur, Kanpur and Saharanpur districts also witnessed similar operations.

Station House Officer of Mirapur police station in Muzaffarnagar, Pankaj Tyagi, claimed that Aadesh Baliyan (38), killed in the encounter, was wanted in cases in the district and neighbouring Baghpat. He was wanted in over 30 cases, including those of murder, loot, and dacoity, and carried a reward of Rs 1 lakh, police said.

On Monday night, the police were tipped off about his presence in Sambhalheda locality. “Joint teams of the police and STF laid a trap and tried to nab him when he fired at us,” The Indian Express quoted the SHO. Baliyan was hit at the chest with a bullet and he was brought dead at the nearest health centre. A couple of pistols were recovered from Baliyan.

Police had the input that Baliyan and an unidentified accomplice were planning to kill someone on Roorkee road area. “We challenged the criminals but they opened fire and we fired back. A bullet hit Baliyan on the chest while his accomplice has managed to escape. We have launched a manhunt to trace his accomplice,” The Indian Express quoted Deputy SP, Special Task Force (STF), Brijesh Kumar Singh.

Shaan Mohammed, who carried the reward of Rs 25,000/-, was arrested from Kakrauli after a brief exchange of fire with police. He was hit at his leg and was admitted to the district hospital and was out of danger, claimed circle officer (CO) of Bhopa area, Ram Mohan Sharma.

Jamaluddin. 32, was hit at his leg before getting arrested in Khatault area.

“Jamaluddin was wanted in more than 10 cases in Muzaffarnagar that include murder, loot, Cow Slaughter Act and dacoity. During a vehicle checking drive, we tried to stop a motorcycle around 8:30 pm on Monday. The man on the vehicle opened fire at the police team and sped away. A police team chased him and in retaliatory firing, he suffered a gunshot injury. He was arrested after primary medical treatment,” The Indian Express quoted Harsaran Sharma, SHO of the Khatauli police station.

Mohammed Imran was arrested from Nai Mandi after he was injured in a brief exchange of fire. He was wanted in cases of loot, theft and carried a reward of Rs 25,000, the SHO said.

Vaibhav Andrews, wanted in a murder case, was injured after a gunfight with the police. He carried a reward of Rs 25, 000.

With 13 cases against him, Kailash Nishad carried a reward of Rs 25, 000 and was arrested in Kanpur on Monday.
