If Congress loses then does that mean India lost? There is a limit to arrogance: PM Modi in Rajya Sabha

PM Narendra Modi in Rajya Sabha | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi Wednesday said that the 'argument' that Congress' defeat meant 'India's loss' was 'arrogance'. Delivering a speech in Rajya Sabha, the Upper House of the Parliament in his reply to the 'Motion Of Thanks On the President's Address', Modi said that he was 'saddened when some leaders said- the BJP and allies won the elections but the country lost and democracy lost'. In his first comment on mob lynching and the incident involving Tabrez Ansari, Modi said that culprits should be 'isolated' and that the entire state of Jharkhand should not be 'blamed' for the incident.

"The lynching in Jharkhand has pained me. It has saddened others too. But, some here in the Rajya Sabha are calling Jharkhand a hub of lynching. Is this fair? Why are they insulting a whole state. None of us has the right to insult the state of Jharkhand," Modi said. He also hit out at the Congress party saying that the NRC was accepted by Rajiv Gandhi government, but later opposed by the Congress party for vote bank politics.

"These statements are really unfortunate. Why should we question the decision of voters?"Modi said in his speech amid thunderous applause from the government benches.

"Did India lose in Wayanad? Did India lose in Rae Bareli? Did India lose in Trivandrum, what about Amethi? What kind of argument is this? If Congress loses then does that mean India lost? There is a limit to arrogance. Congress could not win a single seat in 17 states," Modi further said.

"Some people kept raising the EVM issue in this House. I want to tell them there was a time when we had just 2 MPs in Parliament. People made fun of us. But, we worked harder and won the trust of people. We did not make excuses and blame polling booth," Modi said while commenting on the EVM issue raised by the opposition.

Continuing his attack on the Congress party Modi said, "By saying farmers sold themselves just because of Rs 2,000 scheme is an insult to farmers. I am shocked, even media was abused, it was said elections were won because of the media. What do such ppl mean? That media is on sale? Does same logic apply to Tamil Nadu and Kerala?"

"It is after long that a Government with a full majority won once again with a full majority. In this mandate, we see the wish of the people for stability. In fact, this trend of stable governments is being seen in many states as well," he further said.
