Pakistan collects funds for terror activities in Kashmir’s name: Zakir Musa had 'admitted' [Audio]

Times Now accessed purported audio conversation between Zakir Musa and Abu Dujana | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: A purported conversation between two terrorists has revealed that Pakistan indeed has hand in funding terror in Kashmir Valley and terrorists in the neighbouring country collect money in the name of Kashmir Valley and then use it to purchase arms and ammunition.

An audio clip of an alleged conversation between slain Lashkar-e-Taiba terrorist Abu Dujana and Hizbul Mujahideen commander Zakir Musa has been accessed by Times Now, in which the two discuss how pro-Pakistani terrorists in Kashmir have an agenda to establish ‘Shariat’ – or Islamic law- in the Valley.

As per the alleged audio conversation, it is Zakir Musa (killed in an encounter in South Kashmir in May) who admits that funds are collected in Pakistan on the pretext of using it for the development of Kashmir but the money collected is actually used to buy arms and ammunition to wage terror in the Valley.

The two terrorists had also purportedly discussed, according to the audio clip, how Pakistan had made the fight in Kashmir as a “political” fight even though Musa wanted to focus on establishing the Islamic Law in the state.

Zakir Musa, who had become the successor of slain Burhan Wani in the Valley, and was the chief of Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind, which is a group associated with Al-Qaeda. He was killed in an encounter with security forces in a village in Tral in South Kashmir in May, police officials had confirmed. Following his encounter, protests had broken out in Shopian, Pulwama, Awantipora and downtown Srinagar, reports said.

Musa's killing was hailed as a major success for security forces as the terrorist had been involved in a string of terror-related crimes in the last six years.

On the other hand, Abu Dujana, a top Lashkar-e-Taiba commander, was killed in an encounter in Pulwama in south Kashmir in July last year. Much like Musa's killing, the encounter of Dujana was hailed as a "huge achievement" by the Jammu and Kashmir police as he had been active since December 2014 and had been carrying a reward of Rs 12.5 lakh on his head.


