PM Modi addresses Rajya Sabha, says Jharkhand incident deeply saddening

New Delhi:

Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Wednesday addressed the Rajya Sabha. This comes a day after he hit out at the Congress during his speech in the Lok Sabha. PM Modi greeted the Members of the Upper House of the Parliament and thanked the electorates for giving his government a second term to serve the country. On Tuesday, in his Motion of Thanks to the President’s Address in Lok Sabha, Modi said the government would take India to new heights and urged the Opposition to not disrupt Parliament. Opposition members attacked the government, accusing it of denigrating institutions and destroying federalism.



Highlights of PM Modi address in Rajya Sabha :



02:10 pm: "This election was special and historic. It was only for a second time that a party got a clear majority, which is a sign of a healthy democracy,"PM Modi said.



02.12 pm: Opposition is questioning the wisdom of voters. "I was saddened when some leaders said- the BJP and allies won the elections but the nation lost, democracy lost," PM Modi said.



02.14 pm: It is important to respect our electoral process and democracy: PM Modi



02:16 pm: By saying farmers sold themselves just because of Rs 2,000 scheme is an insult to farmers. I am shocked, even media was abused, it was said elections were won because of the media. What do such ppl mean? That media is on sale? Does same logic apply to Tamil Nadu and Kerala?







02.20 pm: Some people kept raising the EVM issue in this House.I want to tell them there was a time when we had just 2 MPs in Parliament. People made fun of us. But, we worked harder and won trust of people. We did not make excuses and blame polling booth.



02.22 pm: We should appreciate how our electoral processes have improved over the years. In 1950s polling process took long time to complete. Violence and booth capturing were common in some places. Now, news is about rising voter turnout. This is a healthy signal.

02.25 pm: Election Commission had invited parties on the issue of EVMs but just two parties accepted- CPI and NCP. I appreciate them for going to EC to learn more about the issue. But, why did the rest of the parties questioning the EVMs not even bother to go, they should answer.



02.28 pm: Some people kept talking about the EVM issue. I want to tell them that there was a time when we were two MPs in the Parliament. People mocked us. We worked hard to win trust of people. We did not make excuses and blame the polling booth: PM Modi.



02.30 pm: My friends in the Congress have not been able to digest victory, they have not been able to accept defeat. This is not a healthy sign in a democracy.



02.33 pm: This same attitude is visible when it comes to discussing 'One Nation, One Election.' Yes, some may not like this idea or have views on this. But, it is important to present these ideas and have discussions on this.



02.35 pm: The voters now are very very aware, they not only know what is happening in Lok Sabha but also what is happening in Rajya Sabha, and they voted this time keeping these facts in mind.



02.38 pm: Now they are slamming New India. Do they want old India back? Old India where cabinet decisions were torn in press meets, old India where Navy was used for personal trips, old India where numerous scams existed,old India which supported tukde tukde gang?



02.39 pm: Opposition started your terrorism versus my terrorism.



02.40 pm: PM Modi on mob lynching: Deeply saddened by the incident.



02.42 pm: The lynching in Jharkhand has pained me. It has saddened others too. But, some here in the Rajya Sabha are calling Jharkhand a hub of lynching. Is this fair? Why are they insulting a whole state. None of us have the right to insult the state of Jharkhand.



02.45 pm: No one has the right to defame the entire Jharkhand state.



02.47 pm: Sab Ka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas is our mantra.



02.48 pm: I am sure there is no one in this house who will not like India to be part of the 5 trillion dollar economy club. Please gives us constructive suggestions, we are open to all suggestions, we don't believe only we have all the intellect.



02.50 pm: I think Azad sahab(Ghulam Nabi Azad) is having blurred vision,maybe he is seeing everything from political spectacles. Ghalib said something for such people, 'ta umr Ghalib ye bhool karta raha, dhool chehre pe thi, aaina saaf karta raha.'







02.56 pm: Wrong to associate Beti Bachao with advertising.



02.57 pm: PM indicates to fight 2024 polls. Will come up with new development before people to fight polls.



02.59 pm: We have focussed on development of North East regions.



3.00 pm: The deaths in Bihar due to Acute Encephalitis Syndrome are unfortunate and a matter of shame for us. We have to take this seriously. I am in constant touch with the state government and I am sure we will collectively come out of this crisis soon.



3.03 pm: The need of the hour is to strengthen Ayushman Bharat. We want our poor to get the best quality and affordable medical treatment.



03.10 pm: PM Modi's address concludes.



03.12 pm: There are 226 districts in the country where there is water crisis. Now I am trying to mobilize everyone to tackle this, how we can give priority to water in MPLAD funds. We also have to make society aware on water issues. A Jal Shakti ministry has also been setup

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
