Only rain can save you: Leonardo DiCaprio talks Chennai water crisis with haunting Instagram photo

Apart from being an actor, Leonardo DiCaprio is a leading activist in the area of climate change, global warming and other environment domains (Reuters photo)

Actor and environmentalist Leonardo DiCaprio has put up an Instagram post lamenting the Chennai water crisis. "'Only rain can save Chennai from this situation.' A well completely empty, and a city without water," DiCaprio's post said in its caption of the photo, which showed women gathered around a well trying to pull out perhaps the last drop of water.

"The southern Indian city of Chennai is in crisis, after the four main water reservoirs ran completely dry," DiCaprio's post also said, before talking about the crisis that the southern city has found itself in: "The acute water shortage has forced the city to scramble for urgent solutions and residents have to stand in line for hours to get water from government tanks."

"As the water levels depleted, hotels and restaurants started to shut down temporarily, and the air con was turned off in the city's metro. Officials in the city continue to try and find alternative sources of water - but the community continue to pray for rain," the actor's post said. Apart from being an actor, Leonardo DiCaprio is a leading activist in the area of climate change, global warming and other environment domains.

Chennai has been battling acute water shortage for the last few weeks after several of its water reservoirs went bone dry. Citizens are dependent on water tankers and reduced municipal supply.

Distressing photos have shown residents standing in long queues waiting to collect water. Prices of bottled water have skyrocketed four times, reportedly, and IT-sector companies have asked their employees to work from home.

Chennai's water crisis has spent long time in the making. Chennai used to be one of India's water-surplus metropolitan cities till a just two decades ago. Chennai once had nearly two dozen water bodies including three rivers and a British period Buckingham canal. Today, it is reduced to half a dozen.
