Delhi triple murder solved: Friend's daughter and her partner killed senior citizen couple, nurse for money

Manoj, the prime accused, stabbed Khushbu, the caretaker, multiple times in the dining area and then went on to kill the elderly couple. (Representational Image)

The Delhi Police has solved the brutal triple murder that took place in the national capital on June 23. The police have arrested Preeti Sehrawat Mona and Manoj Bhatt in the triple murder of senior citizen couple Vishnu Swaroop Mathur and Shashi Mathur and their caretaker Khushbu.

Giving the details of the investigation, the police said that murder mystery was solved after the daughter of the deceased couple revealed that a few days before the murder, the accused Preeti Sehrawat, daughter of her mother's colleague had suddenly visited her parents and had also stayed there overnight.

The couple's daughter revealed that Preeti Sehrawat had conversed with her on the night of June 17, when she had come to stay with the Mathurs, using the nursing attendant Khushbu's phone.

Preeti's sudden visit cast suspicion and the police checked technical surveillance footage. The surveillance found that on June 23, Preeti had left her Gurguram home along with her live-in partner Manoj Bhatt and checked into a hotel in the city. Suspicion over their behaviour increased when they again shifted to a new hotel in the afternoon of June 25.

Poor financial state becomes motive

Local investigation revealed that Preeti Sehrawat and Manoj Bhatt were in poor financial condition and both had unstable marriages.

With the conduct of the duo raising suspicion, the police conducted a raid and both were detained. During the raid, Manoj Bhatt was found wearing a gold chain with locket and a diamond ring.

Subsequently, both were subjected to sustained interrogation and they confessed to the crime. They revealed that they were constantly on the look out for a vulnerable target and had zeroed in on the hapless elderly couple.

Preeti revealed that she had deliberately come and stayed overnight at the couple's house on June 17 and both her and Manoj had again come on June 21 to figure out their escape plan.

What happened on the night of the murders

It was further revealed that on the night of the murder, both Preeti and Manoj reached the Vasant Apartment flat on motorcycle. They were aware of the CCTV cameras in the area so they had covered their faces.

Preeti went to the flat of elderly couple and Manoj followed after waiting for a few minutes. Khushbu opened the door, while the Mathurs were in their bed room.

Manoj asked Khushbu to switch on the TV to suppress any possible noise. He then took out a bottle of Pepsi in which he had already mixed alcohol.

Preeti asked Khushbu to prepare tea. Thereafter, Manoj stabbed Khushbu multiple times in the dining area and then went on to kill the elderly couple. Soon thereafter, they ransacked the entire house for more than two hours.

Then they left the house with the looted items and returned to Preeti's house. Preeti subsequently booked a hotel and both of them checked into it after which they shifted to another hotel two days later, from where they were detained.
