Delhi Crime: Girl with a peacock tattoo

Raju Gehlot and Neetu Solanki | Photo Credit: Times Now

One of the national capital's big unsolved murder cases has now been closed after the crime branch of the Delhi Police found the prime accused dead in a private hospital in Gurugram. The case hit the headline one winter morning in February 2011. The case was called "girl with a peacock tattoo". This was the time when crime author Stieg Larsson's Millennium trilogy was still very popular.

The deceased was later identified as Neetu Solanki. Her body was found stuffed in a travelling bag. Eyewitnesses had claimed that a young man got off from an autorickshaw and left the bag at the main entrance of New Delhi railway station early morning on 11th February 2011.

When the Delhi Police opened the bag, a severed body of a young woman was found. The only clue was a peacock tattoo on her abdomen. For three days, the body was kept in the mortuary but no one came to identify it. The day police performed the last rites, Neetu's father met the police and identified his daughter from the photographs.

Neetu's parents lived in west Delhi. His father had a dairy and property business. She was a bright student and a law graduate from the Law Faculty of Delhi University. But instead of pursuing a career in law, she had joined a call centre. Over the years, she changed her job thrice and worked in big call centres like Convergys etc. In March 2010, while working at a call centre in Gurugram, she told her parents that she has a got a job offer from Singapore.

In April 2010, she left for Singapore and stayed in touch with the family using a web cam and a Bangalore mobile phone. However, soon her calls became infrequent and for months, the family was not aware of her whereabouts. Few days before the murder, she spoke to her younger sister on webcam. When her sister enquired about an injury mark on her head, Neetu replied she had an accidental fall.

After crime branch identified the deceased, investigating officers found that Neetu Solanki might not have ever gone to Singapore but was living with her boyfriend Raju Gehlot in Delhi.

The two had met a party and were introduced to each other by a common friend. Raju had a diploma in French from a private institute and was employed as a cabin crew in Air India. The two became very close. He also quit Air India without informing anyone in April 2010.

Fearing that their families won't accept them, the two started living incognito in Mumbai. Later, they moved to Goa and Bengaluru. However, the two soon ran out of money and returned to Delhi.

In Delhi, they changed their residence twice and finally moved to Harinagar in Ashram (south-east Delhi). Raju rented the house on a fake identity card and paid the two months rent in advance.

Crime branch found that the couple hardly interacted with anyone during their stay in Harinagar. On the intervening night of 10th-11th February 2011, Neetu and Raju again had a fight. Raju hit her with a sharp object, she fell unconscious. He then strangled her and severed her body.

Soon after committing the crime, he called his cousin Naveen Shokeen and told him that he has killed Neetu. Naveen was later arrested for harbouring an accused.

So where did Raju vanish? Crime branch carried out several raids in Goa, Mumbai but never found him. There were reports that he had fled to Nepal and that the police had gone slow because his uncle was in the same department.

The final breakthrough in the case came eight years later. On Tuesday evening, his parents, whose phone was still under surveillance by the crime branch, received a call from a man who identified himself as their missing son, Raju Gehlot. He told his parents that he is dying and has been admitted to a private hospital in Gurugram.

When the crime branch team reached the hospital, Raju had already passed away, thus bringing closure to one of the many unsolved murder cases in the Capital.

Crime branch sleuths who probed the case for eight years found that initially, Raju had stayed in touch with his parents. Soon after he fled, Raju used 15 different SIM cards and mobile phones. This is the reason being cited by the crime branch for not being able to trace him. "Since August 2011, his interactions with family members ended abruptly", said a crime branch officer.

What did Raju do in past eight years? Where did he vanish? Raju again changed his identity and moved to Gurugram in 2012. He was now Rohan Dahiya and got himself employed as ' returning officer' with Kochhar Automobiles.

In the past seven years, he didn't speak with anyone at Kochhar Automobiles. He would come early to the office and often left late. Rohan was known as a diligent worker but was aloof from others, said a senior official associated with the probe.

Hospital records showed that Raju got himself admitted with a complaint of severe pain in the abdomen, a few days back. He was diagnosed with a serious liver infection and passed away on Tuesday. Delhi Police is now waiting for a medical certificate, which will be then submitted to the court.
