Poldark is going head to head with ITV's new drama Beecham House in a Sunday night ratings battle

They are about to go head-to-head as the star hunks of Sunday night television.

And it appears it is not just their undeniable good looks that Tom Bateman and Aidan Turner have in common.

Bateman, 30, plays a rugged ex-East India Company soldier in ITV's new drama Beecham House and will go up against Turner, 36, as the popular BBC show Poldark returns for the final series next month to spark a duel of the duals.

They are about to go head-to-head as the star hunks of Sunday night television. And it appears it is not just their undeniable good looks that Tom Bateman, left, and Aidan Turner, right, have in common

Just two episodes of Beecham House have been screened so far and it's clear Bateman is up for the battle — he lost no time getting his shirt off as he was seen sweaty and bare-chested as he hacked away at shrubbery.

Was it a deliberate attempt to top Poldark's famous topless scything scenes which had fans swooning across the land?

Not so, says Beecham House director Gurinder Chadha, who insisted she tried to avoid a Poldark-like topless scene.

But she admits: 'It's like 'take your shirt off, come on, get them to take their shirt off', we did resist but it has set the bar in terms of period dramas, I have to say.'

On top of this, both men have been cast in recent Agatha Christie adaptations, with Bateman in the 2018 film Murder On The Orient Express and Turner in the BBC's And Then There Were None.

But as these pictures show, the similarities don't stop there . . .

Tom Bateman, 30

Sunday sizzler: Beecham House.

Stars as: John Beecham, an ex-soldier with the East India Company determined to escape his troubled past.

Born: Oxford.

Parents: Both his father and mother were teachers.

Awards: Won the coveted Leverhulme Scholarship at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art.

Significant other: Engaged to Star Wars's Daisy Ridley.

Other leading roles: The Tunnel, Jekyll And Hyde, Vanity Fair and Cold Pursuit.

Tom with Olivia Cook in Vanity Fair. Bateman, 30, plays a rugged ex-East India Company soldier in ITV's new drama Beecham House

Aidan with Heida Reed in Poldark. Turner, 36, will star in the popular BBC show Poldark for the final series next month to spark a duel of the duals

Aidan Turner, 36

Sunday sizzler: Poldark.

Stars as: Ross Poldark, an incalcitrant ex-soldier trying to rebuild his family's fortune.

Born: Clondalkin, Ireland.

Parents: His father is an electrician and Aidan once worked as his apprentice.

Awards: An Impact Award from the National Television Awards for Ross Poldark.

Significant other: He is reported to be dating U.S. actress Caitlin Fitzgerald.

Other leading roles: Kili in Tolkien's The Hobbit, Being Human, Desperate Romantics and BBC's TV movie Hattie.
