Uttar Pradesh police involved in seven encounters in 24 hours

In a major operation across the state, Uttar Pradesh police were involved in encounters with the criminals at seven different locations resulting in killing one of them and arresting six in the last 24 hours. No policemen suffered any injury in any of the operations.

Interestingly, one of the encounters have even raised question mark on the police functioning.

Ever since Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath came to power, police-criminal encounters have made headlines. Until now more than 40 hardened criminals have been killed in police encounters throughout the state.

However, the number of encounters had come down considerably for the over six months. Opposition also began targeting Yogi government for the deteriorating law and order situation in the state.

But in the past 24 hours alone, policemen were involved in encounters with criminals at least at seven places across the state.

In a joint operation police and STF sleuths gunned down a hardened criminal Adesh Bhaura while three others received bullet injuries under Meerapur police station in Muzaffarnagar district. Bhaura, according to the police was carrying reward of Rs one lakh on his head and was wanted in over a dozen heinous nature of crimes in the state.

Similarly, under Daurala police station area of Meerut, a criminal identified as Sumit carrying a reward of Rs 25,000 on head, received bullet injuries during an encounter with the police.

In yet another similar operation in Saharanpur, police personnel shot at one criminal who was identified as Salman of Muzaffarnpur district. Salman and his aide tried to ran away after breaking the barrier put up at a posh Awas Vikas colony under Sadar Bazar police station. According to the police, Salman's aide, however, managed to flee the spot.

Talking to Zee News, ADG Meerut Zone Prashant Kumar said that it was sheer coincidence that police encounters have increased. He however, said that since the police personnel were involved in Kumbh and then election duty, none of the districts had full strength. Now that Kumbh and elections are over, the districts have full strength and that has resulted in increased patrolling which has subsequently led to encounters, the ADG said.

While West UP alone saw three encounters, an encounter under Kosi Kala police station in Mathura district resulted in the arrest of two criminals, who were later identified by the police as Sahabuddin and Rahees, both residents of Haryana. Police force of Chhata, Shergarh and Kosi Kala were involved in the operation. The two criminals, according to the police were fleeing after lifting a four-wheeler from Haryana.

In east UP's Gorakhpur district, police managed to arrest a wanted criminal identified as Golu alias Vaibhav after an encounter. The encounter resulted in bullet injury to the accused, who was admitted in Baba Raghav Das Medical College. The arrested criminal was wanted for the murder of one Nadeem. The murder took place on February 21. Since then Golu was absconding, the police said.

In yet another police operation, this time in Ghazipur district, the police managed to arrest two criminals after they received bullet injuries following an encounter with the police under Sadat police station area.

However, the encounter under Sajeti police station in Kanpur district has come under scanner. The encounter has resulted in injury to one criminal. The said encounter has come under scanner after a video allegedly shot by the policemen shows cops placing themselves at various positions on the directives of the station officer of Sajeti in anticipation of some criminal trying to flee away on the motorcycle. Interestingly, the criminal received injury on his leg, however, the bullet pierced through the leg without making hole in the jeans, the criminal is wearing.

— Zee Media Newsroom
