Drunken brawl led to migrant’s murder

ATTINGAL: It was a drunken brawl over money to buy a new shirt that provoked Amal (33) alias Hussain Oraon from West Bengal to kill his friend Bimal Bara (39), another migrant labour from West Bengal at work place. Amal, who stabbed his friend with a sharp knife on his neck on March 10, was later arrested from Indo-Bhutan border on Tuesday after a probe that lasted nearly four months.Amal was brought to capital on Tuesday and a local court remanded him in judicial custody. On the night of the murder, Amal came home with liquor, non-vegetarian dishes to coax Bimal to give him the wage that was due.“Since the accused was new to the company, he appeared to be less active at work. On the morning of March 9 (Saturday), the company owner gave Amal’s salary to Bimal. Bimal – who was dissatisfied with Amal’s daily performance – denied his wages . On Saturday night Bimal came home with food and alcohol to their room. After consuming alcohol, Amal asked his wage to buy a new shirt as he had no other clothes. But, Bimal advised him to work hard. Eventually it turned into a heated argument and Amal killed his friend,” said Attingal SI MG Syam.The investigation team had a tough time cracking the case. Though they had tracked down Amal’s mobile tower location and reached his village, they couldn’t arrest him as he had escaped and the team had to return home. The team revisited Amal’s hometown with Rahul, another labourer who had introduced Bimal to the company. Amal had stopped using his phone, had trimmed his beard, shortened his hair and even coloured it.“Since Rahul knew the village, it was easy to deal with residents. We approached them as a recruiting agency that hired migrant labourers and offered high salary. Many approached us and we made sure we collected minute details of Amal. Since he was not using a mobile, it was hard work to trace him. A relative, who came for recruitment, gave us information. We rushed to Makrapara village with the help of local police and found him,” added the officer.
