With Narendra Modi taking lead, how BJP is appropriating Congress's issues, leaders

BJP has learnt from the policies of the Congress and amended its stand on economy from being conservative to market-oriented.

Nationalism, protection of cows from slaughter, eradicating poverty, economic reforms, digital technology are today political issues that most identify with the BJP, with Prime Minister Narendra Modi as champion. But none of these issues originally belonged to the BJP. They were all Congress's issues.

When India got independence, the Congress was symbol of nationalism and talked about bringing development to the country.

The Congress had been the ruling party at the Centre for 55 of nearly 73 years post-independence period. It won elections between 1951-52 and 1967 primarily on its nationalistic appeal.

In 1971 Lok Sabha election, garibi hatao (eradicate poverty) was the poll slogan of Indira Gandhi's Congress. She got a thumping majority in the election. During the campaign, her common refrain was - "they say Indira hatao, I say garibi hatao".

Incidentally, in 2019 Lok Sabha election, PM Modi told his audiences the same - "The Opposition is working on Modi hatao campaign while I am on garibi hatao mission". Like Indira Gandhi, PM Modi won a bigger majority in the polls.

It was the Indira Gandhi government that first began economic reforms with an intent to integrate India's market with the world's.

The economy opened up fully under PV Narasimha Rao government when the then Finance Minister Manmohan Singh presented the watershed budget in July 1991. The BJP was against those economic reforms.

Several years down the line, the BJP learnt from the policies of the Congress and amended its stand on economy from being conservative to market-oriented. Today, the BJP is the votary of economic reforms and the Congress is opposing all such attempts tooth and nail.

Secularism has been a core political issue for the Congress. From Pandit Nehru to Sonia Gandhi, all Congress presidents vowed to protect secularism. Indira Gandhi, in fact, got the word, "secular" inserted in the Preamble to the Constitution when she imposed emergency in 1970s.

There is another side to it. During the time of Pandit Nehru, the Congress reflected Hindu sentiments more and made all attempts to win the trust of Muslims.

In fact, the Muslim League of Muhammad Ali Jinnah forced partition of India with his claim that the Congress under Nehru represented Hindus only.

It was the Congress government of Uttar Pradesh that first passed a law banning cow slaughter, a core Hindutva agenda today. The Congress during emergency had made itself extremely unpopular among Muslims thanks to five-point programme of Sanjay Gandhi.

It included sterilisation of men - in most cases it was implemented by force and on Muslim youths - and urban beautification which began with anti-encroachment drive in the surroundings of the Jama Masjid - an area with large Muslim population - in Delhi.

Today, the BJP claims to be the champion of "political Hindu" and the Congress has let it enjoy that status.

At best, Congress leaders including its president Rahul Gandhi have tried to copy the Hindu model of BJP politics by temple-hopping during election times. But these attempts have failed to match with the BJP's Hindutva politics.

Ironically, Rahul Gandhi and the Congress party spent much of energy on establishing him as a devotee of Lord Shiva during elections while PM Modi grabbed secularism of the Congress by adding "sabka vishwas" to his "sabka saath, sabka vikas" slogan.

Similarly, Rajiv Gandhi, as the prime minister, unveiled the power of computers in India.

The BJP was opposing digitisation of Indian offices, businesses and homes. But, in a matter of two decades, the BJP picket up the thread from the Congress and owned up digital revolution in India.

Now, the BJP is pushing for more digital transaction, conduct of business and the Congress is busy talking about hazards of digital dependence.

PM Modi talks about Aadhaar linking, digital payment and takes pride in putting his government's record online while Rahul Gandhi sided with politicians who called for going back to ballot paper-based voting.

Not only the BJP has appropriated the issues that were Congress's in the past, it has also staked claim on its leadership. Today, PM Modi talks more about Mahatma Gandhi, Subash Chandra Bose, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Lal Bahadur Shastri than any of the Congress leaders.

Of late, PM Modi has referred to PV Narasimha Rao and Pranab Mukheree - both of them spent their lives in the Congress party, in a manner that makes the Congress leadership of Rahul Gandhi and Sonia Gandhi uncomfortable.

In his reply to the motion of thanks in the Rajya Sabha, PM Modi also referred to Manmohan Singh alleging that the Congress leaders don't even take his name lest the first family of the party would feel uncomfortable.

The Congress response to such appropriation of its leaders by the BJP has been of maintaining stoic silence or keeping a distance. This gives PM Modi and the BJP a kind of political walkover in the current setting of national politics.

PM Modi's first speeches after being voted back to power in the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha over past two days give a clear signal that he is aiming to project himself as an all-India leader of all sections and community.

He looks to aim for a stature that Congress leaders such as Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Indira Gandhi enjoyed in post-Independent India.

In his speech, PM Modi repeatedly made appeal to look beyond party divide and did not shy away from offering a word of advice to his own party men saying, "With some authority, I want to say that the leaders should understand the responsibility of being in public life. They should not be saying whatever comes to one's mind."

Given that the Congress is in tatters and its president Rahul Gandhi is still in smarting under the shock that he got in his family pocket through Amethi and the drubbing his party received across the country in the Lok Sabha election, PM Modi emerged as the most emphatic critic of the ruling party members.

Is PM Modi trying to snatch the role of Opposition from the Congress party while its president continues to stay in his sulking chamber?
