Cattle theft goes on unabated in Dakshina Kannada

MANGALURU: Despite stringent laws in place and arrests being made, illegal cattle thefts in undivided Dakshina Kannada district continues unabated. Of late, illegal cattle thefts are leading to communal violence A clash erupted on Saturday (June 22), when the court ordered to hand over cattle to the transporter, which were rescued in Jokatte. The jubilant cattle transporters celebrated the court verdict by bursting crackers. They also made a video and uploaded it on social media , which irked right-wing activists and gau rakshaks . On the other hand, a case was booked against three activists, including a Bajrang Dal member from Vittal, for stopping cattle transportation in Adyanadka, an area bordering Kerala. As a result, about nine buses were pelted with stones.A few weeks ago, six heads of cattle, which were being illegally transported and were cramped in an SUV, were killed, after the driver lost control over the wheel, and the car toppled and fell into a ditch, near Mundaje under Dharmasthala police station. The police have managed to curb the illegal cattle trade, to a certain extent, but not completely, which leads to cattle vigilantism by right-wing outfits.Explaining how the cattle trade takes place, a senior police officer said that it starts from the grassroots level. Cattle owners from villages, who have cows that are not fit for milking and other unproductive bovines, find it difficult to rear them.Following this, they sell them to cattle traders. The same is transported to slaughterhouses across the district. Usually, illegal cattle transportation take place after dark, in order to avoid police and vigilantes.Another police official points out that at least 70 to 80 per cent of the cattle slaughtered in coastal districts are stolen from various places.Take action against cattle thieves: NalinNalin Kumar Kateel, MP, Dakshina Kannda, alleged that the people behind cattle thefts in the district are trying to disrupt the law and order situation. “Police have to take strict action against those involved in the illegal transportation of cattle,” he said. “Incidents of cattle thefts by those wielding weapons have been increasing in the district. Cattle are being stolen from cowsheds, gaushalas and others places. However, the state government has failed to tackle this menace, which has irked Hindus,” he added.Stone pelting: 2 arrestedPolice have arrested two people in connection with stone pelting on private and KSRTC buses in Puttur and Bantwal limits on Wednesday.The arrested are Guruprasad, 20, a resident of Mangalapadavu, Bantwal and Kiranraj of Kepu village, Bantwal. Police added that some accused are still at large.
