4 jail guards suspended after inmate dies in lathi-charge

JAMSHEDPUR: The East Singhbhum district administration on Wednesday suspended four jail officers and detained three home guards for interrogation a day after an inmate was killed and five others sustained injuries in a lathi-charge following a clash between two rival gangs at Ghaghidih central jail on Tuesday evening. The deceased inmate has been identified as Manoj Singh, a resident of Manifit area in Burmamines who was serving a 10-year sentence in a dowry case since 2013.The prison violence erupted after aides of gangster Akhilesh Singh and Paramjeet Singh got into an arguement over making a telephone call from the booth near the jail superintendent’s office. The guards resorted to lathi-charge to disperse the inmates. The injured inmates are Sumit Singh, Rohit Singh alias Patpat, Sonu Lal, Abhishek Srivastava and Aman Mishra.Manoj’s father Anurodh Singh said: “I received a phone call from Ghaghidih Jail informing me that my son is seriously injured. Upon reaching there, I found my son dead with his hands broken and injuries on his head. I hold the jail administration responsible for my son’s death.”Among the five injured, Sumit Singh is undergoing treatment at TMH while the remaining are admitted to MGM hospital. All the five injured are under-trials in different cases.Meanwhile, police has increased security inside and outside the jail campus. “A joint team led by ADC Saurabh Kumar and SP (city) Prabhat Kumar will probe the case and further action will be taken,” SSP Anup Birthare said. He said an FIR will be lodged against prison officials and the inmates.The four kakshpals who have been suspended are Pankaj Mandal, Anil Kumar, Santosh Kumar and Ram Pratap Yadav, police said. Earlier in the day IG (prisons) B Bhushan inspected the jail and questioned officials.The incident at the jail has brought back the memories of the past incident in which two criminals were killed in the jail campus on a same day. In March 2009, gangster Akhilesh’s shot dead Paramjeet Singh in the jail. Paramjeet’s men then lynched the shooter in the prison.More than 1,200 inmates are serving time at Ghaghidih prison, which has the capacity to house 400.
