Chris Hemsworth cheekily FaceTime's Brooke Boney's family during interview

He has an army of fans around the globe.

And Chris Hemsworth made Brooke Boney's family's dreams come true when he called them on FaceTime on Thursday.

The cheeky chat took place mid-interview while the Thor star, 35, made an appearance on the Today show.

'Love you!': Chris Hemsworth (R) cheekily FaceTime's Brooke Boney's family during an interview on the Today show on Thursday... after revealing he's 'taking the rest of the year off to be at home'. Pictured left: Brooke Boney

After Brooke revealed there were 'a lot of Boney's who are big fans', the duo used FaceTime to enter into a group chat.

Flashing a wide grin, Chris greeted her family members and even cheerfully said: '15 people, wow! The Boney's, how are ya? Love you!'

Moments earlier in the interview, Chris revealed he'll be taking the rest of the year off in order to spend more time with his family at home.

What a dream! Flashing a wide grin, Chris greeted her family members and even cheerfully said: 'The Boney's, how are ya? Love you!'. Pictured left, Brooke's family on FaceTime and right, Chris

'You know the years have been whipping by, the kids are getting older and it's not nice to drag them out of school to somewhere else and shoot another film,' he said.

'We're pretty thankful and happy with what the year has given and what we'd been a part of.. and so soak it up now and just be home,' he added.

Chris met wife and model Elsa Pataky in early 2010, and the pair married shortly after in December that year.

'You know the years have been whipping by, the kids are getting older and it's not nice to drag them out of school,' Moments earlier in the interview, Chris revealed he'll be taking the rest of the year off in order to spend more time with his family at home

Family: Chris and his wife Elsa Pataky (pictured) share three children together - a daughter, six-year-old India, and twin sons Tristan and Sasha, five

The couple have a daughter - six-year-old India, and twin sons Tristan and Sasha, five.

Chris and Elsa swapped the bright lights of Hollywood for a more relaxed life in Byron Bay, on Australia's east coast, five years ago.

'We did the move three years ago and I'm so happy with it,' Elsa said in April 2017. 'In Byron we just feel like locals. People really respect us... and it's what I always dreamed of giving to my kids.'
