Haryana Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary shot dead in Faridabad

Follow us on Image Source : TWITTER Vikas Chaudhary

Vikas Chaudhary, Haryana Congress spokesperson, was shot dead by unknown men in Faridabad near Delhi on Thursday, reported ANI. The incident took place around 9 am in the morning.

The 38-year-old Congress leader was shot by more than ten bullets after he stepped out of a gym in Sector 9 of Faridabad. The incident was captured in the CCTV cameras in the vicinity. Chaudhary was immediately rushed to a local hospital where the doctors declared him brought dead.

“He was brought to the hospital in the morning. Doctors tried their best to save him… But we could not save him,” a doctor told reporters.

After Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Khattar was asked about the killing of Congress leader he said he is unaware of the incident. "It is not in my knowledge right now," CM told reporters.

Rahul Gandhi took to Twitter to condemn the murder of Congress leader and termed it a 'shameful event.'

"The murder of Congress spokesman and leader Vikas Chaudhary in Faridabad is a shameful, condemnable and tragic event. This is a mirror of the law and order law in Haryana," Congress President tweeted.

Meanwhile, Haryana Congress President Ashok Tanwar also reacted on Vikas Chaudhary's killing incident and called it as 'Jungle Raj'.

"It's 'jungle raj', there is no fear of law. Same kind of incident happened yesterday, where a woman who opposed molestation was stabbed. There should be an investigation," Tanwar told ANI.

"We are deeply angered and saddened by this act of grotesque violence against a member of the Congress Party. We urge the Haryana government to bring the perpetrators to justice at the earliest. Our sincere condolences to his family in this time of grief," the Congress tweeted.

As per media reports, shortly after Chaudhary got into the car, another vehicle moved in from the back. The unidentified men made their way to the front of Chaudhary's vehicle and opened fire at him. The incident was caught on a CCTV camera in the area.

Police officials have begun investigations into the incident and are screening the footage from a number of CCTV cameras.

VIDEO: Haryana Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary shot dead near Delhi

Latest India News
