Haryana Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary shot dead in Faridabad

13 FIRs were registered against him

Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary was on Thursday shot dead by unknown assailants in Haryana’s Faridabad, an incident which evoked sharp criticism against the ruling BJP-led government by Congress leaders.

The police said initial investigation indicated that the murder of the Congress leader appeared to be connected to his own criminal background.

Additional Director General of Police Navdeep Singh Virk, on Twitter, said, “As per the leads so far Vikas Chaudhary had a criminal background and 13 FIRs of extortion, kidnapping, and attempt to murder, were registered against him since 2007 in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh”

Teams deployed

Mr. Virk added, “Several police teams have been deployed to crack the case and Faridabad Police is confident of detecting it soon. Commissioner of Police, Faridabad is personally supervising the investigation.”

Chaudhary, a party spokesperson, was hit by multiple bullets in Sector 9 area of the city at 9.30 a.m. “CCTV footage showed that he (Chaudhary) was in a sports utility vehicle, parked outside a gym when the assailants fired multiple gun shots at the vehicle from two sides. Bullets hit him on neck and chest,” ACP Jaiveer Singh Rathi told reporters.

Mr. Rathi, said Chaudhary was rushed to a nearby private hospital where he was declared brought dead. “Twelve spent cartridges have been recovered from the crime scene. The body of the deceased was handed over to the family after post-mortem. The report of post-mortem is awaited,” he added.

Police have registered a case under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code and investigation was under way.

The Congress, meanwhile, has hit out at the ruling BJP government for the “deteriorating law and order situation” in the State.

Congress president Rahul Gandhi condemned the killing and on twitter, said that it reflected the deteriorating law and order situation.

Former Chief Minister Bhupinder Singh Hooda said law and order in Haryana had crumbled. “Criminals are roaming freely and the common man is not feeling safe,” Mr. Hooda said.

Haryana Congress president Ashok Tanwar said, “If the assailants are not arrested within 24 hours, the party workers will launch an agitation across the State.”
