Ahead of Republic Day 2019 celebrations, militants attack CRPF camps in J&K

Earlier in the day, the J-K police had said that a grenade was hurled at a police post in South Kashmir’s Anantnag district. (Express File Photo By Shuaib Masoodi)

A day before Republic Day, militants lobbed grenades and attacked at five different places in the Kashmir valley, including camps and posts of the CRPF on Friday. A civilian and a policeman were injured in one of the incidents. CRPF said that their camps and posts were attacked at four different places. However, of the five, J&K police have confirmation of only three incidents.

Earlier on Friday afternoon, a civilian and a policeman were injured in Kashmir’s Anantnag district, after a grenade was lobbed at a police post at the general bus stand in the town on Friday afternoon. “Hand grenade lobbed on a police party in General Bus stand Anantnag. One police constable received minor injury,” said J&K police on Twitter. “The injured were shifted to hospital for treatment. They have sustained minor injuries and their condition is stable,” said a police official.

A CRPF camp was also attacked with a grenade at Tahab Pulwama, said a CRPF spokesperson. Grenades were also lobbed at CRPF posts in Sopore and Keegam, Shopian district.

In another incident, CRPF officials said that unknown militants had fired at their camp in Midoora Tral and were retaliated promptly. In all the attacks on CRPF, no deaths or injuries were reported.

A senior J&K police official said that they have confirmation of grenade attacks at Pulwama, Sopore and Anantnag.

Meanwhile, security has been tightened across Kashmir valley to ensure smooth conduct of Republic Day functions in the valley on Saturday.

In Srinagar, the main function will be held at Sher-i-Kashmir cricket Stadium. CRPF officials said that drones and CCTV cameras will be used to keep a vigil during the events, “We have a multi-tier security arrangement in place. Checkpoints have been set up at various places in the city and adequate security measures have been put in place,” CRPF IGP Ravideep Sahi told The Indian Express.
