Haryana Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary shot dead by masked men

Chaudhary was outside his gym in Faridabad when he was shot in his SUV

Shocking to witness the brutal murder of our @INCHaryana spokesperson @_Vikaschaudhary today in Faridabad. We r deeply hurt by this gruesome murder and I appeal @cmohry to take strictest action #JusticeforVikasChaudhary pic.twitter.com/qA3CNat6K5

The Congress has asked for an investigation by the Haryana government. Police are investigating the matter.

Haryana Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary was shot dead in Faridabad this morning, the party has said, at the time the leader was outside his gym.

Video footage doing the rounds on social media show two figures coming near an SUV and then shooting in the direction of the vehicle from the front and the back.

The video clip was shared by Ashok Tanwar, the president of the Haryana Congress who said the murder was an example of 'jungle raj' in the state. 'Shocking to witness the brutal murder of our @INCHaryana spokesperson @_Vikaschaudhary today in Faridabad. We r deeply hurt by this gruesome murder and I appeal @cmohry to take strictest action #JusticeforVikasChaudhary,' Tanwar tweeted.

“An FIR has been registered with Faridabad police based on a complaint from Chaudhary’s kin. The victim succumbed to bullet injuries at the civil hospital. Around nine or ten bullets were fired at him today morning. We have started the investigation. Members of the crime branch are already at the spot. CCTV footage is being scanned,” Nitika Gahlaut, the deputy commissioner (headquarters), Faridabad, told this website.

The incident is said to have taken place outside a gym in Sector 9 area of Faridabad around 9.30 am.

The Congress put out a tweet that said: 'We are deeply angered & saddened by this act of grotesque violence against a member of the Congress Party. We urge the Haryana govt. to bring the perpetrators to justice at the earliest. Our sincere condolences to his family in this time of grief.'

Some news outlets have said Chaudhary, the Haryana Congress spokesperson, was shot 8-10 times but a post-mortem report can confirm this.
