Kolkata school to monitor time spent by students in washroom; it is to safeguard school's interest: Principal

A mail has been sent to all parents informing about the new move.;/Representational image | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Kolkata-based school to maintain a register that keeps a track of the time that each student spends in school washrooms. As per the school, the initiative would require extensive monitoring but it would safeguard the school's interest.

Kolkata: A Kolkata-based school has formulated a new rule, which is to maintain a register that keeps a track of the time that each student spends in school washrooms. It is to be implemented by July 1.

The rule has been adopted by the school following the incident where a Class 10 girl was found dead in a washroom of GD Birla Centre for Education on Friday.

The Telegraph reported, the rule was announced in the South City International School on Monday morning. Principal John Bagul said that they will implement the rule from next Monday because they need more hands outside the washrooms to maintain these registers. If anything goes wrong, the school should know where the child is, he added.

Reportedly, the school thinks that the initiative would require extensive monitoring but it would help to safeguard the school's interest. It often happens that children seek refuge in washrooms to escape bullying or if they feel down, also pranks in the washroom are not unheard of.

A teacher reportedly told TheTelegraph that these things would stop and they would be to monitor children all the time. The school authorities think that the move will show greater accountability on the part of the institution. But they also mentioned that it cannot be a sure-shot move to prevent bullying on campus or to save children from being bullied or inflicting self-harm.

Meanwhile, along with the new rule, the school has launched an 'extra-mile programme' where teachers will visit homes of students from Class 1-10 to understand the child's environment. A mail has been sent to all parents informing about the new move.

About 30 per cent of the parents have denied being a part of the school's initiative, The Telegraph reported.
