Ludhiana jail inmates clash with police, 1 dead

One prison inmate was killed and five others injured inside the Ludhiana Central Jail Thursday after a clash between prisoners and police turned violent forcing the police to fire several rounds to control the situation. Nearly six cops were injured in the clash which began around 11.30 am and went on for about two hours.

Punjab CM Amarinder Singh has ordered a probe by Ludhiana DC Pradeep Aggarwal into the episode. The deceased prisoner has been identified as Ajit Baba, while the injured inmates are Vishal Kumar, resident of Daba village in Ludhiana, Prince of Civil Lines, Ludhiana, Sunil of Hoshairpur, Ranbir of Gobind Nagar, Jalandhar and Pankaj of Tajpur Road, Ludhiana. The injured police officials include ACP Sandeep Wadhera and DSP Rajinder Singh.

As police tried to control the situation, the mob of prisoners tried to set kitchen items and a gas cylinder on fire inside the jail mess. While Aggarwal claimed that only five prisoners and six policemen had been injured, sources said that the total number of injured was over two dozen.

Interestingly, several videos made by prisoners inside the jail went viral soon after the clash, indicating that many among them had access to both mobile phones and the internet. Jail Superintendent Shamsher Singh refused to comment on videos being shot by inmates inside the jail and even being posted on social media.

Amid the free-for-all, nearly half a dozen prisoners also tried to escape by scaling the jail walls. “We have heard that they tried to escape, but they were brought back. There are a total of 3100 prisoners inside the jail, all have been moved inside their barracks. Now, counting will be done, and only after that we will come to know if anyone escaped or not,” the DC said.

Although authorities did not reveal how many rounds were fired, the intermittent firing was heard outside the jail for over 30 minutes.

Ajit Baba, in jail on robbery charges, died of a bullet injury in his chest. The other five injured inmates too had bullet injuries. Baba, arrested by Daba police station and was brought to Ludhiana jail three months back, was in his twenties.

Sources said those who had sustained minor injuries were being treated inside the Ludhiana Central Jail hospital. Video footage of the injured inmates shot inside the jail hospital also went viral.

In one video shot from the jail’s rooftop, prisoners were seen carrying sticks, rods, and even throwing bricks. In one video, a voice was heard saying,”Make the entire incident ‘Facebook Live’.”

Police have gheraoed the jail premises and situation is still stated to be tense. (Express photo: Gurmeet Singh) Police have gheraoed the jail premises and situation is still stated to be tense. (Express photo: Gurmeet Singh)

What led to the clash

The clash allegedly started over the death of a drugs case accused inmate Sunny Sood on Wednesday night. DC Pardeep Aggarwal said: “One prisoner Sunny Sood booked in an NDPS case was reported to be sick Wednesday evening and he was referred to Civil Hospital and later to Rajindra Hospital, Patiala where he died Wednesday night.

Sentiments of prisoners boiled over after his death due to which a clash happened. It took two hours for the jail staff as well as Punjab Police to control the situation.” DC did not reveal how many shots were fired by the police to control the situation.

The Jail Superintendent Shamsher Singh said,” After the death of Sunny Sood, booked under the NDPS Act, few persons said that their ‘brother had been killed’. Today, it was court hearing of 2-3 persons via video conferencing and while they were being brought back to the barracks, they started speaking about Sood and within no time over 700 gathered around the staff. They even attacked jail staff with bricks brought inside the jail for construction work. There are around 17 gangsters inside the jail apart from other inmates.”

Inmates in videos also alleged the Sunny died after being tortured inside the jail by police. Refuting the allegations, the Jail Superintendent added,” Sunny’s postmortem has been done in Patiala and no injuries have been revealed in the report. I totally dismiss these allegations.” He claimed that Sunny had consumed some poisonous substance on Wednesday evening that led to his death.

Police used tear gas to control the situation. (Express photo by Gurmeet Singh) Police used tear gas to control the situation. (Express photo by Gurmeet Singh)

The Indian Express tried contacting Jails Minister Sukhjinder Randhawa, who did not comment on the issue. His personal assistant said: “As of now Mantri ji has not issued any statement. He is in a meeting to assess the situation.”

Three fire brigade vehicles were called inside the jail complex to douse the flames after the prisoners tried to set the jail mess on fire. No cylinder exploded. The CM, in a statement released from New Delhi, stated that the rioting inmates had set the record room on fire, along with car of the Jail Superintendent apart from vandalising jail property. As they tried to break the prison gates, the jail police tried to stop them by firing in the air, the statement said. It added that additional police force had reached the spot under the guidance of Ashwani Kumar, DCP, Ludhiana, to control the situation, along with the tear gas vehicles and around 300 police personnel.

According to the statement, the situation was finally brought under control at around 1.30 pm, when the prisoners were put back in the barracks.
