Sanjay Dutt on World Drug Day: I am a victim of drug abuse. Want to do my bit in spreading awareness

At a point in his life, Sanjay Dutt struggled with drug addiction. The actor has been open about his battle with drug addiction. On World Drug Day, he took to Twitter to share a video, spreading awareness against drug abuse.

Sanjay shared the video on Twitter. He wrote, "Having been a victim of drug abuse myself, I feel responsible to do my bit in spreading awareness about this menace. It was a moving experience to initiate the Drug Free India campaign earlier this year with guruji Sri Sri Ravi Shankar. Today on World Drug Day, let us continue our mission."

Having been a victim of drug abuse myself, I feel responsible to do my bit in spreading awareness about this menace. It was a moving experience to initiate the #DrugFreeIndia campaign earlier this year with guruji @SriSri. Today on #WorldDrugDay, let us continue our mission pic.twitter.com/Hs2g9w9EAA Sanjay Dutt (@duttsanjay) June 26, 2019

In the video, Sanjay is seen sharing his life experience and how drug abuse took a toll on his life. He said, "My parents would tell me something I would do the opposite. I wouldn’t listen to my teachers. I did not even listen to my own heart. After learning various lessons from life - good and bad - I would still suggest the same, don’t listen to anybody."

He went on to say, "When your friends tell you that a single puff can do no harm, don’t listen to them. When friend say that everybody takes drugs you should too, don’t listen to them. This drug is better than others, don’t listen. If they tell you that it’s okay to take drugs when you are at a party. Taking drugs once does not make you an addict, don’t listen to them. I know the truth, and that’s why I am telling you, don’t listen to them. Today, let’s take a pledge that we will not consume drugs and will stop others from doing the same."

Sanjay's struggle with alcohol and drugs was shown in his biopic Sanju. Ranbir Kapoor played Sanjay Dutt's character in the film.

Watch trailer of Sanju here:

Sanjay Dutt elaborated on his struggle with drugs addiction at India Today Mind Rocks 2017. The actor said, "I got on to drugs in college. I got hooked on to it. It took me about 10 years to get out of it. I'm lucky that I had the means and provision to get out of it. Stay high on life, man! On your family, on your work. There's no substance that can make you high. I speak from experience. It is an easy escape, related to being really cool. Then you get addicted to it... if a donkey dies, you drink; a dog dies, you drink."

He added, "It is never a one-time experience. It becomes a vicious cycle. Rehab is a good place. When I arrived there, they took my passport away. They told me it was a very spiritual programme and I wanted to run away from there. I told my counsellor that I saw a man in my dream who asked me to go home. He told me Sanjay, that was God. And he told me, "Didn't he tell you, you were going to be here for 2 years?"

On the work front, Sanjay will next be seen in Panipat with Arjun Kapoor. He will star in Shamshera with Ranbir Kapoor. He will also be seen in the sequel of his 1991 film Sadak with Alia Bhatt, Aditya Roy Kapur and Pooja Bhatt. The sequel is named Sadak 2.

ALSO READ | Maanayata Dutt twins with daughter Iqra in sweater and mini skirt on shopping date

ALSO SEE | Maanayata Dutt spells fashion fiasco in multicoloured top and pants at airport. See pics
