Who killed Girl with Peacock Tattoo 8 years ago in Delhi? Another death solves mystery

The murder took place during a time the thriller novel The Girl with the Dragon tattoo was being turned into a movie.

The discovery of an unidentified woman's body in a stuffed in airbag dumped outside the New Delhi Railway Station was the beginning of a sensational murder case that remained cold for eight long years. The death of a man living under an assumed identity at a Gurgaon hospital earlier this week was its end.

In between, were years of frustration during which the Delhi Police tried to take the murder case to its logical end -- nabbing the murderer. The murder case is not cold anymore, but its end remains frustrating.

THE GIRL WITH THE PEACOCK TATTOO

On February 11, 2011, the Delhi Police was informed of a suspicious bag dumped outside the New Delhi Railway Station. Opened, the bag revealed the body of a woman with a peacock tattoo on her abdomen.

For an entire fortnight, the woman remained unidentified. Investigators had only one clue to go on -- the tattoo on her abdomen. The tattoo quickly became a talking point when the police published notices seeking information about the dead woman.

The media latched on, calling the woman 'The Girl with the Peacock Tattoo' -- it had just been two years since the Steig Larson novel The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo took the world by storm. The thriller novel's film adaption starring Rooney Mara and Daniel Craig was also in the making.

Nobody initially came forward to claim the woman's body. Frustrated, the Delhi Police performed the woman's last rites on February 23.

FINALLY, A NAME

The very day the police performed the woman's last rites, a man approached investigators and identified the girl as his daughter. And finally, 13 days after The Girl with the Peacock Tattoo was found stuffed in a bag the police had a name -- Neetu Solanki.

Neetu was in her 20s and a bright student who had a law degree. According to a profile published by Livemint, she had a reputation for taking on men who harassed or eve-teased her. She was petite but "that's the mistake people made", her sister Alka told the publication.

Her nerve and audacity was the reason the disbelieving family did not initially respond to the police notices seeking information on the dead, unidentified woman with a peacock tattoo. "Neetu wasn't someone to be killed or overpowered. She would never die without a fight," Alka told Livemint.

Sometime in the middle of 2010, Neetu, who had been working at a call centre, told her family that she was moving to Singapore to work.

That was a lie.

In fact, according to the police, Neetu had met a man with whom she had fallen in love. The man, who was in his late twenties, was identified as Raju Gehlot, an employee with Air India.

Around the same time Neetu told her family she was moving to Singapore, Raju started reporting absent at work. It turns out, Neetu and Raju had started living together in Delhi.

Neetu Solanki was murdered eight years ago. Her live-in partner Raju was the suspect. Seen in the photo on the left are Neetu and Raju (Photo by special arrangement)

What the couple did over that one year isn't very clear -- according to some media reports, they moved across different cities, including Mumbai and Bengaluru, before returning to Delhi.

Neetu's family, which had not seen her since mid-2010, ultimately found out that she was staying in Delhi with Raju, a fact they passed on to the police.

BREAKTHROUGH

With Neetu's identity established and her background traced, the police had enough to go on. They suspected Gehlot had murdered Neetu on the night of February 10-11.

During the course of their investigation, the police picked up a relative of Gehlot's for questioning. The relative -- Naveen Shokeen -- quickly spilled the beans.

Naveen told investigators that Gehlot had called him early on February 11 morning and told him he had murdered Neetu. Gehlot requested Naveen's help in helping dispose of Neetu's body.

Naveen wasn't very helpful and so Raju Gehlot stuffed his girlfriend's body in an airbag, hailed an auto-rickshaw to the New Delhi Railway Station and dumped it there.

CASE SOLVED... KINDA

With this, the Delhi Police claimed to have solved the murder of the Girl with the Peacock Tattoo.

Less than a month after Neetu's body was discovered, the police had a prime suspect on their radar -- Raju Gehlot. All that remained was finding him and closing the case.

That was going to prove quite difficult.

The days turned into weeks. The weeks into months. Months into years. But, Raju remained elusive.

According to reports, the police raided several locations across India, including Mumbai and Bengaluru. They published wanted posters offering rewards of up to Rs 2 lakh.

There was information Raju may have fled to Bangkok or Nepal. Raju's family was kept under surveillance.

But, Raju Gehlot was nowhere to be found.

THE GURGAON HOSPITAL

A few days ago, a man named Rohan Dahiya -- an employee with an automobile company in Gurgaon -- got admitted to a private hospital in Gurgaon.

Dahiya was suffering from a liver ailment and was reportedly on his deathbed. Earlier this week, Dahiya placed a call. It was to Raju Gehlot's family. On the call, Dahiya revealed that it was actually Raju Gehlot calling.

Raju, who had been living under a fake name all these years, told his family he was dying. This information reached the Delhi Police, which had been unable to trace Raju for all these years.

On Wednesday, a team of Delhi Police went to the Gurgaon hospital where Raju was admitted. There, the doctors told them: Raju Gehlot was already dead.

Cover image credit: redghostman
