Two JeM Terrorists Arrested In Delhi, Malayalam Director Attacked Over Sabarimala And Other Top News

Just a day before the Republic Day celebrations, in a major security crackdown the Delhi Police special arrest of two Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists who were planning a series of blasts in the national capital.

One of them has been identified as Abdul Latif Ganai, alias Umair alias Dilawar. The identity of the second arrested man was not immediately clear. Read more

Cow Dung Thrown On Award Winning Filmmaker Over Sabarimala Issue In Kerala, RSS Member Nabbed

An RSS activist has been arrested by the Kerala Police for attacking Malayalam film director Priyanandanan and throwing cow dung on him. The accused, identified as Sarovar, was arrested by the Thrissur Police hours after Priyanandanan came under attack outside his house on Friday.

Priyanandanan had left home and was on his way to a nearby shop when Sarovar confronted him, punched him on his face and threw cow dung on him. Read more

2018 Saw Most Death Penalty Awarded In The Last 20 Years, Thanks To Changes In POCSO Act

The judiciary handing over death penalty to many criminals, particularly the sexual offenders. 162 convicts were sentenced to death in India by trial courts in 2018, the highest number of capital punishments awarded in the country in a year since 2000. The number of capital punishments awarded in 2018 saw dramatic increase from a year ago when 109 convicts were sentenced to death.

In 2018, with a total of 22 capital punishments pronounced by the trial courts, Madhya Pradesh had the highest number of death sentences in the country, an increase of over 4 times fro 2017 when 6 persons were sentenced to death in the state. Read more

No Shortage Of Polio Vaccine In India, Claims Government But There's Still No Clarity On Date Of Immunization Drive

The Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has refuted reports that there was a shortage of polio vaccines in the country and that the next national level immunization drive which was scheduled for February 3.

"There is no shortage of Oral Polio Vaccines (OPV) and Inactivated Polio Vaccine (IPV) in the country," the ministry said in a press release. Read more

500 Crocodiles To Be Displaced From Their Homes To Make Way For Seaplane Terminal Near Statue Of Unity

In order to make way for the seaplane service planned to promote tourism at the recently inaugurated Statue of Unity, the Gujarat Forest Departments have started evacuating crocodiles from the two ponds on Sardar Sarovar Dam premise located on the river Narmada.

In an exclusive report, the Indian Express said that until last Tuesday, 15 out of roughly 500 crocodiles had been evacuated. The crocodiles in the two ponds fall under schedule 1 of the Wildlife Protection Act which protects that most endangered species of the animals. Read more

Leopard Attacks Politician, Hurts Cops, Cameramen; Finally Nabbed In Mumbai

A leopard wreaked havoc in Maharashtra's Nashik district on Friday after entering a crowded locality. The animal was was caught several hours later but not before it had injured a local politician and two media personnel. The leopard strayed into Savarkar Nagar area in the early hours of the day and was finally caught by Forest department personnel at around 10:45 am, an official from Gangapur Road police station said.

"Local Shiv Sena corporator Santosh Gaikwad, television news channel cameramen Tabrez Shaikh and Kapil Bhaskar were injured by the leopard. They are undergoing treatment at a nearby hospital," he said. Read more
