To stop daughter’s wedding, Bengaluru woman allegedly hires killers to murder brother

To stop daughter’s wedding, Bengaluru woman allegedly hires killers to murder brother

Rajashekar had introduced Gowramma’s daughter to one of his friends and the two had fallen in love.

news Crime

The Bengaluru Police arrested a 45-year-old woman for allegedly contracting her brother’s murder in order stop her daughter’s wedding. The Kengeri Police on Thursday arrested Gowramma, a resident of Kalyani Layout for allegedly contracting the murder of her brother Rajashekar.

On June 22, the Kengeri Police had received a call from locals of Kalyani Layout when they discovered Rajashekar’s body in an abandoned house. Rajashekar had been brutally stabbed to death. Upon investigation, the police found that Gowramma had allegedly contracted the killing to her neighbor Mumtaz.

“Gowramma has a 23-year-old daughter. Rajashekar had introduced her to one of his friends four months ago and the two fell in love. Rajashekar also supported them when they decided to get married. They were also engaged for three months. But Gowramma did not want her daughter to marry for love. She wanted her to marry a man she chose,” Arasu, the investigating officer in the case said.

Gowramma had allegedly tried to separate the couple on multiple occasions in the past and had failed because of Rajashekar’s intervention. On June 20, Gowramma allegedly approached her neighbor Mumtaz and is said to have asked her to hire men to kill Rajashekar.

“She knew she could not stop the wedding. So, she informed Mumtaz that the only way to stop the wedding would be to ensure that there is a death in her immediate family. The family members would then have to go into mourning for a year and hence the wedding would have to called off. She paid Mumtaz Rs 3 lakh and asked her to kill Rajashekar,” Sub-Inspector Arasu added.

On June 21, Mumtaz allegedly hired Munna, Arju and Sakeeb to kill Rajashekar. Rajashekar, who was a painter by profession, was allegedly lured by the trio to an abandoned building near Kalyani Layout on the pretext of a project to paint the inner walls of the house.

“When Rajashekar reached the abandoned house, he was attacked by Munna, Arju and Sakeeb. They stabbed him on his stomach, neck, chest and legs multiple times,” SI Arasu added. Rajashekar’s body was discovered by the locals on the morning of January 22.

“We questioned the family members and also Gowramma’s daughter. When we found that she was the only one opposed to the wedding there was suspicion. We detained Gowramma and questioned her after which she confessed to the crime,” the Kengeri police said.

Gowramma, Mumtaz, Munna, Arju and Sakeeb have been booked for murder. The accused are currently in police custody and will be produced before the magistrate on Friday.
