Man accused of knifing dad to death on train ‘told ex-lover: “I’ve done something bad, you’ll see it in the news”‘

A MAN accused of knifing a dad to death on a train told his ex "I've done something bad" in a chilling call, a court heard today.

IT consultant Lee Pomeroy, 51, was allegedly stabbed 18 times in 25 seconds by 36-year-old Darren Pencille.

13 Lee Pomeroy pictured arguing with his alleged murderer Darren Pencille Credit: BTP

13 Pencille gestured angrily as they pair argued, the court was told Credit: BTP

Mr Pomeroy was on his way to London on January 4 for a day out with his 14-year-old son before he had an argument with Pencille, the court heard.

The argument is said to have become violent, and after allegedly attacking Mr Pomery, Pencille called his ex and mother of his child.

Sarah Fry today told the court he said: "I have done something bad today and you will see it in the news", before she ended the call.

Pencille also called his mum, the Old Bailey heard. She said: "He said 'Something happened. I have done something wrong.

'He didn't say anything after that'."

Passenger Kaileigh Carter previously told how she saw the pair arguing but first thought it was just a "tiff".

She then saw Mr Pomeroy follow Pencille down the carriage saying 'what's this?"

Miss Carter told the court: "He was sort of angry he had to move away from his son or something like that.

"One of them said something about 'being in your way'. I thought this was really petty if it was about that".

TRAIN KNIFE ATTACK

Miss Carter said the dad told Pencille: "I've never had to deal with a special needs person before" and she looked up from her phone.

She told how Pencille said something about hearing voices in response, adding: "The younger guy was really shouting. I thought the older was responsive, but calm."

Miss Carter said Pencille put his phone to his ear and said "I am going to kill this man".

She went on: "The only point I saw that was physical was when the younger guy hit the older guy first. It was the younger guy going towards the older guy's chest".

At that point Miss Carter dashed to another carriage, as she went to pick up her bag she noticed it was covered in blood.

Mr Pomeroy's 14-year-old son told the court yesterday how his dad was not the type to back down and how the knifeman shouted "suck your mum" before the attack.

He told the court his dad took a few seconds to get into his seat on the train and Pencille was "a bit impatient" as he went past.

The boy said: "He said 'Ignorance is bliss' as my dad sat down.

"Then my dad said 'Shut up' sarcastically and the man said 'Man, I hate men like you.' Then my dad said 'I hate men like you'.

"The guy, I think he said 'Suck your mum', and then my dad said 'I did yours last night'. I think that annoyed the guy because the guy said 'Come on, get off at the next station' stuff like that.

"And my dad took that as a threat so he got up with a clenched fist."

Mr Pomeroy followed Pencille into the next carriage when they started shouting and eventually a fight broke out.

The teen said he walked down the carriage and found his dad slumped bloodied in a seat.

He recalled how his dad didn't realise he had been knifed.

'WON'T ROLL OVER'

He said: "My dad just leaned back and said, 'He punched me'.

The teen said his dad wasn't the type to back down.

He said: "Normally when someone says something to my dad, he won't let it go, he won't just let it roll over. Whenever someone says something to my dad it's normally because they are trying to start something.

"If someone says something to my dad he would reply. But I have never seen my dad every really start a fight."

The court heard from other passengers, including Megan Fieburg.

She said Mr Pomeroy had appeared to be seeking an apology from Pencille for being humiliated in front of his child.

After the fight Pencille went to disembark but returned briefly to pick up his sunglasses which had fallen off.

He then allegedly fled to the south coast with his girlfriend having dumped his clothes.

His mum, Ingrid Robinson, told the court she had been aware of her son's mental health problems when he was in his twenties.

She said: "I was told he was a paranoid schizophrenic."

Asked how he was in crowded situations, she replied: "Not very good. I was told people were looking at him or wanted to do something to him."

She said he frequently had to leave crowded places like trains, buses and supermarket.

Pencille, of Farnham, Surrey, denies murder.

His girlfriend, Chelsea Mitchell, 27, also of Farnham, denies assisting an offender.

The trial continues.

13 The pair were seen arguing on CCTV during the train journey - shown to the jury at court yesterday Credit: BTP

13 Lee Pomeroy died after being stabbed 18 times on a train into London Credit: PA:Press Association

13 Darren Pencille is accused of murdering the dad in January

13 Pencille's jacket, taken from a field where it was found after he allegedly killed a train passenger Credit: PA:Press Association

13 A map issued by British Transport Police showing the path taken by Pencille after he left the train at Clandon station Credit: PA:Press Association

13 Other passengers reported hearing Mr Pomeroy asking Pencille for an apology Credit: BTP

13 Mr Pomeroy's wife Svetlana arriving at the Old Bailey on Wednesday Credit: gavin rodgers/pixel8000

13 Mitchell has denied one count of assisting an offender but is said to have bought razors and clippers

13 The dad died as he travelled with his son into London on a train Credit: SWNS:South West News Service

13 Pencille, of Farnham, Surrey, denies one count of murder Credit: SWNS:South West News Service

13 The murder accused's girlfriend has denied assisting an offender Credit: SWNS:South West News Service
