In This UP Village, Age-Old Water Conservation Techniques Save The Day

Water crisis in India is so severe that people are not even getting water for their daily needs. While people in Chennai have to wait in long queues to get water, Madhya Pradesh government is distributing 55 litres of water everyday to its people.

Now Bundelkhand, Madhya Pradesh is getting an inch closer to a drought situation every passing day.

While most of Bundelkhand is struggling with water crisis, this village in the drought-hit Banda district of Uttar Pradesh has gone back to traditional conservation techniques to revive its water bodies.

Indian Water Portal

While villages in that area are reeling under severe crisis, Jakhni village which is 20 km away from Banda has managed to find its way out of this. Popularly known as ‘Galgram’ (water village) has its own ponds, wells and other water bodies brimming with water.

Eight years ago, the residents of this village were facing water shortage, this is when they decided to adopt traditional techniques and revived the ponds, wells. Shanti, a farmer told ANI "Eight to ten years ago, we decided to divert wastewater to ponds and this measure has rejuvenated the water level and has made farming easier."

Indiatimes

As a result, the Jakhni village now has 32 wells, 25 hand pumps and four ponds. The villagers claimed that they have battled against the water crisis on their own, without any help from the government.

It is now due to the availability of water that the residents who had once abandoned the village are now coming back.

The villagers have also formed an organisation called Sarvodaya Aadarsh Jal Gram Abhiyan Samiti. This organisation works towards adopting measures to harvest rainwater.

Not just this village, a Chennai-based company has also come up with an innovation - Qua Mist - to fight water crisis in the state. Qua Mist fits to your tap and reduces water consumption. You must be thinking how?

Earth Fokus

Taps that otherwise gush out a lot of water will now manage just a fine spray. Qua Mist is a brass extension to the tap that turns water into a fine mist and its purpose is to save water upto 95%.

The only disadvantage that the device has - it needs a high pressure flow of water.

All of us should learn something from what the residents of Tamil Nadu are facing right now and work towards changing that for the better.

Picture Courtesy: ccafs.cgiar.org
