Alia Bhatt's 'Berry Funny' picture on Instagram is the prettiest snap on the web today

Check out Alia Bhatt's latest Instagram post

Alia Bhatt is undoubtedly one of the finest performers we've ever seen. Whether it was her brilliance in Highway or Udta Punjab, Alia is brilliant and a treat to watch on celluloid. Apart from her on-screen appearances, Alia has also been wowing us with her recent sartorial choices. Amidst her shooting schedules, Alia has taken off to New York along with her beau.

Apart from chilling and dining with Ranbir Kapoor and his family, Alia just shared a pretty picture from New York. With a full bowl of strawberries, the stunner captioned the image as, "Berry Funn." While the Student Of The Year actress looks pretty, Mouni quickly replied, "Berry Monster" and Arjun Kapoor replied saying "Liability" Check out the picture here.

Before jetting off to New York for a short vacay, Alia was in Varanasi shooting for Ayan Mukerji's Brahmastra that will release in 2020. The film also stars Akkineni Nagarjuna, Amitabh Bachchan, Ranbir Kapoor, Dimple Kapadia, and Mouni Roy. Alia will also be teaming with her dad Mahesh Bhatt in Sadak 2 that also stars Sanjay Dutt, Pooja Bhatt, and Aditya Roy Kapur. But that's not all for Alia. She will be teaming up with Sanjay Leela Bhansali and Salman Khan with Inshallah. Alia will also be making her debut in Tollywood with Rajamouli's RRR. While we wait to see more of Alia on the big screen, here are all the pictures from her trip to New York.

On the other hand, Alia is all set to launch her YouTube channel. She shared a glimpse on her social media handle, Alia said, "I have always been a super expressive person. Somewhere I have become a little more private after I became an actor. What you'll get to see on my YouTube channel is a lot of me being totally unadulterated, what goes behind the scenes. Good days, bad days, funny days, hectic days, simple days, sweet days, just days"

While we can' wait to see the actress on the big screen, stay tuned for all the updates on Alia Bhatt.
