Eight people are trampled to death in India in three weeks by a rogue elephant

Eight people in India's Jharkhand state have been killed by a rogue elephant desperately searching for water amid a heatwave.

Authorities are hunting the beast that has wreaked havoc across the eastern Indian state after separating from its herd and roaming from district to district.

'The elephant has taken four lives so far in the district,' said Divisional Forest Officer (DFO) Arvind Kumar. 'Earlier, it has killed two people in Dumka and two in Jamtara.'

This April 30 file photo shows civilians, forest rangers and poliuce trying to chase away a rogue elephant that wandered into the major city of Guwahati in Assam State in search of food. Game wardens later tranquilised the animal

Kumar said the elephant was first spotted way from its herd in Jamtara district.

On June 7 it entered the village of Chegaidih where it killed 50-year-old Amrul Ansari and 35-year-old Jogen Bauri.

The beast then wandered into Dumka district, where it killed two people in separate villages on June 15.

And last Friday it returned to Godda, where it killed three more people and seriously injured one.

The latest victims were two women who startled the elephant when they went to answer the call of nature in fields behind their village in the small hours of Tuesday morning, the London Times reported on Thursday.

The Hindustan Times reported on Tuesday that one 50-year-old woman was killed in the attack in the villge of Kharkachia in Godda district, while her companion was injured and taken to hospital.

'Forest officials kept monitoring the movement of the elephant and alerted the villagers to remain vigilant, said villager Manilal.

'However, two women ventured out of their houses to relieve themselves around 4.30 am.'

'They had a sudden encounter with the elephant, which was hiding behind a minor bamboo forest.'

NDTV reported that a 20-year-old man was trampled to death by an elephant in Dumka on June 14 when he went to look for his missing cow.

DFO Saurabh Chandra confirmed the death and warned villagers not to venture into hilly areas.

Villagers blocked the Dumka-Seuri road in a protest to demand compensation for the victim's family.

'The water bodies have almost dried up and elephant herds move towards human settlements in search of water,' Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF) and Chief Wildlife Warden P K Verma told the New Indian Express.

Game wardens hope to be able to tranquilise the renegade animal and capture it alive, but admit they may be forced to shoot it.

'I have written to the forest department on June 22 for tranquilisation of the elephant and its safe transportation to forest among elephant herds,' Kumar said, adding that forest teams had been sent out to try and drive the elephant out of the area.

'We are exploring the possibilities to send the elephant back to the forest so that it could reunite with its herd,' Verma confirmed.

On Monday June 24 the New Indian Express reported that game wardens in Kharkhand were planning a new elephant alert system that would notify residents by mobile phone message.

Offcials said that there were around 600 elephants in the state, moving in herds of 10-18 animals.

'Eleven quick response teams are in place at different strategic locations,' Verma said.

'People are being informed of tusker movement in their areas through advertisement on televisions and FM channels, it does not seem to be very effective.'

A total of 644 people have been killed by elephants in the state over the past decade.

At least one other elephant is on a deadly rampage in Jharkhand and neighbouring states.

On June 1 four people, including a two-year-old boy and his mother, were killed in an elephant attack on the village of Lapung, southwest of the Jharkhand state capital Ranchi, NDTV reported.

The woman, identified only as Sushma, 35, and her son, Biral, were killed when the elephant destroyed their mud house.

When other villagers tried to chase the animal away, it turned on them too, killing Thakari Pahan, 55, and Birsa Oraon, 60, and injuring two others.

The Times reported that the Lapung attack was by a different elephant.

And one day earlier, a 17-year-old girl was killed in the Jashpur district of neighbouring Chhattisgarh state when an elephant crashed through the wall of her family's mud house and attacked them as they slept.

DFO Krishna Kumar Jadhav said householder Vishwanath Chauhan's daughter Lalita was killed on the spot, while his wife Munni Bai and seven-year-old daughter Varsha were injured.
