Disabled pensioner, 80, is stabbed to death in his own home as cops launch murder probe

A DISABLED pensioner has been stabbed to death in his own home as cops launch a murder probe.

Desmond Wooding, 80, was discovered in a pool of blood in Droitwich, Worcs., at around 8.20am on Monday morning.

5 Desmond Wooding was discovered dead in a pool of his own blood on Monday morning Credit: SWNS:South West News Service

5 Cops have released CCTV of a dog-walker they want to speak to in connection with the pensioner's death Credit: SWNS:South West News Service

Emergency services dashed to the property after concerned residents raised the alarm but nothing could be done to save the OAP, who was pronounced dead at the scene.

Mr Wooding, who lived alone, was well known in the neighbourhood and town centre, where he was regularly seen on his mobility scooter.

LAST SEEN ALIVE

West Mercia Police have released CCTV of a man in a green shirt and grey bottoms, walking a dog that they would like to speak to, as part of their manhunt.

Desmond had last been seen alive on Sunday evening near to his house and officers want to track the dog walker who was seen the day before at around 11.30am.

Detective Chief Inspector Carl Moore said: "This is a tragic case, whereby an elderly gentleman has been killed in his own home.

I would urge members of the public to think back to the weekend, what they were doing, and whether or not they saw or heard anything suspicious Detective Chief Inspector Carl Moore

"I would urge members of the public to think back to the weekend, what they were doing, and whether or not they saw or heard anything suspicious.

"We are also looking to speak to the man in the images and video footage, who we have not yet spoken to, and may be able to assist with our investigation."

Superintendent Damian Pettit, of the Droitwich area policing team said: "We recognise that this is a shocking incident for the local community, but incidents such as these are thankfully rare, and our thoughts remain with Desmond's family and friends at this time.

5 The dog-walker may hold vital information relating to Mr Wooding's death Credit: SWNS:South West News Service

5 The man in the footage was seen walking his dog last weekend Credit: SWNS:South West News Service

"Anyone with any concerns can speak to a member of my team, as we remain in the area carrying out our enquiries.

"This investigation is being led by our Major Crime Investigation team, and I would like to reassure the community that finding out who is responsible for this crime is our upmost priority."

Anyone with any information is asked to contact West Mercia Police on 101 or call Crimestoppers on 0800 555 111.

5 Mr Wooding died in his home in Vines Lane in Droitwich

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
