JNU Prof calls Kashmiri student ‘convict in ten blast cases’

Srinagar: A Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) Professor has been accused of making “Islamophobic comments” against a Kashmiri student.

As per the notice (dated 18-Jan-2019) sent by the Delhi Minorities Commission (DMC), the varsity administration has been asked to set up an enquiry against Professor Amita Singh, who has been accused of making “Islamophobic comments” against the JNU Students’ Union (JNUSU) general secretary, and submit a report by 28 January.

As per reports, in December last year, JNUSU general secretary Aejaz Ahmad Rather complained to the DMC and other institutions, alleging that Singh called him a “convict of 10 bomb blasts” following a verbal altercation.

“She asked for our names, demanded that we show her our identify cards, and, in a brazen display of arrogance, made comments about our religious background,” said Mr. Rather. “Prof. Singh said, ‘from your appearance it looks like you are a convict in ten bomb blast cases and that is why you are not telling your name.”

The Indian Express quoted Singh, however, saying this “fake news” was the work of a group led by “Kashmiri Muslim separatists”. “This was the objective… this is not externally driven, but from my centre itself where a strong group of separatist Kashmiri Muslims… roam around with a clear purpose, which gets defeated due to my presence. Administration is too weak and naive to take a focused shot at these in-built armies,” she alleged.

Meanwhile, the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) condemned the incident recalling how a scuffle on “a small issue in NIT [in 2016] and whole national media goes berserk branding every Kashmiri as an anti-national.”

A party statement further questioned “where are those reporter generals when blatant divisive venom is spewed on university campuses? Or is it beyond their brief.”

A PDP spokesperson Waheed Para also called the incident as unfortunate. He tweeted: Unfortunate that how our scholars are being targeted on religious and region lines. Such acts will only further alienate the Kashmiris from mainland India.”
