After Apollo 11, other nations set their sights on moon landings, too [Orlando Sentinel]

Jun. 27–When the unmanned Beresheet spacecraft crash-landed on the moon in April, Israel joined a small number of nations that have managed to send vehicles to the lunar surface.

Despite the failure, that elite group, which also includes the U.S., India, China, the Soviet Union and Japan, has been helped by updated technology that has changed space exploration, at least for countries that can afford it.

“At this point, the technology to build hardware that can travel to the moon is pretty commonly available,” said Ray Lugo, director of the Florida Space Institute at the University Central Florida. “The hard part is the analysis that determines where on the moon you can safely land.”

Reports have put the price tag of the Beresheet mission at $200 million.

As NASA marks 50 years since the iconic July 20, 1969, Apollo 11 moon landing, other nations have gone to the moon and some are preparing to return, America among them. NASA’s Artemis program is shooting for a crewed mission by 2024.

India sent its first probe hurtling toward the moon on Oct. 22, 2008, and is set to try to land on the moon for the first time with a spacecraft called Chandrayaan-2.

Its lunar orbiter Chandrayaan-1 helped discover evidence of water molecules on the moon.

That contribution serves as an example of how space exploration benefits from having as many countries involved as possible, said Bobby Braun, dean of the Center for Astrodynamics Research at University of Colorado.

“If you have one team trying to get to the moon, then all the great ideas have to come from that team,” he said. “If you have a diverse set of eight teams, like any other engineering enterprise, you have more critical mass and diversity of ideas and approaches.”

The allure of sending missions to the moon had been on the minds of nations long before Apollo 11.

In 1959, the Soviet’s Luna 2 spacecraft became the first to land on the moon, handing the nation one of its biggest victories in the Space Race.

While Luna 2 did not survive the landing, seven years later, Luna 9 became the first to land and survive in 1966.

China, meanwhile, first landed on the moon in December 2013 with its Chang’e 3 rover, which launched aboard a Long March 3B rocket.

Chang’e 4 landed on the South Pole of the moon on Jan. 3.

Japan has had two probes fly near the moon and then deliberately crash on its surface, with the latest being the orbiter SELENE, which made it to the surface on July 11, 2009.

While the Soviet landing was fueled by the space race and Cold War with the U.S., Braun says today’s exploration is more civil.

“It’s not a Space Race like the Cold War,” he said. “It’s a competition, in a sense, but it’s more of a friendly one.”

Israel’s Beresheet mission took off on a SpaceX rocket from the Space Coast on Feb. 21, aiming to put research instruments on the surface along with a digital time capsule and an Israeli flag.

But less than two months later, on April 11, the lander failed and caused its main engines to cut off, crashing into the moon’s surface.

Israeli officials said they would try again, calling the project Beresheet 2.0.

The crash shows that, even as private industry and other nations put together a string of successful launches, it’s still a difficult mission to land on the moon, Lugo said.

“You can do all the best planning and you can simulate this in a laboratory but when the hardware meets the real world, does the engine fire exactly the same way as in the simulation?” he said. “Are the mass properties exactly the same as in the simulation? You have to get 100 things right to be able to land safely. It’s easier now, but it’s still hard.”

Got a news tip? [email protected] or 407-420-5256; Twitter, @marcosantana

This series

This story is part of the Orlando Sentinel’s “Countdown to Apollo 11: The First Moon Landing” — 30 days of stories leading up to 50th anniversary of the historic first steps on moon on July 20, 1969. More stories, photos and videos at OrlandoSentinel.com/Apollo11.

Want more Apollo 11?

Order your copy of “Apollo 50,” the Orlando Sentinel’s new hard-cover keepsake book chronicling the 50th anniversary of America’s moon landing. Order before July 21 and get $10 off the cover price. Supplies are limited. Order your copy at OrlandoSentinel.com/Apollo50

(c)2019 The Orlando Sentinel (Orlando, Fla.)

Visit The Orlando Sentinel (Orlando, Fla.) at www.OrlandoSentinel.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
