Now, Rewa man found in Pak jail

Bhopal: After Budhram Marko of Dindori and Jitendra Arjunwar of Seoni, yet another missing person presumed to be dead by his family in Rewa district has been found to be alive and kicking inside a jail in Pakistan.Anil Kumar Saket, a resident of Chadai village of Naigarhi tehsil, was reported missing by his family in 2015. Two days ago, local police got a message from the embassy to confirm his credentials. However, Saket’s 1124-km escapade to Pakistan remains a mystery.His brother Prakash Saket told local police that Anil had psychological issues. He got married in July 2014 and went missing from his home on January 3, 2015, after which a missing person complaint was lodged by his family. After waiting for three years, the family members thought he was dead and they arranged a second marriage of his wife.Last week, Anil Saket’s family was in for a shock when Naigarhi police visited their house seeking his identity card. After verification, they informed that Anil was alive and he is lodged in Lahore jail. Police believe he must strayed into Pakistan via Rajasthan where he was caught and jailed. Family members are now eagerly waiting for his arrival.Police said that they had received a letter from the home ministry that a man named Kumar Saket, who claims to be a resident of Chadai village in Rewa was lodged in Pakistan jail and they were asked to confirm his credentials so that he could be brought home.Earlier it was Jitendra Arjunwar of MP’s Seoni district who was found in Pakistan jail years after he was reported missing by his family. Pakistan Rangers had arrested Arjunwar for trespass when he crossed into the neighbouring country on August 12, 2013 after apparently digging his way under the barbed wire on the Indo-Pak border in Rajasthan. He was charged under the Foreigners Act and sent to jail. Arjunwar had left his home in Barghat village in May 2012, telling his disabled mother Parvati that he would return soon. His mother had filed a missing complaint at Barghat police station.There was a similar case of Budhram Marko of MP’s Dindori district who was released along with 39 Indian prisoners from Karachi’s district Malir jail on November 28, 2018. Marko, was given a hero’s welcome by his family and villagers.
