BJP-Sena may cash in on quota verdict in upcoming Maharashtra Assembly elections

The Bombay high court's decision to uphold quota for Maratha community has given a major boost to the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party-Shiv Sena combine in the run-up to the Maharashtra Legislative Assembly election slated for October. The saffron combine will exploit every opportunity to further reach out to the Maratha community and get them on board in the run-up to the assembly polls.The Maratha community, which has been traditional vote bank of the Congress and Nationalist Congress Party, over the years have shifted their loyalty to BJP and Shiv Sena. Already, BJP, in particular, has made sufficient inroads in the Maratha dominated segments as the party received an overwhelming response from them in the recently held Lok Sabha election.

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis, who will soon launch a month-long Vikas Yatra, will effectively use the Maratha quota order and party's growth agenda to get mileage. Fadnavis has outpaced opposition as he made opposition to fall in line and pass the Socially and Educationally Backward Class unanimously in November 2018.Ironically, the Congress-NCP government had enacted a law in June 2014 to provide 16% reservation to Maratha community in education and jobs and 5% quota to the Muslim community in jobs and education. However, the reservation could not stand the scrutiny of the judiciary as the Congress-NCP government did not refer the matter to the Backward Class Commission instead took the decision based on a committee chaired by the former chief minister Narayan Rane.

For Congress and Nationalist Congress Party, which are yet to recover from the Lok Sabha poll debacle, they will have to strive to regain support from Maratha community in a bid to foil BJP-Sena combined attempt to tighten their grip. Maratha constitutes nearly 32% of the state population. However, the Congress-NCP can hope to capitalise on the anger that reservation can fuel among other communities like Dhangar and Muslims who have vocally voiced their dissent at the development. It is also notable that BJP led government has yet to fulfil its promise to give quota to the Dhangar community. While the Dhangar plea to include Dhangars in ST reservation is still in the works, the government has shot down the Muslim reservation demand.

Incidentally, the state finance minister Sudhir Mungantiwar, realising legal and technical hurdles in providing quota under scheduled tribe category, has made an allocation of Rs 1,000 crore to spend on development schemes exclusively for the Dhangar community.

Arguments against reservation

Reservation has been granted considering the Lok Sabha and state Assembly elections which is unconstitutional, illegal and in violation of SC order not to grant quota beyond 50% cap MSBCC report was a handiwork of manipulations and hence it was disastrous to have passed an act on the basis of such a report The inclusion of only the Maratha community in SEBC was arbitrary and against the laws of equality State has no power to grant reservations beyond the 50% cap directed by SC Only in exceptional cases the quota can be increased. However, the Constitutional amendment is required and if the quota is to be granted to the Maratha community then it should State government has not taken Presidential assent while declaring Maratha community as backward

State Government gets defensive
