PV Narasimha Rao's grandson demands apology from Sonia, Rahul Gandhi for 'injustice' done to ex-PM

New Delhi:

N V Subhash, the grandson of former Prime Minister PV Narasimha Rao, on Thursday sought an apology from Gandhi family for "injustice" done to him.

Subhash stated that AICC Secretary G Chinna Reddy's statement that Rao had tried to "sideline" the Nehru-Gandhi family during his tenure was "not true and condemnable". "Rao was the most trusted and loyal leader for Gandhi family and always guided the family on many issues", he said.

He further asserted that the Congress always neglected leaders other than from those belonging to the Nehru-Gandhi family.

Talking to the news agency PTI, Subhash said, "It is very clear and evident that his dead body was not even allowed to enter the headquarters of AICC in Delhi." "All the former PM's memorial was built in New Delhi except that of Rao's which shows the indifferent attitude of the Congress leaders," PV Narsimha Rao’s grandson said.

“During his tenure, Rao never sidelined or suppressed the Gandhi family,” he added.

“On every occasion, Sonia Gandhi was very well informed about the party activities, development initiatives taken up by the government, Cabinet expansions, the election process, campaign and allotment of tickets in Assembly elections,” he claimed.

Subhash went on to say that on many occasions, Rao personally met Sonia Gandhi and apprised her. "But she was neither interested in politics nor wanted her kids to get into politics. So, where is the question of suppressing the family?" Subash asked.

Alleging that Congress leaders always gave credit to Nehru-Gandhi family for success but discredited Rao for party's failures, Subhash noted that the Congress never talked about the economic liberalisation policy initiated by the Narasimha Rao-government.

"At least now, Sonia Gandhi, Rahul Gandhi and the entire coterie of Gandhi family and Congress should apologise to the nation for the injustice done to Narasimha Rao", he said.

They should recognise Rao's services by paying him rich tributes on the occasion of his 98th birth anniversary tomorrow, he concluded.

It is to be noted that Subhash joined the BJP in 2014 and is one of the official spokespersons of the Telangana unit of the party.

(With Inputs from PTI)

RELATED



For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
