What is Anurag Kashyap doing in a Cadbury Perk ad?

Mondelez India’s iconic brand, Cadbury Perk launched its latest campaign ‘Masti ka Daily Dose’ featuring Bollywood’s ‘Next Gen Star’, Ananya Panday and acclaimed director, Anurag Kashyap. Conceptualized by Ogilvy and Mather, the campaign is based on the actor-director camaraderie where Anurag pulls a prank on Ananya to get her to shoot for a Cadbury Perk commercial.

Commenting on the same, Anil Vishwanathan, Director - Marketing (Chocolates), Mondelez India, said, “Cadbury Perk is a brand that believes in infusing fun into the mundane and our new campaign lives up to that in an exciting, youthful way. In the past, we have had vivacious personalities like Preity Zinta, Genelia D’souza, and Alia Bhatt who embody what Cadbury Perk stands for – youth, fun and Joie De Vivre. As the new face for Cadbury Perk, Ananya Panday was our natural choice for the brand as she is seen as a rising youth icon and brings alive the brand purpose to life so effortlessly. The brand has a good connect with the youth and with Ananya on board we believe this connect will only get stronger.”

Brand Ambassador, Ananya Panday, said, "Super thrilled to be associated with Cadbury Perk - my new partner in MASTI. A brand that is fun, easy-going, Cadbury Perk reflects my own playful personality. The TVC is about Masti ka daily dose and shooting it was full of masti too."

Amitabh Agnihotri, Group Creative Director, Ogilvy India said “Cadbury Perk is known for its light hearted ‘pranks and masti-ful’ approach for the last few years. Now with Ananya Panday as the new face of the brand, and both she and Anurag Kashyap playing themselves in the campaign, the brand has pushed the envelope in every aspect of communication. This time the whole campaign unfolds as if shot behind-the-scenes and in an ‘unscripted’ style. I hope our audience will enjoy the campaign as much as we loved creating it”

In the teaser ad, Anurag Kashyap is shooting Ananya Panday for the chocolates commercial. The director asks her to be available for the next day’s morning shoot, but Ananya refuses, replying “Sorry, not available”. Pondering how to meet the deadline, he takes a bite of Perk and mischievously decides to use the practice sessions shoot- post taking approval from the actor. The result in the second teaser turns out funny as the director showcases his ‘masti’ by using Ananya’s inset in different scenarios.

Currently, the initial phase of the campaign is on air, and consumers can look forward to more in the coming months.

Agency Details:
