Over 2,000 hit by floods in lower Assam districts

GUWAHATI: An alert has been sounded for two districts in lower Assam where rivers are in spate following heavy rain in neighbouring Bhutan since Wednesday. A severe crisis looms over Chirang and Nalbari districts in lower Assam forcing people to take shelter in camps. Surging rivers have submerged roads, damaged embankments and washed away bridges and culverts in Chirang, Baksa, Kokrajhar and South Salmara districts.Bhutan’s National Centre for Hydrology and Meteorology on Wednesday said the southern belt of Bhutan has recorded heavy rainfall and the downpour continued affecting lives of people in the southern part of the country. On Thursday, the centre said, “There is not much significant change in the water level, however, due to the breaching of the subsidiary lake; the stability of Moraine Dam of the main Thorthormi Lake is likely to be more uncertain. Therefore, people living along the Phochu River and downstream are requested to be vigilant.”The Phochu River connects with the Manas river in Assam and runs through Chirang’s Bijni area, where the flood waters have created havoc in the last 48 hours. The Chirang district administration has issued an alert. According to the state disaster management authority (SDMA), at least 723 people have been affected by the flood waters. People are taking shelter in two relief camps.Heavy rain in Bhutan has also affected the Pagladia river in Nalbari district. The SDMA report said, “At least 1,850 people remained flood affected in the Ghograpar area of the district. Some 550 hectares of cropland have been submerged.”In Tamulpur area of Baksa district, people were facing major hurdles as a crucial bridge connecting Tamulpur with Baksa headquarters was washed away. People were forced to use bamboo rafts for transport. Locals of Musalpur area rescued the carcass of a wild elephant calf on Wednesday which was believed to have been swept away in the swirling waters.Apart from the areas in lower Assam, Jorhat and Dibrugarh districts too were affected. Around 7,850 people were struggling to stay afloat in these districts. Out of them, 183 in Jorhat were in relief camps. The SDMA has said the Brahmaputra is flowing above the danger level at Nimatighat in Jorhat.The Regional Meteorological Centre here on Thursday issued an alert for heavy to very heavy rainfall at isolated places over South-Salmara, Bongaigaon, Barpeta, Baksa, Kamrup, Nalbari, Udalguri, Karbi Anglong, Hailakandi, Dhemaji and Tinsukia districts.
