Top award for designer who makes wedding dreams come true

A PASSION for making wedding day dreams come true has created the 'best job in the world' for a gifted designer.

Flossie's Weddings has won the Best Venue Stylist at the North West Wedding Awards 2019 for the second year running, after receiving the region's highest number of votes from happy couples.

"We're all absolutely over the moon," said owner Steph Marsh, 31. "We are extremely blessed. The team is amazing. They are all really dedicated. I wouldn't be able to do it without them. We absolutely love our job."

Steph started her bespoke stationery business in the bedroom of her Winsford home nine years ago.

"I went to university to study illustration," said the 31-year-old graduate. "I wanted to be an art therapist and started art classes for children with complex needs. I loved care work and really miss it."

Whilst working in care homes, she inspired residents to paint and helped young carers to use art to relax and express themselves.

In her spare time, she designed hand made invitation cards for family and friends and the orders came flooding in.

Steph Marsh studied illustration at university and wanted to be an art therapist

To keep up with demand, she rented a little shed on Delamere Street and developed her expertise as a venue stylist, dressing weddings with bespoke items from table runners, swags and candles to chair decorations, signs and illuminations.

"I did everything on my own for four years," said Steph. "All the ironing and washing. I worked hard and used every penny to buy stock."

With patience and tenacity she built up her business and her designs became so popular, she moved into The Business Centre on Barlow Road in 2017.

She turned a unit into a showroom to give couples ideas of how their venue could look with her styling.

Steph Marsh has created a showroom at Flossie's Weddings on Barlow Road in Winsford to show couples how she can dress their venues

Steph now has a team of four and, with extra support from family and friends, they can now style three weddings a day!

A laundry houses washing machines and dryers and there is a purpose built preparation area for stylists to create fresh flower arrangements.

"Everything is spotless and meticulously organised," said Steph. "We've got to get it right. Nothing is rushed. We rely on a 1:1 personal touch. Each wedding is unique. We want to capture the vision each couple has, the wedding they have dreamed of. We want to create the 'wow' factor.

"We don't only turn up to dress the wedding, we stay on board and help with the changeover from the ceremony to the wedding breakfast.

"It is hard work, we often do 18 hour days and night shifts but it is so rewarding when we see their reaction.

Steph Marsh with team members Megan Duckworth and Caroline Wynne at an open day Flossie's Weddings hosted

"All of us have dressed hundreds of weddings but we still cry when we see how much it means to the couple.

"It is the best job in the world."

Couples from as far away as America, Australia and India have praised Steph for her precision and attention to detail.

Steph Marsh, owner of Flossie's Weddings has won the Best Venue Stylist at the North West Wedding Awards 2019 for the second year running

READ > Party in the park promises to be a scorcher!

"I would like to expand, get bigger premises and another van but I'm not moving out of town," added Steph. "I love Winsford and I love the people. This is the only place that has felt like home.

"We offer 10 per cent discount to anyone in Winsford as our way of supporting them to make their dream wedding come true."
