Mob attacks by extremists

Mob attacks by extremists

A few days ago in Saraikela Kharsawan district of Jharkhand a 24 years old, Tabrez Ansari was lynched by a mob. He worked as a daily wager in Pune and was travelling to his village on June 19. The people of the village Dhatikidih accused him of stealing a two-wheeler, forced him to chant 'Jai Shree Ram ' and 'Jai Hanuman' and beat him badly. Later, he was rescued by police and taken to the hospital. He was arrested by police and produced in the court on the charges of theft. On June 22, his condition worsened and he was admitted to the district hospital, where he died. Six persons have been arrested in connection with this case. An SIT (Special Investigation Team ) has also been formed to look into this case. Supreme Court has made SIT mandatory for every mob lynching case.

Several cases of mob lynching have taken place in past few years out of which 12 cases of such mob lynching have taken place in the state of Jharkhand in last 4 years, including ten Muslims and two schedule tribes. Cases of mob lynching are rising in the name of protecting the cow and the self-claimed "cow protectors" unleashed violence in several parts of the country. These type of mob lynchings can lead to communal polarisation which further can become the base of riots in society.

Senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad took on BJP over its "New India" claim. He said, "please return us our old India. Never heard of a "New America", "New China" or "New Britain". There can be a modern India, but no New India. Please give us back the Old India. There was no violence, no lynching. Give us that India where all religions are equal."

On Sunday, India has rejected a US state department's annual report on religious freedom that raised questions about the government's inability to curb violent attacks on the country's minority Muslims . "Mob attacks by violent extremist Hindu groups against minority communities, especially Muslims, continued throughout the year amid rumours that victims had traded or killed cows for beef," the report said. It also noted reports by non-governmental organisations that the government sometimes failed to act on mob attacks on religious minorities, marginalised communities, and critics of the government.

An environment has been created across the country that enables and encourages this kind of violence. The Government should take strict action against people involved in the massacre of innocents. To revive ha

How can one survive when the enemy is roaming about right here, lurking right in front, to catch and thrash and lynch me? All that's required is that triggering off, for the lynching, hounding and beating to death to take off…rmony, peace and fraternity between different social and religious groups, the government should implement strict laws through which these mob lynchings come to end.

(The author is a UPSC aspirant).
