Haryana CM ML Khattar justifies Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary's murder, says he had a bad character

Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar | Photo Credit: Twitter

Gurugram: Two days after a Congress leader was shot dead in Haryana's Faridabad in broad daylight, Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar has justified the killing saying that the leader had a bad character and anything was possible with such person.

Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary was shot in Faridabad's Sector 9 when he stepped out of his gym. Five to six rounds of bullets were fired by the assailants, who fled from the spot thereafter. Chaudhary was rushed to a local hospital; he succumbed to his injuries there.

While no culprit has been arrested so far, CM Khattar on being asked about the case said that "He (Vikas Chaudhary) had been declared a bad character, anything could be possible with such a person, it could be personal enmity," while adding that the culprits will be caught nonetheless.

Earlier in the day, Congress workers also staged a protest outside the hospital where the Congress leader's body was kept. The party workers accused the authorities of delaying the process of handing over Chaudhary's body, despite formalities having been completed, while demanding justice for the leader.

The protest was led by state Congress leader Ashok Tanwar, who said that the state government has failed to maintain law and order in the state. "Had been a proper security system in the state, Choudhary wouldn't have been killed," Tanwar added.

Earlier, Congress president Rahul Gandhi, spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala and other leaders condemned the killing and attacked the Khattar government, alleging that there is a complete failure of law and order in the state.

Meanwhile, Rajesh Kumar, deputy commissioner of police (DCP), said that five crime teams are investigating and the police have received some leads in the case. He also added that the accused had done a reconnaissance of the area and were aware of Chaudhary's gym training timings.

As for Chaudhary's background, the Congress leader had 13 FIRs of extortion, kidnapping and attempt to murder were registered against him since 2007. "Chaudhary had been declared a “bad character” at Sector 7 police station in Faridabad, and first information reports (FIRs) of assault and attempt to murder, among others, had been registered against him," Kumar told media on Thursday.


