Parliament Updates: Lok Sabha discusses importance of river-linking project in Bundelkhand amid water crisis; Rajya Sabha adjourned-Politics News , Firstpost

Parliament LIVE updates: Amit Shah blamed Congress for losing out on the Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. He asked, 'They are blaming us for situation the situation today but how are they forgetting their own past. Who was the one who called ceasefire just when the Indian forces were on the verge of pushing away Pakistani forces. We lost 1/3rd part of Kashmir because of Jawaharlal Nehru.'

Auto refresh feeds

In reply to his question, The MoS health stated that Rajasthan government is one of the 33 governments to have signed MoUs to implement the Aushman Bharat scheme. He said that the state government has indicated that they will implement the scheme in July

During the question hour, the members discussed the state of healthcare infrastructure. Dushyant Singh asked if Ayushman Bharat will be completely implemented in the state of Rajasthan.

Dayanidhi Maran of the DMK, over "lynching of a Muslim man in Jharkhand", gives adjournment motion notice in the Lok Sabha.

Further, the Act states that any person who has been appointed on the basis of residence in an area adjoining the Actual Line of Control must serve in such areas for at least seven years.

The amendment provides for reservation in appointment and admission at professional institutions for persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and socially and educationally backward classes. The amended draft law defines socially and educationally backward classes and states that it should include persons living in areas adjoining the Actual Line of Control and the International Border.

The government had passed an Ordinance to this accord earlier when the Parliament was not in session. Now the government seeks to turn the presidential order into a duly passed and notified law.

He said that the government was ignorant to the plight of the same people for the last five years and only promulgated an Ordinance in March just before the elections.

Stating that the government introduced the Ordinance for extending quota benefits to residents of border areas at a politically opportune time, RSP MP NK Premchandran said that the decision was a clear abuse of the Ordinance route.

"If we face a situation today that the President's Rule has to be extended, the foundation for it was laid down during the rule of an unnatural alliance in state," Tewari said. He claimed that the Congress handed over a progressive a stable state in 2014 in the NDA government's care, which was reduced to its current state within five years.

"Where terrorism is concerned, I am completely in agreement with the BJP. But the battle against terrorism can only be won if the people support you," Tewari said. He added that if the government brings an enlightened holistic policy which was formulated by rising above party line, the Congress will be happy to support it. He said that if a democratically elected government operates in Jammu and Kashmir, terrorism and separatism can be fought better.

However, on the bill under discussion, she only said, "This reservation bill will integrate the youth to the mainstream. Insaniyat, Jamhooriyat, Kashmiriyat is a priority of the Modi government".

She spoke extensively on the history of the state to attack the Congress party for "historical wrongs.

Responding to the criticism on the BJP-PDP coalition, Poonam. Mahajan says that even though the two parties were ideologically incompatible, it was an attempt to preserve democracy.

He said that either the precentage of reservation should be increased, or the new beneficiaries should have a separate window of quota.

Masoodi said, “We are in a way depriving people worst hit by shelling. The fallout of the bill on the people living around the LoC needs to be taken into account.”

On the proposal to grant reservation to resident's of International Border area as well, Hasnain Masoodi said that reservation of three percent exists in jobs for people residing on the LoC. "People on international borders are of course disadvantaged, but now that small quota meant for 3.5 lakh people will have to be shared by one million people."

" We never used Article 356 for political gains," says Home Minister Amit Shah. He added that the trend of 'pre-emptive arrests' have never been higher in the state under any government but Congress. He said that the Congress has forgotten the situation in its time.

"They are saying we are trampling democracy in Jammu and Kashmir. Before today, Article 356 has been imposed(President's rule) till now 132 times, out of which 93 times Congress has done it. Now of these people will teach us about democracy?" Shah said.

Shah blamed Congress for losing out on the Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. He asked, "They are blaming us for situation the situation today but how are they forgetting their own past. Who was the one who called ceasefire just when the Indian forces were on the verge of pushing away Pakistani forces. We lost 1/3rd part of Kashmir because of Jawaharlal Nehru."

"We will target root of terrorism not only on our land but also inside Pakistan," Shah said.

"Our ideology is to ensure protection of borders and make country free of terrorism. The govt. has spent Rs 2307 crore to upgrade security apparatus in Jammu and Kashmir. So far Art 356 (President’s Rule) was imposed 132 times of which Congress used it 93 times," Shah said.

Home Minister Amit Shah insists that Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India. He stresses on India's zero tolerance towards terror. He says that after Narendra Modi conducted the air strikes over Pakistan, nobody in the world said that it was a fluke. He was after all protecting our country, said Shah.

"In 1953 when Syama Prasad Mukherjee ji entered Kashmir protesting against the two prime ministers in one country, he was thrown in jail. His death was also not probed. Why? Was he not a senior opposition leader? A leader from Bengal, a former Union Minister?," says Amit Shah.

"We are committed to protect the Kashmiri culture," Home Minister Amit Shah said, adding that opposing India does not fall in the ambit of Kashmiriyat. "Those who want to separate Jammu and Kashmir from India must have fear in their minds," Shah said.

Our stance on Jammu and Kashmir has and will remain constant. There has been no change in our position on Article 370. We have always maintained that Article 370 is only a temporary provision in our Constitution: Amit Shah

"We are committed to protect the Kashmiri culture," Home Minister Amit Shah said, adding that opposing India does not fall in the ambit of Kashmiriyat. "Those who want to separate Jammu and Kashmir from India must have fear in their minds," Shah said.

So the Home Minister’s argument is that because the Congress has used Article 356 more times than anyone else the Modi government is justified in denying the people of J&K an elected government. That’s an unacceptable argument. https://t.co/IOsi9aUIKT

Omar Abdullah responds to the Parliament's passage of resolution extending President's rule in J&K Former chief minister Omar Abdullah criticised the move to extend President's Rule in Jammu and Kashmir. He called the the Home Minister's argument justifying the move "unacceptale".

The resolution moved by RJD’s Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha recommended that the government take cognisance of the continued illegal employment of persons for manual scavenging, to implement practices to end the practice, amendment of PEMSRA, among other provisions.

Rajya Sabha discussed the practice of manual scavenging, seeking amendment of PEMSRA Rajya Sabha discussed a Private Member's bill on the deaths of persons cleaning municipal sewers and private septic tanks despite promulgation of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013 (PEMSRA).

Kin of 483 of 713 deceased manual scavengers have been given compensation, says Thawar Chand Gehlot Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment Thaawar Chand Gehlot responded to Jha by listing out the alternative employment and welfare measures the government has extended to manual scavengers like loans, skill development, two-wheelers for women and training for self-protection. He said that 713 people have died cleaning septic tanks. Among these kin of 483 victims have been given compensation as per Supreme Court directions.

Rajya Sabha adjourned On the Private Member's Bill introduced by RJD's Manoj Kumar Jha on the manual scavenging deaths, Thawar Chand Gehlot offered reassurance that the government will take measures as suggested by the members. Chair asks Jha if he will withdraw the bill, to which the latter agreed.

Lok Sabha discusses Ken-Betwa river-linking project in Bundelkhand A resolution to construct canals through the Ken-Betwa river-linking project, moved by Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel, was discussed by Congress’ Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury and BJP’s Jagdambika Pal . The project aims to overcome the problem of water scarcity and stray cows in the Bundelkhand region. “The people of the region are forced to leave their cows to graze in the open, which is popularly known as `Anna Pratha’, and which causes damage to the standing crops,” Chowdhury said. Pal touched upon the history of Bundelkhand before entering into the issue at hand. He said this government is the first one to take the pledge to provide piped water to every household in the country.

Lok Sabha adjourned amid lack of quorum Opposition’s Bhagwant Mann raised the issue of lack of quorum in the House. AAP MP said he not only questions about the lack of quorum in Treasury benches but also in Opposition benches. “Where is Congress? Where is Trinamool Congress," Mann asked. A quorum bell is rung thrice, however, MPs do not return to the benches. At 5.57 pm, the Chair declares that there is no quorum and the House is adjourned till 11 am on 1 July.

Parliament Latest Updates: Amit Shah blamed Congress for losing out on the Pakistan Occupied Kashmir. He asked, "They are blaming us for situation the situation today but how are they forgetting their own past. Who was the one who called ceasefire just when the Indian forces were on the verge of pushing away Pakistani forces. We lost 1/3rd part of Kashmir because of Jawaharlal Nehru."

Shai said, "They are saying we are trampling democracy in Jammu and Kashmir. Before today, Article 356 has been imposed(President's rule) till now 132 times, out of which 93 times Congress has done it. Now of these people will teach us about democracy?"

Asaduddin Owaisi questioned the BJP's claim that the visit of Home Minister Amit Shah was historic in the sense that no protests or violence were reported. "I want to know from home minister, what is the definition of peace in Kashmir according to him? He was there yesterday and the whole valley was closed. The traffic restrictions were such that people were not allowed to come out of their houses. Is that the definition of peace?"

Stating that the government introduced the Ordinance for extending quota benefits to residents of border areas at a politically opportune time, RSP MP NK Premchandran said that the decision was a clear abuse of the Ordinance route. He said that the government was ignorant to the plight of the same people for the last five years and only promulgated an Ordinance in March just before the elections.

Minister of Communications, Electronics & IT Ravi Shankar Prasad on Friday is to introduce a bill to further amend the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 and further to amend the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 and the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002, which is to be taken into consideration. Prasad will also introduce a motion for the bill to be passed.

The new bill additionally allows ‘offline verification’ of an individual’s identity, without authentication, through modes specified by the Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) by regulations

Under the previous act, usage of Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an individual, by the State or a body corporate under any law, is permitted. The new bill removes this provision. An entity may be allowed to perform authentication through Aadhaar, if the UIDAI is satisfied that it is: compliant with certain standards of privacy and security, or permitted by law, or seeks authentication for a purpose specified by the central government in the interest of the State.

The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2019 provides for the use of Aadhaar number as proof of identity of a person, subject to authentication. The new bill allows the Parliament to legislate and bring any service under a list where identification by Aadhaar is mandatory.

Minister of Home Affairs Amit Shah will on Friday is to introduce a bill to further amend the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act 2004. The government had passed an Ordinance to this accord earlier when the Parliament was not in session. Now the government seeks to turn the presidential order into a duly passed and notified law.

The amendment provides for reservation in appointment and admission at professional institutions for persons belonging to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and socially and educationally backward classes.

The amended draft law defines socially and educationally backward classes and states that it should include persons living in areas adjoining the Actual Line of Control.

Further, the Act states that any person who has been appointed on the basis of residence in an area adjoining the Actual Line of Control must serve in such areas for at least seven years. The new bill extends this condition to persons living in areas adjoining the International Border as well.
