Jockey captures the feeling of comfortable innerwear in new TVC

“Feels like Jockey” is built on the idea that when you are wearing Jockey you are so comfortable, you can’t help yourself and break into a dance. The first ‘Feels like Jockey’ campaign created by L&K Saatchi & Saatchi in 2016 showed young men and women dancing to Nina Simone’s “Feelin’ Good”. The new campaign takes this idea ahead beautifully with new situations and different environments and another classic song to dance to, ‘Fever’.

Jockey, the American innerwear and leisurewear brand has been busy the past year with launching Jockey Woman, Athleisure and Jockey Juniors. While introducing new ranges in their men’s and women’s innerwear ranges and this campaign is created for these new innerwear ranges.

The films show men and women going about their typical routine day when they get into their headspace, a comfortable space thanks to their Jockey innerwear, and break into a dance, oblivious to where they are. The films feature contemporary dance moves mixed with freestyling and street dance including jookin, and are choreographed by Ayesha Orange known for her work with Austin Powers movies. The films have been directed by Hans Emanuel and shot in Los Angeles, CA. Two of the five TVCs are already on-air and online.

Talking about the campaign, Debarjyo Nandi, Sr.Vice President, L&K Saatchi & Saatchi said, “An idea that ‘fits like a song’ with the product and the brand, an all-time classic song, iconic American locations, amazing dancers, a celebrated choreographer, a relentless cinematographer, an energetic director and an ever supportive client, all the ingredients that could have only created magic!”

M C Cariappa, President, Sales and Marketing, Jockey India, said, “The ‘Feels Like Jockey’ campaigns are created to strengthen the core proposition of fit and comfort of our core range of men’s and women’s innerwear while ensuring the brand continues to build relevance and affinity with the youth."

#FitsLikeASong #FeelsLikeJockey #JockeyIndia

The Team:

Agency : L&K Saatchi & Saatchi

Creative Team : Pritam Shettigar, Shahid Sheikh, Bharat Gujarati, Aditya Narayan

Account Management : Debarjyo Nandi, Nivedita Lahiri, Himali Shetye

Agency Producer: Vijay Vigamal

Production Company: Hello Robot

Director: Hans Emanuel

Executive Producer: Amit Gupta, Kitisha Gaglani

Producer: Sohan Kumar

DOP: Roman M De.Bujo

Choreographer: Ayesha Orange

Costume Stylist: Coxy Chiara Rodoni

LA Production House : Filmed Imagination

LA Producer : Marius Haugan

Offline Editor (LA): Antonio Gomez

Offline Editor (India): Rachit Mehta

Online Editor: Ravi Sharma

Post Studio India : Prime Focu

Colorist: Alvaro (Barcelona)

Music : Toni (Trafalgar Studio, Barcelona)

Post Producer : Sachin Amberkar
