Ludhiana jail clash: 21 jail inmates booked for violence, 1 escaped

Pooja Rajput, wife of injured inmate Pankaj, protests in front of the minister’s car in Ludhiana on Friday

Book officials for murder: Victims’ kin

LUDHIANA: Police booked 21 jail inmates on Friday for rioting in Ludhiana Central Jail on Thursday. The FIR was registered on statement of jail superintendent Shamsher Singh Boparai under different sections of IPC, including rioting and attempt to murder.One inmate, identified as Amandeep of Gobindgarh, who had been lodged in jail for two theft cases, managed to escape during the clashes. The jail officials found he was missing after completing the count of inmates at 9 pm on Thursday. He is yet to be arrested.Giving details of the clashes, Boparai said in his statement to the police that an inmate lodged in high security zone of the jail had a hearing via video conferencing on June 27 and was taken out of his ward by police and jail staff. At the same time, a group of inmates in high security zone started manhandling staff and inmates of different barracks and wards started gathering on learning that an inmate, Sunny Sood, had died. “When the jail staff tried to pacify them, the inmates started pelting stones and bricks. They also set a car, tractors and records on fire. Following this, jail staff opened fire in air in which an inmate, Ajit Singh, died.”The car was set on fire near an electricity pole that too caught fire and electricity supply and as a consequence, water supply were only restored by late Thursday night. The jail officials also claimed 10 LPG cylinders, stolen from the godown near high security zone, were set on fire by the inmates. An official also said that the inmates had thrown chilli powder into eyes of cops.Five weapons, all SLRs, were used and 183 rounds were fired during the clashes, deputy inspector-general (prisons) S L Jakhar said.Meanwhile, the family of the undertrial who was killed in violence, refused to cremate his body till jail and police officers were booked for murder. At the Ludhiana civil hospital, the family accompanied by Lok Insaaf Party MLA Simarjit Singh Bains and his supporters refused to give permission for the postmortem. More than 100 cops were deployed in and around the hospital.“My son has been killed by jail officials. We will not allow post-mortem and would not cremate body until the jail officials are booked under 302 (murder) of IPC,” Ajit’s father Harjinder Singh said.“If chief minister Amarinder Singh wants to win elections again, he would have to ensure justice to us. If action is not taken against jail officials, we will stage protest with Ajit’s body at Ludhiana-Delhi highway.”Boparai said Ajit was carrying an LPG cylinder and running towards the main gate of the administrative block. “He could have either opened the gate or set it on fire. This was the reason the jail officials opened fire,” he said.Punjab jails minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa faced a protest and sloganshouting as he reached the hospital.Even families of Sunny and Pankaj Rajput, who sustained a bullet injury, joined the protest and sought action against the jail authorities.Randhawa said the magisterial inquiry is likely to be completed within 10 days. Answering the complaints about firing by the police inside jail, he said: “According to the jail manual, if an inmate tries to escape, officials can open fire at him.” He said a separate rapid action force would be trained to improve security in jails.
