Sanaswadi company employee assaulted

Attack sparks fear around industrial zones. Victim, a senior manufacturing operations manager at Sintex-BAPL Ltd, was thrashed by 12 unidentified men on way back home



Sparking fears of crime once again in industrial zones surrounding the city, a senior manufacturing operations manager of a company in the area was grievously assaulted at Sanaswadi on Thursday evening by around 12 unidentified accused. The incident on Nagar Road spread panic among officials of companies in the Sanaswadi industrial area, which is not far from the Shikrapur MIDC (Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation), where a production manager was murdered last year.



The victim was identified as Wagholi resident Sanjaykumar Pallai (36), who works for Sintex-BAPL Ltd. Pallai was allegedly waylaid around 6.45 pm while on his way back home from the production facility, somewhere near APPL Industries. The accused came on six motorbikes and first brushed their vehicles against Pallai’s four-wheeler, then broke his side windshield using wooden logs. Pallai was thrashed and suffered from injuries on his hands, a cut on his head and bruises all over the body. He was left to bleed at the spot, from where he was eventually taken to hospital, and discharged later that night.



Shikrapur police registered a case on Thursday night itself and have launched investigations. One of the attackers was identified on closed-circuit television (CCTV) camera footage at Sintax-BAPL premises.



“This as-yet unidentified attacker had visited the company a day prior to the attack. The victim does not know him. There is no information about this attacker trying to extort the company either. It does not seem to have anything to do with workers’ union activities. So, we need to arrest him to find out the motive,” shared police inspector Sadashiv Shelar of Shikhrapur police station.



All accused were booked under Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections 143 (unlawful assembly), 147 (rioting), 341 (wrongful restraint), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt with a dangerous weapon), 427 (mischief causing damages), 323 (voluntarily causing hurt), 506 (criminal intimidation) and 504 (intentional insult with intent to provoke breach of trust).



A Sintex-BAPL official said Pallai was in a state of shock, and that the company is cooperating with the inquiry. Human resources (HR) official Yuvraj Pawar informed, “In shock, the victim was unable to report to work. He had joined us earlier this month and manages production.”



Organisations like the Deccan Chamber Of Commerce Industries and Agriculture (DCCIA), National Institute of Personnel Management (NIPM) and Vibrant HR Professionals Association have contacted top police officials, demanding strong action in this case. Sudhir Patil, founder-member of the Vibrant HR Professionals Association, told Mirror, “It has become challenging to run industries due to such nefarious activities. People use pressure tactics to get contracts from firms, be it for procurement or running canteens. Such incidents of violence against managers and officials repeat every few months. New companies always check for such issues before investing in Pune. Strict action must be taken.”



Last year in March, a production manager named Aslam Sardar Kothali, who was working in Patil’s ZF Steering Gear (India) Ltd, was murdered. Around eight labour union members had been arrested for the crime, and are undergoing trial.


