Haryana Congress leader’s murder: Two arrested by police, main accused still at large

Two days after Indian National Congress’s (INC) Haryana spokesperson Vikas Chaudhary was shot dead in Faridabad, two persons — including the wife of notorious gangster Kaushal — have been arrested by Haryana Police Saturday.

According to police, apart from Kaushal’s wife, Roshni, resident of Naharpur, and her domestic help, Naresh, alias Chand, who had been working for her since several years, have been arrested.

“During initial questioning, Roshni revealed that she plotted the murder of Vikas Chaudhary on the directions of her husband, Kaushal, and roped in Chand for the same. These two provided weapons to the men who executed the murder,” said ACP (Crime) Anil Kumar.

“It appears Kaushal had a problem with Chaudhary because of some financial transactions that had taken place between them,” he said.

Kaushal, whose gang is believed to be involved in several cases of murder, attempt to murder, and extortion, is absconding. His live-in partner had been arrested from Delhi earlier this month for her involvement in multiple cases of murder and extortion in Gurgaon.

Of the others involved in the Congress leader’s murder, two have been identified as Vikas, alias Bhalle, a resident of Gurgaon’s Dhanwapur, and Sachin, a resident of Kheri village in Faridabad.

“Bhalle and Sachin, as well as their other accomplices, are still absconding. Investigations are being conducted to nab them,” said the ACP.

“On the basis of information provided by Naresh, alias Chand, the car used in the crime has been seized. The two accused who have been arrested and will be produced in court today and taken into police remand for further questioning,” he said.

The incident had occurred on Thursday morning in Faridabad’s Sector 9, outside the gym where Chaudhary used to work out. The CCTV footage of the incident showed him parking his Fortuner car outside the establishment when two men get off a white SX4 standing on the road behind him, and opened fire at him before fleeing.

He had been rushed to Sarvodaya Hospital in the city following the incident, where doctors had declared him dead. An FIR had been registered on the basis of his brother, Gaurav’s complaint, under Sections 302 (murder) and 34 (common intention) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), and various sections of the Arms Act.

In his complaint, Gaurav has stated that his brother was involved in politics and did “property work”.
