Rule of lawlessness

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Asuccession of violent incidents in the past week or so has exposed the respective state governments’ laxity on the law and order front. On June 22, a 24-year-old Muslim, Tabrez Ansari, succumbed to injuries after he was thrashed by a mob with sticks for an alleged theft in Jharkhand’s Seraikela Kharsawan district and forced to chant ‘Jai Shri Ram’ and ‘Jai Hanuman’. The same day, Mahinderpal Bittu, the prime suspect in the 2015 Bargari sacrilege case, was murdered by two fellow inmates in the ‘high-security’ prison at Nabha in Punjab. One prisoner was killed and five others, besides six police personnel, were injured in rioting that broke out at the Ludhiana Central Jail on Thursday after an inmate’s death. Earlier that day, Haryana Congress spokesperson Vikas Chaudhary was shot dead in broad daylight by assailants outside a gym in Faridabad.

In all these cases, the culprits demonstrated brazen disregard of the law, cocking a snook at the police/jail authorities. ‘Police’ and ‘public order’ are State subjects under the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. The onus is on the state governments to curb crime and maintain law and order. The Centre’s job is to provide financial assistance to the states for the modernisation of police forces, while the Central security and intelligence agencies are tasked with regularly sharing intelligence inputs with the state law-enforcement agencies. Even as investigations are in progress, the powers that be should scrutinise the lapses and crack the whip on officials found guilty of dereliction of duty. Exemplary punishment to the hardcore criminals and gangsters should also be ensured.

Politicising crime and indulging in a blame game won't serve to improve the situation. Two of these states — Jharkhand and Haryana — are ruled by the BJP and will go to the polls later this year, while Punjab is under Congress reign. A crime-free society ought to be a top priority for any government, no matter which party is in power in the state or at the Centre.
