Pehlu Khan, who was lynched to death by gau rakshaks in 2017, now accused of cow smuggling by Rajasthan govt

Family of Pehlu Khan | Photo Credit: PTI

Jaipur: Rajasthan government on Saturday filed a chargesheet against Pehlu Khan, a dairy farmer who was killed in 2017 by cow vigilantes, and his sons in a cattle transport case. The chargesheet accuses Khan of transporting cattle from Rajasthan to Haryana allegedly without the permission of the district collector. Since Khan is no more, the case will continue against his sons.

In April 2017, Pehlu Khan and his sons were stopped on the Jaipur-Delhi National Highway by cow vigilantes while they were transporting cows they had bought in a Jaipur fair to their home in Haryana. A video surfaced on social media which showed the mob mercilessly beating Pehlu Khan and his sons for transporting cattle. The family even showed the documents of the purchase to the mob to prove that they were not smuggling cows but were still beaten.

After two days of the incident, Pehlu Khan died while undergoing treatment. Two FIRs were filed in the incident, first against eight people who lynched Khan and his sons while second against Pehlu Khan and his sons for carrying cattle from Rajasthan to Haryana without taking permission from the district collector.

Amer sub-divisional officer Baldev Ram Bhojak said, "The JMC (Jaipur Municipal Corporation) must be issuing the permits. I have never issued any." Bhojak was the issuing authority for the permits at the Jaipur cattle market from where the animals were bought.

All the eight accused are out on bail while two of them are incommunicado from a long time now. The chargesheet accuses Pehlu Khan under sections 5, 8 and 9 of the Rajasthan Bovine Animal (Prohibition of Slaughter and Regulation of Temporary Migration or Export) Act, 1995 and Rules, 1995.

The new development once again brought the Congress, which is the ruling party in Rajasthan, and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) at loggerheads. Rajasthan Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot blamed the saffron party saying Pehlu Khan was lynched under the BJP rule and asserted that Congress is against heinous crimes.
