After parting ways with Harleen Sethi, is Vicky Kaushal now romantically involved with Malavika Mohanan?

Is Vicky Kaushal romantically linked with actress Malavika Mohanan? | Photo Credit: Instagram

Vicky Kaushal is undoubtedly one of the most sought after actors in the film industry. With his performance in movies like Uri: The Surgical Strike, Sanju, Raazi, Masaan, Manarziyaan, Raman Raghav 2.0 and more, the actor has not only made a mark for himself but has also given his peers a run for their money. While the actor is currently busy shooting for Udam Singh biopic, it is apparently his relationship status, that has gained limelight.

Vicky, who was first linked with actress Harleen Sethi, is now, reportedly being associated with Petta actress Malavika Mohanan. In a video that surfaced on the web recently, Vicky is seen having a meal apparently with Malavika's mother. The video also features his brother Sunny Kaushal and Aditya Mohanan. Take a look at the clip below:

Now, a report in India Today claims that Vicky and Malavika have grown closer and have developed something more intimate. The daily publication quoted a source as saying, "Vicky, Sunny, Malavika and her brother have known each other since they were children. They enjoy each other's company and bond really well. But Vicky and Malavika apparently, have become extremely close. Sunny and Malavika are also good friends. In Mumbai, no matter how busy he is, he will make it a point to drop in for lunch or dinner at Malavika’s home, where she stays with her parents and brother. Now it seems that their relationship is becoming stronger and developing into something more intimate."

Vicky earlier spent quality time with Malavika as he shared a video in which he thanked the Petta actress for a "wholesome south Indian meal on a Sunday afternoon." The actor shared the video with a caption that read, "Life’s a Mani Ratnam Film after a wholesome south Indian meal on a Sunday afternoon! Thank You @malavikamohanan_"

Meanwhile, on the work front, Vicky will next be seen alongside Bhumi Pednekar in Bhanu Pratap's next titled Bhoot Part One The Haunted Ship. Bankrolled by Dharma Productions, the film is slated for a November 15 release.

On the other hand, the actor will also be seen in Shoojit Sircar's next titled Sardar Udam Singh, in which the actor will play the role of the Indian revolutionary.

Stay tuned for further updates.
