The great booty

Tony Blair

Mukarram Jah after his coronation as the eighth Nizam of Hyderabad in 1967

Sidney Cotton

Prince Muffakham Jah seen outside the Royal Courts of Justice in London on June 12

How a dispute between India-Pakistan over Rs 350 cr, which belonged to the Nizam and was deposited in a London bank in 1948, played out in a UK court.A vivid imagery of the tension, uncertainty and political drama surrounding the union of Hyderabad with a newly-independent India in 1948, played out during an intense trial — over the last two weeks of June — in the Royal Courts of Justice in London. Justice Marcus Smith heard from counsels representing India, Pakistan, the eighth Nizam, Prince Mukarram Jah, and his younger brother, Prince Muffakham Jah, all of whom are locked in an ownership battle over the Rs 350 crore ‘Hyderabad fund’ that has been lying in a British bank since 1948.The lengthy submissions from the counsels served as a quick introduction to the instability that engulfed the Nizam’s dominion; except when punctuated by references to law cases seeking to trump their own assertions over the other parties. But what is at stake is not just the booty of Rs 350 crore. The deft outlining of the case seemed more of a function to establish a moral sanctity, underpinning the respective claims.On September 16, 1948, Moin Nawaz Jung, the finance and foreign minister of the seventh Nizam, instructed National Westminster Bank (then known as the Westminster Bank) to transfer £10,07,940 into a newly-opened account in the name of Habib Rahimtoola, the Pakistani high commissioner in the UK. This was done by the bank on September 20, 1948. However, the Nizam sent a cable to the bank, as well as to Moin, seeking to reverse the transaction. The bank declined, saying it could not be reversed without the consent of the account holder.In July 1954, the Nizam initiated proceedings against Rahimtoola, Moin and the bank, seeking access to the fund. Exactly a year later, Rahimtoola applied to stay the proceedings, claiming that the Nizam’s action interfered with Pakistan’s sovereign immunity — which meant that as a foreign state, Pakistan had a right to not be subject to a court of law in Britain. The stay was granted by Justice Upjohn on June 27, 1956, but the decision was reversed by the court of appeal on December 20, 1956. But on November 7, 1957, the House of Lords restored the decision of Justice Upjohn, effectively ruling out the role of the British judiciary in trying to reach a solution in the matter.Despite talks at various levels, no solution was forthcoming, and the stalemate continued. In June 2013, the high commissioner for Pakistan, represented by Cherie Blair, wife of former British Prime Minister, initiated a claim against the bank in a UK court.After it became clear that India and the heirs of the seventh Nizam would become a party in the case, Pakistan served a notice of discontinuance in November 2013. Mirror had reported, on January 21, 2015, that Justice Launcelot Henderson had set aside the notice of discontinuance served by Pakistan, ruling that Islamabad had voluntarily ceded the privilege against the legal process that it enjoyed owing to its sovereignty. Pakistan did not appeal the order, and in March 2015, replaced Cherie Blair with Khawar Qureshi.The case progressed through a number of case-management hearings, involving applications for summary judgments and prayers to strike down claims of the opposing parties.In December 2018, it became clear that India and the princes had reached a settlement in May or June of 2018 — thus the trial would effectively be Pakistan versus the defendants. When the nine-day trial began on June 10, 2019, it meant that Pakistan had not much to gain by dwelling upon the fractious relationship between the seventh Nizam and India. This was because pleas of the defendants, against each other, had been abandoned.Two witnesses were slated to be crossexamined during the trial: the Oxfordeducated Prince Muffakham Jah, and Shaharyar Khan, a Cambridge-educated Pakistani diplomat belonging to the royal family of Bhopal. Khan had given a witness statement that Mir Nawaz Jung, the agent-general of the Nizam in Sunday, June 30, 2019 10 London, had told him that the Nizam was “seeking to compensate Pakistan for the assistance which she had provided to Hyderabad” by transferring the money. Both Pakistan and Khan claim the Nizam had provided military and political assistance during ‘Operation Polo’ in 1948, when India tried to annex Hyderabad.Qureshi also emphasised on the ‘gun-running theory’ expounding that Pakistan had engaged the services of an English pilot, Frederick, to organise the airlift of military equipment into Hyderabad, and the money transferred into Rahimtoola’s account was meant to finance that operation.Qureshi concluded that the fund was transferred into Rahimtoola’s account because he was an agent of Pakistan. Just after 4 pm, Qureshi informed the court that Shaharyar Khan, who had agreed to be cross-examined, would not be able to do so due to poor health.Muffakham Jah sat through the whole trial taking notes in front of a laptop that was instantly transcribing and displaying the court proceedings. The significance of Jah’s witness statement revolved around his interaction with Mohammad Ikramullah, the Pakistani high commissioner, whom he met as a secretary of the University of Oxford Islamic Society in 1957.Ikramullah, who was the chief guest at a function, had told him that the “money [the fund] belongs to you people, your family, and has only been kept with us on trust”.On the first day (June 10) itself, in anticipation of Jah’s cross-examination, his counsel Hodge Malek had told the court that he would object to any “cross-examination of my client on relations with India”. On the second day of the trial the following day, Jah was cross-examined by Qureshi. Dressed in a three-piece suit, Jah kept his cool while sitting in the witness stand and answered some leading questions that Qureshi asked him.Over the next few days, Timothy Otty, counsel for India, and Eason Rajah, counsel for the eighth Nizam, emphasised Pakistan’s shifting position. They pointed to the fact that Pakistan had initially claimed (in 2013) that the fund had been gifted to them by the Nizam, but they were now putting forward the theory of safeguarding the funds, and the arms sale.Qureshi produced documents saying that Pakistan continued to pay Cotton till the 1960s, for his services in Hyderabad — which showed that Pakistan had indeed engaged his services to help the Nizam. He also raised questions over the veracity of the letters exchanged between Moin Nawaz Jung and Habib Rahimtoola, which discuss that the latter would hold the fund in his account in trust.The trial took place in the East Block (Courts No 73 and 76) of the Royal Courts of Justice, which is more easily accessible, not from the imposing main entrance, but from the side entrance at Bell Yard. This rather quiet, quaint but circuitous route, both literally and figuratively, taken by the battery of counsels, solicitors, their juniors and the Indian and Pakistan officials, in some ways, signified the manner in which the Hyderabad fund case, a by-product of decolonisation, ended up in a British court.The judgment in the case is expected in an estimated six weeks.
