Cops shot him: Inmate’s mom

editorial@tribune.com

Nikhil Bhardwaj

Tribune News Service

Ludhiana, June 29

Giving a new twist to the violence case in Central Jail here, Meera Rani mother of deceased inmate Ajit Singh Baba, 21, alleged that her son was shot by a jail officer in front of her eyes.

“I was there in the jail to meet my son Ajit. When he was coming to meet me, suddenly violence erupted in the jail and policemen started running from here and there. Policemen suddenly started firing and one of the senior police officers shot my son in front of my eyes. He was then dragged to some other place and I was also made to rush from there,” wailing mother alleged.

She along with Lok Insaf Party MLA Simarjit Singh Bains met DCP Ashwani Kapur and demanded registration of murder case against jail officials. “We urged the DCP to register a murder case against the jail staff who shot Ajit and killed another Sonu Sood by thrashing him. The police hurriedly registered attempt to murder case against 22 inmates. Our application has been marked to ADCP-IV Ajinder Singh for inquiry. The police are siding with the jail staff and if no FIR is registered in two days, we will move the High Court to get justice for the family,” MLA Simarjit told The Tribune.

Asked if they would cremate the body of Ajit or not, the wailing mother said till the time murder case was not registered against the jail officials, they would not do so.

The mother also alleged, “Yesterday some cops from the Dugri police station came to our house and asked for my son Ajit. They said Ajit was a gangster and he had escaped from jail. We were shocked as my son was already killed in firing by jail staff, then why they came to mentally harass us.”

The DCP, Ashwani Kapur, said inquiry was marked to ADCP Ajinder. The CP would take the final decision on the final probe report he would submitted.

A senior police official said the woman’s allegation was without logic as inmates were not allowed to go outside the jail to meet their kin, and how came she witnessed the firing at her son.
