Delhi: Unable to pay loan, 45-yr-old hires three men to murder loaner

The Central District of Delhi Police has arrested a 45-year-old woman and three men including her son, whom she had hired to murder another woman who was pressurizing her to repay a loan of Rs 14 lakh.

According to the police, around 7:15 am on Friday, the body of a woman was found near a bus stand on Deshbandhu Gupta Road whose hands and legs were tied. Police identified the deceased as Roshna alias Rekha (29), a resident of Than Singh Nagar in Anand Parbat.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (central) Mandeep Singh Randhava said the police found that the deceased had received a call from an unknown number on her phone. "Technical surveillance revealed that the number belongs to one Urmila, a resident of Than Singh Nagar in Anand Parbat. Following a raid, the woman was detained for questioning during which she admitted her involvement in getting the woman killed," Randhava said.

The DCP said that Urmila told the police that she had borrowed Rs 14 lakh from her six months ago. "She said she was finding it hard to repay the amount but Rekha was pressurizing her to return the money. She said she planned to eliminate Rekha and hired one Hemant Jain who was known to her. She offered Jain Rs 2 lakh to kill Rekha. Urmila also roped in her two sons Shubham and Sumit in the plan," the DCP said.

On Thursday, Urmila called Rekha to her house where four of them tied her legs and hands and strangled her to death using a stick. "The accused then took Rekha's gold chain and wrapped her body in a bed sheet before dumping it near a bus stop," Randhava said.

The police said the deceased was a financer.

Urmila is a housewife. Her husband works as a security guard in Moti Nagar. Both her sons, Shubham and Sumit are school dropouts and run an eatery in Anand Parbat for last one month.

Hemant Jain used to assist the two brothers in their business. He had borrowed Rs 50,000 from Urmila but was not able to repay. Urmila offered him to give Rs 2 lakh, which he saw as an opportunity to pay her back and also make money.
