Shraddha Kapoor wraps up Saaho in Austria, is back on Street Dancer 3D set

Shraddha Kapoor, who was shooting for Saaho in Austria, has wrapped up her part and has returned to India. The actress will be next seen in Bahubali actor Prabhas-starrer Saaho. Shraddha took to Instagram to announce that she has wrapped up her bit on Saaho. Shraddha is back on Street Dancer 3D set.

In her Instagram story, Shraddha Kapoor shared a picture of herself with her team and penned an emotional post. She wrote, "So we wrapped my bit on Saaho & it's been 1 incredible journey. This is my core team on the film -Hair, make-up, wardrobe & spot. Missing from the photo are @leepakshiellawadi (costume) & Atul (security). Each member is too special & there is only too much love for them. Also, I’m very grateful that they are as lame as I am sometimes & also have the ability to crack really bad jokes and pass retarded statements. For that mostly, I am extremely lucky to know them. Thank you for the mutual stare-offs, looking at the wall punishments, getting immense joy when the other drops something, trips, mispronounces something etc. Abs dabs jabs for life. (sic)"

Right after wrapping up Saaho, the Ek Villain actress joined the Street dancer 3D team. In her Instagram stories, she revealed that she is back on the set.

Apart from Saaho and Street Dancer 3D, Shraddha Kapoor will be seen sharing screen space with Sushant Singh Rajput in Chhichhore. The film is set to release on August 30. Shraddha took to social media to share a video announcing the release date of Chhichhore. She wrote, "#Chhichhore ki madness this 30th August #2MonthsToChhichhore"

Buzz has it that Shraddha Kapoor will play Delhi girl Uzma Ahmed in a film based on the latter's life. According to a report in a website, the makers have approached the actress for the role, and Shraddha has apparently liked the script. Saif Ali Khan is playing an Indian Diplomat JP Singh in the film. Uzma was rescued from Pakistan after she landed up in the neighbouring country following a Pakistani taxi driver Tahir Ali. She fell in love with the dirver in a trip to Malaysia. Uzma finally returned to India with the help of the then Union Minister of External Affairs Sushma Swaraj.

ALSO READ | Shraddha Kapoor to play Delhi girl Uzma Ahmed in biopic with Saif Ali Khan?

ALSO READ | Saif Ali Khan to play Indian diplomat JP Singh in film on Delhi girl Uzma Ahmed

ALSO READ | Saaho: Prabhas and Shraddha Kapoor chill in Austria after shoot. See viral pics
