500 rowdies raided in south Bengaluru, 71 two-wheelers seized

BENGALURU: Police teams swooped down on the residences of about 500 rowdy-sheeters and those facing robbery charges in south Bengaluru in the wee hours of Friday. They seized 71 two-wheelers from their possession.Over 400 police personnel, including women cops, were involved in simultaneous raids carried out in the jurisdiction of Subramanyapura, Konananakunte, KS Layout, Talaghattapura and Puttenahalli police stations.Police had identified the crime-prone pockets before the operation. DCP (south) K Annamalai, who led the exercise, told TOI they were looking for stolen two-wheelers.“Our informants had told us these suspects were using stolen motorbikes for their activities. We crosschecked and seized 71 two-wheelers, most of which are bikes, for which the rowdies didn’t produce documents,” he said.“The rear number plate of a bike read KA-02-VE-5221, while the front number plate said it was KA-02-EV-5221,” said another police officer part of the operation.According to cops, the hand locks of at least 20 bikes had been broken, indicating they could have been stolen or snatched from the original owners. “A special team has been formed to investigate the background and original owners of the 71 two-wheelers. Soon, we will carry out a similar operation in five other police station limits,” he said.Police sources said they had initially planned to conduct raids on rowdy-sheeters in the entire south division but the plan was changed by DCP Annamalai citing difficulties in monitoring the operation.“We chose Subramanyapura sub-division for the raid, which began at midnight and ended at 5am. The DCP had instructed his personnel to avoid wearing sweaters or jackets on their uniform. He wanted the rowdies and their neighbours to know who was knocking on theirs door after midnight,” a police officer said.Another officer said preparation for the raid began at the police stations at 11pm on Thursday when the teams were formed. The teams were headed by inspectors, SIs and ASIs, and left the stations at 11.30pm.Police said the teams also checked two-wheelers parked by the roadside. “We picked up several bikes from in and around the premises of habitual offenders. We seized bikes which were not properly locked. We will return them to the owners if they produce ownership documents,” an officer said.
