Mob lynchings of Muslims and Dalits are linked to Sangh Parivar: Asaduddin Owaisi

Asaduddin Owaisi said, "They [BJP-RSS] have successfully created a mindset where Muslims are seen as terrorists, anti-nationals and cow slaughterers." (Photo: PTI)

Hyderabad MP and AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi held the Sangh Parivar responsible for the recent spate of crimes where individuals were beaten up for not chanting Jai Shri Ram.

Asaduddin Owaisi said only Dalits and Muslims were being targetted.

"People are being beaten up if they do not raise slogans of Jai Shri Ram and Vande Mataram. Such incidents aren't going to stop. Only Muslims and Dalits are being targeted. There are organisations behind such incidents and all of them are linked to Sangh Parivar," Asaduddin Owaisi told ANI.

Asaduddin Owaisi's statement came days after a 24-year-old man, Tabrez Ansari, was thrashed by a mob in Jharkhand for alleged theft and was forced to chant Jai Shri Ram and Jai Hanuman.

Condemning the Jharkhand lynching, Owaisi had said that incidents now followed a familiar pattern.

"This is the pattern with almost all lynchings. First, a Muslim is murdered by cow lovers. Then the most ridiculous excuses begin: a 'suspicion' of beef possession, theft, smuggling & love jihad. So much for 'sabka vishwas' when we can be killed over mere 'suspicions'," he said in a tweet.

Earlier in the week, Asaduddin Owaisi had said that lynchings were not going to stop as the BJP and RSS have increased hate against Muslims in the society.

"Incidents of mob lynching are not going to stop because BJP and RSS have increased a sense of hatred against Muslims," the Hyderabad MP said.

He said, "They have successfully created a mindset where Muslims are seen as terrorists, anti-nationals and cow slaughterers."

In the past week, reports have come from across India of people being beaten up for refusing to chant Jai Shri Ram.

On Friday, a 16-year-old Muslim boy was allegedly beaten by unidentified men in Kanpur for wearing a traditional skull cap and refusing to chant Jai Shri Ram.

Before that, three were arrested by police in Thane, Maharashtra for allegedly beating up a Muslim cab driver and later asking him to chant Jai Shri Ram.
