Watch: TRS' Koneru Krishna Rao, followers attack female forest officer in Telangana

Telangana Rashtra Samithi

TRS

Krishna

IFS Association

A female forest officer was brutally attacked with sticks by men belonging to the ruling) in Telangana's Komaram Bheem Asifabad district on Sunday.The officer, Chole Anitha, climbed a tractor to save herself from the mob's attack but the people mercilessly attacked her. She fell down, crying in pain. TRS leader KoneruRao, who is also a zilla parishad vice-chairman, allegedly led the attack. He is the brother of Kagaznagar MLA Koneru Konappa.Anitha is undergoing treatment at a private hospital. She is a tribal range officer in the forest department. Anitha, along with her staff, went to Sarsala forest village in Sirpur Kagaznagar block to plough 20 acre land for Harita Haaram, a mass tree plantation programme.Krishna Rao arrived there on a call from the locals and entered into an argument as she opposed the department's activity in the lands that are under the occupation of villagers. He contended that the lands they were trying to plough were private lands which belonged to farmers.Anitha informed the villagers that the government had a mass plantation programme and hence, she has to ready the land for it. This particular stretch of 20 acres is meant for afforestation under Harita Haaram, in lieu of the forest cover lost in construction of the government's flagship Kaleswaram multipurpose irrigation project.Soon as she asked her staff to start the work, the villagers attacked her with sticks. Anitha alleged that she was dragged by her hair by Krishna Rao. She climbed the tractor and in her attempt to escape the sticks, she lost her mobile phone. While many farmers began to hit the tractor with their sticks, a close aide of Krishna directed his stick to her. Other farmers joined him in the indiscriminate attack on the female officer. Rao was standing very close to the spot. The nearly 20 policemen remained helpless till she fell down.The government took serious note of the attack on the officer and directed the district police to book all the accused under stringent sections of the forest laws and the Indian Penal Code. District superintendent of police Malla Reddy visited Anitha at the hospital and assured her of stringent action against those responsible.Krishna claimed that neither he nor his men participated in the attack. "The officials came in support of Congress leaders, who were trying to encroach innocent farmers lands. I went there to tell the forest officers that the land belongs to individual farmers," he maintained.Hours after the attack, Krishna resigned as the zilla parishad vice-chairman. He sent his resignation letter to district collector. The Sirpur Kagaznagar police registered a case against Krishna and 16 others. The police are also questioning about 30 farmers and villagers.DGP M Mahender Reddy issued orders placing Kagaznagar DSP Sambaiah and rural inspector Venkatesh under suspension. TRS working president KT Rama Rao also condemned his party leader's brutality and said Krishna had been arrested.Telangana forests and environment minister P Indrakaran Reddy said stern action would be taken against those who attacked Anitha and her staff. He said an enquiry would be ordered. He also said that if anyone had an issue with the forest department, it should have been brought to the government's notice and not attacked officials.Meanwhile, thealso condemned the assault on the officer and asked the authorities to immediately book the offender under law.Meanwhile, district superintendent of police Malla Reddy said Krishna and his close aide Pochamallu were taken into custody. The case is registered under Indian Penal Code (IPC) sections 353. 332, 307.147, 148, 427, 507 and 149.The SP assured the forest officials protection.Koneru Krishna gave a dramatic twist to the episode while tendering his resignation as zilla parishad vice-chairman. He alleged that the forest staff and officers had behaved high handed with the shift cultivators. He resigned protesting against the forest officer and staff rude behaviour but not on moral ground for the attack on the lady officer.
