Doctor’s day: Big bugs, big drugs, big bucks!

Anoop Kohli is a senior consultant neurologist at the Indraprastha Apollo Hospital, New Delhi. His interests go far beyond his chosen profession. For him, it's just one game of life so interesting to study for all its themes and aberrations. He also dabbles in script-writing and recently got a membership of the Bombay Film Writers' Association. In this blog, Masquerader, expect from him anything from H1N1 to Heena. LESS ... MORE

A doctor, due to his professional proximity, has a higher chance, to grasp three of The Buddha’s four noble sights—the sick man, the old man, the dying man! Those with additional introspection may also record, the fourth—the “poor man”, who became so, due to the therapeutic circumstances.

The print on WHO’s most recent guidelines, that yet have to firm-up and dry, point towards the gravity of increasing resistance of bugs to the most recent, broad spectrum. potent, and at times antibiotics specific to notorious drugs.

Those who work in mega set-ups, and those in the periphery, are often dismayed to hold a culture-sensitivity report of an infected patient. With serial “resistant” column on the right (the way the reports are printed), printed against the most promising antibiotics they have used and saved lives.

You and your loyal “next to God” believing patient, are at the end of the rope! Only he does not know that he is passing through a crucial phase, now parked parallel, to an ailment, for which he was under treatment, indeed recovering. The rope of hope, you now have skidded down, was long, but despite being aware, or half aware, your mind runs to the number of factors. Minor slips in precautions, both within and without your setup, that pushed you in the pit.

To enumerate a few, it could initially be domestic lack of awareness on the part of the patient (pardonable), a road accident, where the plethora of suspected bugs can be enumerated, but is undetermined and hence a resort to “higher” the antibiotics, as culture reports of fluid of all exposed portals are awaited. The lissom urinary catheter inserted by a para-medical in the periphery under hygienic standards only he knows, the feeding through the nasal tube, considering the contents and rapidity with which food was forced down, leading to a mega burp, and now pneumonia. The bed sore, and I would still say the sincere intentions of your peripheral colleague to start an antibiotic, and refer onwards.

The continuing duel of big bugs countered by the big drugs, has multiple causes. Many stations at which the disease van stopped, and picked up more muck. It is a matter of individuals; semi lay to the super-specialists. The sterilization procedures used, a well- trained nursing staff, periodic fumigations. The list is long, and requires guidelines at every level. I am focusing on the issues in a big hospital set-up, a universal challenge of system management, anywhere in the world.

To make it simpler and focused, let me point to the two major aspects that are standard, and can make at least a 25% difference in the burden of patient infection. 1) The choice of the antibiotic, that is necessary, even before one awaits the cultural sensitivities, that may take up till 48hours! 2) Embarrassingly simple but often taken lightly—-hand cleansing at the bedside, before touching the patient. Applies from the floor cleaner to paramedical staff. More importantly to the family, and well wishers that drop in during visiting hours. Most good set-ups provide a bedside spirit hand-cleansers, that has immediate bactericidal effect.

The larger problem still remains, if one was to look at patients with chronic conditions, that require long stays in ICUs, some on ventilators, others having illnesses that lower the immunity, or co-morbid ailments as diabetes, deranged renal functions. Other such groups would be those with head injuries, road accidents, and have deranged consciousness. Aspiration pneumonia (feeding contents, that creep up the food pipe, and manage entry into the lungs), infections in the urine, through catheters, that are necessary even before deciding long term, but invasive methods. Mostly a recovering patient is still discharged with a urinary catheter, reasonable antibiotics, but a lurking fear of infection.

I often remind myself of a story heard from a senior surgeon, often ask him to repeat it, when I confront him. He talks of his Professor at King George’s Lucknow. The Prof, would operate an infected appendix, a gall bladder, other abdominal conditions. His appreciations, and the repeated message that revives my instincts are—-the way this surgeon friend scales up an adoring stance describing, how, each swipe of the scalpel by his Prof cleared exactly the depth of the tissue that would lead to the operating field. The inspiring part, which forces me to ask for a repeat of his story, is that post-operative antibiotic would be a single shot of Penicillin, and no patient ever returned with further complaints, and never an infection. Doctors today, despite good intentions, even scientific reasoning, as a community shall continue to explain, even ward -off the mass blemish of over-use of antibiotics, right or not.

The exceptional serendipity of Sir Alexander Fleming, in 1928, relates to a bacterial culture dish, left in the basement of the lab, with an open window next to it. Next morning, he found a greenish mould of fungus in the dish, but lights flashed, when he found that a part of the colony of the bacteria, cleared by the fungus! The bacteria was erased by the fungus! Penicillin the first proper antibiotic, has saved billions of lives, WWII to be noted particularly. Even today penicillin is the antibiotic of choice for throat infections in children, that later lead to rheumatic valvular disease of the heart. The bacteria in Flaming’s culture, was “staphylococcus”, one of the most intimidating, and resistant ones today!

In permissive communities, or red area- frequenters, gay communities, a long shot (effect lasting 3 weeks), shall keep STDs away, though its effect on a person’s character is open to speculation.

There is no denying the fact, in certain situations, mostly grave injuries, oncology, organ transplant, that constitute the workload of tertiary care hospitals, public or private, resistant bacteria are more often seen. Antibiotic overuse is a phenomenon worldwide, but on a regular basis, it’s difficult to put one’s finger on a particular case, or audit a few. A solution, hospitals have adopted is antibiotic regulation committees that give feedback to physicians in case antibiotics are dys-synergic, or the team, through the microbiology lab have alternatives of lower antibiotics, thus preventing resistance.

Audits may be unsettling, but caveats on real cases, where alternative antibiotics would help, can be held periodically.

Doctors in India, where the well trained are comparable to anyone in the world. As a larger professional community they put up with large numbers, incomplete investigations either due to ignorance, non-availability, and one is still not sure of the percentage of the spurious market.

Pharma as a partner is commendable in keeping their research engines active. But marketing pressure for use in any situation adulterates many an opinion.

It’s a karmic circle. Antibiotic use cures. Continued use if necessary, causes resistance and becomes a hindrance to cure!

The medical industry proposes, the Big Bug disposes!

“Haal mera tha jab batar, tab na hui unhey khabar,

Baad mein huwa asar, ab mein asar ko kya karoon”

(When I was unwell, the physician could not comprehend it,

Later he realized the impact, what am I to do with the impact now!)

Happy Doctor-Patient Day

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
