'Pakistan devising new military tactics after Balakot': Intelligence report

Pakistan has adopted a new strategy after the air strikes carried out by the Indian Air Force in the month of February at Balakot.

According to a report by intelligence agencies, "The Pakistani military is under extreme pressure after the air strikes and they are constantly changing their military strategy."

"Pakistan is also busy strengthening the Indian border to protect the country from similar military action by Indian forces," the report continued.

The Pakistani military has been said to purchase long-pending weapons and RADAR systems. Reports also suggest that the Pakistani forces have ordered all terrorists living in terror camps in PoK (Pakistan-occupied Kashmir) to not go armed anywhere near the LOC or PoK.

In addition to this, they have also been told to not go outside the camps without wearing Pakistani outfits.

Intel agencies suspect that the forces from Pakistan want to protect these terrorists from Indian satellites and drones.

Though Pakistan has told these terror camps to remain inactive due to mounting international pressure, Pakistan is geared up to send terrorists in large numbers to the Indian territory after tensions reduce.

The report also revealed that the Pakistani intelligentsia, ISI (Inter-Services Intelligence), is conducting talks with terrorists of Afghanistan's Haqqani network, Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), and ISIS.

Indian intel agencies suspect that such a move might be used to launch a Taliban attack against India in the future.

While Pakistani forces are disturbed due to the imposed ban on JeM and Masood Azhar, on the other hand, they have begun to form a new terrorist organisation called Jaish-e-Mutqi near the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.

In fact, Pakistan has already started training terrorists from terror camps in the city of Miramshah, located 60 kms away from the Afghan border. It is a part of Pakistan's North Waziristan.

It is reported that the ISI is plotting a terrorist attack in Jammu and Kashmir through Nepal. According to inputs received by the intelligence agencies, recently, ISI operatives have been meeting terrorists and their commanders in Nepal.

Furthermore, Pakistan is looking to purchase RADAR-jamming systems to disrupt the Indian communication systems if such a need arises in the future.

New Protocol

The Pakistani military has been said to purchase long-pending weapons and RADAR systems. Reports also suggest that the Pakistani forces have ordered all terrorists living in terror camps in PoK (Pakistan-occupied Kashmir) to not go armed anywhere near the LOC or PoK

In addition to this, they have also been told to not go outside the camps without wearing Pakistani outfits

—Zee Media Newsroom
