In tit-for-tat violence, blasts in Bengal club, BJP neta shot at

BIRBHUM/JHARGRAM: An explosion inside a club and suspected tit-for-tat attacks on local BJP leaders and a Trinamool MLA marked the escalation of political violence in Bengal on Sunday.In Birbhum, bombs exploded inside the three-storey building of Meghdoot Club near Mallarpur railway station, blowing off its roof and iron shutters and blasting a portion of the ground-floor wall. Police said the explosives were possibly stacked inside the club building.The Trinamool leadership accused BJP of storing bombs and arms in the club for use in political attacks, allegations that the party promptly contested. The state government late on Sunday directed the CID to investigate the incident.“BJP, which controls the club, had stored bombs inside the building. This was part of their plan to fan violence across the state,” TMC’s district chief Anubrata Mandal said.BJP denied any connection with the club. Local party leader Subhashis Chowdhury said: “There are BJP supporters in the district, but our members are not connected with the club incident.”In Jhargram, 20-year-old BJP booth president Khagapati Mahato was shot at and critically injured around Saturday midnight. “He had just stepped out after attending a kirtan in the Baghua neighbourhood when three motorbike-borne men accosted him. They shot him in the chest,” his father Rajani Mahato said.Mahato was rushed to a local hospital, from where he was shifted to Kolkata. His condition remained critical till late on Sunday.Mahato had switched to BJP from Trinamool a few months ago.Some residents of the area had alleged that TMC workers were present when the shooting took place. An alleged TMC supporter identified as Bhanu Mahato was arrested on Sunday afternoon in connection with the attack.Trinamool’s Jhargram district president Birbaha Soren denied that any party worker was involved in the incident.In Cooch Behar, Trinamool’s Dinhata MLA Udayan Guha’s car was stopped near Gobrachhara and the windshield smashed. He was on his way to Nayarhat. “We are trying to stop the communal hatred that BJP is spreading in the area,” Guha said.
