Mumbai: Two officers refused to become Waqf board CEO

Two years and counting. The state waqf board's wait for a full-time chief executive officer (CEO) may get even longer.

Two officers, whose names were recommended by the Maharashtra State Board of Waqf (MSBW) to the state government, have refused to accept the assignment. The MSBW controls over 93,000 acres of prime land in Maharashtra, much of which is encumbered.

The MSBW has no full-time CEO since July 2017 and S C Tadvi, the department's joint secretary is holding an additional charge. Under the Waqf Act, 1995, the state government can appoint a CEO from a panel of two names suggested by the Board.

Members of the board admit that the lack of a full-time CEO has affected routine works like registering new waqf properties, completing change reports and encroachment removal.

Sources from the state minority department, said the names of E.M.U Kazi, joint secretary, general administration department, and Tadvi, had been suggested by the board in its February 4 meeting.

"However, both of them have refused. The reasons seem obvious. The board is facing a major shortage of staff and there is a little delegation of work to the CEO," said an official.

He claimed that at present, the state government must consider appointing an administrator to supersede the board. "An efficient official of impeccable integrity must be chosen as the administrator. Waqf land should be freed from encumbrances used for the education of the underprivileged," the official said.

When contacted, Shyam Tagade, principal secretary, minority development, confirmed the developments and said they would ask the waqf board to again send names of officials who were willing to take up the assignment.

"In November 2018, we recommended the names of S E A Hashmi, additional chief executive officer (CEO), Gondia Zilla Parishad and Sajid Pathan, deputy secretary in the medical education department, for the post. However, the government refused to relieve them," said MSBW member and Congress Rajya Sabha MP Hussain Dalwai.

He added that hence, the board had suggested two fresh names. "There is no full-time CEO for two years. Routine work is affected, causing hardships to people. The chairman M.M Shaikh is also holding an acting charge," said Dalwai, adding that encumbered properties and those whose lease conditions were violated must be restored to the board.

After then CEO Sayyed Aejaz Husain was transferred, Naseema Banu Patel was appointed with an additional charge on September 2015. In August 2016, the board suggested three names to the government, but the state said all three were not eligible or their services could not be made available and appointed A R Qureshi in January 2017. Board member Abdullah Khan (Babajani) Durrani approached the Aurangabad Bench of the Bombay High Court against the appointment.

In May 2017, the court ordered that the board may suggest two names of eligible officers and the state may appoint one of them as the CEO. Qureshi, who was to continue till a full-time CEO was transferred in July 2017 after which the board has had no full-time official in the post.

Patel, a revenue officer, was suspended by the state government in March 2017, for allegedly delisting waqf land at Nashik during her tenure in the board.

MSBW chairman and former Congress MLC M M Shaikh, who assumed office in August 2016, resigned in November 2017 after being confronted with a no-confidence motion by members, but is holding an acting charge.

State government statistics suggest that Maharashtra has around 93,418 acres of waqf land spread over about 23,566 registered properties, with most land parcels into Aurangabad division, which was part of the dominion of the Nizam of Hyderabad. However, most of these lands are encroached, illegally occupied or transferred.
