Terrorists lob 2 grenades at Central Reserve Police Force camp in Tral

New Delhi:

Hello and welcome to News Nation breaking blog of January 26. Today is a special day for all the Indians across the globe as the country celebrates its 70th Republic Day. While we celebrate, our national heroes are out there, braving bone-chilling winters and guarding our borders. They do deserve a special mention today. On the other hand, men in blue are also challenging the Kiwis in their own backyard, so will keep an eye on the 2nd ODI between India and New Zealand. Besides this, social media is buzzing with a lot more. With so much happening around us, News Nation brings you all the latest news and updates from around the globe. Stay with us.

Below are the latest news updates:

15:27 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Former President Dr Pranab Mukherjee on being conferred with Bharat Ratna: I would like to express my deep gratitude to the people of this country. I always said and I repeat that in my public life I have received much more from the people and from this country than I have given to it.



Former President Dr Pranab Mukherjee on being conferred with #BharatRatna: I would like to express my deep gratitude to the people of this country. I always said, & I repeat, that in my public life I've received much more from the people & from this country than I've given to it. pic.twitter.com/c8V5m0AxnK

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



15:26 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In MP Minister Imarti fails to read out speech, asks Collector to do so.

15:25 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Republic Day 2019: ITBP (Indo Tibetan Border Police) hoisted the tricolour 9000 feet above the sea level in Uttarakhand's Chamoli district.



Uttarakhand: ITBP (Indo Tibetan Border Police) hoisted the tricolour 9000 feet above the sea level in Chamoli district's Auli. #RepublicDay2019 pic.twitter.com/KjQOpZcIzF

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



15:24 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Padma Shri awardee Manoj Bajpayee: I am honured to receive such a prestigious award. I thank everyone who appreciated our efforts we have put to make the films.



#PadmaShri awardee Manoj Bajpayee: I’m honured to receive such a prestigious award. I thank everyone who appreciated our efforts we've put to make the films. It's not an honor only for Manoj Bajpayee but for the journey of conviction & belief with which I worked towards my goal. pic.twitter.com/ayUPza9nii

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



15:23 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In India beat New Zealand by 90 runs in the 2nd ODI, lead the 5-match ODI series by 2-0.

15:22 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Congress President Rahul Gandhi and former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh meet South African President Cyril Ramaphosa. He was the chief guest at the Republic Day parade today.



Delhi: Congress President Rahul Gandhi and former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh meet South African President Cyril Ramaphosa. He was the chief guest at the Republic Day parade today. pic.twitter.com/XjRYEO3oF7

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



12:26 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In ED arrests AgustaWestland scam accused Gautam Khaitan in a fresh case of holding black money and money laundering, reports news agency PTI.

10:50 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Chhattisgarh government waives off 'Sinchai Kar': “I announce that 'Sinchai Kar' amounting to Rs 207 crore till October 2018 will be waived off, around 15 lakh farmers will be benefited from this,” Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel said during his Republic Day 2019 speech.

09:49 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Crowds gather for the Republic Day 2019 parade at Rajpath in Delhi. President of South Africa Cyril Ramaphosa is the chief guest at the parade today.



Crowds gather for the #RepublicDay2019 parade at Rajpath in Delhi. President of South Africa Cyril Ramaphosa is the chief guest at the parade today. pic.twitter.com/dZCOKSXTiY

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



09:48 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Delhi: Major pollutants PM 2.5 at 108 and PM 10 at 116, both in 'Moderate' category in Lodhi Road area, according to the Air Quality Index (AQI) data.



Delhi: Major pollutants PM 2.5 at 108 and PM 10 at 116, both in 'Moderate' category in Lodhi Road area, according to the Air Quality Index (AQI) data. pic.twitter.com/zGjE2UfBDX

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



09:38 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Republic Day Celebrations: Prime Minister Narendra Modi to reach Amar Jawan Jyoti soon.

09:09 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik’s sister Gita Mehta declines Padma Shri

“Deeply honoured that Govt should think me worthy of a Padma Shri but with great regret I decline it as there is a general election looming and timing might be misconstrued, causing embarrassment both to Govt and me,which I would much regret,” Mehta was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

09:03 (IST) Facebook Twitter Whats app Linked In Two terrorists gunned down by security forces in an ongoing encounter with terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir's Khonmoh.



#Visuals: Encounter underway between terrorists and security forces in Khonmoh, Srinagar (Visuals deferred by unspecified time) pic.twitter.com/gxLased8PF

— ANI (@ANI) January 26, 2019



For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
