Priyanka Gandhi: Before countering Priyanka, UP Police Chief pulled up officers for not taking tough steps to stop crimes against children

The Uttar Pradesh Police has strongly countered Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi on the issue of law and order , but the state police chief had earlier this month read the riot act to his team for not taking tough steps to stop crimes such as rape and murder of minor girls and for not monitoring probes into such cases with all seriousness.ET has accessed a scathing letter that director general of police OP Singh wrote to all senior police officers in the state on June 19 on the issue of crimes such as rape and murder of children below 12 years of age. He pointed to instructions issued last year for taking effective steps to control the occurrence of such crimes, their scientific investigation and quick prosecution.“However given the (continuing) occurrence of such crimes in some districts, it seems you all are not complying with the instructions of taking strict steps to stop such crimes,” said Singh’s letter to the officers. He highlighted earlier orders of monitoring the investigation and prosecution of crimes of rape, murder and POCSO Act through a monthly meeting. “But it is being felt that interest is not being taken in meetings of the monitoring cell on such serious crimes,” he wrote, adding that such crimes lead to public anger against police and a feeling of fear among locals.The letter reiterated instructions for quick arrest of the accused and proper medical examination of victims.Gandhi had written in a post on microblogging site Twitter on Saturday, while pointing to a series of crimes in UP, that criminals were roaming free in the state and that one crime after the other was taking place. “But the BJP government in UP is least bothered. Has the state government surrendered before the criminals?” she asked.UP Police had responded to her on Twitter on Saturday, claiming it had taken strict action against heinous crimes and saying it had arrested 9,225 criminals and killed 81 during encounters over the past two years. “There has been a drastic decrease in crimes like murder, dacoity, robbery and kidnapping,” the UP Police said on Twitter. Asked about Gandhi’s tweet, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday termed it a case of sour grapes. “Her party president lost from UP, so sitting in Delhi, Italy or England, they have to comment something or the other to remain in headlines,” he said.Earlier, the UP DGP wrote another letter to his team on June 15, questioning why Section 66A of IT Act continued to be invoked in cases in UP when it had been struck down by the Supreme Court. He cautioned officers against using the Act since the court had voiced strong objection against it and said the IT Act itself had been wrongly invoked in many cases in the state. “This is objectionable and illegal,” Singh wrote, adding that investigation of IT Act cases also left much to be desired.
