‘Jai Shri Ram’ echoes in Town Hall during budget debate

Nagpur: BJP corporators began shouting ‘Jai Shri Ram’ slogans in the Nagpur Municipal Corporation (NMC) house during a discussion on the civic budget on Friday. They were reacting to Congress corporator Praful Gudadhe talking about mob lynching cases in the country.

The house witnessed heated speeches from Congress, BJP and BSP corporators. Last week Lok Sabha had witnessed such chants during the swearing-in ceremony of new MPs.

Standing committee chairman Pradip Pohane, who presented the budget on Wednesday, mentioned about Jallianwala Bagh massacre in his notes to the surprise of everyone. “Jallianwala Bagh incident has completed 100 years. Therefore, rich tributes should be paid to the citizens as well as freedom fighters, who lost their lives in the incident, by the NMC as well as citizens of Nagpur,” he mentioned in budget.

Gudadhe replied that Jallianwala Bagh was a “mob lynching incident and executed by foreigners”. “Nowadays, similar mob lynching is being witnessed again but by people from this country,” he said without naming the places.

Chairman of city transport committee Bunty Kukde was the first to shout ‘Jai Shri Ram’. Soon, other BJP corporators, who are in majority in the house, followed suit.

Through point of order, ruling party leader Sandip Joshi alleged that Congress was famous for “mob lynching”. “Gudadhe raked up this issue even though it is supposed to be a budget discussion. All are aware who lynched the mob in 1984,” he said.

Gudadhe said Congress has apologized for the 1984 incident. “The lines in budget clearly indicate where some party is heading to. There is no mention about 150th anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi as BJP has started to believe Nathuram Godse,” he said.

Known for his firebrand speech especially on Hinduism, BJP corporator Dayashankar Tiwari then launched a blistering attack on Congress. Accusing the party of being behind attacks on backward class and minorities, he reminded the house about various incidents right from anti-Muslim riots in UP to anti-Sikh riots. The corporators now began shouting ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’.

When Praful Gudadhe stood up to respond to Tiwari, BJP city president Pravin Datke requested him not to continue the debate.

BSP group leader Mohammed Jamal levelled allegations on Congress and BJP and said, “These two parties have always taken undue advantage of backward class and minorities in various ways.”

After a daylong discussion, the NMC’s surplus budget of Rs3,197.60 crore for 2019-20 was approved. BJP corporators supported the budget while corporators of Congress and BSP termed it as an unrealistic budget.

Datke said the number of advertisement hoardings across the city will be reduced. “The advertisement charges will be hiked. It will help in giving a good look for the city as well as fetch good revenue to the NMC,” he said.

On the proposed Ambedkar Smarak near Yashwant Stadium, Datke said CM Devendra Fadnavis has promised to approve the proposal if it is received before August 15.

Gudadhe strongly opposed renaming Hanuman Nagar Zone after Tukdoji Maharaj. “It will set a wrong precedent. And, it is actually defaming the name of a great personality,” he said.

Tiwari suggested that parking charges be levied on shopkeepers and bar owners. He and Congress corporator Sanjay Mahakalkar demanded anti-encroachment drive from morning till midnight.

BJP corporator Prakash Bhoyar demanded making rainwater harvesting mandatory in all buildings. Pragati Patil wanted NMC to give financial assistance to those interested in the project. BJP corporator Sunil Hiranwar demanded exemption in property tax for those who install rainwater harvesting system.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
