Police on patrol

shalender@tribune.com

Today as we celebrate our Republic Day, it’s time to appreciate the real heroes - police officers, who don’t choose what happens in the world, but defend us from it. Both Hollywood and Bollywood have made movies on these silent heroes in past and have a great line-up this year as well. Here’s a list:

Infamous encounter

Batla House

John Abraham-starrer Batla House will be out in theatres on August 15. John will be seen as a cop in this action-thriller, directed by Nikkhil Advani. It is based on the infamous encounter that took place in September 2008. The Batla House incident, popularly known as Operation Batla House, occurred in Delhi’s Jamia Nagar, in which two suspected terrorists were killed.

Getting justice

Domino

Domino is an upcoming crime thriller film directed by Brian De Palma and starring Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Carice van Houten and Guy Pearce. The movie is based on a Copenhagen police officer who seeks justice for his partner’s murder by a mysterious man.

Woman power

Soni

Recently released on Netflix, Soni is the story of a young policewoman in Delhi, and her superintendent, Kalpana. The two collectively take on a growing crisis of violent crimes against women. However, their alliance suffers a major setback when Soni is transferred out for alleged misconduct on duty.

Waiting for Akshay

Sooryavanshi

Akshay Kumar’s entry towards the end in Simmba was a special announcement of Rohit Shetty’s next cop drama titled Sooryavanshi. With just a minute of a teaser, this one is already one of the most awaited movies. The film is expected to go on floors by middle of this year and will release by year end.

Mission and obsession

Romeo Akbar Walter – RAW

John Abraham’s Romeo Akbar Walter aka RAW has a story based on true events. The man, who works with intelligence, is on a mission to protect the nation and how his mission becomes his obsession. Directed by Robby Grewal, the movie also stars Mouni Roy, Jackie Shroff and Sikandar Kher.

Ground zero: Barcelona

Gun City

Gun City is a recently released Spanish thriller film on Netflix. The movie is based in Barcelona, 1921. It revolves around a double agent policeman who attempts to find out people who stole military weapons that could lead to civil war.
