Noida: Police raid spa centres indulging in 'sex trade', foreigners among 35 held

14 spa centres have been sealed during the police raid. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Police raid multiple spa centres on Saturday night Rs 1 lakh in cash, condoms and other items seized

Noida: In a major crackdown on the illegal sex trade, the Noida police carried out simultaneous raids at dozens of spa centres in the city allegedly indulging in the same. 35 people, including foreigners, have been arrested by police during Saturday night operation.



Among those arrested include 25 women and 10 men.

According to a report in PTI, many foreign nationals, including some from Thailand, were also among those detained by police. However, the police did not give an exact count of the arrested foreign nationals.

"On the directions of Senior Superintendent of Police Vaibhav Krishna, the raids were conducted late in the evening at 14 spa centres in the commercial hub of Sector 18. The raids continued till almost midnight," the report quoted Gautam Buddh Nagar (Rural) Superintendent of Police (SP) Vineet Jaiswal as saying.

Fourteen police team comprising 7 circle officer (CO), 8 Station House Officers (SHO), 30 Sub-Inspectors and a number of female constables conducted multiple raids at the alleged spa centres in Noida.

"Altogether 35 people, 10 men and 25 women, were arrested from these spas, including multiple foreign nationals. Around Rs one lakh in cash, beer, used and unused condoms, along with other objectionable articles, were seized from these spa centres," the SP (Rural) added.

According to police, 14 spa centres have been sealed and three them were found involved in the sex trade. Other spa centres showed serious irregularities.

SP Vineet Jaiswal further said that a case has been filed against the spa centres and their owners would be booked under the stringent Uttar Pradesh Gangsters Act.

In a similar case in Gurugram last month, police arrested 24 persons including six women after it busted a sex racket which was run from a rented house in Sushant Lok 3.

Police have also arrested a watchman and a pimp who used to supply girls. The police had received information that one Rajiv Yadav from Mahendergarh, had rented the two-storey house for Rs 60,000 per month. The women arrested were aged between 20 and 35 years, all of them, residents of Delhi.
