Jassi case accused sent to 4-day police remand

editorial@tribune.com

Parvesh Sharma

Tribune News Service

Sangrur, January 25

The Amargarh police have procured four-day police remand of accused Malkiat Kaur and Surjit Singh Badesha in the Jassi murder case from an Illaqa magistrate court of Malerkotla.

The Canadian government has allowed the extradition of Jassi’s mother Malkiat Kaur and maternal uncle Surjit Singh Badesha on some conditions. The SSP, Dr Sandeep Garg, said all conditions would be fulfilled.

“The police need to investigate the source of Rs 7 lakh given to contract killers and the travel history of both Malkiat Kaur and Badesha and their passports. The defence counsel wanted his presence during questioning, but the court has turned down the request,” said Ashwani Chaudhary, counsel for complainant Sukhwinder Singh Mithu, while coming out of the Malerkotla court.

A team of the Sangrur police, led by SP (Investigations) Gurmeet Singh, took the custody of both from the New Delhi airport on Thursday morning and reached the Amargarh police station last night.

“Both took tea and breakfast, which is served to arrested persons in police station. Their medical examination report shows that both are physically fit,” said a senior police officer.

“We have got permission from court to meet both anytime. Both apprehend that they would be coerced to confess their involvement in the Jassi murder. But the court has directed the police to conduct their medical examination before and after questioning. I have told the court that Sukhwinder Mithu may be involved in the murder of Jassi,” said Simrandeep Sandhu, counsel of both accused.

Sandhu said the Canadian government had allowed the extradition on some conditions, including frequent access of both to their counsel and Canadian government officers could visit court anytime during their trial.

“Another condition is that the Punjab Police will not use any coercion method to obtain confession. Both will be produced in the court on January 29,” he said. Sangrur SSP Dr Sandeep Garg said, “Our officers have started questioning both accused and we are taking care of all conditions,” said the SSP.
