RSS activist murder case: SC upholds framing of murder charges against PFI leader

Supporters demanding justice for slain RSS activist R Rudresh (File image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

New Delhi: In a massive setback for controversial political organisation Popular Front of India (PFI), the Supreme Court on Monday upheld the framing of murder charges against a leader of the PFI in the killing of RSS activist R Rudresh in Bengaluru in 2016.

The apex court dismissed a plea by PFI member Asim Shariff who had challenged the framing of charges against him on allegations of murder and terror activities. A bench comprising justices AM Khanwilkar and Ajay Rastogi rejected the petition.

On October 16, 2016, RSS activist Rudresh was hacked to death in the Shivaji Nagar area of Bengaluru. PFI members were said to be involved in the killing. The murder case was probed by the National Investigation Agency (NIA), which filed a chargesheet against Shariff and a few other people.

Last year in January, a Bengaluru court charged five men of the PFI, including Shariff, for hacking an RSS activist to death, under the anti-terror law.

R Rudresh was a city secretary of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh. On the day of his murder, he was returning from a meeting of the organisation in October 2016 when two men riding a motorcycle attacked him with machetes near Commercial Street, which is a busy shopping complex in Bengaluru.

The accused initially threw him down from his bike and then hacked him to death with the machetes.

40-year-old Asim Shariff, who is the main accused in the case, was arrested by the cops in November 2016. The case was transferred by the Union Home Ministry to the NIA which was tasked to find out if there was a deeper conspiracy involved in the attacks on RSS activists in Karnataka and other states.

Besides Shariff, the NIA charged four others including Mohammed Sadiq, 35, Waseem Ahmed, 32, Irfan Pasha, 32 and Mohammed Mujeebullah, 41. All the five accused were linked to the PFI and its affiliated organisation, the Social Democratic Party of India.


