Trying to manage a split in the family? These 4 tips will guide you through

Hinduja Vs Hinduja; Ambani Brothers In Arms, And Other Family Feuds Of India Inc







Autoplay Autoplay 1 of 11 It's NOT All In The Family Conventional wisdom dictates that family, almost always, comes first. But India Inc has shown that conventional wisdom doesn't always hold true. Over the years, a number of prominent business families have faced separation woes. And many have had to take some hard calls.



The Ambani vs Ambani saga that captured the country's imagination in 2004, and gave birth to various kinds of theories, saw rapprochement (of sorts) last year when elder brother Mukesh bailed out younger sibling Anil by paying Rs 453 crore dues in the Ericsson case, and thereby preventing the latter from being jailed.

And while the Ambanis have done course-correction, family ties seem to be shaking at the Hinduja household. The brothers, who run the $11.2 billion conglomerate, are not seeing eye to eye over the Switzerland-based Hinduja Bank. The disagreements have left the family's patriarch SP Hinduja and his daughters on one side, and the other three brothers - Ashok, Gopichand and Prakash on the other.



In Pic: Hinduja Brothers (L), Mukesh and Anil Ambani (R). Falling Apart The once closely-knit Hinduja brothers have become the latest business family to find themselves in the middle of a tussle over the future of their $11.2 billion fortune. Fissures have emerged among the four brothers, one of the world's richest, over a letter signed by them in 2014. According to the document, the assets held by one brother belong to all, and that each man will appoint the others as their executors.



However, the group's patriarch 84-year-old Srichand Hinduja and his daughter, Vinoo, want the letter declared worthless.



The dispute came to a light in a ruling delivered by a London judge, who said that the three other brothers, Gopichand, Prakash and Ashok, tried to use the letter to take control of Hinduja Bank - an asset that was in Srichand’s sole name.



The court also allowed Vinoo, SP’s younger daughter, to act as his ‘litigation friend’ to safeguard his interests, since he is said to be suffering from a form of dementia.



The ongoing litigation in the London court began in November last year. Vinoo is seeking to have the July 2014 agreement declared null and void. Not All Good At The Godrejs The 122-year-old $5-billion Godrej group seems to be the latest India Inc family to have been hit by an internal feud after differences cropped up among family members over development of land holdings owned by Godrej & Boyce.



Brothers Adi and Nadir Godrej control the group’s three listed companies — Godrej Consumer Products Ltd (GCPL), Godrej Properties and Godrej Agrovet. Godrej & Boyce, the holding company of the group with business divisions including aerospace, consumer, office and industrial products, furniture and appliances, is owned by all family members with Jamshyd Godrej as its chairman.



The dispute reportedly arose after the family members were split over the development of a 1,000-acre land parcel they own in Mumbai. According to reports, the crux of the issue is the concentration of the family’s land holding in Godrej & Boyce and its commercial exploitation by the group’s listed arm Godrej Properties.



While Adi and Nadir are in favour of development of the land, the Jamshyd Godrej side is believed to be against excessive development.



JM Financial chairman Nimesh Kampani and lawyer Zia Mody are advising Jamshyd Godrej, while Kotak Mahindra Bank CEO Uday Kotak and Cyril Shroff of legal firm Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas are assisting Adi and Nadir Godrej untangle the situation.



The family business board is led by group chairman Adi Godrej and includes brother Nadir, cousin Jamshyd and brother-in-law Vijay Crishna. The fourth generation of the family, which includes the children of Adi, Jamshyd, Nadir and Crishna who are past 18 years, attend meetings as invitees.





In Pic: (L-R) Adi, Nadir and Jamshyd Godrej inaugurate the 'Godrej Interio' store, a joint venture between Godrej & Boyce's Jamshyd Godrej and designer Krsna Mehta, at Godrej Bhawan in Mumbai on February 24, 2010. The Tale Of Two Brothers The Ambani war was no silent affair. From defamation suits, letters to the PM to dragging each other to court, the once-close brothers did it all.



India’s richest man Mukesh Ambani and his brother Anil Ambani's bitter feud began soon after the death of their father Dhirubhai Ambani, the founder of Reliance Industries, in 2002.



Ambani Sr. hadn't left a will, so his elder son Mukesh became Chairman and MD of Reliance Industries Ltd while Anil was Vice-Chairman.



The feud for control led to the split of the Reliance Group. However, in 2005, their mother, Anandiben, brokered a de-merger, giving Mukesh control of oil and gas, petrochemicals, refining and manufacturing, while Anil got electricity, telecoms and financial services.



Even though some shareholders opposed the decision, the Bombay High Court had approved the de-merger.



But that didn't settle things. Rather the oil wars continued between the brothers, with Anil even accusing involvement of the Government in supporting Mukesh.



Anil's Reliance Natural Resources Ltd. had even placed newspaper ads alleging that the Indian government had sided with Mukesh's Reliance Industries. And It Continued Till 2019 ... Things only went from bad to worse for the brother. In 2008, Anil filed a $2.12 billion defamation suit against Mukesh for remarks he made during an interview with The New York Times.

What started off as a family feud, was termed a matter of 'national interest' by India's then-finance minister Pranab Mukherjee, who requested the brothers to resolve the dispute privately.



After going to the Supreme Court in 2009 over the gas dispute (the court ruled in Mukesh's favour), Kokilaben once again intervened in May 2010 to broker a peace agreement. Officials of both their companies received notes that said the Ambani brothers would draft a non-compete agreement.



Soon after, Anil withdrew his defamation suit.



Now a few years later, the brothers are often seen together at family functions, and other events.

Sometimes, in times of conflict, a family needs to split up to stay together. It may be a principle that’s being employed in the British royal family, with the Duke and Duchess of Sussex taking small steps to distance themselves from the Cambridge pairs. Since their wedding last year, the Sussex’s and Cambridge’s have divided their households, set up separate Instagram pages and recently announced that they would be running separate charities.If you feel like it’s time to branch out on your own, use these tips to keep the family split professional:Understand the reason for the split. Family businesses are subject to all the pressures of a regular business and it’s important to note if there is an actual conflict within the family or if splitting up the business just makes more sense. Sometimes a family may grow beyond the current business or different working styles may clash and cause conf lict. If you foresee any problems that could make it difficult for the business to be successful in the future, it’s smarter to proactively split up before problems arise.Separating your personal feelings from the business is key to a smooth split. Once you’ve made the decision to part ways, begin establishing clear swim lanes as soon as possible. Identify the business interests that are most important to you and evaluate the financial and operating consequences of splitting up, the tax liabilities involved, your business financials and future goals before sitting down at the negotiating table. A financial representative can help you decide how to approach a split — what terms to ask for, when to finalise a split etc. Depending on how negotiations go, the final split may or may not be equitable, but each party should have a clearly demarcated domain that they will be responsible for.Once you’ve identified the businesses that will fall under each entity, set up a senior team to oversee the end-to-end split of all functions (legal entity restructuring, physical location restructuring, HR etc.) Splitting requires collaboration and having a separate team observe the transition will ensure that basic decisions, such as how employees are divided, aren’t slipping through the cracks.A split (even when not acrimonious) can affect everyone from employees to customers to suppliers, especially when the way forward isn’t clear for all parties. In the absence of information, people can succumb to fear and pessimism, causing them to take unnecessary, hasty decisions. To ensure your business runs smoothly during and after a split, draft a communication plan for each group and keep them informed of changes.
