Republic Day: Former militant who laid his life for the Army gets Ashok Chakra

Lance Naik Wani is survived by a wife and two children. (Photo: Twitter/@ShivAroor)

Lance Naik Nazir Ahmad Wani is known for giving up his life in service of the nation after shunning militancy and joining the forces. On Republic Day this year, Wani will be awarded with the Ashok Chakra, posthumously.

Wani's family will be receiving India's highest peace time gallantry award, the Ashok Chakra, on Saturday in New Delhi.

President Ram Nath Kovind will present the award to Wani's wife Mahajabeen.

LANCE NAIK NAZIR AHMAD WANI

Wani had joined the Army's 162 Infantry Battalion (Territorial Army/Home and Hearth) Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry in 2004.

Ahmad Wani was also conferred with the Sena Medal for gallantry twice in 2007 and 2018. The 2018 Sena Medal was awarded to him for eliminating a terrorist from very close range.

A resident of Cheki Ashmuji of Kulgam district in Jammu and Kashmir, Wani is survived by his wife and two sons, Athar (20) and Shaid (18).

FROM MILITANCY TO ARMY

The 38-year-old soldier was once a militant.

Wani had, as a misguided youngster in the Valley, participated in launching attacks on security forces.

In 2004, he surrendered with his weapon and was recruited in the 162nd battalion of the Territorial Army - Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry.

Wani was then recruited into the Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry's Home and Hearth Territorial Army battalion. This was when the metamorphosis happened, From a militant, he soon became a patriot.

Born in Kulgam, Lance Naik Nazir Ahmed Wani had an eagle's eye for gathering intelligence for operations.

He led from the front and played a crucial role in elimination of many terrorists operating in South Kashmir. His brothers-in-arms had tremendous faith in the intelligence gathered by him.

According to Wani's family, they are very proud of his operations.

WANI AND 2018

On November 25 last year, Lance Naik Wani was participating in an operation against six terrorists in Hirapur village near Batgund in the Kashmir Valley.

The information was about a mixed group of Lashkar-e-Taiba and Hizbul Mujahideen terrorists taking shelter in a house.

Amid the intense gun battle, Wani eliminated the district commander of the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) and a foreign terrorist.

He was then hit by several bullets, including some that pierced his head. He also managed to injure another terrorist before succumbing to his injuries.

Wani had joined the Army's 162 Infantry Battalion (Territorial Army/Home and Hearth) Jammu and Kashmir Light Infantry in 2004.

A resident of Cheki Ashmuji of Kulgam district in Jammu and Kashmir, Wani is survived by his wife and two sons, Athar (20) and Shaid (18).
