Three kill neighbour's chickens to take 'revenge' after argument in Gwalior

The bodies of the roosters have been sent for post-mortem (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The three men had an argument with Guddu Joshi, the complainant. The accused poisoned five roosters that belonged to Joshi. Joshi approached the police and lodged a complaint.

Gwalior: Two men from Gwalior allegedly killed five roosters on Monday, July 1 after they had an argument with their neighbour. The accused have been booked under Section 429 (mischief by killing or maiming an animal) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

It is being alleged that the two men had an argument with their neighbour following which, they fed poisoned food to her roosters. The bodies of the roosters have been sent for post-mortem.

MP: 2 men killed 5 roosters by poisoning them after dispute with their neighbours in Gwalior. Police say,'One Guddi Joshi had informed us that she had a dispute with her neighbour after which they killed their 5 roosters by poisoning them. Case registered;Investigation on (30/06) pic.twitter.com/Ngk7k4WZJC — ANI (@ANI) July 1, 2019

While talking to ANI, Station House Officer (SHO) Damodar Gupta said, "Guddu Joshi who lives near Vaishno temple in Gwalior informed us about the entire dispute scene with her neighbours, after which they killed her roosters by mixing poison in their food. We have booked them but not arrested as the investigation is still underway."

Three booked for poisoning pet dog in Kurukshetra

In February this year, a man in Haryana's Kurukshetra alleged that his pet dog had been murdered by three men. The accused were identified as Jeeta Ram, Gurmel Singh and Bakshish Singh. The owner, Dilbag Singh claimed that the accused had poisoned his pet to death. The accused were booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Delhi man shoots another for hurting his pet

A dog owner allegedly shot a man dead for throwing a stone at his pet. The incident came to light from the national capital in the month of January. The deceased was identified as Aafaq Ali.

Ali was allegedly passing by the accused's residence when the latter's dog started barking at him. Allegedly, when the dog tried to bite Ali, he picked up a stone and threw it at the dog. The accused, Mehtab, allegedly saw Ali throwing a stone at his dog and he flew into a rage.

Mehtab then rushed to his house and came out with a gun. Ali and Mehtab allegedly had a brief argument, after which, the latter shot him. Ali was taken to Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital where the doctors declared him brought dead. Ali's father-in-law called the police control room and informed them about the incident. The police registered a case against the accused.
