Malda: 20-year-old man lynched on suspicion of bike theft, 2 arrested

A purported video of the incident has gone viral on social media. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Police say they are trying to identify culprits from viral video 20-year-old victim has been identified as Sanaul Sheikh

Malda: Days after Tabrez Ansari was lynched in Jharkhand, another young man was beaten to death on suspicion of bike theft in Malda district of West Bengal. The lynching of the youth triggered protests after his body arrived in the city from a hospital in Kolkata.

The victim has been identified as 20-year-old Sana-ul Sheikh. Police have arrested two persons in connection with his murder.

According to a report in PTI, the victim was badly beaten by locals at Baishnabnagar Bazar after he was allegedly caught stealing a two-wheeler on Wednesday.

A purported video of the incident has gone viral on social media. According to police, they are trying to identify culprits from the video clip.

The victim succumbed to his injuries at SSKM Hospital in Kolkata on Saturday. Initially, Sheikh was admitted to Bedrabad primary health centre, from where he was referred to Malda Medical College and Hospital for further treatment.

Chandana Sarkar, a senior functionary of the Malda Zilla Parishad, has called on people not to find any communal angle in the incident.

According to Sarkar, the victim had a criminal background and was a known history-sheeter in the area. She said Sheikh was arrested on charges of thefts in the past.

Chandana has said she has met the widow of Sheikh and was trying to help her on humanitarian grounds. Police have filed a case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on a complaint from Sheikh's mother.

As Sheikh's body reached Malda, a group of protesters tried to proceed towards Baishnabnagar police station to register their protest. The protesters also blocked NH-34 during the protest. Later, police requested a Congress MLA, Suja Khan Choudhury, from the adjacent Sujapur Assembly constituency, to pacify the mob and not to proceed towards police post.

After persuasion by the MLA, protesters backed off and took the body back to the victim's home for last rites. In a similar case on June 17, Tabrez Ansari was badly thrashed after being tied to a tree and forced to chant 'Jai Shri Ram' on suspicion of bike theft in Seraikela district of Jharkhand. He breathed his last at a hospital on June 23.
