The world is waiting to see tangible progress on climate issues

The UAE is currently hosting a high-level climate meeting, featuring the UN secretary general Antonio Guterres, who has expressed deep concern about the climate crisis and has called for world leaders to come up with concrete, realistic plans. The Abu Dhabi Climate Meeting will be a milestone ahead of the UN Climate Action Summit, to be held in New York in September.

Nigeria, being a member country with youth engagement and public mobilisation at its heart, one of the summit’s nine areas, has shown a commitment to mobilising people to take action on climate change and ensuring that young people are integrated and represented. At a youth pre-event briefing, Esther Agbarakwe of the office of the UN envoy on youth welcomed Nigeria’s delegates, including myself, and introduced us to colleagues from the Marshall Islands leading the youth engagement and public mobilisation track.

According to Samira Ibrahim, a Nigerian climate specialist who is part of the delegation, this event is very important for Nigeria. As she says, we are not here to just talk. Our job is to “show leaders that the ideas and initiatives of young people around the world are driving landmark climate actions. We want leaders to know the work that is being done, share feedback and make stronger commitments that will scale this climate action.”

The Abu Dhabi Climate Meeting is structured to evaluate and strengthen the initiatives, commitments and achievements that will be announced at the UN Climate Summit in September 2019, as well as to discuss key and emerging political barriers and opportunities for global climate action. The world is now holding its breath for tangible progress on climate change.

Seyifunmi Adebote, Abuja

Sudan needs a government that serves its people

I write in reference to your article Sudan crisis: Seven dead as protesters march on defence ministry (June 30): Hamza Handawi's article on the protests in Sudan was a good read. Decades of dictatorship and little development made the Sudanese demand a change in government (which caused the ousting of Omar Al Bashir) and the ongoing crisis is succinctly analysed in this piece. News that civilian protesters were killed by soldiers and many more were injured is tragic. It is high time for Sudan to have an elected government to properly serve its people. It is unlikely the protests will yield until that occurs.

K Ragavan, Bengaluru

Leading from the front makes this country great

Regarding your online story Sheikh Mohammed: worst UAE government services to be named (July 1), the Ruler of Dubai has set the bar high for all and Inshallah, they will rise to the challenge.

Sheikh Mohammed, your morals, work ethic and values are what this country needs. When things come too easily, it is easy to take them for granted and become complacent.

R Saraiva, Dubai
