German woman goes missing in Kerala, special police team launches probe

Kerala

Thiruvananthapuram

Loknath Behera

Kollam

More than one year after a Latvian woman was murdered in, a German woman has now gone missing in the southern state. A special police team has launched a probe.The 31-year-old German woman, identified as Lisa Wiese, was reported missing three months after she arrived in. Her family has filed a complaint through the German Consulate in this regard with state police chiefAccording to sources, Lisa arrived in Kerala on March 7 accompanied by UK national Muhammed Ali to visit the ashram of Mata Amritanandamayi in. Her three-month visa had expired this month.The Valiyathura police have launched a probe into the matter. Special police team has been formed to trace the whereabouts of Lisa."Investigation is on. Details can't be disclosed now," texted R Ilango, Assistant Commissioner of Police, Shanghumugham to Mirror.Last year, on April 20, the decomposed body of a Latvian woman, who was allegedly sexually abused and murdered, was recovered from a mangrove forest at Panathura near Kovalam after she went missing on March 14. The woman had come to India for traditional treatment for depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. The alleged lacklustre investigation by the police into the case -- even though they later arrested two men for the brutal crime -- came in for criticism from the victim's family and opposition political parties.The Latvian woman's partner told Mirror, "I would like to point out that (her) killers are still walking free, despite the rhetoric of officials, it is clear that there is absolutely no will to make Kerala a safer tourist destination. The two accused (of killing the Latvian woman) are on bail, despite being known to be violent sexual predators. There has been two court dates, the first on April 11, to which the accused were too busy to attend, and the second on June 12, where the judge postponed again, simply because he's waiting for a high court promotion, and doesn't want to start the trial. My heart goes out to the family of Lisa. It's not enough to deal with these cases as they arise, the wider social problems that have created this danger, must be addressed, or tourists will avoid Kerala, just as they are avoiding Goa."He added, "The foreign office and Loknath Behera (State Police Chief and Director General of Police of Kerala State Police) must wake up to the fact that the only way to regain the trust of tourists, is to deal with these cases swiftly and effectively, not by just pretending to search for missing persons and staging sham investigations designed to minimise coverage. These offenders must be brought to swift justice."
