Solar eclipse: How scientist predicted 'longest blackout in 5,000 years’ to occur

Solar eclipse: Longest ever future eclipse REVEALED by Cox

SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up HERE for science breakthroughs in health, business and more that matter We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

A solar eclipse is a rare phenomenon which occurs when the Earth passes through the shadow cast by the Moon and either partially or fully blocks the Sun. The latter will occur tomorrow in parts of Chile and Argentina when skywatchers will be treated to complete darkness for just a few seconds. However, there will be another solar eclipse in the future that we can expect to leave us in the dark for a lot longer than usual.

Brian Cox revealed during the filming of his 2010 series “Wonders of the Solar System” how scientists made the prediction. The physicist, who was in India at the time, said: “Science is different to all the other belief systems in this city, because you don’t need faith in it, you can check that it works. “So for example, I can tell you that tomorrow morning at precisely 6:24 am, the Moon will cover the face of the Sun and there will be a total solar eclipse. “I can tell you that in 2904 there will be five solar eclipses on the Earth and I could tell you on July 1, 2186, there will be the longest solar eclipse for 5,000 years – seven minutes.”

Brian Cox ade the revelation during his BBC show

Skywatchers will get a treat tonight

Science is different to all the other belief systems in this city, because you don’t need faith in it, you can check that it works Brian Cox

Total eclipses are rare because the timing of the Moon within the eclipse season needs to be more exact for an alignment between the observer on Earth and the centre of both the Sun and the Moon. In addition, the elliptical orbit of the Moon often takes it far enough away from Earth that its apparent size is not large enough to block the Sun entirely. The revelation comes after Dr Cox revealed Saturn’s moon could be hiding alien life during his new documentary “The Planets”. In 2005, NASA’s Cassini probe came within 30 miles of the surface of Enceladus, discovering water-rich plumes venting from the south polar region. Scientists found cryovolcanoes shooting geyser-like jets of water vapour, molecular hydrogen, other volatiles, and solid material, including sodium chloride crystals and ice particles, into space.

The eclipse will cover parts of Argentina and Chile

Solar eclipse predictions for the future
