After a Bird Collision, Pilot Saves Jet (With Explosions)

Photo credit: IAF

From Popular Mechanics

A quick-thinking Indian Air Force pilot prevented disaster after his aircraft collided with a flock of birds. The birds caused one of the Jaguar ground attack jet’s two engines to catch fire, placing the aircraft and pilot in danger. The pilot ejected all external stores on his aircraft and later successfully landed his plane.

The incident took place at the India’s Ambala Air Station, north of Delhi, on June 27th. The Indian Air Force Jaguar ground attack jet was just lifting off the runway when it collided with a flock of birds. As the birds scatter, the video clearly shows the right engine suddenly flaring much brighter than the left engine.

The jettisoned objects, described in the Indian press as fuel tanks full of fuel and “carrier bomb light stores” racks, explode in a fireball underneath the plane as the pilot flies on. The Jaguar had just taken off so the fuel tanks were full. A whitish spray—possibly jet fuel—is seen erupting from both fuel tanks after they are released from the airplane. Carrier bomb light stores are ejector racks fitted to planes like the Jaguar allowing them to carry smaller bombs than they are designed to carry. The CBLS carried 20 pound practice bombs , but it’s not clear if those were inert or had an explosive charge.

Photo credit: Hindustan Times - Getty Images

What seems likely to have happened is that one of the Jaguar’s two Adour turbofan engines accidentally ate one of the birds. The bird caused enough damage to set the engine on fire and the pilot, alerted by a warning light on his instrumentation panel, immediately dropped his fuel tanks. This lightened the aircraft considerably, allowing the pilot to gain enough maneuverability and speed to successfully land his airplane.

Like a lot of military air bases worldwide, Ambala is surrounded on several sides by civilian buildings. The base was probably fairly isolated when first established but slow development means today it is surrounded on several sides by housing, temples, government buildings, and local businesses. There are several schools on both ends of the runway, including a high school and elementary school.

Story continues

Photo credit: INDRANIL MUKHERJEE - Getty Images

The Indian Air Force later put out a press release, stating:

“An Indian Air Force Jaguar aircraft took off from Air Force Station Ambala this morning for a training mission around 0745h. The aircraft, immediately after takeoff, had an engine failure due to suspected bird hit. The pilot assessed the situation correctly and jettisoned external stores as per the standard operating procedures. The prompt and correct actions by the pilot enabled him to recover the crippled aircraft on single engine and carry out a safe landing at Air Force Station, Ambala. A court of inquiry has been ordered.”

The Jaguar, on fire and laden with fuel, was a flying bomb. The pilot, just taking off and barely in the air, doesn’t have a lot of options. If he drops his fuel tanks, he has a chance of preventing the plane from crashing into the ground—at the risk of hitting something with his tanks. If he doesn’t drop his tanks his plane is much more dangerous, and then there’s the risk that he could lose his left engine. Having an standard operating procedures for this sort of situation saves the pilot from having to choose a course of action and possibly choosing incorrectly.

The Jaguar fighter was developed in the late 1960s as a joint British-French low-level strike aircraft. The aircraft, famous for its low-level bombing capability, was adopted by the Indian Air Force in the 1970s. India is one of the few countries that still fly the jet, which is considered obsolete by Western standards.

Photo credit: U.S. Marine Corps photo by Sgt. Alex Kouns

Bird strikes are the bane of air forces worldwide, especially during migratory seasons. Last May, a bird strike caused at least $2 million in damage to a Marine Corps F-35 fighter jet. The U.S. military alone experiences up to 3,000 bird strikes a year, which it calls Bird/Wildlife Aircraft Strike Hazard (BASH). Military bases typically use a variety of abatement strategies, from clearing away vegetation to using dogs or propane-powered air horns to frighten away birds.

('You Might Also Like',)
