Mastermind of jewellery shop dacoity and two others nabbed

PATNA: The mastermind of daring dacoity in a jewellery shop on Ashiana-Digha road in the city was arrested along with two others and a major portion of the looted gold jewellery and over Rs6 lakh in cash were recovered from their possession. The criminals had decamped with gold jewellery worth Rs4 crore and Rs13 lakh in cash from the shop around 1pm on June 21.ADG (headquarters) Jitendra Kumar said the special investigation team (SIT) conducted a raids at Digha in western Patna and arrested the mastermind Ravi Kumar Gupta and his two associates. The police team later seized gold jewellery worth Rs1.10 crore and Rs6.30 lakh in cash looted from the shop. The SIT also seized silver worth Rs75,000, 300 grams of gemstones valued at Rs1 lakh, three country-made pistols and seven live cartridges from their possession. A bag used in the crime was also recovered. The two others arrested with Ravi were identified as Vikas Kumar Mali and Sipu Kumar.The ADG said it was a big challenge for the SIT formed under the leadership of Patna SSP Garima Malik . “At least 17 cases of serious nature are pending against Gupta, a resident of Alamganj in Patna City, and 20 cases against Mali in different police stations of Patna alone,” Kumar said, adding raids were on to nab the other gang members involved in the crime. Kumar said at least 10 criminals were involved in the daring dacoity. “We have got their names and they will be arrested shortly,” he added. The ADG (headquarters) also announced reward to the police officers for cracking the case within 10 days.He, however, didn't reveal the names of other gang members as it would affect the investigation. Ravi, who hails from Sadikpur under the Alamganj police station area, is known by several nick names such as ‘Masterji’, ‘Netaji’ or ‘Ravi patient’. His name had earlier figured in the murder of Raj Traders owner Banty Gupta and another person during a dacoity under the Gardanibagh police station area in the state capital, he added.Patna SSP Garima Malik said the looted jewellery were recovered from the house of Sipu at Kurji Balupar under the Digha police station area. A motorbike used in the crime was also seized from Sipu’s house where the criminals had chalked out strategy to commit the crime.DIG (central range) Rajesh Kumar, who was monitoring the police operation, said Ravi also used criminals from outside the state for committing crime. Police have found his links with the criminals operating in Jharkhand’s Bokaro district, he said, adding, “Instructions have been issued to collect more information about the gang and initiate action accordingly.”The criminals had held the jewellery shop owner and staff captive and taken away the hard disk of the CCTV camera. “That had made the task of the police more difficult. The sketches of the suspects were prepared on the basis of information provided by the staff present in the shop at the time of the incident, which finally led to the arrest of the dacoits,” the ADG said.
