Rahul Gandhi must explain position on hate politics against Muslims: Kisan Sabha

Chargesheet against Pehlu Khan’s kin--Kisan Sabha to struggle for justice and Rs. 1 crore as compensation

AMN / New Delhi

The All India Kisan Sabha AIKS has strongly condemned the ‘vindictive steps’ by Ashok Gehlot, Congress Chief Minister in Rajasthan of framing chargesheet against sons of Pehlu Khan, a dairy farmer who had been lynched near Alwar in April 2017 by so called Gourakshaks.

AIKS demanded Rahul Gandhi, President of Congress Party to explain its position on hate politics against Muslims in the name of cow. The Ashok Gehlot government should reinvestigate the Pehlu Khan’s murder case, book the real culprits and provide Rs. 1 crore as compensation to the kins of Pehlu Khan as a message against such hate crimes. AIKS will submit memorandum to the Chief Minister of Rajasthan for this cause.

If the state government of Rajasthan did not withdraw the manipulated charge sheet and provide justice to the victims AIKS along with other peasant organisations will launch intensive struggles.

The dairy farmer was killed by a lynch mob under the patronage of RSS-BJP. The Vasundara Raje government allowed the real culprits named in the dying statement of Khan scot-free by manipulating the case. The BJP led state government did not give any compensation also to the victim’s family exposing its inhuman traits. It was the All India Kisan Sabha and other progressive minded organisations and individuals who have collected money to the tune of Rs 10 lakh to Pehlu Khan’s family as compensation.

It was a clear case of a dairy farmer purchasing cows and calves from Jaipur cattle fair and they were in possession of records from Municipal authorities. The Police and administration under the BJP led state Government had taken vindictive measures against the family since they were Muslims. The farmers belongs to Muslim community in Mewat Region traditionally depend on cattle rearing for their livelihood.

It was expected that the new state government in Rajasthan led by Congress will reinvestigate the case and ensure justice by arresting the real culprits and ensuring strong deterrent punishment as per law. Instead, Gehlot government is trying to further victimse the kins of Pehlu Khan. This is unacceptable and contrary to the finest secular and democratic traditions of India.

According to AIKS, after Narendra Modi got re-elected as Prime Minister, inhuman acts of lynching and mob crimes against Muslims have been reported from different parts of the country. A Muslim youth was killed in Jharkhand. Instead of fighting these anti-national crimes by fanatic communal elements backed by RSS-BJP, the Congress is also trying to appease communal forces by taking unlawful manoeuvring as in Pehlu Khan’s case, which will surely boomerang on it.
