Tax no more | India Today Insight

Winston Churchill had prophetically remarked: "For a nation to try to tax itself into prosperity is like a man standing in a bucket and trying to lift himself up by the handle." India is in a conundrum of sorts. As tax revenues slide and the need to spend more weighs on the minds of policymakers, there is a temptation to impose higher taxes. But it would be ill-advised.

Let's compare income tax paid in India with other countries. Indians earning more than Rs 10 lakh per annum pay over 30 per cent of their incomes as income tax, with an additional 4 per cent as cess. Those earning less than Rs 5 lakh a year pay no taxes while those in the income range of Rs 5-10 lakh pay 20 per cent tax, plus the 4 per cent cess.

China has four slabs of individual income tax-starting from 25 per cent for those earning between 9,000 to 30,000 yuan a month (Rs 90,000 to Rs 300,000 a month). It goes up to 45 per cent for monthly incomes of over 80,000 yuan. In the US, tax rates range between 22 per cent and 35 per cent. Several countries have higher personal income tax rates, such as Denmark, Sweden and Japan, but they provide an expansive social security net that includes state-run schools, healthcare, day care centres, unemployment allowance, housing et al.

At 35 per cent, corporate tax in India is among the highest in the world. In 1980, corporate tax rates around the world averaged 38.8 per cent, and 46.6 per cent when weighted by GDP. However, over time, countries realised the impact higher corporate tax rates have on business investment decisions. In 2018, the tax rates in most countries averaged between 23 and 26.4 per cent. The US, which until 2017 had the fourth highest corporate income tax rate in the world, introduced reforms in 2018 and lowered it towards the middle of the 208 countries surveyed for the International Tax Competitiveness Index. Most countries have corporate tax rates below 30 per cent even as India is holding on to the 35 per cent rate. Other countries levying such rates include Malta, the UAE and Puerto Rico.

In last year's budget, then finance minister Arun Jaitley had lowered corporate tax to 25 per cent for companies with a turnover of Rs 250 crore or less, partially fulfilling a promise made by the Narendra Modi government. Now, there is pressure on the government to reform India's corporate tax structure to remain globally competitive. Sliding investment by the private sector over the past few years presents a compelling case for a more globally-aligned tax policy for the corporate sector.

US President Donald Trump took a radical decision last year to lower corporate tax rates from 35 per cent to 21 per cent. If India continues with its high tax rate, it gives enough reason for major companies that create jobs and drive innovation to move towards lower tax jurisdictions. In April this year, during the Lok Sabha election campaign, Jaitley, though, had reiterated the promise of lowering tax rates.

On the indirect taxes front, the Goods and Services tax expanded the tax base to bring in 3.4 million new taxpayers and made taxation more transparent and difficult to evade. At a time when simplification of processes is the key, GST compliance has been a challenge. There is a case for reducing tax rates on certain commodities, such as cement (currently 28 per cent), and reducing the number of tax slabs from four to three. However, reforms in the GST might not be addressed in the July 5 budget since all GST-related decisions are taken by the GST Council.

Evidently there is a crisis of revenues that the government will have to deal with. The government had budgeted for projected net tax revenue growth of Rs 17.5 lakh crore, but estimates suggest it could eventually manage only Rs 16.3 lakh crore. In such a scenario, it should also refrain from excessive tax vigilantism. Start-ups have often complained about excessive tax policing. The government needs to realise that there is a fine line between effective tax administration and an intrusive administration. The Union budget will be a crucial test for the government as it battles a painful economic slowdown and a financial sector that is in disarray. The challenge will be of reviving growth and moderating government revenue.

MORE FROM INSIGHT | BSNL: Air India of the airwaves?

MORE FROM INSIGHT | Oil tanker attacks: Blasts from the past

WATCH | The Fadnavis Formula for Success
