One BKC developer Radius defaults on interest payments

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Yes Bank Ltd moved up by 1 in a week on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Yes Bank Ltd is 6 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

Mumbai: The slowdown in the non-bank lending industry continues to haunt real-estate companies. Mumbai-based Radius Developers has defaulted on scheduled interest payments on a Rs 1,200-crore loan to private lender, two people aware of the development told ET.The company, which has delayed interest payments by 45-60 days, has exposure of about Rs 5,500 crore to the banking system.“The Radius Developers account is currently in the SMA-2 category and it has delayed interest payments of Rs 30 crore,” said an official familiar with the matter. “We have made requisite provisions on the account if they don’t pay before the 90-day period.”A Radius Group spokesperson told ET that the company will be paying the interest component of Rs 30 crore to Yes Bank by July 5.The Radius Group project that Yes Bank had funded is located in Chembur, a sprawling northeast Mumbai suburb. The development has been delayed by about four years due to want of environmental clearances. The developer had got into an agreement with a prominent NBFC last year to sell a part of the project at a lower rate for Rs 360 crore. But just after the IL&FS crisis squeezed the flow of funds to NBFCs, the non-bank lender called-off the deal putting the developer in lurch.Real-estate developers have been facing a funding freeze owing to debt repayment worries at IL&FS group companies, Dewan Housing Finance and the Zee Group, with financing costs at NBFCs rising to record highs. Spreads on top-rated five-year bonds of Indian non-banking lenders rose 70 basis points in just one year. The Piramal Group, considered among the growth leaders in the non-bank lending industry, is also struggling due to the current cash crunch in the real-estate sector because of its heavy builder loans.ET had reported on April 29 that real-estate funding was undergoing a major change with banks and home financiers focusing on the quality and liquidity of assets instead of indiscriminate lending that had previously helped inflate their loan books. Some bankers are also insisting on rental income from finished commercial projects as collateral in lieu of lower interest costs.Developers need to pay nearly Rs 1.29 lakh crore a year on outstanding debt but generate less than half the amount in income that can be used for repayments, according to an analysis of about 11,000 companies by research firm Liases Foras. Experts say that rolling over loans and tapping into private equity funds will be a struggle for all but the most established builders.With the banking sector in doldrums, the risk of a potential crisis involving wary lenders and troubled developers has increased. The liquidity crunch has worsened the outlook for property companies that have been battling declining home sales, mounting inventories, and falling prices.
