Mumbai: Rains puts city on backfoot; lifeline hit, work suspended

Mumbai: At least 27 persons were killed in various incidents across the city as rains wreak havoc in large parts of Maharashtra on Tuesday.

Sixteen people lost their lives in two separate incidents of wall crashes in Malad and Kalyan reported on Tuesday. Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis met the injured at Shatabdi Hospital in Kandivali.

In the wake of the incessant rainfall, the state government declared July 2 as a public holiday for Mumbai.

The city had come to standstill in the morning hours as the suburban rail services crippled due to heavy rains. The trains on Central and Harbour lines were suspended for major part of the routes, while Western line services were delayed.

Major road routes were also submerged under rainwater as the civic body and police battled hard to ease things down.

Andheri, Sion, Dadar, Kurla were among the areas worst hit. The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation was empathetic in its approach as the city experienced over 340 mm of rainfall.

Mumbai airport was also shut for some time as a Spicejet airplane skidded off the runway bringing the air traffic to a halt.

The city regained its pace later in the day as train services resumed and water level receded.

Following is the timeline of major happenings unfolded in the country's financial capital:

12:05 pm: Andheri Subway in Mumbai is closed due to flooding in the area.

#WATCH Maharashtra: Andheri Subway in Mumbai is closed due to flooding in the area. #MumbaiRains pic.twitter.com/9J4hNyzQTn — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

12:00 pm: Thane Municipal Transport had arranged extra buses to ferry passengers upto Mulund check naka. The arrangement has been directed by Thane Municipal commissioner after local services were stopped between Kurla and Thane.

11:40 am: Maharashtra CM: "High tide is expected at 12 noon, we'll monitor the situation. Last night Mumbai police received 1600-1700 tweets from people, they received immediate help. BMC Disaster Management worked entire night. Heavy rainfall is expected in next 2 days. We are prepared for it."

Photo: ANI | Twitter

11:35 am: Devendra Fadnavis said: "There was heavy rainfall in Mumbai last night which led to accidents. In Malad, wall collapsed&at least 13 died, 30-40 injured.I met them. Local trains operational on Western line but yet to resume on Central line as there's more flooding there. Work on to pump out water. In the light of IMD's prediction, we had declared a holiday in schools and colleges last night & for offices in morning. Police department and Disaster Management under BMC are alert and helping people. Barring a few places, overall traffic has been under control."

10:35 am: CM Devendra Fadnavis visits Shatabdi Hospital to meet the people injured in Malad wall collapse incident today, Minister Yogesh Sagar also present.

Mumbai: CM Devendra Fadnavis visits Shatabdi Hospital to meet the people injured in #Malad wall collapse incident today, Minister Yogesh Sagar also present. 18 people died and at least 13 were injured in the incident. #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/IF13wzibdB — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

10:25 am: The area outside Sion Police station flooded due to rains

Mumbai: The area outside Sion Police station flooded due to #MumbaiRains pic.twitter.com/rkdUz3Qhsg — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

10:20 am: 18 dead after a wall collapsed on hutments in Pimpripada area of Malad East due to heavy rainfall today.

10:05 am: Chief Fire Officer, Mumbai Fire Brigade on wall collapse in Malad East: One woman and a child have been located under debris, rescue work is in progress.

09:40 am: Streets in the city flooded due to heavy rainfall, people wade through water in Gandhi Market area.

Mumbai: Streets in the city flooded due to heavy rainfall, people wade through water in Gandhi Market area. #MumbaiRains pic.twitter.com/R0n0G4Qs3q — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

09:20 am: Indian Navy deploys various teams to provide assistance to rain hit and stranded people, in Kurla area following a request by BMC. About 1000 people have been shifted to safety with the help of NDRF, fire brigade, Naval teams as well as local volunteers.

Mumbai: Indian Navy deploys various teams to provide assistance to rain hit and stranded people, in Kurla area following a request by BMC. About 1000 people have been shifted to safety with the help of NDRF, fire brigade, Naval teams as well as local volunteers. #MumbaiRains pic.twitter.com/udYAylTTx0 — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

09:15 am: High tides of about 4.59 meters expected in Mumbai at around 11.52 am today.

09:12 am: 13 dead after a wall collapsed on hutments in Pimpripada area of Malad East due to heavy rainfall today.

Mumbai: 13 dead after a wall collapsed on hutments in Pimpripada area of Malad East due to heavy rainfall today.NDRF Inspector Rajendra Patil says "In the search by advance equipment, canine search&physical search no more bodies were found so search operation is now being closed" pic.twitter.com/ACQl4mSF9v — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

09:00 am: Maharashtra Govt: Public holiday for today, declared in 3 districts of the state - Mumbai City, Mumbai Suburban and Thane district. Decision has been taken due to continuous rainfall and IMD warning.

08:55 am: Traffic movement affected at Western Express Highway due to heavy rainfall in the city.

Mumbai: Traffic movement affected at Western Express Highway due to heavy rainfall in the city. #MumbaiRains pic.twitter.com/rak4iRl9Om — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

08:05 am: Mumbai Airport official: Due to rain in Mumbai, around 54 flights diverted to nearby airport.

08:03 am: 3 dead & 1 injured after wall of National Urdu School collapsed at around 12:30 am today in Kalyan, following heavy rainfall in the area.

08:00 am: Railway tracks submerge at Sion railway station, after heavy rains in the area.

#MumbaiRains: Railway tracks submerge at Sion railway station, after heavy rains in the area. pic.twitter.com/BxqWp30ENU — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

07:00 am: Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) issues railway traffic update.
