Kashmir still an integral part of India because of Nehru: Azad

Kashmir still an integral part of India because of Nehru: Azad

NEW DELHI, Jul 1(Agencies): Lambasting at the treasury bench in Rajya Sabha, Leader of Opposition Ghulam Nabi Azad on Monday attacked those who accuse first Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru for Kashmir issue and said it was because of him that Kashmir ‘is still an integral part of India.’

Tracing the history of Kashmir, Azad said, “This is history and history cannot be distorted.”

Azad further talked about the political parties in Jammu and Kashmir and their contribution in preventing infiltration in the State.

He said that the fight is not personal, but ideological, and it shall go on. "Everyone wants Kashmir to be peaceful," said he.

Clarifying arrest of Shyama Prasad Mukherjee in Jammu and Kashmir, the Congress leader said, "Mukherjee didn't have the entry permit to visit the state, which was mandatory then. Because he didn’t apply for the permit, the Jana Sangh founder was sent to jail. However, he was not lodged in jail but was made to stay in a guest house. He passed away the next day due to cardiac arrest and Jawaharlal Nehru was not in the state at that time."

Welcoming Home Minister Amit Shah's visit to J&K, Azad said, "We welcome that you are the first home minister who visited Jammu and Kashmir and no black-flags and no protest was organised."

He also questioned as why the killing of security personnel and civilians have gone up in the last five years.

The Congress leader said, "Terrorism was eliminated by 2014. Whether Congress was in power with the PDP or National Conference, terrorism was eliminated. During your regime, 16 army installations were attacked and forces were killed."

He also urged the government to bring all people who are now alienated in a bid to Confidence Building Measure (CBM).

Azad further said stop running the government from Delhi and that would be a great CBM.

On assembly elections, the Congress leader asked the government to announce the polls date soon. "I am certain if you announce tomorrow 70 per cent vote will be polled in Kashmir valley."

On reservation, he added to raise the three per cent bar to 5-6 per cent.
