EXCLUSIVE| Nafisa Ali Sodhi cancer-free; shares why Zaira Wasim quitting films reminds her of her younger self

EXCLUSIVE| Nafisa Ali Sodhi shares why she penned a hard-hitting note seeking work on Instagram | Photo Credit: Instagram



"I am Nafisa Ali Sodhi and I would like an elegant role to portray in Indian cinema. So looking for a perfect script as a senior actor, I need to work to express my emotions. I will not be dictated to."

Just last night, veteran actor Nafisa Ali Sodhi, who was last seen in Saheb, Biwi Aur Gangster 3 took to social media and posted a portfolio shot seeking work. The actor shared that she's looking for a perfect script as a senior actor.

But behind that Instagram post, there are two important points Nafisa Ali Sodhi wants to convey.

"Firstly, I am feeling much better, my scan has shown I don't have cancer. So I wanted to celebrate my life, my journey. I love being part of the film industry and I wanted them to know that if there's a role for me, I am ready to do it. I am not afflicted by cancer, I have overcome it. That was my main idea," she tells ZoomTV.com in an exclusive interaction.

Second, Nafisa Ali shared that she's been listening to all the issues related to Zaira Wasim's decision of quitting films and in a way, it reminds her of her younger self.

"I was just remembering myself at that stage of my life... I was remembering myself as a young girl. When I was young and Junoon was made, it was such a huge success and I had so many offers. I remember I had no family support, I was alone in Bombay trying to find work and it played a huge role in my father saying don't work in cinema, girls in our family don't work in cinema. I gave in to that pressure," she shares.

She adds, "I saw myself when I was 20 and I just felt for her. I thought let me put this message out that work is something which is your choice, it is your freedom, your independent right. There are many pressures young people are surrounded by... but if you have a choice, make you sure you think and make the right choice."

"Because I always look back and say why did I give in, why did I listen to my father, I should have listened to myself," she shares.

It was 18 years after Junoon that she made a comeback with Major Saab. "By then, I was married and I had three children. I knew I was a wife, a mother but you know in life there's so much more that needs to be done. The industry has never forgotten me, they always find me work and it came out of blue."

Recalling how Major Saab shaped up, the actor shares, "I had worked with Shashi and Amitabh was the greatest actor for the whole country and it was my eternal wish if I could act with Amitabh. Tinu called me and said I have a film for you. I said if you are going to make me play a foreigner, I am not going to act. He then explained the role to me and I said yes. It was like my wish coming true."

In her Instagram post, Nafisa also urged people to stop targeting young women in the country and wrote, "May God give each of us the strength to follow our dreams. Stop targeting young women in India. Stop religious intolerance. Stop dictating to Indians. India is unique and we must protect our secular fabric. Stop this divide and rule. Focus on a better world."

When Zaira announced her decision to quit, the actor issued an official statement and shared that her relationship with her religion was being threatened. Nafisa Ali Sodhi, however, shares a different viewpoint.

"I have a personal belief in religion. It's a communication of yourself with a higher power or a guiding force or your intuitive messenger, and the belief of god of course. For example, look at me, I have gone through the biggest scariest journey of aggressive peritoneal cancer I was diagnosed with. It was just my belief and inner strength and my surrounding, family and doctors. It was like believing in a miracle that made me overcome it. So when people say you lose yourself, I don't agree with all these things. Irrespective of religion, the search or pursuit is always for being a better human being and anybody who digresses from that goes into a negative space and in the world, there's too much negativity. So, we need to empower people, give them hope."



"Say if I didn't have my medical insurance, my cancer would have consumed me and in two years, I would have been dead. So to say that II will sit back and wait for things to happen... God takes care of those who take of themselves,"




