Tamil Nadu: Police jeep plays lead role in funny video as it sends mechanic and friend to jail

The jeep that featured in the video had been sent to the accused, Santhosh's garage fro repairs (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Tamil Nadu: Musically or TikTok videos seem to be a new wave of trend that the world is following. Instances of people becoming social media influencers using these platforms have also done the rounds. One thing, however, that these platforms have not been associated with is, jail. However, a feather in the cap of these platforms was added when two men were arrested from Salem, Tamil Nadu for shooting these videos.

A mechanic and his friend, smitten by the new trend, got a little too carried away when they used a police jeep for making a TikTok video. The jeep had been sent to the mechanic's garage when he decided to incorporate it in his video. The two were arrested after the Attur police saw the video that they shared on Facebook, WhatsApp and Twitter.

Also Read: Bengaluru: Solar panels find unusual suitor as elderly corn vendor makes smart switch to save environment

While talking to the Times of India, a police officer from Attur police station said that the video showed a person coming out of the police jeep with a voice-over in the background which suggested that everyone should give birth to a child like him. He also added that a song was also edited into the video, which praised the pretend policeman.

Allegedly, the mechanic, who has been identified as S Santhosh Kumar is 20 years old and belongs to Pethanaickenpalayam and his friend, M Sabaripriyan is 20 years old and hails from Narasingapuram. The infamous jeep that landed the two friends in jail was sent to a garage on January 13 for repairs where Santhosh worked. The two used the jeep and shot a video which they also shared on social media.

A constable, who is also the driver of the jeep lodged a complaint against the two after which the Attur police made the arrest on Thursday evening. The arrest was made under the Section 505(1)(b) of the Indian Penal Code along with the Section 67 of the IT Act. The two accused are currently in judicial custody in the Salem Central Prison.
