Mumbai rains in numbers: 36 dead, 54 flights cancelled, thousands evacuated

Mumbai rains

Mumbai

BMC

Mumbaikars preferred to stay home on Tuesday as most of the roads were waterlogged and local train services were affected due to incessant rains. The government had announced late on Monday night that all schools and colleges will be shut on July 2. Naturally, normal life came to a virtual standstill. Flight services were disrupted, more than 30 Mumbaikars lost their lives as many others came forward to help.Here is a numerical breakdown of theThat's the amount of rainrecorded from Monday to 8:30 am on Tuesday. It is the second heaviest rainfall recorded in the city since the year 1974. The only time the city has seen more rainfall was on July 26, 2005 - during the deluge.That's the amount of rainfall that Nalasopara recorded in the past 72 hours. In 2018, it witnessed around 55 mm rainfall.The number of people who lost their lives in the rains. In Malad, the compound wall of a school in Pimpripada area collapsed on some of the adjoining hutments at around 1 am on Tuesday, claiming 21 lives. On the same day, two persons died after being trapped inside a SUV in the flooded Malad subway. Three persons were killed when the boundary wall of National Urdu School crashed in Kalyan and several more were injured. Besides, two persons were washed away in flood waters in an overflowing river in Jawahar. At least seven people were killed and five injured because of electrocution in several parts of the financial capital. A security guard was killed in a wall collapse in suburban Mulund.The number of flights cancelled from Mumbai because of heavy rains. Another 54 flights were diverted at Mumbais Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj International Airport due to inclement weather.The number of de-watering pumps ofdeployed at 53 flood-prone spots, including 22 chronic spots and assistant municipal commissioners have been asked to supervise their territory.The number of complaints that the disaster management cell of BMC received , including those about water logging, wall collapse and tree branch falling on the Helpline No 1916.The number of people evacuated from Kranti Nagar, Kurla, to prevent any untoward incidents due to an overflowing Mithi river.According to the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation, six pumping stations of MCGM pumped out more than 14,000 million litres of water and discharged it into the sea, which is more than combined capacity of Tulsi and Vihar lake. Also, the entire June month’s average rainfall was recorded in just three days in Mumbai.
