Why Canadian automotive suppliers see India as the next 'land of opportunities'

"It took India around seven years to increase annual production to four million vehicles from three million," the report said. However, the next milestone—five million—is expected in less than five years.

In November, the Canadian Association of Mold Makers and the WindsorEssex Economic Development Corp. signed two memorandums of understanding with the Tools and Gauge Manufacturers' Association of India (TAGMA) and Engineering Export Promotion Council of India to collaborate on opportunities in the burgeoning Indian market, as well as globally.

The MOUs were the first step toward "bringing two already successful industrial economies together to build partnerships (that are) focused on harnessing the strengths of our two industries to create a mold-making superpower on a global scale," Azzopardi said.

The next Mexico?

Mike Hicks, a CAMM board member and vice-president of the Windsor-based mold component supplier DMS, said there are similarities between the current opportunities in India and those that existed in 2008 for Canadian companies in Mexico.

"They had a growing automotive sector then, but there was a disconnect," Hicks said. "They were good at assembly, they were good at production, but they weren't good at mold making or tool making."

India currently imports 60 percent of the molds used in its auto sector, half of which come from Europe, he said.

"We may not be able to displace the Chinese on lower-cost tooling," Hicks said. "But tools that come from Europe are usually higher-priced tools, and more in the range of the type of tools we do. So, if you can capture some of that, in a growing market, that's huge."

Azzopardi said India has an "aggressive" target of building seven million vehicles per year.

"It's larger than Mexico, smaller than the U.S. and three times larger than Canada—they're big numbers. They have the population and they're building the middle class, it's just a question of how fast they align. The middle class has to be able to afford the vehicles they're talking about.

"CAMM's last trip, in March, generated interest from the heads of about 60 businesses in India. They are looking for partnership and investment opportunities in Canada and Azzopardi sees potential for companies developing advanced materials.
