'Heinous crime': Husband of victim arrested in quadruple homicide

Gurpreet Singh and Shalinder Kaur

CINCINNATI – The husband of one of the victims has been arrest in connection with the April shooting that killed four members of a Sikh family in Ohio.

Gurpreet Singh, 37, is charged with four counts of aggravated murder in the killing of four members of his family.

Shalinder Kaur, 39; her parents, Hakiakat Singh Panag, 59, and Parmjit Kaur, 62; and her sister Amarjit Kaur, 58, were found dead in an apartment with food burning on the stove.

It was Gurpreet Singh, Shalinder Kaur's husband, who found the bodies and made a frantic 911 call, often leaving his phone to beg for help from his neighbors.

“I have no words. The trauma has been too much. It’s too hard to even think of all that has happened. My brain is not working,” Singh told The Enquirer, breaking down as he communicated in a mix of Punjabi and English.

On Tuesday, West Chester Police Chief announced the arrest. He called the slayings a "heinous crime."

Family slain: 'I was in shock,' says Ohio man who found wife, family dead

Ohio apartment shooting: Four victims include father, wife and daughter, leader says

At about 2 p.m., Herzog said, authorities in Branford, Connecticut, arrested Singh without incident. Singh will be held in the New Haven County Jail pending extradition, Herzog added. Police did not reveal why he was in Connecticut

Butler County Prosecutor Mike Gmoser, who also attended the conference, said Singh may face the death penalty, but a grand jury will ultimately make that determination.

"There will be a day of reckoning in respect to this case," Gmoser said.

Township trustee lee Wong, chief of police Joel Herzog, butler county prosecutor Mike Gmoser announce West Chester police have made an arrest in connection to the April shooting that killed four members of a Sikh family.

Singh and his wife have three children: two daughters ages 11 and 9, and a son, 5. The children are staying with other family members, and were not present at the apartment at the time of the killings.

"I didn’t tell them yet. It’s difficult. I don’t know what to say and how to say it,” Singh said shortly after the incident. “They believe that their mother has gone to India.”

Story continues

Herzog said during the conference that the children are safe.

Singh received an outpouring of support from the Guru Nanak Society of Greater Cincinnati, the local Sikh gurudwara.

Four members of a Sikh family were shot and killed in their West Chester home April 29

The incident drew international attention. One of the victims was an Indian national, and the other three were of Indian origin.

Until the arrest Tuesday, West Chester authorities were tight-lipped about the investigation. Two days after the killings, a dive team with the Ohio Bureau of Criminal Investigation recovered a gun from a pond near the scene of the crime.

Within days of the slayings, authorities said no evidence suggested that the killings were hate crimes.

Gurinder Hans, the son of Amarjit Kaur, traveled from Melbourne, Australia, to Cincinnati to secure his mother's body and meet with police.

The community reaction to the news of the arrests came quickly.

“I hope the truth comes out and we get an answer to the question of why this happened or had to happen," said Satinder Bharaj, past president of the gurudwara, the temple where the family worshiped.“If it is him, (Gurpreet) it is in no reflection of the Sikh community but the work of one person and as such should not reflect negatively on the Sikh Community in Cincinnati or the US or all over."

“I just want to say thank you to everyone for their love and support. America is the best country in the world. I knew they would arrest the killer who killed my family,” said Gurinder Hans, the son of Amarjit Kaur, who was one of the four victims.

Ajaib Singh, who is the older brother of Amarjit Kaur and the younger brother of Parmjit Kaur and lives in Maryland thanked the West Chester police for the arrest.

“ I am not surprised at Gurpreet’s arrest. I expected it," he said."We knew there were disputes in the family and we expected fist fights or a divorce but we never expected the whole family to be killed.".

He said he was was close to Amarjit Kaur.

"I sponsored her. I went to pick her up in March from India," he said. "I feel so much grief. I still cannot believe she is gone. Her death lies heavy on my heart. It’s painful to see a family member do this to other family members.

"We trusted him, we treated him like a son. It’s painful to me, nobody deserves to die like this, nobody, “ he said

“It’s a huge shock. She just went to visit her sister Parmjit for a few weeks and then she was coming to California," he said. "My mom was shot for nothing. I can’t believe my mother is dead."

This article originally appeared on Cincinnati Enquirer: 'Heinous crime': Husband of victim arrested in quadruple homicide
