Tiware dam breach in Ratnagiri: 6 dead, 19 missing; locals had alerted of 'leakage' earlier [VIDEO]

Tiware dam was breached in Ratnagari late on Tuesday night | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Shiv Sena MP confirms shocking lapse that may have led to dam breach Several people feared missing, at least 6 dead Flood-like situation in 7 downstream villages

Mumbai: The death toll in the Ratnagiri dam breach incident rose to six on Wednesday while at least 19 people were still missing after the Tiware dam in the district in Mahrashtra was breached late on Tuesday night. The dam breach took place as heavy rains lashed the region.

A flood-like situation has taken place in at least seven downstream villages, with as many as 12 houses near the dam being swept away.

Officials of the civil administration, police and local volunteer were present at the spot to carry out search and rescue operations.

Meanwhile, Shiv Sena MP from Chiplun, Vinayak Raut, confirmed of shocking negligence that possibly led to the eventual breach in the dam. The Sena MP stated that locals had previously alerted him of cracks and leakage in the Tewari dam for which he had raised the issue with concerned authorities. However, he claimed that no action was taken by the government officials, Times Now reported.

Congress leader and former Maharashtra CM Ashok Chavan also took to Twitter to slam the state over negligence in maintaining and repairing the dam that cost several lives in the area.

Visuals from the spot after Tiware dam breached:

#WATCH: Tiware dam in Ratnagiri was breached earlier today. 6 bodies have been recovered till now. Rescue operations continue. 12 houses near the dam also washed away. #Maharashtra pic.twitter.com/mkgLaruaau — ANI (@ANI) July 3, 2019

As incessant rainfall lashed several parts of Maharashtra on Tuesday and at least 39 people were killed across the state in separate rain-related incidents. Mumbai recorded the heaviest rainfall since July 2005 showers, which brought the Maximum City to a standstill as public transport was severely affected.

A record 375 mm of rainfall pounded the state capital, which is the highest July rainfall in a 24-hour period since July 1974, news agency PTI reported. Almost 35 per cent of the city's average annual rainfall was received by Mumbai on Tuesday.

In view of the IMD forecast of heavy rainfall on Tuesday, the Maharashtra government declared a public holiday for schools, colleges and officials in the city on Tuesday, with the Education Department announcing that all examinations scheduled for Tuesday were postponed.

Water-logging on streets was reported in several parts of Mumbai and its adjoining areas like Raigad, Thane and Palghar. The local train services on all three Railway lines in Mumbai - Central, Western and Harbour - were disrupted in the morning, leading to cancellation and delay of several trains. However, services were restored by afternoon.

Road and air traffic were also impacted as the main runway of Mumbai airport remained closed since Tuesday midnight after a SpiceJet plane overshot the runway while landing. Over 50 flights were cancelled and another 50 were diverted during the course of the day at the airport.

A spate of fatal incidents also took place in the city as torrential rains continued to lash Mumbai throughout the day. At least 21 people were killed and 78 injured after a wall collapsed on hutments in Pimpripada area of Malad (East) in the wee hours of Tuesday.

Another wall collapsed in Mulund, in which a 45-year-old security guard of a private building was crushed to death. A 22-year-old was electrocuted at Nehru Nagar in Vile Parle while two people were found dead inside an SUV stuck in the flooded Malad subway since Monday night. In nearby Thane, three people were killed after the boundary wall of National Urdu School crashed in Kalyan.


