Father-son duo part of gang behind Jewar rapes, murder

Father-son duo part of gang behind Jewar rapes and murder, arrested

GREATER NOIDA: Monu Bawariya, the last among six members of a highway gang wanted for raping four women and murdering their male relative after ambushing them in Jewar in May 2017, was arrested by the Noida unit of the special task force.Monu and the others, which included his father Jai Singh, had attacked the family after they had spotted their car on the Jewar-Sikandrabad road that night and planted spikes to deflate its tyres. As the car lurched to a halt, they dragged the women to a nearby field and raped them. A total of eight people were in the car. The attack took place just a kilometre from the Yamuna Expressway , near the site of the proposed international airport.The four male passengers were made to squat, tied up execution-style with the women’s dupattas and thrashed before one of them, a 38-year-old scrap dealer, was shot in the chest from point-blank range because he had resisted. He bled to death on the spot. His wife (35), sister (35) and sister-in-law (50) were among the women in the gang’s clutches.Monu alias Kanhaiya (22), who was on the run for two years, is from Alwar in Rajasthan . The arrest was made late on Monday after the STF followed a tipoff that he was in Jewar town. “The accused was seen coming on a bike in Jewar where we nabbed him with the help of local police. During interrogation, he confessed to his involvement in the incident which occurred on May 15,” said Raj Kumar Mishra, the task force’s DSP.Mishra said Monu had a reward of Rs 50,000 on his head, “Among the five men who were involved in the crime, three named Ashok, Deepak and Jai Singh were arrested days after the incident by police while the mastermind of the gang, Anil Bawariya, was nabbed by STF in October 2017,” said Mishra.Police said that Monu revealed in the interrogation that among those in jail, Jai Singh was his father. “The gang is known for their brutality. They had punctured the car on Jewar-Bulandshahr highway using a wooden board with nails. They gang-raped the women and had killed one of the men after he tried to fight back. They robbed all of them,” said Mishra.
