At Least 33 Dead in India Monsoon; Mumbai Crippled by Flooding

At a Glance More than 14 inches of rain fell in just 24 hours, triggering wall collapses in three separate places that killed at least 31 people.

Two others also died in a submerged vehicle in flash flooding.

A plane skidded off the runway during heavy rain in Mumbai

The Mumbai government declared Tuesday a public holiday, shutting schools and businesses to keep people safe.

Heavy monsoon rain killed at least 33 people in India and paralyzed the megacity of Mumbai, forcing government officials to close schools and businesses across the city.

Thirty of the deaths came after the rain triggered the collapse of walls onto poorly constructed housing. All told, four different walls collapsed at four locations in Maharashtra state, the Associated Press reported.

Twenty-four of the deaths occurred in suburbs of Mumbai; 21 people died in Malad and three died in Thane. Six others died in Pune, a city of around 2 million just outside of Mumbai. A 45-year-old man was also killed by a separate wall collapse Monday night.

The walls collapsed onto shanties and huts, poorly constructed domiciles that stood little chance under the weight of the walls.

(MORE: Stunning Before-and-After Images Show India's Water Crisis)

Rescues are still ongoing, and a fire department official told Reuters that they'd rescued more than a dozen people so far in Malad alone.

More than 14 inches of rain has fallen on the city in just 24 hours, according to weather.com meteorologist Chris Dolce.

Advertisement All of that rain falling so quickly caused flash flooding that killed two men trapped in their flooded vehicle, the Associated Press reports. It also disrupted all forms of transportation in the city of more than 18 million, forcing the city to declare a public holiday.

The declaration shuts down schools and businesses. And thankfully so, flooded train tracks on routes across Mumbai disrupted train service, some roads were impassable and flights at Mumbai's airport have been canceled or delayed.

The disruptions at the airport came after a plane skidded off the airport's runway during heavy rain Monday night, shuttering the airport's main runway. No one was injured in the incident, Conde Nast Traveller reports.

The deluge comes in stark contrast to the conditions the country has experienced so far this summer.

The summer monsoon, which is responsible for the vast majority of India's total yearly rainfall, has been missing up until recently and is still predicted to be lackluster overall.

So much so that much of India has been in severe drought, with Chennai, India's sixth largest city, even reaching "day zero," or running out of water in reservoirs.

"That has now changed with monsoonal rains now gripping much of southern, central and northeast India," said Chris Dolce, weather.com senior meteorologist, adding that locally heavy rain and thunderstorms will occur through fall as the country's monsoon kicks into gear.
