Congress leaders in firefighting mode; warn rebels, lash out at rival BJP

Strong action

‘Amit Shah to blame’

BENGALURU: A day after two of its MLAs rattled the party by resigning from the legislative assembly, the Congress slipped into firefighting mode on Tuesday, with top leaders holding talks with potential rebel legislators, even while sending out a stern warning that it will not tolerate what it called “blackmailing and threatening” tactics.The party also warned the opposition BJP that the JD(S)-Congress coalition will not hesitate to counter the saffron party’s Operation Lotus (poaching MLAs) with an operation of its own and was only keeping quiet because of its 70-year-old value system.“Silence is not a weakness,” the Congress’ state unit tweeted on Tuesday.Senior Congress leader and sugar minister RB Thimmapur claimed five BJP legislators are prepared to switch sides and the two ruling parties are very capable of saving the government. However, when asked for names of the potential turncoats, Thimmapur said, “I can’t reveal their names.”Meanwhile, Vijayanagara MLA Anand Singh, who had sparked the current storm by submitting his resignation to speaker KR Ramesh Kumar on Monday, appeared calm after meeting with district Congress leaders from Ballari, at his residence on Tuesday. Singh reiterated that he wasn’t a victim of Operation Lotus.“I am not joining the BJP,” Singh, a three-time MLA, said. “I resigned because the government has ignored my demands to quash the sale of 3,667 acres of land to JSW Steel and to make Vijayanagara a new district. If the government agrees to my demands, I will reconsider my decision to quit.”However, Ramesh Jarkiholi, the other MLA who resigned, hinted that he would meet speaker Ramesh Kumar on Wednesday to submit his resignation papers as per rules. Senior Congress leaders are now trying to contact him in a bid to persuade him to reconsider his decision.Meanwhile, KC Venugopal, AICC general secretary in charge of Karnataka , met senior leader Mallikarjun M Kharge in New Delhi on Tuesday to discuss political developments in the state.Venugopal, who is expected to arrive in Bengaluru on Wednesday, said: “The Congress party is strong enough to deal with people indulging in anti-party activities. If they [rebels] have any issues, they should discuss it at party platforms and not through the media. Blackmail and threats will not be tolerated. Strong action will be initiated against those who indulge in such activities.”Venugopal said he also spoke to chief minister HD Kumaraswamy, who is in the US. “This is an old story that 15, 20 MLAs will resign,” he said. “If one or two guys leave, we will fight it out legally. The BJP wants to torpedo this government. Our party’s focus is on loyalty and discipline.”Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah accused Union home minister and BJP national president Amit Shah of engineering the resignations.“They [BJP] are offering power and money,” Siddaramaiah said. “They will do anything to topple the Congress government, but we will not let it happen. The government is 100% safe.”Siddaramaiah is said to have had a telephonic conversation with Kumaraswamy and reportedly urged him to return to Bengaluru quickly. Water resources minister DK Shivakumar took a very different view, saying there’s no need to pacify rebel MLAs as they will return to the fold. “The MLAs will withdraw their resignations on their own and the government will complete its full term,” he said.
