Samantha's Telugu film 'Oh! Baby' bags 8 am show in Chennai

Samantha's Telugu film 'Oh! Baby' bags 8 am show in Chennai

This is for the first time that a Telugu movie (not bilingual or dubbed) with a woman in the lead is getting a morning show slot outside of the Telugu states.

Flix Tollywood

Samantha Akkineni and Nandini Reddy’s Oh! Baby is all set to hit screens on July 5. The remake of the Korean movie Ms Granny, the movie has veteran actor Lakshmi playing the role of a woman who finds herself in her younger version (played by Samantha) after a photo shoot at a mysterious studio. The movie is Samantha’s next after the success of Majili, where she acted along with Naga Chaitanya.

As Oh! Baby's release is eagerly awaited in both the Telugu states, the film is also getting a significant number of screens in Tamil Nadu. In a first, Oh! Baby, a Telugu movie (not bilingual or dubbed) with a woman playing the lead role, has got the 8 am slot at GK Cinemas in Chennai.

For the first time, a Telugu heroine-centric film gets early morning 8 AM show in Chennai. @Samanthaprabhu2 's #OhBaby to be screened @GKcinemas on July 5, 8 AM. pic.twitter.com/iw6c2ag3e4 — Rajasekar (@sekartweets) July 3, 2019

Confirming to TNM, sources close to the movie unit said that the show at GK Cinemas is a premiere show for fans, and that it’s for the first time that a heroine-centric film has bagged a morning show spot outside of the Telugu states.

Samantha is on a success spree with most of her movies doing well at the box-office. From Rangasthalam and U-Turn in 2018 to Majili and Super Deluxe in 2019, the actor has been delivering one hit after another.

Directed by BV Nandini Reddy, Oh! Baby also stars Rao Ramesh and Naga Shaurya in important roles. The film is produced by Sunita Tati under the banner of People’s Media Factor along with Suresh Productions. Mickey J Meyer has composed the tunes for the film.

From the trailer of the movie, the plot of the Oh! Baby seems to be filled with a number of fun antics as an elderly woman gains her youth back and is set on an adventure.

“Oh! Baby is a movie that has worked well in seven countries already. It has a Disney palette... which means Disney films, if you have noticed, work well in different countries in different languages. Because its spirit is so universal. Human beings, be it from any country, have a set of basic human emotions. Oh! Baby is a story that will cut across all classes,” director Nandini Reddy had said in an interview earlier to TNM.
