Rahul Gandhi resigns as Congress chief, BJP comes out to support decision

Rahul Gandhi formally resigned as the Congress president on Wednesday and posted a 4-page letter on Twitter to announce his decision and asked the party's working committee to choose his successor. The decision has drawn emotional reactions from politicians across party lines while the BJP continued with its attack on Gandhi.

Rahul Gandhi said he has already resigned and the Congress Working Committee (CWC) should make the appointment soon.

BJP MP Rajyavardhan Singh Rathore said, "I respect the decision taken by Rahul Gandhi as party president. But the logic he is giving for his resignation is wrong and factually incorrect. His party lost after people of this country has given massive mandate for Mr. Modi and they were not ready to accept the dynastic and corrupt politics of Congress."

National Conference (NC) chief Farooq Abdullah said, "Mubarak Ho that he stood by his decision. He's young and he can become president again in the future. He had always wanted someone else in that position, I can't say that defeat did this. I think he'll now work towards building the party."

It is an honour for me to serve the Congress Party, whose values and ideals have served as the lifeblood of our beautiful nation.



I owe the country and my organisation a debt of tremendous gratitude and love.



Jai Hind pic.twitter.com/WWGYt5YG4V July 3, 2019

Karnataka Congress leader DK Shivakumar said, "It is a great loss if Rahul Gandhi decides to step down. Without the Gandhi family, Congress will break. I am of the firm opinion that Gandhi family unites Congress. And Congress unites India."

Gorakhpur BJP MP Ravi Kishan voiced support for Rahul Gandhi's decision to step down.

He said, "It is a wise decision and maybe he wants to introspect the reasons behind the defeat of Congress party. It is his own decision and everyone is free to decide what is best suited for him."

BJP leader Nalin Kohli said, "It is up to him whether he continues or resigns. There are two types of parties, one like the BJP which is democratically run and the other is Congress, which is family driven. So it is for them to decide, we have no role."

Rahul Gandhi said in the letter, "I suggest way forward would be to entrust a group of people with task of beginning searching for a new president."

Speaking to reporters, Rahul said, "I am no longer the Congress president. I have already resigned. The CWC should convene a meeting immediately and decide on the new Congress president."

Taking moral responsibility for the party's poor performance in the Lok Sabha elections, Gandhi resigned as Congress president at a CWC meeting on May 25, two days after the results were declared.

Over a month later on Wednesday, Rahul Gandhi formally announced the decision.
