Delhi man kills both wives annoyed of their regular fights, escaped and arrested later

Tired of frequent fights with his two wives, this Delhi man Jamshed Alam, killed both his wives and fled with his 13-year-old son. However, when he returned to Delhi again, he could not escape but got arrested by Delhi police. The run-away murderer was arrested while he was heading to Bara Hindu Rao to take shelter in one of his relative’s house.

The man, arrested by Delhi police, had allegedly murdered his two wives for both his wives used to be engaged in frequent verbal abuses with each other and this had been intolerable for him. Police suspect that Alam murdered his wives at their house in southeast Delhi’s Jaitpur last week.

After committing the crime, Alam fled to his native village in Araria in Bihar accompanied by his son. But had come back to Delhi and this is where he made a mistake.

Before his return to Delhi, police discovered the murder last Thursday as the residents of a building in the same area complained the police of a bad odour emanating from a locked room.

The room was being taken on rent by Jamshed Alam wherein he used to live with his two wives Ismat Parveen (34) and Jabeena (45). Police, on reaching the spot, had to break the door to enter inside the room and discover the heinous crime. As the husband of the women was missing from the scene, the direct suspect for the murders goes on him.

As stated by Deputy Commissioner of police (southeast) Chinmoy Biswal, his teams could find that Alam had fled from the scene taking along his and Jabeena’s 13-year-old son.

Biswal further added, “We checked CCTV footage that showed him leaving. We found he belongs to Araria in Bihar. Our teams were sent to Araria.”

Police, later got this information that Alam has returned to Delhi but is heading to one of his relative’s home on knowing about policed searching for him. It was in an early morning raid at the relative’s place, police could arrest Alam.

Also read: Accused who murdered three of a family in Kokrajhar arrested
