'Seriously Concerned': NCW Takes Note of Attack on Telangana Forest Officer

New Delhi: The National Commission for Women (NCW) has taken note of the Sunday attack in a Telangana village on a woman forest department official by a violent mob led by the brother of a Telangana Rashtra Samithi MLA.

Forest range officer C. Anitha was attacked with sticks at Sarsala village of the Komaram Bheem Asifabad district in the state as she led a plantation drive. Chief among those who rained blows on her vehicle and her were Koneru Krishna, brother of TRS MLA Koneru Kannappa.

Speaking to reporters from the hospital where she had to be admitted after the attack, Anitha alleged that Krishna was the one who first hit her with a bamboo stick, followed by others in the group. Krishna has been arrested and booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code. Anitha was released on July 2.

Videos of the attack and those of Anitha breaking down afterwards were shared many times, over widespread outrage. Anitha can be seen climbing to a tractor to escape her attackers.

NCW has requested to ensure swift and speedy investigation in the matter from @TelanganaDGP

Telangana woman forest officer, on plantation drive at Kaleshwaram project site, thrashed by TRS MLA’s brother https://t.co/SJ5ccJxZSa … via @NewIndianXpress@narendramodi @MinistryWCD pic.twitter.com/kugjVz7hAS — NCW (@NCWIndia) July 1, 2019

The NCW wrote to the Telangana director general of police Mahender Reddy, citing a news report of the attack, coming down heavily on the brutality of the crime and the fact that a woman in particular was targeted.

“I request you to ensure swift and speedy investigation in the matter and send a detailed action taken report to the Commission,” the letter, signed by NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma, added.

Also read: TRS MLA, Whose Brother Led Attack on Forest Officer, Asks Locals to Mislead Media

On Monday, 400 officials carried out the afforestation programme that Anitha and her colleagues had set out to do at Sarsala village, under heavy police protection. Officials planted 22,000 saplings over the 20 hectares in Komaram Bheem Asifabad’s Sirpur Kagaznagar block.

Telangana: Plantation was done by 400 officials from forest dept&police dept in Komaram Bheem’s Sirpur Kagaznagar block in Asifabad y’day. Police&forest guards were attacked allegedly by TRS workers there,on 29 June during plantation. Forest Officer Anitha was injured in attack. pic.twitter.com/Ptnm7gMqQb — ANI (@ANI) July 2, 2019

Telangana has seen a spate of attacks on forest officials in the past week.

News Minute reported that on Monday, two forest officials were attacked after they stopped locals from ploughing forest land, at Gundalapadu village of Bhadradri Kothagudem district. On the same day, Kothagudem TRS MLA Vanama Venkateshwara Rao and his son Raghava, were booked for allegedly abusing forest officials while they were doing their duty at Lothuvagu village in of the same district.
