Woman presents police with a five-month-old foetus after suffering a miscarriage following attack

A pregnant woman presented police with a plastic bag containing a five-month old foetus after she suffered a miscarriage when she was allegedly attacked by a group of nine men at a wedding in Agra, India.

The 26-year-old woman, known only as Tavasum, said the group - all of whom were related to her - attacked her and her family over a dispute related to the music the wedding DJ was playing.

Tavasum arrived at the Etah Nagar Kotwali station late on Tuesday, accompanied by her family members, to lodge a complaint against the culprits.

A pregnant woman presented police with a plastic bag containing a five-month old fetus after she suffered a miscarriage when she was allegedly attacked by a group of nine men at a wedding in Agra, India

The 26-year-old woman, known only as Tavasum, said the group - all of whom were related to her - attacked her and her family over a dispute related to the music the wedding DJ was playing

Her family claim nine men, including six named as Adil Hussain, Sajid Hussain, Abdul Hussain, Farron Hussain, Nassem and Nazir were arrested on charges including riots, rioting with a deadly weapon, causing a miscarriage without a woman's consent.

The group all hail from Badaun and were guests at the wedding of a man known only as Salman, who is the cousin of the attacked woman's husband.

Tavasum's father-in-law Manzur Ali told the Times of India: 'I along with my wife Mehraz, two daughters Sehnaz, Shaheen, son Imran and daughter-in-law Tavasum had went to Kidwai Nagar to attend my nephew Salman's wedding where the six accused who hail from Badaun were also present.

'They assaulted my family members and kicked my pregnant daughter-in-law in the stomach following which she suffered miscarriage'.

In statement, police spokesperson Etah Nagar Kotwali said: 'The accused and the victim are from the same family.

The group of attackers, all hail from Badaun and were guests at the wedding of a man known only as Salman, who is the cousin of the attacked's husband

In statement, police spokesperson Etah Nagar Kotwali said: 'The accused and the victim are from the same family'

'On June 27, Tavasum's husband Imran and other accused Adil and Abdul engaged in fist fight over DJ music during the wedding ceremony.

'The three were brought to police station and were booked under CrPc 151 for breach of peace.

'Later, all were released. Five days later, Tavasum and her relatives came to police station and alleged, that during the scuffle on Thursday night, she was kicked in stomach that caused miscarriage and lodged an FIR [police complaint] against six named men,'

'The victim's family has brought the medical report of the foetus from a private hospital in Agra, where they claimed, that after the attack they admitted Tavasum but lost their unborn child. We will conduct autopsy of the foetus in order ascertain the claims of the victims and then will arrest the accused'.
