Haryana farmer murders wife and daughter-in-law, hangs himself later

Due to repeated blows on their heads, the two women fell unconscious (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Randheer was having an argument with his wife on Tuesday The argument intensifies and he hit he started hitting his wife with a wooden plank When his daughter-in-law tried to pacify him, Randheer started hitting her Randheer went to his farm and hanged himself

Hisar: A farmer from Hisar's Kirori village allegedly killed his wife and daughter-in-law before committing suicide himself. The incident that brought back the memories of the Gurugram Southend Uppal society case is said to have taken place at around 8 pm on Tuesday, July 2. The 52-year-old man was identified as Randheer. The police are suspecting a family dispute to be the reason behind the incident.

Allegedly, Randheer was having an argument with his wife on Tuesday night. When the argument escalated, Randheer allegedly flew into a rage and hit his wife on the head with a wooden plank.

According to Amar Ujala's report, Randheer kept hitting his wife with the wooden plank. When his daughter-in-law intervened, Randheer allegedly thrashed her too. Due to repeated blows on their heads, the two women fell unconscious and succumbed to the injuries. The 52-year-old then went to his farm and hanged himself to death.

Also Read: Family of five found bludgeoned to death in Hamirpur district of Uttar Pradesh, say police

DSP Joginder Singh and Agroha SHO went to the spot when they were informed about the incident. The three bodies have been sent for post-mortem. Further investigation is underway.

Gurugram Uppal Southend Murder case

A similar incident came to light from Gurugram's Southend Uppal society on July 1 where a family of four were found dead at their residence. A probe revealed that a man named Prakash Singh had allegedly murdered his wife and two children before ending his own life. The police also found a suicide note from Prakash's pocket. The police said that anger and frustration might have been the factors that prompted Prakash to commit the crime.

According to the post-mortem report, Prakash stabbed his family members multiple times and hit them with a hammer. Prakash's wife had 19 cuts on her body, his son had 8 injuries and daughter had 12 injuries. In the suicide note, Prakash had allegedly written that he had failed to take care of his family and that he was responsible for the incident.

Forensic Head of Civil Hospital, Deepak Mathur confirmed that Prakash had hanged himself to death. Mathur said that Prakash's family died minutes after they were attacked. The incident came to light on July 2, when the maid went to the house. When no one answered the door, the maid looked inside through a window and saw the bodies.

Prakash's body was found hanging from the ceiling and the wife and children were found dead in another room. Prakash was employed at a chemical factory in Hyderabad while his wife used to run a private school.
