Elephant from Karnataka for Bonalu procession

Rajani, used for procession for the past few years, ruled out due to ill-health

Gajalakshmi would take the place of Rajani on July 28 for the annual Bonalu procession from Akkanna Madanna Mahankali temple at Haribowli to Naya Pul in Hyderabad. Gajalakshmi, the elephant from Veerabhadra Shiva Math of Matamari-Gabbur in Raichur, Karnataka, has been drafted after the Nehru Zoological Park’s Rajani was ruled out due to ill-health. For the past few years, Rajani was requisitioned by the Mahankali temple for the ceremonial procession. The elephant was also used during Muharram by the organisers of Bibi ka Alam procession at Dabeerpura over the years.

“We had to look for an elephant from other States to follow the court orders in March which prohibited the use of Rajani. We reached out to the Math in Karnataka and they agreed to send their elephant,” informed Satish Kumar of Sri Akkanna Madanna Mahankali Mandiram.

According to sources in Matamari, the elephant is used for the annual procession in the village and is also hired out for film shooting on a regular basis, mostly for Telugu films. Taming of wild elephants for commercial purposes has been banned in India since 1982.

The Mahankali Jatara is among the few occasions, besides the Mysuru Dasara procession, where the idol of the Goddess is taken in procession through the streets.

The elephant would be brought by road in two stages as the journey is about 270 kilometres. “We are in touch with the Endowments Department and Forest Department for bringing the elephant for the procession. It will be brought here on July 27 and kept at the zoo and will be brought for the procession at 4 p.m. on July 28,” informed Mr. Satish.

“Bonalu has been declared a State festival. The government is bearing the cost of transportation and care of the elephant this year. But it would be better if the State government ensures that two or three elephants are maintained in reserve at Nehru Zoological Park as the animal is used for both Bonalu and Muharram processions,” said G. Niranjan of Sri Akkanna Madanna Mahankali Mandiram.
