Delhi to get respite from sweltering heat soon as monsoon set to hit national capital in next 48 hours

A boy takes bath on a street-side to get respite from heat on a hot summer day, in New Delhi, on July 2, 2019 | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Monsoon is likely to hit the national capital in the next 48 hours, with further advance of southwest monsoon in the northern parts of the country.

Apart from Delhi, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, some more parts of Rajasthan, Himachal, Jammu and Kashmir, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Haryana and Chandigarh will receive rainfall.

Uttarakhand is likely to experience heavy to very heavy rainfall at isolated places during the next 4-5 days due to the convergence of easterly winds from the Bay of Bengal, the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) said.

"In association with its likely west-northwestward movement, conditions are becoming favourable for further advance of southwest monsoon into remaining parts of North Arabian Sea, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, some more parts of Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, remaining parts of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand and some parts of Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi during the next 48 hours," the IMD said in another tweet.

Meanwhile, heavy to very heavy rainfall has been predicted at isolated places over Madhya Pradesh, east Madhya Pradesh, Konkan, Goa, and coastal Karnataka.

Heavy rains are likely to hit a few parched regions across the states including Uttarakhand, East Rajasthan, Vidarbha, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat region, Kerala, Marathawada, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, and Telangana, the IMD said in its weather bulletin.

Thunderstorm accompanied by lightning is likely to occur at isolated places over Bihar.

Meanwhile, Mumbai received the highest rainfall in a decade on Monday with 550 mm average rainfall throwing the city, its roads, train and air services out of gear.

In its report, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) observed that drains in Mumbai can only handle 25 mm rainfall per hour as there are numerous obstructions in the larger drains due to siphons and other utility services, reported PTI.

The report further stated that out of 45 outfalls in the drains floodgates have been provided in only three of them.

The maximum city witnessed widescale waterlogging due to heavy rains that have been going on since Monday.
