Body of 'kidnapped' boy found in Ludhiana, one person booked for murder

LUDHIANA: Three days after a minor boy went missing from a village in Jagraon area Ludhiana rural police around Wednesday evening found his dead body from a canal in the area. Cops are meanwhile in the process of registering a case against a commerce graduate for his murder as he had allegedly asked for Rs 20 lakhs ransom for freeing him. The accused was identified as twenty 23-year-old Balbir Singh Gavy , a unemployed commerce graduate from the same village.Police officials said that on Sunday evening the deceased 14-year-old Anmol Uppal of Malak village, a seventh standard student, had left home at around 7 pm and was later kidnapped by the accused from near bus stand area. They added that the kidnapper had later sent a encrypted message on the mobile of his friend Harjot wherein he had demanded Rs 20 lakhs as ransom money.Cops said that after the incident, villagers had approached the Ludhiana rural police after which a kidnapping case was registered at Sadar Jagraon police. They added that after that the police had deployed many teams along the Akhara canal as it suspected that the kidnapper had pushed the deceased into the canal.Police officials said that the accused Gavy was always the prime suspect as Anmol was last seen by villagers with him. They added that Gavy was taken into custody by police on the same night and during questioning he divulged that he pushed Anmol into the Akhada Canal in the area as he thought he will not get ransom money.Police said that during searches of the canal, the dead body of the deceased was recovered from near Dhangiyan bridge around Wednesday evening.SSP Ludhiana rural Varinder Singh Brar confirmed that dead body of the deceased has been recovered by police. He added that the accused will be booked for murder of the deceased.Senior police officer said that the accused had pushed the deceased into canal on the same night after the message of ransom went viral in the village as he feared he will be caught. He added that the accused even came to police station with villagers after the incident as he knew the family of the deceased well and was a frequent visitor to their place.Police officials said that the accused knew that the father of the deceased had sold around two kanals land and had got Rs 5 Lakh rupees for that. They added that the father of the deceased had kept the money for sending one of his four daughters for studies abroad so he planned kidnapping as he didn’t have money.In the meanwhile the villagers led by Sarpanch of the village met SSP Ludhiana rural on Wednesday morning and pushed for speedy action into the matter.Police officials said that deceased was lone son of his parents. They added that the accused was friends with the deceased and had taken him on his motorcycle while he had gone to buy vegetables from the market.
