Injured forest department official vows to protect land

Braveheart woman officer Chole Anitha wants State government to take a clear stand on forest clearings

The tears in her eyes have dried up and the trauma of a mob attacking her four days back can be palpably felt to be on the wane. Chole Anitha, Kagaznagar Forest Range Officer, is now waiting for her injury to heal before she reports on duty at Kagaznagar Forest Division in Kumram Bheem Asifabad district.

“I will not stop protecting forest or forest land just because of the June 30 incident,” she says, her eyes betraying a rare resoluteness, in an interview with The Hindu at her home in Kowta (K) village in Sonala mandal of Adilabad district on Wednesday. Ms. Anitha returned home after being discharged from a hospital in Hyderabad on Tuesday evening.

Ms. Anitha had come under attack by villagers of Sarasala in Kagaznagar mandal when she led a contingent of Forest personnel for taking up plantation on a 20 hectare piece of degraded forest as part of compensatory afforestation. The incident of a woman officer being attacked viciously by villagers led by none other than the brother of local MLA has grabbed national attention.

“No. I do not want any police protection. As I belong to the uniformed service, I should be able to take care of myself,” she asserted when questioned about her safety as she wants to join duty at the same place.

It may be mentioned here that the husband of this 2013 batch FRO, Manik Rao Kendre, and the entire Vanjari community in erstwhile united Adilabad district are supportive of her intention to work out of the same place. “If we back out, the assailants will feel victorious,” an elder disclosed of the opinion of the community.

The braveheart woman officer, however, wants the government to take a clear stand with regard to the fate of forest clearings, some of which may be considered as those caused by podu or shifting cultivation but most being encroachments by non-tribals. “The government should take a clear stand so that those who are working sincerely for the cause of environment protection and safeguarding public property can go about their duties with greater clarity,” Ms. Anitha observed.
