How to trade Tesco shares

Understanding Tesco: a brief history

Tesco was setup as a grocery stall in the East End of London in 1919 before opening its first store a decade later. After rapidly expanding inside and around the capital, Tesco went public in 1947, with shares listing for 25p.

There were over 500 Tesco stores by the end of the 1950s as the company bought up several small grocers, and the firm was the first to introduce the ‘superstore’ format to the country when it opened a 40,000 square foot outlet in West Sussex in 1968. It started to bolt petrol stations onto its stores in the early 1970s.

By the 1990s Tesco started to diversify and experiment with new formats. It started to open smaller stores under the Tesco Metro fascia before later adding Tesco Express and Tesco Extra, with the latter offering new homeware and electrical goods as the company moved beyond selling food.

It also expanded beyond the UK in 1995 by entering Hungary and, within a decade, Tesco had pushed further into Central Europe with stores opened in the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Poland, Thailand, Malaysia and India. 1995 was also the year that Tesco first overtook its rival Sainsbury’s in terms of UK market share, partly thanks to the launch of its Tesco Clubcard loyalty programme that attracted 5 million new customers in its first year.

Tesco went digital at the turn of the millennium by launching its online site, which today serves over 20 million customers every month, and a year later it introduced its Florence & Fred (F&F) clothing range. It also expanded its network of convenience stores by buying One Stop.

More recently, Tesco diversified from retail into wholesale by purchasing Booker Group, which supplies food and drink to convenience stores, restaurants and other businesses. It has also responded to the threat of discount chains like Aldi and Lidl by launching a new, no-frills brand named Jack’s, after its founder Jack Cohen.

Tesco: an international business

Tesco in the UK & Ireland

Tesco is the largest supermarket chain in the UK in terms of market share. It has over 3400 stores, including all of its hypermarkets, superstores, supermarkets and convenience outlets.

Tesco Bank

Tesco Bank was launched in 2008 and now has around 7 million customer accounts on its books. This offers financial services to its UK grocery customers, primarily mortgages, credit cards, loans and savings to Clubcard holders.

Booker Group

Booker Group is the UK’s leading food wholesaler that merged with Tesco in March 2018. The company has over 1.2 million customers in the UK and India and significantly diversifies Tesco’s operations and adds vital scale. The Booker Group comprises Booker Wholesale, Makro, Booker Direct, Classic Drinks, Ritter Courivaud, Chef Direct, Premier, Family Shopper, Budgens, Londis and Booker India.

Tesco in Central Europe

Tesco broke into the region by acquiring a string of stores in Hungary in 1995, where it now has over 200 stores and is one of the largest employers in the country. It expanded into the Czech Republic a year later and the country has become a vital component of its European operations, and one of the few where Tesco has launched online grocery services and standalone F&F stores. However, Poland is the company’s biggest market in the region, with over 400 stores serving over 5 million customers each week. It also has over 150 stores in Slovakia, where it also offers financial services, mobile services and F&F clothing.

Tesco in Asia

Tesco has moved into some of the most lucrative Asian markets. Vital global operations, including much of its supply chain, is managed from India, where it also wholesales to local stores. It also had over 50 hypermarkets in Malaysia and over 2000 stores in Thailand, with both countries also offering online services. It has also been present in China since 2014 under a joint venture with China Resources Enterprise. Tesco sources 50% of its clothing and 40% of other non-food items from China to serve across its international operations each year.

Tesco financial performance and future earnings consensus

Tesco has been implementing a turnaround plan for the last four years, which it hopes to complete in the new financial year to 23 February 2020. This has involved making substantial cost-savings, improving the competitiveness of its product ranges and prices, and making profit more sustainable.

Tesco has continued to be the strongest performer among the Big Four supermarkets, even if discounters Aldi and Lidl still pose a threat. It was by far the strongest performer over the crucial Christmas period in 2018, helping to deliver an 11% rise in annual revenue and a 28% jump in pre-tax profit in the recently ended financial year.

Tesco share price soars as turnaround plan pays dividends

Revenue has consistently grown during the turnaround programme and profit has seen a significant step up.

Analysts expect Tesco to continue building on the momentum in the coming years with forecasts that revenue will rise 1.6% in the current financial year with efficiency improvements expected to drive a 12% jump in pre-tax profit. Although that would represent a significant slowdown from what was delivered in the recently ended financial year, investors will welcome any form of growth at a time when the large supermarkets are struggling to stave off competition and battle tighter margins.
