Communal tension in Hauz Qazi: Amit Shah reprimands Delhi Police chief Amulya Patnaik

Union Home Minister Amit Shah summoned Delhi Police Commissioner Amulya Patnaik on Wednesday over the temple vandalisation incident in the national capital. Shah reprimanded the Delhi Police over the delay in action in the case.

After meeting the home minister for 40 long minutes, Delhi Police Commissioner said, "I have briefed him about the situation here." He also said that things are now normal in the Hauz Qazi area and four people have been arrested.

Sources said that Shah was unhappy with the rise in crime incidents in Delhi as well as the way the situation of clashes was dealt with the senior officers. Sources also stated that the Intelligence Bureau has shared an adverse report about the way Delhi Police chief and his men dealt with the entire situation leading to communal flare up.

IB INPUT Intelligence Bureau has shared an adverse report about the way Delhi Police chief and his men dealt with the entire situation.



After meeting with Amit Shah, Delhi Police chief said 4 people have been arrested so far

Shah has directed Patnaik to bring his house in order and to ensure that such situation doesn't arise in future.

Meanwhile, a public interest litigation has been filed in the Delhi High Court seeking court-monitored probe through a special investigation team (SIT) in connection with the communal tension in the national capital. The PIL has been filed by advocate Alakh Alok in the Delhi High Court.

On Sunday, night a PCR call was received around 11.30 pm about two groups fighting, and people from both sides were taken to Hauz Qazi police station.

In the meantime, a rumour spread that a man had been beaten to death. "Around 350 people gathered outside the police station and some went to the temple where the clash took place," said an officer said.

Sources said that Deputy Commissioner of Police Mandeep Singh Randhawa could not assess the situation and when the police station was gheroed, he was no where to be seen. It was only on late Tuesday, the police could assess the situation and started making arrest in connection with the incident.

On Wednesday, the Congress targeted the central government over "no action" in Delhi "temple incident". Congress spokesperson Abhishek Singhvi took to social media and questioned Amit Shah of not taking any action in the temple vandalisation case yet.

Even Congress Abhishek Singhvi said, "Day 2 of the temple incident and no action yet by Home Minister, Delhi Police under the BJP rules Centre. We know the ruling party doesn't care about minorities but does it also not care for the sentiments of majority?"
