She would sweetly bring him for selfies: Ali Abbas Zafar on 'Bharat' actors Salman Khan-Katrina Kaif’s equation

Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif are one of the most loved couple for obvious reasons. Not just professionally, but Salman is smitten by Katrina even in real life, as people would’ve rightly guessed through Bigg Boss 9’s grand finale, where he pulled Katrina for a selfie. Now their Bharat director Ali Abbas Zafar reveals that it is actually Katrina who can get him in a selfie.

While speaking to Filmfare about Salman-Katrina’s bonding, he said, “Sweetly, she’d (Katrina would) get Salman for the selfies,” adding, “Salman is a great person to have around too. It’s always entertaining to be with him.”

The director worked with Katrina Kaif in December 2017 release Tiger Zinda Hai (co-starring Salman Khan), which showed her transformation as an actress. Being impressed with the actress, he even got Katrina as a replacement to Priyanka Chopra, who was the original choice for Bharat.

“Whatever Katrina went through professionally and personally in the past seven years affected Zoya (Katrina’s character in Tiger Zinda Hai) on camera,” he explains. “I was pleasantly surprised with the kind of maturity she brought to her role.”

Smiling when talking about Salman, Ali shared, “The good thing about Salman is that he’s a great listener, he will hear you out because it’s your film. After that he’ll be like, ‘I’m gonna stand by you but as an experienced person this is what I think’. That gives me a different point of view.”

When asked what Ali thinks is unknown about Salman, he adds, “He has the most wicked sense of humour. People feel intimidated by him but he’s extremely funny. He can mimic other actors perfectly. But his finest quality is that he’s an honest person. If he doesn’t like something, he’s not gonna disguise it. Also, I guess, he troubles the people he loves. If he doesn’t like you, he’ll never trouble you.”

It isn’t hidden that Salman believes in the vision of Bharat more than anyone else, and even more so after his brother-in-law Atul Agnihotri came on board for the same, but not many know that Ali got on board after Salman insisted on the film. He revealed, “Though I loved the script, I told him, ‘Bhai, I’m not good at adaptations because till the time I don’t write my own stuff, I don’t know whether I’ll be able to direct it well.” Salman asked Ali about Bharat once again while they were shooting for Tiger Zinda Hai, which is also when Katrina heard the script and wanted to be a part of the project ever since.

“I shared what I had in mind and why I wanted Bharat as the title. He said it worked for him. That’s how Bharat happened. It’s a different film for both of us. Something Salman’s gonna push himself hard to get right. That’s exciting because the film is unexplored territory,” explained Ali.
