Centre Responds To Pakistan's Crackdown On JeM Chief Hafiz Saeed, Says 'seen It Before, Need Irreversible And Verifiable Action': Sources

The Centre has responded to Pakistan's çrackdown on Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Hafiz Saeed. Pakistan had booked the 26/11 Mumbai attacks mastermind and his 12 accomplices for "terrorism financing" in 23 cases, amidst growing international pressure on Islamabad to act against militant groups.

Calling out the country's sham, the Centre said that it has seen such moves from the neighbouring country before, say sources. The sources added that the Centre has said that Pakistan's action against terror must be irreversible and verifiable.

The Counter-Terrorism Department (CTD) of Punjab province which booked Saeed and his JeM accomplices, accused them of 'promoting terrorism and raising funds to facilitate terror activities.'

The action came ahead of the crucial financial bailout meeting between Pakistan and the International Monetary Fund in Washington on Wednesday. The executive board of IMF is expected to decide the fate of the proposed USD six billion bailout package to Pakistan on Wednesday.

Earlier in February, Pakistan had re-instated a ban on two charities linked to Saeed, namely Jamat-ud-Dawa and its charity wing Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation, amid global pressure to clamp down on the terror groups following the Pulwama terror attack that killed 40 CRPF personnel.

Saeed has been a mastermind behind numerous terror attacks, including 26/11 attacks on Mumbai in 2008 that killed scores of people.Washington also announced a USD10 million bounty on his head.

READ | US, UK, France Voice Concern At FATF Meet Over Pakistan Inaction Against Hafiz Saeed, Masood Azhar: Sources

In June, the US, the UK and France voiced concern over Pakistan's failure to do enough to contain terror funding in its soil and not registering cases against terror masterminds Hafiz Saeed and Masood Azhar under anti-terror laws, news agency PTI reported. Several countries expressed this view at a meeting of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF).

While Pakistan claimed that it has done enough by seizing more than 700 properties of Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), JeM, Jamat-ud-Dawah (JuD) and FIF, similar to what it did as a result of its previous gray listing in 2012, FATF members expressed concerns that there no cases were registered against the terror leadership, namely Hafiz Saeed and Masood Azhar and other UN-designated terrorists.

Another serious anomaly is that Pakistan's anti-terror law still remains out of sync with FATF standards and also the latest UN resolution 2462, which calls for criminalising terrorist financing.

READ | Desperate And Debt-ridden, Pakistan Peddles 'crackdown' On 26/11 Mastermind And Global Terrorist Hafiz Saeed By Charging Him With Terror Financing

(With agency inputs)
