Tiff over wrong parking leads to shootout in Kipps Market

Ludhiana: Division 5 police have booked a person in a BMW car, after he allegedly tried to shoot a person during a tiff over wrong parking at the posh Kipps Market on Tuesday evening. Police have booked the unidentified man for endangering the lives of others present at the spot.

Complainant Raj Karan Singh Grewal of Guru Dev Nagar, who is into the transport business, told cops that he and his friend Davinder Mangat had gone to the Kipps Market, and were planning to have tea there. He added that they were sitting in his friend’s Jaguar car, when suddenly a BMW car stopped behind their car, making it difficult for them to come out of the spot. At this, the accused sitting in the car allegedly started using bad words, and pointed a pistol at his friend. He added that the accused pulled the trigger, but fortunately, the pistol did not fire. As the accused tried to run away from the spot, his weapon fell down. Grewal added that the accused seemed to be under the influence of drugs. He added that neither he nor his friend had met him before this incident, and were unable to identify him.

Police officials said after the accused fled from the spot, Grewal informed the police. Cops from Division 5 police station reached the spot and started a probe. They later booked the accused under sections 336 (act endangering the life or personal safety of others), and 511 (punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment for life or other imprisonment) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and sections 25, 27, 54, and 59 of the Arms Act.

Investigating officer of the case, ASI Malkeet Ram, said the accused was yet to be identified, but the police had the registration number of the BMW car (PB23Q-5656). He added that on Thursday, he would also get the address of the car owner, after which further action will be taken under the law. The IO said as per the complainant, the weapon had misfired, and they had recovered the .32 bore countrymade pistol of the accused, He added that they would check whether the weapon was licensed or not.

SIMILAR PAST INCIDENTS

April 6, 2019: Saleem Tabri police booked two persons after they allegedly fired in the air during a function in the area.

November 22, 2018: Panic gripped Romy village of Jagraon after a person allegedly fired in the air following a tiff with another villager who had deposed against him in court in an assault case. The accused was identified as Jagdeep Singh alias Deepa (35), a farmer in Romy village.

November 25, 2017: Police booked a miscreant and his five unknown accomplices for allegedly firing multiple shots in the air with his illegal weapon over a small tiff with his friend’s uncle in Basti Jodhewal.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
