Friend kidnaps, kills Jagraon minor

Ludhiana: Three days after a minor boy went missing from a village in Jagraon, Ludhiana rural police found his body from a canal in the area on Wednesday evening. Police have registered a murder case against a commerce graduate, who had allegedly asked for Rs 20-lakh ransom for 14-year-old Anmol Uppal of Malak village.

The accused, Gurbir Singh Gaiby, 23, is from the same village and unemployed. He was friends with Anmol. Police said on Sunday, Anmol, a Class VII student, had left home around 7pm and joined Gaiby near bus stand. The kidnapper sent an encrypted message on the cellphone of Anmol’s friend, Harjot, demanding Rs 20 lakh.

Cops said villagers approached the Ludhiana rural police and a kidnapping case was registered at Sadar Jagraon police station. The police deployed many teams along the Akhara canal after leads led them to the kidnapper, who, during interrogation, revealed that he had pushed Anmol into the canal as he thought he would not get the ransom. Police officials said Gaiby was always the prime suspect as Anmol was last seen with him. “Gaiby was taken into custody on Sunday night itself and was questioned,” said a cop.

“During searches of the canal, the body was recovered from near Dhangiyan bridge on Wednesday evening. The accused will now be booked for murder,” said Ludhiana rural SSP Varinder Singh Brar.

A senior police officer said the accused had pushed Anmol into the canal on the same night the ransom message went viral in the village. He feared getting caught and had even come to the police station with villagers after the incident as he knew the family of Anmol — whose mother is a panch— well. He was a frequent visitor to their place, too, and thought no one would suspect him. Police said Gaiby knew that Anmol’s father had sold around two-kanal land and got Rs 5 lakh for it. Anmol’s father had kept the money for sending one of his three daughters to Canada for studies. After learning about it, the accused planned kidnapping as he, too, wanted to go abroad, but didn’t have money for it, he added.

Balvir Singh, the village sarpanch, said, “The accused is unemployed. He is the village leader of a political party’s youth wing.”

Abduction diary

Police officials said Gaiby picked up Anmol on his motorcycle from near village bus stand and offered him spiked cold drink. He then pushed him inside a car.

Gaiby downloaded a software to generate a number and registered it on WhatsApp. He then sent a message for ransom to Anmol’s father, but the latter didn’t get it as he was not online. He then sent the same message to Harjot, a friend of Anmol, who showed it to villagers.

Villagers informed the police and when the ransom message became viral, Gaiby pushed Anmol into the canal.

As Anmol was last seen with Gaiby, he was detained and grilled.

Police said they found that the ransom message was sent from a number registered in the US and had a display picture (DP) too. Gaiby had deleted the software after sending the message. After impounding his cellphone, the police got the data restored at a Phillaur laboratory and found that he had deleted the app and uninstalled his WhatsApp too. Police reinstalled the WhatsApp, and found it had the same DP.

A police officer said when the accused was shown the evidence, he spilled his guts.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
