Chhattisgarh: Five-year-old goes to pluck mangoes, murdered by friends with screwdriver

At around 4 pm on June 30, the minor had left his house to go to Amraiya for plucking mangoes (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The minor had gone to pluck mangoes with his friends at 4 pm on June 30 He was allegedly attacked by a screwdriver The minor's body was found next to a pond

Raipur: A five-year-old boy was allegedly murdered by his minor friends on Tuesday in Chhattisgarh when they had gone to pluck mangoes. The minors allegedly stabbed the five-year-old with a screwdriver and threw his body in a pond after an argument.

At around 4 pm on June 30, the minor had left his house to go to Amraiya area for plucking mangoes. When he did not return till late, the minor's parents started searching for him.

At around 7 pm, the minor's grandfather found the five-year-old's body near a pond. He then informed the minor's father and other family members. The minor had severe injury marks on his eyes.

Also Read: Gujarat: Teenage girl killed by minor for rejecting his 'proposal'

According to Amar Ujala's report, the police reached the spot after they were informed about the incident and sent the body for post-mortem. Further investigation is underway.

Dalit man murdered for plucking mangoes from orchard of 'upper caste' in Andhra Pradesh

A Dalit man named Bikki Srinivas was allegedly murdered in East Godavari, Andhra Pradesh for plucking mangoes from the orchard of an 'upper caste' man. After the owner of the orchard saw the man, he allegedly thrashed Srinivas with sticks.

After attacking him, the accused allegedly took Srinivas to the local panchayat and hanged him. The accused tried to present the murder as a suicide. The 'upper caste' man said that the Dalit man committed suicide because he felt humiliated as he was caught stealing the fruit.

When the deceased's family received information about the incident, they went to the panchayat office. The family claimed that Srinivas had been murdered and that he had injury marks on his body. After the incident took place, 1,000 villages took out a protest march and demanded stringent action against the accused. The protesters asked the police to book the accused under sections of the SC, ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.

Patna minor shot dead for plucking mangoes

A 10-year-old boy was allegedly shot dead in Patna by a watchman for plucking mangoes in June, last year. The minor was shot dead in Bihar's Pathraha village allegedly for plucking mangoes. The incident took place under the limits of Gogri police station.

Station House Officer (SHO) Gogri police station, Deepak Kumar Yadav said that the other children who were playing at a park nearby fled when they heard a gunshot. The children informed the villagers about the incident.

Though the minor's father alleged that his son had been shot dead by the watchman, the police did not recover an empty cartridge or firearm from the area of the incident.
