Krishnanand Rai murder case: Delhi court acquits MLA Mukhtar Ansari, six others after witnesses turn hostile

Mukhtar Ansari | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: MLA Mukhtar Ansari and six others were acquitted by a Delhi court in the 2005 murder case of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Krishnanand Rai after all the eyewitnesses turned hostile and for lack of evidence. While announcing the verdict, the court lamented the witnesses turning hostile and stressed on the importance of witness protection scheme during the trial. The people acquitted in the case are Mukhtar Ansari, his brother Afzal Ansari, Azaz-Ul-Haq, Sanjeev Maheshwari, Rakesh Pandey, Ramu Mallah and Mansoor Ansari.

While exonerating all the accused, the CBI court's Special Judge Arun Bhardwaj said, "This is a gruesome case involving the murder of seven persons. The investigation of the case was transferred from UP Police to CBI. The trial of the case was also transferred from UP to Delhi. Unfortunately, the case of the prosecution has suffered as all the eyewitnesses and other material witnesses turned hostile."

"The case in hand is another example of the prosecution failing due to hostile witnesses. If the witnesses, in this case, had the benefit of the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 during the trial, the result may have been different," he added. The court further pointed out that the investigators failed to provide enough evidence against the accused to prove murder charges against them.

On November 29, 2005, Krishnanand Rai, along with six others, was brutally murdered in Ghazipur while he was on his way back home after attending a family wedding in his native village. Mukhtar Ansari was accused of the murders and was put behind bars in Agra Jail.

Rai served as an MLA from 2002 to 2005 representing Mohammadabad Assembly located at Ghazipur district in Uttar Pradesh. While gangster-turned-politician Ansari has been elected MLA from the Mau constituency a record five times, he has more than 40 criminal cases against him including those of murders and attempts to murder.
