J&K: On India's 70th Republic Day, celebrations in New Delhi, 'Black Day' in Srinagar

Security forces gunned down two JeM terrorists on January 26 on the outskirts of Srinagar I Photo credit: BCCL | Photo Credit: BCCL

Srinagar: On a day when New Delhi’s skies roared with Indian Air Force’s fighter jets which put a spectacular view for the audience gathered to watch the R-day parade, people in troubled Northern state of Kashmir’s Srinagar woke to thunder of gunshots and grenades. Two terrorists were neutralised by the security forces after an encounter broke out in early hours of January 26.

Meanwhile, grenades were lobbed by terrorists in Srinagar and parts of North and South Kashmir ahead of Republic Day celebrations although no one was killed in the attacks, as per an AIR report.

The mainland’s Republic Day was marked a ‘black day’ in Kashmir by separatists groups who asked the people to stay away from any celebrations. Offices, schools, shops, petrol pumps were closed and public transport remained shut throwing life out of gear in Kashmir. The situation was accentuated by the heavy presence of security forces to maintain law and order in the backdrop of Republic Day.

"For past 71 years, people of J&K are demanding the right to self-determination that Indian leadership promised to them not only in the United Nations or the Indian Parliament but reiterated at Lal Chowk in Srinagar by none other than Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.

"However, till this day not only has that commitment not been fulfilled but those that remind them of it are rewarded with bullets and pellets are incarcerated and gagged," joint resistance leadership, an amalgam of separatist groups, said in a statement issued earlier this week, as per the news agency PTI.

Meanwhile, internet services were suspended across Kashmir as a precautionary measure on R-Day, mobile services remained intact however.

In the encounter near Srinagar two Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorists were killed by the security forces. The two were planning to carry out an attack during Republic Day celebrations in Jammu and Kashmir. Three soldiers were injured in the Khonmoh operation jointly carried out by 50 Rashtriya Rifles, Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) and the Srinagar police.
