Woman brings miscarried foetus to police after 'stomach kicked by 6 men'

The woman presented police with her five-month-old foetus in a bag.

A woman showed police officers her miscarried foetus after she was allegedly kicked in the stomach by six men at a wedding.

The 26-year-old woman was reportedly five months pregnant when she was allegedly attacked during a dispute over the music being played by a DJ at the wedding.

Known only as Tavasum, the woman claims all of those accused were related to her.

Tavasum arrived at the police station in Etah, in India's Uttar Pradesh state, on Tuesday, accompanied by her family members, to lodge a complaint against the culprits.

She reportedly also delivered the miscarried foetus to the police station as part of her complaint.

Tavasum's father-in-law Manzur Ali told the Times of India : "I along with my wife Mehraz, two daughters Sehnaz, Shaheen, son Imran and daughter-in-law Tavasum had went to Kidwai Nagar to attend my nephew Salman's wedding where the six accused who hail from Badaun were also present.

"They assaulted my family members and kicked my pregnant daughter-in-law in the stomach following which she suffered miscarriage."

According to the police, Tavasum’s husband Imran and other accused, named as Adil and Abdul, engaged in fist fight over DJ music during the wedding ceremony.

The three were brought to police station and were booked for breach of peace.

Five days later, Tavasum and her relatives came to police station and alleged she had been brutally attacked during the scuffle.

She said she was repeatedly kicked in the stomach.

In statement, a police spokesperson said: "The accused and the victim are from the same family.

"On June 27, Tavasum's husband Imran and other accused Adil and Abdul engaged in fist fight over DJ music during the wedding ceremony.

"The three were brought to police station and were booked under CrPc 151 for breach of peace.

"Later, all were released. Five days later, Tavasum and her relatives came to police station and alleged, that during the scuffle on Thursday night, she was kicked in stomach that caused miscarriage and lodged an FIR (police complaint) against six named men.

"The victim's family has brought the medical report of the foetus from a private hospital in Agra, where they claimed, that after the attack they admitted Tavasum but lost their unborn child.

"We will conduct an autopsy of the foetus in order ascertain the claims of the victims and then will arrest the accused."
