Delhi rains at last, monsoon relief for parched capital

On Wednesday, Delhi experienced temperatures up to 38 degree Celsius with a humidity of around 65 per cent. (Photo:Getty Images)

The prolonged wait finally ended after parts of Delhi and its nearby areas received rain on Thursday.

The much-awaited rains brought down temperatures in Delhi bringing respite from the scorching heat.

In its city forecast, IMD said Delhi will be generally cloudy with light rain till July 8. The weather department has forecast heavy rainfall from July 9.

The Met department said the south west monsoon has further advanced into the whole of Delhi and parts of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, Punjab, and Rajasthan.

Heaving a sigh of relief, people took to social media to express their happiness over the showers.

And finally, finally, the rain gods decide to bless Delhi Kartikeya Ramanathan (@krtky) July 4, 2019

On Wednesday, the Indian Metrological Department had said the monsoon rains will reach Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi in the next 48 hours.

The conditions are becoming favourable for further advance of Southwest Monsoon into remaining parts of North Arabian Sea, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, some more parts of Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, remaining parts of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand and some parts of Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi during next 48 hours, the IMD release said on Wednesday evening.

Southwest monsoon has further advanced into some more parts of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh and is currently passing through Dwarka, Deesa, Udaipur, Kota, Gwalior, Shahjahanpur, Najibabad and Mandi, IMD release added.

Delhi and surrounding areas have been reeling under hot and humid weather conditions, as monsoon arrived late by almost a week.

The annual date of arrival of monsoon is around the end of June, however, the rain gods remained elusive to the national capital region, Haryana as well as Punjab.

READ | How Delhi lost its own lakes

READ | Parched India looks up to delayed monsoon for relief

WATCH | Mumbaikars enjoy monsoon
