Kareena Kapoor Khan is back to giving us pout lessons in a latest selfie from London with her team; See Pic

If there is one actor in Bollywood who has made a place in the hearts of the audience with her stellar performances, it is Kareena Kapoor Khan. The Veere De Wedding actor has never failed to impress everyone with her acting as well as her style. Every time Bebo steps out of the house, she nails her look like a bonafide diva. Be it nailing a couture gown or just a regular gym look, Kareena can rock anything like a pro and her style ends up becoming a trend.

Even Kareena’s trademark pout is extremely popular and people love her photos when she is nailing it. Speaking of this, Kareena’s latest selfie presents her back in her pouty avatar. In the photo, we can see Bebo posing with her team in a van. Kareena is currently in London to shoot for Angrezi Medium with Irrfan and hence, is loving every bit of her time there. Even her sister, Karisma and friend, Karan Johar had joined her for a short vacay in London.

(Also Read: Kareena Kapoor Khan and Karisma Kapoor look beautiful as ever in a throwback pic from Lolo's mehendi ceremony)

In her latest selfie, Kareena can be seen sitting in a van with her team as she clicks the photo. Bebo is seen sporting a beige tank top with black sunglasses. The diva surely knows how to ace the pout.

Check it out:

Meanwhile, on the work front, Kareena has signed on quite a lot of projects of different genres. From playing a cop for the first time on screen in Angrezi Medium to portraying a historical role in Karan Johar’s Takht, Kareena has quite a lot to offer in the near future. Aside to this, Kareena also has taken up Aamir Khan’s upcoming film, Laal Singh Chaddha. This year, Bebo also made her debut on Dance India Dance 7 as a celebrity judge and has been nailing that as well. Towards the end of the year, Kareena’s film Good News starring Akshay Kumar, Diljit Dosanjh and Kiara Advani will be releasing. It will hit the screens on December 27, 2019.
