Gurugram: Man shoots teenager after they fall for same class 9 girl in Wazirpur

A black cap was also found at the crime spot, the officer added. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police are waiting for the autopsy report to ascertain exact cause of death While the deceased's family claimed he was shot dead, the girl said he was bludgeoned to death

Gurugram: A 22-year-old man shot dead a teenager at point-blank range in Wazirpur village of Gurugram on Wednesday. Reportedly, both of them had fallen for a certain girl who was studying in class 9 at school. While the family of the teenager alleged he was shot dead, the girl claimed that he was bludgeoned to death with an iron rod.

The accused used the girl to lure the victim and called him near the government school, where he allegedly murdered him following a heated exchange. The victim was identified as 19-year-old Ajay Kumar who had been living with his maternal uncle since his childhood in Wazirpur. Ajay is reportedly a school dropout and was allegedly in love with the Class 9 girl who studies in Wazipur government school.

According to a report in The Times of India (TOI), at around 2:30 pm on Wednesday, Archit allegedly asked the girl to call up Ajay in a bid to bring him to the rear side of the school. Meanwhile, in a few minutes, the victim reached the spot on a grey 'scooty' while Archit and the girl were waiting for him near the school.

A senior police officer told TOI that soon after a heated altercation between the two over the girl, Archit shot him in his forehead and fled from the spot. Meanwhile, the girl also fled from the school and went home. After which a passerby found the victim lying in the pool of blood and he immediately informed the local police room. A black cap was also found at the crime spot, the officer added.

Also Read: Hyderabad: Man shoots himself dead inside his car; probe underway

However, a team led by the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Shakuntala Yadav and Inspector Sanjay Yadav of Sector 10 police station reached the spot. During the preliminary investigation, the police suspected a love triangle plot and the girl was taken into custody for questioning.

However, an FIR was registered against Archit and the girl under the section 302 of murder and Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code and Section 25,54 and 59 of the Arms Act and Section 3 of the SC/ST Act. Sanjay Yadav further told TOI that they took the girl into custody to know if she was part of the plot or was just used as bait on the crime.

However, the autopsy will be carried out on Thursday.
