Karthick Naren’s next with Arun Vijay titled 'Mafia', first look unveiled

Karthick Naren’s next with Arun Vijay titled 'Mafia', first look unveiled

Tipped to be a gangster drama, 'Mafia' features Prasanna in the role of antagonist while Priya Bhavani Shankar has been roped in to play the leading lady.

Flix Kollywood

Karthick Naren made an impressive debut with his critically-acclaimed and highly successful crime-thriller Dhuruvangal 16 aka D 16. Despite making a very noteworthy debut, his second film, Naragasooran, a suspense drama featuring an ensemble cast of Arvind Swami, Indrajith, Shriya Saran, Sundeep Kishan and Aathmika, is yet to find a theatrical release.

Meanwhile, he has teamed up with Arun Vijay for his third project which has been titled Mafia. On Tuesday, Lyca Productions unveiled the film’s title and first look poster which features Arun Vijay in three different looks.

Tipped to be a gangster drama, Mafia features Prasanna in the role of antagonist while Priya Bhavani Shankar has been roped in to play the leading lady. Mafia will go on the floors from July 6.

Talking about the project, Karthick told Cinema Express: “As the gangster drama is set in Chennai, the entire project will be shot in the city. We're planning to wrap up the shoot in a single schedule of 35 days. The first look is more on a sneak peek to what can be expected from the characters. We have incorporated subtle hints about the lead's characterisation in it. All three principal actors will be doing roles that they have not done before."

It is believed that Arun shed a lot of weight for Mafia as the film will see him in different looks. Last seen in Magizh Thirumeni’s crime thriller Thadam, Arun Vijay has two more projects. He has just wrapped up the shooting of Agni Siragugal, which also stars Vijay Antony.

He also has a film called Boxer which will see him in an action-packed role. Arun Vijay will undergo special training in Mixed Martial Arts at the Lienphong Martial Center in Vietnam for this film, we hear.

(Content provided by Digital Native)
