Ludhiana: For ransom call, youth fell back on app of gangsters

LUDHIANA: The 23-year-old accused in the kidnapping and murder of a 15-year-old boy in Malak village near Jagraon used an Android-based smartphone app, which is used by gangsters to hide their actual phone numbers, to make the ransom call to the victim’s father, said police on Thursday.A day after his arrest, Gurvir Singh Gavy was produced before a court on Thursday and remanded in four-day police custody. He is accused of kidnapping and murdering Anmolpreet Singh on June 30. Both hail from the same village.Ludhiana rural SSP Varinder Brar said they had gotten reports of gangsters and drug peddlers in the state using such apps to evade arrest. He said the process was confusing, but they had the expertise to track down accused in such instances. A cyber expert with Ludhiana rural police, who did not wish to be named, said there were two apps, Second Line and TextNow, which were used by criminal to generate fake numbers for registering on WhatsApp , sending messages and making calls.He said a fake number with the ISD code any country could be generated with such softwares and used to register on WhatsApp to make calls and send messages. “However, we send the fake number to the developer and they provide us the IP address and network on which the sender’s number is registered. We use these details to track down the user,” said the expert.He added that the accused in the Malak kidnapping and muder used Second Line to generate a fake US number, used it to register his phone on WhatsApp and then sent the ransom message to the father of deceased.The cyber expert said gangsters and drug peddlers also used proxy servers of virtual private networks (VPNs) to conceal their IP address. In the Malak case, the accused did not use VPN. He said there were a lots of apps available for generating proxy VPN servers. “The VPN trick is solid and the user is difficult to track. This is challenging, but it is just a matter of time for us, and gangsters and peddlers using such systems are also trackable,” said the expert.The SSP added YouTube tutorials for using softwares had added to their work. “These tutorials are making it easy for criminals to learn technology and use it for crimes,” he said.
