India says Pak taking `cosmetic steps' to control terrorists

New Delhi, Jul 4 (UNI) India on Thursday said Pakistan is ``not doing enough to control terrorists operating from its soil' and described whatever action Islamabad has claimed to have taken as ``cosmetic steps' .

The spokesperson's response came when his attention was drawn to a statement by Pakistan police saying that Lashkar-e-Toiba chief Hafiz Saeed, 2008 mastermind behind Mumbai terror attack, would be arrested very soon.

Such assurances, the spokesperson said, is a ``cosmetic step' and Pakistan is not doing enough to control terrorists operating from that country. He said that India had already provided evidence to Pakistan regarding involvement of Hafiz Saeed in terror activities. ``Let's not get fooled by such cosmetic steps,' he said.

"Pakistan's sincerity to take action against terror groups will be on the basis of demonstrating verifiable action, not on the basis of half-hearted steps to hoodwink international community," MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said while answering questions at regular media briefing.

He said Pakistan claims to have taken action. "But when it comes to people against whom we have given evidence and sought action, you (Pakistan) go in denial mode. You try to project to international community. This is a case of double standard," he added.

``Pakistan stands completely exposed as far as their claims of taking action against terror groups on their soil is concerned,' the spokesperson said.

He said that India wanted ``verifiable, credible and irreversible action against terror groups operating from their (Pakistani) soil and not on the basis of half-hearted measures which they undertake sometimes to hoodwink the international community. We want a normal relationship in an environment free from terror.'

Asked about Dawood Ibrahim, the spokesperson said that Dawood's location is not a secret. ``Time and again we have been presenting to Pakistan a list of people who are in their country. We've asked repeatedly that he should be handed over. His imprint on Mumbai serial blasts is very clear.'

On Kartarpur dialogue, he said that India had proposed a set of dates and ``Pakistan agreed they will come for dialogue on July 14. There are certain differences, we will discuss those issues. It's important to emphasize it's a matter of sentiment, it's a matter of fulfilling wishes of Sikh community.'

UNI VT 1819
