Yogi govt to appeal against acquittal of Mukhtar Ansari, others in Krishnanand Rai murder case

The Uttar Pradesh government will file an appeal against the CBI court order acquitting BSP MLA Mukhtar Ansari, his brother and MP Afzal Ansari along with five others in the 2005 murder case of BJP leader Krishnanand Rai, according to a senior state official.

"Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has taken cognisance of the judgement in the Krishnanand Rai case. The government shall examine the judgement and file appeal in the high court," Principal Secretary (Information) Awanish Awasthi said Thursday.

Krishnanand Rai, the then MLA from Mohammadabad Assembly constituency of Ghazipur district, was murdered along with six others in Ghazipur in November 2005. He was allegedly attacked by a group of shooters who ambushed his SUV and fired indiscriminately with AK-47 rifles.

The CBI later charged gangster-turned-politician Mukhtar Ansari, Munna Bajrangi among others. Ansari was already in jail at the time and it was alleged that he planned the murder from inside the jail.

While Mukhtar Ansari, a rival of Rai was accused of ordering the assassination, Munnai Bajrangi allegedly carried out the murder with the help of his associates.

The court in Delhi acquitted Ansaris and others on Wednesday as all the eyewitnesses and material witnesses turned hostile.

It said had the prosecution witnesses not turned hostile, the outcome of the trial would have been different and highlighted the absence of a witness protection scheme.

The CBI court held that the investigators failed to prove the charges by not bringing enough evidence against the persons who were accused of carrying out the gruesome killing of seven persons, including Rai.

The trial was transferred from Ghazipur in Uttar Pradesh to Delhi by the Supreme Court in 2013 on a plea filed by Alka Rai, the wife of Krishnanand Rai who was an MLA from Mohammadabad Assembly seat when he was killed on November 29, 2005, along with six others.

Mukhtar Ansari, who is MLA from Mau in Uttar Pradesh, has several criminal cases against him, including that of murder and abduction.

His brother Afzal Ansari was elected from Ghazipur constituency in the recent Lok Sabha election.

Earlier, the Allahabad High Court had directed a CBI inquiry into Rai's killing.

Ansari, the MLA from Mau in Uttar Pradesh, has several criminal cases against him, including that of murder and abduction.

Ansari has been elected as MLA five times from the Mau Assembly constituency, with his first victory coming in 1996. He has also contested as an independent and under the banner of his own party Quami Ekta Dal. He merged his party with the BSP in 2017 and contested on its ticket.

Munna Bajrangi, one of the most high-profile gangsters of Eastern UP famous for using AK-47s, was arrested in 2009 in Mumbai after evading the law enforcement agencies for over 20 years. After his arrest, he reportedly confessed to killing over 50 people in the 20 years.

CBI had declared a reward of Rs 5 lakh for his arrest in the Krishnanad Rai murder case. While the Uttar Pradesh had also put Rs 2 lakh for his involvement in cases related to murder, extortion, robbery, abduction and arms act.

(With PTI inputs)
