How Amitabh Bachchan ended up shooting for Kaun Banega Crorepati promo on the sets of Gulabo Sitabo

Amitabh Bachchan shoots for Kaun Banega Crorepati's promo | Photo Credit: Instagram

Now this is something you don’t get to hear on a daily basis. Amitabh Bachchan has been busy shooting for Shoojit Sircar’s Gulabo Sitabo in Lucknow and couldn’t find dates in his calendar to shoot for the promo of the upcoming season of Kaun Banega Crorepati. Since Big B couldn’t come to Mumbai to shoot, KBC’s crew flew to Lucknow to shoot the promo. The registrations for KBC began in May and the Pink actor will reportedly begin shooting for it August onward. The promo was shot on Monday and is a light-hearted one.

“The initial plan was to shoot the promo at Film City. But when the channel and the producers realised that Big B could not take time off from the Lucknow leg, they decided to take the first available flight to the city. The promo was shot on Monday. It is a light-hearted concept that sees Bachchan share the frame with a Lucknow-based contestant and several locals," a source told MidDay.



Big B reportedly handled shooting for the promo and the film like a total pro and with ease. He first shot for the film in the morning and then for the promo.



ALSO READ: First look out! Amitabh Bachchan turns into a grumpy yet adorable old man in Gulabo Sitabo - see photo

It has been 18 years since KBC was introduced to the audience and is one of the most loved shows on television. In fact, the previous season ranked quite high on ratings. Big B’s emotional speeches, poetries and the gravitas in his voice are what make KBC special for fans. As per report, Bachchan will stick to striped and checkered suits in the new seaon of KBC and might just experiment with his ties.

The first look of Big B’s Gulaabo Sitaabo was out a couple of weeks back and it was definitely a pleasant surprise for fans. Big B looks unrecognisable and flaunts a very different look in it, one we haven’t seen him play yet.

Though this won’t be the first time that Big B chose to experiment with his look in a film, this one sparks more interest since it will be directed by Shoojit Sircar. Stay tuned with us for more updates.
