1984 anti-Sikh riots: 50 accused move SC against Delhi HC conviction order

On Friday, after the Supreme Court acquitted 20 individuals citing lack of evidence in the 1984 Trilokpuri case, 50 other individuals moved SC against the Delhi High Court order of conviction.

The SC has issued a notice to the Delhi Police and will hear pleas by the riot-accused on 23 July.

The Delhi High court had upheld the conviction of 88 people by a trial court in connection with 1984 anti-Sikh riots in East Delhi's Trilokpuri area.'

Those convicted were charged with rioting and violation of curfew, among other charges for the pogrom in Trilokpuri area of east Delhi in November 1984, following the assassination of then prime minister Indira Gandhi by her Sikh bodyguard.

The court dismissed the petitions of the 88 convicts and directed them to surrender within four weeks. All the accused have been out on bail.

"That the criminal justice administration may falter or crumble, or lose its potency, is no longer a distant doomsday scenario," the court observed sharply. "It appears to have arrived and stared at us in the face. The question as to whether the guilt of the appellants for complicity in rioting and mischief by fire was correctly concluded or not has come up for determination 34 years after the crimes were committed, and 22 years after the trial court had rendered its decision."

The FIR registered in this case noted that 95 people were killed and around 100 houses were set on fire in Trilokpuri over a few days. Over 100 people were later arrested for rioting, arson and violation of curfew. Of these, a Delhi trial court convicted 88 in 1996. While many of the convicts are no longer alive, those who are, had appealed against the convictions in the Delhi High Court.

On November 20, a Delhi trial court awarded the first death penalty in the anti-Sikh riots: Yashpal Singh was found guilty of killing two men in the pogrom. The other convict, Naresh Sehrawat, was awarded life term. The special investigation team had reopened eight cases in 2015 and this was the first conviction from the five cases that have been probed till now.
