HIGHLIGHTS

New Delhi, Jan 26 (PTI) Following are the highlights at 1700 HRS:



TOP STORIES



DEL23 RDAY-LD CHIEFGUEST

Ramaphosa becomes 2nd SA Prez to witnesses R-Day parade after Nelson Mandela

New Delhi: South African President Cyril Ramaphosa Saturday joined a select group of world leaders, including Nelson Mandela, to have graced India's Republic Day celebrations in the past few decades.



DEL20 DAY-FIRSTS

INA veterans, all-women Assam Rifles contingent among many firsts on 70th R-Day

New Delhi: Four veterans of the Indian National Army (INA), an all-women contingent of the 183-year-old Assam Rifles marching down Rajpath and an IAF aircraft flying using a mix of traditional and biofuel on Saturday, were among the many firsts for a Republic Day.



CAL4 RDAY-ASSAM

People of Assam, not foreigners, have right on resources: Guv

Guwahati: There is no place for illegal foreigners in Assam and only the indigenous people of the state have the right on its resources, Governor Jagdish Mukhi said Saturday.



BOM1 GA-CONGRESS-GOVT

Cong will form govt in Goa after state bypolls, claims Chodankar

Panaji: Goa Congress chief Girish Chodankar Saturday claimed his party was in touch with five MLAs of the ruling coalition and would form government in the state after the upcoming assembly bypolls in two seats -- Shiroda and Mandrem.



FES9 RDAY-NEPAL-INDIA-GIFT

India gifts 30 ambulances, 6 buses to Nepal on Republican Day

Kathmandu: India on Saturday donated 30 ambulances and six buses to Nepal and extended its support to the country in achieving prosperity. By Shirish B Pradhan



NATION



DEL19 WATER-INDOPAK

'Pak team to visit Chenab basin in J-K next week under Indus Water Treaty'

New Delhi: A Pakistani delegation will visit the Chenab river basin in Jammu and Kashmir for inspection from January 28 to 31, as mandated under the Indus Water Treaty, sources said.



DEL15 RDAY-FLYPAST

IAF flypast stuns crowd at Republic Day parade

New Delhi: Thousands of restless people were stunned into a brief silence, their eyes rolled towards skies and ears buzzing to the humming sound as the Indian Air Force planes roared over the majestic Rajpath during the 70th Republic Day parade on Saturday.



BES10 CG-RDAY-BAGHEL

C'garh govt to waive Rs 207 crore irrigation tax of farmers

Raipur: In a move that will benefit 15 lakh farmers in Chhattisgarh, Chief Minister Bhupesh Baghel Saturday announced to waive their outstanding irrigation taxes worth Rs 207 crore.



DES17 PB-NAVJOT-CHANDIGARH SEAT

Navjot Kaur Sidhu seeks Cong ticket from Chandigarh

Chandigarh: Punjab minister Navjot Singh Sidhu's wife and former MLA Navjot Kaur Sidhu has staked claim to the Congress ticket from Chandigarh in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls.



DEL22 JK-INTRUDER

'Pak intruder shot dead along IB in JK's Samba '

Jammu: A Pakistani intruder was shot dead Saturday by Border Security Force personnel along the International Border in Samba district of Jammu and Kashmir, officials said.



FOREIGN



FGN9 US-2NDLD SHUTDOWN

Trump accepts deal to temporarily end longest govt shutdown in US history

Washington: Succumbing to political pressure, President Donald Trump has backed a deal to temporarily end the record-breaking government shutdown in America's history despite getting no funding for his controversial plan to build a wall along the US-Mexico border. By Lalit K Jha



FES14 UNHR-ROHINGYA-ENVOY

UN envoy: No prospect Rohingya refugees can go home soon

Dhaka: A UN human rights envoy said that hundreds of thousands of Rohingya Muslim refugees won't be able to return to Myanmar soon because of threats to their safety in the Buddhist-majority nation.



FES10 PAK-BLASPHEMY

Asia Bibi’s lawyer to return to Pakistan: Report

Islamabad: The self-exiled lawyer of Asia Bibi, a Pakistani Christian acquitted of blasphemy, has decided to return to the country as the Supreme Court is set to decide on January 29 whether to allow an appeal against her acquittal. By Sajjad Hussain



FES12 LANKA-TNA

Lanka Tamil leader questions Rajapaksa's statues as Opposition leader

Colombo: The leader of Sri Lanka's main Tamil party has questioned the legitimacy of Mahinda Rajapaksa's position as the leader of the main Opposition in Parliament.



FES7 UN-INDIA-CLIMATE

India calls for cautionary approach to link climate change

United Nations: India has called for adopting a cautionary approach on linking climate change to security and giving the UN Security Council the right to take action to address it, saying overly militarised solutions to problems which require non-military responses bring the "wrong actors" to the table.



BUSINESS



DCM1 BIZ-LUPIN-FDA

Lupin gets 6 observations from USFDA for its Pithampur Unit-2

New Delhi: Drug firm Lupin Saturday said the US health regulator has issued six observations after the inspection of a unit of its Pithampur facility in Madhya Pradesh.



SPORTS



SPO-2ND LD IND

Republic Day gift: India crush New Zealand by 90 runs to take 2-0 lead

Mount Maunganui (New Zealand): India dished out a dominating performance to crush New Zealand by 90 runs as spinners Kuldeep Yadav and Yuzvendra Chahal yet again tormented the home batsmen after a superlative batting show by the visitors in the second ODI, here Saturday.



PTI RHL RHL
