Saqib Saleem talks about his upcoming film '83 and collaborating with Ranveer Singh

Bollywood actor Saqib Saleem has carved a niche for himself in the industry by giving some stellar performances in films like 'Dishoom', 'Race 3' and many more.Now the talented young actor is currently shooting for his upcoming film '83' and in a recent interview with ZoomTV.com, he opened about his upcoming film and working with Ranveer Singh Talking about the prep he had to undergo for his character, he said, "We have tried to get Jimmy Sir’s mannerisms, body language and have also brushed up our Punjabi language skills for the role. I am from Delhi, but Jimmy Sir is from Punjab, therefore there is a slight difference in the dialect. I had to lose a lot of weight and put on a lot of muscle for this specific role. For Rangbaaz, I had put on weight to play the gangster and for '83, I had to lose all that weight."Furthermore, he even revealed his experience of collaborating with the maverick actor Ranveer. "It is an absolute delight to work with Ranveer. He is a thorough professional and at the same time, he is such a cool guy. Everybody likes hanging out with him; he has a very good sense of humour, so he has us in splits majority of the time. I was not intimidated by him but was really amazed at his process. He does his job really well but at the same time, keeps the mood of the set jovial and fun."Not only that but Saqib was all praise for his director Kabir Khan as he was quoted saying "Kabir sir is an extremely planned director. He knows how his film is going to look like and knows exactly what edits are to be made in the film. Thus, it helps the actor a lot when they work with somebody who is so planned. He also does give room for improvisation, therefore it has been a great working experience with him till now. All of us are putting our heart and soul into the film and we hope it turns out to be an awesome film when it comes out next year."The film which is helmed by Kabir Khan will feature Ranveer Singh as Kapil Dev , while Saqib will play Mohinder Amarnath and Tahir Raj Bhasin as Sunil Gavaskar.
