After a week long wait, Monsoon finally arrives in Delhi with good rain and cool conditions

Weather News and Analysis

Skymet Weather Team

As forecast by our Meteorologists, Monsoon 2019 finally arrived in Delhi today, almost a week late from its normal onset date of June 29.

Today, the Southwest Monsoon has further advanced into some more parts of Rajasthan, remaining parts of Uttar Pradesh, Jammu, and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, some more parts of Punjab, Haryana and entire Delhi.

After a gap of almost fifteen days, Delhi received its first spell of rain on July 4, which is likely to continue for another 24 hours. The prolonged dry spell which was just preceded by these showers was very uneasy as the day temperatures recorded above normal. For the last five days, the maximum in the city was settling almost five degrees above normal.

In the last 24 hours, Delhi and NCR area witnessed light to moderate rain and thundershower activities. Yesterday, Ayanagar recorded 17.4 mm of rain, Palam 6.4 mm and Safdarjung 1.4 mm. Whereas, Faridabad and Gurugram recorded heavy rains wherein Gurugram saw 82 mm of rains.

Yesterday, Palam saw the day temperature settle at 36 degrees Celsius in the afternoon, which dropped to record 27 degrees Celsius around 3.30 pm due to commencement of rain and thundershowers. These rains were in the wake of a trough which was extending from Punjab up to the Bay of Bengal across Delhi.

Now, the trough has shifted South of Delhi and we expect scattered rain and thundershower activities to occur over Delhi during the next two to three days.

Thereafter, the intensity is expected to increase with few moderate spells with isolated heavy spells in few pockets. With these rains, we don’t expect the mercury to rise to uncomfortable levels. However, due to high humidity, some discomfort would prevail.

Weather Alert For Delhi and NCR

Light to moderate rain and thundershower at some places with the gusty wind will occur over Faridabad, Gurugram, Jhajjar, Rohtak, Sonipat, Delhi, and Gautam Buddha Nagar during next 6-8 hours.

Image Credit: The Weather Channel

Please Note: Any information picked from here must be attributed to skymetweather.com
