Ghaziabad: Man commits suicide after poisoning wife over suspicion of infidelity, kills children too

Allegedly, the man was suspecting his wife of cheating on him (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The incident took place in Shatabdi Nagar, Masuri The man confessed to the crime in the suicide note The man was suspecting his wife of infidelity

Ghaziabad: Days after the Gurugram Uppal Southend murder case came to light, a similar case has surfaced from Ghaziabad's Masuri. A man allegedly murdered his wife and children by feeding poison to them and committed suicide himself. Allegedly, the man was suspecting his wife of cheating on him.

The police said on Friday, July 5, that a suicide note was recovered from the man. The wife was allegedly alive when the police found her but was declared dead when she reached the hospital.

SSP Ghaziabad on man committed suicide after killing his wife & 3 children: The wife was still alive when we found her. She was taken to a hospital where she was declared dead. A suicide note was found as per which he suspected his wife of having extramarital affairs. pic.twitter.com/C5QV56Jp8e — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 5, 2019

Senior Superintendent of Police, Ghaziabad, Sudhir Kumar Singh said, "A man has committed suicide after murdering his wife and children in Shatabdi Nagar, Masuri. Prima facie, we found that he was an alcoholic. He suspected that his wife was having a relationship with another man."

Singh said that the man confessed to poisoning his family in the suicide note. He added, "We are registering a case". According to ANI's report, the body of the man has been sent for autopsy. Further investigation is underway.

Also Read: Delhi: Man strangles his two wives after they refused to divorce him

Gurugram Southend Uppal Murder case

On July 1, four people were found dead at their residence in Gurugram's Sector 49 area. A suicide note was also recovered from one Prakash Singh's pocket. Singh was employed at a chemical factory in Hyderabad and his wife used to run a school. The couple had a son and a daughter.

In the suicide note, Singh said that he had failed to take care of his family. Allegedly, Singh confessed to killing his wife and children. An investigation revealed that Singh had committed suicide after murdering his family. The police were suspecting anger and frustration to be one of the reasons that prompted Singh to bludgeon his family.

The post-mortem reports suggested that the accused had attacked his family members with a hammer before stabbing them with a knife. Singh's wife had 19 cuts on her body, his son had 8 injuries and his daughter had 12 injuries. The post-mortem reports suggested that Singh's wife and children died minutes after being attacked.

Hisar farmer murders wife and daughter-in-law, commits suicide moments later

On July 2, a 52-year-old farmer from Hisar allegedly murdered his wife and daughter-in-law before hanging himself to death. Randheer allegedly attacked the two women with a wooden plank.

Randheer was allegedly having an argument with his wife and when the argument escalated, he allegedly grabbed a wooden plank and hit her on the head. When his daughter-in-law tried to stop him, Randheer attacked her too. After the two women lost consciousness, Randheer went to his farm and hanged himself.


