ABMSU demands inclusion of all genuine Muslim citizens in final NRC in Kokrajhar

Our Correspondent

KOKRAJHAR: The All Bodoland Minority Students’ Union (ABMSU) on Thursday staged a two hour sit-in-strike at Children Park near the DC office demanding inclusion of names of all Muslim genuine citizens in the final list of NRC. The ABMSU also demanded that the name of the culprit in the murder of ABMSU president Lafiqul Islam should be made public. Around 100 activists of the ABMSU joined the demonstration that started from 11 am.

Talking to reporters, the president of the ABMSU Kokrajhar district committee, Jaidul Islam said that Muslims of Assam had been supporting the NRC update process but the names of some genuine Muslims had been left out in the draft NRC. He demanded that the names of all genuine Muslims of the State should be included in the final list of NRC. He also said that the issue of ‘D’ voter was another major problem of the community. He alleged that there was a conspiracy to wipe out genuine Muslims in the name of ‘D’ voters. He also claimed that 98 per cent of the persons who are subjected to harassment, both mentally and economically, in the name of D-voters had legal proof of being genuine citizens of India and so the government should stop undue harassment on them.

Islam said that former president of the ABMSU, Lafiqul Islam was shot dead on August 1, 2017 but the killer was yet to be identified. He said the CBI had taken over the investigation but the perpetrators were yet to be arrested. He also said that they were not satisfied with the CBI investigation and said that the investigation must be free from political influence and it should be impartial. He further demanded that the name of the killer should be made public.

The president of the district ABMSU claimed that 78 per cent O Boro people of BTC had been deprived of privileges of BTC by the Bodos and treated as second-class citizens. Hence the Government of India should convene tripartite talks to review the BTC accord.

Also read: Udalguri chapter ABMSU seeks release of ‘foreigner’ declared couple
