As India stares at water crisis, FM Sitharaman promises water to all rural households by 2024

Union Budget 2019: Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman promises water to all rural households by 2024 under the 'Jal Jeevan Mission.' (Image: PTI)

Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Friday said the Jal Shakti Ministry will work with all states to provide water to all rural households by 2024 under the 'Jal Jeevan Mission.'

"Ensuring India's water security and providing access to safe drinking water to all Indians is a priority. A major step in this direction has been the constitution of Jal Shakti Ministry," Sitharaman stated in the Parliament while presenting the Union Budget 2019-20.

Jal Shakti Ministry

Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman: This new Ministry will look at the mgmt of our water resources & water supply in an integrated & holistic manner and will work with states to ensure 'Har Ghar Jal', to all rural households by 2024 under 'Jal Jeevan Mission'. https://t.co/ntfrKt4KP3 ANI (@ANI) July 5, 2019

The ambit of the ministry will encompass issues ranging from international and inter-states water disputes, the byzantine Namami Gange project, the flagship initiative to clean the Ganges, its tributaries and sub-tributaries and provide clean drinking water.

"This new Ministry will look at the management of our water resources and water supply in an integrated and holistic manner and will work with states to ensure 'Har Ghar Jal' to all rural households by 2024 under 'Jal Jeevan Mission'," she added.

Water conservation: A mass movement

Union Minister for Jal Shakti Gajendra Singh Shekhawat had on July 1 launched the 'Jal Shakti Abhiyan' and said that government's aim is to make water conservation a people's movement.

Speaking at a press briefing, Shekhawat had said, "Water crisis is a major issue. We want to make Jal Shakti Abhiyan a people's movement. The United Nations has listed the issue of clean drinking water on number six on its sustainable development goals list. The UN expects all countries to provide clean drinking water to every household by 2030."

Shekhawat said, "In India per capita, water availability is decreasing. There are dangers of climate change as well so the country is becoming vulnerable. The rainwater harvesting capacity is only 8 percent. So it is required to make water conservation a people's movement."

He went on to add, "Our target is achieving sustainable development by 2030. However, 'Har Ghar Nal Se Jal' (water to every household) is mentioned in BJP's manifesto. We will work to achieve the target of providing clean drinking water to every household by 2024 as mentioned in the party's manifesto. Jal Shakti Abhiyan is to create sensitivity on this subject and get a focused approach on this issue."

The Jal Shakti Ministry was constituted this year by the government.

Steps taken by Indian states to conserve water

1. In Punjab, drainage lines are being fixed to avoid the problem of waterlogging.

2. In Telengana's Thimayapalli, construction of tanks is changing the lives of the villagers.

3. In Rajasthan, people have created small ponds in the farms which have brought a lot of change to the people.

4. In Vellore, Tamil Nadu, 20 thousand women came together to revive Naga river.

5. In Indore's Kanadiya village, people have revived a river and built a small dam with the help of an engineer to combat the water crisis issue.

6. In Tamil Nadu's Kancheepuram, CM Edappadi K Palanisamy and deputy CM O Panneerselvam laid the foundation stone for Rs 1259-crore seawater desalination plant to address the city's drinking water supply needs.

7. In Delhi, Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal announced the approval of an ambitious water conservation project in the river Yamuna to end water shortage.

"The government also intends to initiate the ground water recharging this monsoon itself, but this time it will be on an experimental basis," said Kejriwal.

Water crisis in India

A 2018 NITI Aayog report had warned that India is suffering from 'the worst water crisis in its history,' placing millions of lives and livelihoods under threat. According to data from independent agencies cited by the report, 200,000 people die every year because of inadequate access to safe water.

According to the NITI Aayog report, 21 cities, including New Delhi, Bengaluru, Chennai, and Hyderabad, are set to run out of groundwater by 2020, affecting an estimated 100 million people.

It warned that groundwater resources, which constitute 40 percent of India's water supply, were being depleted at unsustainable rates.

NITI Aayog report facts

600 million people face high-to-extreme water stress

75 percent of households do not have drinking water on the premise. 84 percent of rural households do not have piped water access

70 percent of our water is contaminated

India is currently ranked 120 among 122 countries in the water quality index

(With inputs from ANI)

Read | Ways to save water by PM Modi: Start a mass movement for water conservation

Read | Union Budget 2019: 14 facts on the Indian Budget and how it changed over the years

Read | Govt to focus on new-age skills for youth to get high-paying jobs

Read | Govt to start 'study in India' programme to attract foreign students
