Four tigers maul circus tamer to death and then ‘play’ with his mutilated body for 30 minutes

A WORLD renowned tiger tamer has been mauled to death by four of his own big cats who then played with his remains for 30 minutes.

Ettore Weber, 61, was mauled to death about 7.30pm last night at the Circo Orfei — Italy's best-known circus.

3 Ettore Weber's tigers turned on him Credit: Circus Mania

Video of circus tamer Ettore Weber, who was mauled to death at Circo Orfei, performing with tigers in 2007

3 Weber was famed for his taming skills Credit: Circus Mania

Weber had been rehearsing for his act when one of the tigers knocked him down before the other three pounced on him and began savaging him.

The tigers then “played” with his body for about 30 minutes in front of stunned medics, who were unable to help, La Gazzetta del Mezzogiorno reported.

Weber's fellow performers also tried to drive the tigers away but to no avail, according to Corriere.

Police were called and have launched an investigation to try to recreate the events leading up to the attack.

Medics say that Weber suffered serious injuries, including severe trauma to the spine.

It is not clear what will become of the tigers now that their trainer is dead.

The attack happened around an hour before Thursday's show was due to take place.

Circo Orfei had arrived in Bari on June 15 and was due to stay until July 14. It is unclear whether that run will continue.

It comes after an experienced zookeeper was savaged by a tiger while trying to leave the enclosure.

Rosa King, 33, was mauled to death by a Malayan male called Cicip at Hamerton Zoo Park in Cambridgeshire in May 2017.

3 Rosa, who had worked at the zoo for 13 years, suffered a string on ‘distressing’ injuries, including three spinal fractures, and was declared at the scene

Terrifying moment giant tiger chases motorbiker down road after leaping out of the woods in India

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
