Thoothukudi: In Suspected Case of Caste Killing, Man, Pregnant Wife Hacked to Death

New Delhi: Days after a 23-year-old was murdered in Andhra Pradesh by her parents for marrying out of her caste, another suspected case of caste-based ‘honour killing’ has emerged, this time from Tamil Nadhu’s Thoothukudi district.

According to The News Minute, a married couple was killed in their front yard on the morning of July 3. The father of the women – who was reportedly pregnant at the time of her death – has been taken into custody in connection to the case.

Solairaj and Jothi – both 24-year-old – belonged to different castes and had recently gotten married. While Solairaj belonged to the Parayar community, Jothi belonged to the Pallar community – due to which her family opposed their relationship. The couple had, however, married three months ago in a temple with the blessings of Solairaj’s family.

On Wednesday night, a power cut led the couple to sleep on a mat in their small courtyard in front of their house, The Hindu reported. An armed gang then entered the courtyard and hacked the duo to death.

Also read | Andhra Pradesh Caste Killing: Fact-Finding Report Accuses Police of Inaction

On the morning of July 3, when Solairaj’s mother went to check on the couple, she found their bodies “lying in a pool of blood” with multiple cut injuries on their necks and faces. As per the police, the couple was attacked by a gang of men in the wee hours of Wednesday.

The bodies have been sent for a post-mortem.

Arun Balagopalan, superintendent of police, said that the couple was “facing hostility from the woman’s parents over the marriage” and suspected it to be case of caste-based crime.

A relative told The News Minute that the day Jothi left for her husband’s house, her family began issuing threats. Her father along with some other men threatened them of violence. When Solairaj’s family approached the police, they issued a warning and the matter subsided. “But now the two of them are gone for no reason,” said Solairaj’s aunt.

The incident follows another in the state last week where an inter-caste couple was murdered in Coimbatore by the man’s brother.
