Sara Ali Khan is vacationing in London with mom Amrita Singh after Aaj Kal wrap. See pic

After wrapping up the shooting of Imtiaz Ali's Aaj Kal, Sara Ali Khan has taken off to a vacation with mom Amrita Singh. The Kedarnath actress, who has been busy shooting for her film with Kartik Aaryan, has finally taken a break from work. A day after returning to Mumbai from Himachal Pradesh, Sara jetted off to London.

The Simmba actress took to Instagram to share a picture with mom from her vacay.

Clad in white dress and denim jacket, Sara looks pretty as she poses with mom Amrita.

Sara in an exclusive interview to Harper's Bazaar India said that she is very close to her mom and wants to live with her forever.

"I intend to live with my mother for the rest of my life. She gets upset when I say that because she has this whole marriage plan for me, but she can also come with me no, what's the problem?" asked Sara.

While she loves spending time with Amrita, she is also scared of her. "I love hanging out with her, and I miss her when she's away even for a few days. There's nothing I hide from her. But having said that, she's the only person I fear," Sara said.

On the work front, Sara Ali Khan finished shooting for Imtiaz Ali's film. The actress penned a heartfelt note thanking Imtiaz and co-star Kartik Aaryan.

She said, "Thank you @imtiazaliofficial for making my dream come true. I truly appreciate your warmth, patience and consideration with me every single day. Being on your set has been a privilege that I will always cherish and already miss. Thank you @kartikaaryan for instantly making me comfortable with you, for selflessly giving and for consistently looking out for me. From coffee's about you to chai's with you, I wish we could do it all over again. I'm going to miss you more than you know and more than I can admit."

The film is set to hit the screens on Valentines Day 2020.

ALSO READ | Sara Ali Khan on Amrita Singh: She has this whole marriage plan for me

ALSO READ | Sara Ali Khan tells Kartik Aaryan after Love Aaj Kal 2 wrap: Going to miss you more than you know
