Delhi: Nehru Place gang stole laptops from cars, sold them on OLX; busted

The Delhi Police on Friday busted a network of thieves who sold laptops, stolen from stationary cars, on online resale websites. The police also recovered 192 laptops from their warehouse at Nehru Place.

The police have arrested two persons, namely Pankhil Grover and Ishwer, for buying stolen laptops from thieves and selling then to customers on online sites.

The gang was busted after someone filed complaint for the their stolen laptop. On June 5, Ishant Arora reported his missing bag containing an Apple laptop and charger, power bank, driving license, wallet, debit and credit cards and other accessories. He claimed that the bag was stolen from his car when it was parked at Krishna Market in Kalkaji.

Noting the rise in such incidences in the area, a police team was constituted under the supervision of ACP Govind Sharma, which was asked to nab the accused persons.

The team, using CCTV footages from the past, monitored the criminals and analysed the pattern of crime, which had similar modus operandi.

The police found one of the stolen laptops being displayed on OLX. They noticed that most of the stolen Apple laptops were sold on various online sites like OLX and Quicker.

Police found that the advertisement was posted from a office at Nehru Place.

In order to take hold of the accused, one of the team member from the police laid a trap by posing as a customer and contacting the seller over phone to purchase a laptop.

The team then apprehended the accused Ishwar with a stolen laptop, who then took the police to Pankhil Grover's shop at Nehru Place from where he had taken the laptop to sell it further.

Pankhil Grover was arrested after the police raided his shop, located on the sixth floor of Shakuntla building, Nehru Place. In an interrogation, the accused disclosed that they were running a shop at Nehru Place market and were in the business of buying and selling of old and used laptops. They further said that they have purchased these stolen laptops from other sellers at Nehru Place Market. They identified two of these sellers as Bablu and Deepak

Pankhil Grover said that Bablu and Deepak, along with their associates, used to steal laptops from parked cars by breaking their glass.

Grover also revealed that he and his associate used to buy the stolen laptops from thieves at 10 per cent rate of the market price, which they sold to genuine buyers at 60-80 per cent market price rate. This way, the customer was offered the branded product at lower rates.

Incidentally, the police on Friday also busted a member of Gulel Gang namely Saheb Ali.

Ali, who is suspected of breaking window glasses of cars using gulel, was also arrested with a stolen laptop in his possession.

Around 22 cases of theft have been solved with the arrests of three accused.
