Best-dressed celebs of the week: Priyanka Chopra, Sonam Kapoor and Kangana Ranaut make the cut

Best-dressed celebs of the week

There's no denying the fact that the film and the fashion industry go hand in hand. B-Town celebs are not only mere entertainers but are also trendsetters and fashion influencers. With every public appearance that they make, it turns into a fashion outing more often than not when they make an effort to get dressed and step outside.

Fans and followers try to incorporate their beloved favourite stars' sense of fashion by seeking inspiration and taking notes from them. So, now that the week has come to an end, it is time that we turn back and see which stars left us impressed with their sartorial picks. Without further ado, here's our list of best-dressed celebs of the week.

Priyanka Chopra Jonas: The 36-year-old actress, like always, managed to make a mark with not one but multiple of her looks from the week gone by. Starting off with her pale pink Sabyasachi sari with floral thread work at brother-in-law Joe Jonas' wedding to Sophie Turner in France, PeeCee took Indian culture to the French wedding and how beautifully!

Another impressive look is from the recently-held Paris Fashion Week, in which the Isn't It Romantic actress was seen donning a beautiful green-pleated scalloped sleeve silk Dior gown from their Resort '20 collection.

What we admired the most were her stills from her recent Elle photo shoot. Scroll left to take a look at all the photos. We need not describe her look as the pictures speak for themselves.



Photo credit: Elle UK

Karisma Kapoor: The 45-year-old actress appeared on the seventh season of Dance India Dance where she was filling in for sister Kareena Kapoor Khan who is presently busy shooting for her important role in Angrezi Medium. Take a look at her pink sequinned gown with a plunging neckline and a thigh-high slit.

Vicky Kaushal: For his latest magazine photo shoot for Vogue India, Vicky donned the most vibrant outfits. Check them out below. Take, for instance, this marble-print-all-over shirt by Louis Vuitton. Isn't it dapper? Or that white and indigo co-ord outfit. Summer fashion goals!

Kangana Ranaut: At the trailer launch of her next Judgementall Hai Kya, Kangana Ranaut wore one of her boldest ensembles till date. She sported a golden bondage skirt teamed up with a black strapless corset by Marina Hoermanseder.

Sonam Kapoor: To mark crossing 20 million followers on Instagram, Sonam took to the photo-sharing platform to share a series of pics in which she was seen nailing an off-shoulder leaf green dress with a plunging neckline accessorised with a black choker and a clutch.

Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates.
