J&K cop’s tribute to slain security guard goes viral

editorial@tribune.com

Srinagar, July 5

An officer of the J&K Police on Friday paid a moving tribute to his personal security guard (PSO), who was abducted and killed by militants, by calling him “a true patriot”.

As the tribute went viral on social media, it touched innumerable hearts in the strife-torn Kashmir valley where killings have increasingly been reduced to statistics.

Shailendra Mishra, IPS, was an SSP in the troubled Shopian district when Javaid Ahmad Dar, popularly known as JD, was abducted and murdered by militants on July 5 last year. Mishra went on to describe how compassionate 27-year-old JD was.

“Sir, iske ghar mein problem hai, isko please chutti chodhna hai and I’d promptly say yes. This was JD, our favourite in the team,” Mishra wrote in a post on Facebook.

“He was loved by all in the close protection team....” Mishra wrote: “I didn’t know why I liked him so much. Born in the troubled Vehil village in Shopian of south Kashmir, JD was one of the five siblings, including a brother and three sisters.”

“He accompanied me in every battle I fought on the field and on many occasions, I owe my safe return to his bravery. He was duly recognised for his efforts by the J&K Government, which conferred him with the prestigious ‘Sher-e-Kashmir’ medal.”

“There were moments during our small excursions in the hills where we used to pull his leg, telling him that we all would take his ‘baraat’ to his village in a big police convoy, putting him on a truck.” Destiny, however, took a painful different turn.

“On July 5 last year, while he was out on duty, JD was kidnapped by militants from outside a medical store. They took him after firing a few shots in air, knowing that the fighter was unarmed.”

“My phone rang at 6.45 pm on that day. It was the girl whom he loved the most. She kept crying on the phone, asking me why him? I had no answers....”

“The world suddenly came to a standstill. It was happening. Our boy was with the enemy. A long effort in a few hours was undertaken.” “...At dawn, we found his body with gunshot wounds in his chest. JD had been martyred.”

“JD had fallen. Many like him did too. But the question still remains. Why are their stories not told? Why are they just a number? He sacrificed his life in the line of duty, he lived for peace. He revered the idea of India,” Mishra said.

“In 2016, JD carried an injured civilian from a (law and order) site to a district hospital, 5 km away, ignoring the injuries he suffered at the hands of protesters.”

“That was our boy. Selfless, brave, dedicated and a good son.... He was a true patriot, much more than patriotism can ask for.”

Mishra, who had been transferred on the day JD was killed, recalled that the entire police team broke into tears when they accompanied JD’s body to his village.

“When his father hugged me after reaching his village, he was calm and composed. He told me that he removed small iron pieces from his son’s body while cleaning his wounds...” “My grand salute to this family of extraordinary humans. There are many JDs serving for peace in the Valley and laying down their lives for this great nation. We miss you boy.” — IANS/TNS
