Rahul Gandhi to appear before Patna court over 'sare Modi chor hain' jibe during Lok Sabha elections

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights During an election rally in Karnataka, Rahul had said 'sare Modi chor hain' Defamation suit has been filed against him by Bihar Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi

New Delhi: Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi on Saturday will appear before a Patna court in connection with a defamation suit filed against him by Bihar Deputy Chief Minister Sushil Kumar Modi. The senior Congress leader has filed a case against Rahul Gandhi for his jibe at an election rally in Karnataka's Kolar district where the Gandhi family scion said that "sare Modi chor hain (all Modis are thieves)".

During the election speech, Rahul Gandhi likened PM Modi to bank-fraud accused Nirav Modi and former Indian Premier League (IPL) commissioner Lalit Modi. However, he went a step further and called every Modi a "thief".

Earlier on Thursday, Rahul appeared in a Mumbai court regarding defamation case filed by an RSS worker over his comments allegedly linking left-wing journalist Gauri Lankesh's killing with "BJP-RSS ideology".

Speaking to the media after the hearing where he was granted bail on a surety of Rs 15,000, Rahul said that the battle between the ideologies will continue and he's having fun.

After journalist Gauri Lankesh was shot dead outside her home, Rahul had said, "anybody who speaks against the ideology of the BJP, against the ideology of the RSS, is pressured, beaten, attacked and even killed."

Last week, after a month-long period of uncertainty over his resignation, Rahul formally stepped down from the post of party president. Rahul took to Twitter to announce his decision and asked the party's working committee to choose his successor.

ALSO READ: My fight against BJP will continue, says Rahul Gandhi in his first post-resignation reaction

ALSO READ: Coinciding with Rahul Gandhi's defamation case, Congress tweets video on RSS' 'anti-India activities' [VIDEO]

"Accountability is critical for the future growth of our party. It is for this reason that I have resigned as Congress president," Rahul said.

"It is a habit in India that the powerful cling to power, no one sacrifices power. But we will not defeat our opponents without sacrificing the desire for power and fighting a deeper ideological battle," he added.


