Yeh Rishtey Hein Pyaar Ke: TV shoots continued despite record-breaking rains in Mumbai

The City of Dreams was rain-battered these past few days, recording the highest 24-hour of July rain in 10 years, leading the government to declare a public Holiday on July 2. While authorities cautioned people to stay indoors and schools, colleges and most of the offices remained closed on Tuesday, the television industry put up a brave show and almost all the shoots continued, uninterrupted.With most of the daily soaps running five to six days a week on Hindi and Marathi GECs, it is imperative to continue the shoot to keep at least a few episodes in the bank, feel all the actors, including Ssharad Malhotra, the lead actor of Hindi soap ' Musakaan '. “We also want to rest in the safety of our homes on public holidays, but with just two episodes in the bank, it is important that we stay ahead of our schedule. It takes about 18 hours to shoot one episode, so wasting a day is a sacrilege,” says Ssharad.Similar sentiments are echoed by Marathi actor Suruchi Adarkar, who plays the lead in Marathi daily soap ' Ek Ghar Mantarlela '. She says, “We couldn’t cancel the shoot simply because we don’t have too many backup episodes for our six-days-a-week show. So, I left the car at home and called a cab instead to avoid traffic hassles. As professionals, we have to ensure that our project doesn’t suffer, whatever the weather conditions.”Does the fact that a lot of actors are paid on per day basis also serve as a major motivation to take a risk and step out on water-logged roads? To this, Ssharad replies, “Mooolah matters, but continuity matters more. Heavens forbid, if we aren’t able to shoot a couple of episodes in a row due to some unforeseen circumstances, we will cut a sorry figure in front of our viewers as a team. So, the show must go on.”Another general assumption is that production houses insist on shoots not being cancelled because each cancellation costs them a lot of money. But Rajan Shahi, who is currently producing three shows, including ' Yeh Rishta Kya Kehlata Hai ', ' Yeh Rishtey Hein Pyaar Ke ' and 'Baavle Utaavle', begs to differ. “On the contrary, cancelled TV shoots save us a lot of money,” says he and explains, “From per day payments of the lead actors to food, cabs and overheads, we get to save a lot of money for each cancellation. So money wasn’t the reason to go ahead with the shoot . Due to some recent date adjustments of some of the artists, who had cancelled everything and given us their dates, we had to call a small unit as they all stay nearby and we got the vehicles ready to pick them up and drop them.”“The show must go on, but it is our duty to provide adequate facilities during difficult times like monsoons,” adds Rajan Shahi.It is definitely the invincible spirit of Mumbai that came for the fore once again as not just the actors, but also the technicians, support staff reported to various shoots across the City of Dreams, feel the members of TV fraternity. Binaifer Kohli, the producer of ' Bhabiji Ghar Par Hain ', is one of them. “It rained all night on Monday, but we didn’t have a single absentee in our team. Although if someone can’t make it on such days, that is perfectly alright. Kudos to the spirit of my people who put up a great fight whenever we face adverse conditions. No amount of money is more important than such wonderful people that is why from pickup, drop facility to fire safety measures, we take no chance with their safety,” shares Binaifer.Such difficult times bring the entire unit together, says Hruta Durgule, the main lead of Marathi serial ' Phulpakharu '. She adds, “The rain had stopped on Tuesday morning but there was a lot of water-logging right outside the bungalow at Thane where we were shooting, but nobody complained about the weather woes. We all left in groups post the shoot to ensure that everyone was safe. Mumbai never stops, our spirit of survival keeps us going.”"Not just us actors, but also the technicians and support staff of daily soaps face this mercurial Mumbai weather with a lot of calm. After travelling through water-logged roads and numerous traffic jams, I happily enjoyed hot pakoras and cups of masala chai with the entire team""Shooting in Mumbai rains is not easy because you have to bear with a lot to reach your location, but the show goes on, every single time. So instead of complaining about the weather woes, I prefer to grin and bear it"
