Alia Bhatt and Ram Charan to shoot for SS Rajamouli’s RRR in Ahmedabad & Pune; Read Details

A film that has created a lot of buzz with its announcement was SS Rajamouli’s RRR starring Ram Charan and Jr NTR in the lead. Another news about the film that made headlines was the association of Bollywood actors like Alia Bhatt and Ajay Devgn with RRR. While Ajay will be seen in a cameo, Alia Bhatt is paired opposite Ram Charan and will be seen as Sita. However, the Gully Boy star is yet to join the shoot of the film. Alia was on a vacation with Ranbir Kapoor in New York and recently came back.

Now, as per a report of Mumbai Mirror, Alia is all set to kickstart the shoot of the film with Ram Charan in Ahmedabad and Pune. As per the report, over the next few months, the Kalank actor will be shooting for her portions in the two cities with Ram Charan. Alia will be seen as Sita who will come into the story and will leave a huge impact. After her entry, the course of the story will change. Her role is important and pivotal to the film.

(Also Read: RRR: Alia Bhatt reveals some interesting details about her role in the Jr NTR and Ram Charan starrer)

As per Mumbai Mirror, “She will shoot with Charan in Ahmedabad and Pune in the next couple of months. She will be seen in the look of a young girl from the early 1900s. Her character appears at a crucial point in the story, determining the course of the film. While Ram Charan’s action-heavy introductory sequence has already been shot, the team will film the entry scene with Jr NTR in a few weeks.” As per the report, 40% filming of the movie is done and SS Rajamouli will be heading abroad for a few days before beginning the next shooting schedule.

RRR is a hugely mounted film and is set in the 1900s. Rajamouli wanted to pay tribute to the freedom fighters and hence, the film is being shot on a massive scale. The report also stated that Ajay Devgn will be seen Ram Charan’s father in the film who will come in the flashback sequence. The film is slated to release on July 30, 2020.
