Happy Birthday Ranveer Singh: From Bitoo Sharma To Murad – Tracing The Journey Of This Superstar!

Happy Birthday Ranveer Singh: If there’s one actor who does not think about what the world thinks about him, it’s Ranveer Singh. Today it’s his 33rd birthday and he has proven us with time that he is a versatile actor. His energy is dynamic and has a funny bone. Remember the time in 2015 when he had planted cute kiss to Arjun Kapoor in front of everyone AIB Knockout. Yes! It does show us that Ranveer does not follow the trail of being the butt of all jokes. In Fact, his quirky sense of humour has always set the stage on fire. I really can’t stop reminiscing over the kind of roles Ranveer does, which makes him really unique for the Hindi cinema industry. Be it the role of a wedding planner, or a courageous and a bold Maratha warrior too playing a merciless emperor, he perfectly weaves himself into the roles he ropes in. He has hardly delivered a few flops because he has always craved for some interesting scrips, which satisfies the masses.

Advertisement

Take a look at these 10 films where he had played the breakthrough roles:

1) The Bindaas, playful Bitoo Sharma in Band Baaja Baarat

Band Baaja Baaraat was Ranveer’s debut film in 2010. He essayed the role of a charming wedding planner alongside Anushka Sharma. The Delhi University boy, Bitoo Sharma’s Bread Pakora scene was shot at Lovers Point Of Hansraj College and ‘’Ainvayi Ainvayi” due to his charming appeal he garnered a mass fan following. He created a legacy with this film and broke the myth that he was not just a good looking boy. He had the talent and nailed the very first character of a marriage planner to being a fine boss. Apparently, did you know that the film was first offered to Ranbir Kapoor and Aditya Chopra felt that Ranveer would not be a good looking conventional hero? Well! Bitoo knew that he was the next superstar in the making, he proved everyone wrong.

2) A professional con man- a king of deception in Ladies VS Ricky Bahl

Ranveer was seen conning girls as Ricky Bahl in 2011. He broke the image of a cute puppy boy and was seen wooing girls through his natural skills to extract money out of them. Ricky never had an intention to break anyone’s heart and entertained the audience a thrilling performance. The character was inspired by some real life experiences that he had as a conman in reality also. He is charming, handsome, suave and will make you go weak on your knees. Though the movie was not very well loved, but he stole our hearts.

3) A reserved and an emotional man in Lootera

Ranveer’s character in Vikramaditya Motwane’s period romance drama Lootera was a man of few words but great emotions as a visiting archaeologist. Not only, the movie was not much appreciated but Ranveer’s character as an introverted brooding man was much loved. Having done highly energetic roles in the past, pairing opposite Sonakshi Sinha in this movie, he essayed the role of an intense lover possessing utmost knowledge in music, books, making his way into the life of Pakhi( Sonakshi Sinha). The movie was inspired by O Henry’s The Last Leaf.

4) A flirtatious and a dramatic Gujarati lover in Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela

Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela in 2013 was the career-changing point for Ranveer Singh. We could see the reel to now real life couple Deep Veer’s love story here clearly. Ranveer set the screen on fire by romancing Deepika Padukone. The movie was an adaptation of Romeo- Juliet and Ranveer’s character as Ram was vibrant, a shirtless muscle man of fortune’s fool to conquer true love.

5) Masala punch in Gunday

Advertisement

We loved Ranveer Singh’s dialogue baazi as Bikram Bose, a quintessential Bengali gangster in Ali Abbas Zafar’s Gunday. He loves his best friend Bala very dearly and proves that true friendship is worth running errands.

6) A rich son with a kind heart in the conquer of love- Dil Dhadakne Do

Dil Dhadakne Do had a stellar cast of Anil Kapoor, Shefali Shah, Priyanka Chopra, Farhan Akhtar, Rahul Bose and Zarina Wahab. Be it the brother-sister equation with Priyanka Chopra, the father-son brunt with Anil Kapoor, or taking his heart on his sleeve romantic with Anushka Sharma, Ranveer was the life of the ensemble cast. He played the character of a cool dude elegantly and had the strongest role.

7) Conquered Bollywood as Peshwa Bajirao in Bajirao Mastani

In 2015 Ranveer Singh again showed that he was the perfect fit for versatility in Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s historical drama. Doting the character of Maratha Peshwa Bajirao he had a great physical transformation also his dialogue delivery was commendable in this film. He had watched several Marathi films too, in order to get the linguistic accent right. He had learnt horse galloping too for the intense role.

8) A villainous and a tyrannical ruler as Alauddin Khilji in Padmaavat

In Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s magnum opus drama Padmaavat, Ranveer played the erratic and unpredictable emperor Alauddin Khilji. He proved that whatever God has created belonged to him. He had to read a lot of texts related to History, oppression and genocide. The characters hangover had stayed with him for a long time. It was one of the most difficult roles he played. He had isolated himself for the shoot of this role. Alauddin was bad, a narcissist but Ranveer ensured that he gets into the mind space of the character and grab the audience’s eyeballs.

9) Aala Re Aala Simmba Aala!

As Sangram Bhalerao, Ranveer Singh doted a machoistic appeal in Rohit Shetty’s cop drama Simmba opposite Sara Ali Khan. He is daring, chivalrous, intelligent, an unabashedly corrupt policeman and a total Bollywood Avenger. He took stardom as a true warrior for women.

10) Extraordinary performance as Murad in Gully Boy

Inspired by real-life rappers, Vivian Fernandes aka Divine, Ranveer played the role of a poor boy who wanted to be a rapper, whose dreams were as tall as Mt Everest. Zoya Akhtar’s Gully Boy showed Ranveer playing the role of Murad who wants to discover himself. A tale about rags to riches Murad was poetry in muse through his struggles and fame.

Wishing Deepika Padukone’s mindblowing hubby a very happy birthday. Ranveer will be next seen in Kabir Singh’s ‘83

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
