Tale of Tiger Hill: What reporting amidst enemy fire into Indian territory entailed during Kargil war

Widows of Kargil war heroes visit Kargil War Memorial at Drass in Jammu and Kashmir | Photo Credit: IANS

New Delhi: Just when the Indian Army would attack Tiger Hill most of us knew. We discussed it, we prepared for it, some of us even told our offices about it. It was important and perhaps, the most talked-about operation of the war. As Lieutenant-general Mohinder Puri (then Major-general) commanding 8 Division famously said, "If it had been called Mole Hill or Rabbit Hill, there wouldn't be such a fuss." Still, it was called Tiger Hill and if you were standing outside the 56 Brigade HQ in Drass, it was very visible. You couldn't just see it, you could see soldiers moving towards it. I remember saying "All the best" to a young Signals officer I knew just before he went up to lay the communication lines.

Which is why most of us were there, milling around 56 Brigade HQ, taking photographs of the 155mm guns and the Multi Barrel Rocket Launchers (MBRLs) as the battle began. We ran for cover when the Pakistan artillery hit back, several journalists were hit by shrapnel. There were journalists in Kargil on their own; there were others escorted by PROs from Srinagar to Kargil for a day or two and then brought back. During that Tiger Hill evening, as we were standing around waiting for the battle to begin, we saw buses carrying journalists drive past. And they drove all the way to Kargil...

The night before the battle, one journalist made different plans. We called him Double H, or, the Hero of Herat. He was everything we weren't: older, better-known, he had been to Afghanistan (we were lucky to have been sent to Kargil), wounded there. He had seen war, we were lucky to have covered communal riots, difficult as they were. Importantly, he (working for a wire service) had a satellite phone. We were at the mercy of the dodgy telephone booths. He didn't approve of us. "Be careful of those guys. They don't know what they're doing. It's not worth it," he warned me.

Also Read: How IAF quietly buried Pakistan's hopes during Kargil War

Must Read: Tiger Hill anniversary: A war correspondent's diary while reporting from the frontlines of the Kargil war

Double H wouldn't be with us outside 56 Brigade, he told me the night before. He'd be in Bimbit with a Naga battalion, sitting with the commanding officer. He'd pick up stuff from the RT (Radio Transmission). He had startling news for us the next morning. "The attack was called off halfway. And that was because there were too many reporters hanging around outside the brigade headquarters," he declared. That was news to us. Some of us had driven back to Kargil late in the night to send our stories on the phone and at that time, the troops were moving up, the fighting was continuing. How did he know? "I've confirmed," he said. He had spoken with an Army PRO in Srinagar! We never asked him anything because he wasn't entirely in the loop. It was all very mystifying.

Hours later came Army chief General VP Malik's congratulations to the troops for taking Tiger Hill. Then, we learnt what had happened with Double H. He was very drunk when the battle began and whatever he had written wasn't accurate at all. That evening, we saw him sitting quietly in the hotel corridor, laptop before him, bashing something out. "Did the Army chief say something?" he asked. "Yes," I replied joyfully. The next morning, he was outside, his bags packed. "I am going off to Leh," he said. "But the battle's here!" I replied. "Yes, I have the option of returning," he said. he never did. So, that's what free rum could do.

In the early days of the war, till Tololing, right on the Srinagar-Leh highway, we were wary of the Pakistan Army gunners. One stretch near Drass, where the road looped and you had to drive slowly, was particularly worrying. One morning, as we were driving past, we had a loud 'bang-bang,' clearly, two rounds of small-arms fire. I'll never know where it came from and who the target was, but we clearly thought it was us. I am not sure how anxious I looked; my colleague's face had turned white.

As it was, you'd get advice from just about anybody about when Pak gunners were more active and when they weren't. As if they knew! "Well, tomorrow's Friday. If you're driving past in the morning, you'll be okay," I was told. Someone else would tell you exactly the opposite. People would tell you how some cars (painted bright-red, for instance) were more 'visible,' than others. What was said wasn't really important. That such discussions happened was a sign that there was a serious danger, a sign of how jittery people were. You would often see wrecked army trucks in the stream beside the road. Some had been hit by Pak artillery. One morning, just in front of us, we saw shells hit a tanker bringing kerosene to Kargil. It blazed furiously, didn't explode though.

Even in Kargil, you'd see shells falling a distance away, a puff of dust each time if they fell safely, a loud crash if they hit a building. Initially, after all the shelling, you'd be startled if the door banged. Gradually, you'd get more used to it.

In the middle of all this, you made friends. The friends made during the war stayed friends. Even today, 20 years later. One morning, when I went to meet an officer, a seriously good source, I was told he couldn't meet me: he wasn't very well. All I had with me was a packet of biscuits, a bar of chocolate. My lunch. I gave it to his sahayak. Later that evening, I wondered if he were better. He was.

"What did you have for lunch?" he asked.

"Rice, dal, a vegetable," I replied.

"What vegetable?"

"Lauki,"

"Jhoot bol raha hai, (You're fibbing). There was no lauki today. You haven't had anything," he said. And he was right.

He immediately ensured I had something to eat.

Sometimes, jawans would give us their version of world news. The then US president Bill Clinton had summoned then Pakistan prime minister Nawaz Sharif to Washington DC. "Nawaz Sharif haath utha diya hai (has surrendered)," one jawan told me. He felt, and quite rightly too, the war would end. And when it did, after the ceasefire, there was only relief. You've been under fire, you're still in one piece, you haven't had a decent meal in weeks. And finally, you're returning to your own world.

(Srinjoy Chowdhury is the author of Despatches from Kargil)

In his book - Despatches from Kargil (which now has a mint-fresh 20th-anniversary edition) - Srinjoy Chowdhury, who covered the war for a newspaper, recounts what it was like for journalists to report from amidst the enemy fire into Indian territory and (in an era when cell phones and satellite phones were an exception rather than the norm) send news despatches from the battleground.
