Two days after he was beaten up, Nadia man dies; BJP MP blames ‘TMC goons’

Two days after he was beaten up by a group of people in Swarupganj, under Nabadwip block of West Bengal’s Nadia district, a 31-year-old man succumbed to injuries at Kolkata’s NRS Medical College and Hospital on Friday night.

State BJP leaders alleged that the deceased, identified as Krishna Debnath, was killed by TMC supporters for chanting “Jai Shri Ram”.

A local TMC leader denied the allegation and accused Debnath of having misbehaved with women after getting inebriated, after which a group of local residents beat him up.

A senior district police officer said, “The reason behind the murder is still unclear. It is not clear how and why he was killed. However, prima facie it seems to have no connection with any political party. Investigation is underway.” BJP Lok Sabha MP Babul Supriyo, however, accused the TMC for the murder and said, “A youngster named Krishna Debnath was brutally murdered by TMC goons for supporting BJP and chanting Jai Shri Ram. Mamata Banerjee’s bloodthirsty politics will soon see its end.”

He also said, “Such incidents are taking place every day. Mamata Banerjee established her hatred towards this slogan (Jai Shri Ram), and now her party workers are retaliating…”

According to the police, Debnath, who mostly stayed outside Swarupganj on work, had arrived home on Wednesday (July 3), and the same night a group of local people called him out and took him to an isolated place. Debnath’s family has told the police that he remained missing that night, and was found, bleeding profusely, near a local club the following morning.

Debnath was rushed to Shantinagar Hospital in the area first. As his health deteriorated, he was taken to NRS Hospital in Kolkata, where he succumbed to injuries on Friday night.

The police said the family has alleged that three people had called Debnath and led him away that night. All three are absconding since the incident. The family has filed a police complaint.

On Saturday, as Debnath’s body reached Swarupganj, irate villagers blocked the road and protested before the local police station. Local BJP leaders raised slogans against the TMC, accusing the state’s ruling party’s “goons” of murdering him. Senior BJP leader Mukul Roy today met the victim’s family and the police.

Denying the BJP’s allegations, TMC Gram Panchayat chief Sirajul Sheikh said: “The BJP has a habit of giving political colour to all murders. The TMC has no connection with this case. There is no relation between the Jai Shri Ram chant and the incident. The man was drunk and misbehaved with local woman, so he was beaten up by some local people. The BJP is trying to politicise the matter to create a controversy.”
