CBI Raids the Home of Former Haryana Chief Minister BS Hooda

Bhupinder Singh Hooda, the former Chief Minister of Haryana got his home in Rohtak and Delhi raided by officials from the CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) this happened because it is believed that he has a connection with a land deal case. The Central Bureau of Investigation registered a new case against the former minister over the suspected irregularities in a land allotment between the years of 2004 and 2007, during these years he was the Chief Minister of the State.

A team of CBI officers raided his home in Rohtak today. The Central Bureau of Investigation is currently conducting a search operation at more than 30 places near Delhi, they are targeting all the places that are connected with land allocation irregularity cases.

A CBI Official said that “Over 30 places in Delhi and the National Capital Region, including Hooda’s Delhi residence, were raided in connection with alleged irregularities in land allotment between 2004 and 2007.”

Bhupinder Sing Hooda said: “This is a result of political vendetta. I will fight this battle myself. I have complete faith in the judiciary. No one can silence my voice.” Hooda was anticipated to lead a rally in Jind City today.

Back in 2016, the CBI launched an investigation on how the Haryana Urban Authority allotted land to the associated journals under Mr. Hooda, this is a group that owned the National Herald newspaper.

The Central Bureau of Investigation took the case into their own hands and said that the re-allotment of this land is illegal, the land is in Panchkula. The original allotment was dated back to 1982 and it was taken away in the year 1996. The re-allotment happened during the reign of Mr. Hooda, this is why he and other officials are getting charged of cheating and corruption.

In December 2018, the CBI filed a charge-sheet against Motilal Vora and Bhupinder Singh Hooda. The CBI has alleged that during the re-allotment of the plot led to a sum loss of Rupees 67 lakhs. Both Vora and Hooda have been charged for corruption and criminal conspiracy.
