Sheikh violated all democratic norms while arresting Dr Mukherjee: Dr Jitendra - Jammu Kashmir Latest News

First ever statue unveiled in J&K

Avtar Bhat

KATHUA, July 6: Turning tables on National Conference (NC) and its leadership, Union Minister in PMO with independent charge of North Eastern States, Dr Jitendra Singh today accused the former president of the party and then Prime Minister of the State, Sheikh Mohammed Abdullah for violating all democratic and legal norms and protocol while arresting the founder president of Bharatiya Jana Sang and a great nationalist, Dr Shyama Prasad Mukherjee after he entered the State and broke the draconian permit system.

Addressing a function in connection with observance of his 119th birth anniversary here today while unveiling the first ever statue of this great son of India in the State, Dr Jitendra Singh said BJP is committed to fulfill the dream of Dr Mukherjee by liberating not only Jammu but even Kashmiris from the three families’ dynastic rule. “Dr Mukherjee did not only want to liberate the Jammu people from the dynastic rule of some families but also the people of Kashmir”, he added.

He said our commitment will only be fulfilled the day there will be 40 percent voter turnout in Kashmir and those who become MPs and MLAs with eight to 10 percent votes are rejected by the masses. He reiterated that the dynastic parties have developed a vested interest in terrorism as they want to enter the Parliament and State Assembly with a low turn out percentage.

“Dr Mukheerjee’s supreme sacrifice will pay dividends the day we free Kashmiris from the politicians who enter Parliament and State Assembly with eight to 10 percent voter turn out”, Dr Jitendra Singh said, adding that late Jana Sangh president was not only a leader of J&K but entire India.

Dr Jitendra Singh said it is still a mystery how the death of the Dr Mukherjee took place who entered J&K after breaking the permit system. Instead of arresting him and putting him in small rooms at Nishat, the then Government could have not allowed him to enter J&K and sent him back from Pathankot. But it was not done and Dr Mukherjee was arrested under a conspiracy and kept in two rooms servant hut at Srinagar for 44 days, he added.

It is unfortunate that being a sitting MP, the then Prime Minister of India Pt Jawahar Lal Nehru who visited Kashmir on June 24 did not bother to visit him or enquire about his health, he said.

He said it is pity that the then State Government even did not pay Rs 7000 as fair of plane to shift his body to Kolkata. The mourners in large numbers at Kolkata were giving slogans that “Sheikh poisoned him to death”, he added.

Dr Jitendra Singh said the founder president of Jana Sangh gave a supreme sacrifice for the nation at a young age but the question is who was responsible for his death and this required a probe.

Lambasting the National Conference and Congress, he accused them for the prevailing mess and injustice meted out to people of the State. He said NC which is talking of special status of the State has itself eroded the same when it suited the party. When the term of Lok Sabha and State Legislatures was increased from five to six years by then Prime Minister, Indira Gandhi after imposing black law of emergency in 1975, Sheikh Abdullah then CM of the State implemented the same in J&K. But did not reverse it to five years after the Morarji Desai in 1977 through another Constitutional amendment reverted the term of Parliament and Assemblies to five years when the same was followed by all other States of the country,” he added.

Likewise the NC implemented delimitation law up to 2026 because it suited the party as it did not want to give justice to those regions who were not getting proper representation in the Legislature. The NC-Congress coalition also did not implement the 73rd and 74th Constitutional amendments in the State to empower Panchayats and Local Bodies because the parties wanted the autonomy of their families only.

Dr Jitendra Singh said that Narendra Modi led BJP Government is committed to welfare of people and it wants to reach last man in the last queue. This can be gauged by the yesterday’s budget presented in Parliament by Finance Minister, Nirmala Sitharaman in which much focus was given to rural people and education of urban children and neglected areas.

Addressing the function, BJP national vice president and Prabhari J&K Avinash Rai Khanna said Dr Mukherjee came from Bengal and removed the permit system in the State. He showed the people of the State a way that there can’t be two flags, two Constitutions and two Prime Ministers within a country. He said the party is committed to fulfill his dream and take the resolve made by him in 1953 to logical conclusion.

Mahesh Giri, national secretary of the BJP said that Dr Mukherjee gave a supreme sacrifice and it is pity that till date the Governments have failed to probe his death.

Speaker State Assembly, Dr Nirmal Singh while paying tributes to Dr Mukherjee said the late Jana Sangh president sacrificed his life on the soil of the J&K and it will continue to inspire coming generations. He said there is a question mark on his death as many queries still remain unanswered. Sixteen people during Praja Parishad Andolan inspired by him and the leadership of Sher Duggar, Prem Nath Dogra laid down their lives for a supreme cause, he added.

Dr Singh said it is the result of this Andolan that in J&K the nationalist forces struggle is getting strengthened day by day. “But we have to take the battle started by him to logical conclusion as J&K has still separate Constitution and Flag.”

Ravinder Raina, State president, BJP while paying tributes to Dr Mukherjee said that he removed permit system from the State otherwise people visiting Haridwar and other shrines from here and those visiting for pilgrimage of Shri Amarnath Ji and Mata Vaishno Devi had to sought permit first.

He said it was the sacrifice of the Dr Mukherjee and other 16 martyrs that Tricolour is today unfurled in J&K. Maintaining that J&K is land of warriors, Raina said “our second mission begins which is to install statue of Mukherjee at Lal Chowk in Srinagar”.

Ashok Kaul general secretary, BJP while paying tributes to late Jana Sangh president said his death is a plain murder and it should be probed. He said Dr Mukherjee was murdered under a conspiracy and time has come to unmask it now.

Others who paid tributes included MP Rajya Sabha Shamsher Singh Manhas former Deputy CM, Kavinder Gupta, former Minister Sat Sharma, former Minister and MLA Kathua, Rajiv Jasrotia, BJP general secretary, Dr Narender Singh, spokesperson, Brig (retd) Anil Gupta, district president BJP, Prem Nath Dogra, former Minister, D K Manyal, ex MLAs Kuldeep Kumar, Jeevan Lal, Durga Dass and others.
