13 Karnataka Congress, JD(S) MLAs quit, land in Mumbai

BJP

Bandra-Kurla Complex

Raj Bhavan

Union Home Minister Amit Shah

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy

corrals rebel MLAs into a BKC hotel; Guv to take call on accepting resignations on Tuesday.The 14-month-old coalition government in Karnataka might not come back from the brink this time. Thirteen Congress and JD(S) MLAs handed over their resignation letters on Saturday to the assembly secretary—Speaker Ramesh Kumar was not present—thereby bringing the coalition’s strength on a par with that of the BJP.As the Congress and the JD(S) went into huddles, the rebels left for Mumbai after claiming that more MLAs are likely on their way out.Kumar confirmed the resignations but said he is busy till Monday owing to scheduled programmes. He is due to meet the MLAs on Tuesday. His decision will be crucial—if the resignations are accepted, the government will be reduced to a minority. The coalition had 119 MLAs, including the Speaker, a BSP MLA and two independents. Vijayanagara MLA Anand Singh resigned on July 1. With Saturday’s swift exits, the strength stands at 105—the same as that of the BJP.The presence of former minister and hitherto loyal Congressman Ramalinga Reddy, first-time MLA Soumya Reddy and JD(S) MLA Gopalaiah among the rebels took party leaders by surprise. AH Vishwanath, who had recently stepped down as JD(S) president and launched attack on the coalition government, too, put in his papers.A shaken Congress leadership dispatched AICC General Secretary KC Venugopal to Bengaluru for damage control. But the response from the party high command was too little, too late as Venugopal was left with little option after MLAs were flown to Mumbai and put up in ahotel atWater Resources Minister DK Shivakumar failed to persuade a few MLAs to change their mind. “We cannot contain those leaving the party. Let us see. There is still time until their resignations are accepted,” he said.Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy, who is in the US, is returning to Bengaluru on Sunday evening as scheduled. Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee President Dinesh Gundurao is out of the country on a private trip.Karnataka BJP leaders maintained total silence while giving out signals that the resignations had nothing to do with its defection campaign ‘Operation Lotus’. The party’s role, however, became quite evident after the MLAs who resigned met Governor Vajubhai Vala and later left for the airport under police protection from. The Maharashtra BJP is said to have made arrangements for their stay in Navi Mumbai.Sources, however, said the entire planning and execution—albeit kept secret—was done by central BJP leaders, includingBJP leaders are confident that the governor will invite the party to form the government—it will be its fourth since 2007—once the coalition government loses its majority on the floor of the assembly. The legislature session is scheduled to begin on July 12. The governor may askto prove majority or the latter may choose to quit before the session, paving way for Vala to take a call on whether to invite the BJP or advise dissolution of the assembly.“Why would the governor advise dissolution? We still have four years for the election and there is a BJP government at the Centre. It is easier for the central government to ensure effective programme implementation if there a BJP government in the state,” said a senior BJP leader.There was speculation that the en masse resignation of Congress MLAs was prompted by Congress Legislature Party leader Siddaramaiah, who is said to be against continuing a truck with the JD(S). The rumour gained credence as six of the Congress MLAs who resigned— Ramesh Jarkiholi, Mahesh Kumtalli, BC Patil, Pratapgouda Patil, Byreti Basavaraj, Munirathna and ST Somashekhar— are from his camp.Congress and JD(S) sources said there was an attempt to replace Siddaramaiah with senior leader Mallikarjun Kharge. The JD(S) had even proposed making Kharge the CM to save the government. But the Congress sat on the proposal, said a JD(S) leader.
