Finally, a helping hand

Rachna Seth

Rachna Seth in New Delhi

When three persons died in the national capital while cleaning a drain in the last week of June, it exposed the dirty underbelly of the country — manual scavenging, which continues despite a ban. Manual scavenging is the practice of manually cleaning insanitary latrines, open pits, drains and sewer lines. Despite the existing Prohibition of Employment as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2003, the practice is flourishing thanks to some unscrupulous contractors hiring untrained poor people. “There is a law but the enforcement agencies lack will to implement it. The laws for marginalised, poor, deprived and women do not work at all. The law enforcement agencies think it is not required,” says Ramon Magsaysay awardee Bezwada Wilson, who works for the development of manual scavengers.

Such is the plight of people involved in manual scavenging that there’s not even credible data on the number of deaths because of this illegal and inhuman practice. In the past three years, there have been 18 such deaths in Delhi, Ramdas Athawale, Minister of State for Social Justice and Empowerment, informed the Rajya Sabha on July 3. In all, 88 people have died in the country in the past three years, the Minister said. The National Commission for Safai Karamcharis (NCSK), the statutory body that was set up by an act of Parliament for the welfare of the sanitation workers, has different numbers. The NCSK, in September, 2018, said 123 people doing manual scavenging lost their lives in the country between January 2017 and September 2018.

As per the government data, made public in October 2018, there are 13,657 manual scavengers, identified in 13 states. For their rehabilitation, a task force has carried out a national survey in 170 identified districts of 18 states. The survey has been completed in 163 districts.

Changes in law

“Earlier, the police would register cases related to manual scavenging under Section 304 A of the IPC (causing death by negligence), which is a bailable offence. But now the government has become strict, and the arrests are made under Section 304, IPC (culpable homicide not amounting to murder). It's a non-bailable offence and the punishment can be a seven-year jail term.

Wilson says it is an ‘organised murder’. These deaths are caused by the incompetence and indifference of the government and administration. Wilson, who is also a Safai Karamchari Andolan organiser, says where manual scavenging is unavoidable, there are 21 directives, including a special suit, oxygen cylinder, mask, gum shoes, safety belts, an ambulance for emergency situations, that need to be followed but aren’t.

There’s hope

The Delhi Government has bought 100 machines that will clean drains and sewers. In all, some 200 machines are estimated to be deployed in Delhi. These machines are perfect for cleaning in spacious areas. In cramped areas like narrow alleys, these machines need some access point. The government is mulling a robotic solution, and is in talks with Kerala-based GenRobotics company. Robots are small and handy and will help clean up narrow areas.

According to the office of Delhi's Social Welfare Minister Rajendra Pal Gautam, manual scavengers are being rehabilitated. The government has floated tenders for allocating these machines and the first preference will be given to safai karamcharies. A week ago, the Delhi cabinet approved a rehabilitation programme for the manual scavengers. It will include skill development programme with Rs 3,000 stipend for these workers. The government has also decided to give one-time cash assistance of Rs 40,000 and loan up to Rs 15 lakh, said Gautam.

Delhi Jal Board (DJB) vice-chairman Dinesh Mohaniya says the board has more than 200 machines and manual scavenging has been wiped out from the capital. Since February this year, the DJB is providing machines to its workers. He says only the housing societies and owners of private buildings hire cheap labour for manual scavenging.

Wilson disagrees. “No safai karamchari has been given the tender for the machines. Only the rich are making money from these tenders. No safai karamchari has been given the job to handle these machines. They are still doing the work with their bare hands”. Ravi Shankar, a member of Safai Karamchari Aayog, Delhi, is not sure how the machines will help. “The government is making efforts to eradicate manual scavenging by replacing manpower with machines. However, some supervisors in the PWD, Delhi Jal Board and Flood Control Department hire untrained workers who are ready to do this job for mere Rs 250.”

The Aayog has asked the Delhi Police and civic bodies to keep a tab on illegal scavenging. The beat-officers and the supervisors of the civic bodies have been directed to keep a check on open sewers and people engaged in this illegal practice.

WHAT THE LAW SAYS
