MC gets just one fire tender against demand of 10

Ludhiana: Against the requirement of 10 new fire tenders, the Ludhiana municipal corporation has received only one fire tender, while neighbouring cities of Patiala, Zirakpur and Jalandhar got two fire tenders each.

Civic officials claimed that they had demanded 10 fire tenders because Ludhiana witnesses more fire incidents during summer, keeping the fire officials constantly on their toes. Some fires take 12 to 18 hours to douse.

The local bodies department had recently received 20 multi-purpose fire tenders before the parliamentary elections. But due to the model code of conduct being in force, the fire tenders could not be distributed. Now, the state government has decided to include small municipal committees in the distribution process as well. As a result, cities like Moga, Shahkot, Ferozepur, Batala, Sardulgarh, Khanna, Gobindgarh, Kartarpur, Rampuraphul, Kharar, Sangrur etc also got one fire tender each recently.

The officials claimed that earlier too, one fire tender was given to Raikot MC but it was never used due to the lack of staff.

According to the set norms, one fire tender is required for every 50,000 people. Ludhiana district’s population is more than 30 lakh, requiring at least 60 fire tenders. But the fire department has only 17 working fire tenders and another 7 which are defunct. The fire department does not have hydraulic ladder for reaching high-rise buildings when it comes to dousing fires from the outside. Also, while the Jalandhar MC got fire-proof suits for their firemen, Ludhiana is yet to get them.

Assistant divisional fire officer Bhupinder Sandhu claimed that they had raised a demand for 10 new fire tenders keeping in view the rate of fire incidents, but the state government decided to not pay heed to this demand.

Meanwhile, requesting anonymity, one of the fire department officials claimed that of the 17 working fire tenders with the city, they had received only two previously after a long wait and only after the central government approved a grant for the same. Out of the new 20 fire tenders, the state government allotted only one to Ludhiana. “If Patiala and Zirakpur were allocated two fire tenders each despite having one fire station, why was Ludhiana, which has 5 fire stations to cater to all the industries, allotted just one fire tender against the requirement of 10,” the official asked.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
