The banality of India

When Hannah Arendt witnessed the trial of Adolf Eichmann, the Nazi General, in Jerusalem, she was taken aback. Reporting for The New Yorker, she went to Jerusalem for the trials, and also to see things in a post-War scenario. However, she was taken aback to hear what Eichmann had to say. He had no remorse for whatever crimes he had committed. He did not feel anything because he was doing it in the sheer fashion of bureaucracy. It compelled Hannah’s thoughts to cross the limits of pre-existing “normal” and come up with the thought of a new normal, or the “banality of evil”.

Banality means unoriginal of the truest sense; a sense that is normal enough to lack even slightest interest and becomes boring. She wrote about how the crimes committed against humanity in Germany were nothing unusual for the Nazi soldiers. When she talks about the banality of evil, she refers to how evil has found its place in a world where people not only do wrong but even try to justify that without realising the gravity of their sins.

The case of the Gujarat riots where even swords were used to slay members of a minority community, or the 1984 anti-Sikh riots that shook the country, or the interview of the youngest culprit of the Nirbhaya case, show the banality of evil in our society. In the latest form of “cow protection groups”, or as these are often quoted “the cow vigilantes”, we are facing a similar situation. We see people taking the law into their hands with the justification ready. It becomes painful when the culprits are honoured by a few for their political benefits.

The murder of a police inspector in Bulandshahr while trying to perform his duty, or the lynching of a Google engineer in Karnataka, put forward examples of the sheer banality with which crimes are being committed without any remorse.

A Minister from Uttar Pradesh said people were crying over the death of one inspector when more than 20 cows had been killed. I want to ask him how can he justify the death of one man who was in his uniform and performing his duty? Would he react the same if it was his family member who faced the wreath of the mob?

Our social values have taught us that violence in all its forms must be condemned. However, it seems we are now trying to justify violence in all its forms for the sake of political gains. Whether it is the case of mob lynchings, or the murder of a scribe. None of the major political parties seem to remain an exception to this.

End of the day, it is not very difficult to conclude that Hannah Arendt was not wrong after all in saying that modernity has given rise to the banality of evil. It remains true even in a society like India that has had deep cultural roots since time immemorial.

singhws8@gmail.com
