Prisoner shift likely after Ghagidih jail clash

The East Singhbhum district administration has decided to shift as many as 27 prisoners from Ghagidih Central Jail to other jails in the state after an inmate, Manoj Kumar Singh, was killed during a gang war inside the Ghagidih jail on June 25. An official note for shifting of the prisoners has been sent to the IG (prisons) by the DC and the SSP.Sources said the gang war broke out between Akhilesh Singh and Pankaj Dubey groups inside the jail in a bid to control over a telephone booth within the jail premises. Following the clashes, members belonging to the two gangs have been put in different wards. Earlier in 2009, two prisoners were also killed during a clash between the two gangs. The clashes happened despite claims by jail authorities that they have total control over the prisoners.Moreover, both the gang leaders have been running their crime empires from behind the bars. Akhilesh Singh, was a one-time terror of the Steel City and accused in several murders, including the infamous Sakchi jailer killing. He is currently lodged in Dumka jail. Singh, son of a police sub-inspector, is also an accused in the murder of Sreeleathers’ co-owner Ashis Dey in 2007.In the past, the jail authorities said the prisoners have been put under the scanner of of CCTVs and increased the number to 156 from the existing 24. Out of these 156 hi-tech gadgets, 68 are revolving ones which keep an eye on every movement of the inmates.The then jail superintendent, Satyendra Kumar Chaudhury, had said a room would be set up where round-the-clock vigil of inmates’ movements would be done. Sources said these efforts have hardly borne any fruit. A report submitted about the June 25 clash had blamed the jail authorities for the incident and said they have not discharged their duty properly, resulting in the death of the inmate. The CCTVs were also not monitored properly. Moreover, past raids several have found banned items, including mobile phones, from the jail premises.Meanwhile, outgoing jailer Baleshwar Singh said the recent jail clash was unfortunate incident in his career. He, however, said his timely intervention prevented two other inmates being killed in the group clash.
