Judgementall Hai Kya The Wakhra Song: Kangana Ranaut, Rajkummar Rao track is a sure-shot party anthem

[Watch] Judgementall Hai Kya's The Wakhra Song out now | Photo Credit: YouTube

The Wakhra Song, the first track from Kangana Ranaut and Rajkummar Rao's Judgementall Hai Kya, has dropped online. A remake of Navv Inder and Badshah's original 2015 track Wakhra Swag, the new version also features vocals by Lisa Mishra and American-Indian rapper Raja Kumari. The track has been remade by Tanishk Bagchi and Dance India Dance: Battle of the Champions judge Bosco Martis has done the choreography.

In the said video, Kangana and Rajkummar are seen taking on each other's fashion game as well as dancing skills. The duo can be seen shelling out major fashion inspo with their multiple looks in the song. The track itself is peppy and catchy and it feels like justice has been done to the original song by cranking it up a notch.

In one of the many looks, Kangana can be seen looking like a true blue 'Queen' as she donned a regal crown with a heavily embellished glittery bodysuit and teamed it up with a faux-fur jacket. Rajkummar also looked uber-chic in an all-black avatar and is seen tethered to a chair.

Here, without further ado, check out the music video in question below.

A 20-second teaser, giving a glimpse into the party number, was unveiled by the makers yesterday. A song launch event took place in Mumbai and was attended by the lead actors as well as Ekta Kapoor, the producer of the movie.

Kangana said that producer Ekta Kapoor had a clear vision of what the peppy number should be like. “I’m not used to being a part of a promotional video, I don’t like to do them, but because Ekta Kapoor has a certain vision for the marketing, I was up for it. This is not just a disco number but has a theme to it wherein both, Rajkummar and I take on each other. There was a story here and it was relevant to the narrative.” Rajkummar added, “Kangana and I together in a song is something nobody has seen before and I have to say designer Sheetal Sharma has done a fab job with the styling.”

Helmed by Prakash Kovelamudi, Judgementall Hai Kya also features Brijendra Kala, Jimmy Sheirgill and Amyra Dastur in important roles. It is slated to hit the theatres on July 26, 2019.
