When cops averted terror in royal city

They had to act fast

Money, SFJ propaganda

Money trap

PATIALA: If Patiala police wouldn’t have acted on time on an input given by the country’s top intelligence agency, terrorists could have struck multiple times in Punjab in November last year.Nearly two weeks before the November 18 hand-grenade attack on a Nirankari Bhawan in Amritsar in which three lives were lost, the crime investigation agency (CIA) of Samana was tipped off by the Intelligence Bureau (IB) about a radicalized Sikh youth planning to carry out attacks in public places. The CIA got down to probing the antecedents of the suspect and found out that he was an operative of the newly-formed terror group Khalistan Gadar Force (KGF), in touch with ISI handlers in Pakistan through WhatsApp and Facebook , and in possession of firearms and explosives.Within days of getting the input from IB, the CIA and Patiala police arrested Shabnamdeep Singh from the royal city’s Lahoria Gate on November 1 morning. Then 24 years old, Shabnamdeep did not have a criminal past, but he was found in possession of a hand grenade, a pistol, maps to a location from where he procured the explosive and firearm, and letter pads of KGF and other terror groups. Shabnamdeep’s interrogation revealed that he was about to carry out the attack when he was arrested. The plan was to strike at a crowded public place during festive season for a high fatality count.The arrest had not just averted loss of innocent lives, but also blown the lid off a New York-based pro-Khalistan group which had been claiming to be not involved in terrorist activities — Sikhs For Justice. Shabnamdeep’s interrogation revealed that the persons he was in touch with included a Pakistan intelligence officer named Javed Khan Wazir, SFJ operative Nihal Singh and even Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee general secretary Gopal Singh Chawla.The plan to strike terror in Patiala had been in the works for nearly four months before Shabnamdeep’s arrest, revealed the investigation. In July 2018, Shabnamdeep had been contacted by Wazir on Facebook. He then introduced the youth hailing from Samana’s Daftari Wala Burar village to Chawla and then to Nihal Singh. On Facebook, Shabnamdeep formed the page of Khalistan Gadar Force and was operating a profile with pseudonym Lahoria Jatt Gill.Shabnamdeep told his interrogators that Nihal and Wazir were in regular touch with him through Facebook and kept on inciting him to indulge in arson of liquor vends. As an incentive, they even promised him Rs 10 lakh for every strike.Shabnamdeep was asked to videograph such acts of arson and share videos along with news reports of these incidents. By November, Shabnamdeep had acquired several aliases — Maninder Lahoria, Sheru, Deep and Billa. To prove his capability, he started by using kerosene to set on fire the shutter of a liquor vend at Fatehemajri village in Samana. He then burnt down an abandoned shack at Bhatian village near Kaithal, Haryana. He sent the videos of both acts to his handlers. He even recorded the video of a brick kiln in Hemumajra in Kaithal, Haryana, sent it to his handlers and told them that it was a school which he had burned down.Police recovered all three videos from Shabnamdeep’s phone and found that he had shared these with foreign mobile numbers on WhatsApp. While Shabnamdeep’s earlier crimes were not so grave in nature, the real threat came when Wazir tasked Shabnamdeep to carry out mass killings in Patiala and promised him Rs 10 lakh for each act, according to the charge sheet filed by police.To provide him firepower for the attacks, the handlers sent Shabnamdeep the location of the place where they had stashed a hand grenade for him. He went to collect the explosive with another radicalized youth, Gursewak Singh. The duo collected the explosive from under a signboard on National Highway 44 near Khanna on October26. Shabnamdeep kept the explosive, which had been covered with grease and then wrapped in plastic tape, with him. The pistol was also kept at the same location.Nearly a week after collecting the explosive, it is alleged, Shabnamdeep was headed for carrying out the attack when police nabbed him from Lahoria Gate.Terror had been averted. “He was nabbed before he could execute the grenade attack at crowded places in Patiala, for which he was to receive foreign funding,” said Patiala SSP M S Sidhu.
