Week After Being Attacked by Mob, Telangana Officer Faces Criminal Charge

New Delhi: After a woman forest department official was attacked last Sunday by a mob in Sarsala village in Telangana, the official in question, C. Anitha has been booked under the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.

According to a report in The News Minute, a resident of the village, Nayini Saroja, has lodged a complaint with the police alleging that Anitha and the Forest Department staff had abused them by taking their ‘caste’ name.

Subsequently, Anitha and 15 others were booked by the police

On June 30, Anitha, a Telangana woman forest department official was attacked by a mob, led by the brother of Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) MLA Koneru Konappa, over an afforestation programme taken up by the state government.

A video of the incident where the mob attempts to disrupt the programme and assaults Anitha was widely circulated on social media.

TRS MLA Koneru Konappa’s brother and 15 others were arrested following the incident.

The National Commission for Women (NCW) also took note of the attack on Anitha and wrote to the Telangana director general of police Mahender Reddy condemning the brutality of the crime and the fact that a woman, in particular, was targeted.

Also read: TRS MLA, Whose Brother Led Attack on Forest Officer, Asks Locals to Mislead Media

Just a day before she was booked, the police had extended armed security to Anitha in light of the threat perception after she alleged that she feared a threat to her life. “I am scared of those people,” she told the Hindustan Times. “They might kill me after coming out of jail. I am very scared.”

Anitha also alleged that her predecessors had faced similar threats and attacks from the local leaders. “They are known for instigating the tribals to attack forest officials.”

In a press note, the Forest Divisional Officer in Kagaznagar alleged that Konappa’s brother and some locals carried out the attack as they had a ‘mala fide intention’ to occupy the Reserve Forest land. However, locals claimed that they had been cultivating the land for decades.

A case had been registered under Sections 353 (Assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty), 332 (Voluntarily causing hurt to deter public servant from his duty), 307 (Attempt to murder), 147 (Rioting), 148 (Rioting, armed with deadly weapon), 427 (Mischief causing damage), 507 (Criminal intimidation), 509 (Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman) of the IPC.
