Illegal rehab centre sealed in Patiala; 29 inmates rescued

amansharma@tribunemail.com

Karam Prakash

Tribune News Service

Patiala, July 8

The district health department has unearthed illegal drug rehabilitation centre – running in the outskirts of Patiala and rescued 29 drug addicts.

On Monday, the Health Department raided New Way Welfare Foundation Counseling and Rehabilitation centre -- in Hardaspur village -- and sealed it.

The health department officials, after receiving a tip-off from police, conducted the raid at the centre which falls under the Kauli health sub-centre of Patiala.

“All 29 men, aged between 20 and 30, were confined in one big room. The centre had applied for the licence, but it was under consideration. So, we have sealed the centre,” Deputy Medical Commissioner Dr MS Dhaliwal said.

The rehab centre was being, allegedly, run by Jaspreet Singh who could not produce the requisite licence and other documents, Dhaliwal said. The owner of the centre, Shamsher Singh, was not present at the time of the raid.

Inmates alleged inhuman treatment

During the raid, it came to the fore that the inmates had been illegally confined at the centre. The rescued inmates complained of physical torture and said they were coerced to stay in inhuman and unhygienic conditions.

The health officers said only 23 beds were available for 29 inmates. During the raid, it was found that inmates were inhumanly huddled in one hall. Wooden beds with basic bedding were put tightly next to each other. The access to the hall was through a gate that remained locked throughout the day.

Inmates said they used to do all the work of the centre and even prepare meals. They added that the owner was charging Rs 15,000-20,000 for one month from each inmate.

A 29-year-old inmate from Barnala, said, “We were always kept under CCTV surveillance and badly treated. I was beaten up last month with a wooden stick after I complained about food.”

Opioid dependent

The health department informed that the majority of inmates were opioid-dependent, including heroin and smack. Dr Prabhdeep Singh, psychiatrist, said the majority of inmates were addicted to heroin while some were addicted to habit-forming drugs. He added that people come to the rehabilitation centre after they have given up on drugs. He said the inmates were from far-off districts, including Tarn Taran and Amritsar.

Inmates shifted to govt centres

Meanwhile, the health officials reiterated that the department would conduct more such raids in coming days and action would be initiated against the defaulters immediately, as per the law. Dr Jaitley said out of 29 inmates six were taken by family members while nine shifted to a government centre in Fatehgarh Sahib. The remaining inmates were shifted to the government centre in Rajpura and Saket hospital in Patiala.
