Karnataka: Roshan Baig to resign as Congress MLA; set to join BJP

File picture: Roshan Baig | Photo Credit: IANS

Bengaluru: Karnataka Congress legislator R Roshan Baig on Monday announced that he is set to resign from his post and join the Bharatiya Janata Party.

The Karnataka Pradesh Congress Committee (KPCC) had last month suspended Baig for 'anti-party activities'. He was suspended following the approval of the All India Congress Committee (AICC).

While talking to a news agency today, Baig said that he was hurt by the way Congress party had treated him. "I'll resign from my MLA post and join BJP," added Baig.

"I'm hurt by the way Congress has treated me and suspended me as I spoke bitter truth. The state leadership has failed. There is no accountability. I am not going to either Mumbai or Goa, I am in Bengaluru. I am going to resign from MLA post. They (BJP) are in touch with me."

Speaking on his decision to join the BJP, Baig said: "Why not? I am not compromising on my integrity. The BJP is also a political party, what is the big deal in it."

67-year-old Baig is a former Congress minister and an eight-time MLA from the Shivajinagar Assembly segment in Karnataka's Bengaluru.

On May 20, Baig had openly lashed out at AICC general secretary KC Venugopal, Congress Legislative Party (CLP) leader Siddaramaiah, and party's state unit president Dinesh Gundu Rao following the exit polls, which predicted that the party would perform poorly in the Lok Sabha Elections.

"Venugopal is a buffoon. What does he know about the party in our state as he is from Kerala? Due to Siddaramaiah's arrogance, the party lost in the May 2018 Assembly elections and Rao's immaturity is responsible for the dismal state of affairs currently," Baig had told the media at his residence.

The KPCC on May 21 served a notice to him, asking him to explain his statement. Baig was suspended on June 19.

A day later, Baig reaffirmed his loyalty to Congress president Rahul Gandhi, saying: "As a loyal and dedicated member of the party, I spoke the truth on why the Congress won only one parliamentary seat and lost in 20 seats it contested in alliance with the Janata Dal-Secular (JD-S). I will explain my views to the leadership soon."

"Blaming the party's state leadership, especially Congress Legislature Party (CLP) leader Siddaramaiah and KPCC president Dinesh Gundu Rao, cannot be termed anti-party when they were responsible for the party's rout in the general election," Baig had added.
