suicides, sepsis and murder at hands of their own dad

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Want all the latest Showbiz news direct to your inbox? Share your email for news, gossip and more

They had their whole lives ahead of them and had already got their careers off to a flying start.

But for these child stars, their time on Earth was to be cut tragically short.

For some it was rare disease or just plain bad luck that caused their untimely death, whilst others were murdered in cold blood by nightclub bullies or even their own father...

Rob Knox - Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince

Cause of death: Murder

The 18-year-old British actor played Marcus Belby in the franchise and had just wrapped filming when he was stabbed to death after a row outside a bar in Sidcup, Kent, in May 2008.

Rob had stepped in to defend his brother Jamie, then 17, before being butchered by killer Karl Bishop in a 90-second frenzy.

"It happened in front of me, I didn't see a knife go in, but I saw Rob go up to get the knives off the boy," Jamie told the Jeremy Kyle Show last year.

"This kid was just swinging his arms around with knives towards people. I'll never forget it. I turned around and screamed and when I turned back I saw Rob slumped around him, holding himself with his arms.

"He was saying, 'I've been stabbed, I've been stabbed."

The subsequent trial heard how Bishop was a known carrier of knives and had armed himself with two knives from his kitchen.

He got a life term for Rob's murder and three others for wounding Dean Saunders, 23, Nicky Lee Jones, 20, and Charlie Grimley, 17.

Sawyer Sweeten - Everybody Loves Raymond

Cause of death: Suicide

(Image: Getty)

The actor who played twin son Geoffrey Barone in the CBS show shot himself on the porch of his family's Texas home in 2015.

Aged just 19, he is believed to have suffered a mental breakdown whilst visiting his parents, and an autopsy discovered cannabis in his blood.

He joined the show alongside twin brother Sullivan when they were just 16 months old in 1996 and quit acting when it ended in 2005.

Heather O'Rourke - Poltergeist

Cause of death: Septic shock and cardiac arrest

(Image: Internet Unknown)

She found fame playing the angelic Carol Anne Freeling in the 1982 Steven Spielberg horror about a family whose home was being terrorised by a supernatural being.

Heather also starred in the two sequels before being misdiagnosed with Crohn's disease. But when she collapsed on January 31, 1988, doctors realised she'd actually had a long-standing bowel blockage.

Surgery to remove the obstruction gave her septic shock and she died from a subsequent heart attack aged just 12 years old.

Judith Barsi - Land Before Time

Cause of death: Murder

She voiced Ducky in the 1988 movie before being murdered alongside her mother that same year.

Having also voiced orphan Anne-Marie in All Dogs Go to Heaven and starred in Jaws: The Revenge she was earning up to £80,000 a year and had helped her parents to buy a home in West Hollywood.

But her alcoholic dad became increasingly abusive, and the then 10 year old was so traumatised that she started pulling her own eye lashes out.

She was last seen riding her bike on the morning of July 25, 1988.

That evening her dad shot her in the head and then murdered her mum.

After spending two days wandering around the house, he poured petrol over their bodies and set them on fire before shooting himself in the garage.

Mya-Lecia Naylor - Absolutely Fabulous

Cause of death: Unknown

(Image: Instagram)

The rising CBBC star died suddenly on April 7 aged just 16.

A neighbour of the teen actress' dad, Martin Naylor, said she 'collapsed' before her death.

Nana Boateng told the Daily Mail: "He told me that Mya had collapsed. He was about to break down when he added: 'We’ve lost our baby'.

"I feel so sorry for them. She was such a young, happy and beautiful girl with everything to live for."

She first appeared on screens as Saffy's baby daughter Jane in Absolutely Fabulous and went on to star in Cloud Atlas alongside Tom Hanks in 2012.

No cause of death has yet been given with an inquest at Croydon Coroner's Court still to be heard.

Cameron Boyce - Grown Ups

Cause of death: Seizure

The Disney star tragically died after suffering a seizure in his sleep on July 6 this year.

"It is with a profoundly heavy heart that we report that this morning we lost Cameron," a family spokesman said.

"He passed away in his sleep due to a seizure which was a result of an ongoing medical condition for which he was being treated.

"The world is now undoubtedly without one of its brightest lights, but his spirit will live on through the kindness and compassion of all who knew and loved him.

He was best known for playing Adam Sandler's son Keithie Feder in 2010 film Grown Ups and Luke Ross in the Disney Channel show, Jessie.

Michelle Thomas - The Cosby Show

Cause of death: Stomach cancer

She starred as Theo Huxtable's girlfriend, Justine Phillips, on The Cosby Show for three years before featuring in music videos for Boyz II Men.

In 1993 she landed her first leading role as Myra Monkhouse in Family Matters but was diagnosed with a rare form of stomach cancer a year before it went off air in 1997.

Doctors successfully managed to operate and remove the tumour.

But it returned in 1998 and Michelle died surrounded by friends and family aged 30 after the mass ruptured.

Matthew Garber - Mary Poppins

Cause of death: Hepatitis

(Image: Supplied by LMK)

Brit star Matthew played Michael Banks in the 1964 film Mary Poppins but retired from acting aged 10.

He unknowingly contracted hepatitis while in India in 1976, but by the time his dad managed to get him home in 1977, it had already spread to his pancreas.

He died from hemorrhagic necrotising pancreatitis at the Royal Free Hospital in Hampstead, London aged 21.

His brother Fergus, who was 13 when Matthew died, denied claims his brother contracted hepatitis by using drugs and said it had probably come from eating infected meat.
