2008 Malegaon blast: Judge examines Sadhvi Pragya's bike which allegedly was laden with explosives

Two motorbikes and five cycles were seized from the Malegaon blast site. (Photo: PTI)

A special court on Monday examined the motorbike, allegedly owned by Sadhvi Pragya, which was seized from the 2008 blast site in Malegaon.

Two motorbikes and five cycles seized from the blast site were brought in a tempo to the Mumbai sessions court before special NIA Judge Vinod Padalkar who is conducting the trial.

Malegaon, a small town in Nashik district of Maharashtra was terrorised by a bomb blast in 2008 which killed six people and injured over hundred. Sadhvi Pragya is one of the accused in the case.

She is currently out on bail after seeking exemption from the court on grounds of medical treatment and attending the Parliament.

Two motorbikes and five cycles seized from the blast site were brought in a tempo to the Mumbai sessions court before special NIA Judge Vinod Padalkar who is conducting the trial. The judge, concerned lawyers and a witness got into the tempo to examine the motorbikes and the cycles.

The witness identified the motorbike as the one he saw at the blast site on September 29, 2008, in Malegaon.

According to the prosecution, the bomb was fitted on the gold-coloured LML Freedom motorcycle which is registered under Sadhvi Pragya's name.

According to one of the chargesheets, Sadhvi Pragya had provided the motorbike for the blast to her close associate Ramji Kalsangra. Kalsangra is also wanted in the case.

Sadhvi Pragya's advocate JP Mishra also cross examined the witness in the case which was later adjourned for Tuesday.

In May, the court had ordered Sadhvi Pragya and other six accused in the case including Lt Col Prasad Purohit to appear before the court at least once.

However, Sadhvi Pragya has appeared only one time since then. Her lawyer, Mishra, has been filing exemption applications stating that Sadhvi Pragya is facing health issues and is under the care of Medical health care centre in Parliament.

In spite of her ill-health, Sadhvi Pragya has been attending Parliament. The court has been granting exemption from appearance to her on a daily basis.

During the hearing on Monday, only one accused, Sameer Kulkarni, was present in court.
