ISIS funder in Britain deceiving through ‘white lies’

David Giddings

Back in 2009, a Bangladeshi family had entered the United Kingdom by obtaining immigration visas under Visa Tier-1. Authorities in Britain had no problem in inviting this family, despite the fact they entered the country with millions of laundered dirty money.

According to newspaper reports a man named Md. Shahid Uddin Khan, along with his wife Farjana Anjum and daughters Shehtaz Munasi Khan, Parisa Pinaz Khan and Zumana Fiza Khan had entered the United Kingdom with tons of dirty money and had even managed immigrant status under Visa Tier 1, vide VAF No. 511702. On October 23, 2010, this family has established a company named Zumana Investment & Properties Limited [incorporation number 74174117] in Britain.

Media reports claim Khan, who has earlier cheated several individuals in Bangladesh by forging land documents may ultimately use his Zumana Investment & Properties Limited in cheating Britons.

It was also reported in the media that Khans are having business connections with Tory MP Stephen Hammond as well as fugitive terrorist Dawood Ibrahim.

The report said, Md. Shahid Uddin Khan had actually invested the money in South Coast Regeneration and Investment Property (SCRIP), where Tory MP and junior minister Stephen Hammond is holding 15 percent of issued share capital from March 8, 2017. Khan also has invited Sally Hammond, wife of the MP to join Zumana Investment & Properties Limited as the chairman.

Md. Shahid Uddin Khan, his wife Farjana Anjum and daughters named Shehtaz Munasi Khan and Parisa Pinaz Khan have laundered millions of dollars between 2009-2018 from Bangladesh and invested in the United Arab Emirates and Britain.

There are allegations about Md. Shahid Uddin Khan and his family having business relations with Dawood Ibrahim’s D-Company in Dubai. Dawood Ibrahim controls much of the illegal channels of money transfer around the world. He has strong bases in India, United Arab Emirates, Thailand, Malaysia, United Arab Emirates, Britain, European Union nations, Australia, Canada, the United States, and the African continent.

The United States Department of the Treasury designated Dawood Ibrahim as a terrorist as part of its international sanctions program, effectively forbidding US financial entities from working with him and seizing assets believed to be under his control. The Department of Treasury keeps a fact sheet on Dawood which contains reports of his syndicate having smuggling routes from South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa shared with and used by terrorist organization Al Qaeda. The fact sheet also said that Dawood’s syndicate is involved in the large-scale shipment of narcotics in the United Kingdom and Western Europe.

On January 17, 2019, Dhaka residence of Md. Shahid Uddin Khan was raided by the members of the Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) unit of Bangladesh Police.

CTTC, based on secret information, raided House No. 184, Road No. 2, Baridhara DOHS in Dhaka, Bangladesh on January 17, 2019. This house is owned by Md. Shahid Uddin Khan and was allegedly used as a warehouse for arms, explosives and propaganda materials of Islamic State (ISIS). During the raid, a large volume of weapons, detonator, counterfeit Bangladesh currency notes and jihadist materials of ISIS were recovered by the CTTC unit.

Following this recovery, three separate cases against ISIS-funder Md. Shahid Uddin Khan, his wife Farjana Anjum, daughters and other accomplices were lodged. The cases are Cantonment PS, Case no 10, Section-6(2)/7/11/12 of Anti Terrorism Act 2009 (amendment 2013); Cantonment PS, Case no 11, Section-25-A, Special Power Act 1974; and Cantonment PS, Case no 12, Section-19-A of Arms Act 1878.

Shahid Uddin Khan’s youngest daughter Zumana Fiza Khan not only is romancing with the nephew of a commander of Joish-e-Mohammad, but she is also actively promoting Pakistan and Pakistanis through her social media accounts.

His second daughter, Parisa Pinaz Khan, who is a committed towards Islamic State (ISIS), has been looking after her father’s business interest with D-Company, a notorious brand operated by Dawood Ibrahim. Sitting in London, Parisa is taking care of their business in Dubai – a business covering drugs, arms, and counterfeit currency.

Md. Shahid Uddin Khan has the ambition of becoming a top figure in the jihadist world and capture power in Bangladesh by establishing Caliphate. With this goal, he has been advancing his notorious activities by financing Islamic State as well as other jihadist groups in South Asia. He has contributed a large sum of money behind the Easter Sunday jihadist attacks in Sri Lanka.

On the other hand, Parisa Pinaz Khan is even much ferocious than her father. For a couple of years, she has been trying to establish connections with the Russian underground – or maybe the secret service of the country. Following the Novichok (name of the Russian nerve agent) attack on Sergei Skripal in London, Moscow too is now looking for some people – ambitious like Parisa, who would work for the Federal Security Service. Accordingly, Parisa visited Moscow.

The most disturbing fact about Md. Shahid Uddin Khan is his direct involvement in dealing into counterfeit Indian currency, which is being manufactured in Pakistan by its spy agency, Inter Service Intelligence (ISI). During 2009-2018, Khan has made a huge amount of money by dealing into Indian counterfeit currency while the consignments were sent inside India through Khan’s old-contacts within the cross-border smuggling rackets.

Shahid Uddin Khan is applying the notorious tactics of Taqiya [deception] with the Britons, which he reportedly justifies as “white lies”. His argument is – there is no religious bar in deceiving or cheating non-Muslims and he would fool them through “white lies” and “contribute in establishing Sharia rule” in the United Kingdom.

On June 20, 2019, Interpol has issued Red Notice on Md. Shahid Uddin Khan, his wife Farjana Anjum, daughters Shehtaz Munasi Khan and Parisa Pinaz Khan. Authorities in the United Kingdom should immediately deport the members of this notorious family to Bangladesh, as part of its commitment towards combating militancy and crime.
