29 dead as bus falls through gap between e-way flyovers

UP: At least 29 killed as passenger bus falls into gorge on Yamuna expressway

AGRA: In the worst-ever crash on the Yamuna Expressway , 29 people were killed and 23 others injured when an Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation (UPSRTC) bus plunged 40 feet into a drain between two flyovers after breaking through the safety railing on the high-speed stretch near Agra early on Monday.The two-tiered AC sleeper bus, known as Jan Rath seva , was cruising at a high speed when it crashed at 4.05am at Etmadpur, 4km from Agra, near Milestone 161 of the expressway. It fell upside down into a drain called Jharna Nullah, which had about six-eight feet of water.“Prima facie, it appears that the driver fell asleep at the wheel. The bus was speeding, which caused it to jump off the flyover's railing,” Agra district magistrate N G Ravi Kumar said.So far this year, 135 people have died in 302 accidents on the Yamuna Expressway. The toll is higher than all of last year, when 111 lives were lost on the stretch, as per figures released by Union road transport minister Nitin Gadkari on Monday.The driver, identified as Kripa Shankar Chaudhary, was among those killed.Senior superintendent of police Babloo Kumar said, “Twenty-nine passengers, including a 2.5-year-old kid and 20-year-old woman, were killed in the accident. Another 23 were injured. They are being provided treatment.”The bus with 52 passengers and two crew members was heading to Delhi’s Anand Vihar ISBT from Lucknow’s Alambagh depot. Agra police confirmed the identities of all 29 dead, who hailed from Lucknow (11), Ghaziabad (2), Delhi (2), Gorakhpur (2), Basti (2), Rae Bareli (3), Pune (1), Bhojpur, Bihar (1), Gonda (1), Kurukshetra (1), Barabanki (1), Mirzapur (1) and one from an unidentified district.The Yamuna Expressway is one of the most modern roads in the country but the high-speed stretch is also notorious for its fatal crashes. A total of 944 deaths have been reported on the expressway since it was commissioned in August 2012.Major (retired) Manish Singh, in-charge coordinator of the expressway, said, “It seems the driver of the speeding bus fell asleep at the wheel. The bus crashed through the reinforced concrete railing and dropped 40 feet to the drain through the gap between two flyovers.”“Since our team was at Milestone 165 where a truck driver was killed around 12.30am in a hit-and-run accident, we moved our entire machinery, including cranes, ambulances and rescue team to the accident site within minutes and the rescue operation was started,” Singh said.Dilip Shrivastav, a 35-year-old resident of Eldeco II in Lucknow who was heading to Delhi to attend an official meeting, said, “I don’t know how the bus plunged into the nullah. All of us were trying to escape from the mangled vehicle. We were saved by the rescue team of expressway.”“It was the last bus for Delhi from the Alambagh depot in Lucknow. All seats were occupied. I was sleeping at the time of the accident when I heard a loud thud. When I opened my eyes next, I found myself in hospital,” said another passenger Sham Ahmad, 28, from Amethi.Two boys who were running along the road in preparation for recruitment in the armed forces told reporters that they saw the bus fall and rushed to join the rescue.Nihal Singh, who was in a field answering the call of nature, added that he was the first to see the accident.Other villagers, too, joined in to do whatever possible, losing no time to help save those injured. The victims were quickly taken to hospitals. However, the operation to pull out the bus, whose roof had ripped off as it fell, from the drain, took several hours. Two excavators and a crane were deployed.Expressing grief over the tragedy, UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath announced an ex-gratia of Rs 5 lakh to the kin of the passengers killed in the accident. He also ordered that an investigating committee, comprising the transport commissioner, divisional commissioner and IG (Agra range), be set up to probe the accident and submit it report to the state government. On his instructions, deputy CM Dinesh Sharma and state transport minister Swatantra Dev Singh rushed to Agra and met the injured in hospitals.Deputy CM Sharma said, “It's an unfortunate accident. The medical expenses of all the victims will be borne by the state government. The transport commissioner, divisional commissioner and IG (Agra range) will submit a detailed report of the bus accident to UP government to ascertain the cause of accident.”
