Auto firms' production cut hits bestseller models

Automakers are cutting production to battle falling demand, but best selling models are facing the brunt.

The production cuts are leading to increase in waiting periods of certain cars which still have a strong demand.

According to the dealers associated with Mahindra & Mahindra (M&M), the customers who book XUV300 now have to wait for a period no less than four weeks. Earlier the waiting period was over a couple of weeks. An M&M official while confirming that the waiting period has increased, said, "It's new and is amongst the most popular products in our portfolio, and that gives a sense of how dynamics are playing out". XUV 300, which was launched in February this year, has crossed production of 25,000 units.

LONG QUEUES XUV 300, which was launched in February this year, has crossed production of 25,000 units



Maruti Suzuki's Ertiga is witnessing an average waiting period of six to seven months in Mumbai due to the production cuts

Similarly, market leader Maruti Suzuki's Ertiga is witnessing an average waiting period of six to seven months in Mumbai due to the production cuts. A senior executive attached with one of Maruti Suzuki's Mumbai retail showroom said, "Though the market is going through a very bad phase, vehicles like Ertiga have maintained their demand." Similarly, industry sources said Hyundai Creta, another popular car, has a waiting period of about four weeks in Delhi and goes up to about a couple of months in cities like Hyderabad.

Automakers are making production cuts since past several months due to the spiralling inventory at the showrooms arising out of lack in demand. The severity of the slowdown can be gauged by the 15.6% cut in production by the country's largest car manufacturer Maruti Suzuki to 1,11,917 units in June, a fifth consecutive monthly drop. Similarly, M&M had announced it will shut productions across its plants for up to 13 days in the current quarter to adjust to the slowing demand. Likewise, Tata Motors, which is working to turn around its fortunes, is left with no option but to reduce its production. The company is looking to reduce its factory inventory to less than 1,000 units this month.

However, the automakers are now expecting that the government's recent announcement regarding the funding of sound non-banking finance companies (NBFCs) would help in bringing liquidity in the market, thereby arresting the sales slowdown in the short term.

According to Pawan Goenka, managing director, M&M, it will provide some immediate results as even if 10% customers get the finances for vehicle purchase (who were earlier not getting it), it would help in reducing the slowdown by 10%. "It can turn out to be a masterstroke for short term demand".

The Indian automotive industry has been facing a prolonged spell of slowdown for over nine months, as even festive seasons have failed to bring any cheers. According to the executives across the OEMs, retailers and component makers, one of the primary reasons for the slowdown has been the tightening of liquidity by non-banking financial institutions following the IL&FS crisis. The other prominent reasons include a rise in fuel prices, rural distress due to lack of rains in certain regions, new insurance laws leading to increase in its costs and slowdown in certain industries, leading to dip in consumer sentiments.
