Minutes after exchanging garlands, groom dies from celebratory firing in Bihar

His brother is still undergoing treatment and battling for his life. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The groom's brother also suffered injuries and is still undergoing treatment Bihar police has banned celebratory firing at social functions. Police said, during wedding season number of casualties increases due to celebratory firing

Patna: In a case reported from Patna, Bihar, minutes after exchanging garlands with the bride, the groom was wounded in celebratory firing on Sunday night. He later died in the hospital while his brother who also suffered injuries is still undergoing treatment. The incident happened in the Shahpur police station area limits.

The victim was identified as Satyendra Kumar, whose wedding was scheduled for Sunday. The victim hailed from Harshamchak village under the Akhilpur police station area. At around 10 pm, according to the rituals, the procession reached the bride's house. Meanwhile, minutes after the couple reportedly exchanged garlands, the groom's friends took over the stage and began dancing.

According to a report, one of the groom's friend took to the stage, pulled out a firearm and began firing in the air. Three such bullets got misfired, while he was trying to clear the bullets stuck in the barrel. One of these bullets hit the groom and his brother- Guddu, as well.

The bride was identified as Bhuletan Rai and the incident happened at around 11 pm. The report also mentioned that soon after the incident the victims were rushed to a local hospital in Danapur, where Kumar succumbed to his injuries on Monday morning at around 6 am. His brother is still undergoing treatment and battling for his life.

Danpur Assistant Police Commissioner, Ashok Mishra told HT that they have not been able to identify who the culprit was. He added that someone in the procession, the groom's friend has resorted to celebratory firing and he is currently absconding. The forensic team has also visited the spot to collect pieces of evidence.

Another senior police officer said that during the wedding season the number of casualties increases across the state due to celebratory firing in the wedding celebrations, while a number of cases also go unreported.

Also Read: Delhi: 3 held in connection with illegal ammunition business; probe underway

However, the local police are investigating the case and they are trying to get the video recording of the incident. An FIR in the case has been registered by the police. Reportedly, as per recent rules and regulations, the Bihar police has banned celebratory firing at social functions.
