JDS-Cong regime still on edge; BJP bullish but patient

Bengaluru: Karnataka chief minister HD Kumaraswamy has extracted the resignations of all his ministers, in a bid to send a message to the 13 MLAs who have quit their assembly seats that he is open to inducting them in the cabinet.Ministers H Nagesh and R Shankar, both independents, resigned and switched loyalties to the BJP. With their addition, the BJP’s strength in the 224-member assembly has increased to 107. A few more Congress MLAs are rumoured to be planning to quit their assembly membership on Tuesday, and the Congress leaders are reaching out to potential targets to prevent their resignations.The chief minister, however, has not yet forwarded the resignations of the ministers to governor VR Vala, nor has he met him with a formal communication about any restructuring of the ministry. The opposition BJP, which has turned bullish at the swift turn of events in the ruling Janata Dal(S)-Congress camp, is playing a waiting game, and has resisted the temptation of staking claim to form the government.BJP state president BS Yeddyurappa held a meeting of the legislature party on Monday evening, where they decided to wait for the fate of the JD(S)-Congress regime for the next two-three days.“Our party strength has risen to 107, while that of the coalition has dropped to 104. Our party workers will hold protest demonstrations in all district headquarters on Tuesday, to press for the government’s resignation,” BJP state general secretary Aravind Limbavali told reporters.Real political action, however, is expected to begin on Tuesday when assembly speaker KR Ramesh Kumar will take up the resignations submitted by 10 Congress and 3 JD(S) MLAs for further formalities. There is a possibility of the speaker requiring the physical presence of these MLAs in which case all those lawmakers now camping in Mumbai will have to return to Bengaluru.Congress legislature party leader Siddaramaiah too has called an official meeting with all party MLAs on Tuesday morning for which the party has issued a whip. The dissident group, however, has said it has no plans to attend it. Ahead of this meeting, Siddaramaiah appealed to his party MLAs not to fall prey to the BJP’s “inducements” and withdraw their resignations. “We have already decided to form the ministry afresh,” he tweeted.After resigning from the cabinet on Monday morning, Nagesh left for Mumbai by a special flight to join the group of disgruntled MLAs. Shankar too left for Mumbai, however, from the Kempegowda International Airport to evade Congress leaders who are keeping a hawk’s eye on the HAL airport from where the other MLAs flew by a private aircraft.The Congress party’s main trouble-shooter, DK Shivakumar, meanwhile, has left for New Delhi.In another development, Congress MLA (Jayanagar) Sowmya Reddy met senior leader Sonia Gandhi in New Delhi. Gandhi reportedly asked her to persuade her father Ramalinga Reddy, who is among the 13 MLAs who have resigned, to stay back in the party. She is expected to attend the CLP meeting on Tuesday.In a chat with ET, Reddy, however, ruled out withdrawing the resignation even if offered a ministership. The BJP leaders, he said, did talk to him, but that was not the reason why he had resigned.BJP Rajya Sabha member Rajeev Chandrashekar, meanwhile, hit back at Congress leaders for alleging that he had lent his private aircraft for flying the MLAs to Mumbai. Chandrashekar said he ran a charter service and the same had been availed of by many people including Congress ministers in the past.
