Three people injured in firing from across LoC

MUZAFFARABAD: Two men and a woman were injured in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) on Saturday as Indian troops resorted to ceasefire violations from across the restive Line of Control (LoC) on their Republic Day that was observed by the Kashmiris on both sides of the divide as a ‘black day’.

The casualties occurred in the Tattapani Goi sector of Kotli district, where Indian troops targeted the civilian population with mortar, machine-gun and small arms fire without any provocation, said Dr Umer Azam, the deputy commissioner of Kotli.

“They [Indian troops] started firing at about 2pm… It was intense and continued till 7pm, with the civilian population as its primary target,” he told Dawn by telephone.

“As a result, a woman and two men were injured,” he said.

He identified the victims as Mohammad Sharif, 55, Mohammad Shafi, 60, of Kanait village, and Sadia Nazarat, 24, of Batali village.

The house of Sadia Naz­a­rat was damaged after being hit by a mortar shell, the deputy commissioner said.

The three wounded persons were evacuated to Kotli District Headquarters Hospital, where doctors said their condition was out of danger, he added.

On Wednesday, two men and a woman were injured by Indian shelling in Sandara Nakyal and Batali villages of the same sector.

Officials say that although a ceasefire agreement sig­n­­ed by the armies of Pakistan and India in November 2003 holds, the Indian side has been “frequently and severely” violating it, particularly since 2015.

According to Syed Shahid Mohyiddin Qadri, the secretary of the State Disaster Management Authority, 134 AJK residents have been killed and another 629 injured in such violations since January 2015.

Sharing year-wise data, he told Dawn that 17 persons were killed and 44 injured in 2015, 41 were killed and 142 wounded in 2016, 46 were killed and 262 wounded in 2017, 28 were killed and 172 wounded in 2018 and two were killed and nine wounded in the 26 days of 2019.

Meanwhile, AJK Prime Minister Raja Farooq Haider condemned unprovoked Indian firing in the Goi sector, saying the AJK’s civilian population was being targeted under a well thought out policy of Narendra Modi government to divert world attention away from its savagery in occupied Kashmir.

Mr Haider called upon the United Nations and other global organisations and institutions to take stock of the situation and press India to honour its commitments about UN resolutions on Kashmir to save the region from a catastrophic war between nuclear armed neighbours.

Published in Dawn, January 27th, 2019
