Rahul Gandhi to appear before Ahmedabad court for calling Amit Shah murder-accused

Rahul Gandhi had appeared in a Mumbai court in another case last week. (File Photo)

Rahul Gandhi will appear before an Ahmedabad court on Tuesday in connection with a defamation case filed against the Congress leader for allegedly calling Amit Shah a murder accused.

In the run-up to the Lok Sabha elections, Rahul Gandhi had called Amit Shah a murder accused while addressing an election rally at Madhya Pradesh in April. Rahul was citing a murder case in which the BJP leader was discharged five years ago.

"Murder accused BJP chief Amit Shah. Wah, kya shaan hai! (Wow, what a glory!)" Rahul Gandhi had reportedly said.

In 2014, a special court discharged Amit Shah in the Sohrabuddin Sheikh and Tulsiram Prajapati encounter killing cases, holding there existed "no case" against him and that he had been implicated for "political reasons".

Taking strong objection to Rahul Gandhi's statement, BJP leader Prabhat Jha sent a legal notice to the then Congress president.

Prabhat Jha had alleged that Rahul Gandhi's statements was directed at the national president of a party which has 11 crore members, one of whom is the nation's Prime Minister.

The remark had prompted a strong rebuttal from Amit Shah, who questioned the Rahul Gandhi's "legal knowledge" and said the "fake" charge was dismissed as "politically motivated" by the court long ago.

"Let me tell you the gist of the order. I was slapped with a fake case and the court has already passed its order that it was a politically motivated allegation and was without any evidence. I don't want to make any comment on the legal knowledge of Rahul Gandhi," Amit Shah had said.

Rahul Gandhi had earlier appeared before a Mumbai court in connection with a defamation case filed by an RSS worker against him for allegedly linking journalist Gauri Lankesh's killing with the "BJP-RSS ideology".

READ | Rahul Gandhi granted bail in 'all Modis are chors' remark defamation case

READ | Series of defamation hearings to keep Rahul Gandhi on his toes
