SC refuses to intervene in Saravana Bhavan owner’s plea for time to surrender

Case pertains to murder of his employee 18 years ago

The Supreme Court on Tuesday refused to intervene in a plea by P. Rajagopal, the proprietor of Saravana Bhavan hotel chain, for extension of time to surrender in a case of murder of his employee 18 years ago.

Rajagopal was supposed to surrender on July 7 as per a March 2019 judgment of the Supreme Court, holding him guilty in the case and sentencing him to life imprisonment.

Rajagopal had sought further extension of his stay at a private hospital on medical grounds.

“If he was so ill, why did he not choose to indicate the same during the hearing of his appeal here?” Justice N.V. Ramana asked senior advocate Kapil Sibal, who appeared for Rajagopal, on Tuesday.

“No more adjournments now,” Justice Mohan M. Shantanagoudar, on the Bench, observed orally.

The employee, Santhakumar, was strangled and his body dumped in Tiger Shola forest area by Rajagopal’s henchmen. Rajagopal wanted to make Santhakumar’s wife, Jeevajothi, his third wife.

The Supreme Court had concluded that the steadfast testimonies of Jeevajothi and her family, the circumstantial evidence, recovery of personal items, such as the wallet and a gold chain of the victim, along with forensic techniques such as the superimposition test to identify the body, undoubtedly pointed to the guilt of Rajagopal and his henchman. All of them had appealed in the Supreme Court after the Madras High Court had convicted and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment.

“The prosecution has proved the complicity of all the appellants in murdering Santhakumar by strangulating him and thereafter throwing the body at Tiger Shola,” a three-judge Bench of Justices N.V. Ramana, Mohan M. Shantagoudar and Indira Banerjee held, dismissing their appeals.

The body was identified by Jeevajothi. The photographs of the victim, his clothes and a scar on his body fully proved that the body was that of Santhakumar, the court concluded. Besides, the police used three different methods — video superimposition, visual observation and dental trait superimposition. They all matched.

Justice Shantangoudar, who wrote the judgment, said “someone who is guilty cannot get away with impunity only because the truth may develop some infirmity when projected through human processes”.

The body of Santhakumar was found in the Kodaikanal range in October 2001. It was buried in the Kodaikanal municipal burial ground. Later, the body was identified to be that of Santhakumar and a chargesheet filed for offences under Sections 302 (murder), 364 (abduction) and 201 (destruction of evidence) of the IPC, following which the alleged conspiracy came to light.
