Constitution is complete, one should not think about changing it: U T Khader

MANGALURU: The world’s largest democracy that India is, has gone about the task of nation formation for the past seven decades without any hitches based on principles that the Indian Constitution has laid down. Just as breathing is important for the human body, so is the Constitution important for the nation. There is no need to change the basic principles of the Constitution, which is complete in itself, and one should not even think about it, said district minister U T Khader He was delivering the Republic Day address after unfurling the national tricolour at the district level Republic Day celebration on Saturday. Khader said it is the duty of every Indian to save the basic tenets of the Constitution, which has been framed on the principles of justice, equality and independence. The Constitution guarantees equal opportunities and equality for all, he said, adding the socio-economic-political justice that the Constitution ensures, is its beauty.It is the power of this very Constitution that has ensured that the likes of Lal Bahadur Shastri, Indira Gandhi and Manmohan Singh battled diverse disadvantages to become Prime Ministers. It has also ensured that the likes of Devaraj Urs, M Veerappa Moily, D V Sadananda Gowda, Janardhan Poojary, Oscar Fernandes, V Dhananjay Kumar and even a person like me adorn various important political posts at the state and national levels, Khader said.“The other beauty of this Constitution is that unlike constitutions of other forward nations in the world that did not give universal franchise at one go and to their women at a much later date, Khader said it was the vision of the B R Ambedkar, architect of the Indian Constitution who advocated this right for all its citizens at the very beginning. The Constitution also gave 6 fundamental rights and 11 duties at the outset and all must adhere to it,” he said.“It is duty of every citizen to uphold India’s glorious tradition and culture. People must rise above narrow consideration of religion, caste, language and sub-castes and work concertedly to protect unity and diversity of the nation and strive to build a strong and united India,” Khader said. “The history of DK is replete with instances of people who have played this role without expecting anything in return,” he said, adding it is this spirit that is lacking and needed now.Khader also outlined the various steps taken by the present coalition government to live up to the expectations of the people during the current fiscal. Under the Ayushman Bharath-Arogya Karnataka, 920 beneficiaries have benefitted to the tune of Rs 3.81 crore. Using Parihara software, Rs 19.15 crore relief has been provided to 18,350 farmer beneficiaries who lost their standing crops during the South-West monsoon in 2018-19, he noted.Khader presented the district Sarvotham award to six government employees, four state and one central government employee from Indian Coast Guard for their role in rescuing victims of the landslide at Jodupala, and silver medals to six KSRTC drivers for five-years of accident-free driving, on the occasion. Bharat Seva Dal and Road Safety Patrol were adjudged the top two marching units in the impressive march-past that was held on the occasion.
