India’s response to UN human rights body appropriate

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

The Office of United Nations High Commissioner of Human Rights (OHCHR), in its latest reprimand over its last year’s report on rights violations in Kashmir, has raised serious questions about its credibility.

For the last three years, Kashmir has been under the grip of Pakistan-backed mob violence and terrorism. Compared to the human rights violations in the 90s and 2000s, the security forces in Kashmir in the last decade have been remarkably law-abiding. In the last five years, the rights abuse in Kashmir has been at its lowest since.

The OHCHR overlooks that Pakistan-backed terror groups have unrestrainedly violated human rights of ordinary citizens and caused massive civilian casualties in Kashmir for the last 30 years. In the last one year, the period for which OHCHR has taken India to task, dozens of political workers and ordinary people have been killed by Pakistani terror groups like Jaish-e-Mohammad, Lashkar-e-Taiba and Hizbul Mujahideen. While claiming responsibility for some terror attacks, provincial branches of ISIS and al-Qaida have been releasing promotional videos to recruit youth in Kashmir. This is apart from the suicide bombings like the February 14 in Pulwama in which 44 policemen of Indian central reserve police force were killed.

Read also: India slams UN rights body’s report on J&K

While it is important that Indian security forces should improve their record on human rights abuse, the OHCHR will do well for its own institutional credibility to conduct proper research before compiling reports based on dubious sources. Ignoring the context in which Indian security forces operate in Kashmir and disproportionate rebuke India for the killings of Pakistan-backed terrorists and their over ground workers, only raises doubts about OHCHR’s neutrality. The government’s rebuttal to OHCHR is therefore valid and appropriate.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
