NIA busts bomb manufacturing unit in Karnataka; arrests three Bangladeshi individuals

Incriminating material confiscated in the bust | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights NIA busted the terror module after information provided by a Burdwan blast accused Reportedly, the confiscated IED was supposed to be detonated in a busy Bengaluru location

Bengaluru: The National Investigation Agency (NIA) on Tuesday busted a bomb manufacturing unit in Bengaluru, Karnataka and recovered grenades and an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) from the location. Apart from the incriminating material, three persons from Bangladesh were also detained from the location. The NIA received the information about the bomb manufacturing unit through a Burdwan blast accused.

According to reports, after interrogating Burdwan blast accused Habibur Rahman, who is in NIA's custody since January 2019, the investigative agency received crucial information from him about bomb manufacturing units in the capital city of Karnataka.

Acting upon the inputs provided by Habibur Rahman, the NIA raided a location in the northern district of Bengaluru. The NIA recovered five fabricated hand grenades, one timer device, three electric circuits, suspected explosive substance and different components for making IEDs/rockets.

Burdwan Blast case: On disclosure of arrested accused Habibur Rahman, NIA recovered 5 fabricated hand grenades,1 timer device,3 electric circuits,suspected explosive substance,different components for making IEDs/rockets incriminating materials from North Dist. of B'luru on 7Jul pic.twitter.com/ZE9dZIAAeN — ANI (@ANI) July 9, 2019

A fully assembled and operational IED was also recovered which was reportedly manufactured to target one of the crowded areas of Bengaluru. In the raid, the NIA also detained three persons allegedly from Bangladesh from the bomb manufacturing unit.

Earlier in January this year, the NIA arrested a key operative of the Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) module which was allegedly involved in the 2014 Burdwan blast. The arrest was made in Hooghly's Aramabagh in West Bengal.

Kader alias Kodor Kazi alias Harun (32), the arrested individual, is the brother-in-law of JMB India head Kausar alias Boma Mizan. Kazi, one of the main recruiters of the 2014 JMB module, was also the logistics head of the group in Birbhum district. His aide, Sajjad Ali alias Habibur Rahaman (20) was also picked up in another operation. Kazi and Ali are from Kirnahar in Birbhum.

Back in October 2014, at least two persons were killed and one was injured in a bomb explosion at a house in Khagragarh locality of Burdwan in West Bengal.
