Disappointing: Cow vigilantism continues to thrive in Kamal Nath’s Madhya Pradesh

Having journeyed to journalism via academics and a PhD from the University of Florida, Renuka Bisht now has the great pleasure of working with the editorial page of TOI. As impressed as the next person by big bang reforms, she’s also a champion of incremental change – because even a little star can light the way for a traveler in the dark. LESS ... MORE

Cow vigilantes continue to run amok in the country. It doesn’t even matter anymore whether the state is governed by BJP. This week a horrifying video has surfaced from Khandwa district in Madhya Pradesh.

It shows a group of men roped to each other, on their knees, many made to hold their ears as well like truant children. But of course this is many times worse than infantilization. They are surrounded by a much larger group of people, the righteous ones, or at least the mightier ones. The mightier ones are making the roped ones recite, gau mata ki jai. The whole scene brings to mind ancient scenes of slavery. But back then and in those places slavery used to be legal. Here and today this deprivation of human rights is absolutely illegal. But when the roped men were marched to the police station, police booked them, seized their trucks, and sent their cattle to a shelter. In a tragic perversion of law, the roped and abused men are presumed guilty, with a cruel ‘bonus’ being that their livelihood is blithely shattered.

This is on the heels of the Kamal Nath government deciding to amend the Madhya Pradesh law against cow slaughter, to make cow vigilantism a serious offence. That may address one end of the problem, but at the other end there is an urgent need to stop the torture of hapless cattle traders. The 19th livestock census estimated India’s bovine population at around 300 million. This population supports a large human population. Nobody should be treating these humans as less than such. And the law should be on their side.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
