Parineeti Chopra has a crazy three-week schedule: Guys, I'm dying of nerves

Parineeti Chopra will be next seen in Jabariya Jodi with Sidharth Malhotra.

Parineeti Chopra is going to be super busy for the upcoming three weeks. In the coming weeks, the actress will be promoting her film Jabariya Jodi, along with prepping for her next films The Girl On The Train and Saina Nehwal biopic. At the same time, she will also be moving to a new house.

Parineeti Chopra took to Instagram to share a hectic three-week schedule and said that she is "dying of nerves" because of it.

The actress has a busy schedule for the upcoming three weeks as she will start promoting her film Jabariya Jodi with her co-star Sidharth Malhotra. Since she will kick off The Girl On The Train shoot in the end of July, she has to prepare for the film along with her ongoing preparation for the Saina Nehwal biopic.

Along with all work commitments, the Hasee Toh Phasee actress has to shift her house as well, which will make her schedule more hectic.

Parineeti Chopra is currently waiting for the release of Jabariya Jodi, which is scheduled to release on August 2. The film, which is directed by Prashant Singh, is a wacky take on pakadwa vivah (forced marriage) prevalent in Bihar.

She will also be seen in the official remake of Hollywood thriller The Girl On The Train that starred Emily Blunt. The film was based on Paula Hawkin's popular 2015 debut novel of the same name. Parineeti will be staying in the UK for two months to shoot for the film. The actress is excited to be shooting the film in England as she will get an opportunity to meet her university friends. Parineeti studied at Manchester Business School in UK for three years before recession made her move back to India.

In an earlier interview with Mid-day, Parineeti said, "My friends have been the most integral part of my life. They were my support system when I was living away from my home. I can't wait to meet them in London. This moment calls for a massive reunion with my entire crew, and we will bring the house down."

Parineeti has been preparing for the Saina Nehwal biopic for months now. The shoot for the film will commence in October this year. Parineeti recently took to Twitter to inform her fans about the shoot.

Hi everyone, we have NOT started the shoot of #Saina yet. I am still learning how to play Badminton! We will start in October once I get better at it!! 4 MONTHS TO GO! #Saina @TSeries Parineeti Chopra (@ParineetiChopra) June 13, 2019

Earlier, Shraddha Kapoor was roped in for the biopic, which is being directed by Amol Gupte. After Shraddha's exit, Parineeti Chopra stepped in.

ALSO READ | Jabariya Jodi trailer: Sidharth Malhotra and Parineeti Chopra film is a wacky take on pakadwa vivaah

ALSO READ | Parineeti Chopra reveals exact moment she knew Priyanka and Nick were meant for each other
