Infiltration bids drop by 43% along LoC, security situation in J&K improves: Home Ministry

According to a report tabled in Parliament last month, 113 terrorists were killed so far this year in Jammu and Kashmir till June 16. | File image

Key Highlights Centre says govt has adopted a policy of zero tolerance towards cross-border infiltration The electric fence on the Line of Control along the India-Pakistan border has proved vital in curbing cross-border infiltration

New Delhi: Infiltration bids in Jammu and Kashmir have reduced by around 43 per cent ever since India carried out surgical strikes on terror camps based in Pakistan, as a result effecting massive improvement in the security situation in the Valley, Union Minister of State for Home Affairs Nityanand Rai said in the Lok Sabha today.

Rai was speaking in response to a question raised in the lower house of Parliament on whether the current situation as far as cross-border infiltration is concerned had reduced in the Valley after the Indian Air Force’s surgical strike against terror training camps in Pakistan’s Balakot in February this year post the horrific Pulwama attack.

The Union Minister, in his written response, said that the Centre has adopted a policy of zero-tolerance towards cross-border infiltration.

“Due to concerted and synergised efforts of security forces, the security situation in the state has witnessed an improvement in the first half of this year over the corresponding period of 2018. Net infiltration has reduced by 43 per cent,” Rai told Parliament.

He also said that “the government of India, in tandem with the state government, has adopted a multi-pronged approach to contain cross-border infiltration, which inter-alia include multi-tiered deployment along the International Border and the Line of Control (LoC), border fencing, improved intelligence and operational coordination, equipping security forces with improved technological weapons and taking pro-active action against infiltrators”.

Rai further said that the Anti Infiltration Obstacle System (AIOS), the electric fence on the Line of Control along the India-Pakistan border, has proved vital in curbing cross-border infiltration.

“The electricity requirements for the AIOS are being catered through power grid wherever available and through generators at other locations to ensure uninterrupted power supply,” he added.

According to a report tabled in Parliament last month, 113 terrorists were killed so far this year in Jammu and Kashmir till June 16.
