Saravana Bhavan owner Rajagopal surrenders before Chennai Police in connection with 2001 murder

Owner of Saravana Bhavan group of hotels, P Rajagopal surrendering at IV Additional Sessions Court in Chennai | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Santharam's body was found in the Kodaikanal forests in 2001 Nine, including Rajagopal were awarded the life sentence in 2009 The Supreme Court in March of this year upheld the Madras HC's verdict

New Delhi: The owner of one of the world's largest food chains, Saravana Bhavan, P Rajagopal on Tuesday surrendered before Chennai Police at an additional sessions court in connection with a kidnapping and murder case which dates back to 2001. Aged 72, Rajagopal arrived at the HC in an ambulance with an oxygen mask clinging to his face. The South-Indian food chain proprietor was supposed to surrender on July 7 as per the instructions of the Supreme Court of India which granted him bail in 2009.

Criticising the delay on his part to surrender before authorities, Justice NV Ramana of the Madras HC asked Rajagopal why he did not indicate illness for even a single day during the hearings of his appeal if he was so ill. On Monday, the convicted murderer's lawyers argued that he had been hospitalised and was in need of more time to serve the prison sentence awarded to him in 2004 for the kidnapping and murder of one of his own employees.

Reports pertaining to the investigation of the crime revealed that Rajagopal was in love with the daughter of the assistant manager of the Saravana Bhavan branch in Chennai. There are also those who claim that Rajagopal, a husband of two at the time, coveted Jeevajothi on the advice of his astrologer. After she refused his proposal, Jeevajothi married Santhakumar in 1999. Rajagopal first threatened the couple to part ways in 2001, the prosecution had told the court.

However, when the two refused to give in and instead approached police, Santhakumar was abducted and later murdered. His body was found at Perumalmalai in the Kodaikanal forests. An investigation by Tamil Nadu Police led them to Rajagopal and his role in the crime. In 2004, a court in Chennai sentenced Rajagopal and eight others involved in the murder to 10 years in prison. The Madras HC in 2009, upheld the verdict and increased the sentence to life in prison which was then upheld by the Supreme Court of India in March of this year.

The infamous murder of Santharam from the 1990s has been widely reported in both Indian and foreign publications ever since. Over 18 years after Santharam was killed, Rajagopal will finally serve the life sentence awarded to him in 2004, now that the Supreme Court has turned down his plea to serve the remainder of his prison term in a hospital. Saravana Bhavan, Rajagopal's food chain is considered to be one of the largest in the world with outlets in over 20 countries.

Rajagopal's residence in Punnai Nagar area of Chennai (Picture Courtesy: BCCL)
