CBI raids 110 places across 19 states in latest surgical strike on corruption, smuggling

India's premier investigative agency conducted a nationwide surgical strike on those who are involved corruption, criminal activities and arms smuggling. Over 120 teams of Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) conducted raids at over 110 locations across 19 states, including Union Territories, in connection with 33 FIRs the agency lodged.

A few of these cases also involved high profile individuals like former Haryana CM Bhupinder Singh Hooda, aviation lobbyist Deepak Talwar, alleged close associate of Mayawati, Netram. Sources said it is an attempt by the Modi government to show that CBI is serious about all the cases and government has zero tolerance towards corruption and criminal misconduct.

In one of the cases, it was alleged that in 2014, accused Kundan Lal Jaiswal and others (Santosh Jaiswal, Jawahar Chauhan, Satish Makode, Munna Lal Pawar, Ashok Kumar Jaiswal) cheated complainant Ramesh Chaurasia by executing fake land deals of 900 acres in Chhindwara using forged government seals and stamp papers misappropriating about Rs 11.5 crore.

The raids were conducted at six places in Jabalpur, Baitul and Indore in connection with the case. CBI recovered a file which is an original MoU signed between the parties, some receipts, property-related documents and bank passbooks.

In another case, the complainant, Archana Rathod said that her son was missing since August 2015 and alleged that her husband was involved in his disappearance. An FIR has been lodged against accused Vimlendra Pal Singh and Himanshu. The agency conducted searches in Mumbai and Bharatpur.

In an bank fraud case in Haridwar, it has been alleged that Sujit Lohani, former branch manager SBI, Shivalik Nagar Branch, Haridwar, in conspiracy with other private persons and unknown officials of the bank sanctioned 13 housing loans worth Rs 3 crore without observing the formalities and also sanctioned loans to members of the family of Vijay Kumar Kushwaha and some private persons. The agency conducted searches in Haridwar.

Jammu also witnessed similar raids by the CBI on Tuesday. In connection with issuing fake gun licenses, the agency conducted raids at private gun houses in Udhampur, Srinagar and 11 places in Jammu. The agency also recovered incriminating documents and renewal of arms licenses, blank application forms submitted by various licencees, money transactions of gun dealers with the licencees, blank NoCs purportedly issued by DM and arms license issue register.

The agency also conducted raids in Kathua, Jammu in connection with a case involving an assistant development officer KVIC Jammu and an administrative officer. It has been alleged that they cheated the government of Rs 17 lakh on the pretext of SMSE purportedly executing the same on papers.

In Uttar Pradesh, raids were conducted in Ghaziabad and Bulandshahr in connection with a case involving DK Gupta, then branch manager of Punjab National Bank (PNB) Meerut Road branch, on allegations of opening the current account of Kanha Sales Corporation Ghaziabad by flouting KYC norms and depositing demonetised notes of Rs 500 and Rs 1000 amounting to Rs 58 lakh. The CBI seized documents related to LIC, banks, immovable property and papers of mutual funds.

A team also conducted raids at 7 locations in Shillong in connection with a case registered against the branch manager of Meghalaya Rural Bank in Shillong. It has been alleged that when he was the branch manager, he abused his position while sanctioning and disbursement of various credit facilities to 114 borrowers amounting to Rs 14.33 crore, which later became an NPA. Total 9 accused have been booked.

In connection the sugar mills, CBI has registered 1 FIR and 6 PEs involving 10 running and 11 closed sugar mills that were sold.

Searches were carried out at the residence and offices of retired public servants such as former IAS officer Netram. His residence in Lucknow was raided along with the residence of Vinaypriya Dubey.

Private individuals Mohd Wajid Ali and Mohd Jawed of Saharanpur, sons of ex-MLC Iqbal Singh were also not spared by the CBI.

During the searches, CBI recovered Rs 11 lakh cash from 14 places. Netram (ex IAS official) is said to be close to BSP chief Mayawati.

Income Tax raided his premises and 12 other locations in UP and Kolkata and claimed that when Mayawati was CM, he misappropriated Rs 100 crore.

The agency also conducted searches in connection with the case against from Hooda that was registered in January 2019.

Searches were also conducted at office premises of Krrish Built Tech Pvt Ltd, Jasola district centre. Fourteen incriminating documents pertaining to the land deal were recovered by CBI.

Further raids and searches were conducted at the premises owned directly and indirectly by corporate lobbyist Deepak Talwar against whom a case was lodged in 2017.

The case was registered against Advantage India, Ms Accordis Health Care Pvt LTD, Deepak Talwar, Sunil Khandelwal, Raman Kapoor and Ms T Kapoor and other unknown persons. Allegations were also that Advantage India received a foreign contribution of Rs 90.72 crore and interest of Rs 6.69 crore was also accrued on this foreign contribution and misused. Searches were conducted at 11 places in Munirka, Krishna Nagar, Laxmi Nagar, Nirman Vihar, Sahibabad, Ghaziabad, Dwarka, Pitampura and Turkman Gate in Delhi-NCR.
