Bulandshahr case: UP cops recover slain inspector Subodh’s phone from main accused Prashant Natt’s house

Inspector Subodh Singh was killed in Bulandshahr violence last year (File image)

Lucknow: In a major development in the Bulandshahr clashes case, the Uttar Pradesh police on Saturday recovered the mobile phone of the slain cop, Inspector Subodh Kumar Singh, from the house of the main accused in the killing, Prashant Natt, news agency ANI reported. However, the search was still underway to find his mobile phone, ANI quoted the police as saying.

Speaking on this, Atul Srivastav, SP City, said, "Information was received through sources about the location of the mobile phone of the deceased policeman Subodh Kumar. We've recovered the phone after search operation at the location. Probe is underway. Search for the pistol is still underway."

Atul Srivastav, SP City: Info was received through sources about the location of the mobile phone of the deceased policeman Subodh Kumar. We've recovered the phone after search operation at the location. Probe underway. Search for the pistol still underway. #BulandshahrViolence pic.twitter.com/1BPnm4ZQDd — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) January 27, 2019

Inspector Subodh was killed after he was shot in the head during the clashes that broke out in Bulandhshar on December 3, 2018, over rumours of alleged cow slaughter in the area. Along with the police officer, a civilian named Sumit, was also killed during the clashes. A video of the slain cop lying on the ground near his jeep with bullet injuries on his face had gone viral on social media, shortly after the clashes had erupted between the protesters and police.

On December 27 last year, the police arrested one Prashant Nat for allegedly killing the inspector during the clashes. "We have recreated the crime scene and narrowed down the people who went and killed the inspector - Natt was part of that group," UP's Additional Director General (Law and Order) Anand Kumar had told the Economic Times last year.

Earlier, it was suspected that another person, Yogesh Raj, had killed Inspector Subodh during the December 3. However, Kumar told the daily that even though Yogesh Raj was allegedly responsible for instigating the mob and arguing with the Inspector and a circle officer at the police station, he was not involved in the cop’s murder.

The accused, Prashant Natt, is reportedly a resident of Bulandshahr. Last year, police sources had claimed that Nat had confessed to his crime and had informed the cops that he had snatched Inspector Subodh's pistol and had shot him dead. Nat is also said to have told the police that Inspector Subodh was already injured before he shot him, as he had previously been attacked by a mob in a field.


