Special law needed to check mob lynching: Maulana Arshad Madani

‘It is PM’s responsibility to make Muslims feel safe and secure’

Jamiat-i-Ulema Hind Working Committee meets







AMN / NEW DELHI

Alarmed by, the head of India’s prominent socio-religious body the Jamiat-i-Ulema Hind (JUH), Maulana Syed Arshad Madani has asked the government to enact a special law to deal with growing menace of mob-lynching.



Maulana Madani said Tabrez’s killing was not a simple murder but an extreme level inhuman savagery and barbarity and it is blot on India’s face which brought disrepute to the country in the world. It seems that Jharkhand has emerged as mob-lynching laboratory where 19 people were killed in these unfortunate incidents so far and out of this , 11 belongs to Muslim community and rest from the Dalit and tribal communities, he said. It is also shocking that in spite of the Supreme Court’s stringent directives and guidelines, this bestiality did not come under control, he said.



Recalling the Supreme Court judgment on mob lynching incidents delivered on July 17, 2018, Maulana Madani said the highest court of the land had expressed its deep anguish on mob-lynching incidents and ruled that nobody could take law into his hands and it also directed the Central government to make a special legislation for checking this menace.

However, it is unfortunate that apex court ruling did not have salutary effect on this as mob lynching incidents happening from time to time. After the court’s ruling on mob lynching as many as 55 people were lynched and since May 26 after the Modi government was re-elected for the second term, as many as eight people were killed. It seems that these forces have no respect for the Supreme Court. Maulana Madani also reminded that the after the court verdict, the Union Home Ministry had also issued directives to state governments to take appropriate and effective measures for curbing mob lynching incidents .



Despite all these steps, mob lynching is taking place in the country , therefore, we can say that those involved in such incidents have political protection and support, he said and adding that not only such hooligans get protection but also welcomed by the ministers after they come out from jail on bail. In this backdrop, it cannot be said that the government is serious about curbing the mob lynching problem.



He said that it was the duty of the Prime Minister to make sure that minorities feel safe and secure. He also warned that the hugely diverse and multi-religious country like India cannot be governed by one particular ideology and religion.



Presiding over the special meeting of Jamiat’s Working Committee at its headquarters here recently, Maulana Arshad Madani expressed deep concerns over the further deteriorating communal atmosphere, particularly the spurt of mob lynching incidents in the country after the re-election of this government. He said the present situation has been worse than the partition time for Muslims and Dalits and weaker sections of the society. On the one side attempts are being made to finish the rule of law while on the other side attempts also have been made to undermine the justice delivery system, Maulana Madani added.



In its meeting, the working committee deliberated upon a range of issues including social and community issues particularly mob-lynching, NRC, Babri Masjid case, and law and order situation in the country. The Working committee took the stock of progress in matters related to NRC in Assam and Babri Masjid case and other issues.



Maulana said for centuries, India is recognized all over the world as a very diverse, secular and tolerant country which has its unique composite culture and its strength lies in unity in diversity but unfortunately, of late these very foundations are being undermined for the sake of votes.

Maulana Madani asserted that in a multi-religious country like India cannot be government by imposing a particular religion or ideology. This country only move on the path of progress if it follows secularism and religious neutrality, he said and alleging that the minorities especially Muslims are being targeted on the basis of their religious identity resulting the death of scores of people.
