Ahmedabad: Wife's family kills Dalit man in police presence

At 25, Haresh Solanki died a tragic death. His only fault: the Dalit youth had married a girl from the so-called upper caste.



The brutal killing of Solanki – in the presence of police personnel – on Monday added to the growing statistics of gruesome crimes emanating from the country's caste divide.



Six months ago, Solanki married his then girlfriend Urmilaben, from Darbar community that considers itself superior to Dalits, much against the wishes of her parents. She then moved to Solanki's native place in Gandhidham of Kutch.



Urmilaben conceived two months ago, and around the same time, her father visited Gandhidham. "Urmilaben's father brought her to his home in Mandal taluka of Ahmedabad district saying her mother was ill," said Rajendra Asari, superintendent of police.



Solanki grew anxious after there no communication from his wife. He decided to head for Mandal taluka. Sensing a hostile welcome, he approached the state's women helpline service – Abhayam 181 – and boarded their vehicle for Varmor village.



The police team asked him to stay put in the vehicle. "The officers then went inside Urmilaben's home and tried to persuade her father to send her back to Solanki," said Asari.



Things went wrong in a hurry after Urmilaben's family learnt that Solanki was waiting outside. "Her relatives blocked the vehicle, damaged its windshield. They dragged Solanki out and attacked him with sharp objects, killing him on the spot," said the SP. The enraged relatives even assaulted the officers who tried to intervene.



The killing has again put the spotlight on caste-based discriminations that are still prevalent in almost all parts of the country. Dalits, being among the most marginalised communities, often bear the brunt of this centuries-old attitudes.



Three years ago, seven members of a Dalit family were assaulted by a group of self-professed cow protectors in Una of Gujarat. The video of the assault went viral on social media, triggering statewide protests.



In 2016, an estimated 214 crimes against Scheduled Castes were reported per million SC population, up from 207 a year ago, according to the National Crime Records Bureau. Dalits comprise nearly one-sixth of India's population.



Vadgam MLA and Dalit leader Jignesh Mevani condemned the brazen murder and called it a cultural issue. "This is freedom of choice. The state of Gujarat cannot get away with few arrests. Since the assembly session is on, I am going to raise this case in the House. If the state doesn't take any concrete action, we will have no option but to fight for it."



Meanwhile, the police have arrested one person. SP Asari said, "We have made five teams hunt down those involved in the murder."

Community Under Attack
