Govt to shift gangsters to prisons in South

editorial@tribune.com

Jupinderjit Singh

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, July 9

After the experiment to put gangsters in isolated and special security zones in jails, away from other inmates, failed to check troublemakers, the government has now made a move to shift notorious gangsters to jails in far off states.

Official sources said an informal discussion on the proposal had already taken place between Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh and Union Home Minister Amit Shah, who had agreed in principle to it.

They said the state was looking mainly to transfer some of the gangsters to southern states. Jails Minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa confirmed the move saying the modalities were being worked out. “It would be for convicted gangsters initially and later undertrials might also be transferred to jails having video-conferencing facility,” he added.

Officials said the move was aimed at breaking the network of gangsters in the state. They said due to the language barrier in southern states, it would be tough for notorious criminals to expand network or recruit new members from the jails itself in their group. Gangsters have run their writ large in the jails by browbeating officials. Several instances of gangsters having ordering cakes and food from outside have also been reported. The Jails Department has recently dismantled private kitchens of gangsters and other influential inmates in several prisons.

Gangsters had almost a free run before 2017 in the state when the police records said there might be about 500 of them active in the state. The issue gained prominence during the elections in 2017. Following that, the police launched a crackdown, which resulted in the arrest of more than 300 gangsters, besides killing of some prominent ones like Vicky Gounder in encounters.

However, high number of arrests led to trouble for of jail officials, who are suffering shortage of staff and they gave in to threats by gangsters. As per Police records, about 25 gangsters were notorious and were divided in A and B category. Of them, 17 are in jails.

A scheme to put them in isolated security zones has worked partially as recent clashes in Ludhiana and Gurdapsur jails showed the involvement of gangsters. Jail Minister Sukhjinder Singh Randhawa recently said the gangsters were using other inmates as “sewadars” who cook for them. Besides enjoying variety of food, they had even got gym equipment for exercising in jails.

Trouble brewing

June 28: Violence in Ludhiana Central Jail, one inmate dies in police firing. Eleven others, including six cops and five inmates, sustain injuries. Twenty-two inmates booked.

June 22: Two inmates kill key accused in sacrilege incidents Mohinder Pal Bittu with an iron rod in New Nabha Jail.

May 31: Fourbooked for attacking two inmates in Amritsar Central Jail.
