Man hangs self from transformer pole

transformer pole

Food delivery boy attacked, robbed

Notice to Roshan Baig in IMA scam

Shivaji Nagar MLA R Roshan Baig

Upset over a domestic row, a 25-year-old man committed suicide by hanging himself from awhile he was under the influence of alcohol on Monday night in Yelahanka police station limits. The deceased, Pandu Dorai, a JCB driver and a resident of Kogilu Road, was married and has a three- year-old child. Police said that he was drunk and had fought with his wife, who left the house immediately. “He was upset over the same and around 9:30 pm, he hung himself from a transformer pole by using a dog leash on Kogilu Main Road,” he said.A food delivery boy from the North East working for a Sikkim-based fast food restaurants in the city was attacked and robbed by three armed men on the Sanjaynagar Main Road on Monday night.The man, Mahesh, was attacked with lethal weapons. When he yelled out, one of the three accused was nabbed and handed over to the police by the public. The accused is alleged to be from North India and they were said to have been targeting delivery boys assuming that they would be carrying cash after having dropped off the order. Mahesh has been working as a food delivery personnel only for a few months now. On Monday around 10 pm, he was on his bike and was near the petrol bunk on the Sanjaynagar Main Road, when the three accused who were reportedly hiding in the dark chased him on a bike. The police suspect the gang from North India and targets food delivery boys and lone motorists. They do a recce of the area to identify a target. They choose upscale residential layouts, which are quiet after late evenings. They commit robberies, leave the city and return later.The SIT team probing the multi crore IMA scam, have issued a summon noticeon Tuesday. The Managing Director of I Monetary Advisory, Mansoor Khan in an audio clip which he released before fleeing, had accused Baig of harassment when asked to return 400 crore rupees. However, Baig had denied all the claims. On Monday, the team had arrested the Deputy Commissioner (Urban), BM Vijay Shankar on charges of taking Rs. 1.5 crore bribe.
