Delhi: Woman fakes suicide to see husband behind bars over 'harassment'

The woman was caught when she contacted some of her close friends. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Woman say she wanted to see her husband behind bars Victim alleged that her husband, in-laws were harassing her for dowry Woman forged identity to buy air and train tickets to flee Delhi

New Delhi: In a curious incident, a woman faked her suicide to see her husband in jail after allegedly facing harassment at the hands of her husband and in-laws. The woman, a trainee manager with an insurance company, left her in-laws house in Delhi's Pandav Nagar for office on the morning of July 5, but never returned.

She later reached Ghaziabad in Uttar Pradesh in an SUV and parked the vehicle under the elevated road near Hindon river. She later got disappeared. The next day, her SUV was found by police with a note saying she was 'going away' prompting officials to assume that she committed suicide by jumping into the river.

In the so-called suicide note, the woman accused her in-laws and husband of allegedly torturing her for dowry since their wedding in 2018. The Ghaziabad police officials sent divers in the to locate the woman's 'body' but found nothing. Later, the divers of National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) were also roped in to 'fish out' the body but to no avail.

According to a report, 24-hours after woman's disappearance, her father, who is a Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU) member, lodged a police complaint against her husband Abhishek Chaudhary and his family at the Indirapuram police station in Ghaziabad. The accused works as a bank executive. The police charged Abhishek and his family for kidnapping, domestic violence, and the Dowry Prohibition Act. It was the second FIR in the case.

In the first FIR, a missing person's complaint was filed at Delhi's Barakhamba police station on July 5 when she first disappeared. The UP police later detained woman's husband as victim's father suspected that his daughter was murdered and thrown into Hindon river.

The woman's last location was found in Sahibabad in Ghaziabad as she switched off her mobile phone. From Hindon river, she left for Anand Vihar Inter-state bus terminal to board a bus for Jaipur. Later, she travelled to Mumbai by a flight. During her disappearance, the woman forged her identity and bought an air ticket on a fake name.

The woman was caught when she contacted some of her close friends by using a different purchased with a forged ID. The police later contacted her friends and came to know of her location in Bengaluru. She was then brought to Ghaziabad, where she narrated the entire sequence of events. The police have now removed kidnapping charges Gainst Abhishek, but other charges will stay in the FIR. Police have now formally arrested Abhishek.
