Parliament Highlights: Union cabinet bans pro-Khalistan group Sikhs for Justice

Cabinet approves Banning of Unregulated Deposit Schemes Bill

According to PTI, Union minister Prakash Javadekar said, “The bill will help tackle the menace of illicit deposit taking activities in the country, which at present are exploiting regulatory gaps and lack of strict administrative measures to dupe poor and gulible people of their hard earned money,” in an official release. He also added that people were suffering due to chit fund scams.

Union Cabinet approves amendments to the POCSO Act, includes death penalty

The amendments in the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act also provide for fines and imprisonment to curb child pornography. The changes are expected to discourage the trend of child sexual abuse by acting as a deterrent due to strong penal provisions incorporated in the Act, the government said, according to PTI.

Cabinet bans Sikhs for Justice

Cabinet has banned Sikhs for Justice - a New York based organisation - supporting the cause of Khalistan.

Punjab CM Capt. Amarinder Singh hailed the Government’s decision to ban SFJ. and described it as the first step towards protecting the nation. He said that SFJ’s activities were beyond unlawful.

Union Cabinet okays labour safety code

Union Cabinet has okayed labour safety code that will benefit 400 million workers in organised, unorganised sectors.

‘Projections made in Budget realistic’

The finance minister said, “Projections made in the budget are realistic and adequately provide for items for expenditures such as defense, pensions and salaries, internal security and establishment expenditures of the govt itself. So, to fully finance these expenditure commitments, necessary resource mobilisations from tax and non-tax sources have also been envisaged”.

FM says income receipts have also increased

Continuing her reply on Union Budget 2019-20, the finance minsiter said, “I reassure that there is nowhere a decline. Expenditure has improved and increased, income receipts have also increased.”

Budget estimate shows increase in govt’s expenditure

“Budget estimate clearly shows an increase in government’s expenditure and the total expenditure includes the provision of 5,02,404 crore under various schemes” : FM Nirmala Sitharaman in Lok Sabha

Budget reflects govt’s commitment: Finance minister

Nirmala Sitharaman says, “government committed to the path of fiscal consolidation without compromising on public expenditure.” Adds, “The budget 2019-20 reflects the commitment of this government to substantially boost investment in agriculture, social sector, particularly in education and health, keeping the fiscal deficit at 3.3% of GDP as against 3.4% which was envisaged in the interim budget.”

Nirmala Sitharaman replies to debate on Union Budget

Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman is replying to debate on Union Budget in the Lok Sabha. Says, “growth of the economy is as important as national security.”

RS Prasad: Initiation of proposal for appointment of Judges in HCs vests with Chief Justice

Union Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad in Lok Sabha on if there is proposal for reservations in judicial services: Under Article 235, the administrative control over the members of district and subordinate judiciary in the states vest with the concerned High Court. Further,state in consultation with High Court, frames rules and regulations regarding appointment, promotion, reservations etc of judicial officers in state.Therefore, Centre has no role in this.

Union Law Minister Ravi Shankar Prasad in Lok Sabha on if there is proposal for reservations in judicial services: Under Article 235, the administrative control over the members of district and subordinate judiciary in the states vest with the concerned High Court. 1/2 (file pic) pic.twitter.com/OZpYgqPHkc — ANI (@ANI) July 10, 2019

V Muraleedharan in LS: Ministry revoked the passport of Nirav Modi

V Muraleedharan, MOS MEA in Lok Sabha: Ministry revoked the passport of Nirav Modi as per provisions of Section 10(3)(c) of The Passports Act,1967, on 23 Feb,2018.The Ministry has no means to verify the travels,if any,of Nirav Modi & passport used for such travels by him, reports news agency ANI.

RS Prasad: There is no shortage of judges in Supreme Court

Union Minister RS Prasad in Lok Sabha: There is no shortage of judges in SC. SC has reached its full strength of 31 Judges for the first time since 2009. However, as on 1 July,19 there are 403 vacancies in the High Courts, reports news agency ANI.

Jitendra Singh: Govt has the right to proceed against corrupt officials

Dr Jitendra Singh, MoS, Min of Personnel,Public Grievances & Pensions,in Lok Sabha: As per applicable Disciplinary Rules, Govt has the right to proceed against corrupt officials on basis of evidence&to retire Govt officials prematurely on ground of lack of integrity&ineffectiveness, reports news agency ANI.

Dr Jitendra Singh, MoS, Min of Personnel,Public Grievances&Pensions,in Lok Sabha: As per applicable Disciplinary Rules, Govt has the right to proceed against corrupt officials on basis of evidence&to retire Govt officials prematurely on ground of lack of integrity&ineffectiveness pic.twitter.com/mfpQ6NWoHU — ANI (@ANI) July 10, 2019

Illegal immigrants are a security threat to the state: BJP MP Tejasvi Surya

BJP MP Tejasvi Surya in Lok Sabha says, “Illegal immigrants are a security threat to the state. Yesterday a terror module that operates from Bangladesh was busted in Bengaluru. I call upon the Centre to extend NRC to Karnataka&B’luru to weed out Bangladeshis who’ve come here illegally, reports news agency ANI.

Nityanand Rai questions govt in Rajya Sabha

MoS Home N Rai in Rajya Sabha on “what measures Govt took for progress of pilot project for security of Indo-Pak border in Punjab.”

MoS Home N Rai in Rajya Sabha on "what measures Govt took for progress of pilot project for security of Indo-Pak border in Punjab": Pilot project approved to replace existing old design fencing with new "anti-cut" & "anti-rust" modular fencing in 7.18 km border length in Amritsar pic.twitter.com/6tJObK3tKo — ANI (@ANI) July 10, 2019

Nityanand Rai: Pilot project approved to replace existing fencing

MoS Home, Nityanand Rai in Rajya Sabha: A pilot project has been approved to replace the existing old design/composite fencing with a new “anti-cut” & “anti-rust” modular fencing in 7.18 kms border length in Amritsar & work has recently been awarded, reports news agency ANI

Kishan Reddy: Pakistan’s ISI is known for giving support to Khalistani elements

MoS Home G Kishan Reddy in Lok Sabha says, “Pakistan’s ISI is known for giving support to Khalistani elements in Canada for anti-India activities. We have zero tolerance policy on this & have taken many important steps against it, reports news ahency ANI.

Prahlad Joshi blames Rahul Gandhi for crisis in Karnataka

Parliamentary affairs minister Prahlad Joshi blames Rahul Gandhi for crisis in Karnataka

Congress MP Kodikunnil Suresh gives Adjournment Motion Notice in LS

Congress MP Kodikunnil Suresh has given Adjournment Motion Notice in Lok Sabha over “Dalit youth killed in Gujarat by Upper caste people”

Rahul Gandhi raises slogans in LS over Karnataka issue

In a rare instance, Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Tuesday joined his party members in raising slogans in Lok Sabha over the developments in Karnataka.However, he remained seated and did not go in the Well of the House with the other protesting MPs.

Gandhi arrived in Lok Sabha at noon just before the commencement of Zero Hour. At that time Congress leader Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury tried to raise the Karnataka issue and accused the BJP of “poaching” its MLAs in the state, reports news agency PTI.

TMC MP Dr Santanu Sen gives zero hour notice in RS

TMC MP Dr Santanu Sen has given zero hour notice in Rajya sabha over “violence against doctors in medical institutions,” reports news agency ANI.

Nirmala Sitharaman to reply to the debate on Union Budget in the Parliament

Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman to reply to the debate on Union Budget in the Parliament, today. She presented her first Union Budget on 5th July. (file pic) pic.twitter.com/PdaTenlGE1 — ANI (@ANI) July 10, 2019

TMC MP Saugata Roy terms Union Budget ‘useless’, ‘directionless’

TMC MP Saugata Roy Tuesday termed the Union Budget as “useless” and “directionless” as there was nothing in it for the poor and the farmers.

“There is nothing for the poor, farmers and common man in the Budget. I oppose it as it is useless and directionless,” he said.

During the discussion on the Budget, Roy raised the issue of the absence of Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman and Minister of State Anurag Singh Thakur in the House, reports news agency PTI.

Rajya Sabha was adjourned yesterday after uproar over Karnataka crisis

Rajya Sabha was adjourned yesterday after uproar by opposition Congress over political crisis Karnataka. The year-old Congress-Janata Dal (S) coalition government in Karnataka is on the brink of collapse after resignations by 14 MLAs.

Rajya Sabha on Monday passed the Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2019

The Rajya Sabha on Monday passed the Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2019, which allows for voluntary use of Aadhaar as proof of identity for consumers to open bank accounts and get mobile phone connections.

The bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on July 4.The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was passed by Rajya Sabha by a voice vote.

The Bill, which also provides for a stiff Rs 1 crore penalty and a jail term for private entities violating provisions on Aadhaar data, was already passed by Lok Sabha on July 4.

The Aadhaar and Other Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2019, was introduced in Lok Sabha on June 24.

Sonia, Rahul meet first time Congress MPs at orientation programme

UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi and Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Monday met newly elected first time MPs of the party at an orientation programme.Sharing further details, party leader Saptagiri Ulaka said, “This was an internal programme. It was mostly around orientation and getting to know each other. She (Sonia Gandhi) cheered us up and wished us all luck to counter the BJP and fight unitedly. Rahul Gandhi also addressed us. It was an orientation programme for first time MPs,” reports news agency ANI.

Modi asks BJP MPs to embark on ‘padayatra’ on Gandhi birth anniversary

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has instructed BJP MPs to embark on ‘padayatra’ in their constituencies and cover a distance of 150 km between October 2 and October 31, the birth anniversaries of Mahatma Gandhi and Vallabhbhai Patel respectively, Parliamentary Affairs Minister Prahlad Joshi said on Tuesday.

Addressing the BJP parliamentary party meeting, Modi also asked Rajya Sabha members to visit constituencies where the BJP organisation was weak, reports news agency PTI.

First meeting of BJP Parliamentary Party after the presentation of Union Budget

The Parliamentary Party meeting of the BJP took place on Tuesday at the Parliament Library Building. This was the first meeting of the BJP Parliamentary Party after the presentation of the Union Budget, which the Prime Minister hailed as “one of hope” that would boost India’s development in the 21st century and empower the downtrodden.

Meeting of Lok Sabha MPs of Congress also took place at the Parliament premises. UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi had called the meeting in the capacity of being the leader of the Congress Parliamentary Party.

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut has given zero hour notice in RS

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut has given zero hour notice in Rajya sabha over delay in the production of Vande Bharat Express train.

Shiv Sena MP Sanjay Raut has given zero hour notice in Rajya sabha over delay in the production of Vande Bharat Express train. (File pic) pic.twitter.com/4jzNJweTfD — ANI (@ANI) July 10, 2019

Lok Sabha sits late to conclude debate on Union Budget

The Lok Sabha sat till 11.10 pm on Tuesday to conclude the debate on the Union Budget, the reply to which will be given by Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Wednesday.

During the discussion, the Opposition criticised the Budget for its “distinctive misses” and questioned the hike in fuel prices, even as the BJP described it as a roadmap to achieve the USD 5-trillion economy.

Several opposition members also criticised the government for increasing the duty on petrol and diesel in the Budget, saying it would hurt the common man and must be withdrawn, reports news agency PTI.
