Human rights violations in IOK

In yet another severe indictment of repression by Indian occupation forces in occupied Jammu and Kashmir, a UN report has exposed the blunt and violent means adopted by India to keep the occupied territory under its tyrannical control. The report, published by the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and released on July 8, called on the 47 member states of the Human Rights Council to “consider… the possible establishment of a commission of inquiry to conduct a comprehensive, independent, international investigation into allegations of human rights violations in Kashmir.” Pakistan has demanded a probe into India’s systematic human rights violations in India-Occupied Kashmir.Tensions in IOK spiked sharply after the suicide bombing in February targeting Indian occupation forces in Pulwama. Citing data compiled by local civil society, the report says around 160 civilians were killed in 2018, which is believed to be the highest number in over a decade. The year also registered the highest number of conflict-related casualties since 2008 with 586 people killed. According to the Government of Pakistan, the report says, a further 35 civilians were killed and 135 injured on the Pakistan side of the LoC due to shelling and firing by Indian forces in 2018.The report says despite the high numbers of civilians killed in the vicinity of gun battles between Indian forces and freedom fighters, “there is no information about any new investigation into excessive use of force leading to casualties.” Calling for repeal of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act that protects troops from prosecution, the report points out that in the past three decades there has not been a single prosecution of armed forces personnel. The report also takes notice of the spike in hate crimes against Kashmiris in various parts of India. The way Kashmiris are being persecuted by India makes it clear that it only wants Kashmir, not its people.Published in The Express Tribune, July 10, 2019.Like Opinion & Editorial on Facebook , follow @ETOpEd on Twitter to receive all updates on all our daily pieces.
