Bangalore building collapse: Two buildings collapse in Bengaluru; woman dies

A 4-year-old girl rescued by NDRF & Civil Defence Quick Response Team (QRT) in the incident where an under-construc… https://t.co/RcJI14aNIB — TOI Bengaluru (@TOIBengaluru) 1562732644000

BBMP mayor Gangambika Mallikarjun on building collapse in Pulikeshi Nagar: An extra floor has been built in violati… https://t.co/BMMUELC7kD — TOI Bengaluru (@TOIBengaluru) 1562732936000

BENGALURU: The death toll in the twin building collapse at Hutchins Road, Thomas Town in Pulakeshinagar rose to five.Cops said four bodies have been identified, while efforts are on to identify the fifth one, who is a middle-aged man. Deceased are Narayana, 26, Nirmala, 20, Anushka, 03, and Shambhu Kumar. A total of 13 labourers from Bihar were working in the under-construction building, on which a residential apartment collapsed, cops said.Four men have been rescued so far and operations are on.Speaking to TOI, BBMP’s east zone chief engineer BS Prasad said that the incident took place at around 2 am after the four-year-old residential apartment, in which eight families were staying, came down. He said,"The apartment collapsed after earth below the basement floor shrunk. Similarly, the neighboring under-construction apartment also collapsed."In the residential apartment, all the eight families were rescued. However, rescue operations continued as the authorities are yet to ascertain how many people stayed in the two buildings. The local cops, fire service personnel, NDRF and Karnataka Civil Defence teams are at the spot and trying to rescue the trapped people. Mayor Gangambike Mallikarjun and East zone joint commissioner Raveendra visited the spot.Prasad said that the under-construction building had violated building bye-laws during the construction. The local engineer had already issued provisional and confirmation order for the demolition of under-construction apartment but the builder had continued with the construction. BBMP engineers have also asked structural engineers to visit the spot and submit the report.Mayor Gangambike said: "The foundation of both the apartments were not laid properly even though the land was not fit for the construction of apartment. BBMP will demolish both the apartments. The architect, engineer and the builders will be held responsible for the incident. It has come to notice that one floor was constructed illegally by deviating the sanctioned plan. The builder will be asked to compensate the injured and family members of the dead woman."Deputy Chief Minister G Parameshwar also visited the spot.
