Karnataka crisis: How it started and what has happened so far | 10 points

Precariousness is the word that can best describe the state of the Congress-Janata Dal (Secular) government in Karnataka since last Saturday. At least 14 MLAs of the two ruling parties (including an Independent) have tendered their resignations, putting the HD Kumaraswamy-led government in a state of quandary.

Kumaraswamy has said he will navigate through this political quagmire, but he and the Congress know that the marshy land on which the battle for Karnataka is being fought is not a bed of roses. Should the rebel MLAs hold their grounds and refuse to retract their resignations, the government will find itself staring at a trust vote in the state assembly.

The Opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), the single-largest party in the state with 105 MLAs, is in a wait-and-watch mode (at least it is trying to project this image). HD Kumaraswamy and the Congress know that BJP will switch gears the moment it senses an opportunity -- an opportunity to force a trust vote and oust the present government to form its own.

When the results of the Karnataka assembly elections were announced in May last year, the BJP was at the cusp of returning to power in the state after five years. It missed it by a whisker as it fell short of majority in the 225-member assembly.

The present crisis, not the first one in the past one year, came to the fore on a day when Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy and state Congress president were not in the state.

Here is what has happened in Karnataka so far:

1) On July 1, two Congress MLAs - Anand Singh and Ramesh Jarkiholi - resigned citing differences with the HD Kumaraswamy government. The Congress had then said that the resignations won't affect the government. The numbers back then were on its side and there wasn't any immediate threat.

ALSO READ | Karnataka crisis: Leaderless Congress becoming easy target? What it could have learnt from BJP | Opinion

2) This was the first public sign that all was not well within the camps of the ruling parties. Five days later, on July 6, eight Congress and three JD (S) MLAs marched to the Speaker's office and submitted their resignations. (The eight Congress MLAs included the two who had resigned on July 1.)

3) News agency ANI quoted Speaker Ramesh Kumar saying his office has received 11 resignations and that he will go through them on Tuesday.

4) Some of the MLAs who resigned claimed that the total strength was 14. These MLAs also met Governor Vajubhai Vala and apprised him about their resignations. Later, the MLAs left for Mumbai in a chartered plane and camped in a five star hotel there. The chartered plane used by the MLAs reportedly belongs to a company associated with a BJP Rajya Sabha MP.

5) Hectic parleys followed on Sunday and Monday. Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy cut short his personal trip to the US. The Congress also held meetings to try find ways to persuade the rebel MLAs to withdraw their resignations and ensure no other MLA follows them.

6) On Tuesday, Speaker Ramesh Kumar ruled that eight resignations were not in order. He said he has written to them that if they wish to resign, the resignation should come in proper order. The total number of resignations by Tuesday was 13. The Speaker said he has asked the remaining five MLAs to meet him personally and discuss their resignations. He ensured that he will follow the Constitution in discharging his duties and wrote to the Governor that none of the 13 MLAs who tendered resignations have met him.

7) Meanwhile in Mumbai, high-level drama was witnessed on Wednesday. Congress's trouble-shooter and Karnataka minister DK Shivakumar reached Mumbai on a special flight to meet the rebel MLAs. However apprehending his visit, the rebel MLAs wrote to the Mumbai Police to provide them security and prevent Shivakumar from meeting them.

ALSO READ | Plane that flew Karnataka MLAs to Mumbai belongs to firm associated with BJP Rajya Sabha member

8) When DK Shivakumar reached the hotel, police did not allow him in. The rebel MLAs in their request to the Mumbai Police had stated that they feel threatened. The hotel also cancelled reservations made for Shivakumar, citing "emergency" circumstances. In turn, Shivakumar said he is not trying to intimidate anyone and wants to "just meet friends [rebel MLAs] for coffee".

9) Meanwhile, the rebel MLAs have indicated that they will move the Supreme Court to challenge the Speaker's decision of declaring their resignations invalid. BJP's chief ministerial candidate and state unit president BS Yeddyurappa has said he will meet Speaker Ramesh Kumar this evening. He said he will raise the issue of DK Shivakumar tearing the resignation letter of some rebel MLAs inside the Speaker's office. "The Speaker has still not condemned tearing up of resignations [of rebel MLAs] by DK Shivakumar. Tearing up of resignations is an 'apradh' that is unforgivable," BS Yeddyurappa said.

10) The latest number of MLAs who have turned rebel is 14. One more MLA (an Independent who was also a minister) has stepped down as minister in Kumaraswamy government and withdrawn support from the government.

ALSO READ | Koffee with Kumar: Karnataka leader DK Shivakumar says he is at Mumbai hotel for a cuppa with friends

ALSO READ | Karnataka crisis: Speaker dismisses 8 out of 13 resignations

ALSO WATCH | Karnataka crisis: All Congress ministers in state cabinet resign to placate rebel MLAs
