World War II veteran, of Vestal, recalls unique experience in China-Burma-India Theater

While Americans at home thrilled at the newspaper headlines of a World War II D-Day victory in June 1944, Walter Mach and his comrades in the U.S. Army Air Corps wrangled with treacherous mountains and jungles in the China-Burma-India Theater on the other side of the world, trying to hold back encroaching Japanese forces.

They flew notoriously deadly supply routes over the Himalayas from India and built access routes through gnarled roadways there and in what was then Burma. Weather conditions were harsh, and isolation extreme.

It's often referred to as the Forgotten Theater, taking a backseat to Europe and the central Pacific, but 98-year-old Walter Mach, of Vestal, remembers every detail.

Mach grew up in West Wyoming, Pennsylvania, which he describes as a small mining town outside of Wilkes-Barre. He'd dropped out of school in ninth grade. When he was 20, the war broke out; he turned 21 the following April and joined the military that September.

Mach's unit — primarily ground crew who'd had no combat training — first landed in India at its border with China.

"We were just transports," Mach is quick to say, but supply was crucial to the Allies' mission in the CBI Theater: to keep funneling aid to China in its fight against Japanese invasion. China's seaports had already been seized, and its main ground supply route, Burma Road, destroyed.

Mach's unit changed bases frequently, They traveled to Jorhat, Korachi, Myikynia, Calcutta and Kharagpur.

They toiled long hours in hot, sticky weather over every supply plane that landed on their lightly constructed runways and survived on C-rations — the canned, pre-cooked foods the Army provided when fresh food (A-rations) or unprepared, packaged foods (B-rations) weren't available.

"Spam," Mach says with a smile. "Good old Spam and Vienna sausages."

They were short on everything, Mach remembers. He never had a warm shower, and at night, with his clothing tied tight to his wrists, ankles and neck to protect his skin from mosquitoes — Mach counts himself lucky that he did not contract malaria like so many others did — they sometimes slept on cots under tarp tents pitched between jungle trees.

As CBI-ers, they were ill-equipped, isolated and tired, "always fighting monotony," but they didn't complain.

"We had no reason to complain," Mach said. "You still had a bed, a place to eat. Not far from you, they were fighting their heads off."

Instead, the CBI-ers fought monsoons, strong winds and ice to complete their task.

Sent a mixed bag of any aircraft not already being used in the war, they worked to repurpose bombers as transports and carry supplies to China. Staying out of range of Japanese fighters meant taking off from high-elevation airfields and battling turbulence above 15,000-foot peaks marking "The Hump" route over the Himalayas.

When a storm took hold, Mach said, "God help you."

"I got caught in one, and I swore we were not going to get out of it," he said.

An estimated 600 Air Transport Command planes and nearly 1,000 airmen were lost over "The Hump" by the end of CBI Theater operations.

Even away from the mountains, servicemen were frequently called out on rescue missions for downed pilots in the thick of the jungle. Crash landings became routine.

Mach remembers one landing, looking down at the airfield, seeing fire engines and ambulances, "and people waiting to pick your pieces up."

He survived that landing, and with every hardship his unit faced, Mach said, "you just managed, that's all."

Looking back, there were moments Mach treasured, like flying over the Taj Mahal four times, stirring up the mud in the Irrawaddy River and watching gold flakes drift through his hands, or sitting on the river's bank and watching the water flow by.

After the war had ended, and after Mach and his remaining comrades had been shipped home, he'd think back on their wartime conversations, when they discussed what jobs they'd have when they got home. Without a high school diploma, Mach worried there would be no opportunities for him.

Inspired by his comrades, and after a year and a half of trying out trade schools, none of which struck his interest, Mach went back for his GED. He went to King's College in Wilkes-Barre, where he earned his bachelor's degree, then went on to work in Social Security.

"It still proves if you want to do something," Mach says, "you can do it."

On tribute pages to those who served in the China-Burma-India Theater, there's a circulating slogan: "CBI veterans are unique."

In the decades after they'd left service, local CBI-ers gathered occasionally in Broome County and reminisced about their shared experiences.

Now, 75 years later, Mach names a list of local men he knew who also served in the China-Burma-India Theater, including his brother. He's the only one left from the list, and by sharing his story, he also honors theirs.

"I personally think we did a tremendous job."

Follow Katie Sullivan Borrelli on Twitter @ByKatieBorrelli. Support our journalism and become a digital subscriber today. Click here for our special offers.
