Bumble Owner Accused Of Sexism And Racism

Andrey Andreev, the Russian billionaire who launched both Bumble and the Latin-America and Europe-specific dating app Badoo, is battling charges of sexism and racism made by his employees.

The allegations were made in an article published by Forbes on Tuesday. In the piece titled ‘Sex, Drugs, Misogyny And Sleaze At The HQ Of Bumble’s Owner’, journalist Angel Au-Yeung spoke to some 13 employees of Badoo.

From “Ketamine-infused afterparties”, to engineering updates named after porn stars, and a video shared internally of an employee receiving oral sex, the reports describes a work culture that is “toxic to women”.

The article also detailed racist attitudes of the 45-year-old business man. Here is the bit which has grabbed a lot of attention: “Andreev would complain when he saw too many dark faces on the app—he believed it lowered the value of the brand and made it look cheap, says a former employee who worked on marketing campaigns.”

“Andrey was always making it clear that white was better,” says the former high-ranking executive. “If someone were to arrive a little bit late to the office and they were Latino or African, he would make comments like, ‘Well, what can you expect,’ as if people who were not white were not hardworking.”

Badoo’s former CMO Jessica Powell, spoke on-record with Forbes and stated that she was fired because she didn’t fit into the company’s “patriarchal” environment. She said that “female employees were routinely discussed in terms of their appearance” and their complaints were “ignored or minimised”.

Interestingly, one of Andreev’s buzziest launch is Bumble, an app which has been touted as a product which puts women and their safety first. The face of the app in India is Priyanka Chopra, who is also a shareholder in the app.

Whitney Wolfe Herd, who helms Bumble, and was in India for the app’s launch has responded to the allegations in a statement, which has distanced Bumble from the controversy.

“We at Bumble remain fiercely committed to our mission, while being openly apologetic to anyone who feels our mission is compromised. We assure you that we would never conduct business in a manner contradictory to our values and would never tolerate the type of toxic behavior described by Forbes,” said Herd in a statement.

Priyanka was the face of Bumble’s #Equalnotloose campaign, which was meant to be an empowering message for women who wanted to exercise their sexual agency. Turns out the progressive attitude may have been restricted to just the ads.






