Chandrayaan 2: ISRO shares first images of the rocket that will carry our Moon mission

Chandrayaan 2

Key Highlights ISRO has released first Chandrayaan 2 images Chandrayaan 2 is scheduled to launch on July 15 The moon mission will see GSLV Mk III carry three modules into space

India's ambitious space mission to land a rover on Moon, Chandrayaan 2, is scheduled to launch on July 15 at 2:51 am from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh. And ahead of its launch, the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) has finally unveiled the first images of the launch vehicle of the lunar mission today.

The photos uploaded on ISRO's website show off the launch vehicle in all its magnificence.

The Chandrayaan 2 mission will see indigenously made GSLV Mk III carry three modules into space -- an orbiter, a lander and a rover. The lander has been named Vikram while the rover is called Pragyan. Rover Pragyan will be housed inside lander Vikram and will be deployed after Vikram lands on the lunar surface.

Which of these theories is correct? Is there a fifth alternative that no one else has considered? We are looking to find the answer to these questions and more through Chandrayaan 2 — the world’s first mission to the Moon’s south polar region! pic.twitter.com/PHIcA2kr0D — ISRO (@isro) July 9, 2019

As per the information revealed by the ISRO, the orbiter is scheduled to orbit the moon while on the mission and then perform a soft landing at a site close to the lunar South Pole. Later when it reaches the surface, the six-wheeled Pragyan is planned to be deployed on the Moon's surface where it is expected to carry out experiments -- all the while being controlled by ISRO scientists back at Earth.

Interestingly, this is the second time in 10 years that India is planning to send a lunar mission into space. Chandrayaan 2 comes 10 years after ISRO launched Chandrayaan 1 in 2009. Although, unlike Chandrayan 2, the first mission didn't include a rover. Chandrayaan 1 was sent to the moon only equipped with an orbiter and an 'impactor' that crashed into the Moon's surface near the South Pole.

ISRO shares theories behind Moon's origin

Ahead of ISRO's first attempt at the soft-landing of a module on another heavenly body, Indian Space Research Organisation is building steam for the mission. For this, it shared a teaser and released four interesting theories about the origin of the moon. On its Twitter handle, it shared a picture and put forward four theories on the origin of the moon.
