Kin of patient who attacked junior resident doctor at Kolkata hospital to be charged with attempt to murder

Doctors Protest at NRS Medical College and Hospital in Kolkata earlier this year

Key Highlights The junior resident doctor had suffered a dent to his skull as a result of the attack The attack had triggered a nationwide protest by medical professionals

Kolkata: New details have emerged in connection with the brutal assault of a junior resident doctor at Kolkata's Nil Ratan Sircar (NRS) Medical College and Hospital in June of this year. Close to a month after Dr Paribaha Mukherjee was attacked by relatives of a 75-year-old patient, investigators have recorded the statement of an eyewitness who saw the accused assaulting Mukherjee on the day of the incident.

The accused, namely Mohammed Shehnawaz, Adil Hadun, Adil Seikh, Mohammed Yasuf and Mohammed Badal, were earlier booked under various sections of the Indian Penal Code. These included Sections 148, 149, 326 and 324. They were arrested on the above charges but a court in Sealdah granted them bail by turning down a plea by the public prosecutor seeking an extension of their judicial custody. The bail was granted against a bond of Rs 2,000 each.

However, a court in Sealdah city of West Bengal has now given police officials the permission to include Section 307 of the IPC which prescribes the punishment for attempt to murder. According to a report, a senior police official has claimed that investigators are probing the matter and are likely to arrest all of the accused on the basis of the recently added attempt to murder charge. The officer further added that there was ample evidence to establish this charge against the accused.

All of the accused are relatives of Mohammed Syed, the patient who died on June 10 reportedly after a cardiac arrest. A sequence of events from the day of the incident revealed that the accused mercilessly thrashed Mukherjee, a junior resident doctor at the NRS Medical College and Hospital after Syed's death. The victim suffered a severe skull injury and had to undergo surgery to treat the dent in his skull.

The attack on Mukherjee sparked a nationwide protest by junior resident doctors demanding justice for their colleague and a legislation to guarantee the safety of medical professionals from the ire of disgruntled patients or their kin. Hailed as 'cease work' protest by junior resident doctors, the doors of state-run medical facilities and health centres were closed for patients with the exception of OPDs. Several delegations of medicos also met Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan in this regard. Such instances of medical professionals being threatened and even assaulted by patients of victims continue to pour in from across the length and breadth of the country despite concerned bodies urging for government intervention in this regard.
