Illegal mining case: IAS officers transferred after CBI raids, 1 officer says he followed govt's instructions

In a major action by the government, 3 IAS officers who were raided by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in connection with their roles in illegal mining cases on Wednesday have been transferred with immediate effect.

District Magistrate of Bulandshahr Abhay Singh, Director, Training & Employment at Lucknow - Vivek and Devi Sharan Upadhyaya - Chief Development Officer have been transferred after CBI's raids on these officers.

The Central Bureau of Investigation has also lodged an FIR against Abhay Singh and Vivek in connection with the illegal mining case. Before being transferred from Bulandshahr, Abhay Singh clarified on the allegations levelled against him and said, "I was DM of Fatehpur for very brief time when the alleged irregularities took place and I followed the instructions from the then government."

On huge cash amount recovered from his residence by CBI, Singh said that he has provided evidence in connection with recoveries. "I will cooperate with the investigation and have handed over some documents to the CBI," said Singh.

Ravindra Kumar will replace Abhay Singh as DM of Bulandshahr.

The Central Bureau of Investigation conducted raids at 12 locations in Uttar Pradesh with respect to illegal mining cases in which from UP Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav is under scanner of investigators.

The raids were carried out in Bulandshahar, Lucknow, Fatehpur, Azamgarh, Allahabad, Noida, Gorakhpur, Deoria etc in two separate cases related to alleged illegal mining.

According to CBI, one case has been registered against Abhay Singh, current DM of Bulandshahr and then DM of Fatehpur (Uttar Pradesh) and others. The other case has been registered against Vivek, then DM of Deoria (Uttar Pradesh) and others.

The agency has also recovered cash of around Rs 49 lakh from the premises of IAS officer Abhay Singh and cash of around Rs 10 lakh from the premises of Devi Sharan Upadhyay, then ADM, Deoria and some documents related to properties from the premises of Vivek, then DM of Deoria.

The role of Samajwadi Party Chief and former UP Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav is under the scanner.

Akhilesh Yadav was the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh from 2012 to 2017 and the mining minister of the state from 2012 to 2013. The illegal mining took place between 2012 to 2016.

Sources in the Central Bureau of Investigation have told India Today TV that a total of 22 tenders were passed by the UP government between 2012 and 2016 and are being scrutinised. Of these, 14 were passed during Akhilesh Yadav's tenure between 2012 and 2013.

According to sources, of the 22 lease violations, 14 happened when Akhilesh was the mining minister and the others during Gayatri Prajapati's term.

Also Read | Former SP minister Gayatri Prajapati, four IAS officers booked by CBI in UP mining scam

Also Watch | Illegal mining case: Not scared to face CBI, says Akhilesh Yadav
