School student injured after fan falls on his head

A 14-year-old student of a government school was injured after a ceiling fan allegedly fell on his head in east Delhi's Trilokpuri, police said on Wednesday.

A senior official from the Directorate of said the blade of the fan fell on the student's head.

According to the police, the incident took place on Tuesday afternoon and the teenager was rushed to a nearby hospital by the school authorities, where he was operated for his serious injuries.

Once the teenager was declared fit by the doctor, he gave a statement to the police and said the fan was making squeaking noise for the past two days. On Tuesday, he was standing under the fan inside the classroom when it fell on his head, a senior officer said.

Based on the statement of the student, a case was registered against the school administration for the negligence, Deputy Commissioner of Police (East) Jasmeet Singh said.

Following the incident, the senior official of the Directorate of ordered an inquiry into the matter.

Directorate of Director Binay Bhushan said, "The blade of a fan fell on the student injuring him. He was rushed to a hospital and teachers of the school have been taking care of him. We have ordered an inquiry in the matter and the committee has been given a time of two days to submit its report."



He said if any negligence is found in the matter, the department will lodge a complaint.

In another incident in central Delhi, a one-and-half-year-old child died after he allegedly fell off the fourth floor of a school building, police said.

According to police, construction work was underway on the fourth floor of the building and the child's parents were working as labourers there when the incident took place.

The boy was taken to a nearby hospital, where he was declared brought dead by doctors, they said.

A case was registered in the matter, police added.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
