2 more K’taka MLAs resign, Cong on edge

High drama outside Speaker’s office in Assembly as BJP functionaries clash with Congress, JD(S) leaders



BENGALURU Dealing yet another blow to the already shaky Congress-JDS coalition government in Karnataka, two more Congress legislators – Housing minister MTB Nagaraj and K Sudhakar – tendered their resignations on Wednesday to the Speaker, taking the number of disgruntled MLAs who have quit to 16.



The ruling Congress-JDS coalition faces the threat of losing majority in the Assembly if the resignations are accepted as its current tally is 116 in the 224-member House.



Nagaraj and Sudhakar submitted their resignations to Speaker Ramesh Kumar at his chamber in Vidhana Soudha, the State secretariat.



Confirming the resignations, Ramesh Kumar told reporters, “Yes, Sudhakar and MTB Nagaraj have resigned.



Soon after submitting his resignation, Nagaraj went and met Governor Vajubhai Vala, informing him about his decision. On the other hand, high drama prevailed when Sudhakar came out of the Speaker’s office after tendering his resignation.



Angry Congress leaders, including social welfare minister Priyank Kharge surrounded him, demanding that he withdraw his resignation, but he did not relent.



BJP workers staged a demonstration outside the secretariat, demanding that Sudhakar be allowed to leave and entered into an altercation with Congress leaders.



Later, Sudhakar was escorted to Raj Bhavan with full police protection.



According to reports, Sudhakar was escorted to Raj Bhavan by police after Governor Vajubhai Vala directed police commissioner Alok Kumar to present the MLA before him at the earliest.



After putting in his papers, Nagaraj told reporters that he was “fed up” with politics and wished to retire from public life.



“I don’t want any ministerial position or anything. I am fed up with politics,” Nagaraj said.



The two join the list of 14 Congress and JD Secular MLAs who have submitted their letters to resign from the assembly over the last week.



Nagaraj represents Hoskote in the assembly while Sudhakar Chikballapur.



Former chief minister Siddaramaiah too came to the Vidhana Soudha to persuade Sudhakar to withdraw his resignation and had a discussion with him inside the chamber of the minister for large and medium industries K J George.



Rebel MLAs move SC



Meanwhile, ten rebel Congress and JD(S) MLAs moved the Supreme Court on Wednesday alleging that the state Assembly Speaker has been deliberately not accepting their resignations. SC has accorded the matter an urgent hearing today.





Now, a Karnataka in Goa



Winds of political instability in Karnataka reached Goa on Wednesday, with twothirds (10 out of 15) of Congress MLAs breaking away to merge with the ruling BJP.



The group, led by Leader of Opposition Chandrakant Kavlekar, met Assembly Speaker Rajesh Patnekar in the evening and gave him a letter, informing him about their breaking away from the party.



The MLAs include Atanasio Monserratte, Jeniffer Monserratte, Francis Silveira, Philip Nery Rodrigues, Cleaofacio Dias, Wilfred DSa, Nilkant Halarnkar and Isidor Fernandes



PTI


