Active case finding of TB gets under way in Dakshina Kannada from July 15

MANGALURU: Department of health and family welfare will undertake ‘Active Case Finding (ACF) of Tuberculosis ’ in Dakshina Kannada district from Monday to July 27. This is the third such instance where the department is carrying out this survey, with the last two carried out in January and July last year. In the survey carried out in January 2018, the department came across 58 new TB cases and this dipped to 28 in the second survey carried out in July 2018.Dr Ramakrishna Rao, district health and family welfare officer, said the above campaign is being carried out as per official directions, is part of the larger departmental goal to eradicate TB in India by 2025. The department has constituted 559 teams, with each team comprising two people, he said, adding the teams will cover nearly 2.69 lakh people or a sample size of 10%-12% of the district’s total population of around 22 lakh, as per norms.The focus of the campaign will be on the high risk groups mapped by the department. These include people with malnutrition, slum pockets, those who are HIV positive, diabetics, smokers, labourers on construction sites, people lodged in prison, vagabonds and senior citizens and orphans in care homes. With each TB affected person likely to spread this contagious disease to 12 others, active surveillance of those with symptoms is the key, he noted.Details of patients found with TB symptoms will be uploaded on to the Nikshay portal, a web-enabled patient management system for TB control under the Revised National Tuberculosis Programme. Such patients will be provided monthly remuneration of Rs 500 credited to their bank accounts to help boost their immunity levels. Even the referring doctor too will be paid a similar incentive to help the department combat the disease effectively.Services of referring doctors will be availed to work as Direct Observation Treatment Short Course (DOTS) supervisor, to ensure that patients complete their treatment regimen. Affirming that nearly 80% of reported cases are TB of lungs, Dr Rao said this highly contagious disease is curable with a strict treatment regimen. All medical facilities in the district are in on the fight to combat TB, he said. Dr Badarudeen M N, district TB officer, was present.
