Men found dead in charred car were murdered: Police

The duo was allegedly killed over a financial dispute, said cops



The two persons who were reportedly found dead in a charred car in Mulshi taluka near Tamhini ghat on July 4 have been identified by police. The cops investigating the case have ascertained on Wednesday that the duo was allegedly murdered over a financial dispute.



Last Thursday, a charred car was located with two burnt corpses inside in Pimpri village. Paud police station under Pune rural police had initially registered a case of accidental death and initiated investigation. They have identified the deceased as Vikas Gosavi (28), a native of Belgaon, and Vijay Salunkhe (32) of Sindhudurg.



Subhash Salunke, their relative, had filed a missing complaint at Mangaon police when the duo did not return home for more than 24 hours. However, after the police identified the deceased men based on the car’s registration number and informed the family, the family reportedly cried foul play.



Subhash Salunkhe later filed a complaint with Paud police, alleging that his relatives were murdered and identified one of the alleged culprits as Ashok Devu Hilam of Raigad and few others yet to be unidentified.



Subhash Salunkhe reportedly told police that Hilam had some financial transactions with both the men allegedly murdered the two over the same.



According to police, the accused allegedly first killed the duo and then dumped their bodies in the Wagon R MH 07 AG 1477 and pushed it down Tamhini ghat. The charred bodies were found in almost a decomposed condition.



SP Pune (rural) Sandip Patil said, “The family had raised suspicion on two other persons besides the main accused. The teams are on the go to arrest them. The accused and deceased men had financial dispute, which will be properly ascertained after their arrest. The accused even tried to destroy the evidence by burning their bodies; however, their act has been caught.”



The police have now registered a case of murder under section 302 and 201 for destruction of evidence and other sections under the Indian Penal Code.


