Uttar Pradesh: NIA court awards 7-year imprisonment to 4 for firing at policemen in 2018

meanwhile, Karam Singh was sentenced to five years in prison by the court. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The convicts reportedly belonged to Babbar Khalsa Outfit After attacking police officials the convicts fled with their rifles. Two accused were nabbed from Rajasthan and Punjab.

Lucknow: In a case reported from Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, a special National Investigation Agency (NIA) court on Wednesday sentenced four people to seven-year imprisonment for firing at two policemen and snatching their rifles. The incident took place in 2018 in the Shamli district of the state.

The convicts reportedly belonged to Babbar Khalsa Outfit - reportedly, a Sikh militant organisation. Judge PM Tripathi sentenced the fifth accused who also belonged to the same outfit, to five years of imprisonment. These convicts were identified as Gurjant Singh, alias Jinta, Jarmon Singh, Karmveer Singh, alias Karma, and Amrit Singh, they all were given seven years in prison, meanwhile, Karam Singh was sentenced to five years in prison by the court.

A news agency report stated that as per the prosecution, the convicts attacked two police constables, Sansar Singh and Sanjay Verma on October 2, 2018. The constables were posted on the picket duty. Moreover, after attacking the police officials, the convicts fled with their rifles.

During the investigation in the case, the NIA arrested Karam, Gurjant and Amrit on October 16, same year and they seized the stolen rifles. Meanwhile, the other two accused were nabbed from Rajasthan and Punjab. However, the convicts were booked under the sections of the Indian Penal Code, Arms Act and the Prevention of Unlawful Activities Act.

In another case reported from Uttar Pradesh, as many as 12 policemen including two sub-inspectors were injured when people allegedly attacked them. The incident happened when the cops stepped into an altercation between two sides disputing over the installation of a transformer in Nathapur village.

The incident happened earlier this month in Shahjahanpur district. The Station House Officer, Puwayan, Jasveer Singh said that there was a dispute in Nathapur village and the police reached the spot and tried to pacify the villagers. However, the villagers began throwing stones at the policemen and even beat them up. Reportedly, two Sub Inspectors and 10 police jawans were injured and shifted to a local hospital.

However, the police registered the case against 41 villagers and nine of the accused were arrested. Further probe was underway.
