Dalit murder: Two more held, hunt on for 5 others

Two days after a Dalit man was killed by his upper-caste in-laws, the police have arrested two more people in connection with the death of a Dalit youth in Mandal taluka, while the hunt is on for five others.

The deceased, Haresh Solanki, was murdered by his in-laws, who belonged to the Darbar community and were opposed to their marriage when he went to fetch his two-month pregnant wife from her home in Varmor village.

Confirming the arrests, Rajendra Asari, Superintendent of Police, Ahmedabad district said, "Indrajeet Jhala, who is the brother-in-law of the victim and another accused identified as Hasmukhsinh have been arrested," said Asari.

Dashrathsinh Zala, father-in-law of Solanki, is the prime accused in the case and is absconding. The police had earlier arrested one Harishchandrasinhh immediately after the incident.

Meanwhile, Social Justice and Empowerment Minister Ishwar Parmar said that all the accused in the case have been booked under nine sections of the IPC including the Atrocity Act. "We have directed the police to take strict action in the case," said Parmar, adding the state government will also provide support to the family in the case.

Meanwhile, independent MLA from Vadgam Jignesh Mevani also made a representation before the chief minister in connection with the case. Mevani later told media persons that there was a question of safety of Dalits in the state.

"Their life is increasingly being put in danger. In this particular case, the youth did seek help from the police. Yet, the police did nothing," said Mevani. "In Gujarat, people cannot think of inter-caste marriage because it will put their lives in jeopardy," said Mevani. He also said that the matter will be taken up in the Assembly, although interestingly, it did not find a mention on Wednesday.

Solanki, a resident of Kutch had sought the police's help to convince his father-in-law to persuade his in-laws to send his wife Urmila back. Solanki and Urmila had been married six months ago against her parents' wishes. Her father took her back on the pretext that her mother was very ill. Since then Urmila had not been allowed to meet her husband.

On Tuesday, Solanki went to fetch his wife and fearing attack had sought help from 181 Abhayam. While the counsellors and cops went to talk with her in-laws, they soon realised that Solanki was inside the van and attacked him with sticks and knives. The Abhayam staff was also attacked and sustained injuries.

Forbidden Love

Inter-caste marriage is still a big issue in state, puts couples’ lives in jeopardy

Cong Condemns

Condemning the murder, Congress leader Ahmed Patel on Wednesday tweeted: “Caste violence and killings are not a part of Gujarati culture. These developments are alien to our state and reflect the failure of the government to curb anti-social activities”

Adjournment Motion

Congress MP Kodikunnil Suresh on Wednesday submitted an Adjournment Motion Notice in the Lok Sabha over the murder. If admitted, it will lead to setting aside the normal business of the House for discussing a definite matter of urgent public importance

only two instances of untouchability!

A day after a Dalit youth was murdered, the state government in reply to a query on a report by CEPT about untouchability in the state said that only two instances of untouchability that were reported from the 1589 villages in the state. The state also said that the accused were arrested in both the cases and a case was registered against them.

A hand of help

The state government in a reply said that it had in all received 188 applications for financial aid from couples who had married outside their caste. Of these, 175 applications were approved and Rs97.5 lakh was spent as aid as part of the Dr Savita Ambedkar inter-caste marriage help scheme. The government also said under the scheme, each couple is entitled to up to Rs1 lakh of help. Of the couple seeking help one should belong to Scheduled Castes and the other should be from Hindu upper caste
