Muslims across Maharashtra organise rallies to push for legal redressal mechanism for victims of mob lynching

mob lynching

Constitution

Muslim protests

Solapur dharna

Maulana Azad Vichar Manch

SC/ST Atrocities Act

The Solapur dharna on July 3 saw 4,000 participants

Malegaon, Ahmednagar, Solapur, Satara, Badnapur. The many incidents ofafter the Lok Sabha results have made Muslims across Maharashtra break their five-year silence and take to the streets—armed with the. While Malegaon’s July 1morcha was the largest—around one lakh participated—Ahmednagar’s on July 5 saw a turnout of close to 25,000, and Solapur’s dharna on July 3 about 4,000.Unlike mostwhich have an overtly religious flavour, the emphasis in these was on the Constitution. Thestarted with a reading of the Preamble and ended with the National Anthem. “We have realised that if we focus on Islam, or talk about avenging the lynchings, the reaction from the other side is magnified. Muslims must now become secular. Now, we understand we need no weapon other than our Constitution,” said Hasib Nadaf of the, one of the organisers in Solapur.All the protests put forward similar demands: a special law for victims of lynching (recommended by the Supreme Court in July last year), making lynching a non-bailable offence, hefty compensation to the victim’s family, legal action against those making anti-Muslim pronouncements in public, and a law for protection of Muslims on the lines of the. Such a law had been envisaged in a Private Member’s Bill introduced in 2015 BY Congress MLA Amin Patel, but nothing came of it.There were two other aspects that set the protests apart. They weren’t organised by a single organisation and no political party was at the forefront— the involvement of Muslim members of Opposition parties, and also the BJP and the Shiv Sena was limited to participation. According to Ameen Mulla from Ahmednagar, so many people wouldn’t have turned up had any political party planned the protests. In Malegaon, it was the Jamiat Ulema, the biggest organisation of imams in the country, that initiated it. In Ahmednagar and Solapur, Muslim NGOs and religious groups got together. At all three locations, Dalit organisations and the Sambhaji Brigade also participated. “Dalits and tribals, too, have been targeted by lynch mobs,” pointed out Afzal Syed of the Ahmednagar Sangharsh Samiti, a collection of groups that organised the morcha there. “Five members of a nomadic tribe were lynched in Dhule district last year.”Why did these disparate groups decide to protest on the streets now? “Ab sar ke upar se pani nikal gaya hai (We’ve reached the end of our tether),” said Hasib Nadaf. The lynching of 22-yearold Tabrez Ansari in Jharkhand, a video of which went viral, was the final straw. Many of the posters announcing these morchas had Ansari’s tormented face on them.“Riots hurt both communities,” said Syed. “So now, Hindutvavadis have adopted this new strategy. By lynching random Muslims and circulating videos of the act, they’ve tried to terrorise and demoralise us into submission. But now, we feel we must stand up, even if it means coming on the streets.”Perhaps sensing this mood, Maulana Mehmood Madani, head of one faction of the Jamiat Ulema, declared in Delhi on June 26 that if the Jharkhand government didn’t act against Ansari’s killers in accordance with the Supreme Court guidelines on lynching, his organisation would launch a countrywide protest.Muslim youth in particular were very agitated, said Mufti Mohammed Ismail Qasmi of the Malegaon Jamiat Ulema, chief organiser of the morcha there. “Their anguish needed an outlet.”“As parents, we are worried, too,” said Afzal. “After all, our sons can’t sit at home. They must go out and earn.”The fear isn’t misplaced. Although most lynchings of Muslims have taken place in north India, Nadaf pointed out that the first lynching after the BJP took over at the Centre in 2014 was in Maharashtra. IT professional Mohsin Sheikh, who hailed from Solapur, was killed in Pune in June that year by Hindutva goons. Since then, there have been several instances in the state of groups of men accosting lone Muslims and forcing them to remove their skullcaps, said Qasmi. But these Muslims have preferred not to file FIRs. The last reported instance in the state was of 25-year-old cab driver Faizal Usman Khan, who was assaulted in Diva on June 24 and made to chant ‘Jai Sri Ram’. Three persons have been arrested for this.Mumbai, however, has been conspicuous by the absence of such rallies. Groups of organisations held two demonstrations and Samajwadi Party Corporator Rais Shaikh organised one in Nagpada. But these hardly made a mark. “Mumbai’s leaders are not willing to take responsibility for the crowd’s conduct,” said an activist unwilling to be named. The memory of the 2012 Azad Maidan violence, in which two persons were killed and 65 injured, including police and media personnel, is fresh in their memory.Rally organisers elsewhere have not been troubled by such fears. “Since 1986, we have been training our youth on how to live like good citizens,” said Qasmi. “That is why, even after the 2006 and 2008 bomb blasts that targeted Muslims in Malegaon, no riot broke out.” The Solapur organisers were so confident of controlling the crowd that they told the police they need not bother with bandobast, revealed Nadaf. “All the organisers were respected figures in the city,” he explained.The message, asserted Syed, that the rallies wanted to convey wasn’t “pathar ka jawab pathar se(an eye for an eye)”. “We wanted to assert that the Constitution allows us to protest through democratic means. So, of course, we had to ensure that our morcha was peaceful. Ahmednagar is a sensitive city.”
