Karnataka political crisis: Section 144 imposed around Bengaluru's Vidhana Soudha

Karnataka political crisis: Section 144 imposed around Bengaluru's Vidhana Soudha

The prohibitory orders will be in place from July 11 to 14 from 6 am to midnight.

news Politics

Bengaluru police issued prohibitory orders under IPC Section 144 in a 2 km radius of the Vidhana Soudha, the seat of the state legislature, for four days starting on Thursday. The prohibitory orders will be in place from July 11 to 14 from 6 am to midnight.

The section bars unlawful assembly of more than five persons, conducting processions, picking up weapons like clubs, swords, knives and stones.

In a statement, Bengaluru police said that the section was imposed to prevent any untoward incidents since the police have received inputs about the likelihood of disturbances.

"Due to political uncertainty, there could be a situation of protests by political leaders and workers inside the Vidhana Soudha. This will affect officials working in the Vidhana Soudha and could also affect peace among the public...," read the statement issued by Bengaluru Commissioner Alok Kumar.

The decision by the police comes after a chaotic day at the Vidhana Soudha on Wednesday.

Congress leaders Priyank Kharge and Dinesh Gundu Rao among others were seen pulling away rebel MLA K Sudhakar into an office on the third floor of the building. This prompted a ruckus with BJP and Congress leaders sparring while reporters and camera-persons jostled for space in the narrow corridor outside the office.

Read: How the Congress plunged Vidhana Soudha into chaos for two hours to save their govt

Eventually, police managed to cordon off the corridor and escort Sudhakar out of the building, more than two hours after he had entered it.

Sudhakar had earlier submitted his resignation from the Karnataka Assembly making him the 16th MLA from the coalition to do so.

Police officials barred the media from entering the gates of the Vidhana Soudha during the two-hour ruckus and manhandled journalists trying to speak to Sudhakar. Police also tried to restrict journalists entry into the third floor of the Vidhana Soudha where Sudhakar was taken to meet senior Congress leaders.

The prohibitory order appears to be another measure to prevent journalists from covering the events unfolding at Vidhana Soudha.
