Ananya Panday TROLLED for a spelling mistake in her recent Twitter post & sharing it again after correction

Ananya Panday is the latest sensation who debuted in Bollywood with her film, Student Of The Year 2. The gorgeous actress has garnered a lot of attention with her performance in her debut film and also with her cool attitude. However, like all other Bollywood actors, Ananya also has been subjected to a lot of trolling on social media. Recently, the SOTY 2 actor also launched an initiative called So+ against social media bullying. However, it seems that despite Ananya’s best efforts, trolls just can’t stop.

Recently, Ananya shared a couple of photos of Suhana Khan, Shanaya Kapoor and herself posing together on social media. While many of her fans loved the photos, a minute mistake in her caption on Twitter seemed to have caught the eye of the trolls. Instead of writing ‘Charlie’s Angels’ Ananya wrote, ‘Charlie’s Angles.’ This surely was noticed by the trolls who then attacked her for her spelling error. In the comments, many trolled Ananya for the minute folly in her spelling.

(Also Read: Ananya Panday on social media trolls: I think you need to take them positively but not too seriously)

A few hours later, when Ananya realised her mistake, she deleted the post and reshared it with the correct spellings. However, even then, the social media trolls didn’t stop and commented on her post and quizzed her about deleting and resharing the same post.

Check out the correct post and comments:

This isn’t the first time Ananya has been trolled on social media for her mistake. However, Ananya had mentioned earlier in an interview that she doesn’t pay heed to the trolls and said, “I am so familiar with the whole thing that I saw how my father can laugh at himself. I have learnt it too... I think because he took it such a positive way, now that I get trolled or something, I take it positively. It doesn't affect me.” Meanwhile, Ananya has jetted off to Lucknow, UP to shoot for her upcoming film, Pati Patni Aur Woh remake. The film stars Kartik Aaryan, Bhumi Pednekar and Ananya Panday in the lead roles. It is being helmed by Muddassar Aziz and is slated to release on December 6, 2019.
