Senior advocate Indira Jaising's residence raided by CBI in ongoing FCRA violation case

Senior lawyer Indira Jaising | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The license of the NGO had earlier been cancelled by the Centre Delhi CM Arvind Kejriwal termed the raids ‘political vendetta’ The CBI carried out the raids over alleged violation in foreign funding

New Delhi: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is carrying out raids at the residence of Supreme Court advocates Indira Jaising and Anand Grover, in connection with Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act (FCRA) violation case. The raid is ongoing at Indira Jaising's house in Delhi. The raids have also been carried out at her NGO Lawyers Collective office in Mumbai.

The CBI had earlier filed a case of FCRA violation against Anand Grover and the Lawyer's Collective after receiving a complaint from the Ministry of Home Affairs. The license of the NGO had earlier been cancelled by the Centre.

Both Jaising and Grover have said that this is a political vendetta by the BJP as they had filed a plea in Sohrabuddin case against BJP president Amit Shah and also pursued several cases of 2002 Gujarat riots.

The case revolves around the donation received by Lawyer’s Collective over a period of 4 to 5 years starting from 2010. The MHA in its report had said that the NGO had not carried out the specific work but was involved in lobbying work and also certain guidelines laid out by the Centre were not followed.

In May, the Supreme Court had issued a notice to Jaising, Grover and their NGO Lawyers Collective on a plea which alleged that they had violated FCRA regulations.

Reacting to the notice, the duo alleged that they were being "victimised" as Jaising had picked up the case of a sacked woman employee of the top court who had accused Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi of sexual harassment. Meanwhile, the case against the CJI was rejected by an in-House Inquiry Committee.

I strongly condemn CBI raids on well known senior advocates @IJaising and Mr Anand Grover. Let the law take its own course but subjecting veterans who have all through their lives fought for upholding the rule of law & Constitutional values is clear vendetta — Arvind Kejriwal (@ArvindKejriwal) July 11, 2019

Senior advocate Prashant Bhushan tweeted, “CBI raids at residence of Indira Jaisingh & Anand Grover in case of alleges misuse of foreign funding to their NGO is a clear act of Vendetta. Registration of cases & raids by Govt agencies has now become the way of govt to harass & intimidate opponents.”

Congress leader Salman Anees Soz tweeted, “CBI raiding Indira Jaising's home. This seems about alleged misuse of Rs. 13 lakhs received in foreign contributions. Will the CBI get more serious and hunt down criminals likely misusing hundreds of crores in Karnataka and Goa? #NewIndia”

Condemning the raids, Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal tweeted, “I strongly condemn CBI raids on well known senior advocates @IJaising and Mr Anand Grover. Let the law take its own course but subjecting veterans who have all through their lives fought for upholding the rule of law & Constitutional values is clear vendetta.”
