Bulandshahr: Mobile phone of slain cop recovered from accused house

BULANDSHAHR: Nearly two months after Inspector Subodh Kumar Singh death in mob violence, the Uttar Pradesh police on Sunday reportedly recovered his Closed User Group (CUG) mobile phone from the house of main accused Prashant Natt, who had allegedly shot down the policeman on December 3 in Bulandshahr.

Atul Srivastav, Superintendent of Police (SP) City, said, “As per information received from sources, an operation was conducted to recover the mobile of the deceased policeman Subodh Kumar. His phone was recovered from the main accused Prashant Natt’s house.”

The search for the pistol is still underway, he added.

Inspector Kumar was killed on December 3, 2018, in violence that flared up after carcasses of cattle were apparently found in a forest close to a police post in Uttar Pradesh.

Kumar was wounded and later died. A postmortem report had found that the policeman had died of a bullet wound below his left eyebrow.

[also_read url=”https://www.siasat.com/news/bulandhahr-violence-sho-killed-berserk-mob-was-doing-his-job-1441434/”]Bulandhahr violence: SHO killed by berserk mob was doing his job[/also_read]

One of the prime accused in the case, BJP’s Yuva Morcha leader Shikhar Agarwal was on January 10 arrested by the police from Hapur.

So far over 35 people, including Prashant Natt, have been arrested from the Bulandshahr-Noida border on December 28 in connection with the violence.

Natt, a cab driver had confessed to shooting at Subodh Kumar, according to police. Police also arrested the main accused Yogesh Raj on January 2 who was on the run for a month to escape arrest. Raj is affiliated with the Bajrang Dal.

Earlier, the Uttar Pradesh police arrested three Muslim men – Azhar Khan, Nadeem Khan and Mehboob Ali of Syana for the alleged cattle slaughter and had slapped the stringent provisions of the National Security Act (NSA) against them.

[also_read url=”https://www.siasat.com/news/bulandshahr-nsa-invoked-against-3-muslims-alleged-cow-slaughter-act-1456503/”]Bulandshahr: NSA invoked against 3 Muslims in alleged cow slaughter act[/also_read]

Previously, UP CM Yogi Adityanath while speaking at the Jagran Forum in Delhi had said that the incident was an “accident” and that the death of Inspector Singh was not a case of “mob lynching”.

“Uttar Pradesh mein mob lynching ki koi ghatna nahi hai, ek. Bulandshahr ki ghatna ek durghatna hai, aur isme kanoon apna karya kar raha hai. Koi bhi doshi baksha nahi jayega. Illegal slaughtering, keval cow hatya hi nahi, illegal slaughtering poore UP mein ban hai and DM, SP uske prati poore jawabdeyi honge,” Adityanath had said.
