The big news: Narendra Modi says Left trying to disrespect Kerala’s culture, and 9 other top stories

A look at the headlines right now:

Narendra Modi rakes up Sabarimala row in Kerala, claims state’s culture is under attack: The prime minister also visited Tamil Nadu, where social media users protested against the Centre’s apathy after cyclone Gaja. CBI officer transferred a day after signing FIR against accused in Videocon loan case, say reports: The agency filed a case against former ICICI Bank chief Chanda Kochhar, her husband Deepak Kochhar and Videocon CEO Venugopal Dhoot on January 24. January 29 Ayodhya hearing in SC deferred, new date not yet announced: Justice SA Bobde of the five-member Constitution Bench is reportedly not available on Tuesday. At least 27 killed and 77 injured in twin explosions in a church in Philippines: The attack on the cathedral on the southern island of Jolo bears the hallmark of attacks carried out by the Islamist Abu Sayyaf group, said officials. Collective urges CM to stall transfer of nuns who protested against rape-accused bishop: Save our Sisters has requested Pinarayi Vijayan to ensure that the lives of the five nuns are not in danger. Electoral bond scheme is ‘a damp squib and a huge disappointment’, says Navin Chawla: The former chief election commissioner said the monetary instruments were being used to camouflage black money. We can resolve Ayodhya dispute within 24 hours, says Adityanath: The Uttar Pradesh chief minister told India TV that the Supreme Court should hand over the matter to his government if it cannot deliver a verdict soon. Priyanka Gandhi suffers from bipolar disorder and beats up people, alleges Subramanian Swamy: The BJP leader said that Gandhi, who was recently appointed Congress general secretary for eastern Uttar Pradesh, was not fit to lead a public life.. Former Kerala police chief questions decision to award Padma Bhushan to Nambi Narayanan: Conferring the country’s third-highest civilian award on the former ISRO scientist was like ‘mixing poison with nectar’, said TP Senkumar. Andhra Pradesh CM Chandrababu Naidu to go on fast in Delhi on February 13: The Telugu Desam Party chief shared his protest plans at a parliamentary party meeting in Amaravati on Saturday.
