Former Gujarat BJP MP gets life term for murder of RTI activist

Gujarat Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MP Dinu Bogha Solanki was convicted in the case with six others. (File)

Former Bharatiya Janata MP Dinu Solanki and six others were on Thursday sentenced to life imprisonment by the Ahmedabad CBI Court in connection with the murder case of RTI activist Amit Jethwa.

The case dates back to July 20, 2010, when RTI activist Amit Jethwa was shot dead outside the Gujarat High Court.

A special court of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) had on July 6 convicted Dinu Bogha Solanki in the murder of RTI activist Amit Jethva. The court had also convicted six others in the case.

THE CASE

Jethva was shot dead outside the Gujarat High Court on July 20, 2010, by two assailants. Jethva, had through RTI queries, exposed illegal mining in the Gir forests allegedly involving the former parliamentarian. Gir forests are the only abode of the Asiatic Lion.

Special CBI judge KM Dave convicted the seven accused, including Solanki, a former Lok Sabha member from Junagadh constituency in the Saurashtra region.

Solanki was chargesheeted by the CBI as the key conspirator in the murder of the RTI activist. The CBI established that Jethva was killed at Solanki's behest because he brought to light the illegal mining activities, involving the MP, in the prohibited areas of the Gir forest. The findings were based mainly on call data records (CDR).

The murder case was earlier investigated by Ahmedabad Detection Crime Branch (DCB), which had chargesheeted six persons -- Shiva Solanki, a nephew of Dinu Solanki, Shailesh Pandya, Bahadursinh Vadher, Panchan G Desai, Sanjay Chauhan and Udaji Thakore. But the DCB gave a clean chit to all the accused.

Jethva's father, Bhikhabhai Jethva, had then moved the Gujarat High Court and filed a petition seeking a fair probe by the CBI into the investigation.

After more than 100 out of the total 195 witnesses turned hostile, the Supreme Court ordered a re-investigation in the high-profile case.

READ | CBI court convicts former Gujarat BJP MP in RTI activist's murder

READ | Justice after a long struggle, says slain RTI activist Amit Jethva's father
