Kolkata Actress Thrown Out Of Cab As Driver Cancels. Is The Cab Mafia Real?

Booking cabs today is equivalent to running track against Usain Bolt. There is a 5-year commitment clause attached because the time you invest only to finally fail in booking a cab is quite significant. Now, there are cabbies that have taken the onus to harass you on top of the cab booking process itself. Something very similar happened to Kolkata actress, Swastika Dutta, when she booked an Uber to her shoot location in the southern neighbourhood of Rania. Is this incident an indication of the operations of a supposed cab mafia that's been gradually terrorising us or are we being alarmist for no reason?



According to Swastika’s updated Facebook post: "This guy named Jamshed, after picking me up from my location suddenly in the middle of the road he cancelled the trip and asked me to get down from the car." Additionally, she also shared a photograph of the driver, his phone number, and the number plate of the cab. When she refused to pay, like any customer, he took her to "his locality" and abused her. "He got down from the car, opened the door and literally pulled me out... when I lost my temper and started asking for help he threatened me and called other boys," she wrote. The driver allegedly told Ms Dutta in Bengali, "Do what you want, let's see what you can do." If this isn't harassment, we don't really know what is.

The bigger problem here are these cab apps

It starts with small problems--refusing to go to a location despite getting the ride because they just feel like cheating you off money, to the bigger problem of incomplete background checks. Cab services have repeatedly come under fire for their lapse in judgement when it came to hiring new drivers--often finding cheap labour but at the cost of passenger security.

Particularly in the case of cabs, the outcomes are way riskier considering there are situations where not just women, but even men are in vulnerable positions--late hours and shady localities, amongst other things. The scope of a slight tiff turning into a full blown episode is higher. Add to that the road rage factor or just reckless driving-- the reasons are infinite.

Although this incident is another unfortunate one to add to the list, the time has come to at least voice our concerns in a more systematic way so that multinational cab companies can actually take notice. It's the least we deserve--we are their 'valued customer', like they say!
