Sri Lankan coast guard intercepts boats carrying drugs from Karachi after intelligence alert from India

Sri Lankan Coast Guard | Source: Sri Lankan Navy

Key Highlights Illegal drug trade a major source of income for Pakistan’ ISI Dawood Ibrahim’s D-Company runs ISI’s drug business Narco-terrorism a major cause of concern for Sri Lanka

Colombo: Two boats carrying illegal drugs from Pakistan’s port city of Karachi to Sri Lanka were intercepted by the Sri Lankan Coast Guards on Wednesday after receiving crucial intelligence inputs from the Indian security agencies.

India’s Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) had shared specific inputs about the two boats carrying banned drugs from Karachi to Sri Lanka. The inputs were shared with concerned Sri Lankan agencies and timely intervention by coast guards prevented the trafficking.

The war on drugs has intensified in Sri Lanka with record narcotics seizures since 2018 with Dehiwala gaining notoriety as a major drug distribution hub in South Colombo. Dehiwala, which has a large Muslim population, was also targeted in 2019 Easter Sunday bombings.

The heroin which arrives in Sri Lanka comes from Afghanistan, by air and sea route and local media reports have indicated that income generated from sales of the banned contraband are diverted to fund finance terror networks across the world.

According to Indian intelligence agencies, the illegal drug trade is a major source of income for Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) which is used in terror funding. The intelligence agencies believe that funds through such trade are also used to fund extremist ideology in Sri Lanka.

Sea route is considered safe to transport drugs over long routes and small boats and ships carry these drugs on a regular basis.

Coast Guards of India and Sri Lankan Navy work closely in areas of coastal security to prevent illegal activities along their maritime boundary.

Afghanistan is known for its opium poppy plantations and falls under the Golden Crescent region which also comprises of Iran and Pakistan. The poppy cultivation and heroin processing are tightly controlled by the Taliban and the ISI buys the heroin from them directly.

It is widely believed that Dawood Ibrahim-led D-Company runs ISI’s nefarious drugs trade all over the world.

Narco-terrorism is a major cause of concern not only for Sri Lanka but India as well. Pakistan’s ISI has been pushing drugs into India through Nepal and Bangladesh. Drug trafficking is also the main source of funding for terrorist outfits operating in J&K and other parts of the country, says Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies adding that with tight control on the western border the ISI has started targeting the Northeastern border.

This diabolic alliance between transnational drug traffickers and terrorist groups is a global threat and India has been working closely with neighbouring countries to find ways to tackle it.
