Uttar Pradesh Law Commission urges CM to immediately enact law to combat mob lynchings

Protest against Mob lynching at Jantar Mantar, New Delhi (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Uttar Pradesh has witnessed 50 instances of mob lynching between 2012 and 2015 The law can be called 'Uttar Pradesh Combating of Mob Lynching Act', suggested the Commission The report and draft Bill were submitted to the Chief Minister on July 10

Lucknow: More than six months have passed since a mob in Bulandshahr district of Uttar Pradesh turned on police officers attempting to restore law and order on December 3 of last year. The incident has since come to be known as the murder of Inspector Subodh Kumar Singh, the station house in-charge (SHO) of Siyana police station. Scores of similar instances of mob lynching have come to light from across India in recent years.

Taking suo-moto cognizance of the mob culture which is seeping into the country's social fabric, the Uttar Pradesh Law Commission conducted a study. Justice (retd) AN Mittal, the Commission chairman submitted a report, along with a draft Bill, to UP Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on July 10. While recommending immediate enactment of a law in this regard as per recommendations made by the Supreme Court in 2018, the commission in its 128-page report cited several cases of lynching in the heartland state."Incidents of mob violence have taken place in districts of Farukkhabad, Unnao, Kanpur, Hapur and Muzaffarnagar," said the chairman in the report.

Existing laws are insufficient to tackle the phenomenon and a separate law should be enacted to curb such instances, said the report. The commission also suggested calling the law 'Uttar Pradesh Combating of Mob Lynching Act'. Citing available data which suggests that as many as 50 incidents of bob violence have come to light from Uttar Pradesh between 2012 and 2019, the commission recommended punishment ranging from seven years in jail to life imprisonment for the offence. It also reported that out of a little over 50 victims, 11 have died.

In addition, the Commission has paid special emphasis to the responsibilities of police officers and district magistrates dealing with cases of mob lynching. The report and draft Bill was drafted after studying laws for various countries and suggests punishment for conspiracy, aid or abetment in such cases, along with obstructing the legal process. Punishment has been specified for government officers who fail in their duty to secure justice for the victims. Compensation for family members of these victims has also been mentioned in the report.

At present, only Manipur has a special law to tackle the menace of mob lynchings with reports by sections of the media hinting at Madhya Pradesh government enacting a similar law in the near future. With the Uttar Pradesh Law Commission's report and draft Bill on the Chief Minister's table, the onus to combat mob lynchings in Uttar Pradesh now lies on the state government.
