Bhopal: Death sentence awarded to child rapist within 32 days of trial

A 100-page charge sheet had been filed against Bamora on June 12 (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The trial was completed on Thursday, July 11 The incident took place on June 8 The accused was identified as Vishnu Bamora The trial was completed within 32 days

Bhopal: Justice was granted to a minor who had been raped and murdered by a 35-year-old in June by a special court in Bhopal. The court awarded death sentence to the middle-aged man, 32 days after the trial began. The judgement was announced by Special Judge (Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act cases) Kumudini Patel on Thursday, July 11.

The accused Vishnu Bamora has been booked under Section 302 (murder) and Section 376-AB (punishment for rape of woman under 12 years of age) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). A 100-page chargesheet had been filed against Bamora on June 12, three days after the incident came to light.

Sudha Vijay Sigh Bhadoriya, spokesperson of the state prosecution cell, said that Bamora was awarded three years of imprisonment under Section 363 (kidnapping a minor) and seven years of imprisonment under Section 366 (abduction for forced and illicit intercourse) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC).

Bhadoriya told PTI that the court ordered all the sentences to run simultaneously. The decision was based on the results of the DNA test and the examination of 30 witnesses.

Allegedly, the eight-year-old girl had left her residence in Kamla Nagar on June 8 to make a purchase. The following morning, the minor's body was found near a drain. The police had arrested Bamora from Mortakka village, Khandwa on June 10.

POCSO court orders 20 years imprisonment to two men for sexually assaulting minor girl

In May this year, a special POCSO court awarded 20 years of imprisonment to two youths for sexually assaulting a minor. The decision was announced four years after the incident. The court also levied a fine worth Rs 20,000 on the two men.

The accused were identified as Sachin Kumar and KT Mathew. The court found the two accused guilty under Section 276 (D) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Section 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act.

On May 7, 2015, the minor was on her way home towards Koyyur when the two accused approached her and accosted her on the pretext of giving her a lift. The accused drove to an isolated spot and raped her. The minor escaped and shared the incident with her mother. The minor's mother lodged a complaint at Belthangady police station. Circle Inspector of Belthangady BR Lingappa conducted an investigation and submitted a chargesheet to the court.
