4 lakh people, 749 villages affected as heavy rain continues in Assam

Thief in Assam caught red-handed after cooking Khichdi in the middle of burglary

4 lakh people, 749 vaillages affected as heavy rain continues in Assam

India

oi-PTI

Guwahati, July 11: The flood situation in Assam deteriorated on Thursday as it spread to 17 districts affecting 4.23 lakh people with many rivers flowing above the danger level in various places, officials said.

According to the Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA), three people were killed in rain and flood-related incidents in Golaghat, Dhemaji and Kamrup Metropolitan district on Wednesday.

The deluge, which had affected 2.5 lakh people in 11 districts on Wednesday, spread to six more districts on Thursday affecting 4.23 lakh people, it said. The district which have been affected by floods are Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Biswanath, Darrang, Barpeta, Nalbari, Chirang, Golaghat, Majuli, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Nagaon, Morigaon, Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon, Baksa and Sonitpur.

Barpeta is the worst-affected district with 85,262 people reeling under the impact of the flood. It is closely followed by Dhemaji where 80,219 people have been affected, ASDMA said.

As many as 749 villages in 41 revenue circles are under water and 1,843 people have taken shelter in the 53 relief camps and relief distribution centres set up by district administrations, the ASDMA said.

Flood waters also entered the Kaziranga National Park in upper Assam forcing the animals to take shelter on the platforms constructed for them to be safe during deluge, authorities said.

The river Brahmaputra at Nimatighat in Jorhat and Tezpur in Sonitpur, the Dikhow river at Sivasagar town, the Dhansiri river at Numaligarh in Golaghat, the Jia Bharali river at NT Road Crossing in Sonitpur, the Puthimari river at NH Road Crossing in Kamrup and the Beki river at Road Bridge in Barpeta are flowing above the danger marks, ASDMA said.

Chief Minister Sarbananda Sonowal Thursday held a video conference with deputy commissioners of affected districts and senior officials of different government departments to review the flood situation and directed them to remain fully alert and be prepared to tackle the situation promptly and effectively.

He directed the deputy commissioners to set up round-the-clock control room to ensure that people in distress get immediate response when faced with an emergency situation during floods, officials said.

The chief minister also reviewed the status of relief camps, distribution of relief material to marooned people and measures adopted for safety and security of animals in the flood affected districts, an official spokesperson said.

Sonowal directed officials that adequate medical services be provided to flood-affected people and asked the deputy commissioners to contact the Director of Health Services if there is any shortage of doctors in their respective districts.

He also instructed them to take steps for adequate care for animals affected by flood and arrange fodder for them.

For Breaking News and Instant Updates Allow Notifications

Story first published: Friday, July 12, 2019, 1:09 [IST]
