Top news of the day — SC cancels Jan 29 hearing on Ayodhya title suit, Djokovic beats Nadal to win 7th Australian Open, and more

Here are the important news stories of the day

The Supreme Court on Sunday put out a notice that the Constitution Bench hearing the Ayodhya title suit appeals will not be sitting on January 29 as one of the judges, Justice S.A. Bobde, is not available on the day.

Novak Djokovic claimed a record seventh Australian Open crown on Sunday as he demolished Rafael Nadal 6-3 6-2 6-3 in his most dominant Grand Slam win in his long rivalry with the Spaniard.

Firefighters called for the evacuation to higher ground of some 24,000 people from the Brazilian town hit by deadly mud flow from an earlier mining dam rupture, as a second dam threatened to collapse.

Watch: Brazil dam collapse: 40 dead, 300 missing

Acknowledging its made-in-India status, the Indian Railways has named the indigenously manufactured Train 18 as Vande Bharat Express, Railway Minister Piyush Goyal said on Sunday.

The Central Bureau of Investigation is inquiring into the suspected role of Superintendent of Police Sudhanshu Dhar Mishra for the delay in probing the ICICI Bank loan fraud case.

Prime Minister laid foundation stone for All India Institute of Medical Sciences Hospital to come up in Thoppur in Madurai at a cost of Rs. 1264 Crore. Project expected to get over in 45 months.

The official mobile phone of an inspector killed in the December mob violence in Uttar Pradesh’s Bulandshahr district has been recovered from the residence of the man who allegedly shot him, officials said on January 27.

Senior Congress leader P. Chidambaram on January 27 slammed the CBI for “indiscriminately targeting” some of the bankers, saying the agency has received “ultimate certificate” on its action from Union Minister Arun Jaitley, who had criticised it.

Ace shuttler Saina Nehwal claimed her first BWF title in two years after three-time world champion Carolina Marin of Spain limped out of the Indonesia Masters final due to a leg injury, here Sunday.

Crocodiles from two ponds near the Statue of Unity in Gujarat’s Narmada district are being relocated for the safety of tourists visiting the Sardar Patel memorial, officials said on Sunday while dismissing reports that the move is linked to the seaplane service.
