Street Dancer 3D: Varun Dhawan & Shraddha Kapoor all set to shoot the final face off with global dance crews

From quite some time, we have been seeing Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor rehearse with the dancers for their upcoming dance film, Street Dancer 3D. Post Shraddha’s return from Austria, the actress has been prepping herself for the final dance battle in which Varun and she will take on various global dance crews. While the rest of the film has already been shot, the final battle between Varun, Shraddha and some international dance crews had to be shot in Mumbai.

Now, as per a report of Mumbai Mirror, the shooting for the climax of Street Dancer 3D is all set to be shot this month in Mumbai. For the same, many international dance troupes have arrived in the city from places like the UK, Africa, Nepal and Germany. As per the report, the climax shoot will go on for the next 25 days at a studio in Mumbai which has been converted into a stage keeping in mind the needs for a 3D shoot. The finale shoot will involve Varun, Shraddha, Nora Fatehi and Prabhudheva. The actors will be choreographed by Suresh Mukund.

(Also Read: Varun Dhawan & Shraddha Kapoor to shake a leg with 20 real dancers in Street Dancer 3D; Details inside)

As per the report, producer Bhushan Kumar said, “We are so glad that Street Dancer 3D has gone global and many artistes from across continents are a part of the finale act. The set looks spectacular and the actors have been rehearsing and shooting in the rain to complete the schedule on time.” A source also informed the daily, “The special 3D set-up is of a live stage show with thousands of fans supporting their respective countries. The film’s premise has a nationalistic element that showcases the Indian team as underdogs who stand tall in front of the rest of the world.”

As per the report, the climax will bring out the high point of the story. While Varun plays a guy who has lived his life in London, details about Shraddha’s role have been kept hidden. The film has been shot in Amritsar, London and Dubai. The shoot had kicked off back in January this year when Varun and a dance crew had performed at the border. The film is being helmed by Remo D’souza and is being produced by Bhushan Kumar with Lizelle D’souza. Street Dancer 3D is slated to release on January 24, 2020.
