Rafale-Su-30MKI a deadly combination against Pakistan or anybody else: IAF

Rafale fighter jet

New Delhi: Rafale fighter jet and Su-30MKI jets will be a deadly combination once they start operating jointly and will make India’s enemies including Pakistan worried in case of any conflict, said Indian Air Force Vice Chief Air Marshal RKS Bhadauria.

He further said that if Islamabad dares to mount February 27-type attack on India once the two fighters start operating together the losses suffered by Pakistan would be very high and attrition that the IAF will inflict upon them would also be very high.

Speaking to ANI on the sidelines of the Exercise Garuda, Bhadauria said, “Once the Su-30MKI and the Rafale start operating together, it will be a potent combination against our adversaries, be it Pakistan or anybody else. It will be a potent capability. Any adversary would be worried about such a combination.”

IAF Vice Chief also said that he was looking forward to flying the Rafale aircraft of the French Air Force.

|K|

Bhadauria was the head of the Indian team that negotiated the acquisition of 36 Rafale fighter jets with France in 2016.

After India attacked Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot, the Pakistanis retaliated by sending a strike package of 20 fighter planes but the attack was foiled by the MiG-21s and Su-30s.

After the aerial conflict, the IAF had said that that if the IAF had Rafales fighter jets then the Pakistanis would not have even dared to come close to the Line of Control (LoC).

|R|

Described as an “omnirole” aircraft by Dassault, Rafale was first selected by the IAF in January 2012. However, the contract was cancelled after Dassault refused to take responsibility for the 108 jets which were supposed to be manufactured by the HAL. As per the initial reports, it had expressed reservations about the ability of HAL to absorb and handle complex manufacturing and technology transfers.

An IAF contingent is currently in France for the joint exercise 'Garuda' with the French Air Force (FAF) to enhance interoperability and cooperation between the two Air Forces, reported ANI.

India and France are strategic partners and have been increasing their cooperation from the past many years.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led BJP government signed a government-to-government deal for 36 Rafale fighters with France in the year 2016.

The first squadron would be based in Ambala while the second one would be based in Hasimara Air Force Station in West Bengal's Alipurduar district. The latter is expected to be ready by 2020.
