Man evades arrest for nine years, takes up aliases; finally nabbed by Delhi Police

Singh allegedly shot the cable operator on November 27, 2010 (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place on November 27, 2010 The arrest was made from Katihar, Bihar by Delhi Police's Crime Branch The accused had come to Delhi in 2008

New Delhi: A murder case was solved by the police almost nine years after it happened after the police arrested the accused, Ranjeet Singh for murdering a cable operator in West Delhi. According to DCP (crime) Ram Gopal Naik, Singh had changed his identity to evade arrest.

The struggle of Delhi Police's Crime Branch came to an end after they received a tip-off about a man who had been hiding in Forbesganj. A team of Crime Branch officials reached the area and found out that Singh had fled to Katihar, Bihar. The team then reached Katihar and arrested Singh. Singh allegedly shot the cable operator on November 27, 2010, with the help of his allies.

When Singh had first come to the national capital in 2008, he started working with a vegetable businessman in Azadpur Mandi. Sometime later, Singh became friends with Vijay Nauti, a cable operator and joined the business. Reportedly, Singh and Nauti got into a rivalry with Bhola, who was also a cable operator.

According to a report, Bhola planned on getting Nauti and Singh shot but the two escaped with minor injuries. Nauti and Singh then attacked Bhola with their allies and succeeded in murdering him.

Soon after the incident, Singh went to Bhopal and changed his name to 'Rahul'. Singh moved to Katihar in Bihar after working at a grocery shop in Bhopal for a brief period. In Bihar, Singh took up the aliases of Nagesh and Ravinder. He worked as an electrician in Bihar before shifting to Forbesganj near Nepal. In Nepal, Singh took up the alias 'Sunny' and opened a mess service in Forbesganj.

Hyderabad murder mystery solved after 18 years

In April this year, the Hyderabad police arrested four people who had allegedly been involved in an 18-year-old murder case. The accused were identified as the deceased's friend, Syed Hasham, his brothers-in-law Mohammed Rasheed and Basheer Ahmed Qureshi and his mother Masooda Bee.

During a vehicle checking, the police arrested an inebriated Qureshi and seized a knife from his car. When he was being interrogated, Qureshi confessed that he had been a part of his brother-in-law's murder.

Qureshi told the cops that his brother-in-law, Mohammad Khaja was financially dependent on his mother and was addicted to drinking and playing cards. Qureshi alleged that Khaja used to assault his family members. Tired of being subjected to constant abuse, Khaja's mother allegedly decided to plan her son's murder.

Hasham, Qureshi and Rasheed allegedly invited Khaja for having toddy and started travelling to Shastripuram in Hashim's autorickshaw. The three accused allegedly stepped down from the vehicle on the pretext of relieving themselves and attacked Khaja with a granite boulder.
