Chennai: Breaking ‘suicide pact’, man feeds poisonous drink to ex-girlfriend

Singh was produced before a magisterial court and was sent to judicial custody (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place at a lodge in Chepauk, Chennai The accused was identified as K Sumer Singh Singh laced his girlfriend's drink with sodium cyanide

Chennai: A man in Chennai confessed to murdering his ex-girlfriend a month after the incident. The accused, K Sumer Singh allegedly fed sodium cyanide to his ex-girlfriend and strangled her to death at a lodge in Chepauk, Chennai. Singh was arrested on Sunday after he was discharged from Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital.

The deceased was identified as Kajal Kumari. While Singh laced Kumari's drink with cyanide, he fell unconscious as he had inhaled the chemical. Singh was produced before a magisterial court and was sent to judicial custody.

According to the police, Singh and the deceased had been in a relationship for the past two years. The deceased, however, ended the relationship after her parents did not approve of the same. Kumari allegedly got engaged to another man after her break-up with Singh.

Kumari allegedly later told the accused that she did not want to marry the man she had been engaged to and the couple formed a suicide pact. Allegedly, Singh was against Kumari's idea.

The accused booked a room at the lodge on June 10. He laced Kumari's cold drink with sodium cyanide that he had bought from Mumbai and pretended to drink himself. Suspicious that Singh was not drowsy even after drinking, Kumari questioned the former, which led to a heated argument. When the argument intensified, the accused allegedly strangled Kumari with her dupatta.

The incident came to light after Singh and Kumari did not answer calls from the staff. The manager of the lodge then opened the door using duplicate keys. Singh allegedly told the police that Kumari had consumed poison herself but the post-mortem report gave him away.

Jilted lover rapes woman, hurls acid on her after break up

In May this year, a man allegedly raped his girlfriend and hurled acid at her in Shahjahanpur, Uttar Pradesh after she said that she wanted to end their relationship. Allegedly, the two had been dating for the past five years.

The accused allegedly asked the woman to meet him at an orchard. When she reached there, the accused allegedly raped her. The accused threw acid on the woman after she protested and said that she wanted to end their relationship.

Following the incident, the woman approached the Shahjahanpur police and lodged a complaint against the accused. The police booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and arrested him.
