[PICS INSIDE] Ananya Panday, Kartik Aaryan share 'first day' photos from Pati Patni Aur Woh shoot

Ananya Panday and Kartik Aaryan start shooting for Pati, Patni Aur Woh | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Ananya Panday and Kartik Aaryan have officially begun shooting for their upcoming film Pati Patni Aur Woh The stars shared photos from 'first day' on their social media handles

Ever since the makers announced the remake of the classic film Pati Patni Aur Woh, fans have been waiting eagerly to see Ananya Panday, Kartik Aaryan and Bhumi Pednekar together on the silver screens. The film which is scheduled to release on December 6, has finally gone on the floors and the lead pair Kartik Aaryan and Anaya Panday have started shooting for their respective parts.

After shooting with Sara Ali Khan for Imtiaz Ali's upcoming film, Kartik Aaryan has begun shooting for his next with Ananya Panday and the actor is currently in the city of Nawabs, Lucknow. The actor took to his social media handle to share a photo where he can be seen sitting in an airplane and holding a script with his name on it. The actor can be seen striking a pose as he is all geared up for his shooting schedule. Kartik captioned the photo as '#ChintuTyagi chale #Lucknow !! #PatiPatniAurWoh Kal se.'

While Kartik shared a photo giving his fans an update about his next, Ananya Panday too made sure to do the same. The actress shared a couple of pictures where she is seen looking like a total diva. Sharing the photo Anaya wrote 'kebabs > kebab mein haddi #PatiPatniAurWohMood #FirstDay #Wish'. Check out the photos shared by the two here:

Announcing the film, the stars shared the post where the trio was seen striking the pose. While Ananya and Kartik have started shooting for the film, Bhumi Pednekar has yet not updated anything on her social media handle.

Here is another adorable photo of the two which was shared by Kartik Aaryan on his social media handle. Congratulating Ananya on the release of Student Of The Year 2, the Lukka Chuupi actor wrote 'Arey arey itni saari taareefein !!! Congratulations on your big day. Keep brightening up the big screen with your bright smile n cuteness @ananyapanday #SOTY2.'

Stay tuned for zoomtv.com for more updates.
