Three of a Nepali family killed in Bengaluru house collapse

Kathmandu, July 11

Three members of a Nepali family, who hailed from Bajhang district, were killed in Bengaluru — the Capital of city of Karnataka, India — when two multi-storeyed buildings collapsed on a crossroad off Hutchins Road in Cooke Town.

The deceased have been identified as 28-year-old Narayan Khadka, his 23-year-old wife Nirmala and their four-year-old daughter Anuska. The incident occurred at around 1:30 am today.

Two Indian nationals were also killed in the incident.

Narayan Khadka’s father and mother also live in Bengaluru. The Khadka family hailed from Bagda village, Ward No 2 of Thalara Rural Municipality, Bajhang.

According to Ward No 2 Chairperson Hem Khadka, who is also Narayan’s cousin, the tragic death of his family members had shocked the entire village. “Everybody in my village is in grief,” he said over phone from Bajhang.

Hem said Narayan went to Bengaluru four years ago with the hope of settling down in the city after his bid to go to a gulf country failed. “He was a very helpful person who would always help Nepalis in India, sometimes buying them train tickets and other times receiving Nepalis at the railway station,” he said and added he would always send gifts to the people of the village and to his friends.

The Khadka couple’s six-year-old son Anmol was lucky to escape the tragedy.

He is currently studying in a kindergarten school in Dhangadi, Kailali. Narayan, who complained he had not been able to give enough time for his son’s study in Bengaluru, had admitted his son into a Dhangadi school one-and-a-half years ago, hoping that his family members living there could take care of his son.

Hem said he had visited his cousin in Bengaluru two years ago but was clueless about the vulnerability of the building he was staying in. Narayan was working as a security guard in the same building.

Narayan’s cousin Shankar Khadka told The Himalayan Times over phone from Bengaluru that the bodies were cremated in Bengaluru today. Shankar added that the family of the victims would seek compensation from the builders.

According to New Indian Express, the Khadka family were residing in the basement of the apartment block, Sai Adi Ambal, on site number 40, which was constructed in 2016 and was inhabited.

All the occupants of the building where the Khadka family was residing had a miraculous escape except Khadka family.

Times of India has reported that the foundations of both buildings were not laid properly and the government authorities would hold the builders, engineers and architects accountable for the incident.
