For parched Chennai, hope arrives with the first train carrying water to the city

Train carrying water reaches Chennai | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Chennai has been gripped by a water crisis Four reservoirs that supply water to the city have gone dry State govt had requested Railways for assistance in ferrying water

New Delhi: With water crisis continuing in Chennai, a train carrying water reached the Tamil Nadu capital on Friday in a bid to ease the situation. The first of such trains had started from Jolarpettai railway station in Vellore district early this morning.

The AIADMK government in Tamil Nadu had announced earlier that water would be brought from Vellore on rail wagons to tackle the situation in Chennai.

The train had departed Jolarpettai at 7.20 am with 50 tank wagons (BTPN), each having a capacity of 50,000 litres. The train reached the Villivakkam station around noon. Officials had earlier said that Tamil Nadu ministers would receive the train at the station.

Jolarpettai is located some 217 km from Chennai. The train was originally due to arrive in Chennai yesterday but could not depart as leakages were spotted in the valves.

Chennai has been gripped by a severe water crisis for the past four months. It has been receiving water supply that is some 200 million litres less than the normal. At present, the Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board has been supplying some 525 million litres of water per day.

The crisis has been aggravated by the fact that the four reservoirs that supply water to the city have gone dry and monsoon too arrived late in the state.

In view of the crisis, the Tamil Nadu government had placed a request before the Railways for assistance in ferrying water to Chennai.

The acute water crisis in the southern metropolis had earlier led to the closure of several schools due to water shortage. Many companies had even asked their employees to work from home, while hotels asked their guests to restrict water usage.

Clashes were also witnessed in the city as water tankers supplied drinking water to residential areas.
