High Time Assam Floods Are Taken Seriously As Brahmaputra River Overflows, Over 4 Lakh People Affected

Rains bring respite to us but when it pours unabatedly then it halts our daily life. Recently Mumbai had come to a standstill after heavy rain lashed parts of the city. The situation seems to be coming back to normal there but it is the north eastern state of Assam that is facing nature's wrath. The flood situation in Assam deteriorated as it spread to 17 districts affecting 4.23 lakh people with many rivers flowing above the danger level in various places, officials said.

afp

According to the Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA), three people were killed in rain and flood-related incidents in Golaghat, Dhemaji and Kamrup Metropolitan district on Wednesday.

The deluge, which had affected 2.5 lakh people in 11 districts on Wednesday, spread to six more districts on Thursday affecting 4.23 lakh people, it said.

The district which have been affected by floods are Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Biswanath, Darrang, Barpeta, Nalbari, Chirang, Golaghat, Majuli, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Nagaon, Morigaon, Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon, Baksa and Sonitpur.

reuters

Barpeta is the worst-affected district with 85,262 people reeling under the impact of the flood. It is closely followed by Dhemaji where 80,219 people have been affected, ASDMA said.

As many as 749 villages in 41 revenue circles are under water and 1,843 people have taken shelter in the 53 relief camps and relief distribution centres set up by district administrations, the ASDMA said.

Flood waters also entered the Kaziranga National Park in upper Assam forcing the animals to take shelter on the platforms constructed for them to be safe during deluge, authorities said.

afp

The river Brahmaputra at Nimatighat in Jorhat and Tezpur in Sonitpur, the Dikhow river at Sivasagar town, the Dhansiri river at Numaligarh in Golaghat, the Jia Bharali river at NT Road Crossing in Sonitpur, the Puthimari river at NH Road Crossing in Kamrup and the Beki river at Road Bridge in Barpeta are flowing above the danger marks, ASDMA said.

(With agency inputs)
