Members of minority community thrash children for holding RSS meet in Bundi, minister calls it ‘minor issue'

Children were thrashed for holding RSS meet | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights Rajasthan Parliamentary Affairs Minister Shanti Dhariwal called it ‘minor issue’ BJP slammed the Congress for making objectionable remarks BJP said that Congress government was trying to protect the culprits

Jaipur: An argument between children holding an RSS shakha turned violent in Rajasthan’s Bundi after men and women from the minority community thrashed them with sticks. The incident took place in Ganesh Park on Wednesday evening. BJP MLA Madan Dilawar raised this issue in the state assembly during Zero Hour on Thursday saying that such incidents cannot be tolerated.

Meanwhile, Superintendent of Police (Bundi) Mamta Gupta said that three people were arrested in the case after which they were produced before an SDM court and sent to judicial custody. She further termed the incident as a “trivial issue”.

Dilawar further accused the police of negligence and said a video of the incident has surfaced.

Dilawar was joined by the leader of Opposition in the Assembly Gulab Chand Kataria who said that the government needs to inform the House what action has been taken in the case.

"The matter is serious and there is resentment in people. If the government has taken any action then they should inform the House," said Kataria.

Reacting to this, Rajasthan Parliamentary Affairs Minister Shanti Dhariwal raised objection saying that according to the rules, only that person who has raised an issue can speak on it.

Kataria, who served as the Home Minister in Vasudhara Raje-led BJP government, alleged that the government was trying to protect the culprits.

BJP legislators also slammed the Congress for making objectionable remarks on the sensitive issue. Later, the Speaker said that such remarks would be expunged from the proceedings.

Dhariwal then informed the House saying that an FIR has been registered against five people and gave assurance that all accused will be arrested soon. He also called it a minor issue saying that nobody was injured in the attack.

Earlier today, reports came that Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha (BJYM) members had attacked Madrasa students in Unnao, Uttar Pradesh for not chanting ‘Jai Shri Ram’.

According to the FIR, students aged 12 to 14 years belonging to Madrasa Dar-ul-Uloom Faiz-e-Aam in Unnao were attacked by alleged BJYM members at Government Inter College (GIC) grounds.

Imam Naeem of Jama Masjid alleged that the children refused to chant ‘Jai Shri Ram’ as it was against their belief after which they were brutally assaulted by the BJYM members with bats and wickets.

As per the medical reports, one student sustained a grievous injury to his head and was admitted to a hospital.
