International dance troupes join Shraddha Kapoor and Varun Dhawan's for Street Dancer 3D

Shraddha Kapoor and Varun Dhawan shooting the climax for their film Street Dancer 3D | Photo Credit: Instagram

Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor starrer, Street Dancer 3D is one of the most anticipated films. Directed by Remo D’Souza, it is a coming-of-age, dance drama film. Off late a lot of buzz has surrounded the film, as the film is in its last leg of shooting. Shraddha has had her hands full because as soon as she returned from Austria’s shooting schedule of Saaho, she started shooting for Street Dancer 3D’s climax.

The climax showcases a final dance battle. For this very shoot, troupes from across the globe have joined the lead cast. Skilled dancers have poured in from the United Kingdom, Germany, Nepal and Africa. The shooting of the climax began on June 29 in Mumbai.

The climax is being shot at a thoroughly rigorous pace and has a schedule of 25 days. Featuring back-to-back performances, the shoot will go on till the month-end. All the actors in pivotal roles, such as Varun, Shraddha, Nora Fatehi and Prabhudheva, have rehearsed meticulously for almost a month for this final shoot.

Kings United is choreographing the dance sequence, in a suburban studio of Mumbai. A special set up has been established for the climax. It includes thousands of fans, each group cheering for their own country.

Varun recently uploaded a photo on his Instagram, with his co-star Shraddha, which she too put up on her handle:

Other videos that the Varun uploaded includes:

The producer of the film, Bhushan Kumar said, “We are so glad that Street Dancer 3D has gone global and many artists from across continents are being part of the final act of the film. The set for this finale is magnanimous and looks spectacular. The actors have been rehearsing and shooting in these rains to complete the schedule on time. The choreography and the music will surely sweep the audiences off their feet.”

The film has also been produced by Divya Khosla Kumar, Krishan Kumar and Lizelle D’ Souza, It will hit the screens on January 24, 2020.
