Actor Sameera Reddy gives birth to baby girl

Actor Sameera Reddy gives birth to baby girl

This is the couple's second child.

Flix Social

Actor Sameera Reddy, who recently broke stereotypes by doing an underwater photo-shoot during her pregnancy, was blessed with a baby girl on Friday morning. “Our little angel came this morning. My Baby girl! Thank you for all the love and blessings,” the actor wrote on her Instagram page, announcing the arrival of the newborn.

According to reports, Sameera was admitted to the Beams Multispecialty hospital in Mumbai on Thursday night. Sameera is married to Mumbai-based businessman Akshai Varde and the couple had a son in 2015.

Sameera had recently put up a video on Instagram, where she spoke about being oneself and celebrating imperfections. “This is the real me! Almost ready to pop! I know I’ll bounce back and I am not afraid of being judged. I wanted to share how I looked without make up & my morning face, and how it’s important for me to celebrate it!” the actor wrote along with a video where she appeared without any make-up, shot during the final days of her pregnancy.

Sameera in April had written on her social media page about how she had struggled to get back to normalcy after her first pregnancy. She talked about losing confidence after gaining weight and how for days together she hadn’t stepped out of her house in the fear of being judged. The actor had written on Instagram that it took her two years to get back to her original weight.

A few days back, celebrating body positivity, Sameera had posted pictures from her underwater photo-shoot during the ninth month of her pregnancy. The pictures, which were posted without any filters or Photoshop, had taken social media by storm.

Sameera Reddy is best remembered for her role in Suriya starrer 2008 film Vaarnam Aayiram. Hailing from Andhra Pradesh, she has also acted in several Hindi, Telugu and Tamil movies. She is also remembered for her 1998 music video, ‘Ahista’, by Pankaj Udas.
