Student members slam SFI unit in Kerala college as 'fascist'

Thiruvananthapuram, July 12 : In a first public outburst by Students' Federation of India (SFI) members, angry students at the University College here on Friday slammed the functioning of the SFI unit at the college, forcing the union's national president to disband the college unit.

This turn of events followed the stabbing of BA Final Year student Akhil, and injuries to two other students, in a fight at the college between the SFI unit members and other students.

Akhil and the other two injured students have been admitted to the Medical College hospital.

"We are all supporters of the SFI, but today the 13 unit members in the college are acting like fascists. None can freely move around the college and if we sit around a tree or sing songs, we are abused beaten and chased away," one of the protesting students said.

"There is total disarray and we are forced to speak against SFI, to whom we all belong," he added..

Reacting quickly to the situation, SFI President V.P. Sanu, told the media that it has been decided to dismiss the SFI unit of the University College.

"The other details of what happened are being ascertained and we will take action if any member of the SFI is involved," Sanu said.

Following the stabbing, angry students of the college protested by blocking the main road, forcing the police to act.

This college is regarded as an SFI bastion and is located a stone's throw from the state secretariat. The SFI is affiliated to the Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M), which is the lead alliance partner of the ruling Left Democratic Front (LDF).

"Akhil was sitting under a tree and singing a song. Soon the unit members came and started to beat him badly. The unit members know that whatever they do, they will get the necessary support from the CPI-M. What happened to a probe when a girl tried to commit suicide?" another protesting student asked.

Akhil's father Chandran told the media that his son had been threatened by SFI leaders in the past, and following a conciliation meeting also involving the CPI-M district secretary, he had been assured that there would be no more trouble.

Meanwhile, University College Principal K. Viswambharan tried to play down the incident, saying he was busy with new admissions and is yet to find out what occured. He also asked the media to clear out from the college campus and threatened to call the police.
