Uttarakhand MLA bought VIP number '0001' for Rs. 5.51L

(MENAFN- NewsBytes) Uttarakhand MLA bought VIP number '0001' for Rs. 5.51L

12 Jul 2019

Uttarakhand BJP MLA Kunwar Pranav Singh Champion, who was recently seen in a controversial viral video of him dancing with guns and mouthing expletives, has been suspended from the party indefinitely.

Interestingly, other than causing an embarrassment to the party, the lawmaker also has an affinity to VIP number plates for his vehicles, for which, he reportedly shelled out Rs. 5.51 lakh!

"Highest amount paid for VIP number in past 2 years"

Details

Notably, Additional regional transport officer Arvind Pandey told The Times of India that Champion acquired the envied '0001' VIP number plate for his vehicle, paying Rs. 5.51 lakh for the same.

"Many others applied for these VIP numbers since the process became online in June 2017 but this is the highest amount paid for a VIP number in Dehradun in the past two years," Pandey said.

Previous record Rs. 5.25L; held by AAP's mayoral candidate

Previous record

Further, according to TOI, the previous record for the highest bid for a VIP number plate in Dehradun region was held by AAP's Dehradun mayoral candidate Rajni Rawat in 2018, and the only transgender politician in Uttarakhand.

In February, Rawat bought the VIP '0001' number plate for Rs. 5.25 lakh, for "good luck."

She also reportedly bought the '0007' plate for Rs. 1.13 lakh.

Transport Department conducts VIP number online auction twice a month

Fact

"The 0001 number of each series is the most sought after number followed by 0007," Pandey told TOI, adding Champion made the highest bid for '0001' number for the UK-07-DN series. The state transport department conducts an online auction for VIP numbers twice every month.

Champion was seen drinking, dancing with guns, in viral video

Viral Video

Coming to Champion, he recently made headlines over a viral video where he is seen drinking with a group of men. In the video, he dances with guns in hand to the Karan Arjun song, 'Mujhko Ranaji Maaf Karna,' mouthing expletives.

Presumably, post that, the BJP extended his three-month suspension to an indefinite period, in a notice issued by state BJP general secretary.

Viral video is edited; intrusion of privacy, says Champion

Fact

Meanwhile, Champion has defended his actions, saying, "The video which has gone viral is edited and an intrusion into my privacy." He added, "I never used abusive words against anyone as is being shown by the media."
