Barks, bites, and a Republic

Anoop Kohli is a senior consultant neurologist at the Indraprastha Apollo Hospital, New Delhi. His interests go far beyond his chosen profession. For him, it's just one game of life so interesting to study for all its themes and aberrations. He also dabbles in script-writing and recently got a membership of the Bombay Film Writers' Association. In this blog, Masquerader, expect from him anything from H1N1 to Heena. LESS ... MORE

A popular photograph in one of today’s national dailies shows the feathered ones in the front two rows, gazing at the skies. Obviously, the ceremonial Indian fighter jets, spreading the three colours of the flag, in surprisingly clear blue skies. It was nice to see these men and women who shall soon hold the keys of the kingdom, sit together.

South African (SA) President Ramphosa’s presence somehow drew a trail of the father of the nation’s philosophy from its incubation in SA, to its formal combative shape (still firmly and un-mistakenly called non-violence), to shake off an imperial power. Though it finally happened, but not without cruelly minded diplomacy leading to one of the worst blood-sheds in history, just on the heels of a ghastly holocaust!

However, there was quite a storm over a particular aircraft purchase a week earlier. Hopefully, matters are settled, or the communication has shifted to subsonic or supersonic frequencies. It spares the common man some mind space to judge before he votes. I do not have the burden, nor the talent, to dissect the merits and demerits, but with India being possibly the highest buyer of arms, and soon to have a decent ranking in weapon manufacture, and knowing weapon deals being what they are, at any given time one should be able to see half a dozen scams afloat. The mix -up of the names that happens often at key public addresses, is not so much because the names are too many, it is because the leader has changed as many parties. The dusty sandal often has to be held back by others from before the urge to put it in the mouth!

The week that passed, saw premature and mindless criticism of the parties seeking power, the total number amounting to around two dozen, clearly excluding the prominence of the GOP, that has ruled this country longest in terms of tenure. There was exchange of abusive and curt language—a sour but routine interaction in politics these days.

Some confidence, peace, and what is sound political understanding, seems to be taking shape after the GOP dissociated and made itself a centre point of negotiations.

What India needed long back and citizens, irrespective of their allegiance may appreciate, is the two-party system. It’s easier for each party to gauge each other, develop strategies, and there is little doubt, that the winner shall be the one that, addresses the voter as well as the future of the nation. Both are not perceived the same by the common man and this is where true political acumen lies. External influences, particularly towards allies have to be handled deftly, because the nation can only retain an upward trajectory if it sharpens purposeful diplomacy towards the external world.

It means, that not only farmer loans have to be seriously systematized as a long- term policy, but external debt, foreign investments to increase the GDP, and the baggage of employment, infrastructure, education, health need to be tackled. Indian R&D, but for ISRO, and recent upgrading of some export-worthy cars, presently sees a spark in young start-ups, concentrating on AI. Ai is applicable everywhere. Quick returns shall come from the farm, health, telecom and pharma sector. A certain percentage should focus on exports for products not widely in use at present in India.

A much- talked about the phenomenon is the entry of a new face in the GOP as Gen Secretary of the party, with a particular role of increasing the stakes in the most populous state UP, once its stronghold.

The amazing and pleasant fact is, that what was projected as a cakewalk to the present coalition on the basis of recent results, is somewhat stunned!

Not going into the politics of party functioning, it shows how fragile are caste and community- based power grids. It also gives the voter another option to choose. The backwards and minorities have been constitutionally defined. They deserve an opportunity to select a party that gives them a better deal. There may be a migration, to a more experienced party!

Hopefully, the caste and communal polarization may be on its way to dilution.

The good news that emanates, what may matter, is the scale of development, performance, the easing and social back-up to the farmer, student and trader, that a party promises, even shows a mini demo.

However, party loyalties are sometimes inalienable. The percentage of shift on account of an un-attached entry of a national party shall minimize compulsive loyalties with a shift to optional and performance-based loyalties.

I believe, by contesting on its own agenda, the national party is carrying out its democratic responsibility.

Will the “hand” hold the “bike” and chide the elephant, and move round a “lotus” pond!

Elections are after all a human circus. The only performance to judge is who’s show sells the maximum tickets.

If you were to enumerate global terrorism, right from Mr Bush Sr’s 32nd parallel, invasion of Iraq, 9/11, Britain’s 7/7, India’s 26/11, the rise of Taliban, ISIS, terrorism is perhaps less in terms of sporadic violence, or pitched battles. But terrorism has slowly shifted towards the sub-continent. That concerns us, as well as global peace.

Let there be no extraneous influences of nature, that national integrity be compromised. On this, the two big parties should have a tacit and binding understanding.

Beyond that, let the party ready to develop a prosperous India come forth.

Went over some old editions of National Herald. Below the title, was always this sentence written in Nehru’s handwriting:

“Freedom is in peril, it’s all Your might…..”

(Wo jahan bhi gaya laut key merey paas aaya,

Yahi ek baat hai acchi merey harjai ki)

(Wherever he/she went, came back to me, This is one virtue, of my disloyal friend)

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
