Karnataka: Cyanide Mohan held guilty of murdering Kasaragod woman

MANGALURU: The sixth additional district and sessions court has held Anand alias Cyanide Mohan , a former government school teacher, guilty of murder, robbery, cheating, destruction of evidence and poisoning, in a case related to the murder of a woman from Paivalike in Kasaragod . The court will pronounce its sentence in the case on July 18.Judge Sayeedunnisa found Mohan guilty under Indian Penal Code sections 328, 392, 394, 302, 201 and 417. However, he was not found guilty under IPC sections 366 (abduction) and 376 (rape).Mohan had befriended the woman from Kasaragod after introducing himself to her as Sudhakar, who worked for an insurance company in Mangaluru in 2006. The victim was working at a house, and Mohan promised to marry her. On April 20, he had invited her to Mangaluru. The woman came along with her aunt to meet him. After having lunch at a restaurant near State Bank Bus Stand, Mohan asked her aunt to leave saying that he would take the victim for some work.After the aunt left, the woman and Mohan went to Madikeri in a bus. They stayed in a lodge. The next day, he asked the woman to leave all her valuables at the lodge. He had an affair with the woman at the lodge. He told the victim that they would marry at a temple, and took her to the Madikeri Bus Stand the next day. He made her take a tablet laced with cyanide by telling her that it was a contraceptive. She took it without thinking twice, and died in the washroom of the bus stand. Mohan later went to the lodge and took all the valuables kept by the woman, which he later sold in Mangaluru.The police had arrested Mohan on October 21, 2009, in connection with another case. Two days later, while being interrogated, he revealed details about this case.Public prosecutor Judith O M Crasta said that the court has examined 41 witnesses, 50 documents and 42 material objects. Mohan is still facing a trial in five more cases.Judith added that the victim’s aunt wasn’t aware about her death. She came to know about it through media reports. She believed that Cyanide Mohan had married her niece and they were living happily.
