Salman Khan & Indian Idol fame Thupten Tsering singing together is the best thing on the internet; WATCH

If there is one superstar in Bollywood who has the unique ability to win hearts with his sweet gestures for people, it is Salman Khan. The star of films like Bharat, Dabangg, Race 3 and more is well-known for his big heart as well. Be it taking care of a co-actor who had a heart attack recently or just spending time with his fans, Salman’s heartwarming gestures make him not just a superstar but also a good human being. His fans love to see his humble side and in recent times, the Bharat actor has been sharing his personal life on social media.

Today, once again, Salman shared a video which has surely won the hearts of people. In the video, we can see Salman sitting beside Thupten Tsering who was a contestant on Indian Idol 9. Thupten was known for his vocals and his ability to motivate others. Despite being differently-abled, Thupten pursued his love for singing and even inspired Sachin Tendulkar back during the Indian Idol days. Thupten had lost both his arms at the age of 5 but that didn’t stop him from winning hearts of people with his singing on Indian Idol.

(Also Read: Dabangg 3: Salman Khan to shoot extensive courtroom scenes for the film for 15 days)

In the video, we can see Salman sitting beside Thupten who recited a motivational shayari which impressed the superstar. Later, Salman and Thupten sang together an old song. Their video of crooning together is completely winning the hearts of the people.

Check it out:

Meanwhile, Salman is currently shooting for his next film, Dabangg 3 with Sonakshi Sinha, Arbaaz Khan and Sudeep. The film is being directed by Prabhudheva and is a sequel to the Dabangg 2. It kickstarted a while back in MP and Salman along with the rest of the actors had gone to shoot in the city of Maheshwar. Dabangg 3 is slated to release on December 20, 2019. Aside to this, Salman is also producing the couple dance reality show, Nach Baliye 9.
