Rains claim 7 lives in North East

New Delhi: Heavy monsoon showers triggered floods and landslides in parts of the Northeast, where at least seven people died Friday and over four lakh in Assam were affected by a raging Brahmaputra, while rain-related incidents claimed 14 lives in Uttar Pradesh in past nine days.

However, the national capital’s wait for the rain continued as it witnessed a hot and humid day with the maximum temperature settling at 38.3 degrees Celsius, three notches above normal. Some relief is likely on July 15-16 as rains are expected in the city.

In Uttar Pradesh, rains lashed eastern and western parts of the state as the water level in several rivers neared the danger mark. “Fourteen persons have died between July 3 and July 11 in rain related incidents including house collapse, lightning, wall collapse,” a UP Relief Commissioner office report said.

While three persons died in Fatehpur in this period, one each was killed in Mahoba, Pilibhit, Kanpur Dehat, Sonbhadra, Hardoi, Kushinagar, Pratapgarh, Sitapur, Kannauj, Barabanki and Jaunpur, it said.

According to the Central Water Commission (CWC) report on Thursday, river Ganga is rising in Kanpur, Chhatnag in Prayagraj, Mirzapur, Varanasi, Ghazipur and Ballia, while river Ramganga is rising in Kalagarh (Bijnore) and Bareilly.

Yamuna is rising in Kalpi (Jalaun) and Naini (Prayagraj). Gomti river is rising in Sitapur and Sultanpur, it said. River Sharda is flowing above the danger mark in Palliakalan (Lakhimpur) and rising in Sharda Nagar.

Rains lashed large parts of Punjab and Haryana also, bringing down the maximum temperatures below normal limits in most places. Chandigarh received a heavy downpour in the morning for a second consecutive day.

In the Northeast, while three people died in Assam, two each lost their lives in Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram in rain-related incidents.

The flood situation in Assam remained grim with more than half of the state’s 33 districts battling the raging waters of the Brahmaputra and its tributaries. The floods have led to death of three persons and affected 4.23 lakh people.

The swirling flood waters have forced the railway authority to control train services due to “settlement of tracks” in the Lumding-Badarpur hill section.

Barpeta is the worst-hit district with over 85,000 people affected.

The ASDMA said nearly 800 villages in 41 revenue circles are under water and about 2,000 marooned people have been put up in 53 relief camps and relief distribution centres.

The Kaziranga National Park, the famed habitat of the Great Indian Rhino and a World Heritage site, has been affected too.

The Brahmaputra is flowing above the danger mark at Nimatighat in Jorhat and Tezpur in Sonitpur, while Dikhow river has breached the danger mark at Sivsagar town, Dhansiri river at Numaligarh in Golaghat, Jia Bharali at NT Road Crossing in Sonitpur, Puthimari at NH Road Crossing in Kamrup and Beki river at Road Bridge in Barpeta.

In Mizoram, two men drowned and 390 houses submerged in floods triggered by incessant rain across Mizoram. Disaster management and rehabilitation officials said landslides made many places inaccessible.

The swelling water of Khawthlangtuipui river, also known as the Karnaphuli, has submerged at least 390 houses in six villages of Lunglei district. A total of 119 families have been rescued from one of the affected villages.

BJP’s women MPs urged to focus on health, sanitation, eradicating malnutrition

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday met women MPs of the BJP over breakfast at his residence and said they should focus on health, sanitation and eradicating malnutrition.

More than 30 MPs attended the meeting, speaking at length and sharing their views on various issues with their Prime Minister, sources said.

The Prime Minister listened to them patiently and said every woman MP is an institution in herself, disclosed one of the women who attended the interaction.

Being women, he said, they have excellent soft skills that can help them connect effectively with the public, the sources added.

Modi advised the women MPs of his party to focus on health, sanitation and eradicating malnutrition among children.

Friday’s meeting is the fifth in the series of meetings with a cross-section of parliamentarians from the party.

The party’s MPs have been divided into seven groups and Modi has already met party parliamentarians belonging to the OBC, SC and ST categories, young MPs and those who were ministers once, sources said.

The meetings have been planned so BJP MPs from both the houses get an opportunity to directly interact with the prime minister, who can guide them and discuss various issues, especially related to Parliament, a BJP leader said.

These meetings are in the nature of introductory meetings, party insiders said.

In his meeting with young MPs recently, Modi said they should involve themselves in doing social work because people appreciate that more than hard-core politics.

Home Minister Amit Shah, who is also the BJP president, and Parliamentary Affairs Minister Pralhad Joshi are the only Union ministers who are part of these meetings. The party’s working president J P Nadda also attends.

During the 16th Lok Sabha, the prime minister met MPs from various states in every session of Parliament, where he spoken to them about the government’s agenda.

The newly elected 17th Lok Sabha has 78 women MPs, the highest since independence. Of these, 41 are from the BJP.
