Opposition united only for corruption, undermining institutions, alleges PM Modi

THRISSUR: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday launched a scathing attack on Congress and communists saying they are united only in undermining institutions, corruption and in attacking him.Inaugurating the rally organized in connection with the Yuva Morcha’s state conference the Prime Minister made it clear that he would not tolerate corruption and destruction of national culture as long as he continued to be the `chowkidar’ of the country.Without taking names, the Prime Minister alleged a prominent Congress leader had undermined even the Election Commission of India and the democratic process of the country, in a foreign land, by raking up unfounded criticisms on the electronic voting systems. The ECI had to convene a press conference to clarify its stand, Modi alleged.He said both the Congress and the communists were undermining other institutions like police, CBI and even the CAG. ``According to them all others are wrong and only they are right’’, the Prime Minister said.Modi said the Congress and the communists talking about democracy was "a big joke’’. They had no right to speak about democracy. The communists in Kerala were killing BJP activists in Kerala just because they didn’t agree with their ideology. Now this culture of killing political opponents are spreading to Madhya Pradesh , where several BJP workers are getting killed. Many of the Congress leaders are still under the grip of the mindset of the Emergency, he said.According to Modi, the Congress and communists had no genuine respect for the rights of the women. If they had the respect they would have wholeheartedly supported the Bill to end the infamous practice of Triple Talaq moved by the present government.The Prime Minister also attacked the opposition for not having any positive and developmental agenda for the nation. ``You can abuse me as much as you want, but don’t harm the poor, You can abuse me as much as you want, but don’t put barriers in the progress of India, You can abuse me as much as you want, but don’t create hurdles in the opportunities of the youth, you can abuse me as much as you want, but don’t abuse the our great nation,’’ the Prime Minister asserted.Modi also attacked the LDF and the Congress on their stance on the Sabarimala issue. He said both the parties were trying to decimate cultural heritage of Kerala.The Prime Minister also defended the decision of the President to confer Padma award to the scientist Nambi Narayan. He said this renowned scientist was a victim of the internal schism in the Congress.
