Cops on lookout for goons involved in threatening Steel City doctor

JAMSHEDPUR: The Steel City police are still on the look out to nab goons involved in the firing outside Dr S K Kundu’s clinic in Baradwari area on Wednesday afternoon. The firing happened 72 hours after alleged extortion calls was made by the notorious Akhilesh Singh gang to the doctor. An FIR has been lodged with the Sitaramdera police station in connection with the threat call and the firing.Talking to TOI on Friday, SP (city) Subash Chandra Jat said: “We have got some initial clues and will soon arrest those involved in the crime.” Jat assured that there was no reason to panic and said he is leading a team to catch the culprit. So far, they have detained two persons, who are out on bail, for questioning in connection with the crime. He further said the CCTV footages from the area are being checked to zero in on the identity of the criminals. Further, security outside the nursing home and Dr Kundu’s residence has been beefed up.Jat said preliminary inquiries into the firing incident conducted soon after he reached the spot have indicated that the goons may have used “toy pistol” to terrorize the doctor as no cartridges were recovered from the spot.Dr Kundu, an oncologist working with the state-run MGMMCH, had received the call from mobile number 8789909880, demanding Rs 5 lakh. Over the phone, the culprits identified themselves as members of the the Akhilesh Singh gang. Akhilesh, an accused in several criminal cases, including murder, is lodged in Dumka jail. Dr Kundu was attending a doctors’ seminar in the city when he received the threatening call and the SDM (law and order) was also present.When the doctor reported the call to police, he was given armed security guards. Sources said when the culprits opened fire, the armed guard was sitting in the parking lot outside the private nursing home. A private security guard posted outside the clinic said when he heard the shots, he rushed to the spot after which two goons, who came on a bike, escaped.After the news of the attack spread on the social media, many in the city especially the medical fraternity were left terrified. They recalled the series of crime which took place in the Steel City in 2009-10. Renowned doctor Prabhat Kumar was gunned down inside his house at northern town area on December 17, 2009. Gangster Pankaj Dubey and his aides were found allegedly involved in the killing.In October of that same year, criminals open fire at a petrol pump in the Circuit House area. On December 3, 2009 one Dr P K Mishra was fired at by goons. The bullets missed the doctor by a whisker.On January 5, 2010, a young businessman, Inderpal Singh, was killed. Six days after that incident, goons fired at Dr Asish Ray near Convent School. A Jugsalai-based photographer was also attacked in that year.
