Sidharth Malhotra starrer Captain Vikram Batra biopic to go on floors in April

Follow us on Sidharth Malhotra starrer Vikram Batra biopic to go on floors in April

Sidharth Malhotra will soon start shooting for Kargil martyr Vikram Batra's biopic. The Dharma Productions' film will go on floors in April and will be directed by Vishnuvardhan. Sidharth is currently busy shooting for Nikkhil Advani's romantic action, Marjaavaan, co-starring Tara Sutaria and Riteish Deshmukh. After completing the film, he will start filming the biopic, which has been tentatively titled Kargil's Sher Shah. For unversed, it was code name of Captain Batra. The title is enough to tell the story of Captain Batra's valour.

The shooting will begin in Chandigarh where the actor will shoot college portions at DAV college, where Captain Batra studied. Then, the filming will be done in Palampur, where he lived. Director Vishnuvardhan has got necessary permissions and done the recce. The war sequences will be shot in Kashmir and Leh. Mumbai Mirror reported that Sidharth will undergo a look change by the end of the year. He will also be playing Batra's twin brother, Vishal.

Captain Batra's girlfriend Dimple along with his family is helping the team with their research. Meanwhile, makers are looking for an actress to essay the role of Dimple.

Earlier, in an interview, Sidharth called it the toughest role of his life. He said, ''I am preparing for it but it seems like I have to prepare more for it because it is not enough for the kind of character that I am playing. I feel it is an emotional responsibility to play that character because the family of Vikram Batra felt that I can play his role so, it is a big responsibility to present their story on the big screen."

For unversed, Captain Vikram lost his life in Kargil war. He was given Param Vir Chakra - India's highest military award - posthumously.

More stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
