Society that called BMC penalty ‘extortionate’ gets notice for turning garages into shops

BMC

Malabar Hill society

Bombay High Court

illegal parking

Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act

‘104 flats, 70 cars but no parking’

sayschanged ‘use of space’ without permission; residents claim no in-built parking given during construction.Two days after residents of Malabar Hill’s Chandralok ‘B’ CHS filed a petition in theagainst the BMC’s move to impose a fine of Rs 10,000 on cars parked in no-parking zones in their neighbourhood, the BMC issued a notice to the housing society for converting car garages on its premises into shops and commercial establishments without permission. The notice has also been issued to Chandralok ‘A’ building next door.Earlier this month, the BMC started imposing exorbitant fines for parking on streets within 500 mt of public parking lots and rid some business areas in Parel of illegally parked cars. The fines are part of the civic body’s new parking and towing penalty policy, whereby owners of light motor vehicles (LMVs) could end up paying Rs 10,000-Rs 13,100 for. By way of this policy, two-wheelers could end up paying between Rs 5,000 and Rs 8,300. The policy also applies to housing societies across the city.In its petition in the HC on Wednesday, the Malabar Hill housing society had termed the civic body’s new policy as “violation of the right to life” and “excessively harsh, unconstitutional and colourable exercise of power” to “hold citizens to ransom”. Filed through solicitor Vikram Trivedi, who is also a resident of the Malabar Hill society, the petition terms 1,000 per cent hike in parking penalty as “disproportionate” and “bad in law”. It also claimed that the BMC is not legally empowered to impose these fines on unattended vehicles, which fall under the domain of the Motor Vehicles Act.“As per the sanctioned plan, the ground floor is designated for parking. They changed the ‘use of space’ from garages to shops in the 1990s without approval,” said Sanjay Jadhav, deputy chief engineer of the BMC’s Building Proposal department. Assistant Municipal Commissioner Vishwas Mote said the BMC has issued a notice under section 488 of theand will carry out an inspection. “Once the inspection is done, further notice will be issued as per due procedure and action will be taken,” Mote said. “Had they used their garages, they wouldn’t have faced such a big space crunch. The remaining cars could be accommodated in the BMC public parking lot,” a civic official said. When contacted, Trivedi, didn’t respond to calls and text messages.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------In the petition, Chandralok ‘B’ has said the building was constructed in 1961 and that the society has 104 flats but no parking. It claims the BMC didn’t require the buildings to create in-built parking at the time of construction. As a result, they are now forced to park their cars along the road outside. The petition added that it’s also the case with several housing societies in their neighbourhood.
