Uttar Pradesh: 15 people killed, 133 buildings collapsed as heavy rainfall hits 14 districts

Representational Image | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has predicted "partly cloudy sky with one or two spells of rain or thundershowers" for Saturday and next five days in Lucknow The affected districts include Sonabhadra, Chandoli, Firozabad, Unnao, Ambedkar Nagar, Khiri, Prayagraj, Barabanki, Pilibhit, Gorakhpur, Kanpur Nagar, Hardoi, Mau and Sultanpur Meanwhile, monsoon has yet not hit the national capital, that has been facing blistering heat for the past few months

Lucknow: Heavy rainfall accompanied by thunderstorm hit 14 districts of Uttar Pradesh in the last four days, claiming lives of at least 15 people.

The affected districts include Sonabhadra, Chandoli, Firozabad, Unnao, Ambedkar Nagar, Khiri, Prayagraj, Barabanki, Pilibhit, Gorakhpur, Kanpur Nagar, Hardoi, Mau and Sultanpur.

As per official data, as many as 15 people lost their lives, 23 animals were killed and 133 buildings collapsed in rain-related incidents in the past four days, July 9 to 12.

The Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) has predicted "partly cloudy sky with one or two spells of rain or thundershowers" for Saturday and next five days in Lucknow, news agency ANI reported.

According to IMD, heavy rainfall at isolated places over Uttarakhand, East Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Maharashtra, Konkan and Goa, Coastal Karnataka, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura is expected on Saturday.

Last week, the weather forecaster had predicted that some parts of Uttar Pradesh would receive heavy rainfall.

The IMD had said in a tweet: "In association with its likely west-northwestward movement, conditions are becoming favourable for further advance of southwest monsoon into remaining parts of North Arabian Sea, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, some more parts of Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, remaining parts of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand and some parts of Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi during the next 48 hours.”

Heavy rainfall in Mumbai affected daily life

Meanwhile, Mumbai received the highest rainfall in a decade last Monday with 550 mm average rainfall throwing the city, its roads, train and air services out of gear.

Heavy rainfall led to waterlogged streets in Mumbai (Photo: PTI)

In its report, the Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG) observed that drains in Mumbai can only handle 25 mm rainfall per hour as there are numerous obstructions in the larger drains due to siphons and other utility services, reported PTI.

The report further stated that out of 45 outfalls in the drains floodgates have been provided in only three of them. The maximum city witnessed widescale waterlogging due to heavy rains since Monday.

Delhi still awaiting monsoon

Meanwhile, monsoon has yet not hit the national capital, that has been facing blistering heat for the past few months. Earlier, the IMD had predicted that monsoon would hit the national city by July 3 or 4.

On Thursday, the IMD had predicted ‘heavy to very heavy’ rainfall in the sub-Himalayan region for the coming two-three days, with extremely heavy rainfalls forecast at isolated places.

The Met department, in its evening bulletin, warned districts of North Bengal of extremely heavy rainfall in isolated places till Sunday morning, July 14. Darjeeling, Kalimpong, Jalpaiguri, Alipurduar and Coochbehar are among the districts that have been warned of ‘heavy to very heavy’ rainfall till Sunday morning. However, the IMD did not mention any rainfall in the Delhi NCR region.
