Punitive action post Uri, Pulwama attacks shows political-military resolve: Army Chief Bipin Rawat

Chief Army Staff General Bipin Rawat | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Army Chief General Bipin Rawat was speaking at a seminar to mark 20 years after Kargil conflict General Rawat said Indian Armed Forces are transforming to become future ready Army Chief said punitive action after Uri and Pulwama attacks show political-military resolve to deal with threats

New Delhi: Chief of Army Staff (COAS) General Bipin Rawat said time and again Pakistan has time and again resorted to misadventures through proxy wars and state-sponsored terror. The Army Chief vowed that India will take a resolute action to defend its territory against any such misadventures.

“Let there be no doubt that any misadventure will be repelled with a punitive response,” Rawat said on Saturday while speaking at a seminar to mark 20 years after the Kargil conflict.

Rawat said, “despite several odds including several operations conducted on arduous terrain and diplomatic necessities, the valiant forces and nation was proud in achieving a resounding victory”.

On future of wars, the Army Chief said such conflicts will entail more violence and will be unpredictable with the advent of technology and cyber warfare will play a greater role.

“Our forces must be prepared for a multi-spectrum war. Non-state actors and a surge in technology is changing the nature of warfare. Cyber and space domain will increasingly play a bigger role as the battle field becomes more contested and at the same time will be seamlessly connected,” Rawat said.

The Indian Army is going through a transformation with the creation of Space, Cyber and Special Forces divisions in a clear sign of changing times, General Rawat said.

The General said the cross border strikes in Pakistan after the 2016 Uri attack and the punitive action after the Balakot suicide attack demonstrates political-military resolve and indicates of deeper changes.

India conducted cross-border surgical strikes after 2016 and 2019 terrorist attacks by Pakistan-based terrorist organisations. In 2019, Indian Air Force jets entered Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and bombed a terror camp run by Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), the terrorist outfit behind Pulwama attacks.

Rawat earlier said that Pakistan cannot attempt a Kargil-like attack again as no area has been left unoccupied by the Indian Army.

"There is no area which has been left unoccupied. I don’t think Pakistan would dare to do it again as it has already seen the result when it did this last time," Rawat said. .

Rawat also said that the Ministry of Defence (MoD) has cleared the restructuring of the Army headquarters for turning the Army into an 'agile, lethal and capability-based force'.

"The defence ministry has approved the proposal to restructure the Army headquarters. Now we will start the implementation of the plans," Rawat told ANI earlier.


