Wet Weather Persists Over Sikkim, Meghalaya, Assam and Northeast

Here’s our latest weather outlook for India

Saturday - Nationwide Rain Forecast

Southwest monsoon has advanced into south Rajasthan, large parts of Haryana, north and east Punjab and Jammu & Kashmir.

Heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Goa and coastal Karnataka. Fairly widespread rain and thunderstorms are likely over West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu & Kashmir. Also, scattered rain and thunderstorms can be expected over Odisha, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, interior Karnataka and Kerala.

East Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and Andaman & Nicobar Islands are likely to expect isolated rain and thunderstorms. Also, dry weather is likely over west Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan.

Saturday - State/Regional Forecast

An upper level trough and surface low-pressure area persists over northern, north central and northeastern India. The surface low-pressure area covers north Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar on Saturday morning.

A cyclonic circulation is located over northeast Uttar Pradesh and northwest Bihar on Saturday morning. The cyclonic circulation and related low-pressure produce heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms over central and eastern India.

Another cyclonic circulation is located over Punjab and the adjoining areas on Saturday morning. Along with this yet another cyclonic circulation persists over Arunachal Pradesh bringing heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms over northeastern India. The incursion of southwesterly humid winds from the Bay of Bengal and a related low-pressure area adds to the instability of this cyclonic circulation. A total precipitation of 50 to 100 mm is possible over the northeastern states in the next 24 hours.

Heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya and Bihar. Also, heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura.

Advertisement The westerly humid winds from Arabian Sea produce heavy rain and thunderstorms over western coastal, west and south India. Strong westerly winds causes rough sea conditions over the Arabian Sea and at the coast of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Goa and Karnataka.

Heatwave conditions are unlikely over entire India for the next 5 days and more. Maximum temperatures of 40°C or more is possible over west Rajasthan for the next 5 days. Such conditions can also be observed in some areas of Andhra Pradesh on Saturday. The high temperature areas are likely to decrease over a duration.

Sunday and Beyond

The prevailing surface low-pressure persists until the middle of next week. The existing trough along with the surface low-pressure lead to instability and produce heavy to very heavy rain & thunderstorms over northern, central, eastern and northeastern India. The cyclonic circulation over Punjab and adjoining areas also brings heavy rain and thunderstorms over northern India on Sunday and Monday.

Heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorm is likely over Uttarakhand. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are also likely over Jammu & Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi.

The effect of the cyclonic circulation over east Uttar Pradesh and northwest Bihar will gradually weaken and heavy rain and thunderstorms over central and eastern India will also gradually subside. Isolated rain and thunderstorms are possible over Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Chhattisgarh and interior Maharashtra. Also, scattered rain and thunderstorms are expected over Odisha, Jharkhand, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and interior Karnataka.

The cyclonic circulation over Arunachal pradesh with a related low-pressure area and incursion of southwesterly humid winds is likely to bring a total precipitation of 150-200 mm over the next 48 hours in the northeastern states. Heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya, while, heavy rain and thunderstorms is possible over Arunachal Pradesh. Also, fairly widespread rain and thunderstorms are likely over Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura and West Bengal.

Westerly humid winds from the Arabian Sea and unstable conditions over coastal western and southern India persist for the duration. Heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over Maharashtra, Goa, coastal Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. Also, fairly widespread rainfall is possible over Kerala.

Northern, central and eastern India under the low-pressure are 2°C to 8°C cooler than normal due to heavy rainfalls and cloud. The minimum temperatures over these areas are 1°C to 2°C cooler than normal and the southern India is warmer than normal for the next 5 days.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
