Dreaded gangster MLA campaigns for Rahul Gandhi's Patna rally

Rahul Gandhi's Jan Akanksha rally is scheduled for February 3 at Gandhi Maidan in Patna. (Photo: Reuters)

Independent MLA from Mokama and dreaded gangster Anant Singh on Sunday took part in a road show in Patna to galvanise support for Congress president Rahul Gandhi's Jan Akanksha rally. The Jan Akanksha rally is scheduled for February 3 at Gandhi Maidan in Patna.

Anant Singh joined the road show of the the Congress party's Rajya Sabha MP and chief of the campaign committee Akhilesh Prasad Singh in the Patna city area.

The Congress is carrying out an extensive public outreach program across the state to make Rahul Gandhi’s rally a huge success.

During the course of the road show, the dreaded gangster reiterated his intention of contesting the 2019 Lok Sabha elections on a Congress ticket from Munger seat.

A few days ago, Anant Singh had carried out a road show in Munger where he mentioned that he will be contesting the 2019 Lok Sabha elections on a Congress ticket triggering lot of speculations that he might join the party.

Notably, Singh’s induction into the Congress may put the opposition grand alliance in Bihar under strain since the RJD has been bitterly opposed to his entry.

During the road show, Akhilesh Prasad Singh showered lavish praises on Anant Singh calling him a strong man.

Formerly known to be close to Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, Singh was ousted from the JD(U) in 2015 after RJD supremo Lalu Prasad Yadav demanded action against him in connection with assault on a party supporter in Mokama.

Several criminal cases, including many murder cases, are going on against Anant Singh and he is called the "Terror of Mokama" in his area. Before contesting and winning election as an independent candidate in 2015, Anand Singh was a JDU legislator.

Also Read | Taj Mahal not built by Muslims, it's a Shiv Mandir: Union minister Anant Hegde

Also Read | PM Modi to present his government's report card in Patna rally on March 3: BJP
