Ghaziabad: Man shoots sister-in-law over 'affair', commits suicide

The 36-year-old woman is undergoing treatment at Ram Manohar Lohia hospital in Delhi. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Ramesh shot her sister-in-law thrice in abdomen He later went to home in Ghaziabad and committed suicide

Ghaziabad: A 26-year-old man shot her sister-in-law and later committed suicide in Sahibabad area of Ghaziabad on Friday. The victim is undergoing treatment and is said to be in a critical condition. The slain accused has been identified as Ramesh, who hailed from Khagaria district in Bihar.

The accused reached her sister-in-law's house in Haibatpur in Greater Noida, where his brother runs a paan shop and shot her thrice in the abdomen. Later, he went to his house at Jhanda Pur village in Sahibabad area of Ghaziabad and shot himself. The 36-year-old woman is undergoing treatment at Ram Manohar Lohia hospital in Delhi.

According to a report, the accused was allegedly having an affair with the woman. Ramesh's older brother Janaradan objected to his alleged affair, which possibly led him to take the extreme step.

Police said the accused Ramesh killed himself using a country-made pistol. Police recovered the pistol and some cartridges near his body.

According to Ghaziabad Superintendent of Police, Shlok Kumar, Ramesh's brother recently asked him to leave his house and since then he was residing in Sahibabad, where he used to work as a vegetable vendor. Police have sent Ramesh's body for autopsy.

In another incident from Delhi, a man stabbed to death his former live-in partner, who suspected her of having an affair with someone else. The accused has been identified as 36-year-old Varun Pandey. The woman was admitted to the Indian Spinal Injuries Centre, where her condition is said to be critical.

The 32-year-old victim, who was a Jawaharlal Nehru University employee, was stabbed multiple times. The victim was stabbed near J D Tytler School in south Delhi's Munirka area. The incident happened when the woman had gone to pick her daughter.

Deputy Commissioner of Police (Southwest) Devender Arya said the accused was caught by the local residents and later handed over to police.

According to police, the woman was a divorcee and was in a live-in relationship with Pandey for the last eight years. However, the two separated recently over some dispute. The accused suspected that the woman was in a relationship with some other man.

Meanwhile, Jawaharlal Nehru Students' Union president (JNUSU) N Sai Balaji has requested people to donate money and blood to the victim. The woman is the sanitation in-charge of Shipra Hostel in JNU.

Maharashtra: Woman murders 60-year-old husband over property dispute

In June this year, a woman was arrested for allegedly killing her 60-year-old husband at their house over a property dispute in Mahakala village in Maharashtra's Jalna district. The accused, Shardabai Mule, is a second wife of the deceased Manik Mule.

The deceased had allotted four acres of land to his first wife and two acres to Shardabai. On the possible trigger behind the crime, a police officer said Shardabai had opposed her husband's decision to adopt a son of his first brother-in-law, as both his wives couldn't bear a child.


