Meet Maoist Saradakka Who Killed TRS MPTC Leader

Hyderabad: The kidnap and murder of a Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) leader and MPTC member Nalluri Srinivas Rao by Maoists has shaken the police establishments of Telangana and Chhattisgarh and the surrounding areas of the eastern forest zone of Telangana. N Srinivas Rao (45), a local TRS leader, was abducted from Kothur village in Bhadradri-Kothagudem district around midnight Monday.

His body was found four days later on Friday in Errampadu, a small hamlet in Chhattisgarh with injuries to his head. A letter signed by Saradakka, secretary of the CPI (Maoist), found near the TRS leader’s body claimed that the Maoists killed him because he was acting as an informer to the police. The letter also said that Srinivas had grabbed land from Adivasis, and been tipping off to state intelligence units that resulted in the arrest of a few civil rights activists.

This is the first time that Maoists have killed an elected representative in Telangana after the state was bifurcated. The police were able to contain the activities of Maoists, especially in Eastern areas like Manchiriyal, Peddapalli, Jayashankar Bhupalapalli, Mahabubabad, Khammam and Bhadradri Koshygodem. They have been conducting combing operations and had prevented Maoist activities to a major extent here.

In the last week of June, intelligence sources alerted the police that 20 Maoists, including Telangana state secretary Vepa Narayana alias Haribhushan and another leader named Bade Chokka Rao had had entered Telangana. After their entry, the Maoists killed Srinivasa Rao.

Sarada (40) is said to be Haribhushan's wife and hails from Gangaram village at Kothaguda Mandal in Warangal district. She goes by different names including, Jajjari Sammakka, Sarakka and Saradakka. Police suspect that with the murder of the leader and the letter which was released in her name clearly confirms their presence in Telangana. With the arrival of another Maoist Nambala Koteshwara Rao, their activities have been on the rise in Chhattisgarh.

It may be recollected that in October last year, the Maoists had murdered Araku TDP MLA Kidari Sarveshwar Rao and former MLA Sewri Soma in Andhra Pradesh. After which they have been attempting to regain control in the Telangana region. As part of this, the Central Committee of the party seems to have handed over its operations to Haribhushan. New committees have also been set up in Bhadrachalam and Etturunagaram agency areas. Previously, Charla-Sabari Area Committee was functioning after that Venkatapuram-Vajedu Committee was appointed.

On April 9 this year, four police officers, including a BJP MLA Bima Mandavi, were killed while they were returning from an election campaign. On May 1, 16 police officers were killed in an ambush when Maoists attacked their convoy in Gadchiroli.

Also Read: Abducted TRS Leader Found Dead In Chhattisgarh; Police

Also Read: Naxals Set Bus Afire In Chhattisgarh, Passengers Asked To Get Down

Also Read: Andhra Pradesh To Get Central, Tribal Universities As Per Lok Sabha Bill
