Kartik Aaryan receives the cutest welcome from 'Nawabon ka Sheher' as he preps for Pati Patni Aur Woh

Kartik Aaryan receives a warm welcome from Nawabon ka Sheher

Key Highlights Kartik Aaryan is currently enjoying stay in Lucknow to shoot for the film Pati, Patni aur Woh Pati, Patni aur Woh is the official remake of the 1978 film of the same name

Kartik Aaryan, who recently wrapped the shoot of Imtiaz Ali's next venture, is currently enjoying his stay in Lucknow. The actor has arrived in the city of Nawabs to shoot for his upcoming film Pati, Patni aur Woh. The film also co-stars Ananya Panday and Bhumi Pendekar in the lead roles and is the official remake of the 1978 film of the same name.

The Pyaar Ka Panchanama actor share a picture from his time in the city and wrote, "Nawabon ka Sheher "

Here's this adorable photo of Kartik Aryan from the Lucknow:

In the picture, there is a sweet message for the star that reads, "Best Wishes for Pati, Patni aur Woh." In the film, Kartik will be seen in the role of a man name Chintu Tyagi, who falls for another girl despite being married. He updated his fans about his plans to arrive in the city with an Instagram post. Along with the post, he wrote, "#ChintuTyagi chale #Lucknow !!

#PatiPatniAurWoh Kal se "



Earlier this month the actor wrapped the shoot of his project co-starring Sara Ali Khan.

Kartik shared a heartfelt post for Sara and Imtiaz after the end of the shoot and wrote, "When Veera says "...Par yeh raasta, yeh bahut accha hai.Mein chahti hoon ki yeh raasta kabhi khatam na ho"This is what shooting with @imtiazaliofficial feels like. 66 days were wayyy too less.

It's a wrap A film i never wanted to end Thank you to my dream director .. And couldn't have asked for a better saathi in this journey than Princess @saraalikhan95 Want to work with you again and again and again "

Not just that, he also shared a video in which he can be seen Imitiyaz Ali after finishing the last shot of the film.

Though the name of the film is yet to be confirmed, fans have already started hailing the film as Love Aaj Kal 2.
