Death toll rises to seven in Assam floods

GUWAHATI: Death toll due to floods increased to seven as the deluge continued to ravage different parts of Assam on Saturday. The body of a person who was drowned recently was retrieved from Sissibargaon in Dhemaji district on the northern part of the state on Saturday.Flood situation turned grim with 25 out of 33 district hit by the deluge, affecting over 14 lakh people on Saturday. The affected districts cover upper Assam, lower Assam, southern Assam and the hilly Karbi Anglong Barpeta district in lower Assam is the worst affected with 5,21,546 still reeling under the flood.Over 20,000 flood-displaced people have taken shelter in 234 relief camps and relief distribution centres in the 25 affected districts.According to the Assam State Disaster Management Authority , cropland covering 51,752 hectare area has been inundated in the second wave of flood that hit the state early this year.At least 15 trains connecting Silchar in Barak valley and Agartala in Tripura have been cancelled till July 16. Northeast Frontier Railway CPRO, Pranav Jyoti Sharma said that the train services had to be cancelled following restoration works on the damaged stretch of railway tracks between Jatinga Lumpur- New Harangajao under Lumding-Badarpur hill section of the railway. Heavy rain led to a portion of the tracks to cave in on Friday.On Saturday Brahmaputra at Nematighat in Jorhat, Tezpur, Guwahati, Goalpara, Dhubri continued to flow above danger level. Also its tributaries Burhidehing, Subansiri, Dhansiri, Jia Bharali, Beki, Kopili, Puthimari are in spate. In southern Assam too, Barak and Kushiyara rivers are flowing above danger mark.District administrations in several flood affected districts have suspended ferry services on Brahmaputra and its tributaries following the rise in water level.Animals have started leaving the inundated Kaziranga National Park, a World heritage site about 250 km from here, for highlands in the adjoining Karbi Anglong district. At least 90 anti-poaching camps have been flooded on Saturday. Also Pobitora wildlife sanctuary, about 50 km from here, is also underwater.Chief minister Sarbananda Sonowal spoke to Union home minister Amit Shah over phone on Saturday about the measures taken by the state government to assist the flood-affected people. Sonowal said he is monitoring the prevailing flood situation personally and already interacted with all deputy commissioners and top officials of different departments of the districts. He informed Shah that all district administrations have been asked to remain alert and prepared to respond to the flood situation and extend all help to the affected people. Shah assured to extend all support and assistance from the Centre to the state government to tackle the flood situation.NDRF’s 1st battalion said 900 people have been rescued from the flood-affected areas in Baksa, Morigaon, Hajo, and Kamrup (Rural) districts in last three days. A 12 teams of the NDRF, comprising about 300 personnel, have been deployed to help rescue operations in flood-affected districts. End
