Court sentences prisoner for attacking fellow inmate over comment on Dera chief's 'daughter' Honeypreet Insan

Honeypreet Insan accompanied by police personnel (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Honeypreet Insan is currently lodged at Ambala Central Jail Panchkula Sessions Court rejected her bail in June of this year She has been accused of inciting riots in Panchkula following her father's arrest

Bhopal: A court in Madhya Pradesh has sentenced a prisoner to one year in prison for attacking an inmate at the Sagar Central Jail with a tin dustbin. First Class Judicial Magistrate Karnal Singh Shyam sentenced 26-year-old Mukesh Raikwar to one year in jail under section 324 of the Indian Penal Code which specifies the punishment for causing physical hurt by dangerous weapon or means.

Interestingly, Raikwar attacked fellow inmate Pratap Rajput after the latter spoke ill about Honeypreet Insan, the adopted 'daughter' of jailed Dera Sacha Sauda chief Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh Insan. Honeypreet is lodged at the Ambala Central Jail in Haryana since October 2017 while her 'father' Gurmeet is serving a life sentence on charges of murder at the Sunaria Jail in Rohtak.

A media in-charge for the District Prosecutor's office in Sagar said that Raikwar attacked Rajput after the latter passed derogatory comments about Honeypreet while the two were watching television news about Ram Rahim Singh's conviction for rape in Haryana's Panchkula on September 27, 2017. Media in-charge Brajesh Dixit further clarified that Rajput said that Insan would have to pay for her misdeeds. His statement triggered Raikwar who attacked him with a tin dustbin, said Dixit adding that a case against the accused was lodged at the Gopalganj Police Station.

In June of this year, the Panchkula Sessions Court rejected Honeypreet Insan's bail plea. She was arrested in August 2018, for attempting to incite violence in Haryana's Panchkula in the wake of her alleged father's arrest. In its charge sheet, an SIT formed to investigate the events which transpired in Panchkula stated that Honeypreet and other senior members of the sect had planned to burn the city in the event of the court nor granting bail to the Dera chief.

Police officials familiar with the investigation also claimed that Honeypreet, whose real name is Priyanka Taneja, allegedly gave money to Dera followers while asking them to incite riots and create a ruckus in order to facilitate the escape of Gurmeet Ram Rahim Singh. In 2017, the Dera chief was convicted by a special CBI court in Panchkula for the rape of two of his female disciples and awarded 20 years in prison.

Soon after her arrest in 2017, Honeypreet Insan had claimed that she had no money to hire a legal defence to argue her case in court. She wrote to the Ambala Central jail administration and claimed that her bank accounts were frozen by investigators which made it impossible for her to arrange enough funds to hire a lawyer.
