NSCN (IM) slams move for Register of Indigenous Inhabitants of Nagaland

Terms it a bid to divide and undermine the inherent rights of the Nagas, who want to live together.

The Isak-Muivah faction of the National Socialist Council of Nagaland (NSCN (IM)) has slammed the Nagaland government’s exercise to implement a Register of Indigenous Inhabitants of Nagaland (RIIN) as a bid to divide and undermine the inherent rights of the Nagas, besides diluting the peace process approaching a final settlement.

The NSCN-IM, the largest and most prominent of the armed Naga groups that had signed a framework accord with the Centre in August 2015, also termed the RIIN exercise a conspiracy of the groups that had agreed to the 16-Point Agreement of 1960.

That accord, signed between New Delhi and the Naga People’s Convention on July 26, 1960, paved the way for Nagaland’s statehood on December 1, 1963. The new State was earlier the Naga Hills-Tuensang area of Assam.

The agreement for forming a State “within the Indian Union” and to be “under the Ministry of External Affairs” followed a prolonged battle for the independence of Naga-inhabited areas.

“The Nagaland State does and will not represent the national decision of the Naga people,” the NSCN-IM’s publicity wing said in a statement on Friday evening. “It [the State] was formed purely to divide the Nagas,” the NSCN-IM asserted, adding that all Nagas were indigenous in the ancestral homeland that is contiguous.

One of the major demands of the NSCN-IM, in ceasefire mode since July 1997, has been for bringing all Naga-inhabited areas under a single administrative umbrella in a homeland called ‘Greater Nagalim’.

“It is the legitimate right and political decision of the Naga people to live together under one political roof,” the NSCN-IM said. “The Nagas will not accept their division by the imposed artificial State and international boundaries. This is the key focus of all Nagas and any political steps to be taken must be in conjunction with this decision.”

“Nothing is conclusive on the Naga issue, until and unless a mutually agreed, honourable political solution is signed between the two entities (Centre and NSCN-IM). Therefore, any attempt to dilute the final political settlement by justifying any past accord of treason should be seriously viewed by all Nagas,” the armed group said, referring to the 16-Point Agreement.

The contents of the NSCN-IM’s accord with the Centre have not been made public.

According to the Nagaland government, the objective of the RIIN was to prevent non-indigenous residents of the State from acquiring indigenous inhabitant certificates for jobs and beneficiary schemes. This has raised apprehensions that Nagas from beyond Nagaland may be excluded.

There are more than 50 Naga tribes across Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Myanmar, besides Nagaland. Though the NSCN-IM has had its peace headquarters at Hebron near Nagaland’s Dimapur, most of its members belong to the Tangkhul community dominating the Ukhrul and Kampong districts of Manipur.
