India to get first Rafale fighter jet in September, confirms defence ministry official

India is to get 36 Rafale fighter jets in 'ready-to-fly' condition by 2022

Key Highlights India will get its first Rafale jet in September this year: Defence production secretary Ajay Kumar As per the deal, India is to get 36 Rafale fighter jets in 'ready-to-fly' condition by 2022. The purchase of these fighter jets had triggered one of the biggest political controversies in India.

New Delhi: India will get its first Rafale jet in September this year, as per schedule, a top Defene Ministry official told a news agency on Saturday. The confirmation has come a week after French Ambassador to India, Alexandre Ziegler said that the delivery of the twin-engine multi-role fighter aircraft will be "perfectly on time".

As per the deal, India is to get 36 Rafale fighter jets in 'ready-to-fly' condition by 2022. After the first delivery in September, the rest of the 35 Rafale jets will be delivered one by one. Manufactured by Dassault Aviation, these jets are twin-engine multi-role fighter aircraft, capable of engaging in both air-to-air and air-to-ground attacks.

Recently during the tactical exercise between India and France - Garuda VI held from July 1 to July 12 at Mont-de-Marsan, Indian pilots, including Air Marshal Rakesh Kumar Singh Bhadauria, flew the aircraft for around 300 hours.

However, the purchase of these fighter jets triggered one of the biggest political controversies in India. The deal is pegged at Rs 58,000 crore, however, the Opposition parties have accused the government of spending at least thrice the amount it was supposed to.

Rafale controversy in a nutshell

Prime Minister Narendra Modi during a visit to France in 2015 announced that India will buy 36 Rafale jest in ready-to-fly condition. However, this meant that the earlier deal struck by the UPA government to buy 18 fly-away jets and 108 jets to be made by a joint venture between Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) would be scrapped.

In 2016, India signed an intergovernmental agreement (IGA) with France where India would pay Rs 58,000 crore (7.87 billion euros) for the 36 fighters. The deal contained an offset clause - which stated that Dassault Aviation will invest 20 per cent of the deal money into local production of the Rafale along with an Indian partner.

It was revealed that Anil Ambani-led Reliance Defence Limited was chosen as Indian partner by the French company. The Opposition accused the government of crony capitalism, claiming that the deal was struck to ‘favour’ Anil Ambani’s company as his firm had no prior experience in aerospace manufacturing.




