Surgical, Balakot strikes demonstrate political will to fight terror, says Army Chief Bipin Rawat

We have come a long way since Kargil. We need to be prepared for future wars and cannot let our guard down: General Bipin Rawat (File Photo)

Indian Army Chief General Bipin Rawat on Saturday said that the surgical strikes after the Uri attack in 2017 and this year's airstrike on a terror camp in Balakot, Pakistan, by the Indian Air Force demonstrated that India has the political will to respond against terror.

Speaking at an event in New Delhi to commemorate 20 years of the Kargil War, General Rawat said a political will along with proactive diplomacy is the key to success in military matters.

"We are working in a coordinated manner for a cogent and synchronised national response against sub-conventional and asymmetric threats by any adversary. Surgical and Balakot strikes have amply demonstrated our political and military will against terror. Any act of terror will not go unpunished," said Bipin Rawat while referring to the current challenges for the armed forces.

The reference to the synergy between the military and diplomacy could be in the context of the Doklam stand-off with China and Balakot airstrikes.

In both instances, the military and diplomatic channels made efforts to work in a coordinated manner to leave little scope for speculation.

Speaking of the transformation of the Army since the Kargil War in 1999, General Bipin Rawat said tri-service wings dedicated to space, cyber and special operations are the way forward for jointness or synergy in the armed forces to combat future challenges.

"We have come a long way since Kargil. We need to be prepared for future wars and cannot let our guard down," General Bipin Rawat further said.

He also stressed on the need for capability enhancement and fast track procurement.

"While the armed forces have to be prepared for multi-spectrum challenges, at the same time need to be ready for conventional wars," Bipin Rawat added.

The Army Chief said the changing dynamics of cyber and space domains are the biggest challenges for the future.

"We must be prepared for future conflicts that will be more violent and unpredictable as technology will be the key driver in future wars," said Bipin Rawat.
