CM Edapadi K Palaniswami to inaugurate veteran farmer leader Narayanasamy’s memorial

COIMBATORE: Considering the novel protests that farmers have staged in the last couple of years to attract the government’s attention to their demands, iconic farmer leader C Narayanasamy had been a front-runner. He not just fought for farmers’ rights, but also made sure the government deliver them.To honour the veteran leader, the state government has constructed a memorial hall on a 30-cent land at Vaiyampalayam in the district at the cost of Rs 1.75crore. Chief minister Edapadi K Palaniswami will inaugurate it on February 6.Back in the 60s, when electricity was not provided to houses, the state government used to provide electricity to farm lands to operate motors for 16 hours. ”When the government reduced it to four hours, a group of farmers led by Narayanasamy met the electricity minister and requested him to provide electricity for 16 hours. The minister immediately fulfilled the demand. It gave hope to the farmers that government will listen to our demands,” recalled R Balusami, president of the Farmers’ Iconic Leader Narayanasamy Iyya Memorial Trust.To bring farmers’ problems to the notice of the government, a small associationKovai Northern Part Farmers Associationwas formed with just six members in 1966. “It later became the Coimbatore District Farmers Association,” Balusami said. “One of Narayanasamy’s main demands was free electricity to farmers as the government had increased power tariff from nine paisa to 12 paisa per unit in 1972. Upon failing to pay the tariff, the electricity board officials would disconnect power supply and the crops would wither due to lack of water. Many farmers bore huge losses. Whenever farmers protested, police would lathicharge the protesters and arrest the frontline leaders. During the mid-70s, over 5,000 farmers were lodged in prison. To bring them out, farmers with their bullock carts entered the city from all sides and parked them for 32 hours, leaving no space for motor vehicles,” he told TOI.“But Narayanasamy rebuked the protesting farmers for causing inconvenience to the people. Even though he was against violence, over 47 farmers, who participated in the protests, were killed in police firing between 1970 and 1980,” Balusami recalled.Even when the state had powerful and charismatic leaders, Narayanasamy attracted even the farmers belonging to the political parties as he fought genuinely for their welfare, said P Chinnikrishnaiah, an advocate, who worked with the deceased leader. “It was mainly because of the lathicharge and firing during the protests, he decided to start a political party. He thought it would give farmers a forum to express their grievances.”All India Ulavar Ulaippalar Katchi) was formed in 1982. “The party decided to contest assembly elections in alliance with DMK in 1984 at 10 major places. But Narayanasamy passed away due to cardiac arrest about five days before the election. After his death, the state government announced free electricity for the farmers and loan waiver for some,” Chinnikrishnaiah added.
