National Investigation Agency nabs three terror suspects from Tamil Nadu

The National Investigation Agency (NIA) arrested three suspected terrorists from Tamil Nadu for allegedly planning to carry out strikes at various parts of the country. The agency carried out raids at their houses and arrested them along with terror literature.



The arrested suspected terrorists have been identified as Syed Mohammed Bukhari, resident of Chennai; Hassan Ali Yunusmaricar, a native of Nagapattinam; and Mohammed Yusuffudeen Harish Mohamed, also from Nagapattinam. The agency arrested them after they registered a case on July 9 following the tip-off about the accused activities under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act.



NIA stated that the accused and their associates had collected funds and made preparations to carry out terrorist attacks in India, with the intention of establishing Islamic rule in India.



As per the case, the accused hailing from Chennai and Nagapattinam, and others "while being within and beyond India, had conspired and conducted consequent preparations to wage war against the Government of India by forming the terrorist gang Ansarulla".



NIA said that they carried out searches at the house and office of Bukhari, Ali and Harish.



During searches, nine mobiles, 15 SIM cards, seven memory cards, three laptops, five hard discs, six pen drives, two tablets and three CDs/ DVDs besides documents including magazines, banners, notices, posters and books have been seized by NIA.



The NIA shifted its focus to South India after Easter Day blasts in Sri Lanka. Within days of Colombo terror attack, it emerged that the terrorists involved in the explosions in the island nation had links with IS sympathisers in Tamil Nadu.



Last September, a Special Investigation Unit of the Coimbatore police had foiled a plot by seven-members of an IS-inspired Islamic group in Tamil Nadu to murder Hindu Makkal Katchi (Tamil Nadu) leader Arjun Sampath, Hindu Munnani leader Mookambikai Mani and Sakthi Sena leader Anbu Mari.



Since then NIA has been working and gathering in South India and looking into activities of suspected radical youths.
