San Antonio residents flock to Stinson Municipal Airport celebration of World War II ace

Hangar 3 at Stinson Municipal Airport was abuzz early Saturday with preparations to honor a legendary World War II fighter pilot from San Antonio. Commemorative Air Force members readied vintage aircraft for the “Tex” Hill Birthday Fly-In and Car Show & Air Extravaganza. Drivers parked classic hot rods on the tarmac. Volunteer re-enactors from the National Museum of the Pacific War set up historic displays.

Then a P-51 Mustang roared in the distance.

“Everybody look at the runway!” CAF wing leader Darren Bond shouted. “Whoo! That’s 1,800 horsepower right there!”

The Mustang zoomed low and fast over the air field. CAF members cheered as the plane landed. Then they crowded around the 65-year-old pilot, James Bohannon Jr., who called himself “an old outlaw.”

“It just kind of grabs you like, ‘come on, let’s go put the spurs on,’” he said. “They named it right. It’s like a wild mustang.”

More than 150 people attended the free event that featured other vintage aircraft and demonstrations of WWII weapons. Military vehicles were on display and guests could pay to take to the skies in two aircraft that included a helicopter and a World War II trainer. There were flyovers by aircraft from other units and the CAF’s yellow North American “Ole Yeller,” whose pilot tipped a wing on each pass. And there was the anticipation of a flame-thrower demonstration.

Chris Watson, 57, said the mission is to inspire, educate and honor. He said the planes at the hangar were the types that Hill would have trained on.

Hill flew with the American Volunteer Group of the Chinese Air Force, called the Flying Tigers. They flew combat missions in the Chinese-Burma-India theater in defense of China against the Japanese. Hill flew a Curtiss P-40 Warhawk fighter and shot down a dozen enemy planes during his seven months with the squadron.

He died at the age of 92 in 2007.

Speakers blared boogie woogie music from the 1940s as crowds clustered around aircraft that CAF members nicknamed “war birds.”

Katheryn Springhart, 45, lifted her 3-year-old son, Conrad, to look inside of a T-34 Beechcraft with a nose painted with jagged teeth. Her husband Frank, took pictures of Conrad in front of the plane. He it looked like a shark and gave the event a “thumbs up.”

“He’s interested in anything that goes,” Katheryn Springhart said. “He’s fascinated with the buttons and everything that surrounds a pilot.”

Hill’s nephew Doug Hill, 67, said he was honored to represent his family at his uncle’s birthday party.

“If you liked talking dog fights, he had the information,” Doug Hill said. “He was a wealth of knowledge.”

Lynn Purkiss, 56, watched her husband, Jeff, sit in Bohannon’s P-51 Mustang and talk about the thrill of flying with the pilot who made the day’s first flyover. Bohannon knelt on the wing as he talked to Purkiss, who had flown F-15s and F-16s in the Air Force.

Purkiss watched the pair and said, “those two men are in their passion.”

Vincent T. Davis is a reporter in the Greater San Antonio and Bexar County area. Read him on our free site, mySA.com, and on our subscriber site, ExpressNews.com. | vtdavis@express-news.net | Twitter: @vincentdavis
