3 found murdered in Turbhe scrap godown

Navi Mumbai Crime Branch

robbery or dacoity

Friends kill man for lying to mother

Rs 2 lakh in cash missing; cops suspect robbery.Three people, including two brothers, who used to work in a scrap godown in Bonsari village in Turbhe MIDC, Navi Mumbai, were found dead by their employer on Saturday morning. The police said Rs 2 lakh in cash were missing from the godown, and that they suspect somebody with a motive of robbery killed them while they were asleep in the godown.The victims identified as Rajeshkumar Devnarayan Pal, 30, Irshad Javaad Khan, 19 and his brother Naushad Javaad Khan, 19, belong to Amethi in Uttar Pradesh.According to Turbhe police, who along withare investigating the case, the owner of the godown, Naseem alias Mohammed Moinuddhin Abdul Shaikh, 44, stays in Turbhe Naka.“When he came to his shop around 8am, he found the three employees lying in a pool of blood. Somebody had smashed their head and later even slit their throats with a sword or a knife,” said an official from Turbhe police station.Several senior officials of Navi Mumbai Police immediately reached the spot.The police said Shaikh told them that he was in the business of purchasing scrap from small collectors and dealers, and that the victims used to work for him.According to the police, Shaikh also told them that Rs 2 lakh cash meant for buying scrap was missing from the cupboard.“We have registered a case of murder,with the attempt to cause grievous hurt, housetrespass and common intention,” said apolice official.“We are investigating the case from all angles, and are gathering clues,” said Manoj Doshi, Deputy Commissioner of Police, Navi Mumbai Crime Branch.The police have lifted fingerprints from the spot. A dog squad also visited the spot and CCTVs are being checked to trace the accused.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------A 29-year-old man was allegedly killed by two of his friends after a heated exchange over a trivial matter. The incident happened on Friday night in Thorat Chawl, Bheem Nagar, Ghatkopar West. Ashwini Kumar Dubey allegedly lied to his mother that he had not received his salary. His friends, Narendra Rane and Rahul Raut, did not like this. They called Dube out, and asked him why he was lying to his family. The arguments turned violent and they allegedly started beating him up. “Dubey’s head banged against wall and he started bleeding. He was rushed to the hospital where he was declared dead,” said a police official.
