Three youths run over by train near Udhna railway station

SURAT: Three youngsters were killed after they were hit by a train on railway tracks near Udhna railway station on Saturday morning.They were walking on the railway tracks along with three other youngsters, who escaped having moved away in the nick of time to the walkway, when Karnavati Express heading towards Mumbai hit them on South Kakra Khadi Bridge no 440.The deceased were Kuldeep Singh Ravat, 18, Pravin Singh Ravat, 19, and Parveen Singh Ravat, 19. Police said Kuldeep died on the spot while the other two succumbed to their injuries in a hospital.The group of six youngsters had boarded Ajmer Express from Marwar region in Rajasthan. They got down at Surat station on Saturday as they wanted to go to Vapi. The group boarded Sri Jagannath Express and on realizing that it was wrong train, the youngsters alighted just before Udhna when it stopped for a few seconds on a signal. A slum dweller told them that Udhna railway station was nearby and so they started walking along the rail line. When the youngsters reached 100-metre long South Kakra Khadi Bridge no 440 without railing, Karnavati Express came hurtling down the tracks behind them.Kuldeep, Pravin and Parveen tried to run and cross the bridge but were hit by the train while the other three namely Mahendra Singh Ravat, 8, Omprakash Ravat, 19, and Kesu Singh Ravat, 17, moved away and were saved.Mahendra Singh Ravat said, “We were to reach Vapi for work by Saturday evening. After we alighted from the wrong train and started to walk on the rail tracks, we saw a train coming from behind. I, Omprakash and Kesu moved to the walkway and were saved. Our other three friends thought they would be able to cross to bridge before the train’s arrival, but were hit by it from behind.”SB Bhutiya, police inspector, Railway Protection Force, said, “Misjudgement about the Karnavati Express’ speed cost the three youngsters their lives. Government Railway Police have taken over the probe of the case.”A railway source said 16 people were killed when a train ran over them at South Kakra Khadi Bridge no 440 on February 28, 2008. The victims were labourers and were walking on the railway tracks on the night when they were run over by the train. Their bodies were spotted by the driver of another train, who informed railway authorities about the tragedy.
