Decoding DK Shivakumar, the self-styled ‘saviour’ of the Karnataka Congress

DK Shivakumar

Rahul Gandhi

BS Yeddyurappa

Karnataka Assembly

High political drama unfolded outside the Renaissance in Powai on Wednesday

Hours after being taken into custody, Shivakumar was put on a flight back home

DK Shivakumar, flanked by Milind Deora and Sanjay Nirupam, current and former city Congress chiefs, at a sit-in held in Powai earlier this week. Shivakumar is being hailed as a hero and a troubleshooter for the party

Karnataka Assembly speaker Ramesh Kumar at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru

DK Shivkumar, who arrived in Mumbai to meet the Karnataka MLAs staying in a hotel, was detained by the police on July 10

has been projecting himself as the right person to succeedas AICC president.It happened at the Hilton, in Bangalore, on May 23, 2018. Sonia Gandhi stepped out of the elevator and confronted Karnataka minister DK Shivakumar, who was jostling with other leaders to receive her and Rahul Gandhi. She was there to meet the newly-elected legislators, just hours before the inauguration of the Congress-Janata Dal (S) coalition government in Karnataka. In the presence of some senior Congress leaders, Sonia asked Shivakumar, rather frostily: “How many seats did you win in your region?”This was Sonia’s way of channeling ire at Shivakumar’s interminable projection of himself in the media, as the ‘mastermind’ and the ‘bare-knuckles guy’ who had stitched the secular coalition together, and halted Modi-Shah’s BJP from grabbing yet another big state. Shivakumar was being hailed as the one who had ensured — in what was an anxious finish —’s defeat on the floor of thea few days ago. He had gleefully worn the media’s prosaic crown of ‘troubleshooter’, much like the emperor had proverbially worn his new clothes, but his own leader had called his bluff.Obviously, Sonia knew the truth about the putting together of the coalition, and those who were actually behind it; there was nobody better informed in the party. But her put down had been a sharp hint at another piece of reality: that Shivakumar could, at best, win his Kanakapura seat, but could never influence another victory in his region. Although he projected himself as a stalwart of the dominant Vokkaliga community from south Karnataka, the fiefdom belonged to the HD Deve Gowda family, and the poll results were there for all to see.Sonia’s sarcasm had little or no bearing on DK’s unabashed instinct for showmanship and engineered glory. If it had, he wouldn’t have landed in Mumbai earlier this week, playing his familiar game of appearing to be the Congress’ saviour in its hour of crisis. But the truth was that he had no leverage over even a single legislator who had been holed up in a Mumbai hotel on July 8. The spectacle he created served only himself — and filled the media’s idle airtime.There was something else that worked in the media’s reasoning. The Congress has become rudderless after Rahul Gandhi’s resignation, and the party presents a rather meek image before the muscular BJP. But here was a leader who looked like he had the grit and gumption to alter the perception about the Congress in the minds of the people. He came across as a valiant leader, set to storm the hotel and rescue his misled colleagues. There was a doggedness about him that appeared at odds with the general Congress character — and also a Gandhigiri that would make for a good sequel to the popular Munnabhai films.In fact, something interesting had preceded Shivakumar’s arrival in Mumbai. For over a week — while there were no apparent signs of him trying to calm the simmer in Karnataka’s coalition government — there was a mysterious campaign running on social media, where certain easily-identifiable ‘dummy’ accounts had started pitching and promoting Shivakumar as the ‘best’ and ‘popular’ choice for the presidentship of the AICC, the post Rahul Gandhi had vacated on July 3.One fudged poll conducted said Shivakumar was favoured by 66 per cent of the people, while the next bet, Sachin Pilot, was desired by 32 per cent. Rajasthan chief minister Ashok Gehlot, and KC Venugopal, Congress general secretary in-charge of Karnataka, got one per cent each. There was nobody else in the reckoning. When we confronted a young leader in the DK network about this, she sent us a direct message on Twitter that asked: “Don’t you agree that he is a better choice than most oldies?” By ‘oldies’, she probably meant Mallikarjun Kharge and Sushil Kumar Shinde.Then, there was a shoddily-made poster that listed the ‘heroics’ of Shivakumar. Of the five rhetorical questions it asked, two went like this: “Who had ensured that Congress-JDS govt won trust vote in Assembly in 2018 to form JDS-Congress Govt and Gujarat Rajya Sabha election win in 2017?” The answer, in bold, capital letters, ran like a refrain to all five questions on the poster: “ONLY DK SHIVAKUMAR.” To the second question, which asked: “Who is the person facing fake IT and ED cases because he took on Modi and Shah?”, the answer was the same. The poster declared that Shivakumar was a “grassroots mass leader and go-getter,” and deserved to be CM — that is, if the AICC chair wasn’t offered to him first.In Sonia Gandhi’s query, we already have an answer to who set up the coalition government. But the second reference is to Ahmed Patel’s election to the Rajya Sabha, when Shivakumar had played ‘host’ to Gujarat Congress MLAs being hunted by the BJP. He had similarly played host to Maharashtra Congress MLAs when Vilasrao Deshmukh was chief minister, and has corralled Karnataka Congress legislators a number of times in the past.Interestingly, after Shivakumar arrived in Mumbai — and before the police could detain him — Ahmed Patel put out a tweet arguing for the “fundamental rights” of his junior colleague to enter the hotel. This solidarity was not payback; Shivakumar wouldn’t accept such small returns. But one could certainly detect an obligation in this. Once a leader as senior as Patel had stepped in, a lot of others in the Congress, too, were forced to capitulate to the DK ‘charm.’ So the campaign, that had begun on social media before the Mumbai visit, had clearly reached its crescendo.In the past, Shivakumar has been able to quickly whip up a support storm in the media, and on social media, for his causes because his patronage of people who controlled these outlets, was legendary. For instance, a senior Congress social media leader always refers to him as ‘DK uncle.’ Can anything be greater than such kinship? During the Mumbai fracas, one Delhi journalist even wrote: “DK Shivakumar will never be awarded while a ‘puppet president’ is planned for [the] Congress [which is] in tatters”.Shivakumar has perfected the politics of pelf, patronage, consummate performance, and indebtedness. He works by instilling fear, but that gets spun around as respect. He has earned a reputation of earning liberally and spending generously. He perhaps wishes to see himself in the mould of Karna from the Mahabharata, who evokes sympathy, though the character’s embedded sacrifice has little interest for him. In other words, he aspires to a vague Robinhood reputation, where only what you give away should matter, but not how you earn it.Shivakumar has been projected as someone who is valiantly trying to save the Karnataka coalition government, but nobody remembers that he is, in fact, one of the primary reasons for the coalition’s troubles. In August-September 2018, Ramesh Jharkiholi, a prominent Congress leader from the Mumbai-Karnataka region, had signaled a revolt because Shivakumar had been meddling in the affairs of Belgaum district, Jharkiholi’s fiefdom. It was alleged that DK had helped another MLA, and former Mahila Congress chief, Lakshmi Hebbalkar, to take control of the PLD Bank in Belgaum. Jharkiholi was one of the MLAs holed up in Mumbai, so DK’s arrival at the doors of the hotel was likely a red rag for the MLAs. He was clearly a part of the problem and not its solution; yet he performed his rehearsed part of self aggrandisement.Another aspect of Shivakumar relates to his relationship with BJP leader and CM-again aspirant BS Yeddyurappa. Mysteriously, the BJP leader’s alleged diary of political payments was found in Shivakumar’s bedroom during recent IT raids. More importantly, a case was re-opened in the Supreme Court earlier this year, thanks to lawyer Prashant Bhushan and activist SR Hiremath (who fought the Bellary mining mafia), which pertains to the alleged denotification of prime land when Yeddyurappa was chief minister in 2010. The petition reads that Shivakumar had purchased the land as urban development minister in 2003, despite it having been acquired by the government in 1986, and Yeddyurappa had helped DK by denotifying it.This is just a sample of Shivakumar’s mounting legal troubles. A PIL related to illegal granite mining in the forest areas of Kanakapura, will come up before the Karnataka High Court sometime next week. Also, in the last few years, Hiremath has levelled a plethora of charges against Shivakumar, with regard to illegal granite mining and land grab. He even openly challenged Shivakumar during a local TV debate a few years ago. In 2004, when JDS formed its first coalition government with the Congress, Deve Gowda had used the corruption allegations against DK to keep him out the cabinet. It is ironic that Shivakumar is now trying to save his son HD Kumaraswamy’s government. Clearly, both the Gowda family and Shivakumar are skilled at burying the hatchet.Shivakumar’s utility quotient was fully realised during SM Krishna’s tenure as chief minister. It was alleged by the Congress at the time, that he had become totally unhinged. Watchers say Shivakumar had tremendous influence over Krishna. To this day, DK calls Krishna, who crossed over to the BJP in 2018, his ‘political guru’.The question to ask — if one were to make another poster — is this: Is Shivakumar a bubble that the world thinks is real? Should the Congress shun his brand of pelf and patronage, to resurrect itself? And is Shivakumar, an antithesis of all that Rahul Gandhi has been passionately arguing for: the idea of India, justice, love and hugs?
