7 Indian places that have the haunted tag attached to them

Indian places that have the haunted tag attached to them | Photo Credit: Instagram

There are many things in the world, that are dependent on your make belief only. Such is the case with haunted places in India. There are many sites in the country that are considered to be cursed by the presence of spirits. Most of the travellers and tourists are asked to avoid these places, in order to keep everyone safe and sound, but many people find the haunted tag the most appealing thing about a place.



So, lets' get to know about the sites that have scary stories attachment to them and are considered to be jinxed by the presence of paranormal things.



7 Indian places that have the haunted tag attached to them

Bhangarh Fort- Rajasthan



Possibly the most popular haunted place in the entire country. People from all parts of the country arrive here to scrutinize the legend attached to the place. The fort is located near a forest, it is forbidden to visit the palace after sunset as there are plenty of warning signs in place regarding the same. The story behind the fall of the palace is that once a magician fell in love with the princess that lived in the town. He tried to win her over with dark magic, fortunately, the princess got to know of his plans and killed him. Before his death, the sorcerer cursed the fort of Bhangarh.

Dumas Black Sand Beach- Gujarat



The Dumas Beach in Surat, Gujarat is considered to be one of the most scenic beaches in India, but a few people have the courage to actually visit it. The folklores are full of stories of paranormal activities at the place and what led to the arrival of demonic spirits at the beach. The most popular story is that the beach was a burial ground for Hindus and this is the reason for its black sand. All these tales have made this place a spooky site.

Shaniwarwada Fort-Pune



This fort is one of the most popular forts in Maharashtra but for an entirely different reason. It is said that a young prince was killed at the place and his spirit still haunts the fort. Many people who have visited the palace have claimed that in the night the young prince can be heard saying, "Kaka mala wachawa".

Jamali Kamali Mosque and Tomb-Delhi



This archaeological site is located right near Qutub Minar and is a monument built during the Mughal rule. It is believed that Jinns (spirit) live here and there is a paranormal presence in the vicinity. The place is the home to many royal tombs, which is the reason many people consider this place to be spooky.

Ramoji Film City- Telangana



The film city is spread over an impressive 1666 acres and also has a place in the Guinness World Records. However, the city is famous for bizarre incidents that have led to the claim that the place is haunted. The spotlights during the shoot go off, things turn south during the shoot and many other strange things have happened in this place.



Writers’ Building -Kolkata

Kolkata is the home to a famous haunted building that dates back to 8th December 1930. It is allegedly occupied by the presence of Inspector General Colonel N.S Simpson who was killed along with three freedom fighter Benoy Basu, Badal Gupta, Dinesh Gupta.

Jatinga- Assam



The place became famous due to unexplained incidents of bird suicides. Most of the birds that arrive in the place drop dead for no scientific reason and their mass suicides have give a raise to the claim that the place is haunted.
