Massive divide in DU over proposal to include 2002 Gujarat riots, paper on homosexuality in syllabus

Students at DU | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Both the topics come under the English Department In 2010, Mumbai University had to remove Rohinton Mistry’s book from syllabus Congress government made changes to the biography of Veer Savarkar

New Delhi: Professors in Delhi University are divided over inclusion of a chapter on Gujarat Riots in the syllabus with members of Executive Council calling the move an attempt to politicise the syllabus.

The group from a DU panel not only recommended dropping the chapter from the syllabus under the BA (Programme) course but also objected to a paper on homosexuality.

As per a news report, both the topics come under the English Department whose teachers said that they will argue against dropping the lessons on Monday.

The objections over adding the course in the syllabus were made during a meeting of the University’s standing committee for academic affairs.

This is not the first time that controversy has erupted over the syllabus. In 2010, Mumbai University had to remove prize-winning author Rohinton Mistry’s book ‘Such a Long Journey’ after Aditya Thackeray carried out a protest by burning the book at the university gates and also threatened Dr Rajan Welukar, the then Vice-Chancellor of the university.

The reason behind the protest was that it portrayed Shiv Sena in poor light.

This year in May, a controversy erupted after Congress government made changes to the biography of freedom fighter Veer Savarkar. The grand old party said that it was important to teach students about history in an honest and right way.

After the opposition BJP protested, Rajasthan chief minister Ashok Gehlot defending the move said it was a tradition for the new government to form a committee to review the syllabus.

Rajasthan Education Minister Govind Dotasara slammed the BJP for making the education department a laboratory and changing the curriculum for furthering nefarious agenda of the RSS.

In 2017, when BJP was in power in the desert state Rajasthan education board approved changing Class X history books to teach students that the Maharana Pratap had defeated Mughal emperor Akbar in the Battle of Haldighati.

Earlier, the students were taught that the battle between Akbar and Rana Pratap, which took place on June 18, 1576, was inconclusive. However, after the changes approved by the board, the battle ended with Maharana Pratap successfully defending his motherland Mewar from the Mughal army.

After coming to power in Rajasthan, the Vasundhara Raje-led Bharatiya Janata Party government had ordered the removal of a chapter titled 'Akbar Mahan' (Akbar the Great) from the syllabus.

Later, Dr Chandrashekhar Sharma, a professor at Udaipur's government Meera Kanya Mahavidyalaya, published a report arguing that the Battle of Haldighati was not inconclusive adding that the Rana Pratap won the battle.
