Delhi: Elderly man bludgeoned to death for refusing to pay Rs 50 extortion

Police arrested Mukesh Kumar from the house of his friends. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Bakshi refused to pay Rs 50 extortion to set up his stall at weekly market Accused Mukesh Kumar smashed Bakshi's face with a brick

New Delhi: In a tragic incident, an 85-year-old man was killed after he refused to pay Rs 50 extortion for setting up his shop at a weekly market in Delhi. Police have arrested the accused, who is said to be a known history-sheeter.

The incident took place in Shiv Vihar colony in Southwest Delhi's Uttam Nagar. The victim has been identified as Bakshi. The victim had gone to set up his small shop at the weekly market in the area when he was attacked by the accused Mukesh Kumar.

As Bakshi started to set up his stall, accused Mukesh demanded the extortion money which Bakshi refused to pay and this led to an argument between the two. The people present at the spot intervened and tried to resolve the issue and asked the accused the leave. But Kumar returned half-an-hour later and started troubling Bakshi again.

The argument broke out again and a fist-fight ensued in which Mukesh Kumar attacked elderly Bakshi with a brick and smashed his face. The victim was rushed to a nearby hospital and was declared brought dead. Later, the police were called and a case was filed against the accused.

The police arrested Mukesh Kumar from the house of his friends later in the day. According to police, the accused already has many criminal cases registered against him. Police say the accused was under some intoxicant when he committed the crime.



Earlier in June, a vegetable vendor stabbed a male customer to death in Dadar market of Mumbai, Maharashtra after an argument over the cost of vegetable prices. The deceased was identified as Mohammad Hanif, who had gone to purchase vegetables in the market. A dispute broke out between the victim and the vegetable vendor over payment of Rs 10 which escalated to fight where the accused stabbed him with his vegetable knife. The accused stabbed several times on Hanif's neck and hands after which he fled the spot. The accused was later arrested and a murder case registered against him.

Truck driver shot dead by security guards over Rs 20 'extortion'

For a dispute over Rs 20 'extortion', the security guards of a sand mine shot dead a truck driver in Hamirpur district of Uttar Pradesh on June 20. The incident occurred in Bhulsi sand mine-3 under Sisolar police station. The victim was identified as 22-year-old Arun Kumar. The driver paid with his life after the accused security guards demanded Rs 50 rangdaari or extortion, while the slain driver handed them just Rs 30. This enraged the accused guard and they opened fire killing the driver instantly. According to police officials, the incident took place at around 4 am when the guards indulged into an argument with the driver after he refused to pay extra money.
