Chandrayaan 1: Looking back at the legacy of India's first Moon mission

Chandrayaan 1

Key Highlights Chandrayaan 1 was India's first mission to the Moon, as well as India's first deep space mission It was launched in 2008 and remained operational for about a year Chandrayaan 1 confirmed the presence of water on the Moon

Of all the celestial objects that surround us, the pleasant shine of the Moon has always intrigued humankind the most. And for good reason!

While the Sun shines brightly over us in the morning and fosters life on our planet through the day, its burning gaze ensures we hardly ever get the chance to raise our heads to the sky and see what lies above us. The Moon, on the other hand, remains a pleasant presence all through the night, helping us not only recover from a tiring day but also gives us an opportunity to look up and think about the mysteries that remain unexplored in the skies above.

One of these mysteries is the Moon itself which owing to its close proximity to Earth has remained our window into the cosmos around us. But, this satellite of planet Earth hasn't been one of the greatest objects of our fancy only because it's the closest celestial body to our planet, but also because it possibly holds the answer to the very question of the existence of life outside Earth.

India's second lunar mission, Chandrayaan 2, will hopefully help find this answer when it goes to the Moon. But as we await its launch, it'll be prudent to look back at the country's first lunar mission, Chandrayaan 1, which paved the way for this upcoming Moon mission.

Chandrayaan 1 and its legacy

Chandrayaan 1 was India's first mission to the moon, as well as India's first deep space mission. But despite being the first, and having been brought to life at a very thin budget, it was a major success.

It was launched in 2008 and remained operational for about a year (between October 2008 and August 2009). Chandrayaan 1 was launched aboard PSLV C-11 on October 22, 2008, which was an XL variant of ISRO's PSLV -- one of the world's most reliable launchers. PSLV was later used to launch the Mars Orbiter Mission in 2013.

However, unlike Chandrayaan 2, the first mission didn't include a rover. Chandrayaan 1 was sent to the moon only equipped with an orbiter and an 'impactor' that crashed into the Moon's surface near the South Pole.

The PSLV launch vehicle carried on board the Chandrayaan 1 spacecraft which was a cube of side 1.5 m. The Moon Impact Probe was purposely crashed on the Moon on November 14, 2009. This crash released debris that was later analysed by the orbiting spacecraft's science instruments.

While reaching the moon was a success in itself, the greatest achievement of Chandrayaan 1 was that it confirmed some important findings. In September 2009, scientists published initial results of findings that talked about the presence of water on the Moon.

But later in 2013, these findings were used to make the conclusive announcement of evidence of water molecules locked in mineral grains on the surface of the Moon -- magmatic water, or water that originates from deep in the Moon’s interior. These findings were further confirmed by observations of water ice by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) in later years.

While the presence of water on the Moon had always been talked about, the evidence sent home by Chandrayaan 1 had for the first time conclusively proven that explorers to the moon could use the reservoirs of water for future lunar missions and even set-up colonies there if enough water is found on the Moon.
