Your Social Media Profile & Horoscope Might Cost You Your Dream Job, If You're Badly Behaved

You might have 10 years of experience even 20 that might make you confident for holding a leadership role or a position like that of a CEO of a company, but if you are not well behaved, chances are that some companies might reject you.

A driver from the company Hunt Partners was driving a candidate who was to appear for an interview for the position of the CEO. However, he lost his cool and yelled at the driver for being stuck in a traffic jam in the heavy Mumbai rains. The driver reported it back to the Head Quarters, as a result his candidature was rejected.

AFP

The managing partner of the company Suresh Raina, reportedly said, “The company’s management took serious note of the driver's complaint. They felt if a candidate couldn’t maintain his cool on a rainy day, how would he lead the business, where he would be firefighting on a daily basis?”

Increasing number of organisations are taking, what one would think, unusual steps to ensure they select the right candidate for leadership positions. From scrutinizing lifestyles to going through their social media, to even checking a person’s horoscope (this seems like going too far though).

Reportedly some years ago, a company that almost finalized a candidate for a director level position did not go ahead with the decision when the person’s lifestyle and personal views came to light. The firm that does background checks on candidates informed the organisation about the candidate’s possible habit of substance abuse. A racial bias also appeared from the candidate’s social media posts. This is what led to his candidature’s dismissal.

Apparently, organisations do not only ask the search firms to look into any potential drinking or smoking problems, but also a person’s sense of style. Ronesh Puri, MD of Executive Access India reportedly said, “Companies do checks to protect their brand. There have been cases where CEOs/CXOs have got drunk and created scenes, causing embarrassment. Companies are therefore looking at the lifestyle of leadership candidates more closely now. Some companies where promoters believe in simplicity and upholding values are petrified of somebody changing the culture and values of the organisation by exhibiting a different lifestyle.”

Regard Post

Shaija Dutt the founder and chairperson of Stellar Search strongly believes in carrying out a complete background research of a candidate, she reportedly said, “In the current corporate environment, CXO hiring mistakes are considered a risk oversight and many boards/leadership teams are facing intense scrutiny in view of the same.”

Commenting on the argument about the invasion of a person’s private space, Dutt reportedly said, “In light of easily available information, thanks to their digital footprint, candidates are under the microscope more than ever before and this trend is poised to grow in times to come.”

Apart from all these companies are taking increasing care in hiring people who they deem ‘fit’. While doing thorough background checks seems like a good idea, going as far as choosing candidates based on their horoscopes seems like crossing the line. What do you think?
