Kartik Aaryan stands on a ledge in leaked photo from Pati Patni Aur Woh sets

A picture of Kartik Aaryan shooting for Pati Patni Aur Woh has surfaced on social media.

Kartik Aaryan, who landed in Lucknow two days ago, has begun shooting for Pati Patni Aur Woh. After getting a warm welcome on the sets of the film, the Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety actor jumped into action, and this new picture is proof of it.

A picture of Kartik Aaryan shooting for Pati Patni Aur Woh on the streets of Lucknow has surfaced on social media. In the photo, formally dressed actor can be seen precariously standing on a ledge.

Kartik essays the role of Chintu Tyagi who falls in love with another woman despite being married. Pati Patni Aur Woh is a remake of the 1978 film starring Sanjeev Kumar, Vidya Sinha and Ranjeeta.

On Saturday, Kartik posted a picture from 'nawabo ke shehar' Lucknow and gave a sneak-peek into the warm welcome that he got on the film sets.

Before this, he posted a picture of him jetting off to Lucknow for the shooting of Pati Patni Aur Woh. "Chintu Tyagi chale Lucknow!! #PatiPatniAurWoh kal se," he captioned the photo.

Apart from Kartik, the film also stars Ananya Panday and Bhumi Pednekar. It is for the first time that Kartik will share screen space with the two heroines.

Talking about the experience of working with Kartik, Ananya Panday called him a "selfless actor."

We shot three days in February, that was one short schedule that we did. But I'm going to Lucknow and I'm going for two months so, I'm super excited. I shot with him, I didn't get a chance to shoot with Bhumi yet. But he is such a good actor, his command over the language is amazing so he improvises really well," Ananya told a portal.

"And such a selfless actor, he thinks about how to make the scene better rather than just his own lines. Also, he is just fun to be around, just makes me laugh all the time," added the 20-year-old actress.

Pati Patni Aur Woh is set to hit the screens on January 10, 2020.

ALSO READ | Kartik Aaryan reveals what he hates the most about Ananya Panday

ALSO READ | Kartik Aaryan gets warm welcome on sets of Pati Patni Aur Woh in Lucknow. See pic
