Chandrayaan 2 launch live streaming: When and where to watch online, time in India

Chandrayaan 2

Key Highlights The Chandrayaan 2 mission will see indigenously made GSLV Mk III carry three modules into space Chandrayaan 2 is India's most ambitious space mission till now The launch will be streamed online by ISRO

India's ambitious space mission to land a rover on Moon, Chandrayaan 2, is scheduled to launch on July 15 at 2:51 am IST from the Satish Dhawan Space Center in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh. The countdown for the mission has already begun which will see ISRO land a rover near the South Pole of Moon in September.

More than being ambitious in its scope, the Chandrayaan 2 is a mission that will put India in the elite company of countries who have previously carried our successful Moon missions. After the United States, Russia and China, India will become only the fourth successful country to land a rover on the surface of the moon.

When to watch Chandrayaan 2 live coverage:

The Chandrayaan 2 mission will see indigenously made GSLV Mk III also referred to as 'Bahubali' rocket carry three modules into space -- an orbiter, a lander and a rover. The lander has been named Vikram while the rover is called Pragyan. The rover Pragyan will be housed inside lander Vikram and will be deployed after Vikram lands on the lunar surface. The Chandrayaan 2 is scheduled to launch at 2:51 am IST and the launch will take off from Sriharikota.

Where to watch Chandrayaan 2 live streaming:

For those hoping to watch it online, ISRO will be streaming the event live tonight through social media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter. Live stream for the launch will also be available on YouTube channels of the national broadcaster, Doordarshan's channel as well as PIB and ISRO.

For viewers looking to watch it on TV, Doordarshan again is the best bet. The broadcaster will stream the event live on its channel along with behind the scene content and commentary from the Sriharikota.

Interestingly, this is the second time in 10 years that India is planning to send a lunar mission into space. Chandrayaan 2 comes 10 years after ISRO launched Chandrayaan 1 in 2009. Although, unlike Chandrayan 2, the first mission didn't include a rover. Chandrayaan 1 was sent to the moon only equipped with an orbiter and an 'impactor' that crashed into the Moon's surface near the South Pole.
