PICS: Kartik Aaryan & Ananya Panday's LOOK From Sets Of 'Pati Patni Aur Woh' in Lucknow LEAKED

View this post on Instagram A post shared by kartikk ki diwani (@kartik_aarayn_) on Jul 13, 2019 at 11:35am PDT

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Ananya ???????????? (@ananyapandayteam) on Jul 14, 2019 at 4:00am PDT

View this post on Instagram A post shared by KARTIK AARYAN (@kartikaaryan) on Jul 13, 2019 at 4:22am PDT

The remake of ‘Pati Patni Aur Woh’ has been making waves ever since the film was announced. The upcoming romantic comedy stars Kartik Aaryan, Bhumi Pedneka and Ananya Panday in lead roles. The actors have started shooting for a new schedule of the film in Lucknow. Kartik, who was seen spotting a moustache as Chintu Tyagi , jumped into action on the very first day of shoot. The ‘Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety’ actor’s look was spotted standing on a ledge outside a building. Aaryan can be seen wearing a light blue shirt along with grey trousers in the photo which is going viral on social media. Check it out!Ananya Panday’s first look from ‘Pati Patni Aur Woh’ from the sets of Lucknow has been leaked too. The star kid, who made her Bollywood debut with ‘Student of the Year 2’, looked stunning in her yellow tank top and pants. The actress is seen standing on the busy roads of Lucknow and we assume she is shooting in Hazratganj. Check out the picture!Kartik, who also has ‘Love Aaj Kal 2’ in his kitty, had shared a picture on Instagram along with the caption, ‘’Nawabon Ka Sheher.’’ The actor received a warm welcome on the sets of the film.‘Pati Patni Aur Woh’ is the adaptation of the 1978 drama of the same name, which starred Sanjeev Kumar, Vidya Sinha and Ranjeeta Kaur. The original film revolved around a married couple Ranjeet (Sanjeev) and Sharda (Vidya) and how things changed between them after he got involved with his secretary Nirmala (Ranjeeta). The new ‘Pati Patni Aur Woh’ will hit the silver screens on December 6, 2019. The film, which is being directed by Mudassar Aziz, also stars Anupam Kher and Navni Parihar. Watch this space for more updates!
