Jammu And Kashmir Leader's Security Officer Shot Dead By Terrorists

A case has been filed and police is investigating the attack. (Representional image)

Highlights Riyaz Ahmed posted as security officer to a National Conference leader

Police constable was taken to a hospital where he died of his injuries

The leader, Syed Tauqeer, survived the attack that took place in Anantnag

A police constable posted as a Personal Security Officer to National Conference leader and former judge Syed Tauqeer was shot dead by terrorists in Jammu and Kashmir's Anantnag on Sunday.

The security officer, identified as Riyaz Ahmed Khan, was shot in the abdomen. "In a terror incident at Hiller area of Anantnag district, terrorists fired upon a policeman on duty identified as Riyaz Ahmad, causing grievous injuries to him," a police spokesman said soon after the attack. He was taken to a district hospital where he died of his injuries.

Mr Tauqeer survived the attack that took place in Anantnag's Hiller Kokernag area as he was on his way back home after a party meeting.

The site of the attack has been cordoned off. A case has been filed and police is investigating the attack.

National Conference leader Omar Abdullah offered his condolences and condemned the attack. "My colleague from Kokernag in South Kashmir Judge (Retd) Tauqeer Sb was just attacked by militants. While he escaped unhurt his security officer was hit & killed in the line of duty. I unreservedly condemn this dastardly attack & convey my condolences to the family of the deceased," he said in a tweet.

"The security officer Selection Grade Constable Riyaz Ahmed Khan was posted with him for the last few years & was killed when 3 militants attacked a party convention. I've just spoken to Tauqeer Sb to convey my concern & my condolences for Riyaz's death," said the former Jammu And Kashmir Chief Minister.

The Kashmir zone police also tweeted: "We pay our #rich #tributes to #martyr Riyaz Ahmad who made supreme #sacrifice in the line of duty at Hiller #Anantnag today. We stand by his #family at this #critical juncture. #RIP".
