Uttar Pradesh: 2 held for producing illicit spurious liquor in Sambhal; police seize urea, spirit during raid

they recovered raw and ready material to sell hooch in huge quantity from the possession of the accused. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police seized rectified spirit, urea, salt ammoniac and colour from the accused's possession Accused confessed that they used to supply hooch across the district

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh police apprehended two people from Saraitareen locality of Sambhal district for allegedly producing hooch or illicit liquor and supplying in that area. The police have also seized rectified spirit, urea, salt ammoniac and colour - dangerous elements which were allegedly meant to be used in preparing the liquor. All these items were later destroyed.

The accused have been identified as Surendra and Ravindra, who are the residents Amroha and Sambhal districts respectively. As per a report, the Additional Superintendent of Police (ASP), Alok Kumar Jaiswal said that they recovered raw and ready material to sell hooch in huge quantity from the possession of the accused.

The ASP said that they have seized 90 litres of rectified spirit, 45-litre hooch and 80 pouches from the Kotala locality in Saraitareen area under the drive initiated on the Superintendent's instructions. He added that the accused have also confessed that they used to supply hooch across the district on demand of the customers. Meanwhile, a man named Hargyan who was present at the site fled with the connivance of the accused, moments before the police raided the spot. The police have also seized 150 empty bottles from the spot.

An FIR has been lodged in the case under Section 272 (Adulteration of food or drink intended for sale) of the Indian Penal Code and under the relevant sections of the Excise Act. However, the two accused have been sent to jail.

Similar cases reported from Uttar Pradesh

Several hooch tragedies have surfaced in Uttar Pradesh in the past one year. Recently, in the Barabanki city of the state, on May 29, 2019, as many as 23 people died after consuming illicit liquor. The prime accused who ran the licenced liquor shop was arrested by the local police. The incident had prompted the Yogi Adityanath led- Bharatiya Janata Party government to order a high-level probe into the case, including the possibility of a political conspiracy.

The police had also arrested the three workers employed in the shop in connection with the case. Reportedly, locals belonging to Raniganj and adjoining villages consumed the illicit liquor purchased from a licensed shop in Ramnagar area and were immediately rushed to the Ramnagar Community Health Centre (CHC) after the consumption.

Reportedly, the police had sealed the shop from where the liquor was sourced after the incident was reported. Along with the accused, one inspector was also suspended and departmental action was ordered against the Circle Officer.

The complacency of Uttar Pradesh police

In December last year, in a bizarre incident, police officials in the BJP-administered state gave a shocking reply when asked where some 1,000 litres of seized liquor from the state's Bareilly’s Cantonment police station storehouse had gone. Quite shockingly and unconvincingly, the police officials reportedly claimed that a gang of rats had siphoned off the alcohol that had been seized from different illegal shops that were operating in different regions of the state.

They claimed that when the officials opened the storehouse to bring out the body of a dead stray dog, they had found that the 1,000 litres alcohol kept in there not to be found.
