A ticking bomb: 2 more youths die at Kharjune Khare, cops say activity common; army refuses to get involved

A few days ago, two youths from the small Kharjune Khare village, just ahead of the industrial area of Ahmednagar, sneaked into military land located at walking distance from one their homes in the dead of the night. Shortly thereafter, a stray bomb that the unfortunate duo mistook for scrap metal, which they allegedly hoped to sell in the market for a quick buck, exploded and took both their lives.



Alarmingly, this was the fourth such incident in three years, occurring in a district that houses the largest display of military tanks in the world, some 120-odd kilometres from Pune. Local police have cited helplessness in the absence of complaints, even as they claim the Army provides less to no co-operation when it comes to such incidents. The crux of this phenomenon is the firing range around 1.5 km from Kharjune Khare, an old Britishera army establishment sprawled over 30,000 acres, with many villages in its proximity. Close by is the Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) area of Ahmednagar that houses the Army Armoured Corps’ Centre and School and Mechanised Infantry Regimental Centre (MIRC), which conduct firing drills at the range. Over at Ahmednagar is the Army Cantonment, popularly known as Bhingar Camp.



The recent tragedy took place on July 10, when Akshay Gaikwad (19) and Sandip Dhirwade (34) allegedly decided to steal a fired shell found a few kilometres from the latter’s house. The duo allegedly began breaking the shell to separate glass and metal for scrap, when it exploded, around 4 am.



As per police records, in 2018, two friends from the same village, Subhash Nikam and Ganesh Gaikwad, were killed in an explosion when they allegedly lifted live shells. Back in 2017, farm labourer Anil Pator was killed in a blast when he had allegedly lifted a live shell. In 2016, two migrants from Rajasthan working as labourers in a factory, Roshan Rajput and Sonu Tarak, met a similar fate.



~~70219342~~

Meanwhile, the family of one of the deceased has staunchly negated any claims made by police that the youth was trying to burgle items off defence land.



Unable to bear his loss, Akshay’s family has blamed the authorities for making false charges. His father Navnath, a labourer, told Mirror, “My son did not steal anything for scrap. He was a Class XII science student. He was at home till 6 pm the night before the explosion and later, went out to attend a wedding in the village. He was going to return home late. In the wee hours, when villagers heard a huge blast, they came rushing to tell us our son had died. He was just sitting with a friend there when the bomb went off.” His inconsolable mother Mangala said, “Akshay wanted to become a police officer and after his boards, wished to apply for the constables’ exams. They neither made an attempt to talk to us nor inquired into the matter — they just blamed him of theft right away. It’s the authorities who are to be blamed as they have no solution to avoid such incidents.”



Meanwhile, Sandip left behind only his 70-year-old grandmother, who lives in a small hut near an Army pillar, notifying the public that the area is military land. A heartbroken Sharda Dhirwade said, “Sandip grew up here in this village and worked as a casual labourer. The villagers told me he went to steal the bomb but I didn’t know he did such things. The Army area is very close. We keep hearing sounds of tanks firing regularly.”



Police investigating the case said the alleged robbery of shells and bombs from the military area is out of their control. Police inspector Mohan Borse of Ahmednagar MIDC police station said, “The Army has their training centre there and as per our knowledge, firing takes place at least fivesix times a month. Young boys walk up to sixseven kilometres inside military property to pick up shells. They separate glass and metal and sell it for scrap. Even if there were no deaths, the youths are at risk by entering a tank firing range. It has become a common practice. But the Army doesn’t even file complaints regarding this.”



When Mirror visited the village last week, we found the firing range marked with a simple stone and two flags to indicate army area. There were no fences or barricades — anyone could enter freely. It is noted that after firing drills, army officials sanitise the area and issue warnings not to enter — these have, however, often been ignored.



Police shared that village youth between the ages of 17 and 30 years have been drawn to this dangerous activity. They tend to be school dropouts supporting their families by working as farm labourers and rearing cattle. Kharjune Khare is sparsely populated, with only a few houses.



Police stated that in the absence of official complaints or even a proactive initiative from the army for a solution, this remains a burning issue. Cops have so far investigated these cases as accidental deaths.



Borse added, “The army has given a tender to waste management companies to collect scrap — these agents have an ID card to access the area. But youths sneak in anyway. The army does patrolling during the morning and at night, but the youths find gaps. When we sought defense help about the recent deaths, we hardly received any co-operation.”



The MIDC area in Ahmednagar has over 100 scrap dealers. Dhanish Lodha from Samarth Trading Company told Mirror, “We know some metals collected from in and around the army area are dangerous, so we don’t accept such scrap. We only collect scrap from MIDC companies and resell it to rolling mills. There are some scrap dealers on carts where these youths sell the contraband easily.”


