Terrifying moment Indian funfair ride crashes down, killing two people and injuring 29 others

This is the terrifying moment a funfair ride crashed down killing two people and injuring 29 others in western India.

The incident took place on Sunday at Balvatika Amusement Park near Kanakaria lake in Gujarat state's Ahmedabad city.

The horrific video shows the joyride, named 'Discovery', coming down after its load-bearing cable snapped when the pendulum-like carriage was swinging around 20 ft above the ground.

Two people were killed and more than 29 people were injured in the accident. There were 31 people inside the ride during the time of the crash.

Terrifying footage shows the moment a funfair ride crashed down killing two people and injuring 29 others in western India

The horrific video shows the joyride, named 'Discovery', coming down after its load-bearing cable snapped when the pendulum-like carriage was swinging around 20 feet above the ground

At least three among the 29 injured are in critical condition, after the ride collapsed at around 5.40pm, prompting park authorities to vacate the area

Footage also shows rescue officials pulling out the injured people from the ride.

The victims were identified as Manali Rajvadi, 24, and Mohammed Zaid Momin, 22. At least three among the 29 injured are in critical condition.

The accident occurred at 5.40pm, prompting park authorities to get the crowd to vacate the spot.

According to officials, the contract for the joyride in the amusement park was given to Superstar Amusement Private Limited.

Footage also shows rescue officials pulling out the injured people from the ride

Two people were killed and more than 29 people were injured in the accident. There were 31 people inside the ride during the time of the crash

They added that they are collecting information regarding the mishap. Meanwhile, representatives of the Superstar Amusement Private Limited have been detained by the police.

Police said that they would register a case under charges of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against those responsible for the accident.

Gujarat Chief Minister Vijay Rupani has ordered an inquiry into the accident and assured action against those responsible. The chief minister also asked Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation to provide free treatment to all the injured.

In a similar incident, that took place on June 18 in the southern Indian state of Karnataka, four people were injured after an amusement park ride malfunctioned and crashed to the ground.
