[VIDEO] Mumbai Police arrest one of three accused of attacking doctors of Mumbai's Nair Hospital

The patient's kin attacked three resident doctors and vandalised hospital property.

Key Highlights The incident took place on Saturday, July 14 Three persons have been accused in the FIR One of the accused has been arrested

Mumbai: A man has been arrested by the Mumbai Police in relation to the attack on three doctors of the Nair Hospital. Three people have been named in the FIR of the incident, out of which, two are women. Family members of a patient allegedly attacked the doctors on Saturday after the patient died during treatment.

The patient's kin attacked three resident doctors and vandalised hospital property. The police said that efforts are underway to arrest the other two accused.

The 46-year-old patient had been undergoing treatment for Tuberculosis and HIV. The doctors who had been attacked claimed that they had informed the patients' family that he was extremely critical when he was brought to the hospital.

The deceased had been admitted in ward number 23 of the hospital. When the patient's kin learned about his death, the relatives allegedly entered into the ward and started abusing the doctors. The accused then started assaulting the doctors and security guards.

Maharashtra Association of Resident Doctors (MARD) voiced their support towards the doctors and condemned the incident. MARD said that increased violence towards doctors has caused mental stress to the medical fraternity.

Following the attack, MARD demanded the formulation of the Central Protection Act for medicos all across the country. The organisation said that necessary amendments should be made in the Doctors Protection Act. They said that security audits should be conducted in government-run hospitals and an emergency alarm system should also be installed to strengthen security.

Attacks on doctors becoming rampant:

TIn a similar case reported from Jharkhand's Ranchi, the relatives of a patient attacked doctors of the Ranchi Trust Hospital in June. The accused attacked medical superintendent Dr AK Singh, Dr Om Prakash Mahansarai, Dr SK Sinha and Dr Nijam.

The patient had been brought to the hospital after he had been involved in a drowning accident in Patratu Dam. The doctors declared the patient dead on arrival after which, his relatives started shouting slogans outside the hospital. The mob allegedly attacked Dr Singh when he went to pacify them. The mob also allegedly attacked the doctors who tried to rescue Dr Singh. A group of junior resident doctors filed a plea after the incident and demanded protection for medical professionals.

The Kolkata case of an attack on doctors

In June this year, a nation-wide strike by doctors was carried out in support of a junior doctor who had been seriously wounded in an attack by the relatives of a deceased patient at the NRS Medical College. The junior doctor had been attacked after the 75-year-old patient succumbed to his ailment. Doctors from all across the country carried out 'cease-work' strikes to show their solidarity towards the junior doctor.
