Why Kartik Aaryan had to run on the edge of a terrace during Patni Patni Aur Woh sequel

Kartik Aaryan in Pati, Patni Aur Woh remake | Photo Credit: Instagram

A modern-day adaptation of the hit 1978 romcom Pati, Patni Aur Woh is in the making and Kartik Aaryan will be playing the protagonist Chintu Tyagi. Originally played by the late Sanjeev Kumar, Aaryan is all set to add his style to the role in the Mudassar Aziz directorial. In a pin-striped shirt, neatly combed hair and a bushy moustache, Aaryan surely looks unrecognisable and every bit an average office clerk.

From the bundles of files and a storage unit with stacked up papers, Kartik Aaryan certainly looks like he is employed at a government institute. One of the cool things about the first look is how the makers of the remake have set a snazzy new printer and computer that promises that the film is not set during the '80s but is a fresh take on a famous storyline in modern times. Speaking about one of the sequences from the film, a source revealed to a tabloid, “They were shooting an important sequence at the post office where Kartik’s character is running on the edge of the terrace, with his co-star hot on his heels. The chase is guaranteed to get a lot of laughs on screen." Well, with Kartik Aaryan on board, we are already convinced that the film will be a laugh riot! Check out his first look as aam aadmi Chintu Tyagi, happily seated at the Hazratganj post office in Lucknow, the 'City of Nawabs'.

Pati, Patni Aur Woh's remake is produced by Juno Chopra and Bhushan Kumar. The film will be shot in and around the outskirts of Lucknow. The Kartik Aaryan starrer is set to wrap filming by August-end. The plot of the movie is similar to the 1978 movie wherein a family man with a wife and child is drawn to his sultry secretary. “Like all remakes, the screenplay has been tweaked to keep up with modern sensibilities while retaining the essence of the earlier film," added the source.

Simultaneously, Kartik Aaryan, who is also involved in other projects, has wrapped the shooting of Imtiaz Ali's next with Sara Ali Khan with a tentative title, Aaj Kal. Bhumi Pednekar has also completed shooting her set of films such as Dinesh Vijan's Bala where she reunites with Ayushmann Khurrana, is awaiting the release of Tushar Hiranandani's Saand Ki Aankh with Taapsee Pannu as her co-star.

Stay tuned to zoomtv.com as we bring more updates to you.

Complete your TV viewing experience with the best of Hollywood entertainment and News. Get the Times Movies And News pack at just Rs 13. Ask your cable/DTH provider for Times M.A.N. pack now. Know more
