[NEWSWRAP] News of The Day, July 15, 2019: From NIA Bill to Assam, Bihar floods

Home Minister Amit Shah wanted to pass the NIA bill as it is in line with his government’s ‘zero tolerance’ policy towards terrorism. | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights It was Monday mania of news as the much awaited NIA Bill was finally passed in the Lok Sabha with Home Minister Amit Shah telling the House why it was important. Also, floods ravaged many states in India. Scroll down for the biggest news highlights of the day.

New Delhi: The week started off with a bang as NIA Bill was passed in Lok Sabha, Assam and Bihar battled with floods and Realme X was launched in India at an affordable price. Here are the day’s biggest news headlines:

National Investigation Agency (Amendment) Bill 2019 passed

Adding another feather to the NDA government’s achievements, the Lok Sabha passed the National Investigation Agency (Amendment) Bill, 2019, giving more power to the country’s India’s premier anti-terror agency. With the passage of the bill, the NIA will be able to investigate terrorist acts against Indians and Indian interests abroad, cases of human trafficking, and cybercrimes. Speaking in Parliament before the Bill was passed, Home Minister Amit Shah asserted that the Bill’s only aim is to finish off terrorism. Read More

[OPINION] Assam and Bihar submerged in water: Aftermath of floods and government's inefficiency

Assam, Bihar and West Bengal have been experiencing flood-like situations for over 10 days. The situation has put the government to test once again as the danger and death toll, both are on the rise. Imagine a large piece of land that has been ploughed for hours by a farmer despite the scorching heat. One flood and all of his efforts are washed away within minutes by a roaring stream of water. With his crops uprooted and no means of income left, farmers are often rendered hopeless by floods. Read More

Did Priyanka Chopra call truce after 15-year court battle with former secretary?

In her long and successful career, Bollywood actress Priyanka Chopra has not only starred in over 50 Hindi films but has also made her mark in the West. However, back in 2004, the global icon had made headlines when her former secretary Prakash Jaju filed a criminal case in the Andheri Magistrate court accusing her of violating their legal contract when Priyanka suddenly announced that his services had been terminated. The legal battle that had been going on for 15 years has reportedly ended as both the parties have agreed to withdraw the case. A report had stated that the case was resolved at the Andheri court earlier this week. Read More

What will happen if you miss July 31, 2019, ITR filing deadline

The Income Tax Department has fixed July 31, 2019, as the last of income tax return (ITR) filing for all the taxpayers who are willing to pay income tax for FY 2018-19. There are certain implications for people who miss the ITR filing deadline. The Income Tax Department charges penalty fee on delayed tax filings and levies interest on tax amount carried forward if taxpayers miss multiple deadlines. Read More

Realme X launched in India; price starts at Rs 16,999

After weeks of waiting, Chinese smartphone major Realme has finally launched its flagship model in the Indian market. The smartphone is called the Realme X and comes with an in-display fingerprint sensor and a pop-up camera.

The Realme X was initially launched in the Chinese market a couple of weeks ago and has now made its way to the Indian shores alongside its younger sibling, the Realme 3i which is a budget segment offering. Read More

How serious is epilepsy? Steps to prevent SUDEP

Disney Channel star Cameron Boyce’s tragic death highlights the real dangers of epilepsy, while also prompting questions and concerns from the public that how could an otherwise, fit, young man die from this common neurological disorder that affects some 50 million people worldwide. Here’s all you need to know about this common neurological disorder, including the risk factors for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy and steps patients can take to manage their condition. Read More


