Indian forces launch cordon, search operation in Kulgam, Kupwara, Pulwama districts

Indian forces launch cordon, search operation in Kulgam, Kupwara, Pulwama districts

In occupied Kashmir, Indian forces launched cordon and search operations in different areas of Kulgam, Islamabad, Kupwara and Pulwama districts, today (Monday).

The troops sealed all the entry and exit points and conducted house-to-house searches. The CASOs were jointly launched by personnel of Indian army, Central Reserve Police Force and Special Operation Group.

An Indian Central Reserve Police Force soldier committed suicide by shooting himself with his service rifle during duty hours at Civil Secretariat in Jammu.

This incident raised the number of such deaths amongst the Indian army and police personnel to 436 in occupied Kashmir since January 2007 till date.

Meanwhile, the authorities invoked draconian law, Public Safety Act on a teenage boy, Huzaifa Ahmad Butt, and sent him to Udhampur jail in Jammu.

The 17- year-old boy from Pattan was facing illegal detention in Baramulla jail for the past six months. He has now been shifted to Udhampur jail.

Over a thousand Hurriyat leaders, activists and students are facing illegal detention under black laws in jails of Jammu and in India’s infamous Tihar jail.

Prominent among them are Muhammad Yasin Malik, Shabbir Ahmad Shah, Masarrat Aalam Butt, Dr Hameed Fayaz, Aasiya Andrabi, Nahida Nasreen, Fehmida Sofi, Nayeem Ahmad Khan, Mohammad Ayaz Akbar, Altaf Ahmad Shah, Peer Saifullah, Merajuddin Kalwal, Farooq Ahmad Dar, Sarjan Barkati, Qazi Yasir, Advocate Zahid Ali, Moulana Mushtaq Veeri and others.

It is mentioned that the Indian authorities are using the draconian law as a tool to prolong the illegal detention of Kashmiri political prisoners.

Under this law, an individual is kept in prison from six months to two years, but each time on the expiry of the detention period, the authorities slap another PSA on him to prevent his release.

World human rights bodies have been demanding of Indian authorities to repeal draconian laws including Public Safety Act and Armed Forces Special Powers Act in IOK.
