Elsa Pataky's lavish 43rd birthday celebrations in Spain with husband Chris Hemsworth revealed

Elsa Pataky has kicked off her birthday celebrations several days early.

The Spanish actress, who turns 43 on Thursday, has been partying up a storm in Ibiza with her husband Chris Hemsworth, 35, and their Hollywood pals.

The mother-of-three shared a gallery of photos to Instagram on Monday, which showed her partying on a yacht and posing in front of a private jet.

Scroll down for video

Inside Elsa Pataky's lavish 43rd birthday party: The Spanish actress (left) has shared a gallery of photos from her celebrations in Ibiza. Pictured with her husband Chris Hemsworth (right)

'Early birthday celebrations with my favourite people,' she captioned the gallery.

In one photo, Elsa posed with her friends on the beach against the backdrop of a hazy summer sunset. Another snap showed the group boarding a private jet.

The Fate of the Furious star made sure to tag the famous guests in attendance, including actor Matt Damon and his wife Luciana Barroso.

Famous friends! In one photo, Elsa posed with her friends on the beach at sunset. Matt Damon and his wife Luciana Barroso are visible in the back row, behind Chris and Elsa

From Ibiza with love! Elsa (centre) looked effortlessly chic in a plunging boho dress

High flyers! Chris, Elsa and their friends posed in front of a private jet before jetting off

Several of Elsa's photos showed what appeared to be a glamorous girls' night out.

Other pictures and videos documented their party on a private yacht, which seemed to take place in the afternoon and early evening.

Elsa and Chris travelled to Spain with their daughter India, seven, and twin sons Tristan and Sasha, five - however the children were not pictured in Elsa's gallery.

No boys allowed! Several of Elsa's photos showed what appeared to be a girls' night out

Smooth sailing! Other pictures and videos documented their party on a private yacht, which seemed to take place in the afternoon and early evening

Living the good life! Elsa and Chris appeared to be having the time of their lives on the yacht

The couple have been married for eight years.

In 2014, they quit life in Hollywood and relocated to Byron Bay, a popular tourist town on Australia's east coast.

After three years living in a rental property, they will soon be moving into a 'mega-mansion' in Broken Head worth an estimated $20million.
