It was a full house for Rajasthan BJP leaders at Uri

After the release of Bollywood movie Uri, the issue of surgical strikes has once again come to limelight in the country. Union Human Resources Development Minister Prakash Javadekar and state BJP leaders and workers saw “Uri-The Surgical Strike” in the theatre on Sunday. The workers of Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha also saw the movie on Republic Day and a day later, Javadekar saw this movie in the city with the party workers on Sunday.

Terrorists were attacked on the army camp in Uri of Jammu and Kashmir in 2016. After this attack, Indian soldiers conducted a surgical strike in Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) in which the Indian Army had demolished several terrorists’ launch pads in the area.

The movie is released after two years of the actual surgical strike and is based on the same event. After the release of the movie, the issue of the surgical strike has again come to light and the BJP may use it as an election topic in the upcoming Lok Sabha polls. The workers of the State BJP Yuva Morcha also saw Uri movie in a theatre. Hundreds of Yuva Morcha workers walked from the BJP headquarters to a multiplex located at 22 Godowns for the movie.

Following the same, Union Minister and state election in-charge Prakash Javadekar also saw the movie on Sunday. Javadekar was accompanied by former Cabinet Minister Kalicharan Saraf, former MLA Surendra Pareek, Jaipur City President Sanjay Jain and other BJP workers in the same multiplex as the Yuva Morcha workers.

After the film, Saraf told the media that, “Under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, our army conducted a surgical strike in the PoK and the film is the perfect portrayal of Indian Army’s courage. We are proud of our army.” Before this, on January 23, the former Union Minister Arjun Ram Meghwal also saw the movie in Bikaner with ex-servicemen.

THE RELEASE

The movie is released after two years of the actual surgical strike and is based on the same event. After the release of the movie, the issue of the surgical strike has again come to light.
