Lonely elderly couple's decomposed body found in South-East Delhi

The semi-decomposed bodies of a septuagenarian couple were found dead with the hands of the woman tied with a religious stole at their residence in South-East Delhi's Mount Kailash society in Amar Colony area. The deceased have been identified as Virender Kumar Khaneja (77) and his wife Sarla (72). The Amar Colony police have registered a case of murder under IPC section 302. Their elder son Amit is a doctor and settled in USA while her younger son Sumit passed away due to illness.

Sarla's hands were tied in the front with a religious stole. Her body had bloated up. A string made out of cloths was also lying around her neck. Virender on the other hand was wearing a brown waist court with his legs under the cooler and head resting on a book shelf, with blood on the side close to his head.

According to the police a relative of the couple had called on 100 number and stated that occupants of the house had not been responding to calls and their phone was switched off. The relative also provided the house number and other relevant details. The police reached the house on Saturday night and found the main door of the house locked from inside. The back gate was also locked from inside.

The police officials then jumped on the balcony of the neighbour and then the couple's to cut the grill of the window. They then broke the glass of the window to open the door. Sarla and Virender were found dead inside their son Sumit's room with their bodies lying on the either sides of the bed.

The police recovered phenyl balls from the room as well. The last phone call with the couple was made on telephone on January 16. The footage's from the CCTV revealed that the couple were spotted in the cameras on January 18. The couple also had a part time domestic help who has been detained by the police for questioning. The domestic help had last visited the house on January 18 only.

The couple was also registered in the Delhi Police senior citizen cell. Neighbours revealed that the police officers even visited them. "The staff had last visited when they complained about water tank issue. The case is being probed from all angles," said Chinmoy Biswal, DCP, South-East.

CRIME SCENE
