Rebel Congress leader Roshan Baig arrested by SIT; Yeddyurappa’s PA flees; Baig moves HC

Rebel Congress MLA Roshan Baig. | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy confirmed the development on social media and said that the SIT team had nabbed Baig for questioning Kumaraswamy accused state BJP chief BS Yeddyurappa of aiding a former minister to flee when he is facing probe in a fraud case Baig resigned from the state Legislative Assembly and announced his decision to join the BJP

Bengaluru: Amid the ongoing political tussle that has gripped Karnataka for close to two weeks, the woes of the Janata Dal (Secular)-Congress coalition government are far from over after rebel Congress leader Roshan Baig was on Monday night arrested from the Kempegowda International Airport by a Special Investigation Team (SIT) in relation to the IMA fraud case. He eventually moved to the Karnataka High Court against his detention.

Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy confirmed the development on social media and said that the SIT team had nabbed Baig for questioning for his alleged connection with the case. Baig was arrested at Bengaluru airport when he was on way to Mumbai on a chartered aircraft along with Santosh, the personal assistant of Bharatiya Janata Party's Karnataka chief BS Yeddyurappa.

“Today, SIT probing the IMA case detained Roshan Baig for questioning at the BIAL airport while he was trying (to) leave along with Yeddyurappa’s PA, Santosh, on a chartered flight to Mumbai. I was told that on seeing the SIT, Santhosh ran away while the team apprehended Baig,” Kumaraswamy said through a post on social media platform Twitter.

The chief minister further accused the state BJP chief of aiding a former minister flee when he is facing probe in a fraud case.

#Karnataka: SIT probing the IMA case detained Roshan Baig for questioning at Bengaluru Airport International airport, last night. pic.twitter.com/pJLI2ETAMI — ANI (@ANI) July 16, 2019

“BJP MLA Yogeshwar was present at the time there. It’s a (matter of) shame that BJP Karnataka is helping a former minister escape, who is facing a probe in the IMA case. This clearly shows BJP’s direct involvement in destabilising the government through horse trading,” he claimed.

Today SIT probing the #IMA case detained @rroshanbaig for questioning at the BIAL airport while he was trying leave along with @BSYBJP's PA Santosh on a chartered flight to Mumbai. I was told that on seeing the SIT, Santhosh ran away while the team apprehended Mr. Baig. 1/2 pic.twitter.com/MmyH4CyVfP — H D Kumaraswamy (@hd_kumaraswamy) July 15, 2019

The Congress MLA was, however, released later today and said that he was being framed and the Karnataka government was snopping on him.

“I was going to meet my other MLA friends. I was not going out of the county as I had said I will cooperate with the SIT. They told me they are not arresting me and are only taking me for questioning... Yesterday was my birthday, so I had asked for an extension. They gave me a gift by questioning... There is a lot of natak in Karnataka... I can’t blame the investigation officer. It is all a political drama... I felt so bad. In 40 years of my career, nobody followed me. I am a seven-time MLA. I have not murdered anyone... However, whatever has happened has happened. The day I came back from Delhi I met the CM and requested him for an CBI enquiry,” Baig told Times Now.

IMA Ponzi Scam case: Suspended Congress MLA Roshan Baig who was taken for inquiry yesterday from Bengaluru airport back home after interrogation ended for today. He was allowed to appear on July 19 for further interrogation pic.twitter.com/slXWpAxuvU — ANI (@ANI) July 16, 2019

Baig had on July 8 said he would quit the Congress and move to the BJP and a day later resigned from the state Legislative Assembly. He was earlier suspended from the Congress for speaking against the party and praising Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

BJP Karnataka promptly hit back at Kumaraswamy and said that the JD(S)-Congress government is using the state machinery to save the coalition.

“CM HD Kumaraswamy is using the state machinery to save his government now. Roshan Baig was given time till July 19 to appear before SIT. This shows how the state government is blackmailing and treating their own MLAs using the institutions,” the BJP Karnataka said on Twitter.

CM @hd_kumaraswamy is using the state machinery to save his govt now. Mr. Roshan Baig was given time till 19th July to appear before SIT. This shows how the state Govt is blackmailing and treating their own MLAs’ using the institutions. pic.twitter.com/m3u09OFRkD — BJP Karnataka (@BJP4Karnataka) July 15, 2019

“It is false that Yeddyurappa’s PA Santhosh was travelling along with Baig. CM is peddling fake news and misleading the state. It was only Baig who was travelling and their was no second passenger. We demand to check boarding passes and CCTV footage to put out the facts,” the tweet said.

It is false that @BSYBJP’s PA Santhosh was travelling along with Mr. Baig.



CM is peddling fake news & misleading the state. It was only Mr. Baig who was travelling & their was no 2nd passenger.



We demand to check boarding passes & CCTV footage to put out the facts. — BJP Karnataka (@BJP4Karnataka) July 15, 2019

The Karnataka government has formed an SIT team comprising 11 members, led by DIG BR Ravikanthe Gowda, to investigate the alleged fraud by I Monetary Advisory (IMA) that has approximately Rs 200 crore worth of investment from just Muslim women.
