Consumer banks: Needed: Data sharing to curb consumer banking frauds

MUMBAI: Experts from the banking and payments industry want a common registry to battle the menace of consumer banking frauds . They say that transparency in reporting and reducing the turn-around time (TAT) of the resolution of debit card and OTP related frauds can go a long way in increasing the adoption of digital payments.While National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI), the umbrella body responsible for governance of payments systems, is considering the creation of such a registry, the key challenge lies in getting a regulatory diktat and cooperation of all stakeholders to share fraud information that is deemed sensitive by banks, said a person aware of industry discussions on the subject of fraud registry.“There are broadly two major types of debit card related frauds the banks are facing. One is related to cloning of cards and the other is related to OTP frauds,” said the person cited above. “In both the cases, the money is transferred immediately to a bank account which is linked to a KYC. A common registry can help blacklist these accounts and track the perpetrators of these frauds more effectively.”However, bankers say that while KYC authentication may be an important step toward establishing credentials of account holders, in most cases it need not amount to due diligence. “We’ve found that the addresses provided by these fraudsters during their KYC authentication are fake which makes it near impossible for a bank to track the whereabouts of the perpetrator,” said Puneet Kapoor – senior executive vice-president of Kotak Mahindra Bank.The Nandan Nilekani-headed committee for deepening digital payments favoured a ‘central fraud registry’ to ‘ensure a systematic response to fraud.’ “This registry should be accessible to all payment system participants on a near real-time basis, who may use it to evaluate the fraud risk for all users, and transactions (dynamically). This risk rating may be used to provide additional protections to the user,” as per the report.While the report doesn’t dwell on the specifics of how such a repository would work, experts say that a real-time information window can help payment players also help improve the quality of fraud reporting standards.“A common repository can help banks work in unison rather than in silos in dealing with such frauds where the money is siphoned off across various bank accounts in different geographies. Furthermore, the trends and patterns from the repository can also be used to improve banks’ analytic engines and police in predetecting these frauds,” said Prashant Choudhary, partner - cyber security, financial services, EY. The modus operandi of debit card cloning frauds involves a scanning machine that copies the details of the magnetic chip when a customer swipes a card at an ATM or a point of sale machine and a pinhole camera in the vicinity that records the password to authenticate the transaction, said a fraud risk expert.The fraudster then replicates the transactions and siphons off the funds to multiple accounts and correspondingly withdraws the cash before the customers can notify their bank and freeze these accounts. “In real-time payments, the window for fraud prevention is much shorter and the ability to recover a fraudulent payment is much lower. Traditional rules-only systems are great at detecting known threats, but can’t uncover new criminal fraud strategies or zero-day attacks, putting customers at risk,” said Kaushik Roy, vice- president, South Asia of ACI worldwide, a payments solution company.
