Haryana, Delhi and Western Uttar Pradesh to Get 40- 100mm Rainfall

Here’s our latest weather outlook for India

Tuesday - Nationwide Rain Forecast

The Northern Limit of Monsoon (NLM) has further advanced into much of Punjab, Haryana, and southeastern Rajasthan. Heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over southern Uttarakhand, Punjab, Chandigarh, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, coastal Karnataka, coastal Maharashtra, Goa and Kerala.

Fairly widespread rain and thunderstorms are likely over Bihar, Jharkhand, Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, and Andaman and Nicobar Island. Also, fairly widespread rain or snow and thunderstorms are possible over Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

Scattered rain and thunderstorms are likely over Telangana, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra. Also, isolated rain and thunderstorms possible over Jammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan and Gujarat.

Tuesday - State/Regional Forecast

A cyclonic circulation located over Punjab triggers thundery activities over foothills of Northern India. Haryana, Delhi, and western Uttar Pradesh may receive rainfall with total accumulation of 40 mm - 100 mm from Tuesday morning to Wednesday morning.

Another trough is lying in between West Bengal and Bangladesh. Moist southerly winds from the Bay of Bengal affect the northeastern India and it causes instability resulting in moderate to heavy rain and thunderstorms in northeastern and eastern parts of India during the week. Heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms likely over Sikkim, West Bengal, Assam, Meghalaya, and Arunachal Pradesh. Also, fairly widespread rainfall is likely over Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura,

Similarly down South, moist onshore winds causes instability along the west coast of Arabian Sea. This brings moderate to heavy rainfall and thunderstorms along the western coast and the inland South may also receive some heavy spells of rainfall this week.

Advertisement Maximum temperatures in Punjab, Haryana, western Uttar Pradesh, and northern Rajasthan will be around 2 to 8°C lower than normal for the next 5 days due to rainfall. On the other hand, the maximum temperatures in western Rajasthan is likely to be 40°C or more on Tuesday.

The air quality is likely to be poor or very poor over northern, central, western, and eastern India, especially in major cities like Delhi.

Wednesday and Beyond

The prevailing cyclonic circulation over Punjab brings heavy spells of rainfall and it is expected to move eastward along with a trough which runs across northern and eastern foothills for coming days. Fairly widespread rain and thunderstorms are likely over Punjab, Chandigarh, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. Fairly widespread rain or snow and thunderstorms are also likely over Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand.

The trough running from West Bengal to Bangladesh causes instability over northeastern India. Fairly widespread rainfall is likely over Sikkim, West Bengal, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram and Tripura.

Westerly humid winds also continue to cause instability over the western coast and inland south. Heavy to very heavy rain and thunderstorms are likely over coastal Karnataka and Kerala. Fairly widespread rainfall is likely over Goa, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Andhra Pradesh,Tamil Nadu, and Andaman and Nicobar Island. Also, scattered rain and thunderstorms are likely over Jharkhand, Karnataka, and Telangana. Isolated rain and thunderstorms are also possible over Jammu and Kashmir, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra.

Also, yet another cyclonic circulation will dominate the western Bay of Bengal from Thursday. This circulation is likely to bring, rainfall and thunderstorms in Odisha and the neighbouring states. It will intensify as we head into the weekend.

The maximum temperatures in Maharashtra and the adjoining areas are likely to be 3 to 8°C higher than normal until Friday. Max temperature of 40°C or more is also likely over western Rajasthan on Wednesday.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
