Delhi cops gear up to combat drone threats

Drones with four rotors can be operated from more than a mile away and can fly for more than 20 minutes.

There have been multiple intelligence inputs, issued almost routinely, about the possibility of terrorists using drones to carry out attacks in the Capital. But this time, the danger seems "clear and present".

It all began with the Union Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) learning, from terror communication intercepts, that unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) can be used to attack people, dignitaries and vital installations.

"Conversations via WhatsApp, emails, Facebook and Telegram have pointed towards plans of aerial attacks in the city. They also mention details of recently purchased drones from the online market," said an official.

The MHA passed it on to Delhi Police that issued high alert and deployed sleuths in Delhi's strategic locations to thwart any possible terror attack from the skies.

"To prevent any untoward incident in the city, the use of flying objects like drones has been restricted by the police," said Delhi Police spokesperson Madhur Verma. Republic Day celebrations passed off peacefully. But the threat is "too potent and complex" for such a measure to be effective in the long run.

The Union civil aviation ministry is learnt to have met companies that can provide an effective antiunmanned aircraft system (UAS) to detect and tackle drones.

The ministry is expected to hand over the technology to security agencies in the next couple of months. This will follow training to capture drones mid-flight and block their communication systems. Terror groups such as Islamic State have used drones to carry out attacks by dropping grenades or crashing into infrastructure. There have been drone attacks in countries such as the US, Venezuela, Saudi Arabian, France and Japan.

Even the US admitted in June that drones are a very serious threat that the country is currently unprepared to confront.

The market for commercial drones has flourished in recent years amid widespread availability and falling prices. India is expected to become $886 million worth drone market by 2021.

The civil aviation ministry has allowed individuals and companies to take permission and fly drones for photography and recreational purposes from December 1, 2018, but in areas other than those barred for security reasons. Drones have also triggered a scare at Delhi's Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA). A special training for the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) that guards airports has been started. Personnel are being trained to deal with aerial attacks.

"The possibility of drones being misused cannot be ruled out. We need to see if a drone is carrying any explosive for security agencies to control it. When pilots notice any drone-like object, they inform authorities," said CISF spokesperson Hemendra Singh. In August, one of the three runways of the airport had to be closed for over an hour after the pilot of a Chennai-bound flight spotted an unidentified flying object.

"There are various wedding venues near Aerocity. They have been prohibited from using drones. Posing as a customer, I have called more than 20 vendors supplying drones on rent. They refused to make supplies if they were to be used near the airport," said Sanjay Bhatia, DCP Airport.

Also read | 16-year-old develops landmine-destroying drone, wants to help Indian armed forces

Also read | After Heathrow airport, drone sighting halts flights at Newark Liberty airport

Also read | CISF goes tech-savvy, adds technology wing to combat airborne threats at IGI airport

Also watch | Indian troops beef up defences at India-China border
