SP worker Akhilesh Yadav, advocate killed in separate Uttar Pradesh shoot-outs; SP, VHP condemn attacks

The two shootouts took place in Pratapgarh and Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights VHP district president and advocate Pranav Mishra was killed by unidentified bike-borne assailants SP leader Akhilesh Yadav was killed in Kanakpur village Samajwadi Party leaders condemned the incident and said their party workers are being murdered due to political vendetta.

Lucknow: In a shocking development from Uttar Pradesh that once again puts forth a lawless image of the state, two separate shoot-outs recently led to the deaths of leaders from the Samajwadi Party and the Vishwa Hindu Parishad in Ayodhya and Pratapgarh, respectively.

VHP district president and advocate Pranav Mishra was killed by unidentified bike-borne assailants. SP leader, who strangely goes by the name Akhilesh Yadav, was killed in Kanakpur village when unidentified assailants on a bike fired several rounds at him and fled.

This isn’t the first time such incidents have come to the fore from the state. The shoot-outs have displayed a brazen show of lawlessness and absence of order in the state of Uttar Pradesh.

“Our fellow advocate Pranav Mishra, who worked at the district court, was on his way to work when some armed men murdered him...advocates are being killed since 2014 and as many as 7 advocates have been killed so far...the police is silent on it and there have also been no strict investigations on the murderers so that the criminals get scared of the consequences of killing an advocate...we want that they get arrested immediately, and the family of the deceased should be given a compensation of Rs 50 lakhs along with security... the murderers should be probed under the National Security Act,” Arif Khan, an advocate and Mishra’s friend, told Times Now.

Ayodhya Superintendent of Police Vijay Pal Singh said that Yadav was shot at when he was returning from the gym. “Akhilesh Yadav, who hailed from the village Kanakpur, was returning from the gym when 2 assailants shot at him...he was brought to the hospital injured but he later succumbed to his injuries... We are in the process to arrest the accused...strict investigation will be undertaken,” Singh said.

Meanwhile, Samajwadi Party leaders condemned the incident and said their party workers are being murdered due to political vendetta.

“The way Samajwadi Party workers are being murdered is condemnable... Our party condemns this...we demand from the government and the SP top brass that the murderers be strictly investigated, whoever it might be...incidents like these in the past, such as the Dwarka case have shown the lackadaisical approach of the state government, which has in a way given birth to such lawlessness...this has only encouraged the criminals further...this is a political murder,” Abhay Singh, former SP MLA, said.

Another SP leader Tej Narayan Pandey said that ‘Jungle Raj’ still exists in Uttar Pradesh.
