Taapsee Pannu's sneaky dig at 'Kabir Singh' by mentioning Nagpur murder case raises Twitter’s wrath; actress says it was sarcastic

Or maybe let’s just say they were madly in love with each other n this ‘act’ was to validate his TRUE love for her.… https://t.co/lOudTjiWeK — taapsee pannu (@taapsee) 1563191308000

Statutory warning: people with no sense of sarcasm kindly ignore me n my tweet. Thank you , it was nice not knowing… https://t.co/FGHOkQKZYv — taapsee pannu (@taapsee) 1563191820000

'Game over' actress Taapsee Pannu has taken a dig at the misogyny of Shahid Kapoor ’s Kabir Singh and the film’s director Sandeep Vanga Reddy while reacting to a Nagpur murder case in which a woman gets murdered brutally by her alleged boyfriend. Quoting the news Taapsee took to Twitter to write, “Or maybe let’s just say they were madly in love with each other n this ‘act’ was to validate his TRUE love for her.”For all those who are unaware, on Monday it was reported that a 19-year-old aspiring model was allegedly killed by her boyfriend on suspicion of her 'character', as per the police; the accused has been arrested.As soon as the actress tweeted the post netizens started criticising her. Most of them questioned Taapsee the reason behind choosing a piece of heinous news for a sarcastic tweet. Replying to them Taapsee wrote, “Statutory warning: people with no sense of sarcasm kindly ignore me n my tweet. Thank you, it was nice not knowing you.” However, it did little to abate the storm of negative tweets; most questioned Taapsee’s choice of picking up a heinous murder for a sarcastic tweet.Taapsee appeared to be referring to filmmaker Sandeep Vanga Reddy defending the slapping scene in 'Kabir Singh'. Recently, in an interview, he had mentioned when two people are deeply in love and deeply connected to each other; and if they don’t have the liberty of slapping each other, then he does not see anything there.Later the director was bashed for his comments, however, he claimed that he was misquoted. While talking to Times Now he averred, “You took me completely wrong. It’s not an assault. When you’re so close to each other when you can’t handle your worst thing with each other. And you don’t have the liberty of showing your worst side. The worst thing is not like ‘iss din daaru peeke aake maar rha hai’. It’s about the liberty of the expression between a couple who is deeply connected. It works for a woman also and it works for a man also. I spoke for both sides. But sadly, they are quoting in a very wrong way".
