Leonardo DiCaprio, Brad Pitt and Margot Robbie talk about if Jack could have fit on the door in Titanic

Brad Pitt and Leonardo DiCaprio are starring together in a movie for the very first time in their illustrious Hollywood careers. It was none other than Quentin Tarantino who got these legends together in his ninth film, Once Upon A Time In Hollywood. Leo will be seen as Rick Dalton, a struggling actor from the 1960s while Brad will be seen as Cliff Booth, Rick's stunt double. Along with Pitt and DiCaprio, Margot Robbie also stars in the movie as Sharon Tate, Manson family's famous murder victim.

The trio is currently immersed with the promotions of Once Upon A Time In Hollywood and during an interview with MTV News, Leonardo was asked Hollywood's controversial question - could Jack have fit on the boat at the end of Titanic? Margot was the first to respond with, "Oh my god, I thought about it. I remember bawling my eyes out!" Leo was quick to react with "I have no comment." However, egging on to the question was Brad who quipped, "That is fun. Well, I’m going to go back and look now, certainly."

Margot stated that this question is indeed the biggest controversy in cinema history, which DiCaprio wholeheartedly agreed with. Furthermore, the actress asked Leo if he mentioned at the time, to make the door bigger while Brad asked if he could have squeezed in. To both, Leo stated, "No comment."

Do you think Jack could have fit on the door with Rose? Let us know your views in the comments section below.

ALSO READ: Did you know Once Upon A Time In Hollywood co stars Brad Pitt & Leonardo DiCaprio starred in the same TV show?

Meanwhile, Leonardo's co-star and close friend Kate Winslet does feel that Jack could have fit on the door. Back in 2017, at an award show, Kate had shared, "I completely agree with you on that door. He could have fit on it! He could have fit on that door!"

Meanwhile, Once Upon A Time In Hollywood is slated to release on August 9, 2019, in India.
