Human sacrifice suspected in Andhra’s Shiva temple triple-murder case

Police have hinted at the case being one of human sacrifice (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The deaths were reported from Shiva temple in Anantpur district Among the victims was temple priest Shivarami Reddy

Hyderabad: Devotees visiting a temple at the Korthikota village of Tanakallu Mandal in Anantpur district of Andhra Pradesh found the bodies of three people, with their throats slit, on the temple premises. The victims, including two women, were found murdered on Monday morning. Local police were alerted and rushed to the spot. An investigation has been launched into the matter and is currently underway.

The victims have been identified as 70-year-old Shivarami Reddy, his 75-year-old sister Kadapala Kamalamma along with 70-year-old Satya Lakshmiamma. Police officials also found the devotees' blood sprinkled on the 'Shivalinga' located inside the temple. A preliminary investigation has revealed that while Reddy was the temple's priest, he was also one of the three people who were sleeping on the temple premises on the night of the crime.

Officials familiar with the matter said that the bodies were found in a makeshift temple since the original 15th-century temple at Korthikota village is being renovated. While villagers suspect the role of treasure hunters behind the crime, police are yet to rule out the possibility of human sacrifice. Meanwhile, a case of murder has been registered and an investigation into the appalling murders is underway.

Earlier this week, a partially buried body was exhumed from near the Narasimha temple in Kurnool. The matter came to light when locals complained of a foul smell emanating from the temple area. At the time it was found, the victim's body was missing the head. Police officials had suspected the role of treasure hunters without ruling out the possibility of the murder is an act of human sacrifice. The body was later sent for post-mortem and an investigation into the matter is underway.

Similarly, police in Jharkhand's Palamu arrested a mentally unstable man on July 12 for the alleged murders of a boy and a girl. The victims' headless bodies were found in Semarhat village about a week after they went missing. While investigators did not recover any evidence suggesting that this was a case of human sacrifice, a relative of the victims was adamant on stating that this was a case of sacrifice and not merely murder. In Guwahati, officials found the headless body of a woman at the Kamakhya temple in June of this year. During a preliminary probe, police recovered 'puja items' from near the woman's body. A red thread and an earthen lamp were also found near the body
