Kerala engineering student who went missing found dead near campus

Kerala engineering student who went missing found dead near campus

Shyan Padmanabhan, an MTech student at CET had killed himself. Here is a list of helplines.

news Suicide

Kerala police have confirmed that the 27-year-old MTech student Shyan Padmanabhan’s death was a case of suicide. Shyan had gone missing on July 8, and was found dead in a secluded area in University of Kerala’s Karyavattom campus on Monday. He was a student of the College of Engineering Trivandrum (CET).

Shyan, who hails from Vadakara in Kozhikode, was living with his sister and brother-in-law in Thiruvananthapuram. “He had gone out from the house on July 8 saying he was going to the library. And ever since he went missing, his friends and family were frantically searching for him everywhere,” an investigating officer told TNM.

Police had traced his phone to the Karyavattom campus, and the CCTV footage showed Shyan entering the campus. “We conducted a search then. While his phone was ringing, it was on silent mode,” the police official said.

The body was finally found on Monday when a university staff searched the area after a bad odour started to emit from a secluded portion in the university.

Police had retrieved Shyan’s bag and suicide note from the area. The body was found near an abandoned pond. “It is like a mini forest near the pond, there are many trees and bushes and not many go there. It was because of this his body was not found all these days,” the official said.

According to the police Shyan was depressed. In the suicide note that the police retrieved, Shyan said that he had been battling depression for the past three years. Shyan’s family was also aware of this and he was under medication.

“We think he might have consumed poison, we can only confirm that after the post-mortem report comes,” said the official.

Shyan earlier studied in NIT Calicut and had worked for a while in Bengaluru before joining the post-graduation course in Thiruvananthapuram.

If you or anyone you know is feeling suicidal, or is facing bullying, or require mental health related assistance, consider contacting one of the following:

1. Maithri is a registered non-governmental organisation in Kochi (Cochin), working for suicide prevention in Kerala. According to their website, “The organisation is run by volunteers who lend an understanding ear to any person in distress wanting to talk to another human being, in an atmosphere of respect, trust and confidence. Maithri offers befriending to any person who reaches out for help, whether suicidal or not.”

Contact: 0484-2540530

Website : http://maithrikochin.org/ about_us.htm

2. Chaithram is a non governmental organisation that works as an emotional support centre.

Contact: 0484 2361161

Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/ Chaithram-1179956188704604/

3. DISHA is a 24 hour helpline launched by the health department of Kerala and National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). As per the website, “Trained counselors have been employed to help students manage all stress-related problems during exams and also handle suicide prevention counselling. The helpline has been devised in such a manner that, if required, the calls may be transferred to psychiatrists in Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi or the counselling centres attached to them.”

Contact: 1056

Website: http://disha1056.com/ disha1056inauguration/

Also read: ‘Exorcising’ a ghost to save a pond: Heartwarming story from Kerala University campus
