Cop among six dead in two accidents

RAJKOT: Six persons, including a cop, were killed in two different accidents reported from a village of Jasdan taluka in Rajkot district and a village of Rajkot taluka.The first accident was reported from Rajkot-Bhavnagar Highway near Jangwad village of Jasdan taluka, where five persons were killed when the SUV they were travelling in turned turtle by the roadside early morning on Sunday .The deceased were identified as Lakhman Kuwadia (27), a resident of Kamrej village of Vartej taluka in Bhavnagar district , who was driving the SUV, Rakesh Chawda (23) and his brother Nilesh Chawda (26), both residents of Lakhawad village of Umrada taluka in Bhavnagar district, and Bharat Kerasia (24) and his brother Kalpesh Kerasia (22), both residents of Langara village of Umrada taluka.“It appears that the SUV driver lost control over the steering wheel, resulting in the accident. After overturning three to four times, the SUV fell into a pit by the roadside. The SUV was apparently overspeeding. It is also suspected that the SUV driver dozed off while driving. The accident also left Shailesh Kerasia (27) and Sanjay Kuwadia (28), both residents of Nesada village of Sihor taluka in Bhavnagar district, seriously injured,” said an official from Atkot police station.All the victims are cousin brothers from the same family. They were returning home after attending a marriage function.The case in this connection was registered on the complaint of Mahesh Kerasia, brother of Shailesh.In the second accident, assistant sub-inspector with Rajkot crime branch, was killed after the car he was travelling in had a head-on collision with a truck on Rajkot-Morbi Highway near Kagdadi village of Rajkot taluka early morning on Sunday.The deceased was identified as Jaideepsinh Rana (26). “The truck driver was apparently driving on the wrong side. It rammed into the car. The accident also left Rana’s father Rajendrasinh Rana (56), inspector with Kutch police, Rana’s mother Manchha Rana (51), his sister in-law Dakshaba Rana and his cousin brother Darshansinh Rana injured,” said an official from Kuwadawa Road police station.The victims were returning home after attending a marriage function in Naliya of Kutch district . They were residents of CLF Quarters on Jamnagar Road in Rajkot.
