Lawyer for hit-run driver claims Aussie extradition bid ‘will be dropped’

Speaking outside a Delhi court exclusively to A Current Affair , hit-run driver Puneet Puneet’s lawyer has said they have “a very good case and there are good chances that [they] will win [their] case and extradition will be dropped.”

The claim comes after lawyer Kanhaiya Kumar Singhal said he knew that his offer of a guaranteed two-year sentence in return for Puneet’s extradition to Australia was being “discussed” by Victoria’s Acting Attorney-General Gavin Jennings.

However, the Victorian Attorney-General’s office today confirmed it “does not dictate what sentences courts impose, nor are they able to offer plea deals.”

An extradition bid to return hit-and-run driver Puneet Puneet to Australia could be dropped, his lawyers claim. (A Current Affair)

This back-and-forth discussion between Puneet’s lawyers and the state and federal government has been ongoing since Puneet first fled to India with a friend’s passport while he was facing culpable driving charges in Melbourne.

The charges relate to Puneet fatally striking Dean Hofstee and seriously injuring Clancy Coker while he was driving at 150km/hr in a 60km/hr zone with a blood alcohol reading three times the legal limit in 2008.

Student Dean Hofstee was killed in the crash. (A Current Affair)

It’s been 11 years since Puneet pleaded guilty to those charges in Melbourne, and international law expert Donald Rothwell believes he won’t be returning to Australia anytime soon.

“Extradition cases, not only in India but around the world can drag out for a considerable period of time … and this one has all the hallmarks of one that's going to continue to drag out before the Indian courts,” he said.

Puneet’s case has angered many in the Melbourne community, including 3AW broadcaster Neil Mitchell, who believes Peter and Fran Hofstee, Dean’s parents, are the ultimate victims and have suffered more pain as this trial has dragged out.

“It's desperately unfair on the victim's family, I don't think this bloke cares about fairness, you know he's killed somebody, he was speeding, he was drunk, he left the country, they had a party for him before he left the country, he's conned us all the way along the line,” Mitchell said.
