After Karisma, Malaika Arora Steps In As A Judge For ‘Dance India Dance’

Dance India Dance has been making news all thanks to Kareena Kapoor Khan and her debut number on television. The actress is a celebrity judge on the show and everything from her rapport with the other judges (Bosco Martis and Raftaar) to her impromptu dance moves--remember when she recreated husband Saif Ali Khan’s iconic, Ole Ole from Yeh Dillagi!?

After Karisma Kapoor Malaika Arora steps in as a judge on DID

However, despite being a hit on the show, the actress is finding it hard to keep up with the hectic schedule. Bebo, who is in London right now, shooting for a film, has to keep flying to Mumbai each week for her shoot. A few weeks ago, the actress got her sister, Karisma Kapoor to step in and be the judge for one episode. Lolo was a clear hit and we got major nostalgic feels with her shaking a leg and recreating the iconic ‘Dance of Envy’ from her hit film Dil Toh Pagal Hai.

Now we hear the actress has turned to good friend Malaika Arora to step in as a judge for her. Like Karisma, we are sure Malaika will be a big hit as well, considering she’s already been a celebrity judge on two reality shows, Nach Baliye and India's Got Talent.

What would be an ultimate treat for the audience would be to see all three of them come together to judge the finale episode. However, until someone makes that happen, we are happy to see Malaika back on our TV screens.

Kareena is the highest-paid celebrity judge on TV right now

Bebo is rumoured to be the highest-paid celebrity judge on TV. On being questioned about the big paycheck she was taking home, Kareena, in an interview with a leading daily, said, “You need to put a lot of hard work, especially on television. So definitely, the pay package has to be a good amount. And when a male judge can get it, why not a female judge? Also, it's the first time that a mainstream actress has forayed into TV and a dance reality show at this point in her career. So, I think I have gotten what I completely deserve for the hours I will put in.”

On the work front, Kareena is currently shooting for Homi Adajania’s Angrezi Medium starring Irrfan. She has wrapped up the shoot of Good News co-starring Akshay Kumar, Kiara Advani, and Diljit Dosanjh and will soon start work on Karan Johar’s period drama, Takht, co-starring Ranveer Singh, Janhvi Kapoor, Vicky Kaushal, and Bhumi Pednekar.
