PM Narendra Modi expresses ‘anguish’ over Mumbai building collapse, extends condolences to victims’ kin

Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights 12 people were killed in building collapse in Dongri on Tuesday Rescue operations were underway as at least 40 people were trapped under debris PM Modi expressed anguish over the tragic incident

Mumbai/New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi expressed “anguish” over the unfortunate incident of building collapse in Dongri in Mumbai on Tuesday, in which at least 12 people were killed and 40 others were trapped in the debris.

In a tweet shared on the official account of Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), the Prime Minister expressed condolences to the families of the victims who died in the tragedy.

PM Modi said, “Collapse of a building in Mumbai’s Dongri is anguishing. My condolences to the families of those who lost their lives. I hope the injured recover soon. Maharashtra Government, NDRF and local authorities are working on rescue operations and assisting those in need.”

A four-storey building in Mumbai’s Dongri collapsed at around 11 am today, with the narrow lanes leading to the building making it difficult for the rescue teams to bring heavy machinery to the site.

Collapse of a building in Mumbai’s Dongri is anguishing. My condolences to the families of those who lost their lives. I hope the injured recover soon. Maharashtra Government, NDRF and local authorities are working on rescue operations & assisting those in need: PM @narendramodi — PMO India (@PMOIndia) July 16, 2019

Three teams of NDRF, fire brigade and Disaster Management Team and senior officials of MCGM were present at the spot to execute the rescue operation.

In a letter dated August 7, 2017, the BMC had stated that the Kesarbhai building - which collapsed today - was classified as 'C1', to be evacuated for demolition at the earliest. "In the event any mishap this office won't be responsible," the letter had stated.

However, RTI activist Shakeel Ahmed told Times Now that the Dongri building had not been listed as “dangerous” by either the BMC or the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority (MHADA) till at least five years ago, and hence residents had continued to live in the 100-year-old dilapidated building till now.

On the other hand, the two civic bodies – BMC and MHADA – indulged in blame-game shortly after the building collapse. While the BMC claimed that the building was owned by MHADA which was responsible for its repairs, the MHADA shifted the blame on the builder of the structure.

Speaking on this, Uday Samant, MHADA chairman, told Times Now, "We had given the responsibility to repair the buildings in the area to a contractor but no development work was done between 2012 and 2019... We do take the blame and whoever within MHADA is responsible for it, we will take strict action against them.”

Meanwhile, Maharashtra Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis said that a probe has been ordered into the incident. He told reporters, “As per the initial information I have received, around 15 families are feared trapped in the collapse. The building is around 100 yrs old. The entire focus is on rescuing the people trapped. An investigation will be done.”
