Opposition slams Uttar Pradesh govt over law and order

The opposition parties have accused the Yogi Adityanath government of failing to curb lawlessness in Uttar Pradesh after a Vishwa Hindu Parishad (VHP) and a Samajwadi Party (SP) leader were shot dead in two separate incidents in Pratapgarh and Ayodhya respectively.

Thirty-eight-year-old Om Mishra, VHP president of the Kunda tehsil and a lawyer by profession was gunned down in Pratapgarh on Monday morning when he was riding his motorbike.

Immediately after the incident, local lawyers and residents carried out a protest demanding action against the accused.

The police have registered an FIR and efforts are being made to arrest the perpetrators who have still not been identified.

Meanwhile, the superintendent of police (SP) of Pratapgarh has been attached to the director general of police's office. Senior Superintendent of Police Special Task Force (SSP STF) Abhishek Singh has been made police chief of the district.

In Ayodhya, local SP leader Akhilesh Yadav was shot dead in the Maharajganj area on July 15 while on his way to the gym. His family members have blamed three local people responsible for the incident.

Local SP workers also staged a protest outside the district hospital demanding action and claimed that the murder took place due to political vendetta.

Speaking to the media, SP leader and former state minister Tej Narain Pandey said, "There is jungle raj in UP and our party workers are being killed across the state. We demand strict action against those responsible for the murder."

Superintendent of Police (SP) Ayodhya Vijay Pal Singh said: "Crime has been committed by bike-borne assailants. Immediately after the incident Akhilesh was taken to the hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. Investigation is on."

Voices of protest

Speaking to India Today TV, UP Congress leader Dwijendra Tripathi said "UP CM says that criminals have disappeared from the state after the police started carrying out encounters but the situation is completely different. Lawlessness is increasing everyday and cops are failing to take action against the perpetrators. People are being killed mercilessly in broad day light and those responsible for such crimes are being given a free hand by the government."

Pragatisheel Samajwadi Party (PSP) leader CP Rai said, "Increasing incidents of crime against women and young children is a major concern and now people are being murdered on streets. The government and top police officers only make tall claims of taking strict action against the criminals but nothing is being done on the ground. "

Responding to the opposition, state cabinet minister and government spokesperson Srikant Sharma said "In both Pratapgarh and Ayodhya, the police have formed teams to nab the perpetrators and soon they will be behind bars. Our government will not tolerate any criminal activity. We will continue to take action against those taking law in their hands."




