'Happily married man' hit by train hours after returning from a family holiday

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up to get the latest Burton news in a daily email bulletin

A man who died after being struck by a train hours after returning from a family holiday from India has been described as 'happily married'.

Stuart Tooth left his work at midday on the day he returned after his holiday.

An inquest heard how the 51-year-old man walked for two hours before stopping near to the former Norton Railway Bridge between Stafford and Stoke-on-Trent.

He then killed himself by moving into the path of a Liverpool-to-Birmingham train, Stoke-on-TrentLive reports.

In a statement, his wife said Mr Tooth had no history of depression, was a happy man and they had a great time on holiday. She has since found out that he had a degree of debt on credit cards, which may possibly have been a reason for his actions.

PC Paul Simmons, from British Transport Police, told the inquest the train was travelling south along the tracks at the time.

"It had four carriages, weighed 160 tons and was electrically powered so there was no engine sound," he said. “The driver stopped at Crewe and the next stop was Stafford.

"They had been travelling for 15 minutes, with a line speed of 110 miles per hour, when they approached the area. The driver saw a figure running towards the tracks.

“They applied the brakes, but had no time to sound the horn. They came to a stop half-a-mile further along."

Mr Tooth died instantly following the impact.

“In searching the area, a black rucksack was found on a footpath nearby," added PC Simmons.

"A note was inside from Stuart to his business partner, saying he was resigning and relinquishing rights to his printing business.

“A driver’s licence in the bag identified Stuart. Fingerprints compared to those taken from his home also confirmed his identity.

“It is not known how he gained access to the tracks, but all fencing is compliant and no extra measures were needed.

“The death was not suspicious, no third person was involved and we believe he was not trying to cross the tracks. There was no suicide note left, but the letter appears to be sorting out his affairs.”

South Staffordshire coroner Andrew Haigh recorded a conclusion of suicide.

He said: “I made a check with local mental health services and he wasn’t known to them. There was also nothing of significance in his medical records from his GP.

“Stuart was only 51 when he died - not an old age at all - and was a happily married family man. Stuart returned from holiday with his family from India that morning.

“He resigns from work and walks to the area, known to him from having fished there, where he moved to position himself in front of a train that could not have possibly stopped.

“No post mortem was needed as cause of death is clear from the circumstances. The investigation concludes there was no third party involved in this death and subsequently we became aware that Stuart did have debt and that provides a probable reason."
