90 Day Fiance The Other Way Episode Recap: Chickening Out

On last night’s episode of 90 Day Fiance The Other Way, we finally got to see the backlash from Relapse Ronnie’s bachelor party. I have to admit I was underwhelmed by Tiffany Franco’s reaction to Ronald Smith’s confession. Corey takes several losses not only during this episode, but in his relationship in general. His first “L” is for leaving everything for a conniving EVIL woman. The second “L” is leaving his comfortable lifestyle for a life he may never adapt to in that small town. Lastly, and most important Evelin’s entire family knows Corey gave up everything for a woman who DOESN’T want to marry him. Whew, Chile the naivety of it all. SMH…

Despite Evelin being so evil, her grandmother is sweet as pie. She takes Corey to a chicken farm shack to pick out a fresh chicken for dinner. Corey freaks out when he sees the proprietor of the business decapitate and skin the chicken in front of him. Evelin is embarrassed that Corey was upset watching the chicken killed. Ugh… what did she want him to do, laugh? She knows where he is from he goes to the grocery store and doesn’t take part in the processing fresh meat.

Corey, 31 (Mill A, Washington) & Evelin, 26 (Ecuador)

Evelin’s brother is turning thirteen and the family is having a party. Corey is nervous because he knows Evelin expects him to impress her family. Her father asks Corey if he plans to marry his daughter. Corey wants to marry her for some reason, but replies the only problem is Evelin. Duh!

In an attempt to entertain the guests, Corey decides to do some magic tricks. He lights a card on fire and uses the ashes to guess the card that was picked. Little did he know, this would be perceived as black magic by the guests. Evelin didn’t even attempt to explain to her family that magic tricks are fun in America and don’t represent anything sinister. Poor Corey. Good luck living in this small town. I would have gone running for the hills when I arrived at a house with no roof or shower. I don’t know how you move somewhere and have no idea of societal norms.

Laura, 51 (Eustis, Florida) & Aladin, 29 (Qatar)

Laura Jallali has finally made it to Qatar. She is extremely worried about how she will be received by her husband. Aladin Jallali shows up with flowers in hand excitedly waving at his bride. Insert eye roll emoji. The two haven’t seen each other in six months. He even points out that she has gained weight since he last saw her.

Ummm… I highly doubt she was skinny six months ago. Chile, please. I don’t care what Aladin says, I find it hard to believe his intentions are pure. Actually, replace “hard to believe” with “I don’t believe it at all.”

Laura is excited to finally be with her husband. But she is worried about the roaches who resided in Aladin’s last home. Upon seeing her new living quarters, she isn’t impressed at all. If I was moving to another country, you would have to send me pictures and do a video walkthrough of the home. There would be no way I would wait until I get there to learn very important details. After complaining about virtually everything she demands “jiggy-jiggy.” Ewww…

The thought of Laura and Aladin getting it on in a roach infested apartment is enough to make me lose my dinner. Laura’s sexcapades during every episode are getting out of hand!

Deavan, 22 (Salt Lake City, Utah) & Jihoon, 29 (South Korea)

It’s another day and Deavan Clegg still looks dazed and confused. SMH… I have never seen an adult look so disheveled on an everyday basis. Deavan takes Jihoon Lee and his parents sightseeing. Fortunately for everyone, little Drascilla is home with her grandmother and missing the fun. Jihoon Lee’s parents ask Deavan if she will miss her family if she moves to Korea. She admits that she worries more about her daughter not being able to see them. Something tells me Drascilla will be in their heart, but they will find a way to get over it.

Deavan decides to bite the bullet and asks Jihoon’s parents if they will give her their blessing to be married. After a short deliberation, Jihoon’s parents welcome Deavan into their family. They even tell her they like Drascilla and not to worry about her. Sure, until she wreaks havoc on their lives and small home in Korea.

Tiffany, 27 (Frederick, Maryland) & Ronald, 29 (South Africa)

Ronald came home and told Tiffany everything that took place at his party. He basically broke every single rule she gave him. He even had the nerve to say that he only thought of Tiffany while a stripper danced on him. Umm… all signs point to NO.

He sure looked like he was thinking of everything besides Tiffany and his 12 steps. Tiffany decides to confront Ronald the next day and express her disappointment. She feels like because of his addiction trust is extremely important. Well… maybe you should have made him rebuild your trust BEFORE rushing into marrying him. I just can’t imagine being so naive and delusional.

On one hand, I think it must be an easy life to just believe anything people tell you. Then I think I will take JADED for 200, Alex! Just wait until Tiffany sees the footage of this party.

Jenny, 60 (Palm Springs, California) & Sumit, 30 (India)

Sumit is finally taking Jenny out on the town to meet with friends. He is still afraid to tell his parents about his live-in girlfriend. Sumit’s friends offer to go with him to his parent’s home for moral support. His friends actually seem mature. They feel Sumit is being selfish by hiding Jenny after all she has given up for him. I agree!

While they are dining, Sumit confronts a man who is making fun of Jenny. Jenny doesn’t seem fazed by the heckler. She understands that they will have naysayers and is fine ignoring them. I am actually happy to see Sumit stand his ground. The next step is to do the same with his family. Even his friends don’t think it’s right that Jenny has sacrificed everything to be hidden away in India.

Jenny and Sumit go see an immigration lawyer to get more information on the process to get married. They find out that the notice will go to Sumit’s permanent address, which is his parent’s home. He is shocked that his parents would be able to object to the marriage. Jenny has an emotional breakdown thinking that she could be forced to leave her man. She has invested a lot of time into her relationship and doesn’t want anything to come between them.

As much as I talk about these two, I actually think they care about each other. I also believe Sumit doesn’t mind his life being enhanced from their relationship. He claims he will do anything he has to do to make their relationship work. I guess we will have to wait until next week if that involves actually confronting his parents.

TELL US – WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT JIHOON’S PARENTS’ BLESSING? WILL COREY EVER ADAPT TO HIS NEW LIFE IN ECUADOR? WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT LAURA’S NEW HOME? DO YOU THINK SUMIT WILL FINALLY CONFRONT HIS PARENTS ABOUT HIS RELATIONSHIP WITH JENNY? WHICH 90 DAY FIANCE THE OTHER WAY COUPLE IS YOUR FAVORITE?

[Photo Credit: TLC]
