Heavy rains to hit normal life in Kerala, Punjab, Haryana, Bihar; Telangana faces drought

Monsoon rains have wreaked havoc across India | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights In Assam, more than 45 lakh have been affected due to floods with over a lakh of people taking refuge in 226 relief camps In Bihar, 25 have been killed with over 26 lakh being affected IMD has predicted heavy rains in Kerala, Punjab, Haryana, and Bihar in the next couple of days.

New Delhi: Monsoon rains have wreaked havoc across India with flooding, and landslides, being reported from several states. While 33 districts in Assam are under the grip of deluge, 25 have died in Bihar with approximately 26 lakhs spread over 12 districts being affected by the flood-like situation. Normal life in northern states of Punjab and Haryana has also been thrown out of gear with incessant rains since the past few days, increasing the water level of several rivers close to the danger mark.

And even in this rain fury, there are states like Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and the national capital - New Delhi - that are witnessing inadequate rainfall.

In Assam, more than 45 lakh have been affected due to floods with over a lakh of people taking refuge in 226 relief camps. As many as 562 distribution centres have been set up for providing relief to the affected people, as per Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA). The situation has become grim in areas such as Kaziranga, Kharguli and Bharalamukh where large areas of land have been inundated, causing men and animals alike to move to other places.

In Bihar, 25 have been killed with over 26 lakh being affected, prompting the government to set up 221 relief camps and run 700 open community kitchens. Chief Minister Nitish Kumar along with Chief Secretary and other officials are conducted aerial surveys of the flooded areas.

In the northern states of Punjab and Haryana, Bathinda and Ambala are bearing the brunt of heavy rains, with the joint capital Chandigarh receiving continuous rains since the last few weeks. Water levels of rivers like Badi Nadi and Ghaggar have risen close to the danger mark. Among other places, Karnal and Hisar also received heavy rains since the last few days.

Down south, the India Meteorological Department has predicted extremely heavy rains in the coming days for Kerala, with a red alert being issued for state's six districts. The state weatherman has issued warnings for Idukki, Malappuram, Wayanad, Kannur, Ernakulam and Thrissur districts.

Meanwhile, Opposition parties in Telangana have urged Chandrasekhar government to provide relief to farmers and others in view of inadequate rainfall in the state this season. Several leaders have demanded that a special session of the Assembly be convened to discuss the 'drought' like situation being faced by the people of the state.


