Century-old house takes lives in Mumbai

Century-old house takes lives in Mumbai 11 dead in collapse, glare on cave-ins

| Mumbai | Published 16.07.19, 08:41 PM

At least 11 people were killed when a century-old, unauthorised four-storey residential building collapsed in south Mumbai’s Dongri on Tuesday, trapping over 40 people under the debris in an area whose narrow and congested lanes made rescue efforts difficult. It was the second such collapse around Mumbai in less than 15 days. On July 2, a rain-triggered wall collapse had killed 24 people. Torrential rains that lash Mumbai during the monsoon often destabilise older or badly constructed structures and this has led to multiple collapses over the years.

Advertisement

“We don’t know exactly how many, but with the input provided by neighbours, we estimate more than 40 could be trapped,” said a civic official. Maharashtra chief minister Devendra Fadnavis said the Kausarbaug building, located in a bustling narrow lane in Tandel Street, was around 100 years old and housed 10 to 15 families. It was not on the list of dilapidated buildings and had been given to a developer for redevelopment, the chief minister said. Housing minister Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil had said earlier that 12 people had been killed in the 11.40am collapse. According to a Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) mayor Vishwanath Mahadeshwar, the municipal commissioner will probe the building cave-in. TV channels showed dramatic visuals of a child, wrapped in a cloth bundle, being carried out of the debris by rescue workers. The child is alive, officials said. The BMC has opened a shelter at Imamwada Municipal Secondary Girls’ School for the residents of the building, a civic official said. “A team of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) is reaching the spot. We are assuming that 10 to 12 families are still under the debris,” Mumbadevi MLA Amin Patel told reporters at the spot earlier in the day. The building was unauthorised, officials of the Maharashtra Housing and Area Development Authority said, adding that it was not under its supervision.
