Pakistan injecting counterfeit INR through multiple routes

Muzaffar Ahmad Noori Bajwa

Inter-Service Intelligence (ISI) of Pakistan has actively been involved in infiltration in India through different means.

ISI is Pakistan’s secret intelligence agency. Since India’s partition, Pakistan’s efforts in dismantling India’s progressive plans are furiously somehow, effective.

Pakistan has been ranked no.1 among world’s top intelligence agencies. ISI is ranked one due to its infiltration in other countries.

ISI has been playing a very secretive role in creating disturbing within India.

ISI formed in 1948 right after the Indo-Pak separation makes Pakistan’s intentions very clear towards the intelligence of its neighboring states.

ISI used various means to infiltrate India. Targeted bombings, killings of top influential leaders, and creating a disturbance among the economic sector of India are a few tactics ISI use.

ISI and Fake Indian Currency

Various sources reveal that in 2018 the circulation of Indian fake currency was no less than 400 crores (INR). After demonetization in 2016, these figures are reportedly not changed.

Econo-Jihad

Different terrorist groups around the globe use different tactics to please their politico-religious agendas. Econo-Jihad or Economic Jihad is one of the most important fronts of jihadist groups nowadays. Econo-Jihad is a silent killer for any nation. Pakistan’s ISI has opted this method of war to target the growing Indian economy.

Pakistan – a terrorist state

Since Pakistan’s separation, it has been playing its card of Jihad among Muslims. Early jihadist groups including radical Islamist wings within Pakistan started their religious agenda of Jihad against other non-muslim states.

The state of Pakistan sponsored many terrorist attacks in India. Taliban is the begotten child of Pakistan born out of radical thought of so-called ‘Jihad’.

Numerous times Indian authorities confirmed the involvement of Pakistan’s ISI in several bombings and killings in India.

The latest Pulwama terrorist attack is among the top of the list. Involvement of Jaish-e-Mohammed terror outfit is an example of Pakistan’s involvement in terror attacks on Indian soil.

Jaish-e-Mohammad is Pakistan based terrorist outfit sponsored by the government of Pakistan.

The Kandahar Hijack of Indian Airlines Flight 814 commonly known as IC 814 was a failure of Indian intelligence. This hijack made India pay a huge price.

Masood Azhar, chief of Jaish-e-Mohammad was released against the return of IC 814.

Terrorism & Pakistani Jihad against infidel states

Pakistan is a frontrunner is notorious jihadist activities around the world and particularly in Asia.

Many radical groups were formed right after the separation of Pakistan. Within the state of Pakistan, these radical Islamist groups played very significantly to spread the understanding of Jihad as understood by radical groups like Barelwi and Deobandi school of thoughts within Islam.

According to the top scholars of both Barelwi and Deobandi sects, it is a religious obligation of Muslims to spread their religion by means of force.

Taliban and ISIS are the products developed by these radical thoughts. Jamaat-e-Islami is the main source of funding and training many other child terrorist outfits. These child terror outfits are operational within and outside Pakistan.

Barelwi and Deobandi understanding of Jihad

Both Barelwi and Deobandi including Jamaat-e-Islami believe that the religion cannot dominate until you impose the war upon kaafirs (infidels).

They believe that offer your religion to infidels. If they accept then treat them equal otherwise impose war on them.

Role of Jamaat-e-Islami in spreading Jihad

They believe those who denounce Islam are murtad (rejected). According to them, these people are to be killed.

This thought revoked huge riots among Ahmadi Muslims in Pakistan. During 1953 such a riot is witnessed against Ahmadiyya Muslims in Pakistan. Thousands of Ahmadis are butchered and ransacked.

Hindus in Pakistan are not safe. Every day there are reports of forced conversions, beating, lynching and looting by radical Islamists in the country.

According to a false understanding of Jamaat-e-Islami, the wealth of non-muslims is legally permissible for Muslims to loot.

Khatm-e-Nabuwat group backed by Jamaat-e-Islami is the root cause of terrorism around the world today.

Again in 1974, these riots are revoked by the radical Islamist leaders in Pakistan. 1974 Anti-Ahmadiyya riots are the resultant due to the declaration of Ahmadis as non-muslims in Pakistan’s constitution.

The amendment of the constitution was purely the effort of Jamaat-e-Islami and it’s an alliance.

Christians in Pakistan face serious persecution too among other minority communities. A notorious case of Asia Bibi is one among many.

Many churches in Pakistan are burnt or converted forcefully to mosques.

Dawood Ibrahim and his D-Company

Dawood was a well known notorious gangster in Mumbai. During the 1980s and 1990s, Dawood was the biggest name in the Bombay underworld.

Involvement of Dawood and his gang in the series of crimes is not merely a coincidence.

Dawood Ibrahim is top of the listed terrorists in the world. Dawood fled India right after the serial bomb blasts in Mumbai in 1993.

Extortions, kidnappings, murders, smuggling of Gold and narcotics are few of Dawood’s D-Company’s businesses in India. Many of D-Company’s cohorts are still actively operating these businesses in India.

Dawood Ibrahim, ISI, and Counterfeit Currency Network

After a huge success in Narco-Jihad, Dawood became a prime mastermind for ISI to infiltrate India.

Dawood Ibrahim’s strong network in India makes him one of the most demanded among the rivals of the Indian state.

Now, since 2018 Lok sabha elections, Pakistan is infiltrating India through econo-jihad.

As reported the 2019 Lok Sabha elections were the most expensive polls in the world. Estimated Rs. 50’000 crores equivalent to $7 Billion are spent during elections.

ISI grasped the opportunity and pumped millions of counterfeit currency notes in India.

ISI is still in progress and pushing millions through Jammu & Kashmir border, and Nepal borders.

It has been reported by some secret sources that Astha, a newly formed terror funding outfit, is involved in money laundering and fake currency network in India and Bangladesh.

Terror outfit Astha in collaboration with Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh is sourcing sleeper cells to ISI within India.

Astha and Jamaat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB) has been funding madrassas in India for a long time now. West Bengal is their new home of terror activities.

Astha has already established strong ties with ULFA in India.

A top commander of ULFA, Paresh Baruah is planning crucial terror moves within India. Paresh Baruah is a fugitive terrorist now living a posh life in Britain.

Tamilnadu; A new home of fake currency network

After the success of terror attacks in Sri Lanka, now Tamilnadu is becoming a new infiltration point for fake currency operations. Pakistan’s ISI is now pumping counterfeit currency in India through Sri Lanka to disturb the growth of the Indian economy.

Punjab; a place for Narco-Jihad and Econo-Jihad

Punjab is the only state in India which is most vulnerable towards both kinds of terror activities. Since the 1980s, Punjab is the biggest victim of Narco-Jihad.

The terrorist attack on a military base in Pathankot revealed many loose ends. ISI has strong connections in Punjab.

Its no doubt that due to the narcotics supply network, ISI has crucial links with some top names in Punjab. This makes Punjab most vulnerable to both kinds of terrorist activities.

Some radical Sikhs in Punjab are getting regular support from Pakistan for a separate state. Radical Sikh groups are demanding separation of Punjab from India called Khalistan.

During the 1960s,1970s, and 1980s, Pakistan provided full support to the separatists of Punjab in India.

Indian authorities are already keeping very close eyes on these border states.

Muzaffar Ahmed Bajwa is the Editor of The Eastern Herald
