Locals saw chunks of building fall before it crashed

MUMBAI: Maharashtra housing minister Radhakrishna Vikhe Patil confirmed the building, which collapsed in the city's Dongri area on Tuesday, was illegal. He said officials from both BMC and Mhada should be held responsible for letting it come up.Around 11.40am, Mumbai Fire Brigade received the first call about Kesarbai Mansion crashing. Initial reports indicated over a dozen people trapped in the debris. Eight fire engines, ambulances and rescue vans were sent to the site while NDRF was also mobilised.Local civic ward officials and police officers soon cordoned off the area. Narrow congested lanes hampered operations as rescuers found it difficult to navigate easily in the area. Chief Fire Officer PS Rahangdale said residents were unable to tell his men the exact numbers of those trapped. "Efforts were made to pull out as many people as possible alive. However, we needed to get into the debris very carefully.''Locals said they did see some chunks of the building falling before the crash. Firdoz Salmani, a 2nd floor resident who was injured in the collapse, said, "As pieces began to crumble, we realised something was wrong and began to run . But it had already begun to collapse, and we were trapped."Many people cried helplessly when they could not find their loved ones. Mussarat Menon came from Mazgaon searching for her sister and nephew. She said, "My sister had just shifted to the building around a year ago. While her husband has been removed safely, she and her son cannot be traced." Late on Tuesday evening, municipal commissioner Praveen Pardeshi visited the site and said his immediate priority was to rescue the trapped people.Safdar Karmali, trustee of Dharamsay Khakoo Charitable and Religious Trust which owned the building, said, "I became the trustee in 2002, the building was constructed prior to that. Those days, people used their influence to erect structures without permission. I and the trust are not responsible for it."
