Morning digest: Assembly bypoll in Haryana's Jind, Finance Minister to meet heads of public sector banks, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day

Strongly defending the recent constitutional amendment to create 10% reservation in jobs and education for economically weaker sections (EWS), Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Sunday alleged that certain self-centred forces in Tamil Nadu were trying to create an atmosphere of suspicion and mistrust among people on the new quota.

Around 1.7 lakh people in Haryana's Jind assembly constituency are set to exercise their franchise amid tight security arrangements on Monday to decide on the political fortunes of 21 candidates in fray in a high-stakes election being held just months before the Lok Sabha and Vidhan Sabha polls due later this year. The counting of votes will be taken up on January 31.

The Union Cabinet is expected to soon approve a relief package for farmers grappling with falling prices of their crops and to tackle distress in the farm sector, according to sources. The likely relief package is seen as an attempt to assuage the farming community’s discontent ahead of the general elections.

Finance Minister Piyush Goyal will meet the CEOs of public sector banks (PSBs) on Monday to take stock of the banking sector, and discuss ways to improve their financial health, sources said. The meeting comes three days ahead of the Budget 2019-20, the last from this government before the general elections expected to be held in April-May.

A woman in Indian society does not like to be provoked by being called a ‘prostitute.’ It is not murder but culpable homicide if she reacts to such a slur with deadly force, the Supreme Court held in a judgment.

Despite the looming general election, India should take serious note of the implications of the latest round of Taliban-U.S. talks that ended on Sunday, experts said here. The talks are expected to resume in February but former diplomats said India should watch out of the proxy masters of the Taliban in the Pakistani military establishment.

Five-time winner Viswanathan Anand and Vidit Gujarati signed peace in 30 moves in the 13th and final round to finish fifth and sixth in the Tata Steel Masters chess tournament here on Sunday. Magnus Carlsen (9) won the title for a record seventh time with a 30-move draw with runner-up Anish Giri (8.5).

Last week, Anand Menon, a professor of politics at King’s College London, won plaudits on social media for his no-nonsense performance on Question Time, a popular BBC political show, and his blunt explanation of what a no-deal Brexit entails. ”It means that all the laws governing our interaction with the EU — whether you can fly, whether you can shop, whether you can trade, whether you can travel — cease to exist,” he said.

On January 17, the Supreme Court struck down several statutory provisions and rules governing Maharashtra’s dance bars. This decision forms part of an iterative game that has evolved over 14 years between the Maharashtra government and the courts.

Paulo Machado’s 29th-minute strike enabled Mumbai City FC to hand Bengaluru FC its first defeat in 12 matches in this edition of the Indian Super League here on Sunday. The result lifted the home side to the top spot from second place.
