Why I’ll Never Go on a Mission Trip Again

Why I’ll Never Go on a Mission Trip Again

Credit: Gabriel Perez/Getty Images

I grew up in a mostly White church, where a mission trip was a rite of passage. To fund a trip, we’d raise money through car washes, bake sales, or bottle drives. We prayed. We wrote letters to relatives asking for money. We believed we were being called by God to travel to poor countries and bring the gospel to Black and Brown people.

My first mission was in the summer of 2001. I had just graduated high school, and I traveled to Haiti for a week with a group of teens from my church. One afternoon, our group set out to Neply, a small village neighboring Leogane. Both villages were separated by a rocky dirt road that characterized most of the roads in Haiti. We piled into the back of an old Isuzu truck, and as we jostled past the palm leaf thatched houses, the Haitian children came out to wave at us. Some wore no shoes. Other wore no pants, dusty penises peeking out from neon t-shirts.

Someone ripped into a bag of candy, throwing it behind the truck, leaving a trail of junk food in our wake. As we crept along, more children came out of their homes. We heard frantic howling as the kids fought over the small pieces of candy. I laughed, watching more kids scurry behind the truck, grabbing at the cheap candy. I dug my hand into the bag and threw some candy out like birdseed to hungry pigeons. They hungrily scraped at the dirt, reaching up at us to throw more. Until we reached a curve.

The poor people around us were simply there to help us appreciate our lives back home. They became props in our journey to fulfillment.

A boy stood in front of his home, watching the truck come around the corner. When he saw the candy, his eyes lit up. He reached out to begin sprinting towards the truck, but just as he was going to take his first step, a hand came down on his shoulder. His father, I presume, held him back, fighting against his tiny jerks. The man turned to him and said something I couldn’t hear or understand. When he looked back at us, his face was a mixture of anger and disgust. In a few seconds, I had been taught a lesson about dignity.

That day, it was easy for us to think that we were doing good. Had that father not reached out to stop his son, it would have been an otherwise unremarkable event. That father shamed me that afternoon, made me question my good deed. I sat on the edge of the truck, thinking about that look, bumping along until we reached our destination.
