Two years on, hope fades for residents of collapsed Ghatkopar building

Siddhi Sai building collapsed

Shiv Sena worker Sunil Shitap

BMC

Sanyam Realtors Pvt Ltd

Bombay High Court

A year-old child and a three-month-old were among the 17 people killed when Siddhi Sai building crashed on July 25, 2017

Residents find their plot size has shrunk; some still paying home loan EMIs and rent.Whenin Ghatkopar’s Damodar Nagar two years ago, Darshan Doshi’s father, 57-year-old Rajesh Doshi, was trapped in the debris, and miraculously survived.“Nothing has changed for us since that morning of July 25, 2017, when our world came crashing down. We lost everything, and two years on, we haven’t managed to rebuild our life or our homes,” says Darshan, 28.The Siddhi Sai collapse had killed 16 residents, including a year-old child and a three-monthold baby, and injured 14. A carpenter working in the nursing home on the ground floor of the building, run by, was also killed in the crash.Nearly two years later, residents continue to run from pillar to post to reconstruct the building. Initially, they attended court hearings to ensure that Shitap was not given bail. Shitap, who was chairman of the co-operative society, was found guilty of illegal alterations on the ground floor, where the nursing home was, in aprobe into the incident. He continues to be in jail, and the trial in the case is likely to commence soon.When the residents began collecting documents relating to the building, they discovered the original area of 490 sq m of their plot, 128 C, had shrunk to 357.40 sq m in the suburban collector’s land records as per a 2005 subdivision and amalgamation. They then petitioned Mumbai Suburban Collector Sachin Kurve, and the City Survey Office in Ghatkopar was directed to remeasure the plot.is constructing a project on Plots 128 A and B, exactly opposite Siddhi Sai building; the DP Road on CTS 128 D separates the two plots. In September 2018, the City Survey Office remeasured the plot, CTS 128. As per the report submitted by Dinesh Dhokle, city survey officer, the plot area of 128 C on which Siddhi Sai once stood measured 448.7 sq m, short of the original 490 sq m.The report also stated that Sanyam Realtors’ two plots measured 66.1 sq m and 7.5 sq m less than the 2005 measurement. However, Dhokle gave another report on March 27 this year, stating that if the 2005 realignment order needs to be cancelled, the residents of Siddhi Sai will have to file an appeal with the divisional commissioner, Konkan region.“We approached the suburban collector with the hope that the anomalies in the 2005 subdivision would be corrected. But, now, since the authorities are not doing it, we plan to file a writ petition in the. We have served a notice to the collector,” said Birendra Singh, who also survived the 2017 crash.In their notice to the collector, the residents allege that in the plan Sanyam Realtors’ submitted, the DP Road alignment was shifted to the left, thus reducing Siddhi Sai’s plot area. The notice also blames the collector’s office for not scrutinising and verifying this before sanctioning the realignment.Akshay Jain of Sanyam Realtors denied the allegations. “The city survey report was rejected by the collector on March 26 this year. Our plots, 128 A and B, were not measured by the survey officers and hence there is no question of a mismatch in our plot area. It is unfortunate that the residents are making these allegations. We have the necessary documents that can stand court scrutiny, and they are free to challenge it in court.”Meanwhile, residents continue to fight personal battles. At least two of them, Birendra Singh and Mehul Dongre, who lost his parents, and year-old son in the tragedy, continue to pay home-loan EMIs on their flats.“I have been paying an EMI of Rs 32,000 on my home loan. I had moved to my in-laws’ house in Ghatkopar, but even that building went into redevelopment, and now I am paying rent of Rs 38,000 per month. I requested my bank for a settlement, but its norms do not allow a waiver,” said Dongre, a marketing manager.Lalit Thak, who lost his threemonth-old daughter and wife in the collapse, said “I have managed a home loan settlement with my bank, and that has been a big relief.”
