Bahu Begum's cast visit the Hazrat Nizamuddin Aulia Dargah to seek blessings before promoting their new show

Before starting the promotions for their new show, the cast of Bahu Begum Arjit Taneja , Samiksha Jaiswal and Diana Khan visited the Hazrat Nizamuddin Aulia Dargah to seek blessings and good luck. The actors, who were in the capital for a day, visited the dargah their show Bahu Begum. “It felt auspicious to start our Delhi promotions on such a positive note,” say the actors who were almost mobbed by fans during the surprise visit. From seeking blessings for their show to clicking endless selfies with fans, the actors had a rather busy day out in the city.It was the third time for Delhi boy Arjit at the dargah. “I used to visit this place quite often while I was in school,” he says. Arjit adds, “I visited the dargah after almost 10-12 years and it was such a positive experience.” Samiksha, who shot her first show in Delhi, adds, “I am feeling blessed after my visit. Humne mannat mangi for our show and it was really nice. I have an emotional connection with Delhi because I started shot for my first show here. Ab jab aayi hoon toh I am feeling very emotional about it." Talking about their love for the city, Arjit, who is an alumni of Modern School, Barakhamba Road, shares that Khan Market had been his adda during his school days. “Whenever I come to Delhi, eating chhole bhature from Chache Di Hatti, chaat from Kamla Nagar and Chandni Chowk, and meeting all my friends is usually on my to-do list. This time, I am only here for a day, so I didn’t tell many people about it.”Diana Khan, Arjit Taneja and Samiksha Jaiswal and at Delhi’s Hazrat Nizamuddin Aulia DargahThe team of Bahu Begum shot a few sequences of the show in Bikaner. “I really like shooting in real locations, but because of the heat, we felt like we were melting,” says Arjit. Talking about her character on the show, Diana says, “It is very different from my personality and I am learning a lot from this character.”Diana and Samiksha inside the dargahWhile the actors said yes to the show for its script, the three agree that the TV audience is not very open to new content. Arjit shares, “I don’t think the audience on TV is evolving with the content. TV audience are people from the two and three-tier cities. Aajkal har dusra show supernatural hai. I know that genre is working well so the audience sticks to what they are used to watching on TV. I have said no to a couple of supernatural shows, and I agreed to do this show because of the content only.”Samiksha adds, “I was offered Manmohini when I was doing Zindagi Ki Mehek , but I refused the offer.” Diana, however says, “I would like to do such a show because I am open to trying new things.”Check out our live session with the show’s cast on our Instagram handle https://www.instagram.com/delhi.times/
