Delhi youth caught trying to steal getaway car for murder

Five years of wait, six months of preparations and plan fails because of a simple glitch.

Delhi-resident Ajay Singh's brother was allegedly killed five years ago. He was 15 at the time. Ever since, he has held to desire to avenge his brother's murder.

Now 20, Ajay finally decided to act on it. For the past six months, he planned and plotted to kill his brother’s friend. He listed two juvenile associates to help him carry out his plan.

He even conducted extensive recces to identify the pattern of his target’s movements.

To escape after the murder, Ajay and his associates needed a getaway car. However, procuring one spelled doom for their plan.

According to a report in Times of India, Ajay failed at several car theft attempts, before being caught red handed.

On June 23, Ajay Singh and his two associates kidnapped a businessman along with his Maruti Swift in outer Delhi’s Qutubgarh. They drove towards Haryana and left the businessman tied to a tree in the middle of the night, before fleeing away with his car and Rs 1.1 lakh cash, the TOI report said.

The gang planned to hide the car in colony in Rohtak for a while. However, when they returned to take the car, the locals grew suspicious and chased them away when they failed to show the vehicle’s documents.

Ajay Singh then bought a country-made pistol from the money he had found in the car.

DCP (Rohini) SD Mishra told the newspaper that the gang made three failed carjacking attempts in Bahadurgarh, Sampla and Bawana within a week. Every night, the youths would travel on a motorcycle looking for potential targets to snatch their vehicles.

On Saturday night, Ajay Singh and the two juveniles were intercepted near Karala village by a team led by inspector Ishwar Singh. At that time, they were tailing a car to snatch it, the police said.

Ajay Singh has been sent to judicial custody after being booked for robbery and under sections of Arms Act. His family told police that he had been talking of avenging the death of his elder brother for the past five years.
