Archana Gupta murder case: Delhi Police files charge sheet; accused leader booked for murder

The police officer who prepared the charge sheet has claimed that the disc jockeys (DJs) at the party were allegedly offered Rs 5,000 to wash the blood off the floor. | Photo Credit: Facebook

Key Highlights The 42-year-old architect was shot dead during a New Year's party in January 2019 Police said, the DJs at the party were allegedly offered Rs 5,000 to wash the blood off the floor. The Delhi police in the charge sheet have booked Raju Singh for the murder

New Delhi: The charge sheet in the Archana Gupta murder case has been prepared by the Delhi Police. The 42-year-old architect was shot during a New Year's party in January 2019 allegedly by the former Janata Dal (United) legislator named Raju Singh.

The police officer who prepared the charge sheet has claimed that the disc jockeys (DJs) at the party were allegedly offered Rs 5,000 to wash the blood off the floor. The officer added that when the DJs refused to perform the task, Singh's family members cleaned the floor instead. DJs revelation about the incident has been recorded in their statement and is added in the charge sheet.

According to a report, the police will submit the charge sheet in the court next week. On January 1, during the early hours, Singh who was hosting the New Year party at his farmhouse in South Delhi's Fatehpur Beri area allegedly fired thrice in the air and one of these bullets hit Archana. The deceased was a family friend who later died after being shot.

The report mentioned that an officer privy to the investigation said that 32 witnesses were interrogated during the investigation including DJs present in the party and three members of the Gupta family.

A police officer said that the Singh family offered Rs3000-Rs 5000 to the DJs to wash the blood but they did not accept. They were then asked to leave the premises and instead Raju Singh's wife- Renu Singh, his brother-Rana Rajesh and a friend named Raminder Singh washed the bloodstains off the floor. The officer added that they also picked up the empty cartridges and threw it in the nearby bushes.

However, the Delhi police in the charge sheet have booked Raju Singh for the murder and under the Arms Act, 1959. Meanwhile, his driver Hari Singh has also allegedly fired a shot from Singh's licensed rifle and he has also been booked under the Arms Act for endangering the life of others.
