Tiger attacks, kills labourer accompanying forest rangers on patrol at Corbett Tiger Reserve

The predator in question is yet to be captured (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The attack took place on Tuesday afternoon, said officials Forest rangers found the victim's half-eaten body on the same night Corbett tigers are now attacking and eating elephants: Report

Dehradun: In a tragic incident which has come to light from Ramnagar area of Uttarakhand, a daily wage labourer was mauled to death by a tiger on Tuesday within the limits of the Corbett Tiger Reserve. Identified as Sohan Singh Rawat, the victim was patrolling the area along with forest department rangers when the big cat pounced on him.

Field Director (CTR) Rahul said that the incident took place on Monday afternoon when the predatory cat took the party by surprise. The tiger grabbed Rawat by the neck and dragged him to a hilltop before rangers could take stock of the attack, he added. A search operation was launched and led officials to the daily wage labourer's half-eaten body in the late hours of Tuesday. The victim was a resident of Sendhikhla region in the state's Pauri district.

In June of this year, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change sought a reply from the Uttarakhand Forest Department over a study by Corbett national park authorities which suggested that tigers were killing and eating elephants at the park which features as one of the most popular wildlife tourist spots in India. The study had revealed that nine tigers, 21 elephants and six leopards were found dead at Corbett Tiger Reserve between 2014 and May 31, 2019.

Recently, officials at CTR decided to give a green signal to the electronic eye surveillance of tigers at the facility. The decision was taken with an objective to better wildlife management and habitat monitoring. For this purpose, eight GPS-enabled digital infrared thermal surveillance cameras were installed from Ramnagar to Kalagarh covering any suspicious activity within an area of 400 square km. These cameras will be connected with the central room 24/7 through WiMAX. Any out-of-place activity will then trigger awarning which will be sent out to officials in the form of alerts.

In a similar incident which came to light from Maharashtra earlier this month, a woman died as the result of a suspected tiger attack in Chandrapur district. A resident of Jambarla village, the woman had gone to collect firewood along with a group of other local women when the big cat pounced on her. This was the sixteenth such incident to have come to light from the Chandrapur district in recent months where the man-animal conflict escalated to an extent where a tiger attacked locals. The forest department also issued an advisory for residents, asking them to move in groups and avoid leaving their homes at night.
