Odisha Girl Student’s Murder Mystery Solved As Accused Surrenders

Srikakulam: On August 27, 2016, and an identified body of a young woman was found by the national highway near BC Ramachandrapuram. Police later identified it as that of a student belonging to Chhatrapur in the neighbouring state of Odisha, Truptimayee Panda (23). Her killer surrendered dramatically to the Sompeta police after a three-year long hunt across various cities by the cops. Sompeta Circle Inspector K Srinivasa Rao addressed the media on Tuesday and revealed facts related to the murder case. After the young woman’s dead body was discovered, cops began their probe into the case and found that Triptimayi moved closely with her classmate, Sikkal Behera. After completing her undergraduate degree course from a college in Chhatarpur, the victim joined MCA course at a college in Berhampur and was staying with her classmate, Anuradha in a hostel.

Sikkal Behera belonged to a family of factionists. The girl student victim’s murder was carried out by a rival faction led by Sikkal Behera’s cousin, Sukuda Behera. Police learnt that Sikkal Behera fled to Hyderabad as the faction-fighting was heating up with some of his associates joining the rival gang. Meanwhile, he became suspicious that Triptimayi fell in love with a constable in Berhampur. He called her roommate Anuradha, from Hyderabad and asked her to set up a rendezvous with Triptimayi. They met in Berhampur and the accused then took her on a two wheeler. While returning from a beach beach to which they had gone, there was a heated argument between the two.

The accused took a knife he carried and slit his girlfriend's throat and stabbed her twice in the stomach. He concealed the knife there and dumped her body by the National Highway. The accused fled to Hyderabad after telling his parents that he had some pressing work. Police cracked the case but could not track down the accused though they launched a manhunt through over three years in many cities including Hyderabad, Pune, Mumbai and other major metropolises.

Also Read: Ram Prasad Murder Case Takes A New Turn

Also Read: Six Arrested In Puri Sensational Triple Murder Case

Also Read: Veteran Actress Makes Sensational Comments On Jr NTR

Also Read: Allu Arjun Dons A Wig For This Role
