Ali Fazal gets lead role in British film, flies to London for prep

Ali Fazal, who is busy with the next season of web series Mirzapur, has bagged a lead role in a yet-to-be-titled British film. The Fukrey actor worked overtime to be able to finish his part before he left for London. According to a report in DNA, Ali will be staying in London to attend a week-long training comprising workshops and reading sessions.

Ali had earlier worked in a Hollywood film, Victoria And Abdul, where he was seen alongside Academy Award winner Judi Dench. For Mirzapur, Ali shuttled between Mumbai and Uttar Pradesh.

According to the report, while Ali has been signed for the lead role, the female lead is still being finalised by the makers. The film is scheduled to go on floors in November this year. To prepare for his role, Ali will be commuting between Mumbai and London for weeks before the film goes on floors.

A source close to the development told the daily, "Ali had to request the makers of Mirzapur to allow him to take a week off, for which he shot extra to make up for his absence. The team was understanding and accommodating. He’s taken off to London where he will work with his international team on the project and undergo an extensive week-long training comprising workshops and reading sessions before heading back to India to resume shoot here."

Apart from the British film, Ali will be seen in a Hollywood war film too. According to reports, it is a biopic of a soldier from the Iraq War. The shooting of the film is scheduled to begin in March 2020. In an earlier interview with PTI, the actor said, "It's a biopic, a war drama. But it's going to take time. I'm very new in the market there, barely one film old, so they have to attach big names to the cast. That's happening right now."

Back home in India, Ali Fazal will soon start shooting for Pavan Kriplani's Bhoot Police. The film also stars Saif Ali Khan and Dangal girl Fatima Sana Shaikh. In the film, Saif and Ali Fazal will be seen hunting ghosts.

ALSO READ | Bhoot Police first look: Saif Ali Khan goes ghost hunting with Fatima Sana Shaikh and Ali Fazal

ALSO READ | Ali Fazal on his viral leaked nude photos: I was angry

ALSO READ | Richa Chadha reveals she usually meets boyfriend Ali Fazal at the airport. This is why
