Uttar Pradesh: CBI conducts early morning raids at Atiq Ahmed's properties in Prayagraj

Central Bureau of Investigation is conducting searches at 6 locations including Lucknow & Prayagraj | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The CBI had registered a case against Atiq Ahmed and 17 others on the charge of kidnapping and assaulting real estate dealer Mohit Jaiswal in Deoria jail in December 2018 During the raids personnel from police and Rapid Action Force (RAF) were also present

Prayagraj: The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) today conducted a search at the premises of jailed Uttar Pradesh leader and former Samajwadi Party MP Atiq Ahmed in Prayagraj. The raid started early in the morning under tight security during which personnel from police and Rapid Action Force (RAF) were also present.

Talking to ANI, Atiq's lawyer Shaukat Hanif said, "CBI teams from Lucknow and Delhi are raiding the residence. They have sealed the house and no one is being allowed to get inside. The raid started around 7:30 am."

He further stated that the bureau apart from raiding Atiq's home also raided his in-laws' house and his office in connection with Deoria case saying that some papers were confiscated during the raid of which he hasn’t received any details from the police.

The CBI had registered a case against the former MP and 17 others on the charge of kidnapping and assaulting real estate dealer Mohit Jaiswal in Deoria jail in December 2018.

Jaiswal, a Lucknow-based realtor, was kidnapped and was taken to the Deoria jail in UP where Atiq was lodged and was allegedly assaulted by the SP leader and his aides. The businessman was allegedly forced to transfer his business to Atiq. Before allowing Jaiswal to leave, Atiq’s men snatched his Toyota Fortuner car and other belongings.

After receiving the complaint of the alleged assault, a Supreme Court bench, headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi, ordered his transfer to Sabarmati Central Jail in Ahmedabad from Naini jail.

He had contested from Phulpur Parliamentary Constituency on a Samajwadi Party ticket in 2014 and was also the president of the Apna Dal from 1999 to 2003.

After Jaiswal, another businessman approached the Prayagraj police and lodged a similar complaint against Atiq and his henchmen. The CBI team has also been visiting various hotels in Prayagraj to gather information about members of the Atiq gang.

The victim identified as Mohammad Zaid Khalid of Bamrauli in Prayagraj also sent a copy of his complaint to Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath.

In the complaint, Zaid said that he was abducted by Atiq’s brother-in-law Imran and was taken to his cell in Deoria jail where he was threatened with dire consequences if he failed to transfer his land to one of the aides of Atiq. He was allowed to leave the jail on the condition that he would transfer his land.
