How Bianca Devins, Brandon Clark moved in online worlds of vanity and abuse

UTICA, N.Y. -- Both the victim and the suspect in a grisly Utica homicide were molded by a vain and often toxic Internet culture, sections of which reacted with glee upon seeing photos of 17-year-old Bianca Devins’ body shared online.

Devins, according to police, did not achieve the type of fame online that would explain the widespread interest in her death. She only had a few thousand followers apiece on two Instagram accounts, though was somewhat better known by the name “e-girl” in niche online communities for gamers and goths, officers said.

In her offline world, Devins’ family described her as a “talented artist, a loving sister, daughter, and cousin, and a wonderful young girl, taken from us all too soon.”

Her alleged killer, Brandon Andrew Clark, 21, of Cicero, did not plan to kill her Saturday when the pair attended a concert in Queens, N.Y., police said they believe. But an altercation at the small concert venue, likely over another man, sent him into a violent rage, police said.

Police say Clark slit Devins’ throat, killing her Sunday morning in Utica. Then, in front of officers, he slit his throat. He survived.

Clark was charged Monday with second-degree murder, a felony punishable by up to 25 years to life in state prison, police said.

Even if Clark didn’t plan the alleged murder, he apparently knew the way to get global attention.

He posted photos of Devins’ bloody body on Instagram and on Discord, an online messaging app popular with videogamers. He changed his biography on Instagram to read July 14 (Sunday) as his date of death.

He took selfies just before and after stabbing himself in what police believe was a suicide attempt. And, on Discord, he posted the photos of Devins’ body along with two apparent references to Internet culture.

“Make sure to subscribe to Pewdiepie,” he wrote in messages underneath photos he took of the homicide’s aftermath, police confirmed.

‘Subscribe to Pewdiepie’

Pewdiepie is YouTube’s most popular Swedish personality, and he was once the platform’s account with the most followers globally. An account for a film studio in India recently surpassed him.

As a result, “Subscribe to Pewdiepie” became a common Internet joke. In addition to harmless competition with the Indian account, it’s become a rallying cry for darker corners of the Internet. For example, the suspect in the Christchurch, New Zealand, mass shooting targeting Muslims shouted the phrase “Subscribe to Pewdiepie” during a livestream of his attack.

The man behind the Pewdiepie account, known as Felix Arvid Ulf Kjellberg, denounced the New Zealand suspect’s attack. He has not commented on Clark.

‘Find somebody else to orbit’

Clark posted another message to caption the photos of Devins’ body:

““Sorry f***ers, you’re gonna have to find somebody else to orbit,” he said.

So-called “orbiters” are commonly men or boys who worship girls online.

Utica police said they believe Clark left the message to fans of Devins in an effort to tell them she was taken. Police said family members said Clark and Devins had been dating for two to three months, after meeting online on Instagram.

Police said they do not believe Clark killed Devins specifically as a message to those who “orbit” her.

“Individuals who take a liking (to women) will comment on them,” said Lt. Brian Coromato, a spokesman for Utica police. “In his statement … in essence, he was saying he and Bianca have become, for lack of a better word, boyfriend and girlfriend.”

A search of online message boards for so-called “Incels” shows that “orbit” is a common term for men who circle around women in hopes of having a relationship. “Incel” stands for “involuntarily celibate," an online community of men who complain that social movements like feminism have prevented them from finding a girlfriend.

Police said they are not aware of ties between the “Incel” movement and Clark’s murder of Devins.

However, Devins, as a 17-year-old girl on the Internet, had found herself dealing with online harassment. “Incels” in particular, had harassed her for at least two years.

Bianca Devins, 17, of Utica; Brandon Andrew Clark, 21, of Cicero

‘The ability to influence people’

Three months ago, Devins joined Tellonym, an app that lets readers ask and answer anonymous questions. She had 65 followers and responded to dozens of comments and questions that ranged from harmless and whimsical to cruel and abusive.

Devins – who planned to attend Mohawk Valley Community College in the fall – told one user she was going to major in psychology at the community college. She told another user she had been homeschooled for most of her senior year of high school but was “so excited” to get a chance to walk the stage and get her diploma from T. R. Proctor High School in June.

If she could pick a super power, Devins said, she’d choose: “the ability to influence people. that would b cool.” She dodged questions about whether she was single. She even referenced Incels -- who had been making cruel, sexual comments about her on anonymous messaging boards for years -- in a joke.

Some posters showered Devins with compliments and called her their favorite e-girl. Others asked sexually explicit questions and posted anonymous insults – calling her a tease and “mentally unhinged.”

Devins told her followers she made bad decisions when she was 14 and 15. Since then, she said, she’s changed.

“i really have been happier and just doing generally .. better,” Devins wrote. “i’m almost 18 and i look at myself 2 years ago and i’m like. Damn.”

This screenshot from Instagram shows some of the photos being posted under #pinkcloudsforbianca.Screenshot

#PinkcloudsforBianca

Instagram was the place Devins posted about her ever-changing hair color, selfies and cosplay. (Cosplay is role playing, wearing costumes to represent a specific character.)

Before she was killed, Devins had about 2,000 followers. She had 10 posts on her account – including one from about a week before her death, when she told her followers she had gone on a content purge.

After killing Devins, Clark posted photos of her body online, police said. After being contacted by the public, Instagram at some point removed the photos. However, the photos remain online at other web sites.

Devins’ Instagram account gained over 100,000 followers since her death. Other Instagram users tried to capitalize on her grisly death to gain more followers by claiming they had photos of her body in hopes people would follow them.

But as speculation swirled on forums and Instagram, some users tried to blot out the dark comments with kindness.

Users are posting photos of pink clouds – with the hashtag “pinkcloudsforbianca” – to remember Devins and help get the photos of her homicide off of the internet.

Over and over, users posted the same sentiment: “Don’t use her death for clout."
