Rishi Kapoor opens up about his year-long battle with cancer, reveals has lost 26 kg

New Delhi:

Rishi Kapoor is returning to the silver screen with comedy flick Jhootha Kahi Ka. The actor who has been in news for celebs paying him visit at his US residence recently revealed much about his journey from being diagnosed by cancer to finally recovering.

The 66-year-old actor in an interview to Mumbai Mirror revealed that the disease was first detected when he was filming in New Delhi last year. The disease took such toil in his appetite that he drastically lost 26 kgs in a few months. The actor also added that he is still under treatment and he has regained seven-eight kilos.

Speaking to Mumbai Mirror, Rishi Kapoor said, "The problem was detected when I was shooting in Delhi and was required to dye my hair white. I was told to immediately rush to the Sloan Kettering Hospital. Thankfully, my health started improving week after week, month after month... I had lost 26 kg as I had no appetite for the first four months. Now, I've gained seven-eight kg. I don't want to look too lean, but I haven't gone back to my original self either. Thank God for that."

He elaborated, "I am perfect now. The cancer is in remission, but I am still under treatment. The problem is not the treatment but the reaction time. There is a six-week gap between one treatment and the next when all you can do is eat, shop, watch movies, live a normal life which I would rather do at home than here in New York."

Rishi Kapoor had earlier shared with the media that he will be returning to India by the end of August. Confirming that same, the Rajma Chawal actor said, "It's been nine months and 16 days - I know since I have been counting the days - that I have been away. I really miss home. I have to be here for 11 months, so I will not be back before the end of August. I am waiting to come back and raring to get going. I am hoping that I can plan an end-August return but all this talk that I will be back in early September for my birthday, is again nothing but speculation."

He thanked his wife Neetu Kapoor for supporting him through and through and said, "It's been a difficult time, very taxing, but Neetu (wife), and my children (Ranbir and Riddhima) have been very supportive. I am grateful to everyone."

Rishi Kapoor filmed Jhootha Kahin Ka before leaving for the US. The actor also said that he has committed to a project, which he will resume after returning to India. The actor was last seen sharing screen space with Amitabh Bachchan in movie 102 Not Out.

For all the Latest Entertainment News, Bollywood News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
