Pakistan arrests alleged mastermind of 2008 Mumbai terror attacks

Hafiz Saeed (C), the head of banned Islamic charity Jamat ud Dawa, arrives for Friday prayers in Lahore, Pakistan, Nov.24, 2017. EPA-EFE/FILE/RAHAT DAR

Hafiz Saeed, the head of banned Islamic charity Jamat ud Dawa, speaks to supporters as he opens his newly launched political party Allah-o-Akbar Tehreek (God is Great Movement) after the Pakistani authorities banned his previous political party Milli Muslim League, as the country gears up for general elections, in Lahore, Pakistan, Jun.28, 2018. EPA-EFE/FILE/RAHAT DAR

Pakistan’s anti-terror forces on Wednesday arrested Hafiz Saeed, accused by India and the United States of being the mastermind of the 2008 terror attacks on the western Indian city of Mumbai, on charges of funding terror activities.

Saeed's arrest comes days before Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan is set to visit Washington and meet US President Donald Trump in the White House next week.

"Hafiz Saeed was arrested near Gujranwala city (in Pakistan’s Punjab province) when he was on the way to appear in a court and was transferred to Kot Lakhpat jail," Ahmed Nadeem, spokesperson of Saeed's hardline Islamist group Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD) told EFE.

The JuD, ostensibly a charity outfit that runs hundreds of Islamic seminaries, schools and hospitals across Pakistan, has been included in the list of terrorist organizations by India and the US.

A member of Pakistan's Counter Terrorism Department confirmed the arrest to EFE and said the hardliner was held in relation to a number of terror funding and money laundering cases filed against him and 12 other JuD leaders earlier this month.

"The trusts (managed by Saeed) gathered funds which were being used for terrorism,” the official said on the condition of anonymity.

The US has accused the JuD of being a front organization of the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) group, which allegedly perpetrated the Mumbai attacks on Nov.26, 2008, when 10 heavily armed militants sailed into India’s financial capital and launched a mayhem that lasted for three days.

At least 166 people, including foreigners, were killed in the attacks on a train station, a Jewish center, restaurants and the landmark Taj Mahal Palace hotel.

Pakistan has been included in the grey list of the Financial Action Task Force, a global terror finance watchdog, for its alleged failure to check funding of terror organizations. But Prime Minister Khan has renewed Pakistan’s vow to crack down on militant groups operating in the country.

In March, Islamabad named JuD as a terrorist organization for the first time after the worst military escalation with India in decades, including airstrikes and both sides claiming to shoot down each other's fighter jets.

The US has declared a $10 million reward for Saeed. But the Islamist leader had moved around freely within Pakistan until January and participated in meetings and gave speeches even as his group continues to be popular for its charity work.

The Lashkar-e-Taiba militant outfit is also active in India-administered Kashmir fighting Indian security forces.

aa-jlr/ia/ssk
