Pakistan arrests alleged Mumbai attacks mastermind again

LAHORE, Pakistan, July 17, 2019 (BSS/AFP) – Pakistani authorities Wednesday

detained the alleged mastermind of the 2008 Mumbai attacks, a security

official said, as the country faces increased pressure to crack down on

militants operating on its soil.

Firebrand cleric Hafiz Saeed — declared a global terrorist by the US and

UN, and who has a $10 million US bounty on his head — was taken into custody

following a raid by counter-terrorism forces in the eastern city of

Gujranwala.

“Hafiz Saeed was going to Gujranwala to apply for bail in another case

when he was arrested,” said a security official with knowledge of the arrest,

who requested anonymity.

A spokesman for Saeed’s group, Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD), a wing of the

militant organisation Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), confirmed the arrest to AFP, but

gave no further details.

Another security official said the arrest relates to terror financing

charges.

Saeed has spent years rotating in and out of varying forms of detention,

sometimes under house arrest, sometimes briefly arrested then released again

by authorities.

But for the most part he has been free to move at will around Pakistan,

enraging India which has repeatedly called for his prosecution over his

alleged role in the 2008 attack that killed more than 160 people.

Lashkar-e-Taiba is accused by India and Washington of masterminding the

four-day assault on Mumbai. Saeed has denied involvement.

The move against Saeed comes as Pakistan is facing a potential

blacklisting by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) — an anti-money-

laundering monitor based in Paris — for failing to do enough to combat

terror financing.

FATF is set rule on its fate in the coming months after placing the

country on a watchlist last year.

In February, Pakistani authorities banned Saeed’s Jamaat-ud-Dawa and

Falah-e-Insaniat Foundation — charities that have long been considered

fronts for militant activity targeting India.

Washington and New Delhi have long urged Pakistan to take action against

LeT, which was banned by Islamabad in 2002 but re-branded itself as JuD and

FIF.

And earlier this year, Pakistan arrested more than 100 suspected militants

and shuttered hundreds of religious schools.

The arrests came during an ongoing crackdown on extremists, following

clashes with India after a Pakistan-based group killed dozens of Indian

security forces in a suicide bombing in Kashmir.
