Why Imran Khan govt arrested Hafiz Saeed

Pakistan has once again arrested Mumbai terror attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed. This comes in the wake of Pakistan’s Punjab province registering FIRs against Hafiz Saeed and his accomplices in 23 cases, most of them related to terror financing and money laundering.

This also comes a couple of days after an anti-terror court of Pakistan granted pre-arrest bail to Hafiz Saeed in one of the cases concerning the illegal use of land belonging to his seminaries. Hafiz Saeed and others named in the FIRs are accused of collecting funds to finance terror activities.

These funds, according to the FIRs, were being collected for Hafiz Saeed’s outfits -- Lashkar-e-Taiba and Falah-i-Insaniyat Foundation (FIF), Al-Anfaal, Dawat ul Irshad, Muaz bin Jabal, Al Hamd Trust and Al Madina Foundation. The funds for terror financing were, counter-terrorism department of Punjab province said, collected in Lahore, Gujranwala and Multan.

The arrest of Hafiz Saeed is to be seen in the context of two key developments Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s maiden state visit to the US later this month where he is hoping to meet President Donald Trump and strike a favourable economic deal for his country, and China assuming presidency of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) from July 1.

FATF’s dangling sword on Imran Khan government

Pakistan is on the grey list of the FATF for the second time. It was first put on the grey list in 2012 and remained there for three years. The FATF put it back on the grey list in June last year asking Pakistan government to check terror financing and money laundering.

Pakistan missed its May 2019 deadline following which a new deadline of October was set for the country. The FATF strongly urges Pakistan to swiftly complete its action plan by October 2019 when the last set of action plan items are set to expire. Otherwise, the FATF will decide the next step at that time for insufficient progress, it said after examining compliance by grey list countries on June 21 this year.

If Pakistan fails to act in time to the satisfaction of the FATF, it faces the possibility of being blacklisted by the terror-financing watchdog.

Why FATF matters

The FATF is a 39-member group including two regional organisations and acts as a watchdog to check financing of terror activities. If a country is found lacking either in law or its implementation to check terror financing directly or through money laundering, it first puts the country on the grey list.

The FATF spells out what the guilty government has to do to check terror financing failing which, the country is put on the blacklist. Blacklisting of a country for terror financing and money laundering comes with a huge financial cost and it largely operates through banks.

In a globalised economy, banks function in coordination with foreign counterparts for the transaction of money. If a country has been put on FATF blacklist, it makes the transfer of money involving a bank of that country a tedious and lengthy affair.

The bank from other country double checks a transaction involving a blacklisted country’s bank to ensure that the money is not being routed to someone or some account that could be remotely involved with terror or disruptive activities. This happens with every transaction. The banks of the blacklisted companies suffer a major loss of credibility.

All loans are routed through banks. The FATF member nations don’t extend loans to a blacklisted country. The FATF though a small group, has almost all the economic powerhouses the US, China, the UK, France, Germany, South Korea, Gulf Co-operation Council, European Commission and also the powerful emerging economies such as India, Brazil, South Africa and Russia.

An economic and financial non-cooperation from this powerful group with any country is bound to spell doom for trade and commerce in that country. Pakistan’s Imran Khan government is fighting to keep its economy afloat. Imran Khan has said it a number of times that Pakistan needs easier loans and stronger trade to bring the country’s economy back on track.

Pakistan is not a FATF member and being on its grey list is estimated to be causing it a loss of $10 billion a year.

How will Hafiz Saeed’s arrest help?

Hafiz Saeed was arrested for the first time after December 2001 Parliament terror attack with India mobilising international opinion against Pakistan’s support to Hafiz Saeed. He was put under house arrest and released a few months later without police framing any charges against him.

He was put under house arrest at least six more times in Pakistan over the next eight years and every time under India’s pressure. He had been roaming freely since 2009 -- a year after he was put under house arrest in the aftermath of 2008 Mumbai terror attack.

In 2009, the Lahore High Court had declared Hafiz Saeed’s house arrest unconstitutional and also quashed all cases against him. The police did not back their case against Hafiz Saeed with sufficient evidence.

This time, Pakistan can claim before the FATF that it has followed the due process in acting against Hafiz Saeed. An FIR was first registered and then he was remanded by a court to judicial custody.

The due process argument is likely to help Pakistan in the FATF where China is succeeding the US as its head. Xiangmin Liu of China assumed the position of FATF president taking over from Marshall Billingslea of the US on July 1.

China, Malaysia and Turkey had bailed out Pakistan in June this year when FATF was considering a proposal moved by the US and the UK to blacklist the country. According to the FATF charter, a country needs the support of at least three members to avoid being put on the blacklist.

With China as FATF president, Pakistan hopes the arrest of Hafiz Saeed will help it avoid being blacklisted in the post-October review. However, to be taken off the FATF grey list, Pakistan needs to garner the support of at least 15 member nations.

Imran Khan’s US visit

Though action against terrorists like Hafiz Saeed was imperative for Pakistan in the view of FATF warning, the timing of his arrest is unmistakable. Imran Khan is visiting the US later this month.

The US has stepped up pressure on Pakistan ever since Donald Trump came to power in 2017. He has repeatedly hauled up Pakistan for failing to check terrorism emanating from the country.

The US suspended a $300-million military aid to Pakistan with Trump saying that Pakistan has, in return, given nothing but lies & deceit, thinking of our leaders as fools.

Imran Khan, on his part, has spoken about a possible meeting with Trump as a bitter pill that he has swallow. He expects to seal a peace deal with Trump for facilitating US-Taliban talks.
