NIA Bill passed in Rajya Sabha: HM Amit Shah slams critics, says ‘don’t denigrate NIA for politics’

Amit Shah, Home Minister | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights NIA bill to strengthen the probe agency passed in Rajya Sabha The bill was passed in Lok Sabha on Tuesday Modi govt will not misuse the law, Home Minister Amit Shah assured in Rajya Sabha today

New Delhi: Home Minister Amit Shah on Wednesday hit back at the opposition parties who have questioned the NDA government’s bid to expand the jurisdiction of the National Investigation Agency (NIA) and strengthen the probe agency.

After the NIA Bill was passed in Lok Sabha, Home Minister Amit Shah spoke on the issue in the Rajya Sabha today, urging the opposition parties to “not play politics out of the NIA.”

Speaking during the debate on the NIA Bill in the Parliament, Shah said, “Do not denigrate NIA for politics.”

He also assured the opposition leaders that the Narendra Modi government would “not misuse the law.”

National Investigation Agency (NIA) Amendment Bill, 2019 was introduced in Rajya Sabha on Wednesday after the Bill was passed with 278 votes in favour and six against in the Lok Sabha on Tuesday.

After a two-hour-long debate, the NIA Bill was passed in Rajya Sabha as well.

While arguing in favour of the Bill in the Upper House today, the Home Minister responded to AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi’s earlier remarks in the Lok Sabha questioning the NIA probe in the Samjhauta train blast case.

He said, "Seven people were arrested for Samjhauta Blast. A case was created to connect the blasts to a specific religion, culprits were released and new people were arrested. How could have they received punishment? There was no evidence against them. Who is responsible that justice wasn't served to the victims of Samjhauta Blast? Because it is not us.”

The crucial NIA bill that seeks to give more teeth to the probe agency in investigating cyber crimes and human trafficking cases was passed on Monday in the Lok Sabha after a heated debate.

The Opposition has blamed the Modi government of using Central agencies to exact political vendetta against its rivals and critics.

During the debate, Owaisi and Congress' Manish Tewari had raised concerns over the Constitutional validity of the amendments, with Owaisi alleging that the government used the laws selectively.

“I would like to ask the government about professionalism in the investigations carried out by the NIA. In the Samjhauta blast investigation, they could not even produce the CCTV footage of the railway station in the court. And why is the government not appealing in Malegaon blasts, Samjhauta blasts and Mecca Masjid blast cases?” Owaisi said.

On the other hand, Shah assured that his government's motive to bring in the NIA bill was to combat terrorism "regardless of religion."

“Let me make it clear that the Modi government has no such intention (of targeting a particular community using tough laws and probe agencies). Its only goal is to eradicate terrorism but we will also not look at the religion of the accused while taking an action,” Shah had said in the Lok Sabha.


