Another collapse in Mumbai: 10 people buried under rubble of illegal building

The four-story structure was built around 100 years ago and needed urgent maintenance. The authorities fear that there are other victims still trapped under the rubble. Two weeks ago, the collapse of a wall in another neighborhood caused another 18 deaths.

Mumbai (AsiaNews / Agencies) - At least 10 people were killed and 8 others injured in the collapse of a building in Mumbai, on the southern outskirts of Dongri. The four-story structure collapsed yesterday in the early afternoon and relief efforts are still underway. The causes of the collapse are still to be ascertained, but some denounce that the building, built around 100 years ago, was abusive and needed important maintenance work.

The collapsed "Kesarbai Building" is located on Tandel Street, one of the most congested areas of the Indian megalopolis, with narrow alleys and cluttered passages.

In total, the city has almost 20 million inhabitants and attracts millions of workers from all over the country, in particular migrants from poor and rural areas who settle in the immense hinterland.Local authorities believe that the number of victims could increase further, since there are fears that there are other people trapped under the rubble.

The whole area has been closed to transit and the police allow the passage only of rescuers. The very location of the area makes operations even more difficult, with volunteers who are removing debris by hand and fire trucks parked at long distances due to the inaccessibility of the roads.

The collapse of the Dongri facility is the second that hits the city in a few weeks. On 2 July the collapse of a wall in Malad East, due to the incessant monsoon rains of this period that are causing considerable damage and victims throughout South Asia, caused the death of 18 people.

According to official data, at least 2 thousand people die every year in India due to the collapse of unsafe buildings, not up to standard, illegal or that require urgent restructuring interventions. In the country the collapses of buildings, as well as fires are very common, both for the low levels of security and for the inefficiency of the controls.
