Hafiz Saeed, Founder of Group Behind Mumbai Attacks, Is Arrested in Pakistan

Their discussions are likely to center on the Afghan peace talks between the United States and the Taliban that have been moving forward, in fits and starts, in Doha, Qatar. Pakistan plays a pivotal role in Afghanistan. Its military and spy agencies helped bring the Taliban to power there in the late 1990s. American officials complain that Pakistan still shelters Taliban leaders and wanted terrorists from American airstrikes.

Mr. Khan has tried to walk a fine line, seeking to avoid alienating his own military while trying to present an image of a new and reformed Pakistan. On this trip, he has said he will save his country a lot of money by staying at the Pakistan ambassador’s residence in Washington, not in an expensive hotel like his predecessors.

But Mr. Trump hasn’t been exactly warm toward Pakistan.



“We no longer pay Pakistan the $Billions because they would take our money and do nothing for us,” Mr. Trump said last year in a Twitter message. “They were just one of many countries that take from the United States without giving anything in return. That’s ENDING!”

With its economy nearing meltdown, Pakistan is desperate to find new sources of money and burnish its image. The Financial Action Task Force, an international terrorism-financing watchdog, has threatened to blacklist Pakistan if it does not take action against militant groups and their leaders, such as Mr. Saeed.

Mr. Saeed was charged this month with financing terrorism following investigations into two charities that prosecutors say act as fronts for Lashkar-e-Taiba, the banned Islamist group that he founded. Counterterrorism officials said the two charities were involved in raising money for terrorism and that Mr. Saeed had been accused of accepting a 544-square-yard piece of land from one of his supporters in Punjab Province.

Donating or accepting land for a banned group is illegal, officials said. Mr. Saeed was presented before a judge in court in the city of Gujranwala on Wednesday, under strict security. He will remain in judicial custody for at least a week before his next appearance.
