British schoolgirl Scarlett Keeling’s rape and murder: Goan man convicted by Bombay High Court - 5 points

A file picture of anti-rape protests in India | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Body of 15-year-old Scarlett Keeling was found in Goa’s Anjuna beach in 2008 February. Local police initially claimed she had died due to accidental drowning. But later the case was given to the CBI.

Scarlett Eden Keeling, a British schoolgirl, was found dead at north Goa’s popular Anjuna beach in February 2008. A probe revealed she had also been sexually assaulted.

Eleven years after the crime, one of the accused persons in the case, Samson D’Souza, has been sentenced to 10 years of rigorous imprisonment by the Bombay High Court. Placido Carvalho, a co-accused, was, however, acquitted by the court.

The sentencing in the case is expected to be announced on Friday.

Here is what is known about the case:

1) The body of 15-year-old Scarlett Keeling was found in Goa’s Anjuna beach in 2008 February. The local police initially claimed she died due to accidental drowning. Later the case was given to the CBI.

2) Scarlett had been in India for a six-month vacation with members of her family including her mother. When she was killed, she was alone at Anjuna beach -- the rest of the family had gone to Karnataka. On February 17, she was seen at a shack in Anjuna, according to some eyewitnesses. A British national is believed to have seen Keeling with a local man who later turned into an eyewitness.

3) Scarlett's wounded and half-naked body was found on the beach in the morning of 18 February. A post-mortem examination revealed drugs like ecstasy in her system. After her mother Fiona MacKeown questioned the Goa police’s probe, the CBI stepped into the picture.

4) Carvalho and D'Souza, both of whom were employed at a beach shack, were charged with sexual assault, culpable homicide, and drugging Scarlett. The two men denied charges of grievous sexual assault and culpable homicide. In 2016, the Goa's Children's Court cleared the duo of all charges. More than 70 witnesses were to be called in the trial, but it was marred with delays.

5) Fiona told the BBC that though she was “delighted” by Wednesday’s high court verdict, she was sorry that it took so many years for her daughter to get justice. She also criticised authorities for their handling of the case.
