Delhi: Elderly couple found dead in posh East of Kailash locality; cops suspect ‘suicide pact’

The autopsy report will help ascertain the cause of the couple's death. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: An elderly couple's decomposed bodies were found by the Amar Colony police inside their home in south Delhi's East of Kailash on Saturday after a relative who was unable to contact them approached the police. The bodies lay dead on either side of the bed with the woman's hands tied. Many naphthalene balls were recovered from near the bodies. The police suspect that it was a suicide pact.

The deceased couple who was identified as Virender Kumar Khaneja (77) and Sarla (72) lived alone in the flat. No suicide note was recovered from the scene. The police suspects that the man may have murdered his wife before committing suicide. The flat's door was locked from inside and there were no signs of forceful entry. However, the police has not ruled out the possibility of murder and are investigating if anyone had the spare keys to the house.

Police register murder case into the death of an elderly couple whose decomposed bodies were found inside their house in #Delhi's East of Kailash yesterday pic.twitter.com/sG4G83StVk — Mirror Now (@MirrorNow) January 28, 2019

The relative who informed the police that he had the last telephonic conversation with the couple on January 16. A CCTV footage of the building had captured the couple on January 18. Neighbours claimed to have seen the couple on January 19. After the relative approached the cops on Saturday, their team broke into the flat through a neighbour's balcony to discover the bodies.

A woman who lives next door became aware of the couple's demise only after the police came. An investigating officer said that the domestic help was being questioned to know why she did not inform anybody if the couple was not reachable for a week. The couple's younger son had died a natural death in 2017 while the elder son, Amit Khaneja, a doctor by profession, was settled in the US.

Also Read: Rajasthan police arrest 3 people from Delhi for duping man of Rs 55 lakh

Deputy Commissioner of Police, Chinmoy Biswal, said that it was certainly a case of unnatural deaths and an enquiry proceeding under section 174 of the code of criminal procedure (CrPC) had been initiated. The investigating officer further said that a postmortem will be conducted when the couple's elder son would arrive from the US to claim the bodies. The autopsy report will help ascertain the cause of the couple's death.
