Bloomington fines owner of caracal cat $2,000 for pet violations

BLOOMINGTON — The owner of an exotic pet that was shot and killed after attacking and injuring two people has been fined $2,000 for multiple city ordinance violations related to her pets.

Amy Doyle appeared Wednesday in the city's administrative court, where she admitted to five violations: failure to register a cat, two counts of failure to register a dog, and one count each of allowing a dog and a cat to run at large.

Doyle has turned the dog over to McLean County Animal Control, Deputy Corporation Counsel Angela Fyans-Jimenez said.

In court, Doyle tearfully admitted to the violations, saying she was upset about her animals and receiving the tickets.

The violations, which are civil and not criminal charges, were filed after a caracal cat got loose on June 23 and scratched and bit a 6-year-old girl and scratched the girl's 32-year-old mother while the pair were walking near West Locust and Mason streets, police said. Their injuries were not life-threatening.

The caracal, a medium-sized wild cat native to Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia and India, was shot and killed after the incident.

Because of Doyle's status as a chronic offender, fines were increased from $1,200 to $4,000, but a plea agreement called for a total fine of $2,000 be imposed, said Fyans-Jimenez. If Doyle has no animal-related violations for 12 months, the chronic offender status will be lifted.

Fyans-Jimenez said court documents described the animal as "a large brown cat" and did not specify whether it was a caracal cat. Bloomington police previously identified the cat as being a caracal.

Fyans-Jimenez did not provide any further details about the incident.

Doyle and other relatives with her declined to comment after the hearing.

Doyle owned a Capuchin monkey that garnered social media attention in 2014 for playing in Franklin Park. Fyans-Jimenez said Doyle told her the monkey had died.

City officials said Bloomington does not have an ordinance specifically concerning exotic animals.

Contact Maria Nagle at (309) 820-3244. Follow her on Twitter: @Pg_Nagle

Love 0 Funny 0 Wow 0 Sad 0 Angry 0
