What happened to Scarlett Keeling, where is Anjuna Beach in Goa and what are the latest updates in the murder case?

The mother of Scarlett Keeling has spoken of her relief after a man was finally convicted of killing the British schoolgirl at an Indian beach resort more than a decade ago.

Fiona MacKeown, 55, from Holsworthy, Devon, has been fighting for justice since her 15-year-old daughter's bruised and half-naked body was found on the shores of Anjuna beach in Goa in February 2008.

4 Scarlett Keeling was raped and left for dead on an Indian beach ten years ago Credit: PA:Press Association

4 Her mum, Fiona Mackeown, has been fighting for justice ever since Credit: PA:Press Association

Two local men were charged with her rape and murder but acquitted in 2016.

Ms MacKeown took the case to a higher court and on July 17 Samson D'Souza was convicted of 'culpable homicide not amounting to murder', according to local media.

The court upheld the acquittal of the other suspect.

What happened to Scarlett Keeling?

The teenager travelled to India for a six-month family holiday with her mother and six of her eight brothers and sisters from their home in Bideford, Devon.

But after going to a Valentine's Day beach party while her family went travelling, she was raped and deliberately drowned after being plied with drugs.

Police originally said Keeling had drowned after taking drugs but changed their story after her mum complained.

A second post-mortem concluded she had been raped and murdered.

The case caused outrage among millions of Indian and foreign tourists who throng Goa's beaches.

4 Scarlett's half-naked body was found covered in 50 injuries on Anjuna beach on February 18, 2008 Credit: Getty Images

4 Fiona has fought for justice for her daughter Credit: Getty Images

How has Scarlett Keeling's family reacted to the latest news?

Scarlett's mum Fiona said: "I'm actually still reeling. I can't quite believe that it's going to be over.

"It's happening. It's taking it's time to sink in that this is finally going to be over.

"Our lives have been on hold, well for me anyway. It's different for the children.

"They've been getting on with their lives by growing up. But it's been traumatic.

"Whenever I go to India they're always worried about what will happen to me.

"We are definitely going to be celebrating with a bottle of bubbly."

However under Indian laws, both the accused and prosecutors can appeal a trial court's verdict to the High Court and the Supreme Court.
