Gujjarakere residents flee from homes

Mangaluru: Savitha , who is eight months pregnant , and was staying with her parents in the dengue-stricken Gujjarakere ward, is now staying with her kin in Kavoor . Another resident of the same ward, Asha , and her two-month-old son, Sathish, have also shifted to Kavoor. The dream of another resident of the ward, Aishwarya, to support her family was cut short, after she couldn’t attend the last two examinations of final year BCom, as she was suffering from dengue This is just a glimpse of what is happening at Gujjarkere, which is ward no. 52 of the Mangaluru City Corporation , which is battling dengue since the past two months. At least one member, if not the entire family, of nearly 350 households in the locality, has dengue.“I got fever when my examinations began. However, I managed to write four exams out of six, but was seriously ill during the last two examinations. Soon after my results were declared, I wanted to finish a computer course and support my family. Now, it’s not possible, since I have to waste a year to clear the backlog,” says Aishwarya, who was pursuing her BCom degree in Besant College. Everyone in her family got dengue. Her father is an electrician, and mother rolls beedis to earn a living. Aishwarya’s sister, a PU student, had to be on sick leave, as she had fever for a few days.Sunil Kottary, an autorickshaw driver, has stopped going to work since 25 days, after he suffered from dengue. He told TOI that his neighbour, Sumathi, who is a septuagenarian who lived alone, was asked by her neighbours to leave the house she was staying in, and stay in her son’s house in Bolar. “Since she was staying alone, as a precautionary measure, we asked her to shift so that there is someone with her,” says Kottary, adding that some houses in the ward are locked up, as their occupants have gone elsewhere for fear of contracting dengue.Apart from her, Swetha, who was pregnant, and who was staying in her parent’s house in the ward, left for her aunt’s place in Bolar. Chethan, a class VIII student, who is a resident of Gujjarakere, has not attended school since 20 days, and is recuperating from fever.Presently, there are no children playing in the ward, which was earlier bustling with activity.Almost every child in every house has suffered from dengue in Gujjarakere. One can see elderly men or women sitting outside homes in the ward rolling beedis, doing household chores or discussing the dengue outbreak that has hit their ward.“We want this dengue outbreak to end as soon as possible,” says senior citizen Rohini, in whose home six out of seven people are afflicted with the disease.According to Gujjarakere residents, currently, as many as 30 to 40 people are taking treatment in various hospitals for dengue. About 10 people were discharged from hospitals on Tuesday evening. Most of the residents in this area eke out a living by rolling beedis, work as drivers, masons, electricians, and do other odd jobs. “The healthcare cost is high, and we cannot afford it. Almost all the people in my family have suffered from dengue,” says an elderly woman from the ward.
