10 die, 20 hurt, 5 held as UP gang goes on shooting spree over land dispute

Akhilesh, Priyanka slam UP govt

VARANASI/LUCKNOW: Ten persons, including three women, were shot dead over a land dispute in eastern UP’s Sonbhadra district on Wednesday. At least 19 others were injured in the indiscriminate firing . Five persons have been arrested and six others detained for questioning.The incident took place at Umbhha village, under Ghorawal thana, where pradhan Yagyadutt Bhurtiya claimed to have purchased 90 bighas two years ago. When the village head and his armed henchmen went to take possession of the land, villagers opposed. This prompted Yagyadutt’s men to open fire, police said.Reports said all the victims belonged to the predominant Gond tribe in the village, but police didn’t confirm the same. They, however, conceded that pradhan Yagyadutt was the prime accused.Chief minister Yogi Adityanath has taken cognisance of the incident and directed DGP to personally monitor the case. He has also directed the district magistrate to make necessary arrangements for treatment of the injured.DGP OP Singh said the two sides had clashed around two months ago on the same issue, but the matter was resolved following police intervention. “We have arrested five of the accused. ADG (Varanasi zone) and commissioner (Mirzapur) will submit a detailed report to the government about the incident and the action taken thereafter within 24 hours,” Singh said.ADG (law and order) PV Ramasastry said pradhan Yagyadutt reached Umbhha and asked local villagers to vacate his land. The latter didn’t budge and voiced their resentment, following which the pradhan’s supporters opened fire. Nine were killed and over a dozen suffered gunshot wounds, the officer said.Police have taken the bodies into custody and the injured have been sent to hospital. Some have been admitted to the district hospital and the rest are being treated at the community health centre in Ghorawal,” the officer added.Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav and Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra took to Twitter to slam the Yogi government.Akhilesh tweeted: “Sonbhadra mein bhu-mafia dwara... 9 logon ki hatya dahshat aur daman ka pratik (The killing of nine persons by the land mafia in Sonbhadra represents a culture of coercion).” He also demanded Rs 20 lakh compensation for each of the deceased.Priyanka said the “coldblooded murder of 9 Gondh tribals” was heart-rending. “Is the state government fast asleep? Is this the way UP will become a crime-free state?” she tweeted.
