Spat over water turns ugly in Uttar Pradesh's Etah; neighbour shoots pregnant woman dead

The fight happened at a local handpump (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Accused works in the same farm as the victim's husband Police are on the lookout for the accused, identified as Santosh Several instances of violence over water have been reported from different parts of the country in recent months

Lucknow: Sumaur is a hamlet in Uttar Pradesh's Etah district. The village landed at the centre of a storm when a pregnant woman was shot dead here reportedly following a dispute over water. Local police have registered a case in connection with the woman's death and are in the process of conducting a thorough investigation in this regard. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

The dispute which led to 25-year-old Mamta's demise has been traced back to a handpump which was installed by the state government under Aliganj area limits. Bystanders claim that the victim's children got into a fight with a neighbour's kids. The fight escalated to the extent that the grown-ups had to intervene. Mamta came to the defence of her children and was met with stiff resistance from Santosh, who got into a fit of rage and shot her in the chest. Mamta was pregnant at the time. The incident took place at around 5.30 pm on Wednesday.

Etah: A pregnant woman was shot dead in Sumaur village over dispute for water, yesterday. Police say, "Her body has been sent for postmortem. The accused, Santosh, has been arrested." (17.07.2019) pic.twitter.com/havqrT9QO4 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 17, 2019

While the culprit fled from the scene of the crime, neighbours alerted police officials. A team of officers, including the station house officer (SHO) Pankaj Mishra and circle officer (CO) Ajay Ajay Bhadauria, arrived at the spot and rushed the victim to a nearby health centre where she was declared dead on arrival. Police have lodged a case against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and an investigation into the matter is underway.

The accused works in the fields, the same as the victim's husband, said one local. Her mother-in-law told media outlets that the neighbour was under the heavy influence of alcohol when he brought a country-made pistol from home and shot Mamta. Senior superintendent of police (SSP) Swapnil Mamagai said that an investigation has been launched into the matter and the police are likely to nab the culprits soon.

This is not the first time a fight for drinking water has turned ugly in India. Earlier this month, a woman died in Sompeta town of Andhra Pradesh's Srikakulam district following a physical fight with a fellow villager at the queue for drinking water. A similar incident was reported from Jharkhand in June of this year when a man went on a stabbing spree after engaging into a spat with a local family. The incident took place near state capital Ranchi. Eyewitnesses said that the victims objected to the accused filling over 20 jars of water from a state-installed handpump near their residence.
