Hafiz Saeed roamed freely in Pakistan: US legislative committee refutes Trump’s claims on JuD chief's arrest

Jamaat-ud-Dawa terror chief Hafiz Mohammed Saeed. | File image | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The House committee quoted Trump’s tweet and said everyone should wait till Saeed is actually convicted for the crimes Hafiz Saeed was on July 3 booked on various charges of ‘terror financing’ The US has announced a bounty of $10 million on the terrorist

Washington: A day after US President Donald Trump took credit for the arrest of 26/11 Mumbai terror attack mastermind Hafiz Mohammed Saeed, the Standing Committee of the United States House on Wednesday claimed that the chief of terror organisation Jamaat-ud-Dawa was ‘roaming freely’ in Pakistan.

The House Committee on Foreign Affairs countered Trump’s claim that the Pakistani government was tailing Saeed for a decade and that the US had put pressure on Pakistan for the past two years to nab the terrorist.

The House Committee, which is responsible for foreign policy legislation and oversight in the US, quoted Trump’s tweet and said everyone should wait till Saeed is actually convicted for the crimes.

“FYI (for your information) Pakistan wasn’t searching for him for 10 years. He’s been living freely and was arrested and released in December 2001, May 2002, October 2002, August 2006 (twice), December 2008, September 2009, January 2017. Let’s hold the (applause) until he’s convicted,” the committee said in a post on social media platform Twitter.

FYI Pakistan wasn't searching for him for 10 years. He’s been living freely, and was arrested and released in:

December 2001

May 2002

October 2002

August 2006 (twice)

December 2008

September 2009

January 2017



Let’s hold the until he’s convicted. https://t.co/qMtD7wgSp9 — House Foreign Affairs Committee (@HouseForeign) July 17, 2019

Just hours after the Counter-Terrorism Department (CTD) of Punjab Province in Pakistan arrested Saeed while the terror chief was on his way from Lahore to the anti-terrorism court in Gujranwala to seek bail, Trump tweeted saying it was the result of the “great pressure” exerted by the US government to nab him.

“After a ten year search, the so-called 'mastermind' of the Mumbai Terror attacks has been arrested in Pakistan. Great pressure has been exerted over the last two years to find him!” Trump said in his tweet.

After a ten year search, the so-called “mastermind” of the Mumbai Terror attacks has been arrested in Pakistan. Great pressure has been exerted over the last two years to find him! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) July 17, 2019

Saeed was on July 3 booked on various charges of ‘terror financing’ in several parts of Punjab in Pakistan and 23 FIRs were also registered against him and 13 other JuD leaders.

The US has announced a bounty of $10 million on nabbing the terrorist and his arrest yesterday is a result of the massive pressure that has been put on Pakistan by the international community to take action against terror originating from Pakistani soil.

Ever since the dastardly Pulwama attacks on February 14 this year, where at least 40 CRPF personnel were killed in Jammu and Kashmir by Pakistani terrorists, India has severed all bilateral diplomatic engagements with Pakistan, even at neutral forums. As a reward for India’s persistence to combat terror forces in the region, the United Nations Security Council in May designated Jaish-e-Mohammed chief Masood Azhar, the mastermind of Pulwama terror attack, a ‘global terrorist’.
