Man who lost his arm in horror crash proves doctors who told him not to expect much from life very wrong

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up to the Grimsby Live newsletter for daily updates and breaking news

A Grimsby man who lost his arm and broke his back and neck in a horrific car crash has proved the doctors who told him not to expect much from his life very wrong.

David Huggett spent three months in hospital and three years in recovery after suffering his injuries, along with organ damage. He only has around 30 to 40 per cent lung capacity, and can't bend his upper body.

But the 46-year-old was determined to prove those doctors wrong.

(Image: Rick Byrne / Grimsbylive)

Now, despite only having one arm, he has a degree in commercial photography and turned his life into one big adventure.

The horror crash happened 12 years ago, on July 14 2007.

A 78-year-old unlicensed driver crashed into him.

The former IT worker spent three months in hospitals in Leeds and Hull and had to give up his job.

(Image: David Huggett)

He said: “Following a serious accident in 2007, I was told by doctors and specialists to limit my expectations of what my future held. Screw that!”

Although he admits his poor lung capacity makes breathing 'sometimes a difficult issue', he wasn't going to let it stand in his way.

He said: "I was spending a lot of time at home during my recovery and was thinking about what I could do.

"I thought: ‘Well I can pick up a camera’ and that’s really how I got into it.”

(Image: David Huggett)

He enrolled on a three year photography course at Grimsby Institute where he gained a commercial photography degree.

“I needed something to do. I have always liked photography but I didn’t know much about it. I enrolled at Grimsby Institute and set about learning which end was which on a camera,” David joked.

But then he embarked on his biggest journey yet.

(Image: David Huggett)

Last November he travelled 4,961 miles from Grimsby to Nagaland, a mountainous state in northern India, bordering Myanmar, to document the Konyak people living out their daily lives.

David added: “Up until the 1960s, people in tribes in Nagaland would kill each other and take their victim’s heads to keep their skulls.

“Once India took control, a peace deal was made and the killings stopped. The skulls were buried, but those who did keep skulls still had their face tattoos.”

(Image: David Huggett)

The Konyak people would decorate their skin with tattoos which signified how many people they have killed in an “honour display”.

David said: “It was a privilege to meet these people but I was appalled yet inspired by them. There was a real range of emotions.

“It’s such an odd way of life compared to here in England. The mens' lives consists of hunting, chanting, smoking weed and opium.

(Image: David Huggett)

“The children simply look after other children while the women work on making the roads. There are no disputes about this, it’s just how it is.”

David is venturing back to Nagaland in November to document the Konyak people hunting with spears and 19th century colonial rifles, which are said to have been left behind by the English.

“As long as my body holds out, I’m going to continue to travel with my camera exploring remote and off the grid places and people,” said David.

(Image: David Huggett)

Follow or contact Grimsby Live

Contact us: Email the reporter who wrote this story.

Follow Grimsby Live on Facebook - Like our Facebook page to get the latest news in your feed and join in the lively discussions in the comments. Click here to give it or message us with a comment or story.

Follow us on Twitter - For breaking news and the latest stories, click here to follow Grimsby Live on Twitter.

Follow us on Instagram - On the Grimsby Live Instagram page we like to feature great pictures from our area - and if you tag us in your posts, we could repost your picture on our page! Click here to follow Grimsby Live on Instagram.
