Sentenced to life imprisonment, Saravana Bhavan founder P Rajagopal passes away at private hospital in Chennai

P Rajagopal surrenders before trial court on July 9 of this year (File Photo) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Rajagopal was sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of an employee in 2001 Supreme Court upheld his conviction in March of this year The Saravana Bhavan founder surrendered before a trial court on July 9

Chennai: Two days after the Madras High Court permitted the founder of South Indian food chain Saravana Bhavan to be moved to a private hospital in the state capital of Tamil Nadu, murder convict P Rajagopal passed away at the medical facility on Thursday morning. Sentenced to life imprisonment for the murder of one of his employees, Rajagopal had surrendered the previous week after the Supreme Court of India rejected his plea seeking more time to furnish a defence.

Aged 72, Rajagopal had suffered two episodes of cardiac arrest in the past. At the time of his transfer from a public to a private hospital, the Madras HC had asked him to sign an undertaking that he would bear the cost of any and all steps required to ensure his safe transfer. A petition in this regard was filed by his son, following Rajagopal's surrender before a trial court on July 9.

P Rajagopal surrendering at the Madras High Court in Chennai on 9th July 2019 (File Photo)

A bench of the Madras HC comprising Justices MM Sundresh and M Nirmal Kumar had passed an interim order in this regard on Tuesday. The court had further directed prison authorities to transfer Rajagopal from the state-run Stanley Medical College Hospital to the Vijaya Hospital. The bench of Justices Kumar and Sundresh while taking into consideration medical reports submitted by Rajagopal's legal counsel, had set August 6 as the next date for the hearing.

In March of this year, a bench of the Supreme Court comprising Justices NV Ramana, Mohan M Shantanagoudar and Ajay Rastogi refused to entertain a plea by Rajagopal's son to grant his father more time to surrender owing to his ill health. The apex court upheld the life imprisonment awarded to the founder of one of the world's largest South Indian food chains and told senior counsel Kapil Sibal, appearing on behalf of Rajagopal, that it is unfair of his client to not indicate about his ill health at the time of the appeal being heard.

Rajagopal was sentenced to life in prison for the abduction and murder of one Price Santhakumar in 2001. Santhakumar was married to Jeevajyothi, the daughter of an assistant manager at Saravana Bhavan's Chennai branch. Even before 2001, Rajagopal had asked Jeevajyothi to marry her. When she refused and married Santhakumar instead, the renowned businessman lost his calm and sent eight goons to abduct Santhakumar. These men kidnapped Santhakumar and murdered him before dumping his body in the forests of Kodaikanal.

Popularly known as 'annachi' or elder brother, Rajagopal was supposedly told by his astrologer that getting married to Jeevajyothi will enhance his fortunes. Hoteliers referred to him as 'dosa king' after he managed to expand his chain of South Indian restaurants to 20 countries across the globe. The son of a farmer, Rajagopal had ventured into the restaurant business in the early 80s and captured the market in Chennai.
