Come & get your smack! Rajasthan cops try ‘humour’ to combat drugs

Oops! Did anyone lost their #Smack? If yes, we have them! If you want them back contact us ASAP! Or else it'll be… https://t.co/gksY0CVae8 — Rajasthan Police (@PoliceRajasthan) 1563336112000

JAIPUR: ‘Oops! Did anyone lose their Smack ? If yes, we have them! If you want them back, contact us ASAP! Or else it’ll be lost forever,’ read a tweet put up by the Rajasthan police on its official twitter handle on Wednesday.And before you rejoice, read the next line of the tongue-in-cheek tweet by the cops: ‘We promise free stay & food at our expense! So hurry!’.The funny tweet from the department’s official handle—asking whether someone has misplaced their ‘Smack’ (drug) and requested them to collect it, offering them ‘free food and stay’—received equally humorous replies. The Assam police had tweeted a similar one last month.The tweet was accompanied by photographs that showed few hundred kg of smack in gunny bags piled on top of each other in what appears to be a warehouse.The Rajasthan police has been running a campaign to curb the use of banned substances and seize them.The tweet received equally humorous replies, with one Twitter user cheekily asking ‘if any tasting sessions would be allowed’. While one suggested that the police should keep it, another wondered whether it was a ‘tour package announcement from the Rajasthan police’.A Twitter user went a step ahead and claimed that he does not use ‘smack’ but preferred another drug. Some appreciated the work done by the police using superlatives, and a few found that the tweet was copied from the Assam police which had posted a similar one last month.Many government and international agencies were also tagged in the tweet, including the Narcotics Control Bureau; the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Bengaluru, Ahmedabad and Gujarat; the Punjab police; CM Ashok Gehlot, and the government of Rajasthan.Like its Mumbai and Assam counterparts, the Twitter handle of Rajasthan police has been adding a touch of humour with memes of television shows and movies asking users not to drink and drive.
