India, Pak exchange bullets, not sweets on R-Day

India, Pak exchange bullets, not sweets on R-Day

POONCH, Jan 27: Indian and Pakistan armies Saturday exchanged bullets on the Line of Control (LoC) instead of ritualistic exchange of sweets at Chakkan Da Bagh on the Republic Day in Poonch district.

Official sources said armies of both sides did not exchange sweets at Chakkan Da Bagh due to hostile relations. Sources said this Republic Day Pakistan army did not convey any message to Indian army for exchange of sweets.

Sources said after series of exchange of fire between both armies and infiltration attempts supported by Pak army in Poonch district, Indian army officials also did not convey message pertaining to exchange of sweets to their Pak counterparts on Republic day. “Similarly Pak troops also did not approach Indian army for exchange of sweets,” they said. Sources added that the decision with regard to ‘no exchange of sweets’ was taken by Indian army officials to mark a protest against “double standard of Pakistan army and government.”

PRO Defence Lt Col Devender Anand confirmed that no sweets were exchanged at Chakkan Da Bagh this Republic Day however he did not elaborate about the reason behind this decision.

Earlier, Pakistani troops Saturday violated ceasefire by targeting forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch district, prompting “strong and effective retaliation” by the Indian army.

The unprovoked small arms firing and mortar shelling from across the border started in Mankote area of Mendhar sector around 10 AM on Saturday, the defence spokesman said. He said Indian army retaliated strongly and effectively to silence the Pakistani guns.

A police official said the exchange of fire between the two sides continued till 1230 hours on Saturday but there was no report of any casualty on the Indian side in the Pakistani firing.

Since the beginning of the New Year, Pakistani troops have been regularly violating the ceasefire especially along the LoC in Jammu division.

A few incidents of ceasefire violations were also witnessed along the International Border this year.

On 15 January, Assistant Commandant Vinay Prasad of the Border Security Force was killed when he was hit by Pakistani sniper from across the international border, while an Army porter lost his life along the LoC in Rajouri district on 11 January, the day when two army personnel including a major were killed in an improvised explosive device attack along the LoC in Naushera sector of Rajouri.

The year 2018 had witnessed the highest number of 2,936 ceasefire violations by Pakistani troops in the last 15 years along the Indo-Pak border.
