Offbeat Himalayan escapes for a perfect summer this year!

We have massive, stunning mountains, and then we have the Himalayas. A mountain range so stunning that it is oftelabelled as Gods’ favourite abode. If you have a mountain break on your mind for this summer, a good dose of Himalayas is just what you need. Miles away from the scorching, almost-baked cities, unexplored mountain hamlets are just the places to run off to. If you cannot think of places beyond Manali, Shimla or the good, old Nainital, this guide to four offbeat mountain escapes in India is all that you need.At just 22 km from Manali, Naggar never grabbed the spotlight that its more famous neighbour happily basks in. It is known largely for housing the heritage castle of Naggar, and most of the tourists visit it for not more than an hour or two. If a cosy getaway, away from the crowd is what you are craving, this is your place. While here, do not forget to dig into special desserts at the only cafe right outside the castle gates. Naggar also has some interesting forest trails around, great for hours of easy hiking and a must if you are into picnics.Read more: When in Manali, do not skip Naggar While no words are apt enough to describe the charm of Kalpa, calling it magical would not be a farce. A perfect destination for those into road trips, Kalpa lies at some 225 km from Shimla. A scenic and thrilling ride of around 10 hours down the Hindustan-Tibet road from Shimla will land you at Kalpa. Tucked deep into the high Himalayas, Kalpa will woo you with its apple orchards, meadows, tiny cafes, a famed Buddhist monastery and stunning views of the Kinner-Kailash ranges. Kalpa, like Naggar, sees little crowd, for it stays cut off from the regular touristy glare and you can explore it at ease.Shangarh in Sainj Valley is another delight for anyone seeking an offbeat Himalayan escape. Hop aboard a Himachal Tourism bus or drive towards Neuli from Aut tunnel to reach Shangarh. Worth stopping on the route is the Manu Rishi Temple, a five-tiered structure that stands as testimony of the brilliant architectural expertise of the region. An almost non-existent road from the temple will take you to Shangarh. The huge meadow in the middle of this village can easily beat its more famous competitor that is Khajjiar. The Shangarh Mahadev Temple across the meadow stands quite tall and proud, not a sight that can be missed. This village is perhaps the best hideaway for anyone into nature and a slower pace of life. A few homestays and the Forest Rest House are your best bets for a stay here.Nako is more than just a weekend getaway for mountain lovers. The last village in Kinnaur before Spiti Valley, Nako is an ideal pitstop but can be more than that. A shocking-green lake lies in the middle of this high altitude village (3662m), surrounded by houses built in patterns typical to this region. For those seeking a must-visit list for Nako, a Buddhist monastery and numerous treks around the village are essential.As expected, Nako will delight you with its do-nothing-here charm. A number of hotels with in-house restaurants will keep you well-fed, and you can while away your time in counting sheep, stars or the number of kids that high five you here! A few locals have started bicycle and motorbike rental points in Nako for those seeking some action here.These offbeat Himalayan escapes make for the perfect vacation recipe, and can keep you going for months. If you think you can add more to these charms, feel free to comment in the section below and you might see additions to our list!
