3 Drunk Men Kidnap Traffic Policeman Then Take Him On A 'Joyride' In Mumbai

One can only imagine the kind of people cops of duty comes across. That their jobs are tough would be an understatement.

Recently, a cop in Rajasthan was killed by a mob. He was literally beaten to death. For what? Because he was doing his job and after the argument spiralled out of control, he paid for it with his life. Needless to say, their jobs are dangerous and life-threatening.

And things don't seem to improving just yet. On Tuesday, July 16, three drunk men, reportedly from Thane, 'kidnapped' an on-duty traffic policeman.

They stopped their vehicle in the middle of a road in the busy Chheda Nagar locality of Chembur in eastern Mumbai, ‘kidnapped’ the traffic policeman there and then took him for a 'joyride.'

Here's what went down: when police constable Vikas Munde was informed of a situation leading to problems with traffic, he immediately rushed to the spot. He found that a dark grey Honda City was parked in the middle of the road and it was blocking the traffic during rush hour.

He knocked on the windows to talk to the driver and passengers. When one of the passengers rolled down their windows, Munde noticed that he was in an inebriated state. The car reeked of liquor and reportedly empty beer bottles were lying inside.

Twitter

He asked the driver to park the car by the side of the road. The three men, however, stepped out of the car and in the drunk state that they were in, started arguing with Munde.

"They soon started abusing and beating me. They pounced on me and pushed me inside their car, and before I knew, they were speeding off at high speed.” Munde reportedly said.

He was then taken into the car by the miscreants. Munde’s colleagues managed to relay the messages of help via his walkie-talkie to the Police Control Room. Immediately a team of policemen from Vikhroli Traffic Police sprung into action and chased the vehicle down.

They intercepted the signals on the walkie-talkie about three kilometres away near the Eastern Express Highway in Ghatkopar. They confiscated the vehicle and two of the drunk men were taken into custody. The third one managed to give them the slip.

S.P. Kamble, Senior Police Inspector, Tilak Nagar Police Station reportedly said that the two youngsters who were arrested were 21-year old Viraj S. Shinde and 22-year-old Gaurav M. Panjwani. The police is still looking for Raj Singh.

Kamble reportedly said, "The breath analyser tests revealed they were heavily drunk, and even unfit to make a statement. We have booked them under various sections of Indian Penal Code and Motor Vehicles Act.”

The two men who were arrested were supposed to be produced in magisterial court later yesterday.
