SAD’s outcry on CBI closure report reflects duplicity : Dal Khalsa

JALANDHAR: Reacting to Shiromani Akali Dal ’s outcry following CBI filing closure report in Bargari sacrilege case , Sikh group Dal Khalsa has said that it was so typical of Akali Dal to cry injustice when out of power but to behave differently when in power and reflected its duplicity."Akali Dal did little to catch the culprits when it was in power but now when out of power it is crying injustice. For them Panth is in danger when they are out of power and the same Panth comes out of danger the moment Akalis come in power. Akalis were in power when Bargari Sacrilege was committed. They handed over the probe to SIT, constituted by them. When SIT failed to deliver and arrest the culprit they handed over the probe to the CBI to escape public pressure," said Dal Kalsa spokesperson Kanwarpal Singh "Akalis did nothing in those years to get justice and expose the conspiracy and conspirators. Now, out of power, they are desperate to do everything to see that none of the conspirators escapes the so-called long arm of the law," he said. Accusing the party of doublespeak, he said that the people of Punjab were continuously suffering due to Akali government’s inept handling of the situation pre and post Bargari Sacrilege and Behbal Kalan firing and their vested interests in defending the guilty cops.Drawing a parallel with Akali Dal’s track record on the issue of SYL canal, Dal Khalsa recalled, "It was the Akali government with Parkash Singh Badal as CM that entered into tactical understanding with Haryana government to dig the SYL canal way back in late 1970’s. Once out of power in 1982, they changed their track and launched Morcha against the Centre’s move. During Rajiv-Longowal accord, Akalis again committed to dig the canal. It was Akali government under Surjit Singh Barnala in mid-1980s that started digging canal. The work on SYL came to standstill after militants associated with Babbar Khalsa carried out attack gunning down top engineers of the SYL."
