Hema Malini: It is our duty to take care of Ganga: Hema Malini in Varanasi

Hema Malini as Ganga in the dance ballet she performed in at Prayagraj (BCCL/ Pankaj Singh)

Actor Hema Malini gives a mesmerising performance in Varanasi

With dream girl Hema Malini on stage, what followed was a dream performance. The Bollywood diva, along with her troupe, presented a dance drama on Ganga, as part of the 2019 Pravasi Bhartiya Divas in Varanasi, recently. A beautiful blend of drama and celluloid, the ballet was weaved around the genesis of river Ganga to the present condition of the holy river.Hema Malini as Ganga in the dance ballet she performed in at Prayagraj (BCCL/ Pankaj Singh)Hema, who played Ganga, got a thunderous welcome as she came on stage via a hydraulic open lift. The local audience welcomed her with the signature greeting of Har Har Mahadev. Divided into four parts, the dance drama traced the journey of Ganga in the Satyug, Tretayug, Dwaparyug and Kalyug. The ballet opened with the scene, where Lord Vishnu gets distressed on hearing the plea of his devotee Bhagirath and directs Ganga to descend on earth.The dance drama, that was being staged for the first time, gave a heart rending depiction of the condition the river has been reduced to in Kalyug."I was really keen to do a ballet on Ganga, a show which I was preparing for for the last four years with music director Ravindra Jain, who passed away few years back. I wanted to do something for the river that has been polluted over the years, the reason that I have not only incorporated the mythological aspect of the river but also her present condition. In the past, nobody had bothered for the cleanliness of the river, but now there is a lot of focus on purification of the holy river. River Ganga has been touched by the Tridev – Vishnu, Brahma and Mahesh– so it is our duty to take care of her but we have polluted her very badly. In the show I have also depicted that she gets very upset and wants to go away but she is stopped by the next generation, which comes forward and promises to take care of her," says the actor, interacting with us after her performance.The actor, who has been to Varanasi several times, in connection with her performances, revealed, "One of my films, 'Sanyasi,' co-staring Manoj Kumar, was also shot in the city several decades ago. I have an old connect with Varanasi."After her performance in Varanasi, the danseuse-actor regaled the audience at Kumbh Mela in Prayagraj, with her presentation of the same ballet. In an event organized by the Department of Culture, Uttar Pradesh, in the Kumbh Mela area, the dream girl of Indian cinema gave a captivating performance. Making splendid use of cinematic effect and drama, the ballet had many among the audience moved.Earlier the actor reached Prayagraj and stayed in the camp of Swami Avdheshanand Giri Maharaj, Juna Pithadhishwar Acharya Mahamandaleshwar, in the Kumbh mela area. She soaked in the spiritual ambience of the mela and was all praise of the arrangements. Accompanied by her relatives, she also took the holy dip at Sangam and performed pooja and hawan.This was not the first trip of Hema to Kumbh as she had visited this spiritual congregation first when it was organized six years back.
