NDFB (S) cadre apprehended in Kokrajhar

Kokrajhar: Security forces apprehended a cadre of NDFB (S) at Labanyapur Ultapani late last evening in Kokrajhar district.

A joint operation belonging to Assam police and the Indian army was carried out a search operation at Labanyapur area under Bishmuri police outpost, where the security forces able to nabbed the cadre along with arms and ammunition. One 7.65 mm pistol two round live ammunition cash Rs 14,600 and some documents were recovered from his possession.

Taking to media persons Rajen Singh, Superintendent of Police, Kokrajhar said the cadre Thumba Brahma alias Thwiswm was a 42 batch Myanmar trained hardcore cadre and he has been settled a few months back in that area for recruited for a new cadre.

A strong investigation has been carried out by Kokrajhar police, SP mentioned.

The joint operation Team Apprehended one Mayanmar Trained NDFB(S) Cadre (42 Batch) Namely Thumba Brahma.

One 7.65mm Factory-Made Pistol, Two Rounds of live ammunition, Cash Rs- 14,600/- and incriminating documents have been seized from his possession.

He was accompanied by another NDFB(S) Cadre Jewel Narzary alias Tamang and is part of Batha Group. However, Tamang managed to escape.

Further action is going on.

About NDFB

The National Democratic Front of Bodoland (NDFB) is an armed separatist outfit which seeks to obtain a sovereign Bodoland for the Bodo people.[5] It is designated as a terrorist organization by the Government of India.[6]

NDFB traces its origin to Bodo Security Force, a militant group formed in 1986. The current name was adopted in 1994 after the group rejected the Bodo Accord signed between the Government of India and ABSU-BPAC. The group has carried out several attacks in Assam, targeting non-Bodo civilians as well as the security forces. In particular, it has targeted Santhal, Munda and Oraon Adivasis (tribals), whose ancestors had been brought to Assam as tea labourers during British Raj. Its involvement in attacks on Adivasis during Bodo-Adivasi ethnic clash during the 1996 Assam Legislative Assembly elections led to the formation of Adivasi Cobra Force, a rival militant group. After 1996, NDFB was also involved in conflicts with the militant group Bodo Liberation Tigers Force (which surrendered in 2003). Since 2000, NDFB has increasingly targeted Bangladeshi migrants in what it claims to be the Boro territory.

During the 1990s, NDFB established 12 camps on the Bhutan-Assam border. After suffering major reverses during Royal Bhutan Army's Operation All Clear, NDFB signed a ceasefire with the Indian authorities in May 2005.

This was followed by a split in the group: NDFB (P), the progressive faction supported peace talks with the government, while the faction led by Nabla opposed the talks. In 2012, following the arrest of their chairman, NDFB of Nabla faction split further, leading to the formation of another new faction, which was led by a non-Bodo I K Songbijit as an interim president of the interim council. This faction continued to indulge in militancy and has been blamed by the government for May and December 2014 attacks.

The general assembly of the outfit held on 14 and 15 April 2015 has vowed to revamp their national struggle and declared that the former interim national council of NDFB led by Songbijit is dissolved and a new national council was formed to fight for the liberation of sovereign, independent Bodoland.

Also Read: Two hardcore Lady Cadres of NDFB (S) apprehended in Chirang
