Police seek Army’s help to defuse live artillery gun shell

Coimbatore: The city police have approached the Indian Army’s bomb disposal team to defuse the artillery gun shell that was recovered from the compound of an abandoned house on Sarojini Naidu Street at Ram Nagar here on Wednesday while they were probing an attempt to smuggle sandalwood tree case.

Preliminary investigation revealed that ex-army men were living in that house earlier.

The Kattoor police stumbled upon the live artillery gun shell when they inspected the house compound to see if a three-member gang, which chopped off a sandalwood tree at a nearby house and attempted to smuggle it, was hiding there.

The gang, a police officer said, cut the tree in the early hours of Wednesday but couldn’t smuggle it as a private security guard, identified as Duraisamy, raised an alarm. “The three assaulted the security guard when he tried to stop them and fled.”

When alerted, the Kattoor police held an inquiry and searched the abandoned house also from where they found the live artillery gun shell.

The Kattoor police subsequently registered a case under Section 102 (power of police officer to seize certain property) of the CrPC.

“Earlier, retired Indian Army officers were staying in the house. We are investigating how they brought the unused shell to the house. It weighs about 7.5kg. The shell is now kept safely by the armed reserve police,” the officer said.

According to a source, city police commissioner Sumit Sharan has approached the Indian Army officials in Madukkarai to defuse the unused artillery gun shell. The source said the shell would be handed over to the military’s bomb disposal squad within two days.

The city police have, meanwhile, requested the Army to defuse the shell at their shooting range at Madukkarai. “Army officials will decide where to defuse the artillery gun shell. We will hand over the shell to the Army,” said another police officer.

Further investigation in the case is on.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
