Strays poisoned, builder says ‘sorry’

Animal activist dejected by police handling of case as FIR not filed; construction staff murdered the dogs at Shewalewadi



After its employee ordered the murder of stray dogs at one of its construction sites, all it took for the developer company to get off the hook was a written apology. Despite a written complaint filed on the tragic episode, Hadapsar police allegedly meekly accepted the letter of regret and let the matter drop, without registering an first information report (FIR). Confronted, police claimed they are still investigating the case.



The complaint was filed on July 17 by Vineeta Tandon, president of Voices for India’s Voiceless Animals (VIVA), who used to feed the dogs near the construction site for Troodas Heights being built by Shivganga Developers at Manjri’s Shewalewadi. “Though the area is under the jurisdiction of a gram panchayat, a month ago, the dogs were rounded up by the civic body officials for sterilisation. When they were brought back, three more dogs were brought in as part of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) relocation programme,” Tandon told Mirror.



~~70283847~~

According to her, the dogs were constantly abused by the construction workers. “I’ve seen them being hit with canes and pelted with stones, to keep them at bay. I’ve objected to this,” she pointed out. In the wee hours of July 13 on her way home, she spotted one of the dogs frothing and shivering. “It was 3 am. I immediately rushed him to a neighbourhood vet, but he lost his life eventually,” Tandon recounted.



After daybreak, she confronted the construction workers and they admitted to poisoning the dogs on instructions from their supervisor Prabhakar Harge. “Two more dead dogs were brought out from the construction site and buried in the field nearby. That apart, three other dogs were also missing. The developer did not respond to any query,” she said. This prompted her to approach the police. Meanwhile, Tandon managed to rescue another dog with medication that helped him survive poisoning.



Responding to her written complaint, Hadapsar police station summoned the workers and Harge. “They came and tendered an apology. But these people cannot be trusted,” Tandon pointed out. The written apology actually came from the company the next day, assuring that due action was taken by them and Harge had been terminated from the company. An official of Shivganga Developers claimed, “The action was taken after the allegations of wrongdoing were made.”



Though the letter of apology in itself was incriminating, senior police inspector Raghunath Jadhav of Hadapsar PS insisted, “The workers were called to seek information and details of the incident. The case is still under investigation. Action will be taken accordingly.”



Unhappy with the outcome of her complaint, Tandon is readying to approach the gram panchayat to act and ensure the police register an FIR under section 429 of the Indian Penal Code for mischief and maiming animals and Section 11 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 2017, amounting to torture.


