Bigg Boss Marathi 2: Murder Mystery task gets interesting while Shiv gets punished for breaking rules

Bigg Boss Marathi 2: Murder Mystery task gets interesting while Shiv gets punished for breaking rules | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Bigg Boss Marathi 2 house witnesses two more murders in the Murder Mystery task Shiv Thakare backs out from the task and faces punishment for the same Friends turned foes Hina and Madhav end up in a heated argument once again

Mumbai: New task Murder Mystery got recently announced in the Bigg Boss Marathi 2 house, in which Shiv Thakare and Shivani Surve were selected as murderers, while Abhijeet Kelkar who was kidnapped from the house was the secret mentor of this whole task. At the end of the first day of the task, first suggestive murder in the house took place and that was Kishori Shahane's. The latest episode of Bigg Boss Marathi 2 began with a new day and the second day of this task. While there was still time for the task to begin the day began on a bad note with various small arguments which later turned into fights. Especially Hina Panchal and Madhav Deochakke-Neha Shitole were continuously getting into heated arguments and this continued throughout the day.

Finally, the task began and Neha was the first to reach the booth after the buzzer rang, the next to follow was Shivani, and both ended up giving tips of Hina’s murder. Abhijeet had no choice this time and he went ahead with Hina’s murder tip and was seen calling Shivani on the secret phone provided to her to tell her how to carry out Hina’s murder. In order to succeed with Hina’s suggestive murder, Shivani had to make Hina cry by hook or crook. Shivani tried her best but she failed and Hina got saved. Sivani got irked by this and she ended up hiding Hina’s pouch and even messing with her wardrobe.

After a while, again the buzzer rang and this time Rupali and Kishori managed to reach the booth before anyone else. So Rupali gave Vaishali’s murder tip, on the other hand, Kishori gave Shivani’s. Abhijeet decided to go ahead with Vaishali’s murder and asked Shivani to carry forward the murder by throwing any of Vaishali's red coloured belonging inside the Jail. This time Shivani succeeded in the task and managed to do the needful. Thus the second suggestive murder in the house of Vaishali was declared done. Next to get approved was Veena’s murder tip and Abhijeet selected Shiv as the murderer this time. Shiv was in a fix, as Veena and Shiv’s chemistry is quite evident to everyone, so even if this was a task Shiv was in double minds whether to get going about Veena’s murder or no. He thought for a while and then backed out. Meanwhile, the arguments and fights between Madhav and Hina kept getting worse as the day progressed.

Amidst all the fights and arguments the thing that Shiv backed out from the task did not go down well with Bigg Boss and he underlined how important the task was to Abhijeet. Abhijeet again called Shiv on the secret phone and tried to convince him to complete the task. But Shiv refused to budge. Ultimately, Bigg Boss had to punish Shiv secretly and asked Abhijeet to murder Shiv instead of Veena by Shivani.

Shivani was told to do so by tearing up Veena’s top, which she did it with ease. Thus the third suggestive murder in the house of Shiv was declared done, also as a punishment, he was no more the murderer in the task. Later, Neha was selected by Bigg Boss as the new murderer and this was conveyed to Abhijeet as well. The next episode will be exciting as it will be the final stage of this task and thus will declare who gets closer to winning the Captaincy for next week. So let's wait and watch, what happens next.
