Karnataka Politics Updates: Speaker disqualifies 14 rebel MLAs; floor test on Monday

Karnataka Politics Updates: Speaker disqualifies 14 rebel MLAs; floor test on Monday

India

oi-Oneindia Staff

By Anuj Cariappa

Bengaluru, July 29: Speaker of Karnataka Legislative Assembly Ramesh Kumar on Sunday disqulified 14 rebel MLAs, a day before the newly formed BJP government is expected to face a trust vote. He has disqualified them till the expiry of the current Assembly's term, in 2023.

With this the strenth of the 225 member house comes down to 208. The BJP has 105 members and is perched beyond the majority mark.

Yediyurappa, who earlier staked a claim to form the government will have to prove his majority by July 31. The all important finance bill has to be passed by July 31.

Stay tuned for all the LIVE updates here:

Newest First Oldest First Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa said,''BJP legislature party meeting was held today, we discussed tomorrow's programme in the Assembly in detail. I'm going to move a confidence motion tomorrow, afterwards I'll introduce Finance Bill. I think both Congress & JD(S) are going to support it.'' Satish Jarkiholi blames Ramesh Jarkiholi for collapse of government, says he was the first to raise voice of dissent and by-elections can come anytime in the state. He adds that they have to rebuild congress in Belgavi. Paratap Gouda Patil, says they will approach SC against Speaker #RameshKumar’s order and are confident of getting the justice from SC. Sadanand Gowda reacts on disqualification of MLAs, says he won’t comment on whether the speaker’s decision is right and courts will decide what’s right and what’s wrong. He adds that assembly proceedings were delayed by unwanted drama. Former Minister Shivanand Patil slams H D Revanna, says he used to intervene in all departments and and there were several misunderstandings between them. Congress LP meeting to be held on July 29. CLP leader Siddaramaiah to chair the meeting at 9 am ahead of floor test. Former CM Jagadish Shettar slams Speaker Ramesh Kumar for disqualifying coalition's rebel MLAs, says the decision has not brought anybody justice. KPCC chief Dinesh Gundu Rao says Speaker Ramesh Kumar gave a historic decision. Former Karnataka Chief Minister Siddaramaiah on Sunday welcomed speaker’s decision to disqualify 14 rebels legislators and said it will send strong signals to the public representatives who ‘might fall for BJP's trap.’ "I welcome the decision of the speaker to disqualify 14 legislators. This honest decision of speaker will send strong signals for all the representatives in the country who might fall for BJP's trap," the senior Congress leader tweeted. Karnataka BJP MLAs to stay the night at hotel Chancery Pavilion in Bengaluru, where they held a legislative party meeting, today. Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa has to prove majority in the Assembly, tomorrow. Pratap Gowda Patil (disqualified rebel Congress MLA) said,''My dear voters&my ppl of Maski assembly constituency, I assure you of getting justice in Supreme Court after Karnataka Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar disqualified us from the assembly. No need to worry, we will get justice in SC soon.'' Karnataka: BJP Legislative Party meeting underway at the hotel, Chancery Pavilion in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/QNbUnCMYPl — ANI (@ANI) July 28, 2019 BJP Legislative Party meeting underway at the hotel, Chancery Pavilion in Bengaluru. Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa arrives for BJP Legislative Party meeting at the hotel, Chancery Pavilion in Bengaluru. pic.twitter.com/epN8LAL091 — ANI (@ANI) July 28, 2019 Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa arrives for BJP Legislative Party meeting at the hotel, Chancery Pavilion in Bengaluru Karnataka Congress Legislature Party (CLP) meeting called tomorrow at Vidhana Soudha, ahead of vote of confidence tomorrow. Rebel JD(S) MLA A H Vishwanath, who was disqualified by the Karnataka Speaker on Sunday, said the decision was "against the law" and he and other aggrieved legislators would approach the Supreme Court for redressal on Monday. Anand Singh, the first MLA to tender resignation on July 1, is among the 17 MLAs who have been disqualified by Karnataka Speaker Ramesh Kumar. JD(S) supremo and former Prime Minister H D Devegowda breaks down during a press meet held in Bengaluru. He was seen wiping tears as he said that he regrets him sidelining those who worked for the party. "I wasn't able to give them the respect and recognition they deserved," he said. Former CM Jagadish Shettar slams Speaker Ramesh Kumar for disqualifying coalition's rebel MLAs, says the decision has not brought anybody justice. Siddaramaiah also rubbishes BJP's claims that they'll win trust vote on Monday. Siddaramaiah says BJP lacks majority and adds that the coalition's rebel leaders cannot vote in the assembly. Former CM Siddaramaiah welcomes Speaker Ramesh Kumar’s decision, says the decision sends out a strong message to leaders from all over the country will might fall for BJP’s trap. BJP Legislature Party meeting scheduled at 3 PM has been postponed to 6 PM. BJP leaders are to discuss strategies for Floor Test. Karnataka Congress welcomes Speaker Ramesh Kumar's decision on rebel MLAs, says people will punish the rebels who betrayed their respective parties. I have nothing to comment, I have done my job. The rebel MLAs are free to raise all this in the Supreme Court or at any appropriate forum, says Ramesh Kumar. The disqualified MLAs will not be able to contest elections till the term of the 15th assembly is over. Congress MLA Shrimant Patil has also been disqualified by Speaker Ramesh Kumar. JD(S) MLAs H Vishwanath, Narayan Gowda & Gopalaiah disqualified by Speaker Ramesh Kumar. Congress MLAs Pratap Gouda Patil, BC Patil, Shivaram Hebbar, ST Somashekar, Byrathi Basavaraj, Anand Singh, Roshan Baig, K Sudhakar, Muniratna, MTB Nagaraj disqualified by Speaker Ramesh Kumar. The BJP had staked claim to power after the coalition government of the Congress and HD Kumaraswamy failed the trust vote last week. Speaker of Karnataka Legislative Assembly Ramesh Kumar on Sunday disqulified 14 rebel MLAs, three days after the Speaker disqualified 3 MLAs. Speaker Ramesh Kumar decides on the resignations of coalition's rebel MLAs. Congress leader Siddaramaih and Dinesh Gundu Rao had filed disqualification petition on July 26, says Speaker. Ramalinga Reddy does u-turn. Says will back government As the events progress, it would be interesting to see if more MLAs would stay away from the House. There is uncertainty about N Mahesh, the BSP MLA, who had a pre-poll alliance with the JD(S). The BJP on the other hand 105 on its own. In addition to this it has the support of two independent MLAs, taking its strength to 107 in a House now that needs 105. In all 16 rebels had resigned, but in a late night u-turn, Ramalinga Reddy said he would stay with the Congress and vote in favour of the government. Even if Reddy were to side with the Congress, the strength of the coalition would be just 101. The Supreme Court on Wednesday gave the Speaker a free hand to decide on the resignations of the 16 MLAs. 13 from the Congress and 3 from the JD(S) resigned. The court however did not fix a time frame for the Speaker, but said that whenever he takes a decision, the same would be placed before the court. The SC also said that the MLAs cannot be forced to take part in Thursday’s proceedings. More trouble for the coalition. Congress MLA, Shrimant Patil is said to be missing from the resort where the Congress MLAs are holed up. He is said to be missing since 8 pm yesterday and the party has made all attempts to locate him, including search for him at the airport. The Janata Dal (S) has issued a whip to the rebel MLAs, H Vishwanath, Narayan Gowda and H Gopalaiah to vote in favour of the government. The three MLAs however have the protection of the Supreme Court, which said that they cannot be forced to attend the assembly during the trust vote. Independent MLA, H Nagesh arrives in Bengaluru. He was seen leaving the airport in BJP leader, R Ashoka’s vehicle. D K Shivakumar of the Congress has appealed to the rebels to be part of the trust vote. They are valuable to us and I am sure good sense would prevail over them, he said. The Speaker will then seek a division of votes row by row, which would be both for and against the motion. All doors of the assembly hall will be closed after the bell. No member can leave or enter the House. A division bell will be rung following which all members of the House would need to be seated. If voting is to take place, then the Speaker will put the motion to vote. Kumaraswamy could seek a debate on the motion. This means members of both the ruling party and opposition will speak on the motion. Kumaraswamy would then reply at the end. All parties are in a huddle ahead of the trust vote. Plenty of strategy meetings are on to ensure that the government does not fall. All eyes are on rebel MLAs. While Ramalinga Reddy said that he would vote for the Congress, the rest who are in Mumbai have stuck to their stand and said that they are not attending assembly. Not just the assembly. All eyes would be on the airport as well. Over the past couple of days, several MLAs have landed and left Bengaluru. Security tightened in and around Vidhan Soudha ahead of trust vote Congress MLA Shrimant Balasaheb Patil went missing from the resort ahead of the trust vote in Karnataka assembly. According to reports, He was last seen in the resort at around 8 pm. Will they or won’t they is the big question. Rebels keep everyone guessing both about their decision and whereabouts. Congress makes hectic efforts to reach out to rebels. The other rebel MLAs camping in Mumbai said there was no question of stepping back on their resignations or attending the session. Minister for Urban Development and the lone Congress MLA from Dakshina Kannada district U.T. Khader on Wednesday said the motion of vote of confidence need not be taken up for voting on the day it will be tabled on Thursday. Minister for Urban Development and the lone Congress MLA from Dakshina Kannada district U.T. Khader on Wednesday said the motion of vote of confidence need not be taken up for voting on the day it will be tabled on Thursday. Congress on Thursday filed a complaint with the police saying they are unable to locate MLA Shivaram Hebbar. Hebbar is a rebel staying in Mumbai. Congress leader claims many Congress rebels will vote for govt, says Congress-JD(S) will pass trust vote Public Works Department Minister HD Revanna, who has been accused of interfering in decisions beyond his department, on Wednesday appealed to the rebel legislators — now holed up in a hotel in Mumbai — to return. Kumaraswamy has reportedly ordered three dissident MLAs from the Janata Dal (secular) to attend the confidence vote. He also warned that if they did not participate in the proceedings or voted against the state, action would be taken under the Prohibition Act. According to reports, Section 144 imposed within 2km radius of Vidhan Soudha ahead of trust vote Karnataka: BJP State President BS Yeddyurappa & BJP MLAs arrive at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru. Karnataka government will be facing floor test today. pic.twitter.com/MBvwjqz7L4 — ANI (@ANI) July 18, 2019 BJP State President BS Yeddyurappa & BJP MLAs arrive at Vidhana Soudha in Bengaluru. Bengaluru: Congress leader Siddaramaiah arrives at Vidhana Soudha; Karnataka government to face floor test today. pic.twitter.com/40l1z9MvZ6 — ANI (@ANI) July 18, 2019 Key leaders have started arriving at the Vidhan Soudha premises ahead of the 11 am trust vote. Siddaramaiah was seen entering the premises.
