Uttar Pradesh encounters: Constable killed after gangster shoots him in the chest

The encounter took place after Harsh Chaudhary saw two suspects in the forest of Indrapur and opened fire (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Meerut: In an encounter in Amroha, a district in Uttar Pradesh, a police constable and a history-sheeter lost their lives. The constable and the alleged history-sheeter lost their lives on Sunday evening in an encounter that saw rounds being fired from both sides. The alleged history-sheeter had over two dozen cases on him and was identified as Shiv Avtar.

Shiv Avtar, who also went by the name Shivia, allegedly had more than 12 cases under his name. Shivia's encounter took place in district Amroha, situated in western Uttar Pradesh. While taking part in Shivia's encounter, a constable named Harsh Chaudhary also lost his life.

Also Read: Bombay High Court fines woman Rs 25 lakh for threatening rivals with fake molestation case

The Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, Yogi Adityanath, announced a compensation of Rs 40 lakh for the wife of the deceased constable, Harsh Chaudhary. To honour his life and sacrifice, a compensation of Rs 10 lakh, an extraordinary pension to his wife and a government job for a dependent have also been announced in a government statement. While talking to the Hindustan Times, the Superintendent of Police, Amroha confirmed the identity of the history-sheeter killed in the encounter and also said that the accused had over two dozen cases against him.

Allegedly, Harsh Chaudhary was on patrol duty along with another constable when he saw two people in the forest of Indrapur. Harsh Chaudhary was hit with a bullet when the two suspects opened fire. Injured with the bullet, Chaudhary collapsed on the spot while the history-sheeter was killed when the police counterfired.

Chaudhary, the deceased constable, was a resident of Hathras district and had joined the police in 2016. The Inspector General of Police, Moradabad, Ramit Sharma, reached the area of the incident after receiving information about the same. The IG praised the selfless sacrifice made by Chaudhary and regarded him with respect for his bravery.
