How a bureaucrat’s ‘greed’ led to UP’s land feud killings

VARANASI: The pradhan of Umbhha village in eastern Uttar Pradesh ’s Sonbhadra district was among 21 people arrested on Thursday for the massacre of 10 villagers over a land dispute left festering for more than five decades by a former bureaucrat.“The prime accused, Yagyadutt Bhurtiya, his two brothers and 23 others are now in custody. Two guns have been seized along with 26 tractors used by the accused in the attack.” additional director general (Varanasi zone) Braj Bhushan said.Five of those arrests were made on Wednesday within a few hours of the attack, which also left 20 people seriously injured. All 78 accused named in the FIR face charges of murder, attempt to murder and rioting with weapons, among other offences.The land dispute that created the killing fields of Umbhha allegedly owes its origin to a bureaucrat’s decision to create an allegedly family-run society in 1952 and appoint it as the custodian of a 112-bigha plot that villagers say belonged to the gram sabha.The villagers and the office-bearers of the society have been fighting a legal battle since. Advocate Nityanand Dwivedi, counsel for the villagers, said the disputed plot had been carved out of a 600-bigha parcel of land that belonged to the Raja of Badhaar, Anand Brahm Saha. After the abolition of the Zamindari Act, this land was recorded as banjar(infertile) in revenue records and registered as the property of the gram sabha.Local villagers continued using the land for cultivation and other activities till 1952, when IAS officer Prabhat Kumar Mishra set up the Adarsh Cooperative Society Ltd of Ubha. “The officer’s father-in-law, Maheshwari Prasad Sinha of Muzaffarpur in Bihar, was named the president of the society and his wife Asha Mishra as an office-bearer,” Dwivedi said.Mishra’s daughter Vinita was appointed manager of the society and a total of 463 bighas registered in its name. After Sinha’s death, 200 bighas were transferred in the names of Asha and Vinita on September 6, 1989. They sold 144 bighas out of the total parcel of land to village head Bhurtiya for Rs 2 crore, the advocate said.On October 19, 2017, an application was moved for mutation of the land in the name of Bhurtiya. “The villagers came to know about the application much later and approached the then DM, Amit Kumar Singh, who then ordered the assistant revenue officer to probe how the land was transferred to the society and then to Bhurtiya,” Dwivedi said.Bhurtiya got the land registered in his name within 12 days of Singh’s transfer on February 15 this year.Back in the village where the alleged greed of a former bureaucrat culminated in the massacre on Wednesday, fouryear-old Sapna was left to babysit her 18-month-old sister the next afternoon in between stealing curious glances at the mourners filing past her. She wasn’t sure why everyone was crying. Her eyes scanned the length of the courtyard for her parents Ramnath and Sukhvanti Gondh.
