Priyanka Gandhi dharna Highlights: Congress leader calls off strike after meeting families of Sonbhadra shootout victims

Priyanka Gandhi Detained: Relatives of Sonbhadra shootout victims met Congress general secretary UP East Priyanka Gandhi at a guesthouse in Chunar. On Wednesday, 10 people were killed in a shootout over a land dispute in Sonbhadra.

Priyanka Gandhi detained: A day after high voltage drama in Mirzapur, Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Saturday afternoon called her strike. This comes after relatives of Sonbhadra shooting victims reached Chunar where they met the Congress leader at a guesthouse. Priyanka was stopped on Friday when she was on her way to Sonbhadra to meet the victims’ families. She reached Varanasi airport in the afternoon and went to BHU Trauma Centre where she met the injured people. After meeting the injured persons, Priyanka resumed her road journey to Sonbhadra but she was detained in Mirzapur by the administration. The Congress leader then sat on a strike and spent the night at a guest house in Chunar of Mirzapur district. Meanwhile, the Congress has alleged that Yogi Adityanath government wants to deport Priyanka so that she can’t meet the victims, adding that ‘jungle raj’ (misrule) was prevalent in the state under the BJP government as it has failed to take action against the guilty.

Earlier this week, 10 people including three women were gunned down in a clash between Gond and Gujjar communities over a land dispute in Sonebhadra. Police said that 29 people, including the kingpin Yogesh Dutt, have been arrested in connection with the violence. A case has been filed against 78 people.

Live Blog Highlights UP govt has implemented undeclared emergency: Congress Congress leader Pramod Tiwari said that the BJP government doesn’t want anyone to meet the victims’ families. “Whatever has happened is unconstitutional and undemocratic and it seems as if Uttar Pradesh government has implemented undeclared emergency to hid its sins and short comings,” he said. Congress’ Rajeev Shukla prevented from going to Sonbhadra Congress leader Rajeev Shukla told ANI that Congress leaders have been detained at Varanasi airport soon after they arrived. “Now they have allowed us to go to Chunar,” he said. Congress delegation stopped at Varanasi airport Congress leaders Deepender Singh Hooda, Mukul Wasnik, Raj Babbar, Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh, Jitin Prasada and Rajeev Shukla have been stopped at Varanasi airport by police. They were on their way to Sonbhadra to meet the victims of firing case. Sonbhadra massacre: Relative of main accused arrested Komal a relative of Yagya Dutt, the main accused of the July 17 incident, has been arrested. Komal was arrested from Varanasi. He is the station superintendent of Bhadohi railway station. Victims’ families not allowed to meet me, says Priyanka Priyanka Gandhi said tht two relatives of victims have come to meet her and 15 others are not being allowed to meet her. “Even I am not being allowed to meet them. God knows what they (administration) want. The government is behind met,” she said. Sonbhadra clash: Congress delegation meets Governor Ram Naik Congress delegation led by Pramod Tiwari meets Governor Ram Naik over Sonbhadra firing incident that claimed lives of 10 people. Congress delegation led by Pramod Tiwari meets Governor Ram Naik over Sonbhadra firing incident that claimed lives of 10 people. pic.twitter.com/szDFZQKKyI — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 20, 2019 Priyanka Gandhi refused to pay bail amount On Friday, after Priyanka was detained, she was asked to pay a bail amount of Rs 50,000 or face jail time of 14 days. However, she refused to pay the bail amount and said that she was ready to face arrest. “I will not pay a penny for the bail bond which they showed me on Friday night. I am ready to go to jail if this is what they want. I have not broken any rules. I even agreed to go to Sonebhadra with just two people so that the prohibitory orders are not violated,” she said. BJP govt using Section 144 to hide shortcomings: Mayawati BSP chief Mayawati alleged that the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh was using Section 144 to hide its shortcomings and not allowing anyone to visit Sonbhadra, where 10 people were gunned down this week. Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) empowers an executive magistrate to prohibit an assembly of more than four persons in an area. Relatives of victims meet Priyanka Gandhi Television reports say that relatives of the victims have reached Chunar guest house to meet Priyanka Gandhi Vadra. The Congress leader was stopped yesterday from visiting Sonbhadra. Mirzapur: Family members of the victims of Sonbhadra’s firing case come to meet Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra at Chunar Guest House. pic.twitter.com/Yujq1qcSU6 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 20, 2019 TMC leaders stage protest at Varanasi airport Trinamool Congress (TMC) delegation sit on a dharna at Varanasi airport, after they were stopped by police at the airport. They were on their way to meet the victims of Sonbhadra’s firing case. Sonbhadra killings unfortunate, says BJP’s Arjun Munda BJP leader and Union minister Arjun Munda said that the Sonbhadra incident is unfortunate. “As per the information I have received, state government is taking action. I think state government will do unbiased investigation and culprits will be punished,” he said. Priyanka Gandhi darna: What has happened so far? Priyanka arrived in Varanasi on Friday morning and visited the BHU Trauma Centre to meet those who had been injured in Wednesday’s Sonebhadra massacre. Priyanka was on her way to Sonebhadra but she was detained at Narayanpur in Mirzapur. She asked officials to show her the necessary orders for stopping her but officials said that they had verbal orders from the ‘top’. Thereafter, Priyanka and other Congress leaders were taken to the Chunar Guest house. Ten persons had been killed and two dozen injured in a caste clash over a land dispute in Murtiya village in Sonebhadra. Rahul Gandhi slams Yogi govt for preventing Priyanka from visiting Sonbhadra Priyanka’s brother Rahul Gandhi termed her arrest as ‘illegal’. He tweeted that Priyanka’s arrest was an arbitrary use of power by the Yogi Adityanath government. The illegal arrest of Priyanka in Sonbhadra, UP, is disturbing. This arbitrary application of power, to prevent her from meeting families of the 10 Adivasi farmers brutally gunned down for refusing to vacate their own land, reveals the BJP Govt’s increasing insecurity in UP. pic.twitter.com/D1rty8KJVq — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) July 19, 2019 Sonbhadra unrest: Jyotiraditya Scindia slams BJP govt Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia said that the action was open disrespect of democracy. “Meeting families of victims and expressing condolences is the responsibility of public representatives. The government has attempted to crush democracy which is highly condemnable,” he tweeted. Won’t leave without meeting families of victims, says Priyanka Priyanka gandhi said that she will not leave without meeting the families of the victims. “It has been 24 hours. I am not going to leave until and unless I am allowed to meet the victims of Sonbhadra’s firing case,” she said. Yogi Adityanath speaks on Sonbhadra killings Yogi Adityanath on Friday said that the foundation of thisSonbhadra incident was laid in 1955 when the then Tehsildar did the unlawful act of registering the land of Gram Samaj in the name of Adarsh Cooperative society. He said that raids are being conducted across the state to nab all those involved in the shootout. The police have arrested 29 people, including village head and his brother so far. More arrests are likely to be made in days to come, police said. Sonbhadra killings: SDM, 4 cops suspended so far On Friday, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath suspended a sub divisional magistrate and four policemen. Twenty-nine people have been arrested so far in the Sonbhadra case. Sonbhadra massacre: BJP failed to act against guilty, says Randeep Singh Surjewala Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala lashed out at the BJP over Sonbhadra incident. He said that the BJP government has failed to prevent Sonbhadra massacre. “BJP government fails to act against guilty. BJP government illegally arrests Priyanka ji for wanting to meet families,” he said. Priyanka Gandhi detained in Mirzapur Priyanka Gandhi was detained and stopped from going to Sonbhadra on Friday where 10 people were gunned down earlier this week. Refusing to furnish a personal bond, Priyanka stayed put at a guesthouse in Chunar of Mirzapur. Sonbhadra clash: ‘Jungle raj’ prevailing in UP, says Congress The Congress party alleged that the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh wants to deport Priyanka Gandhi Vadra so that she cannot meet the victims of the Sonbhadra clash. The party also alleged that “jungle raj” was prevalent in the state and the government had failed to take action against the guilty. TMC delegation stopped at Varanasi airport A Trinamool Congress delegation on way to meet Sonbhadra victims’ families detained at Varanasi airport. The Trinamool Congress (TMC) team comprises O’Brien, MP and leader of the delegation Sunil Mondal and MP Abir Ranjan Biswas.
