Bihar mob lynching: Angry locals beat 3 men to death over suspected cattle theft

Relatives of the victims pleading for justice. | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Four men were suspected to be cattle thieves by locals of Paigambarpur village in Bihar. Angry crowd managed to get hold of three 'thieves' and beat them mercilessly. By the time police arrived on the spot, two men had already died while the third one succumbed to his injuries a few minutes later.

Patna: Saran district in Bihar witnessed a brutal case of mob lynching where three men were killed by angry mob. They were beaten to death over allegations of cattle theft in the Paigambarpur village in Baniyapur constituency.

According to villagers, a group of four men were seen stealing cattle and were subsequently intercepted by the locals. While one of the alleged thieves managed to flee the spot, the other three were not so lucky and were senselessly thrashed by the angry mob.

The deceased men were identified as Bides Nat, Raju Nat and Naushad Qureshi. It was reported that two of them had died on the spot after the brutal assault while the third person breathed his last on the way to a hospital. He was being rushed to a nearby medical facility by his family members who came to know of the incident and tried to save him.

Bihar: Three people were beaten to death by locals in Baniyapur, Saran on suspicion of cattle theft, earlier today. Family members in mourning. pic.twitter.com/Ua5DCgrckr — ANI (@ANI) July 19, 2019

The bodies of the deceased have been sent for post-mortem and police investigation is underway. It is to be noted that the people who were beaten to death were locals as well.

West Bengal: Mob attacks woman over suspicion of being child-lifter

A woman was last week beaten by a mob in West Bengal by tea-garden workers on suspicion of being a child-lifter. She was seen walking in Alipurduar district area with two children and locals thought that her movements were suspicious.

An angry crowd confronted her and soon, the scuffle turned into a violent one with the mob injuring her with sharp weapons. Some locals alerted the police and cops had to resort to lathi charge in order to dispel the crowd and stop them from further harming the woman. Even the two children who were accompanying her were injured in the attack and had to be admitted to a hospital.
