Indian Army: Army working to counter Pakistani propaganda on Jammu and Kashmir

(This story originally appeared in on Jul 18, 2019)

NEW DELHI: The Indian Army is working with the ministries of Home and External Affairs to counter Pakistani propaganda which projects law and order actions in Jammu and Kashmir as ‘trumped up’ human rights violations, the defence ministry said.The development was shared in the defence ministry’s annual report for 2018-19. The move comes in the wake of several allegations of human rights violations against the army.The ministry, on the other hand, has slammed Pakistan for its state sponsored terrorism in J&K, which remains the foremost internal security challenge in India. It has also blamed Pakistan for actively training and aiding terrorists to infiltrate into India through the Line of Control (LoC).Meanwhile, the ministry said that the army received 15 allegations of human rights violations from the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) last year. Out of this, six investigations have been completed and all of them have been found false. The remaining allegations are currently under investigation. “The Indian Army continues to maintain its stellar Human Rights record in J&K and assiduously investigates cases of alleged violations received from NHRC,” reads the report.The ministry explained that Pakistan with renewed vigour last year, carried out an international campaign on Kashmir through its ‘sponsored proxies’ by ‘trying to project law and order maintenance actions as trumped up human rights cases of excess use of force’. It added that Pakistan’s effort to portray the Kashmir issue has received a fillip, following the publication of two international reports by the Office of the United Nations Human Rights Commission and the British Parliaments ‘All Party Coordination Committee’.“The Indian Army is proactively engaging with MEA and MHA to counter propaganda both at international and national fora,” reads the report.The government is also carrying out development initiatives such as improving infrastructure, education, health and security equipment for the J&K Police.In light of Pakistan’s sponsored terrorism in J&K, the ministry said that security forces killed 305 ‘ militants ’ from January 1, 2018 to March 31, 2019. “Active training and aiding of terrorists continue from across the border to infiltrate through the LoC. The efficacy of own counter infiltration grid has resulted in heavy attrition of infiltrating terrorists and lowering of successful infiltration across the LoC,” reads the report.Last year, the army eliminated 15 infiltration bids, resulting in 35 terrorists being killed. In 2017, the army eliminated 33 infiltration bids, resulting in 59 terrorists being killed. In the hinterland, 254 terrorists were killed by security forces in J&K last year. “The districts of Pulwama, Shopian, Anantnag and Kulgam remained the hub of terror related activities. Along the LoC, areas South of Pir Panjal Ranges remained violent due to frequent ceasefire violations, while the infiltration attempts from the North of Pir Panjal Ranges have continued as hither to fore,” reads the report.The ministry said that the February Pulwama terrorist attack perpetrated by the Pakistan-based UN designated terrorist entity, Jaish-e-Muhammad (JeM), confirmed again that India remains a persistent target of Pakistan’s cross border terrorism policy. “India’s response, amongst other measures, included a successful pre-emptive non-military anti-terror aerial strike on the largest training camp of JeM at Balakot in Pakistan,” said the ministry.Pakistan, on the other hand, has been expanding its military forces, especially nuclear and missile capabilities, despite a ‘financial crisis’.
