‘Mission Mangal’ Trailer: Why Is Vidya Frying A Poori To Explain Science?

The much-awaited trailer of Mission Mangal released on Thursday. As anticipated, it is a nail-biting journey to the ultimate launch of India’s first-ever space mission to Mars’ orbit. The film has a strong female cast consisting of Taapsee Pannu, Sonakshi Sinha, Vidya Balan, Kirti Kulhari, and Nithya Menen. They are supported by an equally qualified male cast of Akshay Kumar, Sharman Joshi, and H.G. Dattatreya.

The trailer





The trailer introduces us to all the main characters of the film from Akshay to Vidya and Dattatreya. Based on a true story this trailer does grip your attention and you might even save the date to witness what it is to work in clocked situations such as these. The characters are apparently all inspired by real persons working on India’s Mars orbiting mission, giving an insight into their personal and professional lives both.

The trailer weaves together the stories of everyone coming together to work on this project and doesn’t make it chaotic, which one would expect with a large star cast. The film has been in talks regarding its female-heavy star cast and buzz was created even when the poster had launched for the film.

But what has the film exactly been in talks for? First of all, why does Akshay Kumar, also the producer of the film choose to occupy a space in the poster while everyone is moved into a single line on the other half of the poster? If you choose to represent women as strong characters, then why not give them the space to own the film?

If our doubts weren’t heard before, the trailer threw up one more thing to discuss--why does the character of Vidya Balan have to explain science to people at ISRO by frying pooris? Is it because the primary area of female dominance and expertise lies in the kitchen and there is supposed to be a science in that too.

Twitter reacts to this once again

Twitteratis are not one to sit back and watch something unfold without an opinion and well they mirror ours equally. One Twitter user wrote, “So many women I love and yet I am left with a nagging feeling that Akshay Kumar is the hero. UGH”

So many women I love and yet I am left with a nagging feeling that Akshay Kumar is the hero. UGH https://t.co/c5wumiMZn2 — Sonia Mariam Thomas (@SoKneeOh) July 18, 2019

While another one wrote, “Aah, India's greatest male saviour returns with another instalment of ‘Akshay Kumar Uplifting Women While Also Simultaneously Massaging His Jingoism’.”

Aah, India's greatest male saviour returns with another instalment of "Akshay Kumar Uplifting Women While Also Simultaneously Massaging His Jingoism".https://t.co/ZaHadqB9cw — Saurya Sengupta (@sauryasengupta) July 18, 2019

However, overall the trailer has received a thumbs up from the audience who are applauding it already.

THYS TRAILER LOOKS IMPRESSIVE



CANT WAIT TO SEE THYS TALENTED WOMEN GIVING THEIR BEST ON BIG SCREEN



?? #MissionMangalhttps://t.co/gGr8asGncz — NILANJANA (@sharicafever) July 18, 2019

Itni badi muskurahat jaati ye trailer dekh kar.????????????????????????????

Most awaited movie

Best of luck to the team. This gonna be big hit.

And going to make us proud.??????#MissionMangalTrailerhttps://t.co/WDmekcBM7G — PuJaa??? (@theHappySoul73) July 18, 2019

#MissionMangalTrailer so mission mangal trailer have more likes and comments than batla house trailer in just 7 hours... Response ??? — Nikhil (@Nikhil20906806) July 18, 2019

The film is based on the Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM), also known as Mangalyaan which was launched on 5 November 2013 by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO). The craft--which was made in one-tenth of the amount that United State’s space research centre, NASA spent on its Mars orbiter--entered the planet's atmosphere on 24 September 2014. It was a great scientific success owing to its comparatively lower cost and above all made India the first Asian nation to reach Martian orbit. Not just that, the success of this mission also made India the first nation in the world to do so in its maiden attempt.

Slated to release on August 15, 2019, it will be interesting to see how the audiences receive this film.
