Police discovers Rohit Shekhar's pre-recorded 'dying declaration' saying wife Apoorva 'may kill me'

Delhi:

Rohit Shekhar Tiwari, son of late politician ND Tiwari, had recorded his ‘dying declaration’ months before his wife Apoorva Shukla allegedly murdered him in his sleep on April 16 this year. In the video message saved on a pen drive, Rohit Shekhar had said that his ‘wife may kill him’. “She has threatened to destroy me and take away everything I have. My wife, Apoorva Shukla, is blackmailing me and mentally torturing me to grab my properties. This may be considered a dying declaration if anything happens to me in the near future," Rohit Shekhar has said in the video message. According to a Times of India report, the pen drive and the video message are some of the crucial evidences in the murder probe.

The TOI report said that the video message was recorded by Rohit Shekhar on September 17 last year. The cops said that Apoorva allegedly stormed the hospital and humiliated Rohit Shekar inside the ward where he was admitted.

Seven months later, on the intervening night of April 15-16, Apoorva allegedly smothered Rohit in his sleep with a pillow. The cops say that Apoorva had married Rohit for his wealth. When she got to know that Rohit was planning to give away all the properties to a female family friends, she got angry and decided to murder Rohit. She had thought that nobody will think of her as the accused and the murder will pass on as a natural death since Rohit was not keeping well for quite sometime.

After the murder, Rohit's mother had said that his son met Apoorva on a matrimonial site and was even alerted about her nature by their relative Rajiv Shekhar and his wife Kumkum. Apoorva didn't share cordial relationship with Rohit and Siddhartha as they wanted to give a chunk of his property to Rajiv’s son Karthik.

The autopsy report of Rohit Shekhar revealed that he died an ‘unnatural death’ due to “asphyxia” as he was strangulated and smothered possibly by using a pillow.

Apoorva, who was taken into the police custody for questioning, made contradicting statements during the interrogation. The Crime Branch officials questioned Apoorva for over eight hours, the sources said. Besides Apoorva, the Delhi Police Crime Branch on Sunday took Rohit's two househelps -- Martha and Golu -- into its custody in the murder case of former chief minister of Uttar Pradesh and Uttarakhand ND Tiwari’s son.

For all the Latest Crime News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
