After ICJ verdict, Pakistan allows consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav

India Gate has names of 70,000 Indian soldiers who lost their lives fighting for the British Army during World War I | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Pakistan informed Jadhav of his rights on Thursday, a day after the ICJ verdict ICJ pulled Pakistan for violating Vienna Convention

Islamabad: Two days after being pulled by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) for violating Vienna Convention, Pakistan, on Friday, provided consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav, a former Indian Navy officer convicted to death on charges of spying. On Wednesday, the World Court came down heavily on Pakistan and said that in not allowing consular access to Kulbhushan Jadhav, Islamabad had violated the Vienna Convention.

Late on Thursday night, Pakistan issued a statement saying — "As a responsible state, Pakistan will grant consular access to Commander Kulbhushan Jadhav according to Pakistani laws for which modalities are being worked out."

While India welcomed the decision saying it vindicated New Delhi's stand, Pakistan claimed that the decision favoured Islamabad as it did not order a release of Jadhav.

India had submitted that Jadhav was 'kidnapped' by Pakistan on March 3, 2016, from Iran and New Delhi was informed about his detention only on March 25- 22 days after he was picked up. India had also submitted that by delaying the message, Pakistan had violated Article 36 of Vienna Convention.

Commenting on Pakistan's claims that the verdict favoured Islamabad's stand, MEA, on Thursday said that 'it seemed' Pakistan was reading from a different verdict. MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar, however, said that Islamabad had 'its own compulsions' to 'lie' to its people.

"The ICJ judgement is a complete vindication of India's position on the matter... It is incumbent on Pakistan to implement the ICJ verdict... The ICJ judgement is final, binding and without the provision of appeal... Pakistan has its own compulsions to lie to its people," Kumar said.

In its earlier statement, MOFA had said — "It is reiterated that Indian Naval Commander Kulbhushan Jadhav entered Pakistan without a visa on authentic Indian Passport with a fake alias Hussain Mubarak Patel. Commander Kulbhushan Jadhav is responsible for acts of sabotage, espionage and multiple terrorist incidents in which scores of innocent Pakistani citizens were killed resulting in umpteen women being widowed and numerous children becoming orphans. Commander Kulbhushan Jadhav has confessed all these acts during his trial in a Pakistani court in front of a Judicial Magistrate. This is a clear case of Indian state terrorism."
