News Digest: A smart, speedy recap of the day's headlines

Mumbai: Have you missed any news today? Here are the top national, international headlines of the day.

Sheila Dikshit passes away: Three-time Chief Minister of Delhi and senior Congress leader Sheila Dikshit passed away in Delhi on Saturday. She was 81. Dikshit was hospitalised in the national capital. She was being treated for a heart ailment in Fortis Escorts Heart Institute.

Read| Veteran Congress leader and 3-time Delhi CM Sheila Dikshit passes away

Life of Sheila Dikshit: Senior Congress leader and the longest-serving woman chief minister in India Sheila Dikshit passed away in the national capital on Saturday. She was 81.

Dikshit was admitted in Fortis Escorts Heart Institute on Saturday morning. She breathed her last at 03:55 pm after suffering cardiac arrest.

Read| Sheila Dikshit, 1938 – 2019: A storied career with few blights

Yeddyurappa denies giving away bribe: BJP's state unit president B S Yeddyurappa on Saturday denied the allegations of his party offering Rs 5 crore to the MLAs of Congress-JDS coalition in the state and said the two parties were trying to delay the trust vote by "playing games".

Read| BS Yeddyurappa denies Rs 5 crore was offered to Cong-JDS MLAs

Farooq Abdullah on Articles 370, 35-A: National Conference president Farooq Abdullah Saturday said annulling Articles 370 and 35-A will tantamount to a constitutional coup. He asserted that Article 370 is essential and unassailable until a final resolution of the issue of Jammu and Kashmir is reached. "Keeping in view the special circumstances (at the time of accession of J&K to India), Article 370 was added to the Constitution of India. The Article will remain as it is until the final resolution of the issue of Jammu and Kashmir is not reached to," Abdullah said addressing a party convention in Handwara area of Kupwara district. "So until the issue is solved, no power on earth can touch the article 370.

Read| Annulling Articles 370, 35-A will tantamount to constitutional coup: Farooq Abdullah

PDP concerned about arming civilians: Describing the reported plans of the Centre and the Jammu and Kashmir administration to arm civilians in the sensitive Chenab Valley as "alarming", PDP president Mehbooba Mufti Saturday warned the move would have "dangerous consequences".

Read| Plans to arm civilians in Chenab Valley will have 'dangerous consequences': Mehbooba

Governors transferred, appointed: The government transferred two governors and made fresh appointments in some states on Saturday.

Former interlocutor on Naga talks R N Ravi has been appointed as Nagaland governor, according to a Rashtrapati Bhavan communique.

Read| Two governors transferred, new appointments in some states

Police rescues children in Cyberabad: Cyberabad Police have claimed to rescue 300 children employed as child labour in the month of July alone.

Under the operation Muskaan-V, it rescued 267 boys and 33 girls from child labour, begging, rag picking and runaway.

Read| Cyberabad Police claim to have rescued 300 children in July
