'Disturbing', 'arbitrary application of power': Rahul Gandhi condemns sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's detention

Priyanka Gandhi detained, Congress says 'illegal arrest' | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Gandhi was on her way to meet family members of Sonbhadra victims Rahul Gandhi said that the detention reveals BJP government's increasing insecurity in UP

New Delhi: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi, on Friday, condemned his sister Priyanka Gandhi Vadra's detention calling it 'illegal' and 'arbitrary'. Taking to Twitter, the former Congress president said that the action indicates BJP government's 'insecurity' in Uttar Pradesh. Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, the general secretary, in-charge of Uttar Pradesh East was detained and prevented from visiting Sonbhadra, where 10 people were reportedly gunned down.

"The illegal arrest of Priyanka in Sonbhadra, UP, is disturbing. This arbitrary application of power, to prevent her from meeting families of the 10 Adivasi farmers brutally gunned down for refusing to vacate their own land, reveals the BJP Govt’s increasing insecurity in UP," Gandhi said in a tweet. Gandhi also shared a video of an argument between Priyanka Gandhi and UP Police in which Gandhi questioned the grounds on which she was being stopped from visiting the village.

Earlier, Priyanka Gandhi's husband Robert Vadra too condemned the detention and said, "The way my wife and Congress leader, Priyanka, has been arrested, is completely unconstitutional. No documents were produced for the arrest. This is a complete abuse of law in every respect. Is it a crime to visit the family of the deceased?"

"The state government should immediately release her and let democracy be a democracy and not a dictatorship," Vadra further added. Citing UP Police officials, news agency PTI reported that Gandhi was taken to a guest house after she insisted that she be allowed to meet the family members of the deceased.

RELATED NEWS No one can stop me: Priyanka Gandhi vows support for Sonbhadra victims

Various state units of the party condemned the detention. Maharashtra Congress chief Balasaheb Thorat alleged that the BJP was 'afraid' of Gandhi. "The Uttar Pradesh government arrested Priyanka Gandhi as the BJP government is afraid of her...she was arrested illegally. Is it a crime to meet victims of the violence?" a statement quoted Thorat as saying. MP unit leader compared Gandhi to her grandmother Indira Gandhi as Madhya Pradesh Congress spokesperson Shobha Oza said she has 'inherited' sensitivity from her grandmother.

Ten people were killed and 18 were injured when supporters of the village head and Gond tribals clashed over a piece of land in Ghorawal area of Sonbhadra on Wednesday.
