Shiv Sena leader murder Shailesh Nimse wife Sakshi nimse Suicide kalyan jail arrest

Shiv Sena leader murdered: Detained wife commits suicide in jail (File Image) | Photo Credit: ANI

Kalyan: Shiv Sena leader Shailesh Nimse's wife allegedly committed suicide in the jail during her detention. The lady had been arrested in connection with the murder of her husband, a Shiv Sena strongman from Shahapur taluka of Maharashtra.

Sakshi Nimse was found dead on Monday (28 January) morning in the Adharwadi jail, Kalyan. Marathi TV news channel ABP Majha who first brought out this news says the reason behind the alleged suicide has not yet been ascertained.

Sakshi is said to have hanged herself to death on an iron rod in the prison's toilet in the morning. She was housed in the jail under charges of having commissioned the murder of her husband by hiring a killer.

She had since then, been suffering from remorse and depression, say some people. That is likely to have been the reason behind her suicide.

Read Also : Shiv Sena leader’s murder case cracked; wife hired contract killer to eliminate husband over illicit affair

The incident came to light in the morning as Sakshi did not return from the toilet and took unusually long. When the door was forced open, Sakshi was found dead in the toilet.

Meanwhile, when the relatives of the deceased woman were contacted, they told that Sakshi was repenting the murder of her husband. "She had no desire to live because of the husband's murder,' they are said to have said.

The Nimse murder story

Shiv Sena's Shahapur leader Shailesh Nimse's wife Sakshi alias Vaishali Nimse (34) had allegedly hatched the plan to murder him as she was deeply disturbed over his alleged illicit relationship with another woman. The 43-year-old leader had been allegedly eliminated by a contract killer identified as Pramod Lute (32), Thane Rural Additional Superintendent of Police Prashant Kadam said, as per a report in Mid-Day. Kadam said Sakshi gave a 'supari' (contract) of Rs 1.5 lakh to Lute to kill her husband as she was very upset with his illicit relationship and also the alleged violence he subjected Sakshi to whenever they argued over the affair.

Troubled by this, Sakshi had allegedly murdered Shailesh on April 20 last year with the help of the hired killer. The attackers had killed Shailesh in his own house and attempted to burn his body in the nearby forest.
