Pakistan turns victorious in taking Kashmir to global platforms: Defence Ministry of India – KashmirWatch

PTK reports from Indian occupied Kashmir

SRINAGAR, JUL 19 (PTK): The Indian Ministry of Defence (MoD), in its annual report, said that Pakistan has been victorious in taking Kashmir to global platforms despite efforts to counter the propaganda.

“Pakistan’s effort to portray the Kashmir issue has received a fillip following the publication of two international reports by the office of United Nations Human Rights Commission and the British Parliaments All-Party Coordination Committee,” the MoD report for 2018-19 said.

The report added, “Pakistan, with renewed vigour in 2018, orchestrated an international campaign on Kashmir through its sponsored proxies by trying to project law and order maintenance actions as trumped-up human rights cases of excessive use of force.”

The Ministry of Defence added, “Pakistan, with renewed intensity in 2018, choreographed a global campaign on Jammu and Kashmir via its sponsored agents by attempting to display law and order mess in Jammu and Kashmir and propagated Human Rights Violations in the Valley.

The MoD has said that the Indian Defence Forces are vigorously battling with the Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs to counter propaganda on both international and national fronts.

A recent United Nations report alleged human rights violations by the Indian forces in Kashmir and proposed the formation of an inquiry commission.

Rejecting the findings, the Indian Ministry of External Affairs called the report “fallacious, tendentious and motivated” and questioned the intent in bringing out such a report.

“It is a selective compilation of largely unverified information. It is overtly prejudiced and seeks to build a false narrative. The report violates India’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. The entire state of Jammu and Kashmir is an integral part of India,” the MEA had said in response to the report. (PTK)
