'Father of two murdered children' writes open letter, accuses hospital of medical negligence

The doctors avoided important details about the birth of the children and said that nothing could have been to save the infants (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The aggrieved father, Abid Sofi wrote an open letter to the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir The incident happened at Lal Ded Hospital

New Delhi: "As I write this letter to you, hoping that it will bring about a change that will prevent fathers from shouldering the coffins of their children because of criminal negligence of some doctors, I'm filled with sorrow, grief, rage and above all a feeling that I have failed as a father and as a husband-- emotions I would not wish for my enemies", wrote a father who lost his newborns to medical apathy.

Kashmir's Abid Sofi, a journalist by profession, wrote to Satya Pal Malik, Governor of Jammu and Kashmir, after his newborns passed away at Government Lal Ded Hospital on June 28.

Sofi's wife encountered contractions at around 10.30 pm on June 28. Worried about his spouse, Sofi called their doctor who told him that they were 'Braxton Hicks contractions' and asked him to give an already prescribed tablet to his wife.

In an attempt to provide adequate medical assistance to his wife, Sofi took her to the Lal Ded Hospital. On their way, his wife told him that her pain had subsided and she even walked herself to the hospital from the parking.

The staff at the hospital asked Sofi's wife to lie down on the bed and without any medical tests, they "declared that both the babies have died". When Sofi's wife said that she could feel the babies moving inside her, the doctors allegedly yelled at her. This was followed by a pelvic examination after which the doctors said that the woman's cervix had dilated.

"The doctors did a pelvic examination and said that the cervix has dilated, as the babies have already died, we have to induce labour and deliver them immediately. When my wife protests against it and said she can still feel the movement of the children, Ali and Abu Bakar, she was slapped and asked to shut up or leave the hospital and die", the letter said.

Allegedly, Sofi was not allowed to enter the room and was pushed by security every time he tried to see his ailing wife. The doctors administered an injection to induce labour and took Sofi's wife to the labour ward. Even after the delivery, the doctors did not inform the family if the babies were dead or alive.

"The first baby was delivered at around 12 on June 29 and he was alive. My wife says that the senior doctor had asked the assistant to put the child (my baby) on the table, despite him being alive, as according to her (the doctor), he had no chance to survive. It was only after a junior doctor insisted; the baby (wrapped in cloth) was taken to the ICU for children." After the delivery of the second baby, one of the doctors complained of her dress being "ruined by the blood" of the infant and the mother.

He said that his two sons were alive for around three-and-a-half hours without any medical support. Sofi mentioned that instead of informing him about the death of his sons, the doctors went on to carry out formalities and he had to coax out a response from the staff.

Remembering the incident, Sofi wrote, "I could not even muster the courage to hold them in my arms and kiss them goodbye." He added, "Instead of driving my kids to a playfield, I drove them to our graveyard, where they were laid to rest."

After burying his children, Sofi went to the Medical Superintendent of the hospital to "seek some answers". The doctors avoided important details about the birth of the children and said that nothing could have been to save the infants.

Sofi urged the government to investigate into the matter and wrote, "I still can't believe that Ali and Abu Baker are gone and I can't see them ever again, not until I die and meet them in the afterlife. The next day I went to see my children at the graveyard and I promised them I will try with all my might that what happened to them will not happen to anyone else. "

In his letter, Sofi also mentioned that another couple lost their baby to medical negligence. Allegedly, one of the babies "slipped from the tray and fell on the ground, resulting in his death". He added that the doctors allegedly threatened the couple and asked them to stay mum about the incident.

The "father of two murdered sons" posted the letter on Facebook and demanded stringent action against the hospital. He ended the letter with, "I would request the Governor to intervene not just in my case, but all the cases in which families have claimed death due to negligence at Lal Ded Hospital. Mr Malik should initiate an inquiry in all these cases and punish the guilty. Until and unless doctors at the only maternity hospital in the valley are made accountable, things will not streamline at LD Hospital."
