Over 9 hours in detention, Priyanka Gandhi says ready to go to jail, refuses to pay bail

Priyanka Gandhi on a dharna with her supporters in Mirzapur | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Priyanka Gandhi continues to be detained in Mirzapur for more than 9 hours She was detained on her way to meet the victims of Sonbhadra massacre Gandhi was booked under Section 144. She was asked to pay a bail of Rs 50,000 or face prospect of 14 days in prison

Lucknow/New Delhi: Priyanka Gandhi, the All India Congress Committee (AICC) general secretary for Uttar Pradesh (East), is still detained at the Chunar Guest House in Mirzapur district by UP police even after for more than 9 hours as of now (2230 hours). The Gandhi scion was detained by UP police while she was on her way to visit the family members of the victims of the Sonbhadra massacre.

From her detention, Priyanka in a statement on Twitter said she, “came to meet the poor tribal people bearing the brunt of a massacre. Being a servant of the people, it is my religious duty and also a moral right. I am steadfast in my decision to meet them”.

The AICC general secretary, along with some members of the Congress party, was on her way to meet the family members of the people who were killed in firing over a land dispute.

The police detained her for alleged violation of Section 144, which was imposed in the area during her visit. Assembly of more than 4 people is prohibited under the Section which is imposed to maintain public order.

The Congress leaders said the UP Police informed her that she will be released upon furnishing bail of Rs 50,000 or else face the prospect of being jailed for a period of 14 days. But they won’t let me meet the victims on “orders from top”.

Mirzapur: Congress workers allege deliberate power cut at Chunar Guest House by administration; say, "They want to trouble Priyanka Gandhi & Congress workers so that we leave the place. But we will spend the night here with candles & continue our protest." https://t.co/Ld4QBIlnFN — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 19, 2019

Lamenting the UP Police’s decision to detain her, Priyanka said, “neither she has broken any law nor committed any crime. I clarified to the administration that I am ready to go alone with local administration officials to meet the families of the victims in the tribal village or in whichever way the administration deems fit”.

Priyanka blamed the UP government for the spectacle that was created due to her detention. “The people are watching everything. In this context, I consider the bail to be unethical and therefore I won’t pay it. I have clearly demanded to meet the tribal victims of the massacre. The (UP) government can do what it wants,” Priyanka adding she is ready to go the jail if the government considers it a crime to meet the victims.

The Sonbhadra massacre occurred when the village head of Ubbha in Ghorawal region had gone to seek possession of the land he purchased around two years ago. However, the villagers opposed to it, which then led to firing allegedly by his accomplices and aides.

CM Adityanath said that 29 people were arrested in connection with the incident. “The government has ordered the suspension of 4 officials. A 3-member committee has been constituted to investigate the matter from 1955 till now and submit a detailed report to the government in 10 days,” he said.

The issue headlines on Friday as Congress held a press conference denouncing the incident and Trinamool Congress (TMC) announced that it will send its MP Derek O'Brien to Sonbhadra to assess the situation.


