Class monitor election defeat pushes class VIII boy to extreme step

Was taunted by classmates and teachers, alleges child rights activist

Competition and the consequent defeat can sometimes lead to tragic consequences.

A class VIII student of a private school here was found dead on the railway tracks Friday morning, allegedly because he was dejected over his defeat in the Class Representative (CR) election to his classmate, a girl.

The Nalgonda Government Railway Police (GRP), who recovered the mortal remains of the boy about two km away from his house, confirmed his identity with a missing complaint filed with Ramannapeta police station.

According to the petition by Chindam Vijay Kumar, the boy's father, his two sons studying at the local Krishnaveni Talent School returned home at around 5 p.m. on Thursday, and the younger one left home within an hour.

They searched for the boy till 10.30 p.m., after which they approached the police requesting access to the town’s CCTV footage, and later at 12.45 a.m. lodged the missing complaint.

Sub-Inspector Chella Sailu said the parents did not express any suspicion in the petition.

However, hours after accident scene recovery by the GRP on Friday, Vijay Kumar, a kirana store owner, alleged that his son’s loss in the CR election was the reason for the extreme step, and accused the school of conducting elections.

According to information, on July 16, the boy and a girl representing each group stood for the election. While the girl was elected leader, the boy the assistant leader.

“The boy even distributed sweets and the girl gave chocolates to everyone after the results. No one had any hint that he was dejected,” a teacher of the school, requesting anonymity, said.

The school management did not respond to this reporter’s calls, or gave a statement on the incident.

While the boy’s parents and relatives continued their stand against the school, P. Achyutha Rao of Balala Hakkula Sangham, a Hyderabad-based organisation for protection of child rights, supported them.

“It was learnt that the boy was taunted by his classmates and teachers. The school promoted unfair competition, and the police should register cases of culpable homicide and cruelty to the child,” he demanded.

Meanwhile, the GRP has initiated an investigation under section 174 of Cr. PC – unnatural death.

(There is always someone to listen at: +914066202000 in case of any emotional breakdown at this Hyderabad-based suicide intervention centre, Roshni)
