Bulandshahr cop murder: Police planted mobile in their house, alleges wife of accused

rchopra@tribunemail.com

Shahira Naim

Tribune News Service

Lucknow, January 28

The wife of the main accused in the Syana Station Officer murder case has accused the police of planting his missing mobile phone in their house during the search operation on Republic Day.

Syana Circle Officer Raghvendra Kumar Mishra, during a court-ordered search on January 26 of the Chingrawathi village house of main accused Prashant Natt, claimed to have recovered six mobile phones, including slain inspector Subodh Kumar Singh’s mobile which had disappeared from the spot after his killing by a mob.

Categorically denying the police claim, Natt’s wife Sonam said the police had brought the mobile phones with them and planted it in their house.

Speaking to a news channel, she said her husband was innocent and was being falsely implicated. “Two policemen came with a search warrant. They asked for my husband’s room, entered it and placed the mobiles on the dressing table. When I objected that the mobile phones were not ours, they asked me to keep quiet,” she alleged.

While Bulandshahar SSP Prabhakar Chaudhary countered the charges saying what other reaction could be expected from the accused’s family.

He said the search was carried out following the court orders. However, he was at a loss of words when asked why no search was carried out earlier since Natt had been arrested on December 27.

According to the district police, the line of investigation earlier was different as the police were searching the nearby fields where the police inspector had been killed to recover the mobile phone. It was only after the court order that the police searched Natt’s house.

During the December 3 mob violence following the discovery of the remains of a cow in the fields of former gram pradhan Raj Kumar of Mahav village, inspector Subodh Kumar Singh and Sumit, a local, were killed and public property, including a police post, gutted.

According to the police, Natt, a taxi driver, shot the SO dead. Singh’s two mobile phones and a pistol were reportedly missing later. The police are yet to recover the pistol.

The police had registered two cases–one against seven named persons for the alleged cow slaughter case and another against 27 named and 60 unnamed for the murder of the SO and Sumit, along with the ransacking of the police post and damage to public property.

Interestingly, Natt was not named in the FIR.

As many as 37 accused in the case have either been arrested or they have surrendered. They include Bajrang Dal’s Yogesh Raj, BJP leader Shikhar Agarwal, and Upendra Raghav of the Vishwa Hindu Parishad. Raj and Agarwal were arrested while Raghav surrendered before a court.

The state government has separately booked Azhar Khan, Nadeem Khan and Mehboob Ali under the National Security Act for the alleged cow slaughter that triggered the violence.
