Police recover penknife used for attacking Akhil

SFI leaders brought to campus for evidence collection

The police on Friday said they retrieved the penknife used in the near-fatal attack on University College student Akhil Chandran on July 12.

Investigators recovered the weapon from under a pile of dry leaves near an open stage the Students Federation of India (SFI) had expropriated as its unit committee office. The campus violence had occurred during a recess and as scores of students looked on.

Law enforcers said Sivarenjith, SFI leader and the main accused in the case, showed them where he had hidden the knife after the crime. His co-accused and SFI unit secretary Nazeem was present at the spot.

Armed escort

The police brought the students to the college under heavy armed escort. Law enforcers said the accused stabbed Akhil to make an example of him to other students who might defy the diktats of the SFI.

The college, mindful of the threat of reprisal against SFI campus leaders, had remained closed to students since the attack on Akhil.

On the backfoot

The incident had found the dominant SFI on the backfoot on the campus.

The vast majority of students had spontaneously protested against the attempt to murder their college mate and mutinied in the open against the outfit’s campus leadership.

Consequently, the SFI disbanded the unit committee and raised a new ad hoc one, including Akhil, to replace the discredited 13-member crew.

The SFI’s parent organisation, Communist Party of India (Marxist), had also condemned the attack. Its leaders demanded the SFI purge itself of the criminal and extremist elements that had infiltrated into its rank and leadership.

The district unit of the CPI(M) had also pleaded guilty of lack of oversight of the student’s wing despite several complaints of high-handedness against the SFI University College committee.

The attack on Akhil has snowballed into a crisis for the Left Democratic Front government. Governor P. Sathasivam had sought a report from the Kerala University on the discovery of bundles of validated answer sheets from the house of Sivarenjith and the SFI’s unit office in the college.
