Rajnath to visit Jammu, Kargil Saturday

Inauguration of 2 Bridges, laying Wreath at Kargil among itinerary

NL Correspondent

New Delhi, Jul 19

Defence Minister Rajnath Singh will visit Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday (July 20) during which he will lay wreath at Kargil War memorial in Dras area.

Singh who will be accompanied by Army chief General Bipin Rawat will lay wrath at Kargil War Memorial in Dras on the occasion of 20th anniversary of Operation Vijay.

The Defence Minister will also inaugurate two bridges built by Border Roads Organisation (BRO) at Ujh in Kathua district and Basantar in Samba district.

The Ujh Bridge is one kilometer long and the Basantar Bridge is 617.4 meter.

The soldiers of the Indian Army had overcome seemingly insurmountable odds, hostile terrain, weather and a determined enemy occupying dominating heights, to win the Kargil war with the help of Indian Air Force which gave air support to the Army.

On this momentous occasion, the nation is celebrating this victory in memory of its slain soldiers with events covering a myriad spectrum.

One of the major events is the relay of a Victory Flame from National War Memorial (NMW) in New Delhi to Kargil War Memorial at Drass.

Singh also handed over the Flame to ace Army shooter Subedar Jitu Rai who represented India as the first torch bearer, at the NMW on July 14, 2019.

The victory flame is being carried by Indian Army’s outstanding sportsmen and war heroes. It is being passed through nine major towns/cities of North India and finally culminate at the Karambhoomi of the martyrs at the Kargil War Memorial located at Dras on July 26, 2019, where it will be received by the COAS.

All along the journey, Indian Army personnel are paying homage to the heroes who fought valiantly for the Nation.

This victory flame and the journey of the eternal flame from the National War Memorial to the Kargil War Memorial brings alive the theme of the 20th anniversary of the Kargil Vijay Diwas – ‘Remember, Rejoice and Renew’. We ‘remember’ our martyrs by revisiting their sacrifices, we ‘rejoice’ by celebrating the victory in Kargil and we ‘renew’ our resolve to safeguard the honour of the Tricolour.

Earlier, in his first trip as defence minister, Rajnath Singh had visited the Siachen glacier – the world’s most dangerous battlefield – where he met the soldiers guarding the border above altitudes of 12,000 feet.

Singh, accompanied by Army Chief Gen. Rawat, had also visited the headquarters of the Army’s 14 Corps in Leh and 15 Corps in Srinagar.

Related
