Bigg Boss Marathi 2: Murder Mystery task finally ends and Abhijeet returns, while Hina gets targeted

Bigg Boss Marathi 2's Murder Mystery task finally ends and Abhijeet returns, while Hina gets targeted

Key Highlights Bigg Boss Marathi's Murder Mystery task reaches its final stage Abhijeet Kelkar finally returns back inside the Bigg Boss house Madhav, Neha, Rupali and Shivani gang up against Hina

Mumbai: The Murder Mystery task in the Bigg Boss Marathi house finally came to its final stage and a new murderer was selected in form of Neha Shitole. As one of the previous murderer Shiv Thakare was punished for not abiding by the rules and backing out. And the latest episode of Bigg Boss Marathi began on this note but at the same time, many arguments were seen cropping up, especially between Hina Panchal and Shivani Surve, Madhav Deochakke and Neha. Hina in anger had hidden Neha’s letter sent to her by her husband and to take revenge all three Madhav, Neha and Shivani were seen hiding Hina’s things and even targeting her. This led to a lot of fights and arguments, which went on throughout the day.

Amidst all these fights the task buzzer rang and the first murder tip to come in was of Veena. Abhijeet who was the mentor for this task and was sent to the Secret room selected Neha to carry forward the murder. Neha has to make Shiv and Veena dance together in order to complete Veena’s suggestive murder. Neha very smartly did the same and Veena being killed was announced by Bigg Boss. The next tip to follow was for Heena’s murder and Abhijeet this time selected Shivani as the murderer. Shivani had to throw water on Hina and kill her, which she quite efficiently did, but it later became the reason for a fight between Hina and Shivani.

After 5 murders down, the house had only two citizens left namely Madhav and Rupali. So Bigg Boss told Abhijeet that either one had to be murdered to complete the task. Hence, Abhijeet asked both the murderers Neha and Shivani to kill Rupali and Madhav respectively. The first murder amongst the two would be the final murder of the task. Shivani succeeded in murdering Madhav by putting mascara on Madhav’s nameplate in the house. Finally, the Murder Mystery task was over and it was time for Abhijeet to return back inside the house. While he was taken away from the Storeroom, this time he was sent back from the jail.

Abhijeet once inside the jail started yelling for help from fellow housemates. Shiv, Vaishali, and Veena ran to help him and then requested Rupali, who is the current Captain of the house to give the keys to the jail and let Abhijeet free. But Rupali feared this as the part of the task and tried to delay it. This led to a big fight between Shiv and Rupali. Ultimately, Rupali opened the jail and let Abhijeet free. The housemates were then seen enjoying some light moments together. But within no time the ongoing fights between Hina and Madhav, Shivani and Neha escalated again and got worse. These fights got so worse that all were seen targeting Hina over food as well and worse fights took place in the kitchen too. But later the housemates were given a fun task and they were seen forgetting the animosities of the fights and playing Kabaddi. And amidst all the ups and downs another day ended in the Bigg Boss Marathi house.
