Dance India Dance 7: Saif Ali Khan is lucky to have Kareena Kapoor Khan in his life, REVEALS Sidharth Malhotra

While most couples in Bollywood are adorable, there is one that stays away from the limelight and likes to lead their own life privately and it is Saif Ali Khan and Kareena Kapoor Khan. Often, Saif and Bebo are seen taking off with their munchkin, Taimur Ali Khan for vacays and their pictures make their fans fall head over heels in love with them. Among their fans, Jabariya Jodi star, Sidharth Malhotra is one. The actor recently visited the sets of Dance India Dance 7 and shared what he feels about Saif and Bebo.

While talking about equation with Sidharth, Kareena revealed that Saif only roots for Sidharth among the Bollywood actors. Though Sid and Kareena only shared screen space during a song in Brothers, Bebo revealed that Saif had a huge amount of admiration for him. Later, Sidharth also added that his is one of the biggest fans of the Cocktail star and admires him a lot. The Jabariya Jodi actor also thanked Saif for being there. He even went on to give a message to Saif and mentioned that he was extremely lucky to have Kareena in his life.

Also Read: Here’s why Sidharth Malhotra wants to kidnap Kareena Kapoor’s son Taimur Ali Khan; Bebo are you listening?

Sid said, “I am also a big fan of Saif and would like to tell him that Thank you for being this wonderful guy. Saif if you are watching this, you are really lucky to have Bebo in your life.” The actor was all praises for Saif and Kareena and also danced it out with Bebo on stage.

Check out a selfie from the sets:

Meanwhile, the episode featuring Sidharth Malhotra and Parineeti Chopra will go on air this weekend and fans are excited about the same. Dance India Dance 7 is one of the extremely popular dance shows on Indian television and is being judged by Kareena Kapoor Khan, Raftaar and Bosco Martis. Every week, Kareena travels from London to shoot for the show. Once Karisma Kapoor filled in for her and recently, Malaika Arora stepped into the judge's seat as Bebo was occupied with a shoot. The show airs every weekend on Zee Tv from 8 Pm onwards.

Also Read: Kareena Kapoor Khan and Karisma Kapoor family vacation is major travel goals; Check it out
