Sonbhadra clashes aftermath: UP politics heats up as Randeep Surjewala slams Yogi govt for ‘jungle raj’; claims no water, electric supply for Priyanka-India News , Firstpost

Claiming 'jungle raj' in Uttar Pradesh, Randeep Surjewala lashed out at Yogi Adityanath as Priyanka Gandhi Vadra was taken by police to a guest house in Mirzapur, where electricity and water supply were cut off.

New Delhi: Congress chief spokesperson Randeep Surjewala on Saturday lashed out at Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath claiming 'jungle raj' in his state as Priyanka Gandhi Vadra was taken by police to the Chunar Guest House in Mirzapur, where electricity and water supply were cut off. Surjewala said that the BJP government wants to deport Priyanka from Uttar Pradesh.

BJP Govt fails to prevent Sonbhadra Massacre! BJP Govt fails to act against guilty! BJP Govt illegally arrests Priyankaji for wanting to meet families! BJP Govt cuts Elect/Water of Chunar Guest House where she is held! BJP Govt now wants to deport her from U.P! Jungle Raj! https://t.co/FTdHUUdcUy — Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) July 19, 2019

On Friday, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi was detained on her way to meet the kin of those killed in the 17 July Sonbhadra firing incident citing imposition of Section 144 in the area, which prohibits movement of more than four people in the area. She was escorted to Mirzapur by Uttar Pradesh Police from Varanasi.

Referring to Uttar Pradesh as 'crime state', Surjewala had said the Adityanath government has become infamous for "all crimes that happen in the state be it murder, atrocities against women, and robbery". The Congress leader had also said the state government is busy stopping leaders who are going to express condolences instead of nabbing the criminals. "Crime will not be controlled by gagging the voice of Opposition leaders", he had asserted. He had said there was no violation of rules during the party leader's visit.

Meanwhile, Priyanka has said that she will meet victims of the Sonbhadra firing incident and families of the deceased and if the government wants to put her in jail then she is fully prepared for it. She further said that she will not pay the bail amount at any cost.

The firing incident took place in Ubbha village of Ghorawal where the village head went to take possession of his land purchased two years ago. However, he met with opposition from the villagers which triggered the firing allegedly by his aides leading to the death of nine people.
