Priyanka Gandhi in Sonbhadra: Congress to give compensation of Rs 10 lakh to kin of firing victims

Priyanka Gandhi | Photo Credit: ANI

Sonbhadra: Priyanka Gandhi finally met the families of the victims today at Mirzapur guest house where she is currently detained. She was earlier prevented to meet the families of those affected in the Sonbhadra firing case yesterday after which she spent the night at Chunar Guest House.

Three-member Parliamentary delegation of Trinamool Congress (TMC) has been stopped and detained by Varanasi police at Lal Bahadur Shastri International Airport in Babatpur, ahead of their visit to Sonbhadra where 10 people were killed in a land dispute incident on 17 July.

The Sonbhadra firing incident took place in Ubbha village of Ghorawal where the village pradhan (head) went to take possession of his land he had purchased two years ago. However, he met with strong opposition from the villagers which triggered the firing allegedly by his aides leading to the death of 10 people.

Yesterday, Priyanka had said that she was ready to go to jail if the government puts her inside the prison for meeting families of the victims. She also said that she will not furnish the bail amount at any cost.

Priyanka Gandhi in Sonabhadra - As it happened:

6 pm: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will visit Sonbhadra on Sunday to meet the family members of the victims of Sonbhadra firing incident that claimed lives of 10 people.

3:30 pm: Priyanka Gandhi to visit Kashi Vishwanath temple and Kaal Bhairav temple in Varanasi to offer prayers later today.

2:25 pm: "As soon as the situation becomes normal we will remove Section 144. 29 arrests have been made in connection with the incident. Forces have been deployed to maintain peace in the village," the DM said.

1:55 pm: Ankit Aggarwal, DM Sonbhadra: The situation in the village is sensitive so we have imposed Section 144 in the district. This prevents the entry of political parties as well as social organisations. I would like to request everyone to cooperate to maintain peace in the area.

1:35 pm: "Sec144 is imposed there, if you go to fulfil your political intentions, then it's not right. No one should do politics on sensitive issues. Our government is committed to maintaining peace," said Uttar Pradesh Deputy CM Dinesh Sharma on Priyanka Gandhi Vadra meeting those affected in Sonabhadra firing incident.

1:20 am: "My objective has been served as I have met them (victim of Sonbhadra firing).I am still under detention, let's see what the administration says. Congress party will give a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the kin of the person who died in the incident," said Priyanka Gandhi.

1:00 am: "We were detained at the airport soon after we arrived. Now they have allowed us to go to Chunar," said Congress leader Rajeev Shukla.

12:57 pm: “The families after travelling 20 km by tractor and then walking 70 km to meet GS UP East were stopped short of Chunar Fort by the UP Govt for 4 hours. The reign of Ajay Bisht continues to be the most insensitive in memory,” tweeted Congress.

12:45 pm: Congress leaders Deepender Singh Hooda, Mukul Wasnik, Raj Babbar, Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh, Jitin Prasada and Rajeev Shukla have been stopped at Varanasi airport by police. They were on their way to Sonbhadra to meet the victims of firing case.

12:15 pm: Congress delegation led by Pramod Tiwari meets Governor Ram Naik over Sonbhadra firing incident that claimed lives of 10 people.

12:10 pm: "This govt doesn't want that someone should wipe off victims' tears. Whatever has happened is unconstitutional and undemocratic and it seems as if Uttar Pradesh govt has implemented undeclared emergency to hid its sins and shortcomings," said Congress leader Pramod Tiwari.

12:00 pm: Priyanka Gandhi finally meets the family members of victims who were killed in Sonbhadra. The meeting took place at the Chunar Fort in Mirzapur as she was not allowed to visit the spot in Sonbhadra.

11:40 am: "Two relatives of victims have come here to meet me, 15 others are not being allowed to meet me. Even I am not being allowed to meet them. Bhagwan jane inki mansikta kya hai? Aap thoda dawab banayiya, unhe aana dijiye. Mere pichhe pade hain," said Priyanka Gandhi Vadra.

#WATCH Priyanka Gandhi Vadra: Prasashan ko inki (family of victims of Sonbhadra firing case) rakhwali karni chaiye. Jab inke sath hadsa ho raha tha, madad karni chaiye thi. Prasashan ki mansikta meri samaj se bahar hai. Aap unn par thoda dabaw banaiye, aap mere piche pade hain. pic.twitter.com/BIW8ZYnzRF — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 20, 2019

11:30 am: Family members of the victims of Sonbhadra's firing case come to meet Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra at Chunar Guest House.

Mirzapur: Family members of the victims of Sonbhadra's firing case come to meet Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra at Chunar Guest House. pic.twitter.com/Yujq1qcSU6 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 20, 2019

11:20 am: Derek O'Brien, TMC at Varanasi airport: ADM and SP have told us that we've been detained. We've told them that it can’t be Sec-144 (prohibits an assembly of more than 4 people) as only 3 of us are here. We intend to proceed to BHU Trauma Centre to meet the injured and then go to Sonbhadra.

11:19 am: Arjun Munda, Union Minister of Tribal Affairs on the firing incident in Sonbhadra (UP) that claimed 10 lives: The incident is unfortunate. As per the information I have received, state govt is taking action. I think state govt will do unbiased investigation&culprits will be punished.

11:12 am: Three-member TMC delegation led by Derek Derek O'Brien have started dharna inside the airport. Derek said that the ADM and the SP refused to give any reason adding that order for their detention came from the top.

11:00 am: Priyanka Gandhi has said that she is ready to meet somewhere else adding that she won't do anything to violate Section 144 imposed in the area.

10:55 am: Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and party workers continue to sit on dharna at Chunar Guest House. She says, "It has been 24 hours. I am not going to leave until & unless I am allowed to meet the victims of Sonbhadra's firing case."

10:35 am: Congress had earlier referred to Uttar Pradesh as 'crime state' and party spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala said the Adityanath government has become infamous for "all crimes that happen in the state be it murder, atrocities against women, and robbery."

10:30 am: Three-member Parliamentary delegation of Trinamool Congress (TMC) stopped by Varanasi police at Lal Bahadur Shastri International Airport in Babatpur, ahead of their visit to Sonbhadra where 10 people were killed in a land dispute incident on 17 July.

Video message from Trinamool delegation who have been detained/arrested (they still haven’t been told why!) at Varanasi airport tarmac. They were on their way to meet the injured in hospital and meet & give confidence to the grieving families in #Sonbhadra

Watch>> pic.twitter.com/1cSjPfZ7cT — All India Trinamool Congress (@AITCofficial) July 20, 2019

10:11 am: Chhattisgarh CM Bhupesh Baghel will go to Chunar, UP today to meet Priyanka Gandhi, Congress General Secretary for UP East who is on a dharna since yesterday.

10:00 am: Mirzapur: Early morning visuals from Chunar Guest House where Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra & party workers have been sitting on dharna. She was detained in Narayanpur by police yesterday while she was on her way to meet victims of Sonbhadra's firing case.

Mirzapur: Early morning visuals from Chunar Guest House where Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra & party workers have been sitting on dharna. She was detained in Narayanpur by police yesterday while she was on her way to meet victims of Sonbhadra's firing case. pic.twitter.com/8Dl4UaXj4T — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 20, 2019

9:55 am: Priyanka Gandhi’s husband Robert Vadra in a Facebook post asked whether it was a crime to support the poor people in Uttar Pradesh and slammed the Yogi Adityanath government questioning Priyanka Gandhi's detention.
