Alia Bhatt is a huge source of inspiration & she never claimed to be perfect: Ananya Panday on admiring her

If there is one star kid whose debut was eagerly awaited in Bollywood, then only one name comes to mind and it is none other than Ananya Panday. The chirpy and beautiful girl who debuted in Student Of The Year 2 along with Tara Sutaria, has managed to make an impact with her performance and also with her social media initiative against cyber-bullying. Yet, Ananya remains humble and mentions she has a lot to learn as she embarks upon her next film Pati Patni Aur Woh remake with Kartik Aaryan and Bhumi Pednekar. Also, the SOTY 2 star maintains she looks up to Alia Bhatt.

In an interview with Hindustan Times, Ananya expressed her love and admiration for the Raazi star who kind of had a similar start in Bollywood back in 2012 with Student Of The Year. Ananya mentioned that she looks up to Alia and admires her journey in Bollywood. Also, the SOTY 2 actor states that the Raazi star never claimed to be a perfectionist in the start and that is a quality that she admired about her. When talking about pressure on her due to her father, Chunky Pandey being an actor, Ananya mentioned that there is pressure but she doesn’t have time to focus on negative things.

(Also Read: Student of The Year 2 star Ananya Panday: Alia Bhatt has always been my idol)

Ananya said, “It’s not as if I’m trying to imitate or be like someone in particular. Obviously, Alia is a huge source of inspiration. In fact, what I have learned from Alia is that she never claimed to be perfect from the start. She was raw in her first film, and then, she grew from there and people could see the evolution.”

Meanwhile, Alia Bhatt has always encouraged Ananya and when she was about to start her career in Student of the Year 2, the Raazi star was nothing but praise for her. Now, Ananya is all set to be seen in Pati Patni Aur Woh Remake with Kartik Aaryan and Bhumi Pednekar and is in Lucknow for next 2 months shoot the schedule of the film. Helmed by Muddassar Aziz, the film is being produced by Bhushan Kumar and Juno Chopra. Pati Patni Aur Woh remake is slated to release on December 6, 2019.
