Minnow: Prenatal test specialist Yourgene Health could be just what the doctor ordered

P harmaceuticals is among the hardest sectors for the average punter to invest in as, without any specific medical knowledge, it feels like shooting in the dark.

Nevertheless, if a treatment catches on, the rewards can be huge. Diagnostics group Yourgene Health, which makes non-invasive prenatal tests, has been dogged by litigation recently but its luck could be about to change. The tests work by taking a blood sample from a mother who is 10 weeks pregnant to learn whether the foetus is affected with Down’s syndrome or some other congenital condition.

Until now, the foetus’s health has been determined by an amniocentesis — whereby a long thin needle is inserted into the womb to draw off a small amount of amniotic fluid for analysis. But this process has, in some cases, resulted in miscarriage.

Yourgene has been mired in a patent dispute with rival Illumina which started in March 2015 and the two sides settled last September. Yourgene spent large sums on the action, including a £3 million fundraising in October to finance the settlement.

With that behind it, the company decided to change its name from Premaitha Health to Yourgene in November. Analysts are hoping it can now press on. Recent revenues are not bad and for the six months ended September 30 — sales were £3.9 million compared with £2.7 million a year earlier.

Testing volumes in the first-half rose 73% to 38,000 from 22,000 a year earlier. But the company has still not turned a profit. House broker finnCap said recently: “The company is now unencumbered by the litigation ‘handbrake’… We expect the business to become earnings positive in the second half of 2020.”

FinnCap also slapped a 16p target price on the firm — it is trading at 12p today. But the downside is that the business is too focused on one product as the prenatal testing arm makes up 90% of earnings.

The chief executive Lyn Rees says that the company is moving into other areas, including testing for breast cancer and leukemia. It’s also keen to expand further in India, the Middle East, Africa and Southeast Asia — where it believes the growth opportunities are highest.

It is probably best to take pharma stock tips from a doctor. Nevertheless a few quid on Yourgene won’t harm an investor portfolio.


