Explained: What happened in Sonbhadra, what's happening now | All you need to know

Ten people were killed and 28 injured when a village chief and his henchmen opened fire at tribal farmers in Sonbhadra district of Uttar Pradesh on July 17.

Sonbhadra, a mineral-rich district in Eastern Uttar Pradesh sharing its border with four states, is in the news for the past three days. On Wednesday (July 17), 10 people were killed and at least 28 injured in clashes over land ownership in this district.

Since then, police claim to have arrested nearly 30 people, including the main accused and his family members.

The situation on ground is tense and the political environment in Uttar Pradesh remains heated. The district administration has imposed Section 144 of the CrPc, which forbids movement and assembly of large groups of people. The injured are being treated and the Yogi Adityanath government in the state has announced compensation of Rs 5 lakh to the next of kin of the deceased.

The Sonbhdara firing also echoed in the Uttar Pradesh state assembly on Thursday and Friday where the Opposition attacked the government accusing it of rising lawlessness in the state.

Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in a statement said justice will be ensured but also blamed past Congress governments for this tragedy.

On Friday, the state government barred Congress general secretary (for UP East) Priyanka Gandhi Vadra from meeting family members of those killed in the Sonbhadra firing. However, she was able to meet them on Saturday. The Congress has announced it will give a compensation of Rs 10 lack to the family of the deceased.

Congress hits out at Yogi govt after Priyanka Gandhi was blocked from visiting Sonbhadra victims' kin. @mausamii2u gets us more on this. #ITVideohttps://t.co/Nounxo6IKQ pic.twitter.com/UAQLJVXVpH India Today (@IndiaToday) July 19, 2019

The Sonbhadra firing is one of the bloodiest clashes over land ownership in recent years in Uttar Pradesh. Sonbhadra is the second largest district in Uttar Pradesh and the only one that borders four states - Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh.

WHAT EXACTLY HAPPENED IN SONBHADRA ON JULY 17?

On July 17, 10 people, including three women, were killed and 28 injured when Yagya Dutt, a village head, and his supporters opened fire on a group of tribal farmers in Ubha village of Sonbhadra district in Uttar Pradesh. Ubha is a village under Ghorawal police station.

The firing took place following a clash between Yagya Dutt's supporters and the farmers over a land ownership dispute. In 2017, Yagya Dutt had purchased nearly 90 bigha land from a Bihar cadre IAS officer.

On July 17, he, along with his supporters (who were armed) reached Ubha village to take possession of the land that has been tilled by Gond farmers. The exact number of people Dutt brought along with him is unclear but police said 10-12 tractors ferried them.

The firing took place following a clash between Yagya Dutt's supporters and the farmers over a land ownership dispute. In 2017, Yagya Dutt had purchased nearly 90 bigha land from a Bihar cadre IAS officer.

Police said when Yagya Dutt and his henchmen reached the village, locals tried to stop them from taking over the land. Dutt's henchmen then showered a volley of bullets on the villagers, killing 10 of them.

According to the police, the land dispute had been festering for some time and they had initiated the process of attaching the property. The Indian Express in a report said Dutt and his family had been trying to take possession of the land for some time.

"Calling the sale (between Bihar cadre IAS officer and Dutt) illegal, the [Gond] tillers complained first to the revenue authorities and then filed a case in the civil court this year," Indian Express said in its report.

WHAT HAPPENED AFTER THE FIRINGS?

A day after the firing, the villagers were locked in a standoff with the local administration over land to bury their dead, news agency PTI reported.

The standoff continued till late Thursday evening. The villagers, belonging to the Gond tribe, usually cremate those who die of old age. Those who die young or unnatural deaths are often buried.

The villagers were adamant that the bodies should be buried at the spot where the firing took place, which is on the disputed piece of land itself.

But the administration wanted the last rites only at places where the villagers traditionally perform them. The matter was resolved late in the evening when officials managed to persuade the villagers to give up their demand.

Police have arrested 29 people, including the main accused Yadya Dutt, and seized six tractors that were used to ferry Dutt's henchmen on the day of the Sonbhadra firing. Police have also registered FIR against 61 people, including 11 named.

Ramraj, a local villager, said three generations of his family had farmed on the land, and alleged there had been illegal attempts to evict them before.

Meanwhile, the killing of 10 people and mounting pressure from the Opposition forced the police to swing into action and start making arrests. The injured were admitted to hospitals and some referred to Varanasi.

A state government spokesperson said Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has directed the Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh, OP Singh to "personally" monitor the case and ensure action is taken against the culprits.

The chief minister also directed commissioner (Mirzapur) and additional director general (Varanasi zone) to jointly investigate the cause of the clash and fix responsibility within 24 hours.

The state government has also suspended the local sub-divisional magistrate, circle officer and inspector.

On July 17, police arrested Girijesh and Vimlesh, two nephews of the main accused Yagya Dutt. Police said they started a house-to-house search to nab those involved in the shootout.

"If needed, action against the Bihar cadre IAS officer (who sold the disputed land to Yadya Dutt) will also be initiated," DGP OP Singh said.

As on July 20, police have arrested 29 people, including the main accused Yadya Dutt, and seized six tractors that were used to ferry Dutt's henchmen on the day of the Sonbhadra firing.

Police have also registered FIR against 61 people, including 11 named, news agency PTI said in a report.

If needed, action against the Bihar cadre IAS officer (who sold the disputed land to Yadya Dutt) will also be initiated. - DGP OP Singh

Speaking to India Today TV, ADG (Varanasi Zone) Brij Bhushan said the police are also investigating if any lapses were made by the local police.

WHAT CM YOGI ADITYANATH SAID?

Speaking about the Sonbhadra firing case in the Uttar Pradesh assembly on Friday, Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath promised justice to those killed. He said the sub-divisional magistrate and four other officials were suspended and 29 people have been arrested.

A committee under the additional chief secretary (revenue) has also been constituted and will give its report within 10 days, the chief minister said.

"Despite the dispute between the two factions in the past and apprehensions of breach of peace adequate action was not taken by officers. SDM, circle officer and Inspector--all posted in Ghorawal have been suspended on basis of the probe committee, constituted on July 17, report. Beat sub-inspector and constable have also been suspended," Yogi Adityanath said.

A three-member committee headed by the additional chief secretary (revenue) has been constituted to give its report within 10 days on the land dispute. It will take note of the dispute by going through revenue records and give its recommendations - Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath

Yogi Adityanath also blamed previous Congress governments for what happened in Sonbhadra on July 17. He said the land dispute, which led to the clash was old and was there since 1955 and there were a number of cases pending in revenue courts and criminal cases filed by both factions.

"A three-member committee headed by the additional chief secretary (revenue) has been constituted to give its report within 10 days on the land dispute. It will take note of the dispute by going through revenue records and give its recommendations," the CM said.

Additional Director General (Varanasi Zone) has also been asked to probe cases registered between two sides in Sonebhadra before July 17, the CM said.

"Responsibility will be fixed and justice will be given to the victims. Those involved in the act will not be spared," the CM said.

Later in a specially convened press conference, Yogi Adityanath said the genesis of the problem lies in the Congress rule. "If you go to the bottom of the issue, you will know that in 1955, when there was a Congress government [in Uttar Pradesh], an Adarsh Society was created with the intention to grab the land of the people," Yogi Adityanath said.

He said the land was transferred to the Adarsh Society in 1955, when the illegal work was done. The Adarsh Society held the land till 1989, Adityanath said.

If you go to the bottom of the issue, you will know that in 1955, when there was a Congress government [in Uttar Pradesh], an Adarsh Society was created with the intention to grab the land of the people. - Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath

He said, "In 1989, when again there was a Congress government [in Uttar Pradesh], the land ownership was changed from Adarsh Society to an individual. That individual sold this land to the gram pradhan of Ubha in 2017."

Adityanath said the land was sold to Yagya Dutt, the accused gram pradhan, after the previous owner failed to take possession of the land in 2017.

HOW HAS OPPOSITION REACTED?

The Opposition is trying to leave no stone unturned to corner and attack the Yogi Adityanath government over the Sonbhadra firing where 10 people were killed and at least 28 injured.

Congress general secretary of UP (East) Priyanka Gandhi Vadra has been protesting against the BJP government after the UP Police prevented her from meeting families of the deceased in Sonbhadra and Mirzapur.

Samajwadi Party chief Akhilesh Yadav in a tweet said, "The BJP government in Uttar Pradesh which bows down before culprits has allowed a genocide. Deaths in the Sonbhadra firing is an example of terror and suppression under the BJP rule."

! - 9 ! 20-20 Akhilesh Yadav (@yadavakhilesh) July 17, 2019

He demanded that the state government announce compensation of Rs 20 lakh to the next of kin of the deceased. (The government has announced compensation of Rs 5 lakh.) The Congress has demanded compensation of Rs 25 lakh each to the families of the dead and Rs 15 to those injured along with land 'pattas'.

On July 18, Samajwadi Party leader Ram Gopal Yadav raised the Sonbhadra firing case in the Rajya Sabha and said there was "jungle raj" in Uttar Pradesh.

Meanwhile, former Congress president Rahul Gandhi in a tweet said, "The illegal arrest of Priyanka Gandhi in Sonbhadra, UP, is disturbing. This arbitrary application of power, to prevent her from meeting families of the 10 Adivasi farmers brutally gunned down for refusing to vacate their own land, reveals the BJP government's increasing insecurity in UP."

The illegal arrest of Priyanka in Sonbhadra, UP, is disturbing. This arbitrary application of power, to prevent her from meeting families of the 10 Adivasi farmers brutally gunned down for refusing to vacate their own land, reveals the BJP Govt’s increasing insecurity in UP. pic.twitter.com/D1rty8KJVq Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) July 19, 2019

Uttar Pradesh Deputy Chief Minister Dinesh Sharma has meanwhile accused Priyanka Gandhi of doing a "political drama" to hide her party's misdeeds.

"History is a witness to the fact that Congress and its allies, Samajwadi Party and Bahujan Samaj Party have always been illegally occupying lands of the poor during their regime," he said, also alleging that between 1955 and 1989, the Congress government "illegally transferred" the disputed land in Sonbhadra to a society.

"Congress is the root cause of the Sonbhdara land dispute. Now their leaders are shedding crocodile tears. It is Congress which handed over lands of poor to influential people. Now, Priyanka Vadra Gandhi is doing political drama," he said.

- 144 Mayawati (@Mayawati) July 20, 2019

Meanwhile, former UP chief minister and Bahujan Samaj Party president Mayawati held both the Congress and the BJP responsible for the Sonbhadra firing case. Terming it a "genocide", she said the BJP government is trying to hide its failure by imposing Section 144 in the area.

(With inputs from Nelanshu Shukla, Shivendra Shrivastava and agencies)

ALSO READ | 10 killed in Sonbhadra land dispute, CM Yogi thinks Congress is responsible

ALSO READ | Ready to be arrested, will not furnish bail amount: Priyanka Gandhi

ALSO WATCH | Priyanka vs Yogi dangal over Sonbhadra shootout
