Priyanka Gandhi Vadra meet families of Sonbhadra firing victims

Congress general secretary from Uttar Pradesh East, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Saturday met family members of the Sonbhadra shootout victims.

The kin of victims met Priyanka at Chunar guest house where she has been detained.

Priyanka Gandhi told the media that her objective has been served as she met the kin of the victims. She also said that she has been trying to meet them since Friday but was not allowed to and they came to meet her.

The meeting between Priyanka and the families of victims was highly emotional as the women cried while narrating the sequence of events. Priyanka was seen wiping her tears as she hugged them and assured them of all support.

The Congress earlier said in a tweet, “The families of the deceased who travelled to Chunar Fort to meet General Secretary UP East @priyankagandhi were prevented by the by UP Govt from doing so.”

“Day 2 at Chunar Fort: General Secretary UP East @priyankagandhi stands firm on her right to see the families of the deceased. We will not be deterred in our resolve,” Congress added.

Priyanka had been prevented from going to Sonbhadra by the district administration and was detained since Friday at the Chunar Guest House.

According to the sources, Congress leaders, who were on their way to Sonebhadra and Mirzapur on Saturday, were also detained by the UP police at the Varanasi airport.

Trinamool Congress (TMC) delegation detained at Varanasi airport. Trinamool Congress alleged that they are restrained without any reason. TMC claimed that they have been sitting on dharna from 9:45 and they have neither been allowed to visit hospital nor proceed to Sonbhadra.

Trinamool Congress leaders Derek O’Brien, Sunil Mondal and Abhir Ranjan Biswas have been detained at the Varanasi airport since morning.

“Trinamool delegation at Varanasi airport. Restrained without any reason. From 9.45 this morning they are sitting on dharna just off the tarmac. Delegation have not been allowed to visit hospital or proceed to #SonbhadraMassacre,” All India Trinamool Congress said in a tweet.

“Dharna by Trinamool MPs near airport tarmac started at 9.30, continues. DM met MPs at 12 &informed that police will escort us to BHU TraumaCentre to meet docs attending the injured.After that,permission notwithstanding,deleg wishes to proceed to spot of #SonbhadraMassacre,” All India Trinamool Congress added.
