She came, she met, she conquered: Standoff ends after Priyanka Gandhi meets Sonbhadra victims' kin

Priyanka Gandhi had spent Friday night at the Mirzapur guesthouse, insisting she will not return to Delhi unless she meets the families of the victims.

The standoff between Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi and the Uttar Pradesh government ended on Saturday, a day after she was detained by the Mirzapur administration when she insisted on travelling to the scene of a recent shootout in Sonbhadra.

Priyanka Gandhi spent the Friday night at the Chunar guesthouse, insisting she will not return to Delhi unless she meets the families of the victims.

On Saturday, some of the villagers from Sonbhadra, where 10 people were gunned down over a land dispute, came to the guesthouse itself. Later, a Congress leader said she was returning to Varanasi, where she had landed on Friday.

#WATCH: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra met the family members of the victims of Sonbhadra firing incident that claimed lives of 10 people, in Chunar. pic.twitter.com/RhiLijLbm6 ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 20, 2019

The Congress general secretary had earlier met some of those injured in Wednesday’s clash at the BHU Trauma Centre in Varanasi. But she was stopped while she and her supporters were travelling to Sonbhadra by road.

Family members of the Sonbhadra clash victims Saturday met Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi at the Chunar guesthouse in Mirzapur district, where she spent a night in detention.

Twelve members of the affected families met the Congress general secretary at the guesthouse, senior party leader Ajay Rai said. Priyanka Gandhi consoled the aggrieved family members while sharing their sorrows. She wiped the tears of the family members and also offered water to them.

Some of them who came to meet her also clicked photos to treasure the moment. In a late-night tweet, she said she is ready to go to jail if she is not allowed to a go-ahead.

READ | What happened in Sonbhadra, what's happening now | All you need to know

WATCH | Family members of Sonbhadra clash victims meet Priyanka Gandhi at UP guesthouse
