Upset over losing class leader election, 13-year-old boy commits suicide in Telangana

His body was found on railway tracks at Rammanapet area (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Police confirmed that the boy had been missing since Thursday evening His body was found on railway tracks at Rammanapet area Parents of the child are yet to file an official complaint with the police

Telangana: Healthy competition among school students is considered as the driving force behind the exceptional performance, academic and otherwise. Unfortunately, this survival of the fittest can sometimes lead to tragic consequences. Such is a case which is coming to light from the state of Telangana where a 13-year-old boy allegedly committed suicide after he lost the class leader election held recently at his school.

Charan, a student of standard eight, was found dead on the railway track at Ramannapet area on Friday. Police officials familiar with the matter said that the boy's parents approached local law enforcement in the early hours of Friday morning. In their complaint, they claimed that the child had been missing since Thursday evening. A missing person case was registered and a search operation was launched to trace him. Relentless efforts to trace the boy on the intervening night of July 18-19 went in vain.

On Friday afternoon, police personnel found the boy dead on the railway track at Ramannapet area. His body was then shifted to a local government hospital for a post-mortem examination. Deputy Commissioner of Police Naryana Reddy told mediapersons that the boy had been disillusioned for a major part of the last three days. He lost the class leader elections held in his school to a girl student and was disturbed, added the DCP of Bhongir. Reddy also said that police will register a case and launch an investigation into the matter if the parents file a complaint against the school management.

In a reply to the lower house of parliament in 2018, the Minister of State for Home Affairs in 2018 stated that as many as 9,474 students committed suicide in India in 2016. This would mean that almost 26 students committed suicide in India each day that year. Data further show that close to 75,000 student suicides were reported from the country between 2007 and 2016.

In Telangana, 19 students committed over a period of one week earlier this year. The children took the drastic step reportedly over failure in Intermediate examinations. The Telangana Board of Intermediate Education (TBIE) ordered an inquiry into the matter. The state government also formed a three-member committee to probe the alleged glitch in declaring the results. The tragic deaths also triggered statewide protests prompting Chief Minister K Chandrashekhar Rao to offer re-verification of answer sheets of students who had failed the examinations, free of cost.
