Shilpa Shetty to star in Diljit Dosanjh & Yami Gautam Comedy

"she returns to Mumbai in the first week of August and will immediately start shooting"

After nearly 12 years away, Shilpa Shetty will make her return to Bollywood alongside Diljit Dosanjh and Yami Gautam in a comedy film.

It had been previously reported that Diljit had signed on for an untitled comedy with Yami as the leading lady.

At the time, producer Ramesh Taurani had stated that the film will feature another actress who has a major role in the story. The announcement left fans wondering as to who it may be.

It has now been revealed that the filmmakers have cast Shilpa Shetty for the role.

The film will mark the directorial debut of Aziz Mirza’s son Haroon, who has assisted on Shahrukh Khan-led films, such as Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman, Yes Boss and Paheli.

Shilpa’s role in the film sees the actress and businesswoman in her first film role in almost 12 years.

Her last Hindi film outing in a full-fledged role was in 2007 in Anil Sharma’s Apne which starred Dharmendra, Sunny and Bobby Deol. Shilpa played Sunny’s wife Simran.

Shilpa featured in films after but they were special appearances.

She made appearances in Om Shanti Om‘s title track, Dostana‘s ‘Shut up and Bounce’ and ‘Tu Mere Type ka Nahi Hai’ in the 2014 crime thriller Dishkiyaoon, which she also produced.

Regarding her role in the film, a source close to the production told Mumbai Mirror:

“Shilpa plays a writer in the film.

“After a month-long holiday in London and Greece, she returns to Mumbai in the first week of August and will immediately start shooting for the film. She is really excited.”

In the past, Shilpa explained that she reached a point where her career came to a standstill.

She said: “I reached a point where after a few films my career hit a lull.

“I tried hard but it always felt like I was lagging behind. It’s not easy to be celebrated one moment and ignored the next.”

“I remember there were producers, who without any reason, threw me out of their films.”

Regarding her new project alongside Diljit and Yami, Taurani had said that the film will revolve around a couple.

He also said it is one of the last films written by Neeraj Vora who passed away in 2017. Vora co-wrote the script with Vibha Singh and Arshad Sayed.

While the upcoming film remains without a title, the three cast choices look to be an interesting combination.
