Monsoon (Finally) Covers All of India; Deficit Stands at 17%

A sight of a normal rainy day in the Mulund area of Mumbai. (Sanjay Hadkar, BCCL, Mumbai)

After flooding Bihar and northeast India, and amid fears of deluge in southern states, the southwest monsoon completely covered India on Friday, July 19—four days later than normal. Last year, the monsoon had covered the entire country by June 29, two weeks earlier than normal.

The India Meteorological Department (IMD) on Friday confirmed that due to favourable monsoon circulations, light to moderate rainfall has been recorded over West Rajasthan during past 24 hours. With this, the department officially declared that the southwest monsoon has further advanced into the remaining parts of West Rajasthan and covered the entire country.

The monsoon's delayed coverage of the country was comparatively less than the delay of its onset over Kerala (7 days) and Mumbai (14 days). While the initial onset was delayed due to weak cross-equatorial flows, the formation of Cyclone Vayu over the Arabia Sea sucked out the moisture from the monsoon rain bands and forced it to stall over southern India for over ten days.

As per the IMD's records, the overall rainfall deficit across the country was 33% in June. Rains gained pace in July, with all-India rainfall from July 1 to 19 accumulating to 165.7 mm, against the normal rainfall of 170.5 mm (deficient by 3%). The overall monsoon rainfall deficit across the country has now come down to 17%.

Advertisement Over the past fifty days of the monsoon season, the variability of the rainfall, in terms of both space and time, has been a major worry. While the Konkan and Goa region received 16% excess rainfall, regions like Saurashtra, Kutch, Delhi, and Gangetic West Bengal are reeling under more than 50% deficit. The intense rainfall spells in Mumbai, Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar disrupted the daily lives of millions after an unusually long and dry summer season.

Kerala, which has received only 58% of its total monsoon rainfall quota till now, has started to witness very heavy rainfall on Friday. IMD forecasts suggest that widespread rainfall with extremely heavy falls at isolated places are very likely over Kerala and Karnataka till Monday. Red warnings have been issued across many districts in both states urging authorities to take action.

**

For weather & air quality updates on the go, download The Weather Channel App (on Android and iOS store). It's free!
