Priyanka Gandhi back in Delhi with promise to return as big UP stand-off ends

The high-voltage drama between Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra and the Uttar Pradesh government ended Saturday evening after the Congress leader met the Sonbhadra villagers who had travelled to the Mirzapur guesthouse, where she had stayed overnight.

On Friday, the Congress leader was detained when she insisted on going to Sonbhadra where 10 people were gunned down over a land dispute this week.

After preventive detention Priyanka spent the Friday night at the Chunar guesthouse, insisting she will not return to Delhi until she meets the families of the victims.

On Saturday, Priyanka sat on dharna with Congress workers after the villagers, who had landed at the guesthouse were not allowed to meet her. At around 11:30 pm, on Saturday, in a dramatic change, few of victim families allowed to meet the Congress leader. She said those who had arrested her and brought her to the Chunar guesthouse were now saying she is free to leave.

I want to tell them that I have fulfilled my objective. I met family members. I am leaving today, but I shall return, she told party workers who thronged the guesthouse.

UP Congress leader Ajay Rai said, The standoff between Congress general secretary Priyanka and the Mirzapur district administration is over as she has met members of the aggrieved families from Sonbhadra.

A three-member TMC delegation and senior Congress leaders, on their way to meet the Sonbhadra clash victim families, were stopped at the Babatpur airport in Varanasi. Congress leaders including RPN Singh, Jitin Prasada, Raj Babbar and Rajiv Shukla were stopped at the Varanasi airport on Saturday.

After the meeting with the villagers, she left for Varanasi, where she offered prayers at the Kashi Vishwanath and Kaal Bhairav temples before heading for Delhi.

Also read: Priyanka Gandhi Sonbhadra visit updates: Adityanath to visit Sonbhadra to meet victims

ALSO WATCH| Priyanka vs Yogi dangal over Sonbhadra shootout
