Puneet Puneet: Indian driver who killed Dean Hofstee back in court

The learner driver who was drunk and speeding when he hit and killed a young Australian student made a series of callous choices.

Don't miss out on the headlines from Gold Coast. Followed categories will be added to My News.

In a city known locally as the “cast-off capital”, 90km from Delhi, a young Indian man and his wife-to-be are making final preparations for their special day.

Inside the Regency Hotel at Panipat, Puneet Puneet is surrounded by family. He wears a gold jacket he hopes will impress the 100 or so guests who will arrive within hours to watch him tie the knot.

He is a world away from Melbourne and the night in October of 2008 when he cut short the life of a visiting Queensland student because he was drunk, speeding and driving out of control.

But it’s about to catch up with him.

Four hours before exchanging vows, on November 30, 2013, police raided the hotel. Witnesses recalled Puneet “did not try to run but walked down the hotel staircase and burst into tears”.

Hotel Regency in Panipat, where police arrested Puneet Puneet.

The crash scene at City Road, Southbank, where Puneet killed Dean Hofstee. Picture: Morganna Magee

PUNEET’S HEARTLESS DECISIONS

The then-24-year-old thought he had escaped.

Puneet, a learner driver at the time, had pleaded guilty five years earlier to a hit-and-run in the Melbourne CBD that killed 19-year-old Dean Hofstee and seriously injured 20-year-old Clancy Coker.

The Indian national was travelling in excess of 150km/h in a 60km/h zone at Southbank after a night of drinking. His blood alcohol level was 0.165.

A truck driver testified Puneet overtook him at a “furious speed” just after midnight before he lost control and crashed.

Mr Hofstee and Mr Coker were in the wrong place at the wrong time when they stepped outside the Mantra Hotel. The car Puneet was driving was a crumpled mess.

Learner driver Puneet fled to India after killing Mr Hofstee.

Puneet while on the run in India.

Instead of facing up to what he’d done, Puneet tried to hide from it. First by staying with a friend in Melbourne, and second by using another friend’s passport to flee the country while on bail.

It was an insult to the family of the victim, but it was not the last time they would be insulted.

Puneet’s Lawyer Kanhaiya Kumar Singhal last year told the family “accidents happen” and “it was not rape or murder”.

This week, in a Delhi court where Puneet is facing a drawn-out extradition hearing, he did it again.

Puneet, through his lawyers, told Victorian authorities he would only return to Australia if prosecutors guaranteed a maximum sentence of two years in jail.

Mr Singhal has already proposed the idea to Victoria’s Attorney-General Acting Attorney-General Gavin Jennings. He hasn’t heard back yet but says the idea is being “discussed”.

Puneet continues to fight against extradition to Australia.

Puneet was granted bail in Melbourne before he fled. Picture: Nicki Connolly

“It will take a matter of time, but we know there are discussions in Australia,” Mr Singhal told reporters outside court.

Asked whether that could mean the extradition request might be dropped, he said: “Not dropped as that would technically be grounds for surrender. But opposing parties could well sit down and negotiate.”

The request will do Puneet no favours in a city where he was labelled a “coward” last year by Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews.

“The fact that he, in a cowardly act, scarpered, ran away from facing the consequences of his actions, speaks volumes for his character,” he said.

“I think everybody across Victoria would be pleased to see him sent back to do the jail time that he should do right here.”

Mr Hofstee’s father Peter previously said Puneet needs to “accept his responsibilities” and “I want to see him brought back here and the matter sorted”.

‘‘Dean would have accepted the consequences, and I would expect Puneet Puneet to do the same thing.”

Mr Hofstee was visiting Melbourne as part of the University Games when he was killed.

PUNEET’S LIFE ON THE RUN

He had grown his hair out and was happy. He was working in a call centre and thought police would never find him.

But a generous reward led to a tip-off that brought his secret world crashing down.

Victorian police, who never stopped looking for Puneet, issued a $100,000 reward for information that might lead to his capture.

Victoria Police Assistant Commissioner Robert Hill said at a press conference at the time never before had there been an offer of that scale for a traffic offence.

“It has been almost four years since this tragedy occurred, and investigators want to provide some resolution to this, particularly for the family of Dean Hofstee,” he said.

“Our initial investigation resulted in Puneet being charged with extremely serious criminal offences. What we want now is for those matters to have their day in court.

“We believe that there are people both in Australia and India who can provide information in relation to Puneet’s whereabouts.”

He was right. With the help of Australian Federal Police, Interpol, their counterparts in India and a person with knowledge of Puneet’s whereabouts, officers tracked him down as he was preparing to meet with “a friend”, the Herald Sun reported.

Puneet's Interpol notice.

Delhi's infamous Tihar Prison, where Puneet is being held.

Puneet has been behind bars at Delhi’s infamous Tihar Prison. The facility is home to 12,000 inmates.

Last year his lawyers suggested the time in prison had taken its toll on him. They said he was not mentally competent to be the subject of an extradition decision.

A judge even stopped proceedings to ask “what happened?” when he heard Puneet crying in the courtroom.

“Stand up Puneet! Stand up! What happened?” he said.

Puneet, with a bandaged head, fell into his uncle’s arms and began crying hysterically before he was removed from the courtroom. The judge then asked: “Who was making those sounds? Was that him?”

The defence has also previously argued Puneet suffers from kidney problems, schizophrenia, weight loss and at one point drank poison due to his fragile state of mind.

But it won’t be over anytime soon. The hearing continues on August 13 when Puneet is next due in court.

rohan.smith1@news.com.au | @ro_smith

Originally published as Learner driver ‘coward’ in fatal hit-and-run refusing to co-operate with authorities
