Mood of the Nation: Will 2019 see the making of a grand alliance?

Scene 1. Lucknow. On January 12, the sprawling campus of the Taj Mahal hotel in Lucknow’s Gomti Nagar looked both like a mega baraat party as well as a battle zone. With colourful posters and billboards all over Lucknow and the police cordoning off the area, the hotel was teeming with political party workers and journalists who had come to watch the formal announcement of the alliance between the Samajwadi Party (SP) and the Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP). Rival political parties for 35 years, the Mayawati (BSP)-Akhilesh Yadav (SP) team, also known as the bua-bhatija gathbandhan (aunt-nephew alliance), could prove to be a game-changer.

As one senior BJP leader explained in Lucknow, Two Hindi words, vikalp (alternative) and hawa (wind), denote the sharp change in popular mood in Uttar Pradesh after this new alliance. In March 2017, after the BJP swept the UP assembly election and Yogi Adityanath was sworn in as chief minister, the BJP was the only vikalp in the state. Now the SP-BSP gathbandhan is the main vikalp and, as a result, the hawa has changed direction.

For the SP-BSP workers, the despair since March 2017 has changed to hope. Rivals may call it a mere caste coalitionPrime Minister Narendra Modi even called it a combine of those he had prevented from looting Indiabut the truth is the SP-BSP pre-poll alliance may well go down in history as the turning point in the 2019 battle for India with the firming up of a rainbow social coalition of OBCs, Dalits and Muslims who together constitute over 75 per cent of UP’s voting population.

Why the focus on UP when the election is for the entire country? Remember, UP is the country’s most populous and pivotal state with 80 MPs. The state has given India nine of its 14 prime ministers. In 2014, one-fourth of the BJP’s MPs were from here. Prime Minister Narendra Modi contested from here (Varanasi) and so did Congress president Rahul Gandhi (Amethi). In the past, Sonia Gandhi has contested from Raebareli in UP and, on January 23, Priyanka Gandhi was made Congress general secretary for UP East, a region from where the Congress had won over a dozen Lok Sabha seats in 2009. Given the significance of UP in national politics, the india today-Karvy Insights Mood of the Nation (MOTN) survey carried out a separate poll in UP as a bellwether for the Lok Sabha election.

Scene 2. Kolkata. On January 19, the leaders of 22 political parties, including three current chief ministers, a few former ones, ex-cabinet ministers from NDA-1 and even a former prime minister, gathered at a massive United India’ rally in Kolkata’s Brigade Grounds to lay the template for a new grand alliance to take on the BJP and its allies.

West Bengal chief minister and Trinamool Congress (TMC) leader Mamata Banerjee, who hosted the Kolkata rally, publicly declared: Badal do, badal do, Dilli mein sarkar badal do. Let all opposition parties support the strongest BJP opponent in each Lok Sabha seat. The Modi government has reached its expiry date.

Lucknow and Kolkata have emerged in the last fortnight as the simmering new hubs of national power politics. If Bengaluru, after the Karnataka assembly polls in May 2018, provided the photo opportunity for mahagathbandhan politics and Lucknow has laid the foundation for a formidable alliance in UP, Kolkata has surely provided the brick and mortar for the grand all­iance. So many leaders of different parties are on this dais, it is like the country has come together against the BJP. Everyone will have to come together, and we have to strongly support everyone. Collective leadership is crucial, Mamata Banerjee said in her opening address.

Almost all the key opposition parties, barring her state rivals, the Left parties, attended the United India meet. That also jointly announced that more such gatherings would take place in the coming days. While TDP president and Andhra Pradesh chief minister Chandrababu Naidu announced that he was planning a massive meeting in state capital Amaravati, his Delhi counterpart, Arvind Kejriwal of AAP, indicated that a similar meet is likely in the national capital before the Lok Sabha election in 2019. From Karnataka to Lucknow, Kolkata to Amaravati, and finally to Delhi, the grand alliance has plans to stitch together pre-poll local alliances in key states and post-poll alliances across the country.

Will such an alliance be a game changerin UP and across the country in the 2019 Lok Sabha election? Can the mahagathbandhan being forged from Lucknow to Kolkata, Hyderabad to Jammu and Kashmir challenge the Modi-led juggernaut in May 2019?

Consider what the MOTN report reveals a 100 days before the general election. When asked whether a state-level strategic alliance among opposition parties posed a serious challenge to the BJP-led NDA in the upcoming election, some 60 per cent of surveyed voters across the country said yes’, just 26 per cent replied in the negative.

The pre-poll scenarios

Since the mahagathbandhan is in the making and alliances are still in a flux, the MOTN builds three probable scenarios in the battleground state of UP, four probable scenarios in the country and finally two possible post-poll scenarios across the country. All scenarios are hypothetical, based on mathematical probabilities and estimations of vote and seat share.

Uttar Pradesh scenarios

Scenario 1: This is the most realistic scenario as it stands today. The BJP is in alliance with Apna Dal, the same alliance which in 2014 fetched 73 seats in UP. The SP, BSP and RLD are now in an alliance, formally announced on January 12. The Congress is fighting as a third front, attempting to stitch alliances with smaller players such as Shivpal Yadav’s Pragatisheel Samajwadi Party and other smaller groups. As things stand, the MOTN predicts that the SP-BSP-RLD alliance is likely to win 58 seats with 46 per cent vote share, the BJP-plus are likely to end up with just 18 seats with 36 per cent votes, while the Congress-plus are likely to get four seats with 12.5 per cent votes. Clearly, the SP-BSP-RLD gathbandhan is gaining the most, the Cube law applying here increasing the seats in geometric proportion to vote share for the largest player. Inversely, the Congress ends up winning just four seats, even with increase in vote share compared to 2014 since, in a three-way contest, it is the smallest player. The BJP is the biggest loser, since it ends up as the second largest player.

Scenario 2: Suppose all opposition non-BJP parties end up forming a coalition, the ideal secular coalition, which prevents the splitting of the minority 19 per cent vote. In other words, the Congress joins the SP-BSP-RLD alliance. The NDA stays as it is: BJP + Apna Dal. Under such an ideal alliance structure for the opposition, in a two-cornered contest, the gathbandhan would end up with 75 seats based on a 58 per cent vote share, while the NDA alliance would end up with a mere five seats on a base of 36 per cent votes.

Scenario 3: What if all the four large partiesthe BJP, SP, BSP and the Congress compete separately on their own? The results would be 57 seats to the BJP on a base of 35 per cent votes, 16 for the SP (24 per cent vote), 1 for the BSP (21 per cent vote) and four for the Congress. Why is the BJP losing seats and votes despite a four-cornered contest? Reason: the BJP is losing almost 7.5 per cent votes on double anti-incumbencyModi at the Centre and Yogi Adityanath in Lucknow. However, if the personal popularity of the PM and the chief minister is analysed, the anti-incumbency against the Yogi-led BJP state government is greater than for the Modi-led NDA government.

Pre-poll scenarios in the country

Main Scenario: This is the most realistic scenario in the country as things stand today (see lead report, The Fight Gets Tight). In a three-cornered contest, the NDA is likely to get 237 seats based on 35 per cent votes; UPA (including TDP, Congress and others) 166 seats on a base of 33 per cent and Others (which include the SP, BSP, TMC and other smaller players) end up with 140 seats with 32 per cent vote. Result: a hung Parliament since none of the players can make up the minimum 272 seats out of 543 to form the government.

Scenario 1: If the BSP-SP-RLD and TMC join the Congress-led UPA, what is the likely vote and seat share of each player? The NDA would end up with 219 seats on a voter support base of 35 per cent, UPA with 269 seats on a base of 44 per cent and Others with 55 seats on a base of 21 per cent votes. Why consider this situation if this is not realistic? Based on the adage, United we stand, divided we fall’, the Congress-led UPA and the SP-BSP-RLD-TMC-led mahagathbandhan will end up competing with each other, working at cross-purposes, both groups end up losing whereas the NDA gains.

Scenario 2: What if the AIADMK and YSRC join the NDA and the Mehbooba Mufti-led PDP switches sides and allies with the UPA? The rest of the scenario is the same as Scenario 2. The NDA is likely to secure 234 seats with 40 per cent votes, while the UPA is likely to get 272 seats with 44 per cent votes. Clearly, the UPA’s vote share does not increase with the PDP joining it, but it gains seat share, just about touching the majority required to form the government.

Scenario 3: What if the Naveen Patnaik-led Biju Janata Dal and the K. Chandrashekar Rao-led TRS join the NDA? The answer is a puzzle: despite such additions, the NDA gains only a little, getting 257 seats, but the UPA still crosses the halfway mark of 272 to form the government despite the two rivals equalling at 44 per cent votes each. The others end up getting about 14 seats with 12 per cent of the votes. Clearly, the NDA alliance is facing anti-incumbency as the UPA did in 2014.

The two post-poll scenarios

What if the pre-poll scenarios do not change in the course of the campaigns in the next 100 days? Post-poll scenarios could be endless given the number of political players in the country and the possible combinations. In order to simplify possible scenarios for the sake of understanding, the MOTN considered just two:

Scenario 1: If we consider the realistic Main Scenario as the pre-poll picture, then the NDA with 237 seats would require 35 additional seats in order to form the government. It would need support from potential allies in the south like the YSR Congress of Andhra Pradesh, the AIADMK in Tamil Nadu, the TRS in Telangana, along with the BJD in Odisha in the east.

Scenario 2: If we consider the realistic Main Scenario as the pre-poll picture, to form the government, the UPA with 166 seats would require an additional 58 seats from potential allies such as the SP-BSP-RLD-TMC and also another 48 seats that can only come with support from the BJD and other smaller players.

In conclusion, the era of coalition politics is back, and that could spell trouble for Prime Minister Modi. With his popularity receding, polls show that the BJP-led NDA may fall short of a full majority in the 2019 Lok Sabha election. That has prompted the country’s disparate opposition parties to put aside their ideological differences and unite. But the dilemma of 2019 is also that the NDA, UPA or the mahagathbandhan cannot form the government on its own. Each player requires the support of at least one other coalition partner. Under the circumstances, it is better for players such as the mahagathbandhan and the Congress-led UPA to form a pre-poll alliance rather than a post-poll one. In the case of a pre-poll alliance, the political stability and durability will also be higher.
