Sonbhadra shootout: After Priyanka's return, Yogi Adityanath to visit victims' families

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will be paying a visit to the family members of the victims killed in Sonbhadra firing incident Sunday. He will first meet the bereaved families and will then visit the district hospital where those injured are being treated. UP DGP OP Singh is also likely to accompany the CM.

Yogi Adityanath will also address a press conference before coming back to Lucknow. He has promised speedy justice to those killed. 10 people lost their lives in the incident that got triggered due to a land dispute.

Ten people were gunned down and 28 injured in the clash between supporters of a village head Yagya Dutt and Gond tribals this week over a piece of land in Sonbhadra's Ghorawal area on Wednesday. Twenty-nine people, including Dutt and his brother, were arrested.

Priyanka Gandhi's attempt to meet the kith and kin of the firing incident came to a halt on Friday when she was on her way to Sonbhadra to meet them. She was detailed and stopped from moving forward.

This lead to a standoff with the BJP government in Uttar Pradesh.

In a letter sent to Adityanath on Wednesday, Priyanka Gandhi said, "I appreciate the security arrangements made by the police and administration during my visit to the state but it causes a lot of inconvenience to the people and this troubles me."

"Since I am a 'sewak' of people, they should not face any trouble because of me," she said.

After she was stopped, the residents of the Ubbha village covered the distance, mostly on foot, to meet Priyanka at the guest house where she was detained since Friday.

Finally met the families of the Ubbha massacre. What they have been through is unimaginably brutal and unjust. Every single Indian should stand with them in the name of humanity. pic.twitter.com/232oJITUjj Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 20, 2019

They walked for over four hours and then took a tractor to reach the guest house on Saturday morning. In an hour-long meeting, Priyanka consoled the women members of the victims' families.

Priyanka also stated that the Congress party will give a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the kin of those who died in the incident.

The entire hullabaloo came to a closure after Mirzapur DM Saturday said Priyanka was free to leave. "Neither arrested nor detained," he added.
