Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath set to meet families of those killed in Sonbhadra firing

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath is set to visit Sonbhadra today In Sonbhadra, ten people from Gond tribe were shot dead after a village headman along with 200 of his supporters stormed the area. Priyanka Gandhi wasn't allowed to visit Sonbhadra, she met some family members of victim in a Mirzapur guesthouse where she was brought under 'detention'. .

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath is set to visit Sonbhadra today where ten people were gunned down this week over a land dispute. This has come a day after Congress general secretary met some members of the affected families in a Mirzapur guesthouse - where she was forced to stay overnight following her 'detention' on Friday.

In Sonbhadra, ten people from Gond tribe were shot dead when a village headman, Yagya Dutt, and his supporters attempted to take possession of a piece of land in Ubbha village area. After the incident, Yogi Adityanath had accused the previous state governments to let the fraud go on for decades.

Meanwhile, the opposition has hit out at the state government for preventing their leaders from meeting the families of the victims. After Priyanka's detention, a Congress delegation comprising of Raj Babbar, Rajeev Shukla, RPN Singh and Jitin Prasada landed at the Varanasi airport but were stopped from travelling ahead to Sonbhadra. Further, a three-member Trinamool Congress delegation from Delhi was also detained at Varanasi airport.

“Instead of ensuring justice to the families of victims, the BJP government has turned Ubbha village into a cantonment and is treating villagers like criminals. The government is standing with the criminals, and not with the families of the victims,” Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala said.

Former Congress president Rahul Gandhi also came out in support of his sister, tweeting, "The imprisonment of Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi, on way to meet the families of Sonbhadra massacre victims, in Chunar guest house through the night without water and electricity by a dictatorially inclined UP government is an attempt to trample upon democracy."

WHAT WAS THE INCIDENT?

According to reports, a village headman along with 200 supporters on as many as 32 tractors stormed a piece of tribal land in district's Ghorawal area in order to take possession. As their attempt was opposed by the tribals, who were tilling the land, Dutt's men reportedly resorted to indiscriminate firing at them.

The firing went on for almost half an hour with only slippers and blood spot left in the area as the testimony of the carnage.

As per the initial reports, the tribals have cultivated the disputed land for generations. However, they lack ownership titles and have been asking for it for decades now. On the other hand, the village headman, Dutt, claimed that he purchased the land 10 years ago from a local family.

The dispute dates back to the time of Independence when the land in question was transferred to a cooperative society formed by a family as per a government scheme. In the years that followed the scheme was scrapped but the land was transferred to individuals of the family. Dutt bought the land from the family some years ago.


