Chennai: Post bar owner’s death, DVAC raids ADSP’s house

Chennai: Sleuths of the Directorate of Vigilance and Anti-Corruption (DVAC) conducted searches at the residence of Additional District Superintendent of Police (ADSP) Manikavel and six other officers who were booked on charges of accepting bribes from a Tasmac bar owner Nellaipan, who immolated himself outside the DSP office in Mamallapuram, on May 28.

Sources said DVAC sleuths from Chennai, Kancheepuram, Villupuram and Cuddalore, carried out raids in 15 locations on Saturday morning.

Sources said that the searches were conducted at Additional District Superintendent of Police, Manikavel, residence at AC Quarters in Kutchery Road in Mylapore. The house of Mamallapuram DSP Subburaj in Palavakkam on the East Coast Road, the office and house of Madurantakam Prohibition Enforcement Wing Inspector Kannan in Chennai and Cuddalore, Thirukazhukundram Zonal PEW office, the houses of Mamallapuram Inspector Siranjeevi, Kelambakkam Inspector Pandi, Kancheepuram Inspector Ravichandran, were searched.

The office and house of former Tasmac zonal manager, Iyyavu, were also searched and officials said Rs. 10 lakh unaccounted cash was recovered.

According to reports, before immolating himself, Nellaippan had uploaded three videos admitting that he enjoyed clout among politicians and police officers, but was being forced to take the extreme step due to immense pressure from them. In the clips uploaded on his Facebook page, the deceased claimed that he had collected and handed over about Rs 19 crore to seven police personnel attached to Thiruporur, Kancheepuram, Mamallapuram and Thirukazhukundram police station. He said that he was being harassed by police and politicians for bribes to run bars.

Following his death, Kancheepuram SP Santhosh Hadimani transferred the officials to control room and ordered a departmental probe. The SP also ordered to close the 101 illegal bars operating in Kancheepuram district, some of which were earlier sealed by him.
