Public drinking crackdown picks speed in Noida; 260 violators held

The police official further mentioned that in a similar drive on July 6, 474 people were arrested in three hours from across the district for a similar violation. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused were released only after furnishing bail bonds by the police on Sunday. As many as 174 such people were held in Noida area, while 86 in Greater Noida region Most of these cases were under the jurisdiction of Sector 20 and Phase 2 police stations

Lucknow: The Uttar Pradesh police in Noida and Greater Noida held (not arrested) as many as 260 people for drinking alcohol in public spaces and violating the rule of the law. They were released only after furnishing bail bonds by the police on Sunday. The police raids were conducted on Saturday night.

Reportedly, 174 such people were held in Noida area, while 86 in Greater Noida region. The Superintendent of Police, Noida, Vineet Jaiswal told news agency PTI that overall 260 people were held for creating a ruckus and they were found drinking at public places which is a violation of the law.

Reportedly, most of these cases were under the jurisdiction of Sector 20 and Phase 2 police station areas. None of the accused were arrested but the action was taken under the Indian Penal Code section 290 (punishment for public nuisance, with fine, may extend to Rs 200). The violators were fined and were brought to the police station. They were reportedly released after furnishing bail bonds.

A similar anti-liquor drinking drive was conducted by the district police on Friday night. As many as 36 people were arrested for drinking in public. The police official further mentioned that in a similar drive on July 6, 474 people were arrested in three hours from across the district for a similar violation.

In a similar drive conducted in Hyderabad city, data released by the city's traffic police has revealed that as many as 2,282 commuters were caught and fined for driving under the influence of alcohol in the month of April.

These fines were issued as part of a special crackdown by the city traffic police to deter commuters from engaging in drunken driving. Officials also revealed that charge sheets were filed against all of the offenders and a total fine of Rs 49.64 lakh was imposed on them by a court of law. Out of over 2,000 violators, a local court decided to imprison 498 of them and revoked the driving licenses of 167 others.

Meanwhile, the crackdown was appreciated by the road safety experts and responsible citizens, traffic department personnel claim that the special drive has not had much effect on commuters who continue to violate laws concerning drunken driving.
