Navalgund, Nargund ryots continue their agitations

Dharwad: It has been 39 years since the farmers in Nargund and Navalgund taluks launched a fierce agitation for fulfilment of their demands but the issues remain unsolved.The agitation which turned violent on July 21, 1980, resulted in police firing that had claimed the lives of two farmers and two policemen. The agitation also paved the way for the first non-Congress government in Karnataka.Fall of Gundu Rao govtVeerappa Kadlikoppa of Chikkanaragund village in Naragund taluk of Gadag district (then in Dharwad district) and Basappa Lakkundi of Alagawadi village in Navalgund taluk of Dharwad district were killed in the police firing.The farmers of Naragund and Navalgund taluks had launched an agitation against the state government forcibly collecting betterment levy from farmers in the Malaprabha Command Area which included Nargund and Navalgund taluks. Their argument was that the benefits of the Malaprabha project had not reached a majority of farmers due to faulty planning and collection of levy from the non-beneficiaries was unjustified.The agitation that spread to other parts of the state and turned violent also strengthened the Raitha Sangha in the state and led to the downfall of the Gundu Rao government. It also paved way for the first non-Congress government in the state with Ramakrishna Hegde heading the Janata Party government.Martyrs’ Day has also provided an opportunity to the opposition parties to attack the ruling party for ‘neglecting the farmers’ while for the ruling party it has been an occasion to reiterate its commitment to the cause of farmers.Leaders of various political parties and farmers' associations will converge at Naragund and Navalgund on Sunday to pay tributes to farmers who laid down their lives. The day is observed as Farmer Martyrs’ Day.Farmers’ leader Laxman Swamy said this year, more than 5,000 farmers from various parts of north Karnataka would visit the memorial at Nargund, garland it and pay tributes. Later, a farmers’ meeting would be held at Dharwad. At the meeting, farmers would pass a resolution of launching movements against the government, if it fails to complete the Kalasa Banduri project.Farm women’s forumto be launched todayThe North Karnataka Farm Women’s Forum will be inaugurated at 10:30am at Kannada Sahitya Parishat Bhavan at R N Shetty stadium Complex in Dharwad on Sunday. The forum’s state president Shobha Chalvadi said on Saturday that that the forum will comprise of farm women and labourers and will work for the progress of the community. “The agriculture sector is plagued with several problems and there is a need to rejuvenate it. This forum will be inaugurated by Kannada Sahitya Parishat district president Lingaraj Angadi on the occasion of Farmer Martyrs' Day. Dr Vitthal Benagi, Vijay Kulkarni, Bhushan Kagi and other farmer leaders will be present,” she said.
