Rajnath pays homage at War memorial in Drass

Rajnath pays homage at War memorial in Drass

Kargil brave-hearts

DRASS (KARGIL), Jul 20: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh Saturday visited the Kargil War Memorial at Drass and paid homage to brave-hearts of ‘Operation Vijay’.

Defence Minister commenced his visit by laying a wreath in memory of the gallant brave-hearts at the iconic Kargil War Memorial, which was followed by observing of one minute silence as a mark of respect for the fallen heroes.

He subsequently visited the 'Veer Bhoomi' and the ‘Hut of Remembrance’ which are co-located in the Memorial premises. During his visit, Rajnath was briefed on Operation Vijay including the heroic actions of the Indian troops in thwarting the evil designs of the enemy in the Drass, Kargil and Batalik sectors.

As part of the commemoration of the 20th anniversary of Kargil Vijay Diwas, Rajnath dedicated a 'Memory Lane' which displays information on a few important battles. The 'Memory Lane' recapitulates the gallant deeds of the brave Indian army officers, Junior Commissioned Officers and jawans who fought against all odds to rid the Indian territory of enemy intruders.

Later, Lieutenant General YK Joshi, General Officer Commanding Fire & Fury Corps, himself a veteran of Operation Vijay, briefed the Defence Minister at Lamochan View Point on various battles that took place during the Kargil War in 1999. Rajnath also took the opportunity to share a cup of tea and interact with the soldiers presently deployed in the sector.

He appreciated the dedication of the troops defending the borders, in these challenging conditions and conveyed the appreciation of the nation to the Indian army, for always keeping 'Nation First.'

Minister of State for Prime Minister's Office, Department of Atomic Energy and Department of Space Dr Jitendra Singh, the Chief of Army Staff, General Bipin Rawat and the General Officer Commanding in Chief Northern Command Lt Gen Ranbir Singh were also present on the occasion.

Rajnath inaugurated two bridges in Kathua and Basantar later in the day.

Earlier, Singh had taken to Twitter to inform about his day-long trip to Jammu and Kashmir in the morning. “Leaving New Delhi for Drass on a day-long visit to J&K. Shall visit the Kargil War Memorial to pay tributes to the fallen soldiers. I shall also be visiting Jammu region where two bridges built by BRO at Ujh in Kathua and Basantar in Samba will be dedicated to the nation,” Rajnath had tweeted.

Rajnath's visit to the memorial comes days ahead of the celebration of the 20th anniversary of Operation Vijay by Indian Army. The Kargil war was fought between India and Pakistan between May and July 1999 in the Kargil district of Kashmir and along the Line of Control (LOC). During the war, the Indian Army evicted Pakistani intruders and succeeded in recapturing the Tiger Hill and other posts as a part of Operation Vijay. The Indian soldiers had secured this victory after a three-month conflict that led to a loss of lives from both sides with the Indian side losing nearly 490 officers, soldiers, and jawans.

In order to commemorate India's win in the war, the Kargil Vijay Diwas is celebrated every year on July 26. A host of events have been organised and a few major ones are lined up to mark the 20 years of the conflict.
