Civilian injured in Pak shelling in Poonch

Civilian injured in Pak shelling in Poonch

India, Pak trade fire in Rajouri

MENDHAR/RAJOURI, Jul 20: A civilian was injured Saturday morning as Pakistani troops resorted to unprovoked mortar shelling along the Line of Control (LoC) in Mendhar tehsil of Poonch on the day, the Defence Minister Rajnath Singh inaugurated two strategically important bridges on International Border (IB) in Kathua and Samba districts during his day long visit to J&K.

Though India and Pak armies traded fire in Nowshera sector of Rajouri district also in the morning yet there was no report of any loss so far.

In the meanwhile, one person namely Manzoor Hussain, 60, son of Jumma resident of Dhari Dabsi sector of Mendhar died due to heart attack during the ceasefire violation.

“A Naib Sarpanch was injured when Pakistani army opened unprovoked fire on Indian army posts at Mendhar, Mankote, Krishana Ghati and Balakote this morning at around 9:00 AM along the LoC in Poonch district,” a police officer told KTNS.

“At about 0900 hours, Pak initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation with firing of small arms and shelling with mortars along LoC in Mendhar sector,” Defence spokesperson Lt Col Devender Anand said. Indian army also retaliated in equal measure, he added. The cross border shelling continued for a brief time, he said.

“Some Pakistani shells landed near residential areas resulting in injuries to Naib Sarpanch Zaffar Ullah Khan of Baloni in Mankote tehsil of Poonch district,” a police officer informed KTNS. Zaffar suffered injuries in his right hand and was immediately shifted to nearby hospital, he said.

In the meanwhile, one person namely Manzoor Hussain, 60, son of Jumma resident of Dhari Dabsi sector of Mendhar died due to heart attack during the ceasefire violation.

Meanwhile, Pakistan also resorted to unprovoked small arms fire in Nowshera sector of Rajouri. However, no injuries or damage to property was reported, said officials.

The ceasefire violation along the LoC comes on the day when Defence Minister Rajnath Singh is on a visit to Kargil and Jammu in the state to celebrate the 20th anniversary of Kargil Vijay Diwas.

Earlier, Pakistan army had violated the ceasefire by firing unprovoked along the Line of Control in Rajouri district last evening.

The firing had triggered panic among the border residents who were directed to stay at safer places, officials said.
