UP Man Who Only Has A Fan And Bulb At Home Gets Electricity Bill Of Rs 128 Crore!

Shamim, a resident of Uttar Pradesh’s Hapur has been left shell shocked after the Power Corporation sent him an electricity bill of Rs 128 crore. Shamim, who lives with his wife Khairu Nisha says they only use a fan and light at home and is clueless about how he was sent an astronomical amount as a bill.

What is even worse is that since Shamim has not paid the due amount, the authorities have cut his connection.

ANI

“No one listens to our pleas, how will we submit that amount? When we went to complain about it, we were told that they won’t resume our electricity connection unless we pay the bill,” Shamin told ANI.

“I am running from pillar to post but no one is listening. It seems that the electricity department wants me to pay the bill for the whole Hapur,” he added.

Authorities, however, played down the incident and blamed it on a technical glitch.

ANI

“This must be a technical fault. If they provide us the bill we will issue them an updated one after rectifying the technical fault in the system. This is no big deal. Technical faults do take place,” Assistant Electrical Engineer Ram Sharan told ANI.

While the bill may have left Shamin shocked, he is not the first person to get such ludicrous amount as a utility bill.

Just a few months ago another UP man, Abdul Basit got a bill of Rs 23 crore, for his home electricity connection of 2 kilowatts.

This is despite the power meter at his home showing a reading of 178 units, which is normal for an average household.

BCCL/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

It is not just a problem in UP, in 2017, a man from Jamshedpur, Jharkhand got an electricity bill which amounted to Rs 3800 crore. BR Guha who has three fans, three tube-lights and watches TV at times was handed the non-payment of the bill by the Jharkhand Electricity Board, following which, electricity was disconnected from his home.

But what happened with a man in Maharashtra was tragic.

Jagannath Nehaji Shelke, a resident of Aurangabad was sent an electricity bill of Rs 8.64 lakh, which later turned out to be an erroneous one caused due to a missing decimal point.

By the time the mistake was identified, Shelke who was running from one office to another to get it corrected had committed suicide.
