60 Minutes: What has happened to the 'escaped' princesses of Dubai

A royal insider has broken his silence on the ‘escaped’ princesses of Dubai in a world-first interview with 60 Minutes.

Marcus Essabri has spoken out for the first time about the attempted escapes of his cousins Princess Shamsa and Latifa, and says he has serious concerns for their wellbeing.

“I wouldn't treat even an animal the way she has been treated,” Essabri told 60 Minutes reporter Tom Steinfort of his cousin Princess Latifa’s condition.

Marcus Essabri is Princess Latifa's cousin. (60 Minutes)

“Is she being locked up? Is she being beaten? Is she being fed?

“[There is] no freedom, and it's the basic freedom.”

Essabri’s astonishing interview comes just weeks after Princess Haya, the wife of the ruler of Dubai, Sheikh Mohammed, fled to the UK with her two young children - now based in London where she has applied for political asylum.

Princess Haya is the third princess to attempt escape from Dubai’s royal family, leaving behind the confines of the mysterious palace walls and the shadow of Sheikh Mohammed - one of the wealthiest and most powerful men in the world.

Last year, Princess Latifa, the 33-year-old daughter of Sheikh Mohammed, attempted her escape from Dubai, risking her life to flee the palace under the cover of darkness.

But just days after she was smuggled out of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in the boot of a friends car, as she was on her way to India to start her new life, the boat she was travelling in was raided by commandos from the UAE.

It is alleged they dragged Princess Latifa at gunpoint off the boat and forced her to return to Dubai against her will.

Princess Latifa in a video she recorded. (60 Minutes)

Sheik Mohammed. (60 Minutes)

Essabri believes Princess Latifa and Princess Shamsa – who also made a failed escape attempt more than 18 years ago – are both being mistreated and unable to leave Dubai.

He is speaking out in the hopes their situation gains international attention and his cousins can once again experience freedom.

“Somebody's taken her life away from her,” he said of Princess Latifa’s capture.

“The opportunities of her life… it's like you are living, but you have no right to live.”

Essabri has joined the fight for Princess Latifa’s freedom, speaking for the first time about the restricted life women in the royal family live inside the palace.

Essabri identifies as a transgender male – having transitioned to life as a man ten years ago.

He has a unique understanding of what life is like for women in Dubai’s royal family, as during the years he lived in the palace he went by ‘Fatima’.

“If I had stayed there, if I had been kept there, I don't think I could have survived,” he told Steinfort.

“Because I don't fit in. I don't tick their boxes.”

He has spent decades living the UK and Europe, and hopes for his beloved cousins to experience the same freedom he has enjoyed since leaving Dubai’s palace himself.

“My aim, my hope, my dream is that I can hug them, see them, make sure that they are all right,” he said.
