UP CM Yogi Adityanath meets Sonbhadra firing victims' families; blames Congress for the incident

UP CM Yogi Adityanath | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights UP CM announced a compensation of Rs 18.5 lakh to the kin of the deceased and Rs 2.5 lakh to injured He also ordered suspension of police officials responsible for the incident Yogi Adityanath blamed Congress for the land dispute that led to the Sonbhadra firing incident

Varanasi: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath on Sunday met the grieving families of 10 people who were killed in clashes over a land dispute in Sonbhadra's Ubbah village. The chief minister ordered the suspension of police officials responsible for the incident and announced ex-gratia for the kin of the deceased and the ones who got injured in the violent clashes. The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) also took time to blame the Congress party for the incident and accused its leaders of "shedding crocodile tears".

During his visit to Sonbhadra, Yogi Adityanath met the victims of the incident and announced a compensation of Rs 18.5 lakh to the bereaved families of the deceased and Rs 2.5 lakh to individuals who got injured in the clashes. The compensation will be released from the Chief Minister's Relief Fund under SC/ST provisions. He also ordered an investigation into the matter and assured that the state administration will act against the accused at the earliest.

The entire incident took place on July 17 in Ubbah village of Sonbhadra district, Uttar Pradesh. Village chief Yagya Dutt and his associates opened fire on a group of farmers who refused to give up the 36 acres of land they had owned for generations. The eyewitnesses have claimed that over 200 men on 32 tractor trolleys went to seize the land by force and when the tribal farmers protested, they fired shots upon them for nearly half an hour.

While speaking to people in Ubbah village, Yogi Adityanath laid the blame on Congress saying the foundation of the land dispute was put by the grand old party more than five decades ago. "This incident is a big political conspiracy. The foundations were laid in 1955 when the land was transferred to a trust set up by a Congress Rajya Sabha member. In 1989, the Congress government in UP transferred the land to individual members of the trust," said the UP CM.

Continuing his attack on Congress, Adityanath said Sonbhadra firing incident has exposed the anti-Dalit and anti-tribal face of the Congress. He then asserted that the state government will do everything in its power to deliver justice to the victims. 29 people were arrested on Friday alone and four officials were suspended in the firing case, he claimed.
