India Demands Release Of Arrested Crew Of UK Oil Tanker, Assam Faces Encephalitis Outbreak Threat And Other News

India had no role in the Iran nuclear deal or its aftermath and have good relationships with both sides. But ever since the tension between the two sides escalated, the country has been caught up in the middle of it. That is because both sides have seized oil tankers of the other and both of them have Indians onboard.

It all began with the seizure of Grace 1, an Iran-flagged oil tanker off the coast of Gibraltar, by the British authorities for allegedly violating EU sanctions and shipping oil to Syria, a charge Tehran has denied. It had four Indians crew members who were arrested by the British authorities. Read more

Trouble For Assam Flood Victims Deepen As They Return Home Amid Fears Of Encephalitis Outbreak

After nearly two weeks, the floods waters have slowly started receding across Assam, bringing much need relief to the more than 55 lakhs people, who have been hit by the disaster.

Since Saturday, the situation has reportedly improved in 24 flood-affected districts – Dhemaji, Lakhimpur, Biswanath, Sonitpur, Darrang, Barpeta, Nalbari, Chirang, Bongaigaon, Kokrajhar, Dhubri, South Salmara, Goalpara, Kamrup, Kamrup (M), Morigaon, Nagaon, Karbi Anglong, Golaghat, Jorhat, Dibrugarh, Tinsukia, Cachar, and Karimga. Read more

Tax Evaders Will Be Tracked Through Aadhaar Card If They Spend More Than Rs 50,000

The strict eye will be kept on people who buy cars, jewellery, homes and also invest in financial instruments, but don’t declare any taxable income and this will be done with the help of the Aadhaar.

By making the Permanent Account Number (PAN) interchangeable with Aadhaar in high value transactions, people who provide their Aadhaar number will be issued PAN automatically and also to make PANs which aren’t linked with Aadhaar inoperative from September 1- are major decision which will help the authorities to ensure that taxpayers’ base is widen and tax evaders were identified. Read more

Heavy Rains Bring Respite As People Enjoy Sunday Showers In Delhi-NCR

Monsoon has been picking up in Delhi for the past couple of days and has brought some much-needed respite from the heat.Heavy rains lashed Delhi and NCR region of Sunday.

The city has been experiencing humid weather since morning. The rains also brought the temperatures to around 36 and 27 degrees Celsius, respectively. Read more

UP Man Who Only Has A Fan And Bulb At Home Gets Electricity Bill Of Rs 128 Crore

Shamim, a resident of Uttar Pradesh’s Hapur has been left shell shocked after the Power Corporation sent him an electricity bill of Rs 128 crore. Shamim, who lives with his wife Khairu Nisha says they only use a fan and light at home and is clueless about how he was sent an astronomical amount as a bill.

What is even worse is that since Shamim has not paid the due amount, the authorities have cut his connection. Read more

Agra Businessman Celebrates His 73rd Birthday By Gifting Bail To 17 Jail Inmates

The birthday of a businessman in Agra became the freedom for 17 inmates in jail who couldn’t afford bail money as on Motialal Yadav, a businessman deposited Rs 32,380 as the penalty amount to release 17 inmates on bail and this is the gift he gave to the inmates on the occasion of his 73rd birthday.

The amount has been given to sanction bail of the inmates who were booked in petty offence and were languishing in jail for an extended period after they were booked. This will give 17 inmates a release from the prison as they couldn’t afford bail despite being eligible to apply and get. Read more
