Free open Indo-Pacific

China Pakistan Economic Corridor has initiated new economic cold war in the Oceans. Since emergence of geo-economics as back bone of holding grip and influence on the global political, cultural and economic affairs, trade routes attracted attention of the world economic powers. The concept of Indo-Pacific seems counterproductive of CPEC.

A term “Free and Open Indo-Pacific Strategy” was probably first heard in 2007. While speaking to the Indian parliament in 2007, Shinzo Abe, Japanese prime minister talked about ” Free and Open Indo-Pacific”. In the same year he initiated quadrilateral dialogue. The dialogue included Japan, the U.S, Australia and India (Quad) located on two Oceans.

The concept got momentum in 2017 when the U.S president talked about it. He embarked upon his Asian tour in 2017 and reached Japan. Afterwards he visited four more Asian countries i.e China, South Korea, Philippines and Vietnam. The strategy is considered vital for stability and prosperity in Asia and Africa continents and the two Oceans.

There are about forty seven countries located around the Pacific Ocean including China, Japan, the U.S and Canada. The Ocean forms 47% of total water of the earth. It separates Asia and Australia from America. The Ocean is important politically, economically and strategically. The Pacific Ocean is supply line from the Indian Ocean to the countries located around it.

Quad of “Open and Free Indo-Pacific” has common and specific reasons of joining hands. Economic superiority is main point between China and the U.S. The U.S wants to protect its and allies’ interests vis-à-vis China

Indian Ocean is third largest water body on the earth and covers one-fifth ocean area of the globe. It mainly shares its borders with Asia and Africa continents. About forty four countries are located on the water lip of the Ocean.

The Indian Ocean remained center of power competition between the Communist and Capitalist blocs during the cold war period (1945-1991). It is also the theatre of getting superiority and protecting ones interests by the powers in post cold war period aimed at creating their respective sphere of influence. This competition was due to various reasons. Firstly, the Ocean has warm waters which remain open for 365 days for trade and other economic and strategic activities. Secondly, the Ocean has main economically vital water regions. Among them one important is the Middle East. The Persian Gulf is water region of the Middle East. It lies between southwestern Iran and the Arabian Peninsula. Strait of Hormuz is mouth of the gulf.

The Persian Gulf is plenty of fish and natural resources. The natural resources include oil and gas etc. Japan and the other western countries depend on oil of the gulf. According to one report Japan fulfils 80% of its oil requirements from the gulf countries. Number of wars was fought in the Middle East during the cold war era. Moreover, former Soviet Union always tried to extend and increase its sphere of influence in the Middle East whereas the United States successfully established its influence and extended to large extent.

Lastly, after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, the natural resources of Central Asian Republics attracted the world attention including the U.S, China and Japan etc. According to one estimate the region contains more oil reservoirs than that of the Persian Gulf. The world may take benefit of these reservoirs mainly through supply line of water of Gwadar port which is located on the mouth of the Persian Gulf in the Arabian Sea. It is near to outside of Strait of Hormuz.

Quad of “Open and Free Indo-Pacific” has common and specific reasons of joining hands. Economic superiority is main point between China and the U.S. The U.S wants to protect its and allies’ interests vis-à-vis China. India fought war in 1962 with China. India’s defeat caused chain reaction of nuclear armament in the region of South Asia. Japan and China has dispute on the island of Senkaku located in the Pacific Ocean.

It seems that the four countries do not want superiority of China on the waters of the Indian Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. If this happens then trade routes may not be safe for the Quad countries in the two Oceans. China may also not afford upper hand of Quad under the umbrella of FOIP strategy. It is necessary that every country may be allowed to take benefit from the natural resources of the Oceans without undermining other.

The writer is an author and has a doctorate in Political Science
