Caught in the conflict zone

KOCHI: Three Kerlaites are part of the crew of the United Kingdom-flagged oil tanker Stena Impero seized by Iran at the Strait of Hormuz, said the relatives of one among them - Dijo Pappachan - on Sunday. The kin of Dijo, who hails from Kalamassery, said that they had received confirmation that he was on the ship but were unable to contact him.Dijo’s family said that the two others also hail from Ernakulam, however, this information is yet to be verified as their families couldn’t be tracked. They said that Dijo had told them that the captain of the ship hails from Fort Kochi and the second person was from Tripunithura. However, neither of their families have come out in public about the missing seafarers.Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards took control of Stena Impero with its 23-strong crew while it was on the way from Fujairah in the UAE to Saudi Arabia. The seizure happened weeks after Britain seized the Iranian tanker — Grace 1 —citing violation of oil export sanctions imposed on Iran.Dijo, 26, joined the ship as Messman about a month ago. He is the son of T V Pappachan and Deena Pappachan, both residing near the Cochin University campus at Kalamassery. Dijo had left for Mumbai where he joined the shipping company’s office on June 12 and left for Gujarat the next day. He boarded the chemical tanker which was berthed at Gujarat for unloading on July 18, his relatives said.They said that the ship remained at anchorage in the sea, for nearly a fortnight due to some technical issues before going to the Middle East. “The ship had all the amenities for communication and he used to call us every day. The last call was made on Friday morning. But, around 1.30am on Saturday we got a call from the Mumbai unit of the shipping company informing us about the seizure. We have heard that such seized ships are let off in a couple of days and we have been making quiet inquiries till now,” Pappachan said.He added that Dijo’s elder sister, Deepa is in London as part of her work and she is in contact with the company’s London office. “She has gone to the UK for a year as part of her job and has been staying there for nearly six months. She is also trying to get in touch with my son. However, since Friday morning, he has gone incommunicado,” said Pappachan.The spokesperson representing Stena Bulk and Northern Marine Ltd said that the identities of the seafarers were withheld due to security concerns. “Unfortunately, we can’t reveal the name of the seafarers due to obvious security concerns,” said William Marks, the spokesperson. However, through an official communique the company said that their insurers are in the region.“They have been in contact with the head of marine affairs at the Port of Bandar Abbas, who has reported that the crew members of our vessel Stena Impero are in ‘good health’ and that the tanker is at the nearby Bandar Bahonar anchorage. The head of marine affairs has asked a formal request be made for a visit to be arranged to the crew members and vessel,” the official communique stated.Erik Hanell, president and chief executive of Stena Bulk, said the request was acknowledged and an official response was awaited. “Our local staff in India, Latvia, Philippines and Russia are in constant touch with the families and we will continue to do everything humanly possible to keep them informed and to support them in every way we can,” he said.Meanwhile, sources in the directorate general of shipping said that the seafarers would remain safe. “Merchant vessels are rarely pulled into such diplomatic tensions. However, the department is looking into the matter and they will be safe,” said a senior official with the DG shipping.
