Software engineer found dead on railway track

A 35-year-old software engineer, who went missing on July 12 , was found dead on railway track near Rayakottai railway station on Sunday.S Syed Tanvir Ahamed, 35, of Ayanavaram in Chennai, was working with IBM in Ireland. He married Shilpa, 32, of Bengaluru a few years ago. Both belonging to two different religion. She was also working in Ireland and became pregnant.Last month, Syed and Shilpa flew down to her hometown at Rayakottai in Krishnagiri district to stay at her mother’s house.Meanwhile, Tanvir left Bengaluru on July 12 and returned to Hosur on the same day evening. He texted to his wife’s mobile number that he was in Hosur. Later, he did not return home and his phone was switched off.Shilpa lodged a complaint with the Rayakottai police on July 13 and inspector of police Sivalingam registered a man missing case. The preliminary inquiry revealed that Tanvir had gone to Bengaluru to buy a property and went missing. On July 21, a body was found on the railway track near Rayakottai railway station and the public informed to the railway police.The inquiry revealed that it was Tanvir and the railway police alerted Rayakottai police who rushed to the spot. The family members also identified the body and told the police that it was Tanvir. Immediately, the body was taken to the government hospital in Dharmapuri for postmortem.Denkanikottai sub-division deputy superintendent of police Sangeetha conducted inquiry with the railway staff and the public.Meanwhile, police issued a press note on Sunday evening and claimed that Tanvir was in depression and was found roaming in many places. On Saturday, he was found roaming at Hosur railway station and his images were recorded in CCTV cameras in the station. Later, he went to Rayakottai railway station where he was lying on the platform and many people noticed him. A railway staff also inquired with him. The Hosur police registered a suspicious death case (174 CrpC) and further investigation is on.Police claimed that he was facing huge financial crisis and he quit the job also. There is no chance of murder. The cause of the death will be known after the postmortem only.
