Defense news on: 2019 July 22 (acquisition and contracts)

Americas

Lockheed Martin won $22.6 million cost-plus-incentive-fee modification for AEGIS Baseline 9 integration and delivery, Aegis Baseline 5.4 and 9A2A post-certification support. The deal provides for the completion of the development and fielding of the AEGIS Baseline 9 AEGIS Weapon System and integrated AEGIS Combat System on the remaining AEGIS Technical Insertion (TI) 12 configured destroyers as well as TI 12 and TI 08 configured cruisers. The Aegis Combat System is an integrated naval weapons system, which uses powerful computer and radar technology to track and guide weapons to destroy enemy targets. The Aegis Combat System is the world’s most advanced combat system and the only maritime ballistic defense system capable of simultaneously attacking land targets, submarines, and surface ships while protecting the fleet against aircraft, cruise and other ballistic missiles. Baseline 9 is the upgraded version of the weapons system that enables the crew members to track enemy missiles and aircraft with accuracy. The system further enhances the overall range and weapon capabilities of the vessel compared to its predecessors. Lockheed will perform work for the modification in Moorestown, New Jersey and is scheduled to be finished by July 2020.

The company Lockheed Martin also won an $8.2 million contract modification in support of Surface Navy Laser Weapon System Increment 1, High Energy Laser and Integrated Optical-dazzler with Surveillance or HELIOS system. The deal includes technical and field engineering services and a cost-only line item for travel. Lockheed Martin’s HELIOS laser weapons system uses light beams to defend against Chinese or Russian cruise missiles. With the High Energy Laser and Integrated Optical-dazzler with Surveillance (HELIOS) system, Lockheed Martin will help the Navy take a major step forward in its goal to field laser weapon systems aboard surface ships. The army intends to integrate the navy’s laser systems around 2023, however it may not be possible to fully utilize it. Before it can use a system with double the power of those currently in development, the army will need to develop support systems capable of operating these higher-powered naval lasers. The US Navy is planning to deploy Lockheed Martin’s HELIOS laser on destroyers by 2021 after a testing period, in which the weapon was successfully used to target and take down drones.

Middle East & Africa

Iran deployed three Mohajer-6 drones. The UAV would be used to identify and destroy threats to the country’s borders. The military had released photographs showing at least one Mohajer-6 deployed to an unidentified airfield that was said to be in northeast Iran. Iran begun mass production of the indigenously-produced Mohajer-6 tactical and combat unmanned aerial vehicle back in February 2018. The Mohajer-6 was unveiled in 2016. The drone is the first of the Mohajer series to have wheeled undercarriage.

Europe

In a press release, Raytheon announced that the company signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the UK Ministry of Defense to join Team ARTEMIS Industry, a collaboration between government and industry formed to fast track the launch of a small satellite constellation and enhance the UK’s sovereign space capability. “In large part because of US efforts to raise the profile of military space, allies are working hard to ‘close the space gap,'” said Air Vice-Marshal Rocky Rochelle, Royal Air Force chief of staff for capability. ARTEMIS is a hyperspectral sensing system, operating in the visible to shortwave infrared wavelengths. Hyperspectral sensors capture light across a wide swath of the electromagnetic spectrum, providing unprecedented spectral detail. That spectral information produces a distinct signature, which can be compared against the spectral signatures of known objects to rapidly identify potential areas of interest.

MBDA announced it signed a contract for the purchase of Mistral 3 short range air defense systems. This makes Serbia the 32nd customer country for the Mistral missile and the 10th country invited to join the Mistral user club. This will also be the first European order of the missile. The Mistral 3 is a man-portable, fully digital, heat-seeking missile. It features a lightweight man-portable launcher. It can be easily transported and operated from the ground, a vehicle, a building or a ship. MISTRAL MANPADS is normally operated by a gunner and a crew commander. However, if the mission is carried out in a simple tactical environment, it can be operated by one single soldier.

Asia-Pacific

The first batch of AH-64E attack helicopters for India will arrive home on July 27 at Hindon Airbase, local media reports. India has purchased 22 Apache helicopters from the United States. The Apaches will be prepared at the Hindon Airbase and in the last week of August will be sent to Pathankot for a formal induction into the IAF. The deployment of Apache’s first squadron in Pathankot will take another month. The first squadron of the Apaches will be stationed at Pathankot. The Apache AH-64E helicopter is equipped with a 30-mm machine gun, which can fired up to 1,200 rounds at a time.

Today’s Video

Watch: SU-27 Flanker RIAT 2019
