Air India To Charge Flat Rate To Bring Back Mortal Remains, German Woman Wins Padma Shri + More Top News

A long standing demand of the Indian diaspora living across the globe could finally become a reality. The government has reportedly asked national carrier Air India to introduce a 'flat rate' for transporting bodies from abroad.Until now, the charges were levied on the basis of the weight of the body, including the coffin. Read More.

Here's More Top News For The Day:

1) Meet India's 'Gau Rakshak' From Germany Who Received The Padma Shri For Looking After 1,800 Cows

A 61 year old German woman who has been appreciated in the past for giving shelter to sick, abandoned and injured cows. Friederike Irina Bruning who is popularly known as ‘gau mata ki aashraydaatri’ was conferred with the fourth highest civilian honour-Padma Shri for her unceasing efforts towards animal welfare. Read More.

2) 70-Year-Old Unwell Man Carried On Shoulders For 9 Kms To Hospital As Snowfall Blocked Roads In Himachal

A senior citizen had to be carried on shoulders to the nearest hospital that was 9 kilometres away as heavy snowfall had blocked all roads in Himachal Pradesh. No vehicle could run after heavy snowfall blocked arterial roads in Mandi and the neighbouring areas. The elderly man had to be carried for 9 kilometres, from Kal Chham village in Saraj valley to Chakudhar, the nearest health centre, said locals. Read More.

3) How's The Josh? Ailing Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar Asks In First Public Speech In Months

Goa's Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar made his first public speech on Sunday, ever since he was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer last year. On Sunday, in his first public event, Parrikar was present at the event in Panaji to inaugurate a cable-stayed bridge on the Mandovi river. Read More.

4) He Received Excellence Award On Republic Day, Hours Later He Was Stripped Off His Post As Uttarakhand Education Officer

Almora’s Chief Education Officer Jagmohan Soni’s win at Republic Day was just a flash-in-the-pan. Hours after he was conferred with the Chief Minister’s award for excellence and good governance in education, he was removed from his post on grounds of corruption charges. Read More.

5) Jaywalkers To Blame As They Comprise 53% Of Total Deaths On Mumbai Railway Tracks In 2018

According to Government Railway police (GRP) data, out of a total of 2,981 deaths on Mumbai’s suburban railway network last year, 1,619 cases were of people hit by trains while crossing tracks. Read More.
