Maharashtra: Farmer poisons kids after they ask for money to buy uniform

Farmer was arrested by the police on Saturday. (Representative image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Farmer poisoned kids after they ask for money to buy school uniform Incident happened in Nashik district of Maharashtra Accused arrested by police and remanded to police custody

Nashik: In a shocking incident coming in from Maharashtra, a farmer in Nashik allegedly poisoned his two children after his daughter asked him for money to buy a school uniform and other stationery items. The farmer was said to be in an inebriated condition when the took the drastic step.

The children, an 18-year-old girl, and a 16-year-old boy were rushed to Nashik Civil Hospital by their mother. The girl is stated to be in critical condition, while the boy is out of danger.

According to a report, the accused farmer has been identified as 48-year-old Rushikesh Pandharinath Borade from Manik chowk in Shinde village. He was arrested by the police on Saturday. Later, a local court remanded him to three-day police custody.

"As Borade returned home in the night after consuming alcohol, his daughter asked him for money for school-related purchases. The farmer got agitated and started beating his daughter. He bought a bottle of pesticide and forcibly poured the liquid into the girl's mouth. But when his son tried to intervene, he also beat him up and poured the pesticide in his mouth too," the report quoted Assistant Police Inspector KL Sonane as saying.

According to police, Borade's wife who was feeding her 3-year-old son shouted for help and drove the inebriated man out of the house. Later, with the help of her neighbours, the woman rushed her two children to Bytco hospital from where they were later shifted to Nashik Hospital.

Maharashtra has become notorious for farmer distress in recent years due to rising cases of crop failure, insufficient rainfall and debt-related issues. Thousands of farmers have committed suicide in various parts of the state in the last several years.

Ease in obtaining poison to blame?

India seems to have lax laws when it comes to procuring poison. Farmers and rural folks, as well as city-dwellers, can buy insecticides/pesticides over the counter from general stores to kill rodents and other pests. In April this year, a father of a mentally challenged son, committed suicide in his house after allegedly poisoning his son at Kilambakkam in Chennai. The son, however, was rescued by the neighbours who took him to the nearby hospital. The deceased man worked as a cab driver and possibly took the extreme step after he faced financial troubles and could not afford to take care of his 16-year-old son, Sreedhar Vinod. A case of attempt to murder was registered against Perumal at Guduvancherry police station. However, the case was closed as he is no more alive.

In another similarly shocking incident from the same city in July, a man confessed to murdering his ex-girlfriend a month after the incident. The accused, K Sumer Singh allegedly fed sodium cyanide to his ex-girlfriend and strangled her to death at a lodge in Chepauk, Chennai. Singh was arrested after he was discharged from Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital. The deceased woman was identified as Kajal Kumari.
