Huge fire breaks out in MTNL building in Mumbai's Bandra; 60 rescued, 40 still feared trapped

Fire breaks out at MTNL building in Mumbai's Bandra | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Level 4 fire broke out at MTNL building in Bandra in Mumbai on Monday Rescue operations were underway at the building Around 100 people were initially trapped in the building but fire officials said that many of them had been evacuated

Mumbai: A level 4 fire broke out in Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) exchange building in Bandra, Mumbai on Monday afternoon. According to the latest reports, 60 people have been rescued from the building and 40 are still trapped inside it. At least 14 fire tenders are at the spot trying to douse the fire while the Mumbai Fire Brigade is taking the help of the newly introduced robot to help in the rescue operations.

Dramatic visuals from the scene showed a group of people trapped at the top floor of the building even as thick black smoke billowed from the structure.

#WATCH Mumbai: A level 4 fire has broken out in MTNL Building in Bandra, 14 fire tenders are present at the spot. Fire fighting operations are underway. Approximately 100 people are reportedly trapped on the terrace of the building. More details awaited. pic.twitter.com/CVCAP8Tjj2 — ANI (@ANI) July 22, 2019

The nine-storey commercial building is situated at the Linking Road opposite Bandra Masjid in Bandra, which is a very congested area of the city.

Fire officials said that reaching the building for rescue operations had proved to be slightly difficult due to the narrow lanes leading to the building.

The fire department said that a short-circuit in the building could have been the cause of the massive fire, Times Now reported.

So far, authorities said that there were no reports of any casualties.

Meanwhile, a fire at a four-storey building near Taj Mahal Palace hotel in Colaba in South Mumbai on Sunday resulted in the death of one person, while another was injured.

Officials of the fire department had rescued 13 others from Churchill Chambers located behind the iconic hotel.

The blaze broke out at around noon on Sunday at the Churchill Chambers, which is a ground-plus-three-storey residential building in Colaba. It is mostly a wooden structure with reinforcements.

The Fire Brigade had categorised the blaze as Level-2 (minor), which had purportedly broken out at one of the apartments of the building on the third floor, however, the source of the blaze could not be ascertained.

The fire was confined to the third floor flat and the staircase which led to the second floor.
