After Market: YES Bank surges 9%, RBL falls 4%; investors lose Rs 4.37 lakh crore in 3 days

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Reliance Industries Ltd moved up by 1 in a month on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Reliance Industries Ltd is 5 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

NEW DELHI: Headline indices Sensex and Nifty ended in the negative zone for a third consecutive session on Monday on losses in bank, NBFC and FMCG stocks.The market has been witnessing selling spree after Union Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman clarified that the newly-imposed income-tax surcharge on the higher income bracket was here to stay.Uninspiring quarterly numbers, weak global cues, rising crude oil prices, a geopolitical flareup in West Asia and the rupee's weakness further deteriorated investor sentiment."Market entered into a bearish phase as investors turned sellers due to concerns over the extension of economic slowdown while weak corporate earnings hurt the sentiment further. This correction has expanded to largecaps which until now were attracting FII inflows. Concerns over tax and muted Q1 results will continue to impact," said Vinod Nair, Head of Research, Geojit Financial Services.The 30-share Sensex closed 306 points, or 0.80 per cent, down at 38,031.13, with 14 stocks in the red.The Nifty50 ended 82 points, or 0.72 per cent, down at 11,337.15, with 27 stocks up and 23 down.Finance, FMCG, bank and realty packs suffered strong losses on BSE, while metal, energy and oil & gas indices logged healthy gains.We walk you through the highlights of Monday's session:The last three days' selloff in the market dragged the cumulative market capitalisation of BSE-listed firms to Rs 1,44,76,204.02 crore from Rs 1,49,13,806.42 crore on Wednesday, making investors poorer by Rs 4.37 lakh crore.Shares of YES Bank jumped 9.49 per cent to close at Rs 91.15 amid reports that DHFL is likely to announce a deal with special situations investor AION Capital for a majority stake in the housing finance company. The deal would lead to an infusion of $1.5 billion into the debt-ridden firm. With this, DHFL promoters’ family stake is likely to come down to 10 per cent. No big haircut to lenders is likely. SBI, YES Bank, Union Bank and Bank of Maharashtra are among key lenders to the NBFC.Shares of RBL Bank finished 4.46 per cent down at Rs 478.05, extending the losses into the third consecutive session. In the three sessions, the stock has come off 19 per cent. The bank expects the gross non-performing assets ratio to shoot up to 2.5 per cent during the remainder of the year from 1.38 per cent in the June quarter, due to the exposure to some distressed companies, according to PTI.State-owned Oriental Bank of Commerce (OBC) reported a profit of Rs 112.68 crore for the quarter ended June 30. It had posted a loss of Rs 393.21 crore in the same quarter of 2018-19 financial year. However, the numbers failed to excite investors as the stock ended the day with a loss of 2 per cent at Rs 80.35.Shares of Hindustan Media Ventures (HMVL) closed 10.42 per cent up at Rs 90.60 after the company reported over a threefold jump in net profit to Rs 39.67 crore for the quarter ended June 30.Overall, 287 stocks, including Indiabulls Integrated Services, Cox & Kings, Capital Trust, Lancer Container Lines, 5paisa Capital, Rushil décor and 8K Miles Software Services, hit lower circuits on BSE. On the other hand, IMP Powers, Hindusthan National Glass & Industries, GSS Infotech, Unitech and Ashapura Minechem were among the 105 stocks that hit lower circuits.As many as 619 stocks, including Mahindra & Mahindra, Andhra Bank , Apollo Micro Systems, Central Bank of India, Cyient, Eicher Motors, Escorts, Force Motors and Forbes & Company, hit 52-week lows on BSE today.Momentum indicator moving average convergence divergence, or MACD, showed bearish crossovers on 123 counters on BSE, signalling an imminent or more fall for them in the coming sessions. Among those stocks were Vodafone Idea, HDFC, Balrampur Chini, Berger Paints, Minda Industries, Brigade Enterprises and Metalyst Forgings. On the other hand,, Dilip Buildcon, Hindustan Media Ventures, IMP Powers and Kaveri Seed Company were among the 39 stocks that showed bullish crossovers.Cholamandalam Investment and Finance Company, Tasty Bite Eatables, Garware Technical Fibres, India Cements, Bandhan Bank,India, Swan Energy andConsumer Healthcare were among the stocks that witnessed negative breakouts and traded below their 200-DMAs. On the other hand, Avenue Supermarts, Standard Industries, Filatex India, Alembic and Cholamandalam Financial Holdings were among the stocks that traded above their 200-DMAs.
