Rishi Kapoor on battling cancer: "I lost 26 kilos as I had no appetite for the first four months"

We all are afraid of cancer. The disease doesn't care who the victim is- it can strike anyone. A single diagnosis can make you reconsider all of your life decisions and leave you with a lot of 'what ifs'.When Rishi Kapoor left the country to seek treatment for "an undisclosed disease", it got people worried. Later, when it was revealed that he was suffering from cancer, everyone prayed for his recovery.Now in remission and recovering, the actor spoke at length about his scary diagnosis which brought a big change in him. Talking about going through the "toughest phase of his life", Rishi Kapoor said that cancer was life-changing. He was living away from his friends and family in New York and it weakened him. He even lost his appetite during treatment.In the past, Rishi Kapoor said that the cancer prognosis was a learning lesson for him in disguise. In an interview, he mentioned,“A person like me who has never had patience, this is God’s way to teach me patience. Getting well is a slow procedure. But it makes you grateful for the gift of life.”The actor also said that he had become so frail at one point, that he lost as much as 26 kilos. In an interview, he said,"I had lost 26 kgs as I had no appetite for the first four months. Now, I've gained seven-eight kilos. I don't want to look too lean, but I haven't gone back to my original self either. Thank God for that."He also said that going through the problem was emotionally draining for him and said that he couldn't have come through the testing waters without support from his family, especially his wife and kids.“It has been a difficult time, very taxing, but Neetu (wife), and my children (Ranbir and Riddhima) have been very supportive."He also said that accepting that he was not well did not come easy. It took him a little time to settle and realise that he was actually a cancer patient. When Ranbir Kapoor pushed him to consult doctors in New York to seek treatment, that was the moment he realised his problems were real:“My son [Ranbir] literally forced me into the aircraft and flew here [to New York] with me. The acceptance comes gradually,”However, the illness didn't get the positivity out of the veteran actor. Recovering and planning to fly back home, he says that nothing can slow him down. While he has to continue treatment, the actor has received a go-ahead from his doctors to come back to India and carry on with his life."I am waiting to come back and raring to get going.I will plan my return five-six weeks after my last treatment. It is called consolidation or pushback, whereby I will have to undergo chemotherapy to ensure that the ailment does not return. This is the second time I am going through the treatment. I am hoping that I can plan an end-August return but all this talk that I will be back in early September for my birthday, is again nothing but speculation,”Here's wishing him speedy recovery, good health, and happiness!
