Mumbai MTNL building fire: Meet the robot which helped in carrying out fire operations

The robot is used to venture into areas that are narrow and can help the officials in navigating through a site. (Photo: India Today)

As a massive fire broke out in the Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited (MTNL) building in Bandra area of Mumbai, the city fire brigade used Wall-E to carry out the fire operations. Well, it's not really the Wall-E but a similar looking robot which has been inducted by the Mumbai fire brigade to carry out the operations in case of major fires in the city.

The robot can release around 3,800 litres of water in just a few minutes. Not just this, the technology used in the robot can also help in detecting the exact source of the fire. It can enter narrow lanes and carry out the fire services.

During any major fire incident, the robot is used to venture into areas that are narrow and can help the officials in navigating through a site.

Nearly 100 persons were trapped on the terrace of a Mumbai telephone exchange building -- MTNL -- where a fire broke out Monday afternoon, civic officials said. It is a nine-floor building and fire is confined mainly to the third and fourth floors, an official said.

The fire broke out at around 3 pm in the MTNL building, which incidentally is located near a fire brigade centre in suburban Bandra. Fourteen fire engines and other equipment, and an ambulance is engaged in fire fighting.

Two fire brigade personnel, who were exposed to the smoke billowing out of the building, were shifted to a nearby hospital for treatment.

Meanwhile, Congress leader Ashok Chavan has alleged "large-scale corruption" in fire and structural audits of buildings in Mumbai and asked the Shiv Sena-ruled local civic body to own up its "mismanagement".

Reacting to Monday's blaze in MTNL building in suburban Bandra, the former Maharashtra chief minister said according to reports, the fire audit of the nine-storey structure was done just last year.

"If this is true, people need to know why the fire brigade had difficulty in rescuing those trapped. Fire brigade faced difficulties due to the small windows and closed structure of the building. This is a serious issue and its cognisance should be taken," Ashok Chavan said.
