BJP Bengal MPs to brief party lawmakers on 'atrocities' in state

BJP MPs from West Bengal will brief the saffron party's lawmakers from the rest of the country later this week in New Delhi on "the prevailing undemocratic atmosphere" in the state, a top leader said Monday.

"So many of our party workers have been killed by Trinamool Congress goons. Bengal has turned into a safe haven for jihadis where you would be sent to prison if you chant 'Jai Shri Ram'. We will inform the party MPs from the rest of the country about it," BJP state president Dilip Ghosh told PTI.

The briefing sessions will be held on July 24 and July 25 in New Delhi, he said, adding, "We will inform them about the prevailing undemocratic atmosphere in Bengal. We have also printed a booklet, which would also be distributed among them."



Of the 18 BJP MPs from Bengal, eight, including ministers Babul Supriyo and Deboshree Chowdhuri, have been divided into four teams to brief nearly 400 saffron party MPs of both the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha, Ghosh said.

The MPs to be briefed will be divided into eight teams of 50 each, he added.

Elaborating on the need for such a session, Chowdhuri, Union Minister of State for Woman and Child Development, said a large number of party MPs from across the country are curious about the situation in Bengal.

"During the ongoing Parliament session, the prevailing undemocratic situation in West Bengal and the issue of cut money had come up during discussions on various occasions. So it was decided by the BJP central leadership that the briefing session would be conducted. The MPs, who will be briefed, will in turn inform the masses about it in their respective constituencies," she said.

The BJP made deep inroads into Bengal in the last Lok Sabha polls when it won 18 out of the 42 Lok Sabha seats in the state, up from just two in 2014 and four less than that of the ruling Trinamool Congress.

Since the general election results, the BJP and the TMC have been engaged in a high voltage political battle in the state, with an eye on the 2021 Assembly polls.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
