Dr Kafeel Khan Who Treated Encephalitis Kids In UP & Bihar Says These 15 Steps Can Improve Healthcare In India

Dr Kafeel Khan emerged as a hero when he saved dozens of children suffering from encephalitis in Gorakhpur's BRD Medical college in 2017. The state government, however, suspended him, holding him responsible for the death of 63 children. He was sent to jail where he spent nine months, trying to prove his innocence. He eventually got bail from Allahabad High Court and returned to his family only to find his younger brother shot at by unidentified assailants.

All this and months of monetary loss due to suspension. A normal human being would have been shattered by this. But, Dr Khan seems to have nerves of steel. He did not bow to any kind of adversity and stood firm with his belief in helping the others who need him. Dr Khan never forgets that besides being a son, a husband and a brother, he is a doctor. For him, being a doctor is more important than anything else.

So, what is Dr Khan doing these days?

Holding a mirror to the authorities who miserably fail in managing healthcare situation in India.

"I have only one mission now. Healthcare should be accessible to every citizen of the country," says Dr Khan.

"I am yet to receive my salary from the UP government despite a directive by the supreme court, but i think spreading health awareness is more important than anything else," he adds.

Dr Kafeel suggests 15 solutions to improve the state of health infrastructure in India and if executed and implemented, these solutions can solve the crisis of health infrastructure India faces.

1. Increase spending on health

India just spends 3 per cent of its GDP on health infrastructure and this is not enough to cater the health infrastructure needs of the country. India should work towards a scenario where people get universal access to good quality healthcare services without financial hardship.

AFP

Dr Kafeel suggests that this can be achieved if total health budget is increased to Rs 1.5 lakh crore every year for the next 5 years.

2. Developing human resources in medical services.

Reuters

The government should fill the 1.5 lakh existing vacancies and also create new jobs every year. This will create health infrastructure to help people.

3. Universalise and expand immunization and other programs

In order to improve health of the country at infancy and childhood, the universal immunization of diseases such as MMR, Pneumococcal, Typhoid, Hepatitis A, Chicken pox, Rota Virus, JE. In order to arrest the problem of malnutrition, the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) programs need to be universalised and expanded to cover under-5 children. The programmes such as Community-based Management of Acute Malnutrition Model (CMAM) also need to be universalised.

4. Sharing expenditure and other initiatives

The decentralisation of the healthcare service shall be done with the Centre taking care of the 60 percent of the expenditure and the state the remaining 40 percent. The infrastructure shall be worked on such a way that 5 beds per thousand population distributed in such a way that it’s accessible in golden hour rule.

5. Primary and secondary healthcare facility in each assembly constituency

The primary and secondary heath care facility as per norms should be established in each Vidhansabha.

6. One medical college in each Parliamentary constituency

In order to increase the human resource, each Parliamentary constituency should have at least one medical college, nursing institutions and pharma college and paramedical college.

7. Regularise all contractual workers

ASHA Workers

All healthcare workers, including the NHM employees including ASHA, Anganwadi workers and helpers, who are a part of the delivery of public health service should be regularised and it should be ensured that they get social security, equal pay for equal work.

ASHAs and Anganwadi workers should get minimum salary of Rs 20,000 and Rs 15,000 a month.

8. Opening f ive new AIIMS a year

BCCL

The government should work towards coming up with 5 new AIIMS level hospitals a year. This will help the patients in saving a lot of time and getting medical attention as early as possible.

9. Universalise Maternity Benefits

The maternity benefits for all pregnant and post natal mothers including daily wage workers, contractual workers, mothers working in unorganised sector and agrarian sector should be universalised. Creche and rest room for mothers with small children shall be made mandatory at all work places.

10. Tax benefits

The suggestions include the reduction in the GST rate from current 18 percent to 5 percent on health insurance premium which would make health insurance affordable for common man.

The OPD products and drugs for serious ailments such as cancer and diabetes need to be exempted from the GST in order to ensure common can afford the treatment and medication for the ailment. The current GST is 18 percent on the OPD products and drugs.

Giving GST input credit to companies that offer group health insurances to their employees as it will encourage all employers to take health insurance from their employees and would get social and financial security.

The preventive healthcare check up limit under section 80D should also be increased from Rs 5,000 to Rs 20,000.

11. Strengthen Public Health Centres

In order to reduce burden on secondary and tertiary health infrastructure, the Primary Health Centres (PHCs) should be upgraded to provide effective healthcare services.

Doctors should be given incentives to serve in rural area and services such as housing, school and security should be provided to retain doctors at PHCs. Rotational postings shall also be arranged.

12. Medical college level healthcare at Vidhansabha level

The level of healthcare provided at health facility at Vidhansabha level should be raised to the level of healthcare provided at medical college.

13. Basic healthcare to be made available at sub-divisional level

The basic secondary care services such as neonatal care and cesarean section should be made available at sub-divisional level. The blood banks should also be made available at sub-district levels.

14. Better health management

In order to get a better health management, an electronic database on Vidhansabha level on health system component need to be maintained apart from strengthening the health surveillance system and registries for diseases of public health importance.

15. Health education in school curriculum

In order to improve the awareness about hygiene and safe health practices, health education needs to be added to the school curriculum.

Apart from these, Dr Khan has some others suggestions to make. He hopes he will be able to do so once he returns to office.
