Police await political decision on SP

Officials say disciplinary issues are involved in the incident

Top police officers on Monday weighed whether Chaithra Teresa John, SP, had overstepped her authority by raiding the district committee office of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) in Thiruvananthapuram purportedly in search of party workers who had thrown stones at the Medical College Police Station (MCPS) here late on Friday.

Senior officers said Ms. John faced the prospect of disciplinary action, given the stance of Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan that the officer had erred in spearheading an unjustified police action that smacked of an attempt to denigrate political activity, the cornerstone of democracy.

The fact that Ms. John’s inspection had not yielded any accused weighed against her. The police appeared to await a political decision in the matter.

A senior official said there were several disciplinary issues involved in the episode. He said they were verifying a report that the Circle Inspector and the Sub-Inspector, MCPS, had back-pedalled when ordered to accompany Ms. John to inspect the CPI(M) office.

‘Inside information’

The police were also examining whether any insider information relayed from the station helped the accused evade arrest.

They said an examination of the video footage from the surveillance cameras at the CPI(M) office would reveal whether the accused had sought refuge there. However, such evidence could be obtained only through a court warrant.

The police were also vetting a preliminary report on the incident that reportedly suggested that there was no pressing law and order situation to warrant the raid. They also examined whether Ms. John had the concurrence of her superiors to conduct the inspection.

Meanwhile, the family of Nithin, an activist of the Democratic Youth Federation of India (DYFI) whom the police had arrested in connection with the stoning of the station, has accused Ms. John of having broken into their house at midnight to assault them and abuse them by their caste name.

They have reportedly complained to the Chief Minister’s Office against the officer. Ms. John was not available for comment but officers privy to the case said the charge was false and the SP had conducted herself professionally.

State president of the DYFI A.A. Rahim castigated Ms. John for having conducted a “token raid” on the CPI(M) office to garner cheap publicity .
