Sacrilegious betrayal of country’s interests: Congress attacks govt on Trump's offer to mediate in J&K

Sacrilegious betrayal of country’s interests: Cong attacks govt on Trump's offer to mediate in J&K | Photo Credit: ANI

New Delhi: Shortly after US President Donald Trump announced that he is willing to mediate in order to resolve the Kashmir issue and that PM Narendra Modi asked him for his help on same, the opposition launched a scathing attack at the government.

Congress and CPI (Marxist) were the first to pounce on the opportunity to attack the PM Narendra Modi-led government over Donald Trump's statement.

"India has never accepted third party mediation in Jammu & Kashmir! To ask a foreign power to mediate in J&K by PM Modi is a sacrilegious betrayal of country’s interests. Let PM answer to the Nation!" said Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala.

CPI (Marxist) leader Sitaram Yechury said this is in violation of India’s long-held position of sovereignty over the Indian state of J&K.

India has never accepted third party mediation in Jammu & Kashmir!



To ask a foreign power to mediate in J&K by PM Modi is a sacrilegious betrayal of country’s interests.



Let PM answer to the Nation!https://t.co/17wRVtRSMD — Randeep Singh Surjewala (@rssurjewala) July 22, 2019

“What does this say about our long-held position of sovereignty over the Indian state of J&K, as defined in the Simla Agreement? Will our twitter-friendly PM have the courage to rebut the US President who has made a public statement?,” Yechury said in a statement on Twitter.

During his meeting with Pakistan PM Imran Khan on Monday, US President Donald Trump said PM Narendra Modi asked him to “help with disputed Kashmir region” adding he would “move to be a mediator”. Trump said “maybe U.S. can intercede in strained India, Pakistan relations”.

“India has always maintained its a bilateral issue, with no scope for third-party interference. What is this government upto?” Yechury asked.

During his maiden visit to the US, Khan was also accompanied by Army Chief General Qamar Javed Bajwa, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) chief Lt Gen Faiz Hameed and Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi.

"The Prime Minister of Pakistan is here to showcase his vision of a 'Naya Pakistan' and to start a new era of bilateral relations. We have come with a narrative of peace and prosperity in the region," Qureshi tweeted after Khan met Trump.

Trump's statement has to be taken with a pinch of salt given India's long-standing on the matter that no foreign power should intervene in India's internal matters.

Shortly after, Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), in an official statement said that no such request was made by PM Narendra Modi to Trump at any point in time.

"We have seen US President Donald Trump's remarks to the press that he is ready to mediate, if requested by India & Pakistan, on Kashmir issue. No such request has been made by PM Narendra Modi to US President," MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said in a statement on Twitter.

"It has been India's consistent position that all outstanding issues with Pakistan are discussed only bilaterally. Any engagement with Pak would require an end to cross border terrorism. The Shimla Agreement & the Lahore Declaration provide the basis to resolve all issues between India & Pakistan bilaterally," he added.
