Noida: Uflex worker on way home shot dead

NOIDA: A 28-year-old employee of Uflex , a leading flexible packaging company, returning home after overseeing the night shift was allegedly shot dead by an assailant in Sector 60 early on Monday morning.Police said the attack on Mohammed Imran took place near the main gate of the company as he was walking towards the nearest bus stand while talking on his mobile phone. He was rushed to the district hospital, where doctors declared him brought dead. Cops are probing all angles, including a suspected love affair and property dispute.According to his fellow employees, Imran was on the phone call for quite some time when he was shot at from behind at a close range.“He left the company around 7.30 am and attacked moments later. We just heard some contractual labour shouting about the shooting and found Imran lying bleeding on the spot,” his colleague Ashish told TOI.Imran, originally from Meerut ’s Mawana area, was employed with the company since 2011.Since none of his belongings, including his purse and mobile phone, was looted, police suspect the possibility of a personal dispute in the case. “We are also verifying if he had a tiff with someone in the company or there was any property dispute,” said circle officer II Piyush Kumar Singh.Imran’s father Saeed Ahmed, however, said they did not suspect anyone to be behind the crime as his son was “a clean person who had good relations with everybody”. But his younger brother Shahdaab suspects the hand of someone from the company “who was unhappy with his growth”.But with friends confirming that Imran was associated with a woman whom he was in touch with over the phone, cops are also probing love angle. “We are also looking at his association with a woman. Records of his call details has been sought and the same is being checked,” the circle officer II said.Police sources confirmed that from the CCTV footage of the camera installed at the Uflex company’s gate number 2, one person can be seen leading the route he takes to walk towards the Sector 60 intersection. “One person is visible. We are trying to verify his identity,” SP (city) Vineet Jaiswal said.Rajiv Andley, the HR head of Uflex, said that they do not suspect that there was any tiff with anyone as Imran’s promotion was not due any sooner.
