Witch-hunts: Superstition kills more than naxals in Jharkhand

Ranchi: The mob lynching of four elderly persons suspicted of practising witchcraft in Gumla on Sunday is another reminder of how superstition, rampant in Jharkhand’s hinterland, is killing more people than Maoists. According to police data, 123 people, mostly women, were killed after being branded witches from 2016 to May 2019 . In the same period, 88 people were killed in naxal violence.Independent social and legal outfits said many cases of ‘witch murders’ often go unreported. Reshma, state coordinator of Association of Advocacy and Legal Initiatives (AALI), which works on various social evils and crimes in various states, said, “The National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data said 27 cases of witch-hunting took place in 2016. Our independent survey pegged the figure at 56. In 2017-18 alone, our caseworkers intervened in 66 cases across 13 districts.” AALI is currently extending legal help to survivors of the infamous witch-hunting incident in Ranchi’s Mandar block in 2015 in which five women were murdered.Activists attributed superstition, illiteracy and, most importantly, lack of access to quality healthcare in poverty-stricken remote areas as one of the reasons behind the startling numbers. “Even for a simple cough and cold, people do not visit local health centres and choose to go to ab ojha. When they fail to cure the illness, they put the blame on someone in the village,” she said.Ajay Kumar Jaiswal, general secretary of Association of Human and Social Awareness (AHSA), agreed. “This menace is killing more people than naxals and it’s high time all stakeholders come together to curb the menace,” he said.While law (Jharkhand Witchcraft Prevention Act, 2001) is in place, activists said it lacks teeth. Under the law, punishment for branding a woman as witch is imprisonment for up to three months and/or a fine of Rs 1,000. Similarly, causing harm to someone in the name of witchcraft leads to imprisonment for up to six months and/or a fine of Rs 2,000. Ojhas caught for sorcery can be jailed for up to a year and/or fined Rs 2,000.“While these are non-bailable offences, the quantum of punishment is too little to deter anyone. How many ojhas have actually been caught and punished in Jharkhand so far? We have been asking the state government for long to increase the quantum of punishment,” said Jaiswal.Reshma said there is a need for sustained education and awareness drives to weed out superstition. Even police personnel need to be made more proactive and sensitive in such cases, she maintained. “Even just branding anyone as dian (witch) should lead to an filing of FIR under the Act. However, officers only react after violence takes place. This needs to change,” she said.“Nothing can succeed without the involvement of the gram sabha. Holding local panchayat heads and representatives accountable for such incidents could help end such incidents,” Jaiswal said.State police spokesperson and IG (operations) Ashish Batra said it a challenge that police alone can’t achieve. “Though, we keep holding outreach programmes at thana levels to sensitise people from time to time, this alone can’t stop it. From our end, we often try to ensure that the accused is nabbed at the earliest and put to speedy trial,” he said.
