From over the moon to reaching its dark side: How Indian newspapers reported the Chandrayaan 2 launch

India successfully launched its second lunar mission Chandrayaan-2 on-board its powerful rocket GSLV-MkIII-M1 from the spaceport in Sriharikota to explore the uncharted south pole of the celestial body by landing a rover. (Photo: IANS)

The successful launch of Chandrayaan-2, India's ambitious second Moon mission, was a moment of pride for the entire nation.

Aiming to take a "billion dreams to the moon", India successfully launched its second lunar mission Chandrayaan-2 on-board its powerful rocket GSLV-MkIII-M1 from the spaceport in Sriharikota to explore the uncharted south pole of the celestial body by landing a rover.

The geosynchronous satellite launch vehicle lifted-off from the Satish Dhawan Space Centre here into cloudy skies at 2.43 pm and successfully placed the 3,850-kg Chandrayaan-2 into the earth orbit 16 minutes and 14 seconds later.

Anxiety gave way to unbridled joy for Indians after Isro successfully launched its second lunar mission Chandrayaan 2. Now that the rocket dust has settled, here is how some of India's major English newspapers have covered the ambitious feat:

The Times Of India

National daily The Times of India said, 'INDIA LEAPS FOR MOON, ALL EYES ON SEPT LANDING' in its article on the launch. "It was a better-than-textbook launch as the vehicle took the lunarcraft to an orbit that is 6,000km higher than planned, thereby saving on fuel and increasing its life span," said the newspaper.

Hindustan Times

Another national daily, Hindustan Times ran the headline "India shoots for the Moon", adding "Week after aborted launch, spacecraft placed in orbit successfully, rocket over-performs’"

Indian Express

Mumbai-based The Indian Express said that India was "Off to the moon". Writing about the obstacles that Isro faced in the launched, the daily said in its report, "The GSLV Mk-III, which has an interesting history of how technology denial impeded India's progress in space, has taken Isro decades to build...Chandrayaan 2 is its most important mission so far."

The Hindu

The Hindu called Monday's proceedings the "Perfect launch for Chandrayaan 2". "The cheers, whistles and claps every time a launch objective was achieved, at the Viewing Gallery and the Media Centre, gave the launch a semblance of the reception normally given to film stars or excellent sportspersons," it added.

The Telegraph

Kolkata newspaper The Telegraph, known for its witty headlines chose to combine the two biggest developments into one. While on one hand, India launched Chandrayaan 2 into space, on Earth, US President Donald Trump suggested India had sought his help in mediating the crisis in Kashmir. Taking a jibe at the situation, The Telegraph's headline was, "Houston, we have a Kashmir problem". Explaining further, the paper wrote, "Trump fires mediation rocket on day of smooth Moon launch"

Deccan Herald

Down South, newspaper Deccan Herald said, "Chandrayaan-2 lifts off with billion dreams". The newspaper also had features on the landing procedure of Chandrayaan 2, which will take place in September (Landing day to witness 15 minutes of terror’) as well as the women scientists who made the dream possible (Two women who manned Baahubali).

Describing the mood in Sriharikota when the rocket was launched, it wrote, "Shutterbugs went berserk capturing Baahubali’s every push spacewards. As smartphone cameras and selfie addicts got busy, the diehard professionals listened in rapt attention."

Deccan Chronicle

The Deccan Chronicle, meanwhile, hailed former prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee for starting the journey that culminated in the launch of Chandrayaan 2 with a piece "How Vajpayee shaped India's ambitions". It recounted how Vajpayee had coined the name Chandrayaan during the Pokhran II nuclear tests in 1998.

Mumbai Mirror

Regional paper Mumbai Mirror chose to give an ode to the English rock band Pink Floyd with its headline, "AND WE ARE GOING OVER THE MOON; THE DARK SIDE OF THE MOON -- ISRO gets it right in a tight one-minute window; lander will reach moon on September 6"

The New Indian Express

Another daily, The New Indian Express ran with "India over the moon -- Stronger Bahubali does the trick"

The Tribune

The Tribune, daily based from Punjab, said: "India leaps over towards moon". The paper also detailed how an Ambala-based firm Vaiseshika Electron Devices had provided the support required to launch the second lunar mission.
