State plans heritage hotels in its forts

Move inspired from success of a similar initiative in Rajasthan; activists say it will destroy monuments’ legacies



Maharashtra tourism minister Jayprakash Rawal has announced a new scheme to convert historic forts that have fallen into disrepair into heritage hotels in Pune and Sindhudurg districts. He made the announcement during a visit to Ahmednagar on Sunday.



The move is reportedly inspired by the success of monuments converted into hotels in Rajasthan.



Under the plan, the state government will select forts, which have been deemed to be neglected and invited tenders to re-develop them from hoteliers. Speaking to reporters, Rawal said, “Under this scheme, neglected monuments will come into the limelight, while being protected and preserved at the same time. The move will also generate more revenue. The tender will be given to only experienced hoteliers who are capable of undertaking such projects.”



The move has not gone down well with activists who say this plan will hurt the sentiments of history lovers and disrespect history. Furthermore, monuments may be defaced because of this scheme. They have written to the state government against this scheme. They say that these forts can be renovated into independent sources of income through tourism.



Subhash Alam Deshmukh, president of Gadkalyan Pratishthan, which works for the conservation of forts, said, “We are absolutely against any such scheme. There are many forts on the verge of falling apart as there is no status tags attached with them. Many are facing encroachment or are privately owned. Allowing them to be turned into multi-purpose hotels will destroy their remaining legacy. We do not want to see our forts as a place of enjoyment for rich people.”



“Each fort has its own history. We do not want to spoil it,” he added.



Mangesh Navghane, a volunteer for Sawrajyache Shiledars, said, “Some of these forts are over a thousand years old. They are not like forts of Rajasthan which hardly faced any battle and are still in good shape. But here many forts were deliberately destroyed by invaders. Its destruction was also part of historical fact and attached with the bravery of local heroes. It is high time when we protect and conserve them. We have written to the minister to withdraw his proposed scheme.” he said.



Pune district has several forts of historical value like Lohagad, Purandar, Rajgad, Rajmachi, Tikona and Torna. Similarly, Sindhudurg district also boasts of equal heritage that include forts like Sindhudurg, Vijaydurg and Sawantwadi Palace.


