Why Priyanka instead of a non-Gandhi may be Congress’ best bet for revival

For over a decade, Sanjeev Singh has worked with various news channels as a field reporter. His interest lies in politics, sports and most “desi” things from the Hindi heartland. LESS ... MORE

It’s becoming increasingly clear that Congress appears to be far from being headed by a non-Gandhi at the helm as most were predicting. The number of senior leaders publicly asking Priyanka Gandhi Vadra to take over the reins is growing by the day. Ever since Rahul Gandhi resigned as Congress president, the party refuses to wake up from its stupor. The only leader who seems to be bucking the trend is none other than Priyanka herself.

Priyanka’s fiery reaction to the killing of tribals in eastern UP’s Sonbhadra was a signal that Congressmen were desperately waiting for. By refusing to budge till she met the families of victims, Priyanka has become the natural choice for most of the Congress rank and file. Many senior leaders fear Congress will disintegrate and witness more large-scale desertions if Priyanka doesn’t assume control.

Priyanka Gandhi ends dharna, leaves for Delhi https://t.co/coNMGgnKTj — Times of India (@timesofindia) July 20, 2019

Priyanka’s official entry into Congress may have been ill-timed as it didn’t give her much time to prepare before the 2019 Lok Sabha elections. The first few months saw her doing a tough balancing act between creating her own political space and not undermining Rahul Gandhi’s authority in any way. The hesitation manifested itself in many ways including the party’s flip-flop on Priyanka contesting from Varanasi against Narendra Modi.

With Rahul taking a backseat for now, she will find it much easier to chart her own path.

Acknowledging one's duty is good: Priyanka Gandhi on Yogi Adityanath's Sonbhadra visit https://t.co/KvKOaHmixw pic.twitter.com/Kxx1iJRgAQ — Times of India (@timesofindia) July 21, 2019

Priyanka’s focus on UP underlies the importance of reviving Congress in a state that sends 80 MPs to Lok Sabha. With SP and BSP having parted ways, a disjointed opposition would give Congress an outside chance to convert the 2022 assembly elections into a Yogi vs Priyanka battle. Time is running out for Congress, but many believe the inevitable can only be delayed, not stopped.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
