Indian election: BJP-RSS strategy of breaking morale of the opponents

Suraiyya Aziz

Exit polls are showing a landslide victory of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. On the other hand, seeking to bolster the morale of his party’s workers, Congress president Rahul Gandhi has asked them to not be disheartened by fake exit poll results and urged them to stay alert and vigilant. His appeal to workers came a day after opposition parties raised concerns over reports of alleged tampering of EVMs and asked the Election Commission to ensure transparency in counting.

But, after talking to at least few dozens of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and Rashtriya Swamshevak Sangh (RSS) leaders, it is almost clear that the ruling elites this time have very successfully brought the Election Commission under their control and India for the first time is going to witness the result of a massively manipulated election.

As part of BJP-RSS plot, exit polls are being catered by several top media houses, which either are owned by the disciplines of Narendra Modi or are already hired by BJP-RSS against huge financial package. Priyanka Gandhi very correctly said, “Don’t be disheartened by rumors and exit polls. These are crafted to undermine your spirits. Because of all this your alertness becomes all the more important. Be on your guard in strong rooms and counting centers. We are sure our and your hard work will bear fruit”.

While BJP-RSS are trying to crack the morale of their political opponents through tailored exit polls, they are in extreme worries because of two reasons. First of all, Indian intelligence as well as an on-ground survey conducted by RSS had already shown a humiliating defeat for Narendra Modi. On the other hand, the second reason for Prime Minister Modi to be worried is the economy of the country. In past five years, Mr. Modi has miserably failed in attracting foreign investment while the rate of unemployment is growing fast. If he is re-elected, India will for sure witness an economic catastrophe followed by massive unemployment and then countrywide unrest. It may even give scope to religious extremism and militancy as Narendra Modi this time may be compelled in expelling over 4 million Muslims from India and push them into Bangladesh and Pakistan. For Prime Minister Narendra Modi and his radical Hinduist BJP-RSS men, playing communal card would be the only option as they are not capable of offering Indians a better future. Instead, Modi, BJP and RSS are now going to play the religion card as well keep on scaring Indian Hindus by repeatedly saying – Hindu khatreymey hay [Hindus are in danger].
