EastEnders spoilers: Phil Mitchell left for dead after attack – with Ben, Sharon Keanu and Kat on the list of suspects

IT'S a brave man – or woman – who takes on Phil Mitchell and leaves him for dead in EastEnders next week after a horror attack.

Phil – played by Walford legend Steve McFadden - isn’t making friends or influencing people as the week kicks off and there is quite a list of people who wouldn’t mind bumping him off.

2 Phil Mitchell is left for dead next week Credit: BBC

First up is his wife Sharon who gets the DNA results and finally learns if it’s Phil or her toyboy lover Keanu Taylor who has fathered her unborn child.

Meanwhile Phil’s son, Ben – Max Bowden - is summoned by his dad and asked if he can help run the E20 club to lighten Sharon’s workload.

Although he’s initially reluctant, Ben soon makes an intriguing discovery at the club and agrees to help long-term.

Later Phil’s soon-to-be son-in-law, Keanu – Danny Walters - is alarmed when he discovers that Phil is still involved in some dodgy work and business contacts. He ends up winding Phil up by telling him to back off for the sake of his unborn child and grandchild.

2 Phil is expecting a baby with wife Sharon, but is it his? Credit: bbc

With Phil having none of it, Keanu decides to take matters into his own hands. A furious Phil calls Keanu to the Vic and gives him a warning shot he can’t ignore in front of everyone.

Elsewhere, while having a conversation with Ben, Sharon wrongly assumes he knows about the will. When she lets slip that he’s been cut out and Keanu will get the inheritance instead, Ben is incensed.

He sees red and calls Keanu to meet him at The Arches.

Back at the pub Phil is riled even further when Kat Slater – Jessie Wallace - winds him up about the missing money. But despite trying to backtrack, Phil drags her outside and threatens Tommy, leaving Kat shaken.

EastEnders' Phil Mitchell says he's going to 'pop his clogs' as he excludes Ben from his will

He then heads off to The Arches where the day’s events catch up with him and he’s involved in a huge fight as all hell breaks loose.

Phil tries to get the upper hand but the old boy’s getting on a bit now and he quickly loses control, leaving him seriously injured.

Later, with Phil left for dead, those involved take drastic action to cover their tracks – but how far are they willing to go to keep their name out of the frame?

And what will happen to Phil? Is he about to meet a grisly end after 29 years?

Got a story? email digishowbiz@the-sun.co.uk or call us direct on 02077824220.

We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
