Watch: Congress, BJP workers clash over independent MLAs in Bengaluru

Amid escalating tension in Karnataka over the floor test, Section 144 has been imposed in Bengaluru which will continue till July 25.

As the trust vote in Karnataka assembly is expected to be held shortly, the Congress and Bharatiya Janata Party workers clashed outside an apartment in Bengaluru on Tuesday.

The clashes took place outside Nitesh apartment on Race Course road as police struggled to control both the party workers. The Congress alleged that two independent MLAs - R Shankar and Nagesh - are being kept in the apartment.

Meanwhile, amid escalating tension in the state over the floor test, Section 144 has been imposed in Bengaluru which will continue till July 25. All pubs, bars and wine shops have been immediately ordered shutdown.

Earlier on Tuesday, the Supreme Court took note of the submissions of Karnataka Assembly Speaker K R Ramesh Kumar that voting on the trust motion moved by Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy is likely to be concluded by evening.

A bench headed by Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi considered the submission of senior advocate A M Singhvi, appearing for the Speaker.

The apex court adjourned till Wednesday the hearing on the plea of two independent MLAs seeking a direction to the Speaker to forthwith conduct the floor-test in the House.

The two MLAs, who withdrew support to the Congress-JD(S) government in Karnataka, had moved the top court saying the state has plunged into a political crisis after they withdrew their support to the government and 16 lawmakers of the ruling coalition tendered their resignations.

"It is submitted that the trust vote is not being conducted despite the government being in minority. It is submitted that a minority government, which does not have the confidence of the majority, is being allowed to continue in office," they had said in their plea.

The plea had further said, "The petitioners have been constrained to invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of this court under Article 32 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction from this court to conduct a floor test forthwith in the Karnataka Assembly."

Meanwhile, Congress leader Siddaramaiah and Leader of the opposition BS Yeddyurappa of BJP were locked in a wordy duel in the Karnataka assembly on Tuesday over the fate of whip issued to the rebel MLAs whose resignation has threatened the continuity of the coalition government.

During the resumed debate on motion of confidence moved by chief minister H D Kumaraswamy, Yeddyurappa told Siddaramaiah, the Congress Legislature Party leader, that the whip he has issued against the rebel MLAs has no value.

"My understanding of law is that the Supreme Court has given protection to the (rebel) MLAs from the whip. They cannot be compelled to attend the assembly proceedings. Whether you agree with me or not but your whip has no value," the BJP veteran told Siddaramaih.

However, Siddaramaiah countered him saying the apex court has not barred him from issuing whip and the Speaker of the assembly has upheld his right. "Supreme court has not told me not to issue whip. I have got every right to issue whip under the Constitution. It has been upheld by the Speaker," he said.
