Prohibitory orders in Bengaluru as assembly heads to trust vote finally

There are chances that the HD Kumaraswamy government will finally face the trust vote in Karnataka Assembly today. Speaker KR Ramesh Kumar had earlier set a deadline of 6 pm for the test of strength in the Karnataka Assembly today but the many ruling coalition members.

However, this deadline was missed and trust vote could not take place by this time. Meanwhile, prohibitory orders were issued in Bengaluru with apprehension of a clash between the ruling Congress and JDS supporters and the BJP supporters in the view of impending trust vote.

The BJP and ruling Congress-JDS supporters actually clashed over two Independent MLAs, who have withdrawn support to the Kumaraswamy government. The BJP and Congress supporters clashed outside a building in the Race Course Road in Bengaluru. The Independent MLAs were staying inside while the supporters of the two parties clashed with one another.

The BJP supporters apparently reached the place to esnure that the Independent MLAs reach the Vidhana Soudha for the trust vote while the Congress supporters allegedly wanted to prevent the legislators from going to Karnataka Assembly.

A division of vote on the confidence motion moved by Chief Minister Kumaraswamy has been lingering since the last week. Holding of this trust vote has seen involvement of the Supreme Court, Governor Vajubhai Vala and a bitter tussle between the Speaker and the rest.

Voting on trust vote has been deferred for days with the ruling coalition members continuing to debate in the house. The BJP, on the other hand, has refused to participate in the debate saying it wants immediate conduct of the floor test in Karnataka Assembly.

Trouble for the Kumaraswamy government started brewing on July 1 when two MLAs resigned. By July 6, the number of those reisgning had gone up to 13. Then two Independent MLAs, who were made ministers only the last month, withdrew support to the government.

As of now, 18 MLAs of the ruling coalition have resigned, though Speaker Ramesh Kumar has not taken any decision on their resignations. The matter also went to the Supreme Court, where the rebel MLAs filed a petition seeking direction to the Speaker for accepting their resignations.

The Supreme Court did not issue any such direction to the Speaker but gave protection to the rebel MLAs from being disqualified under the Tenth Schedule for violating the whip of their respective parties for attending and voting in favour of the trust vote.

Kumaraswamy moved a confidence motion last week. But a voting could not take place as the ruling coalition's MLAs continued flilibustering to delay the inevitable. The Kumaraswamy government has lost majority in the house.

With 18 MLAs withdrawing support to the government, the effective strength of the ruling coalition in the Karnataka Assembly has come down to 100. The BJP has 105 MLAs and stated support of the two Independent MLAs.

Even if the rebel MLAs abstain from the trust vote or the Speaker disqualifies them as the Congress has demanded, the BJP would be in a position to defeat the confidence motion.
