Facebook post urging women to marry men from a particular caste leads to clashes in Greater Noida village

Facebook post urging women to marry men from a particular caste leads to clashes in Greater Noida village | Photo Credit: Times Now

New Delhi: A Facebook post led to clashes between two groups in Uttar Pradesh’s Greater Noida on Sunday night. The violence occurred in Ahemdpur Jewar, a village near Yamuna Expressway in which six people including the writer of the social media post were injured.

The controversial post which went viral on the social media platform suggested that men from a particular community would be ideal grooms for Brahmin girls. It was widely shared on social media over the weekend triggering outrage among the upper castes which led to the clashes.

A Panchayat was also called in Ahmedpur Choroli village of Jewar over the matter where the incident occurred after the screenshots of the Facebook post were circulated on WhatsApp as well.

The area has been tense since Sunday night after the social media post was shared widely over the weekend leading to violence. As many as 6 people including women were injured in the violence. A group of 25-30 men attacked the Dalit colony and six people were injured in the attack. The marauding group targeted members from the community to which the writer of the Facebook post belongs. They went from house to house and vandalised the property of the people living in the area and thrashed them.

The incident is also seen in the light of a failure of law and order in the state. It is to be noted that the government has requested Facebook to curb such provocative content on its platform but the social media platform has been unable to do so.

The police said they detained seven people in the incident and blamed “anti-social elements” for the violence. The village pradhan said the post was condemned at the village panchayat as it was “derogatory to women” and the writer of the post was asked to apologise.

One of the victims Bunty Gautam said the mob barged into his house and broke everything. Around 10 cars and 20 bikes were also vandalised.


