VNY set to organise controversial IIFA award in Nepal to promote tourism - Nepal24Hours.com - 'Integration Through Media'

KATHMANDU: Visit Nepal Year (VNY) 2020 secretariat informed that it was planning to organise at least one programme of Bollywood in Kathmandu to promote Nepal’s tourism.

National Coordinator of VNY 2020 Suraj Vaidya said that the VNY team would go to visit Mumbai to organise a cinema related programme in Nepal to promote Nepal through it.

The International Indian Film Academy Award (IIFA) 2019 that was earlier proposed to organise in Kathmandu in the initiation of Vaidya was cancelled after it fell into controversy due to budget and other issues.

Vaidya said that there was an immense potentiality of promoting Nepal through cinema and VNY would take initiative for it.

“We can make Nepal a hub of cinema shooting provided that the government provide some incentives for it,” he said.

The government should provide exemption on taxes and incentives on transportation facilities, and help getting customs clearance among others by making a policy for attracting international filmmakers for shooting their films in Nepal, he said.

Vaidya said that the VNY 2020 had allocated budget to organise an international workshop to provide inputs to the government in framing policy to develop Nepal as a hub of film shooting.

Meanwhile, the VNY 2020 Secretariat held a press conference to introduce a Chinese film production team who were in the country to determine and identify location for the Chinese feature film #The Way to Pure Land’.

The team comprised of renowned directors Kim King and Elaine King, actress Selina, writer Ray Chen, Producer Weng Wen Boo and assistant director Eldwise.

On the occasion, secretary at the Ministry of Culture, Tourism and Civil Aviation Mohan Krishna Sapkota said that the Chinese film to be produced by featuring Nepali culture will further enhance the relation between two countries at the people’s level.

Director of the film, ‘The Way to Pure Land’, Kim King, said that they would also include local actors in their film to be shot here in October-November. The VNY 2020 secretariat in coordination with line agencies will facilitate the film crew during the shoot, Vaidya said.

The outflow of Nepali workers has decreased for the last couples of year due to increase jobs opportunities within the country and other issues relating to Nepal and job destination countries.

For Indian tourists travelling by land:- 72 hours (-ve) C-19 report, CCMC form and Antigen Test at entry point
