Brahmins must be at helm of affairs: Kerala HC judge's speech stokes controversy

Brahmins must be at helm of affairs: Kerala HC judge's speech stokes controversy

Justice V Chitambaresh, speaking at the Tamil Brahmins' Global Meet in Kochi, also said that a Brahmin is someone who has all good qualities rolled into one.

news Controversy

In a speech, Justice V Chitambaresh, a sitting judge of the Kerala High Court, said that it is time for Brahmins to deliberate as to whether reservations should be on the basis of community or caste alone.

The judge was delivering an inaugural address at the three-day Tamil Brahmins' Global Meet held in Kochi on Friday. In the speech, a video of which has gone viral on social media, the judge exalts the qualities of Brahmins, the group that holds the highest position in the caste hierarchy of Hindu society. Without acknowledging the privileges that Brahmins have acquired over thousands of years by oppressing those below them, Justice V Chitambaresh painted a virtuous picture of the "good Brahmin" who is full of blessed qualities and never treats anyone poorly.

The judge began by describing who's a Brahmin according to him: "Who is a Brahmin? A Brahmin is twice born because of Poorva Janma Sukrutham (the result of good deeds he did in the previous birth). He has got certain distinct characteristics - clean habits, lofty thinking, sterling character, mostly a vegetarian, a lover of Carnatic music - all good qualities rolled into one is a Brahmin. There are innumerable ‘agraharams’ (Brahmin-only housing areas) in Kerala which need to be preserved. There is a rich cultural heritage, the ‘agraharams’ have to be declared as heritage zones and we shall not allow any flats to be built in between the houses in agraharams."

Justice V Chitambaresh then went on to suggest that caste-based reservation was unnecessary and unfair. While pretending that he wasn't giving an opinion that he isn't supposed to, considering the post that he holds, the judge went ahead and did just that.

“It's time for you (Brahmins) to deliberate as to whether reservations should be on the basis of community or caste alone. Occupying a constitutional post, it may not be proper for me to express any opinion, I am not expressing my opinion at all. But I am only kindling your interest or reminding you that there is a platform for you to agitate or to voice your concerns about economic reservation alone and not caste or communal reservation. Of course, there is a 10 percent reservation for economically backward classes. A son of a Brahmin cook, even if he falls within the non-creamy layer zone will not get any reservation whereas a son of a timber merchant who belongs to other backward communities will get reservation if he's within the non-creamy layer zone. I am not expressing any opinion at all. It’s for you to deliberate and put forward your views. As Mr Raman said, it is the child who cries who gets the milk. Time has come for us to play the orchestra and not continue to play solo,” he said.

He also stressed on the need to conserve Vedic schools and claimed that a Brahmin should be at the helm of affairs since he's so "superior".

“More of Veda patashalas which are now dwindling should be encouraged; the rich cultural heritage should be protected. It may be noted that a Brahmin is never communal, he is always considerate, he is an ahimsa vadi ( a non-violent person), he loves people, he is one who liberally donates for any laudable cause. Such a person should always be at the helm of affairs for which the Tamil Brahmin meet will definitely be a pointer," he said.

Brahmins like Justice V. Chitambaresh can be found across judiciary, media, academia, civil society and politics. And these Brahmins also occupy positions ten times, sometimes twenty times, their population size. Pray tell me how India is a democracy. — Tejas Harad (@h_tejas) July 23, 2019
