DK Ex-Servicemen to organize Kargil Diwas on 26 July at War Memorial-Kadri Hills

DK Ex-Servicemen to organize Kargil Diwas on 26 July at War Memorial-Kadri Hills





Mangaluru: Addressing the media persons during a press meet held at Mangaluru Press Club, Vikram Datta, the President of Dakshina Kannada District Ex-Servicemen’s Association said, “DK ESM Association along with Lions Clubs International District 317 and Sri Shasthavu Bhoothanatheshwara Temple Trust, will organize a solemn function to Mark ‘Kargil Divas’ at the War Memorial, Kadri Hills, Opposite Kadri East Police station-Mangaluru on Friday, 26 July at 6 pm. Floral tributes and Candle Light Vigil will take place in order to pay homage to the brave soldiers who had sacrificed their lives in the line of duty”



He further said, “Additionally, Centre For Integrated Learning (CIL) will be organizing a seminar, as an interactive session of school students and Ex-Servicemen, at Lions Seva Mandir, Mallikatte-Mangaluru commencing from 9 am till 1.30 pm on the same day(26 July). This programme will consist of Quiz competition, Audio Video display of war scenes, Felicitations to Veteran Soldiers, Interactive group discussions, Patriotic songs and dances”.

Also speaking Col N Sharath Bhandary-Past President of DK ESM Association said, “26 July 1999 is a very important day in the history of India and especially for Indian Armed Forces. On this very day, our valiant Armed Forces drove out Pakistan Army intruders from the unauthorized occupation of the Indian territory of Kargil, Drass, Tololing, Batalikand Turkok sectors in Jammu and Kashmir. This war was an example of great courage, valour, comradeship, sacrifices and leadership on the part of Indian Armed Forces. Many brave men had promised their families that they would soon return from the war, and they kept their word”

“They went to the battlefield as valiant soldiers carrying the Indian flag and came back as Heroes, draped in National Flag of our Country. Think of their sacrifices-they gave their TODAY for our TOMORROW. The Defense Forces of India are the most disciplined patriotic forces in the world. They have always proved their worth during external and internal threats. They are the most dependable and strongest pillars of our democracy ” added Col Bhandary.

S M Airan-General secretary of DK ESM Association, Capt Deepak Adyanthaya and Col K Balakrishna were also present on the dais during the press meet.

About KARGIL VIJAY DIWAS :



Kargil Vijay Diwas, named after the success of Operation Vijay. On 26 July 1999, India successfully took command of the high outposts which had been lost to Pakistani intruders. 26 July is celebrated as Kargil Vijay Diwas in India. The Kargil war was fought for more than 60 days, ended on 26 July and resulted in the loss of life on both sides. The war ended with India regaining control of all the previously held territory, hence re-establishing the status quo ante bellum. Kargil Vijay Diwas is celebrated on 26 July every year in honour of the Kargil War’s Heroes who laid down their life for the country. This day is celebrated in the Kargil–Dras sector, all over India, and in the national capital New Delhi, where the Prime Minister of India pays homage to the soldiers at Amar Jawan Jyoti at India Gate every year. Functions are organized all over the country to commemorate the contributions of the armed forces.

After the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971, there had been a long period with relatively few direct armed conflicts involving the military forces of the two neighbours – notwithstanding the efforts of both nations to control the Siachen Glacier by establishing military outposts on the surrounding mountains ridges and the resulting military skirmishes in the 1980s. During the 1990s, however, escalating tensions and conflict due to separatist activities in Kashmir, some of which were supported by Pakistan, as well as the conducting of nuclear tests by both countries in 1998, led to an increasingly belligerent atmosphere. In an attempt to defuse the situation, both countries signed the Lahore Declaration in February 1999, promising to provide a peaceful and bilateral solution to the Kashmir conflict. During the winter of 1998–1999, some elements of the Pakistani Armed Forces were covertly training and sending Pakistani troops and paramilitary forces, some allegedly in the guise of mujahideen, into territory on the Indian side of the line of control (LOC).

The infiltration was code-named “Operation Badr”. The aim of the Pakistani incursion was to sever the link between Kashmir and Ladakh and cause Indian forces to withdraw from the Siachen Glacier, thus forcing India to negotiate a settlement of the broader Kashmir dispute. Pakistan also believed that any tension in the region would internationalize the Kashmir issue, helping it to secure a speedy resolution. Yet another goal may have been to boost the morale of the decade-long rebellion in Indian State of Kashmir by taking a pro-active role.

Initially, with little knowledge of the nature or extent of the infiltration, the Indian troops in the area assumed that the infiltrators were jihadis and declared that they would evict them within a few days. The subsequent discovery of infiltration elsewhere along the LOC, along with the difference in tactics employed by the infiltrators, caused the Indian army to realize that the plan of attack was on a much bigger scale. The total area seized by the ingress is generally accepted to between 130 km – 200 km.

The Government of India responded with Operation Vijay, a mobilization of 200,000 Indian troops. The war came to an official end on July 26, 1999, thus marking it as Kargil Vijay Diwas. It is estimated that between 700 (as per US Department of State), and 4000 (as per Mr Nawaz Sharif) Pakistani soldiers were killed as punishment for their unlawful aggression and intrusion. 527 Indian soldiers bravely lost their lives during the war.
