Trump condemned by India PM over Pakistan remarks - ‘NOT asked to mediate’

Boris Johnson: Trump says new PM is a 'really good man'

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

President Trump said yesterday Mr Modi had asked him during a meeting in Japan last month if he would be a mediator on Kashmir, a territory at the heart of decades of hostility between India and Pakistan. The comments triggered a political storm in India, which has long bristled at any suggestion of third-party involvement in tackling Kashmir, a Muslim-majority region that it considers an integral part of the country. Foreign Minister Subrahmanyan Jaishankar, who was part of the Indian delegation at the G20 meeting where President Trump and Mr Modi met, told agitated politicians that the Indian Prime Minister did not seek any help from the American over Kashmir.

He said: “The US President made certain remarks to the effect he was ready to mediate if requested by India and Pakistan. “I categorically assure the house that no such request has been made by the Prime Minister, I repeat, no such request was made. “I also reiterate that it has been India’s position that all outstanding issues are discussed only bilaterally. “I further underline any engagement with Pakistan would require an end to cross-border terrorism.”

The comments triggered a political storm in India

Mr Jaishankar said there could be no third-party involvement in India’s problems with Pakistan. President Trump was speaking at the White House just before holding talks with Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan. Mr Khan welcomed the US effort to intercede, saying he would carry the hopes of more than a billion people in the region. But President’s Trump’s comments risked further straining political ties with India, which are already under pressure over trade.

The divided Himalayan region is claimed by both Hindu-majority India and Muslim Pakistan and the nuclear-armed neighbours have gone to war twice over the territory since independence in 1947. Pakistan has long pressed for the implementation of decades-old UN (United Nations) resolutions calling for a ballot for the region to decide its future. India says the UN has no role in Kashmir, where separatist militants have been battling Indian forces for years. Tension between India and Pakistan has been high since an attack on an Indian military convoy in Kashmir in February claimed by a Pakistan-based militant group prompted India to send warplanes into Pakistan.

Mr Khan said today he was surprised by India’s reaction

Mr Khan said today he was surprised by India’s reaction to the offer of mediation from the American. He said: “Generations of Kashmiris have suffered & are suffering daily and need conflict resolution.” Washington officials played down the prospect of an active US role in mediating on Kashmir. The US State Department said: “While Kashmir is a bilateral issue for both parties to discuss, the Trump administration welcomes Pakistan and India sitting down and the United States stands ready to assist.”
