How posts ‘inspired by’ MLA daughter’s wedding led to Jewar village caste clash

JEWAR: Tension between Brahmins and Dalits at Greater Noida’s Ahmedpur Choroli village , which led to violence last Sunday night, had been building up over the past week.It coincided with a burst of animated social media talk about BJP’s Bareilly MLA Rajesh Mishra’s daughter Sakshi marrying Ajitesh, a Dalit. The subject was discussed widely in the village, and online by many of its younger residents. As is the case with topics of general interest, memes and jokes followed.This churned the undercurrents of the perpetual caste rift. When a panchayat was called last Sunday to discuss one such post — suggesting youths from a particular community were the ideal grooms for Brahmin girls — virtual cellphone forwards and shares had taken the shape of a full-blown row in the real world, like many of the present-day frictions and conflicts.The Facebook post that divided the Jat-dominated village — where an equal number of Brahmins and Jatavs stay — was originally posted by a politician’s son, Akash Barele, on a page called ‘Yug Ambedkarvad’, which is followed by local youths. The post — shared by Ahmedpur Choroli resident Bobby Kumar — was a reflection of conversations about caste assertiveness and inter-caste marriages taking place predominantly among the youth, who have a very different perspective of caste from their previous generations, thanks to migration for jobs and social media.A group of youngsters who identify themselves as supporters of Chandrashekhar Azad’s Bhim Army on online platforms also started posting about inter-caste marriage on Facebook and joined the conversation, according to local residents, who described views of internet-savvy youngsters of the village taking a political tilt as “a recent phenomenon”.Bobby, who works as a delivery agent in Noida with an online grocery store, was arrested on Tuesday for sharing the post (among other charges, he has been booked for promoting enmity). “This is all because of social media. Had Bobby not shared the post, the incident would not have taken such a turn,” says Ramesh, an Ahmedpur Choroli resident. Another, a youngster, says there is no major fan-following of outfits like Bhim Army but the youngsters do follow Ambedkarite thought.Most blame Sunday night’s violence, in which houses of Jatav families were targeted, on outsiders. To older residents, it has brought back unpleasant memories of 2006 when a caste conflict had flared up in the Jat-dominated village of around 6,000 families (with 200 households of Brahmins and 200 of Jatavs).“Some people from Badalpur had come to the village as part of a wedding procession and clashed with some locals, who accused them of obscene behaviour. Since then, the village has been peaceful barring an incident in 2015,” says Mahesh Chaudhary. Soon after Bobby shared the post last Wednesday, members of the Brahmin community, Ashok and Ram Kumar, arrived at his house and told his parents to ask Bobby to delete it.“They came to our house twice. On Sunday, they told us to be present in a panchayat called by Mahendra Chiroli, who is national secretary in the Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU),” says Bobby’s mother.Lalman Singh, the village pradhan, says he was not invited to the panchayat. “Nobody approached me from either community. I heard about the panchayat but the matter was resolved. However, the same night, houses of members of the Jatav community were vandalised,” he says, hinting at a conspiracy.In that, many villagers speak in one voice, that outsiders got involved. “There were many outsiders. Their faces were covered but we are sure that all of them were not from the village,” says a resident. “We were targeted for no reason,” says Guddi Devi, whose house bore the maximum brunt of the vandalism. In all, 20 houses were targeted. Varsha, a widow who runs a shop, says the mob broke the door of her house, smashed two TV sets and a mirror.SP (rural) Ranvijay Singh said they were trying to identify those who are involved in the vandalism. Eight people have been detained but none arrested so far. There were reports that at least two Jatav families had left the village but the village pradhan denied that. “These are rumours. Some people have sent their kids elsewhere,” says Lalman Singh.Mahesh Sharma, the local MP, visited the village on Tuesday and assured residents of action against the accused. Later, some members of the Brahmin community filed a police complaint about a clash in which one person was injured.
