Pulwama Terror Attack: Imran Khan Admits JeM Is Active India, Gives Cover Fire For Jaish And Blames Indian Forces

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan asserting his duplicity towards terror in a gigantic admission has claimed that the UN-designated terrorist Masood Azhar's Jaish-e-Mohammed in 'operative in India'

During a press brief, the Pakistani Prime Minister downplayed the ghastly terror attack, moreover shielded the perpetrator of Pulwama terror attack by stating that the "atrocities of security forces radicalised the Kashmiri boy" who blew himself up in the fidayeen attack.

He said, "What happened in Pulwama in February last year, it was clearly an indigenous thing. It was a Kashmiri boy radicalised by the brutality of security forces, he blew himself up."

He said that Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed is operative in India "as well" however Pakistan came into the limelight, further claimed that Pakistan had disarmed militants from the country before Pulwama terror attack.

READ| IS THIS INVESTIGATION? 'We Asked Jaish' Is Imran Khan Government's Flimsy Basis For JeM Clean Chit, Despite India Giving Pakistan Evidence

"But because this group claimed responsibility which was in India as well, Jaish-e-Muhammad was operating in India but Pakistan suddenly came into the limelight. So even before this had happened, we decided to disarm all militant groups," he added.

Islamabad has never condemned the Pulwama terror attack. However, Pakistan has been a recipient of global backlash over their intimacy with terror, and along with India, even the US asserted that Pakistan has to take 'sustained' and 'irreversible' steps against terrorists before Khan's maiden visit to Washington.

However, in stark contrast, after the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) greylisted Pakistan due to its failure to curb terror, Pakistan Chief of Army Staff General Qamar Javed Bajwa on June 23, himself claimed that 'Pakistan is doing its best to wipe out terrorism' as per sources, while addressing at the International Institute for Strategic Studies(IISS) in London.

The international terror financing watchdog FATF decided to keep Pakistan on its 'Grey' list for failure to curb funneling of funds to terror groups LeT, JeM and others and has given a September deadline to compile with its 27-point action plan, sources said.

A week before Khan's maiden visit to the US, Islamabad made another sham arrest of US-designated terrorist and 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed, for the 8th time.

Here's an account of the times he was arrested:

December 2001

May 2002

October 2002

August 2006 (twice)

December 2008

September 2009

January 2017

Following the Pulwama terror attack, in an interview to an international news channel, Imran Khan's Minister Mehmood Qureshi had admitted that Masood Azhar was in fact in Pakistan.

READ| US, UK, France Voice Concern At FATF Meet Over Pakistan Inaction Against Hafiz Saeed, Masood Azhar: Sources

After providing safe haven to the world's most wanted man at one time, Osama bin Laden and currently 26/11 mastermind Hafiz Saeed, Pakistan, had also confessed to being in touch with Masood Azhar's JeM while speaking to an international media organisation.

Meanwhile, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, plead to the head of the 'most powerful country in the world' to intervene and bring peace in the South-Asian region on Tuesday in the White House. In an appeal to the US, Khan also said that Pakistan has 'tried its best' to speak to India. However, India has maintained a solid stand of 'no talks amid terror'
