Bihar: Woman beaten to death on suspicion of witchcraft; 12 accused, 4 arrested

The complainant mentioned that his wife had gone to fetch water in the morning, was later found lying on the ground lying in a pool of blood. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident happened in Bihar's Nawada district Husband of deceased has filed an FIR and accused 12 people of lynching his wife

Patna: A 50-year-old woman was allegedly beaten to death on Tuesday by villagers on the suspicion of witchcraft. The incident took place in Nawada district's Koyaligarh village in the Govindpur police station area.

The woman was attacked with bamboo and wooden sticks around 8 am on Tuesday, the Station House Officer (SHO) Jyoti Punj told news agency PTI. He added that the woman's family members brought her to the police station and after noticing her critical condition, the police rushed her to a primary health centre. However, the doctors declared her brought dead on arrival.

The woman's husband has lodged an FIR in the case and has named 12 residents of the village in the complaint. The woman's body has been sent for a post-mortem and reports are still awaited. The complainant mentioned that his wife, who had gone to fetch water in the morning, was found lying on the ground in a pool of blood.

Reportedly the villagers were standing around the woman and accusing her of witchcraft, her husband alleged in the FIR. However, four of those named in the complaint were arrested by the police. The search for the rest is currently underway. The incident has been reported days after three persons were beaten to death in Saran district on suspicion of stealing a buffalo.

On suspicion of witchcraft, 3 forced to eat human excreta in Jharkhand

In another case reported on July 23 from Jharkhand, three people, including two women, were allegedly forced to consume human excreta in Giridih town on the suspicion of practicing witchcraft. Reportedly, the police officials had claimed that the incident occurred last week and came to light only after a phone-shot video of the incident had gone viral on social media.

Four accused in the case were arrested by the police and two others are still absconding. The accused were identified as 50-year-old Veera Das, 32-year-old Hari Das, 30-year-old Jharia Devi and 48-year-old Shanti Devi.

The accused reportedly suspected the four victims of performing witchcraft in the village. Further investigation in the case is still underway.




