I-T sleuths swoop on Bishnoi residences in Delhi, G’gram

editorial@tribune.com

Deepender Deswal

Tribune News Service

Hisar, July 23

Officials of the Income Tax Department from Delhi on Tuesday raided the residences and business premises of the Congress MLA Kuldeep Bishnoi in Hisar, Adampur, Gurugram and Delhi.

The simultaneous raids started early today and were being carried out till the filing of the report. Sources said some family members were present at the residences in Delhi and Adampur. While the Adampur legislator and son of former Chief Minister Bhajan Lal, Kuldeep Bishnoi, and his wife Renuka Bishnoi, who is an MLA from Hansi, were apparently at their farmhouse in Gurugram, their elder son Bhavya, who contested the parliamentary poll from Hisar, was at their shop in Adampur grain market. Kuldeep’s mother and former MLA Jasma Devi was at the family residence in Sector 15, Hisar, the sources added.

The teams of IT sleuths swooped on the family’s residential and business premises around 8 am. “They (IT sleuths) have not allowed anybody from inside the house to leave the premises nor have they permitted anybody to enter. We are unable to get in touch with any of the family members,” said a close aide of the family at the Adampur mandi.

The sources said Bhavya was being questioned by the IT officials. His SUV was also searched by the officials. The local police were also present at the Hisar and Adampur premises to assist the IT team and maintain order outside. A team was also carrying out searches at their automobile showroom in Hisar. Nearly 40 officials headed by an Indian Revenue Service (IRS) officer were part of the raiding teams.

Kuldeep, son of the longest-serving Chief Minister of Haryana, and his wife Renuka had won the 2014 Assembly elections as the Haryana Janhit Congress (HJC) candidates. They later merged their party with the Congress in 2016.

Bhavya had contested the Lok Sabha elections from Hisar as a Congress nominee. He had been camping in Adampur for the last two days while preparing for the Assembly elections.

Early morning crackdown
