Lucknow: Software engineer shot dead at point-blank range by bike-borne assailants in full public view

Lucknow Police are probing the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights The victim was returning home from work when he was attacked Lucknow Police are probing the matter, examining CCTV footages The sound of bullets being fired at the victim triggered panic in the area

Lucknow: A 30-year-old man was shot dead by bike-borne assailants in the capital city of Uttar Pradesh on Tuesday. Identified as one Sharad Nigam, the victim was employed at a software company with offices in the city. Police have registered a case and launched an investigation in this regard. This incident comes a little over a week after a 31-year-old manager of a private hospital died under mysterious circumstances after being stabbed to death in Lucknow's Gomti Nagar area.

Police officials probing Nigam's murder said that he was shot dead by two bike-borne assailants in Azad Nagar area on Tuesday. He further added that first responders arrived at the scene and rushed Nigam to a local hospital. However, he succumbed to injuries during treatment. A preliminary probe has revealed that the software engineer was shot at an arm's distance from his own home. At the time, Nigam was returning home from the office.

Lucknow: A person, Sharad Nigam who was shot at by bike borne assailants in Azad Nagar yesterday, later succumbed to his injuries during treatment. SK Bhagat, IG Lucknow says,"CCTV footage will be examined. Hopefully we will nab the accused soon. Investigation underway." pic.twitter.com/ovreHHZOU9 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) July 24, 2019

A resident of Campal Road in Lucknow, Nigam was returning home when he was caught off-guard by two bike-borne assailants. The miscreants fired three bullets at Nigam before fleeing from the spot. The sound of gunshots triggered a scare across the Campal Road area where Nigam was shot dead, claim reports. The gunshots also prompted other residents of the area to rush to the spot where Nigam was lying in a pool of blood. His neighbours recognised Sharad and immediately informed his family members along with the police. A team of police personnel attached with the Thakurganj police station was dispatched to the spot.

Even as the police are in the process of investigating the software engineer's murder, initial inputs suggest that Nigam was shot dead at point-blank range. While bystanders claim that the miscreants fired three bullets, a post-mortem will confirm not just the cause of death but also the number of bullets that hit Nigam. Meanwhile, police officials are combing through CCTV footage retrieved from the area to search for clues leading to the identity of the men who murdered Nigam in full public view.

This incident comes days after the manager of a private hospital in the city was stabbed to death with a sharp object. Identified as Vishwajeet Pundir, the deceased was left bleeding profusely at his own home by the culprits. He was rushed to the Midland Hospital in Mahanagar by his elder brother and domestic help where he succumbed to his grievous injuries.
