The Behbal Kalan saga

harinder@tribunemail.com

The Punjab and Haryana High Court’s green signal to Punjab Police to probe the killing of two civilians at Behbal Kalan has predictably set the force in high gear. The first to be netted was Charanjit Sharma, the senior-most official on the spot when the police fired at protesters on October 14, 2015, killing two persons. Sharma’s arrest by the Special Investigation Team (SIT) is aimed at unravelling the ‘chain of command’ of officers who used force against those protesting police inaction in cases of sacrilege.

There are bound to be questions about a fair, impartial and speedy investigation undaunted by political pressure as it is undertaken on the eve of the General Election. But it has to be noted that it was only a few days back that the High Court cleared the decks by dismissing petitions against the Justice Ranjit Singh Commission report submitted last June. The Punjab Government had to also cool its heels because of a petition seeking the involvement of the CBI. This, too, was rejected on the grounds that the CBI had hardly made any headway in the case. And accepting the plea would have amounted to the accused seeking investigation by an agency of choice — a right which he does not have (Romila Thapar vs Union of India).

Now that the court has ensured that the investigation will not be partially handled by two separate agencies, it is incumbent on the Punjab Police to heed the High Court’s observations asking it not to be swayed by the observations of commissions since these were only meant to instruct the government to prevent such incidents in future. The Behbal Kalan SIT has only to take the cue from another SIT that has made progress and arrested the accused in sacrilege cases. Admittedly those in the sights of the Behbal Kalan SIT are much bigger fish and its exertions will have a direct impact on the state’s politics since the ‘chain of command’ may have stretched to Chandigarh. It is incumbent on Punjab Police to achieve closure on those unholy incidents as well as book those guilty for the deaths, keeping in mind that its professionalism is on the line.
