British Scarlett Keeling Murder Case, Goan Samson D’souza Sentenced to 10 Yrs Imprisonment

British Scarlett Keeling Murder Case, Goan Samson D’souza Sentenced to 10 Yrs Imprisonment

British Teenage girl 15-year-old Scarlett Keeling was found dead with bruises on her body at Anjuna beach in Goa on February 18, 2008. D’Souza and Placido Carvalho were accused of leaving her to die after drugging and sexually abusing her.

Panjim, Goa: Finally the verdict has been passed by the High Court and Samson D’Souza has been sentenced for 10 years rigorous imprisonment. I am not sure whether this judgement is okay but only the Apex Court of the country will decide when the accused as informed, will approach the apex court. Till then let us accept this verdict as Gospel Truth.

The important aspect of this case is how the Goa Police made the blunder first by dismissing it as an accidental drowning case of Scarlet Keeling and when the CBI took over the case, then only the real truth was surfaced thereby baring the flaws committed by the Goa Police and also by the Juvenile Court. I think all the Judicial luminaries of Juvenile Court must be acting only as Juveniles and as such can any person rely on this Juvenile Court for proper deliverance of justice?

I have totally lost my confidence in Goa Police who as alleged are bribe prone and to make illicit money they will go to any extent. Most shameless and hard hearted people on our planet are the Policemen, they neither have shame to demand Bribe nor if offered bribe they are ashamed to accept it. Many of them are even capable to sell their conscience because some of these Policemen are first to shift their attention on the young females when they enter for any investigation at your place. Precisely because of this the tag as “cheap and undignified” Goans, during the Portuguese time in Goa, Policeman’s job was discarded even by the lower strata of Goans.

If you want to know what segment of Goan society, X Policeman belongs to, you need not go miles on foot but the moment you say you are a Policeman then it is enough for you to know the whole background of that particular Policeman. This quality of the Goan Policemen in Goa disgraces the already disgraceful image of the Goan Policemen who during the Portuguese regime were not given any important rank by our colonial masters, in fact during that time they were kept in the government sectors as third class personnel and as such Portuguese Pakles used to use some of them as Pimps. The real respect Goan Policemen are not getting only because traditionally and historically they are known to get no respect and as things are moving now these Goan Policemen will never receive the real respect whatever rank they may hold.

Samson D’souza

Now I realized why the authorities concerned refused to hand over the case of Fr. Bismarque to CBI because knowing its uprightness CBI will catch the correct culprit and bare the mystery surrounding around the mysterious death of Fr. Bismarque. What a tragedy that if the concerned authority wants to protect the murderer it can easily do so by denying justice to the victim through its powerful wings that are existing only to serve the powerful!! This is what has happened in case of Fr. Bismarque. Such high handedness and “Dadagiri” with regards to meting out justice to the victims were not done even by the Portuguese dictator Dr. Antonio Oliveira SALAZAR. It looks to me in the Salazar’s regime we were far better than in this bloody so called liberated Goa. Liberated Goa is become good for the rogues, rascals, thieves, murderers, defectors and the Rostad Goankars. In such a situation, what good we will see in this dirty and foul Goa?

It is since the end of Portuguese rule that obtaining proper justice by the victim is become very hard because the money power in the hands of culprits is become very big that can easily purchase the cheap police force and unprincipled judiciary. Who can rectify this mistake?

by A.Veronica Fernandes, Goa

A Beach Shack Worker in Goa Sentenced to 10 years Imprisonment in Scarlett Keeling Death Case

Eleven years after the bruised body of British teenager Scarlett Eden Keeling was found on Goa’s Anjuna beach, the Bombay High Court Friday sentenced a shack worker to 10 years’ rigorous imprisonment in connection with her death. Scarlett was found dead with bruises on her body at Anjuna beach in Goa on February 18, 2008. Two people were accused of leaving her to die after drugging and sexually abusing her

A division bench of justices R D Dhanuka and Prithviraj Chavan had held Samson D’Souza guilty on July 17 for “culpable homicide not amounting to murder” and molestation, among other charges. The bench had overturned the verdict of Goa Children’s Court which had acquitted D’Souza, but upheld the acquittal of second accused Placido Carvalho.

Seen in photo L-R : Scarlett Keeling, Samson D’souza and Placido Carvalho

Scarlett (15), who was holidaying in Goa with her mother and siblings, was found dead on the popular beach on February 18, 2008. The cause of death, according to the autopsy report, was drowning. Initial investigation was conducted by Goa Police. However, Scarlett’s mother Fiona Mackeown alleged that the probe was “shabby”. The state government then handed over the case to the CBI.

D’Souza, who worked at a beach-side shack, and Carvalho, a suspected drug dealer, were first arrested, based on witnesses’ accounts, by Goa Police. The CBI named both of them in its charge sheet, claiming they drugged the girl and sexually abused her. Trial court judge Vandana Tendulkar acquitted both the men in 2016, a verdict the CBI challenged.

The Goa bench of the high court two days ago held D’Souza guilty under IPC sections 328 (for administering drugs), 354 (outraging modesty), 304 (culpable homicide not amounting murder) and 201 (destruction of evidence) and for child abuse under section 8 (2) of the Goa Children’s Act. D’Souza was present in the courtroom . His lawyer sought a stay to the sentence for 12 weeks so that he could file an appeal in the Supreme Court. The bench rejected the plea. D’Souza was sent to judicial custody and would be shifted to a prison at Colvale in North Goa district.

Senior lawyer Vikram Varma, who represented Scarlett’s mother, said justice has been finally delivered. The sentence would send a signal that law and order in Goa’s beaches should not be violated, he said.

Source : India Today
