Karnataka: Elephant returns to village, kills watcher who chased it to forest in Hassan

The

which killed a forest watcher in Hassan.

HASSAN: Two weeks after a tusker created panic near Hunasinakere Extension , the animal returned to the spot on Tuesday and killed a forest watcher who drove it back to the forests.The watcher, Annegowda (53), was killed in Seegegudda forest in Hassan rural police limits . He was from Lingarasanahalli village in Hassan taluk This is the second time that the tusker has attacked and killed a human being in the recent past. In May, it had trampled to death a 38-year-old woman at Devarahalli in Belur taluk, nearly 21 kilometres from the city. However, officials are yet to confirm whether it is the same tusker that killed the woman.The forest officers have now decided to capture the animal.According to forest officials, the tusker arrived in the wee hours and roamed in a two-kilometre radius in the residential streets of P&T Colony, Pension Mohalla and Hunasinakere Extension. Four hours later, it was driven back to Seegegudda forests near Belur.An official said they received information about the arrival of the elephant around 3.30 am. Within 30 minutes, a team reached the spot and launched an operation to drive it back to the forest. An alert was sent to early risers near the locality as a precautionary measure. However, most people were not aware of the tusker roaming in their area. The tusker followed the same route to return to Hassan. There have been no complaints of crop damage, though it passed several fields, said sources.The Seegegudda forest range is nearly 10 km from the city.The officials, after driving the tusker to Seegegudda forests around 8 am, took a break. Again they decided to launch the drive around 3 pm to drive it further away so as to prevent it from returning to the town. At that time, the elephant attacked the watcher. He was one among a group of seven forest officers who fled the spot and saved their lives.He was badly injured in his leg. Though he was rushed to a private hospital, he was declared brought dead. The tusker was first sighted near Hassan city on July 6. It stayed for some time in Hunasinakere before it was driven back then.On Tuesday, the forest team was led by deputy conservator of forests (DCF) Shivaram Babu, assistant conservator of forests (ACF) Harish and range forest officer (RFO) Jagadeesh.Shivaram Babu, who became emotional after losing his colleague, said the forest personnel would soon capture the tusker.
