BJP leader, wife and son shot dead by suspected rebels in Khunti

RANCHI: A BJP leader identified as Mago Munda (65), his wife Lakhmani Mundu (60) and son Lipirai Munda, were shot down by unidentified men at their Hethgoa village home in Murhu police station area of Khunti district on Monday evening. A woman also sustained bullet injuries in the incident. Top police officers led by the inspector general of the range have begun an investigation into the case.Eyewitnesses said they informed police after seeing five to seven persons, some of them in uniform, went to Munda's house around 8.30pm on Monday and fired at him and his son. The attackers also fired at Lakhmani and another woman, Nauri Devi, after they raised an alarm and cried for help. The witnesses further said the assailants are suspected to be rebels of the outlawed group People Liberation Front of India (PLFI), which is active in the area.While Munda, an executive committee member of BJP's ST Morcha in the district, and his son died on the spot, Lakhmani died during treatment in hospital. Nauri Devi, who sustained bullet injuries, has been referred to Rajendra Institute of Medical Sciences (Rims) in Ranchi and she is stated to be out of danger.Soon after the incident, IG (South Chhotanagpur range) Navin Singh and DIG Amol Homkar visited the crime scene and started a preliminary investigation. Later, a dog squad and forensic science laboratory personnel were pressed into service."We are gathering intelligence on various aspects of the crime. Several police teams are working on the case and conducting raids to nab the culprits. We cannot say decisively on who the attackers were. We are hopeful of achieving a breakthrough soon," IG Navin Singh said.Police said they were informed that the rebels had demanded money from Munda, who worked as a small-time contractor for a living. They said the modus operandi of the attackers suggests involvement of extremists. Munda also had a land dispute with a person of the locality, police added.Meanwhile, different political leaders including local MP and Union minister Arjun Munda and minister Neelkanth Singh Munda have condemned the murder.
