Irrfan is back with a bang after cancer treatment. This pic from Angrezi Medium set is proof

Irrfan, who was diagnosed with neuroendocrine tumour last year, is all set to return to the big screen with his upcoming film Angrezi Medium. The actor, who came back to India after treatment in the UK, shot a few scenes for Homi Adajania's directorial venture in Udaipur, Rajasthan. He then flew back to London to shoot the remaining portion of the film.

Now, as the post-production of the film is in process, it seems that the audience will get to see a healthier version of him after the treatment and his recent photo on social media is proof. Irrfan took to Twitter to share a picture with director Homi Adajania.

The actor posted a meme that featured both of them in a fun conversation on the film sets.

In the photo, Irrfan, who can be seen holding a sugarcane in his hand, says, "Been shooting for weeks...Can we discuss the character now?"

"Tu ganna choos. Let me make the film," Adajania can be seen saying in the comic joke.

In the second photo, the Angrezi Medium actor says, "Can somebody please call the director."

In an interview with Asian Age, producer Dinesh Vijan talked about shooting with Irrfan after his cancer treatment. He revealed that no special schedule was planned for him on Angrezi Medium sets.

"We did not plan any particular pattern of shooting, especially for Irrfan. I must confess that Irrfan was as fit as a fiddle on the shoot. We had planned a normal shooting schedule, which was not planned according to his health. Though, we found him at his best in spite of Rajasthan’s scorching heat," he told the website.

Praising the 52-year-old actor, Vijan said, "Hats off to Irrfan to have shot all the scenes with the same vigour. I found him to be in the best of his health, no matter how long the shoot. Irrfan would always be present."

Also starring Kareena Kapoor Khan and Radhika Madan, Angrezi Medium is a sequel to Irrfan's 2017 Hindi Medium, which was directed by Saket Choudhary. In the first film, the actor had shared screen space with Pakistani actress Saba Qamar, who played the role of his wife.

ALSO READ | Angrezi Medium: Irrfan kicks off Hindi Medium 2 shoot in Udaipur. See pics

ALSO READ | Irrfan kicks off Hindi Medium 2 in Rajasthan next week. Kareena Kapoor to join after Good News

ALSO SEE | Irrfan back in Mumbai after cancer treatment, meets producer Dinesh Vijan
