HDK threatens to quit, rift wide open

vermaajay1968@gmail.com

Ramakrishna Upadhya

Bengaluru, January 28

A war of words has erupted between ruling coalition partners in Karnataka with Chief Minister HD Kumaraswamy today threatening to quit “if snide comments” against him and his family members continued.

After Congress MLA and chairman of Bangalore Development Authority ST Somashekar remarked at a public meeting that more than concentrating on administration “one family was only interested in the welfare of their sons and daughter-in-law”, Congress minister MTB Nagaraj praised former CM Siddaramaiah saying as far as he was concerned “Siddaramaiah continues to be our Chief Minister”.

Another Congress minister Puttaranga Shetty also endorsed Nagaraj’s views. Angry Kumaraswamy said, “If this continues, I’m ready to step down.” Congress high command’s trouble shooter KC Venugopal immediately issued a notice to Somashekar and also forced him to apologise for his statement. Siddaramaiah said he had no intention of returning as the CM and that he would try to pacify Kumaraswamy.

Congress legislators and ministers have expressed displeasure at the style of functioning of Kumaraswamy, accusing him of interfering in their portfolios and not releasing sufficient funds for their constituencies. Home Minister MB Patil took exception to the CM “unilaterally” effecting some changes in the police department.

Tension is building up between the Congress and the Janata Dal (Secular) as the Lok Sabha elections are nearing and there are serious differences between the two parties over sharing of 28 seats. JD(S) supremo HD Deve Gowda has already pitched his claim for 12 seats, though the JD(S) currently holds only two Lok Sabha seats. Through informal sources, the JD(S) has staked claim for Tumukuru and Chikkaballapur seats, currently held by Congress MPs, including former CM Veerappa Moily, on the grounds that the party had done well in these constituencies during the May 2018 Assembly poll. Deve Gowda himself wants to contest from Bangalore North, which has long been a Congress bastion, as he is keen on putting up his two grandsons, Prajwal Revanna and Nikhil Kumaraswamy, from Hassan and Mandya constituencies, respectively.

Local Congress leaders are in no mood to yield more than five-six seats to the JD(S). They are totally opposed to conceding the seats held by them. The coordination committee meeting of the two parties is scheduled to be held in the next few days to work out the seat-sharing modalities.
