Civilian injured in Pak shelling in Poonch

Civilian injured in Pak shelling in Poonch

POONCH/MENDHAR, Jul 23: A civilian was injured as Pakistan army resorted to unprovoked firing targetting forward Indian border posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Haveli, Dalhan, Krishna Ghati, Mankote and Mendhar sectors of Poonch district for the second consecutive day on Tuesday.

One civilian sustained minor injuries during ceasefire at 20.00 hours. The injured has been identified as Sher Mohd, 45, son of Mohammed Muneer resident of Mohalla Bahchari Baloni.

Defense PRO Lt Col Devender Anand, while confirming ceasefire violation by Pakistan, said, “This afternoon Pakistani army violated ceasefire in Dalhan sector of Poonch district. Indian army retaliated with equal caliber.”

“Later Pakistan violated the ceasefire in Krishna Ghati, Mankote & Mendhar sectors of Poonch district. Pak initiated unprovoked ceasefire violation at around 1220 hours along LoC with firing of small arms in Poonch sector. Indian army befittingly retaliated the cross-border firing by the Pakistani army,’ he added.

Local army sources said this afternoon at about 12.20 PM, Pakistani army opened indiscriminate fire towards Indian forward posts and civilian areas in Dalhan sector in Haveli.

“Heavy mortar shelling was witnessed during ceasefire violation which was retaliated by India in equal measure. Both sides exchanged heavy gun fire and mortar shelling in the area,” Mohammed Sadiq, a local said. “In Pak shelling, two houses in our village were partially damaged. A number of forward LoC locations remained affected due to shelling and civilians were forced to remain inside their houses. The exchange of fire stopped at around 2.55 PM,” he added.

Later this afternoon at around 3.25 PM, Pakistani army initiated unprovoked firing and shelling along the LoC in Krishna Ghati, Mankote sectors of Mendhar tehsil of Poonch district. Indian side too retaliated effectively and strongly.

This was the third such violation in the past four days which left an army jawan dead and a civilian injured, the officials said.

On Monday, Rifleman Mohammad Arif Shafi Alam Khan Pathan was killed in unprovoked firing by Pakistani troops in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district.

A civilian was injured in Pakistani firing in Balnoi village along the LoC in Mendhar sector of Poonch district on Saturday.
