Tamil Nadu: Man claims NIA raids targeted Muslims at BJP's behest, arrested

Tamil Nadu: Man claims NIA raids targeted Muslims at BJP's behest, arrested | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights NIA conducted searches on 14 locations in Tamil Nadu on July 20 A man was arrested for a WhatsApp message accusing NIA of targeting Muslims He was booked under sections 153 and 153(a) of Indian Penal Code (IPC)

Chennai/New Delhi: A man has been arrested in Tamil Nadu for criticising July 20 raids by the National Investigative Agency (NIA) in a message on WhatsApp. Thajudheen, a resident of Thiruvarur town in Tamil Nadu, was taken into police custody for posting a message on WhatsApp accusing the NIA of targeting ‘innocent Muslims’. He is a member of a Muslim organisation named MPT.

The message which was flagged off as provocative by the authorities claimed that the raids are being done at the behest of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leaders in order to target Muslims in the state.

"NIA is targeting innocent Muslims and the raids are being conducted in Muthupettai, the fascist central BJP government is trying to target Muslims. Muslim jamath (group) in the area are mute spectators. Nobody is raising questions about these raids. There are reports that the raids are being conducted at the insistence of the local leaders of the BJP. Beware Muslims."

The police arrested Thajudheen after a complaint was filed by Muthupettai Village Administrative Officer Dinesh Kumar. He has been booked under sections 153 and 153(a) of Indian Penal Code (IPC). He has been sent to judicial custody.

Recently NIA conducted multiple searches and raids in Tamil Nadu in connection with various terror-related cases. Search operations were carried out at 14 locations across Tamil Nadu on July 20 as part of the investigation in the Ansarulla terror case.

A press release by the NIA read, "On July 20, NIA conducted searches at the residences of 14 arrested accused persons in this case, namely Mohamed Ibrahim, Mohamed Sheik Maitheen, Meeran Ghani, Gulam Nabi Asath, Ahamed Azarudhen, Toufiq Ahmed, Mohamed Ibrahim, Mohammed Afzar, Rafi Ahamed, Munthasir, Umar Barook, Mohideen Seeni Shahul Hameed, Faizal Sharief and Farook. Searches were conducted at five locations in Ramanathapuram district, two locations in Theni district and one location each in Chennai city, Tirunelveli city, Madurai city, Tanjavur district, Perambalur district, Nagapattinam district and Thiruvarur district."

The investigative agency had previously registered a case against the accused under various sections of the IPC and Unlawful Activities Prevention (UAP) Act, "based on credible information that the accused persons and their associates, owing allegiance to the proscribed terrorist organizations ISIS or Daish, Al Qaida and Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI), while being within and beyond India, had conspired and made preparations to wage war against the Government of India by forming the terrorist gang Ansarulla."


