Military hotel draws first blood in battle with BBMP

BBMP

High Court

Military Hotel

Bengaluru

Palike realises ‘military hotels’ serve meat and issues shut-down notice on one such restaurant; HC grants reprieve to Vijayanagar eatery that claims to have valid licenceTherealised belatedly that ‘military hotels’ serve meat and asked one such to close down. The civic agency served the notice on an eatery in Vijayanagar contending that the licence did not permit it to cook and serve meat in its premises.The restaurant, however, has managed to get a reprieve from the. The restaurant in question is the Doddaiahon Magadi-Chord Road. Its proprietor R Lokesh approached the HC against the notice issued by the BBMP. The case came up for hearing before Justice S Sunil Dutt Yadav.The notice/order issued by the Medical Health Officer of the Govindarajnagar Zone of the BBMP on November 14, 2018 directed Lokesh to shift his business establishment within seven days.Lokesh’s advocate contended in the HC that he has obtained necessary licence for the purpose of running a food business and the said licence was valid till July 11, 2019.He had also obtained a trade licence which was also valid. Lokesh approached the HC immediately after the BBMP issued notice to him. Though the BBMP called it a notice “for all practical purposes it amounts to cancellation of his licence,” he contended. BBMP’s advocate Kempanna argued that the licence obtained by Lokesh “does not authorise the petitioner to prepare and supply non-vegetarian food and the action of the petitioner is contrary to the terms of the licence.” The HCsaid that since Lokesh was able to produce the necessary documents to substantiate his claim that he possesses a licence, a final opportunity should be granted to him to respond to the notice issued by the BBMP.The HC ordered on January 21, that the notice issued in November by the BBMP should be considerd a show-cause notice and Lokesh should be allowed to reply to it to substantiate his claim. He was given 10 days to reply to the notice. He was also allowed to give an oral hearing. Lokesh was directed to be present in the office of the Medical Health Officer on February 4 at 11 am to avail of the opportunity of personal hearing. The BBMP was directed not to take any precipitative action till it decides on the issue after hearing Lokesh.Restaurants that primarily serve meat on the menu are colloquially called ‘military hotels’ in Bengaluru. They are quintessentiallandmarks but can also be found elsewhere in neighbouring states. There has been many speculations as to why they have the ‘military’ suffix in their names.The most common conclusion is that they primarily served the British soldiers stationed in Bengaluru after the city’s conquest in 1799. Most also have the ‘Hindu’ in their names to clarify that they do not serve beef.
