D Raja becomes CPI general secretary: All you need to know about the man and his political career

CPI general Secretary D Raja | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights D Raja was the national secretary of the CPI before taking over as the party general secretary He has been elected to the Rajya Sabha twice Raja's second term in Rajya Sabha ended on July 24

D Raja on July 21 assumed the charge of Communist Party of India (CPI) general secretary, replacing Sudhakar Reddy, who resigned from the post due to ill-health.

Raja, 70, was unanimously chosen as the CPI general secretary by the party national secretariat, which met on July 18 and 19.

The 70-year-old leader, whose term in Rajya Sabha ended on Wednesday (July 24), is the first Dalit in the communist party to reach to the top post in the party. The appointment of Raja comes at a critical time as the CPI just have one member in the Lok Sabha and the party faces the risk of being stripped of the national party status.

Raja, while addressing a press conference after assuming the charge, took swipe at the ruling dispensation, saying the country was going through a “critical phase” under the “fascist regime” of Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

“Left might have lost seats in Lok Sabha election and may have been reduced as a smaller force in Parliament, doesn’t mean our ideological or political influence has shrunk within the country. We are the hope for the people of this country,” he added.

"The BJP government may have won the electoral battle but not the social or the political one. We want all communist parties to come together. We will have to rework our strategies. That's what our parties are trying to do," he said.

Raja began his political career by joining the All India Students Federation (AISF) during his college days. Later he went on to become the leader of the All India Youth Federation and served as the State Secretary of Tamil Nadu unit from 1975 to 1980.

He was also the general secretary of the All India Youth Federation National council, from 1985 to 1990.

Before taking over as the CPI general secretary, he was the party's national secretary from 1994 to 2019.

Born in 1949 in Vellore district of Tamil Nadu, Raja completed his graduation in Science from GTM College, Gudiyattam and B.Ed from Government Teachers College, Vellore. His parents were landless agricultural workers.

Raja has served twice as the member of the upper house – first from 2007 to 2013 and then from 2013 to 2019. Besides this, he has also served as a member of various Parliamentary committees.

The CPI, which once had won 29 Lok Sabha seats in 1962, has been reduced to just one seat in the lower house of the Parliament. It is yet to be seen if Raja could revive the party and make it relevant again in contemporary politics.
