Students who murdered friend will not get bail

prison

High Court

bail

Court says the 3 students, including a minor, who had killed another, had committed too grave a offenceTwo students, including one engineering student, who murdered another youngster over a love affair will have to stay inlonger. They were arrested in June last year for the murder of SY Rohan, a 17-year-old student. Thelast week rejected their petition forsaying, “Having regard to the gravity of the offence and the material on record, this is not a fit case to grant bail.”BK Ashwin Agni, Jeevan BN, both 18, and a minor boy were arrested for the murder of Rohan. Rohan was in love with a girl from the college in Kadur where he was studying PU. The girl was a relative of the accused boys. Angry over the affair, they conspired to kill Rohan. As per the police version, they took Rohan in a car on July 2, 2018, to an isolated place near Lingadahalli on the Tarikere-Chikkamagaluru State Highway and strangulated him with a veil. They disposed of the body in a forest area.The advocate for the two boys submitted to the HC that “the case is based on circumstantial evidence and to establish the motive, the Investigating Officer has not examined the girl Nayana”. The court was also told that the students were ready to take up the trial.The government advocate pointed out that the dead body was traced at the instance of the accused. The car used in the act was also recovered at the behest of the accused. The Investigating Officer had collected call details between the deceased and the girl and there were also witnesses who had seen the accused and the deceased together on the day of the murder.The HC based its judgement on rejecting the bail petition on the charge sheet.It said, “The charge sheet records prima facie show that on the basis of the alleged voluntary statement of the petitioners the body of the victim was discovered from the forest area. There are statements of the registered owner of the car and the agent regarding the sale of the car to the first petitioner and that car was being used by the first petitioner. The charge sheet records show that the car was recovered at the instance of the petitioners and the foot-mat of the car contained blood stains. The deceased was hardly 16 years old.”
