Gujarat cops raid fake insurance firm in Noida Sector 63, arrest 8

NOIDA: Eight employees of a fake insurance firm ope-rating in H-Block of Sector 63 were arrested on Wednesday by a team of the cyber cell of Ahmedabad police during a raid.The arrested men were allegedly making calls to people in different parts of the country and offering them lucrative insurance policies.The officers seized 21 mobile phones, three CPUs and a file containing some names and contact numbers which police suspect to be of their targets. The building, H-106, belongs to a lawyer who rented it out to the fake firm. Sources said 24 people — including 16 women — were found to be working at the office.While the women were let off, the eight men were arrested. They have been identified Rishikesh Kumar, Imran Mohammed, Shadaab, Devendra Singh, Naveen, Abhishek Raj, Montu and Ganesh. While five of them belong to Ghaziabad, the others are from Noida, Delhi and Bulandshahr.Sources said those arrested were employees and the kingpin is yet to be identified.According to an FIR lodged in Ahmedabad under sections 420 (cheating), 406 (punishment for criminal breach of trust and 120B (criminal conspiracy) of the IPC, the accused cheated Sunil Narayan Mukherjee, an accountant, of around Rs 38 lakh over a period of three years. The fake firm’s employees allegedly called him up in 2016 claiming that an insurance policy of his father, who died in 2007, had matured.“The first call was made in August 2016 from Hyderabad. Mukherjee was told that to get the matured amount, he would have to pay a premium,” the FIR stated.When he asked for the premium amount, the caller later told him that he would have to take a new insurance policy, which he did.However, after paying the amount, a company representative who claimed to be calling from Delhi told Mukherjee that he will also have to pay the VAT for getting the maturity amount. He was told to pay the premium for three years as he could not scrap the policy. In 2019, the firm refused to pay the maturity amount, after which he finally approached police.Phase III SHO Devendra Singh told TOI that a team from Gujarat Police informed Noida police about the presence of the fake company in the city and aid was provided to them. He, however, could not provide details on how long the company had been running in Noida.
