Truckload of poppy straw seized in Ranchi

Ranchi: A truckload of poppy straw (doda), packed in 100 sacks and worth about Rs 40 lakh in the black market, was seized from Namkum police station area here on Monday.Acting on a tip-off, police raided the Sogond forest early in the morning and seized the contraband loaded on the truck but the culprits managed to escape taking advantage of the darkness.Police said the raid is part of their drive in the recent months to prevent illegal sale and transport of poppy and its derivatives in the post-harvest season of the illegal crop. According to police sources, opium is extracted from various parts of the poppy plant and security forces have been conducting drives to destroy the crop since its plantation. However, some illegal farmers managed to covertly harvest the crop and send the contraband to various places where opium is extracted.Ranchi SP (rural) Ashutosh Shekhar said, “The poppy straws are processed to produce opium. Inter-state gangs are involved in promoting cultivation of poppy crop and smuggling after harvest. Different parts of the plant are used to extract opium. Currently, police are focusing on seizing the smuggled parts of the plant.”In the recent drives, police have seized 2,724 kg of poppy straw in March; 3,951 kg in April and 199 kg in May, 2019. In addition, 193 kg of extracted opium have also been seized by police from different parts of state between January and May.Illegal poppy cultivation is widespread in several districts of the state, including Khunti and Chatra, which till recently is considered as mini-Afghanistan of Jharkhand due to extensive cultivation of the illegal crop.Khunti SP Alok said, “Opium cultivation is widespread in Khunti mainly due to the nexus of extremists, smugglers with the local farmers. We start anti-opium drives since the sowing seaon of the crop in September, which continues almost throughout the entire year.”In the first three months of the current year, police carried out multiple raids across the state and destroyed poppy crops planted in over 975 acres of land. Moreover, police also registered 145 cases related to poppy cultivation and arrested 146 people. The figure was higher in 2018 when 237 cases were registered and 301 people were arrested. The number of such cases registered in Chatra and Khunti districts is relatively higher than other districts.
