Trial of Togolese accused of defiling, murdering girl adjourned

The Accra High Court on Tuesday adjourned to Wednesday, July 24, the trial of Lucas Agboyie, a Togolese accused of defiling and murdering a seven-year-old girl at Zenu, near Ashaiman.



This is because of a conference being held for lawyers and judges in Accra.



On July 10, counsel for Lucas, Mr Eric Opoku Brobbey, of the Legal Aid, informed the court that the Accra Psychiatric Hospital has requested to see a relative of the accused, for his mental history to assess his mental capability.



He said it was to ensure that Agboyie was mentally fit to face trial as requested by the court.



Agboyie aka “Sympathy”, “Sky Lover”, Agbey or Gabriel, was convicted by an Accra District Court in April 2017, to stand trial at the High Court for the alleged murder of the girl.



The Prosecution said the victim, Ruth Ankomah, was a pupil of Meshach Academy School at Zenu, Ashiaman.



He said in April, 2015, at about 8am, the girl’s mother prepared porridge and gave GH¢20.00 to her buy bread at a nearby shop.



Prosecution said having waited for some time without Ruth’s return, the mother raised the alarm and searched for the girl, but to no avail.



Prosecution said one Sarah informed the victim’s mother that she saw Agboyie pulling the victim into his metal container.



He said a group of people joined her mother and they went into Agboyie’s container, but could not find him.



However, they found the naked body of the victim lying in a supine position on a student’s mattress with blood oozing from her nostrils and mouth.



Prosecution said Agboyie was nabbed by the search party and he (accused) confessed killing the victim after having sex with her.



He said Agboyie told investigators that he wanted to have sex with the victim, but she kept screaming, so he strangled her after, which he had sex with her.



Prosecution said when the police went to the scene, they saw bruises on the neck of the deceased, with her vagina swollen, while her pants, sandals and dress were lying beside her.



The court heard that wrappers of India hemp, GH¢10.00, a National Health Insurance card, and hospital card bearing the name of one Obeng Oscar, were found at scene.



Prosecution said Agboyie mentioned one Ali Baba, a neighbor, as the one who contracted him to kill the victim.

When the police went to the house of the said Ali Baba, they did not find anybody, but realised the house was occupied by a medical doctor.



Prosecution said the medical doctor told the police that he did not know the accused, adding that an autopsy was conducted on the victim, indicated that the she died as a result of strangulation. – GNA
