Early Christmas present secures Christchurch Santa parade's future

Santa didn't let a little Christchurch drizzle rain on his parade, as thousands flocked to the CBD to see the 2018 event.

The funding problems that have plagued Christchurch's Santa parade for years could soon be over.

The $107,000 annual cost to store 45 floats and hundreds of costumes has been crippling parade organisers, who have struggled in the past to raise enough money to put on the $200,000 plus annual parade.

After years of looking for an alternative affordable building, the Christchurch Children's Christmas Parade Trust will move into the former Christchurch School of Gymnastics (CSG) building at QEII later this year.

DAVID WALKER/STUFF The Christchurch Santa parade is the second largest in the country and attracts about 96,000 each year. It costs more than $200,000 to hold each year.

The trust has been paying $70,000 to rent a warehouse to house its floats. The move is expected to save $68,000 annually.

READ MORE:

* Christchurch Christmas parade to return to the central city

* Christchurch's santa parade gets $35,000 grant to keep running

* Christchurch Santa parade under threat

* Christchurch Christmas parade organisers in battle over funding

Trust chairwoman Anne Jamieson said the new building would allow the trust to put money into new floats and new costumes.

GEORGE HEARD/STUFF Christchurch School of Gymnastics is moving to a state of the art purpose built building elsewhere at QEII Park and is selling its former base to Christchurch Children's Christmas Parade Trust.

"We are ecstatic. For the first time the Santa parade is going to have a home."

The parade, the second largest in New Zealand, has been running for 73 years and attracts 96,000 people each year. It returned to the central city last year for the first time since the earthquakes and would continue on the same Madras St route this year.

Jamieson said the trust planned to eventually open up the building throughout the year so children could look at the floats.

DAVID WALKER/STUFF The Christchurch Children's Christmas Parade Trust will save $68,000 annually by moving to the former Christchurch School of Gymnastics building at QEII later this year.

"We get asked all the time by preschools and kindergartens to come and look but we just couldn't because of health and safety.

"Not all children are lucky enough to be brought to the parade each year to see these floats and characters so to have a facility where they can be alternatively viewed must be a plus."

A Santa's workshop would also be created inside and a space would be set aside for Shirley Boys' High School to establish a trades workshop where students could work on projects and help with the floats.

The trust was buying the former CSG building, which would probably have been demolished, for a nominal amount. CSG has built a new state-of-the-art base at QEII.

The land would be leased from the Christchurch City Council, which has yet to determine the cost of the lease. CSG previously paid about $1100 annually.

The parade was funded solely by donations from several sources including the council and commercial sponsorship.

The trust hoped to reach an agreement with the council over continued financial support.
