[PHOTOS] Kareena Kapoor Khan is back to the bay and paints a pretty picture is this spiffy dress

Check out Kareena Kapoor's latest airport look

Key Highlights Kareena Kapoor Khan is a style icon and there's no denying that We recently spotted the star at Mumbai airport and her latest look is chic and fab We bet this pretty dress will make it to your wardrobe too

Over the years, it's not the runways and magazines but the corridors of the airport that set the trends for the next fashion season. From beautiful kurtas to the most glamorous dresses, Bollywood heroines arrive in spiffy outfits that constantly urge us to upgrade our fashion choices. One heroine who amazes us with her fashion picks is Kareena Kapoor Khan. Kareena's choices have always been edgy, stylish and extremely comfortable.

While we miss spotting Kareena outside the gym, pictures from her trip to London always break the internet. Whether it's chilling in a park along with Taimur or visiting a farm along with Tim Tim, Soha Ali Khan, and Inaaya, Bebo has been dominating our timelines, and we're just as obsessed as netizens.

Kareena is back to the bay for the shoot of her dance reality show, Dance India Dance. And obviously, Bebo's shelling out some fashion goals with her latest look at the airport. She opted for a casual midi -dress by Coco Chanel that she teamed with white converse and black tote bag with D monogrammed on it. She finished her look with a pretty watch and bracelets. With black shades, Kareena pulled her hair back into a fuss-free bun. With soft pink lips and tinted cheeks, Kareena makes such a simple attire look so glamorous.

On the work front, Kareena has been travelling in and out of Mumbai and London, to shoot for her maiden reality show, Dance India Dance along with Bosco and Raftaar. She has been in London for the last few weeks to shoot for her next film, Angrezi Medium along with Irrfan Khan. On the other hand, Kareena's next release is Raj Mehta's Good News also starring Akshay Kumar, Diljit Dosanjh and Kiara Advani in pivotal roles. Produced by Dharma Productions' the film is slotted to release later this year.

That's not all for the diva. Apart from her brand endorsements, Kareena will soon begin filming for Karan Johar's next directorial venture, Takht. The period drama also stars Anil Kapoor, Ranveer Singh, Alia Bhatt, Vicky Kaushal, Janhvi Kapoor and Bhumi Pedenkar. While we wait for more pictures from her DID shoot in Mumbai, stay tuned for all the updates on Kareena Kapoor Khan!
