Govt claims credit for lifting ban on coal mining

Nokmas felicitate CM, MLAs for SC relief

SHILLONG: Chief Minister Conrad Sangma has claimed credit for Supreme Court lifting ban on coal mining in state.

Speaking during a felicitation function on Wednesday organised by the Nokmas of Nongalbibra area in South West Garo Hills for winning the legal battle against NGT ban on coal, the chief minister said the government has achieved what was promised to the people of the state before the election and said that there is no more NGT ban on coal mining in the state.

“During the coal mining ban, the people of the coal mining areas have been made to face hardships and keeping in mind the plight of the people, the government has worked tirelessly to achieve the goal which will enable the state and the people to increase the source of earning and uplift the economy”, he said.

Highlighting the Supreme Court ruling, the chief minister informed the gathering that the government had challenged the NGT ban and the court had passed a historic judgment saying that the land and the minerals belong to the land owners thereby protecting the rights of the tribals.

Lauding the work of the Advocate General Amit Kumar and his legal team, the chief minister said that keeping in the mind the need to protect the natural environment and mining safety, a case was filed in the Supreme Court challenging the NGT ban on coal mining and the team won the legal battle which ultimately resulted in lifting the ban.

While appreciating the ruling of the court, the chief minister informed that illegally extracted coal will be auctioned by the Coal India Limited under the provisions of the MMDR Act.

The chief minister informed that the political will of the present government will bring visible changes to the state and its people.

Stating that the coal deposits in the state are limited, he, however, urged the people of the coal mining areas to invest in other sectors too so that livelihood in the future will not be effected.

The chief minister also thanked the coal dealers’ and miners’ associations of Khasi, Jaintia and Garo Hills district for their support and cooperation in the fight challenging the NGT ban in the Supreme Court.

He, however, urged the miners to respect the need to protect the natural environment.

Earlier, Karnesh N Sangma, president of Daranggre Nokmas Welfare Association, highlighted the plight of the people due to NGT ban on coal mining in the state.

Others who spoke on the occasion included Education Minister Lahkmen Rymbui, Rongara-Siju MLA Rakkam A Sangma, Advocate General Amit Kumar, Vijay Joshi of Gasuapara Coal Exporters Association and Manuel M Sangma, vice president of Daranggre Nokmas Welfare Association.

The associations also presented a memento to the chief minister for winning the legal battle to restore the rights of the tribals in the state.
