Know why you should avoid visiting Pune’s Shaniwarwada Fort on full moon nights

The Shaniwarwada Fort is a landmark site in Pune , known for its historical significance and association with the renowned Bajirao Peshwa. Being a popular destination, tourists often flock to behold the fort that was once the pride of the Maratha Empire. But beware, it is believed to be haunted; it is suggested that you avoid visiting it after sunset.This ancient fort is built of stone and brick, and has high architectural value as well. However, only the stone part of the Wada could survive an attack by the British artillery.After the demise of Baji Rao, his son Balaji Baji Rao aka Nana Saheb took reins of the Maratha Empire in his hands. Nana Saheb had three sons - Madhav Rao, Vishwas Rao and Narayan Rao. When Nana Saheb died in one of the battles, his eldest son Madhav Rao acquired his throne. Unfortunately, the second son of Nana Saheb, Vishwas Rao, also lost his life in a deadly battle.Madhav Rao could not bear the shock of his brother’s untimely death, and therefore, gave up his life. Next in line, Narayan Rao, who was merely a 16-year-old lad then, was made the Peshwa. Since he was too young to look after the state of affairs single-handedly, Narayan Rao was assisted by his wicked-minded uncle Raghunath Rao.It was year 1773; Narayan Rao, the 5th of the Peshwa rulers, was making attempts to demolish all conspiracies against him. He diminished the unjust control of Raghunath Rao over the empire, and put him under house arrest. It was well-known that Narayan Rao did not share a good bonding with the tribe of hunters called Gardi. Raghunath Rao’s spouse Anandi Bai took undue advantage of this fact to play evil. She made her husband Raghunath write a letter to the Gardi head, urging the latter to capture Narayan Rao. However, before sending the letter to the addressed recipient, she skilfully tweaked a word in the letter so as to make it appear like a message to slay Narayan Rao.The tribal chief received the letter and dispatched his men to do the dirty job. The killers entered Narayan Rao’s chamber, waking him up from his sleep. Aghast, Narayan Rao ran for help towards his uncle’s chamber in vain. He was finally caught by the killers, cut into pieces and his body was thrown into the river nearby.According to the general belief held by the locals in Pune, the Wada is also populated with the wandering spirits of people who lost their lives in the fire that engulfed the fort long back.Apparently, for all these reasons, people are discouraged from entering the fort after 6:30 PM. Even now, more so on the full moon nights, the heart-wrenching cries of Narayan Rao, the young prince, can be heard by those who stay close-by. In all likelihood, visiting the Wada on no moon nights is also a no-no.Believe it or not, the story of this fort has caught fancy of many. If you have some ghostbusting goals in mind, visiting Shaniwar Wada feels like a must.
