Neetu Kapoor thinks FaceApp is exaggerated, shares Rishi Kapoor's childhood and current pictures

While the entire wolrd is going gaga over FaceApp, which generates highly realistic transformations of faces in photographs, Neetu Singh finds it "exaggerated". The veteran actress, who is currently accompanying her husband Rishi Kapoor who is recuperating from cancer in New York, proved it by sharing childhood and current pictures of the actor.

Neetu Kapoor took to Instagram to share a comparision of Rishi Kapoor's childhood and current faces. She wrote, "This pic proves Faceapp is so exaggerated."

Of late, FaceApp has become quite popular among netizens. People are using it to know how they will look when they will get old. The app became a massive hit among Bollywood celebrities who shared their old age pictures generated by the app on social media. From Varun Dhawan to Arjun Kapoor, many stars used the app to get a glimpse of their future self.

The app, developed by Russian company Wireless Lab, also attracted controversies as many claim that it raises privacy concerns. People have concerns with a clause in terms and conditions of FaceApp. This clause says users give FaceApp "a perpetual, irrevocable, nonexclusive, royalty-free, worldwide, fully-paid, transferable sub-licensable license" to use photos they upload. There is also a rumour that the app not only uploads the photo on which you are applying age filter into its servers but also all other photos from your phone.

It's been more than ten months since Rishi Kapoor has been in New York for his cancer treatment. In September last year, the actor flew to Big Apple with his wife Neetu. From Priyanka Chopra and Aamir Khan to Shah Rukh Khan and Anupam Kher, many Bollywood celebs have paid a visit to the veteran actor in the city.

The actor, who is away from camera for a long time now, can't wait to get back to work and says that he has never been away from films for this long. In a recent interview with Bombay Times, the actor said, "I can't wait to face the camera again, I hope I haven't lost my touch. I hope I am still an actor. I will be coming back to India after a year of not working in films."

The actor also revealed that many filmmakers are enquiring about his return but he is not committing to any project right now.

Rishi Kapoor's last film Jhootha Kahin Ka was recently released and has received negative reviews from critics. The actor shot for the film before he left for his cancer treatment.

ALSO READ | Rishi Kapoor on returning to films: I hope I haven't lost my touch and am still an actor

ALSO READ | Rishi Kapoor on cancer treatment: It has been 9 months and 16 days. I really miss home

ALSO READ | Rishi Kapoor on cancer: I had lost 26kg as I had no appetite for the first four months
