Police continue drive to dig out skeleton of woman, murdered around 8 years ago

SAMBALPUR: Police on Wednesday continued its drive to dig out the skeleton of the widow, Jayashree Mishra, who was murdered by her relative around 8 years ago Jayashree Mishra had gone missing while she had gone to distribute invitation card of her elder daughter's marriage and subsequently, the family member lodged a missing complaint with the town police station in Sambalpur on October 13, 2011. However, on July 21 this year, Jayashree's younger daughter, Bijayani Mishra lodged a written complaint with the town police station that her mother had been murdered by one Basanta Panda of Badsinghari under Burla police limits. She also alleged that the accused had buried the body of her mother. Subsequently, police launched fresh investigation and arrested the accused on July 22. The accused confessed the crime and based on his confession, the police have been searching the body since Monday.On other hand, deceased Jayashree's daughter, Bijayani, whose quest led to the unravelling of the murder, is hopeful that the body will be found soon and the case will be taken to a logical end.A PhD scholar of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU), New Delhi, Bijayani said, after my mother went missing, the people and my relatives humiliated my family presuming that my mother had eloped with someone. They fabricated stories about my mother and never hesitated to pour invective on my family. No one came forward for our help. I had several times visited the police station to know about my mother. But the police officials also humiliated me and sent me back from the police station telling that my mother had eloped. They didn't even investigate the matter. But I knew my mother. She was most wonderful woman in the earth.Though the people and the relative cast aspersion on the family, Bijayani did not give up. She continued her fight to bring the truth to the light. She did everything whatever she could do. She met many senior police officers but she could achieve nothing as none of them took the matter seriously.During this period, despite the adversity, Bijayani cracked JNU entrance and took admission in MPhil program there in 2013. She continued her study there but the aspersion, the society had cast on her family, was haunting her. She did not forget her mother for a moment. Though she was in New Delhi, she was regularly, making calls to the police officers here to know the status of the investigation and every time, she was getting the same answer, 'the investigation is underway'.However, on April 22, this year, Bijayani filed an RTI application seeking status of investigation, following which she could know that the police had done nothing. In the meantime, she also got call on her mobile from unknown persons that her mother had been murdered by Basanta Panda. Subsequently, she filed a petition with the Director General of Police, following which the investigation gained momentum and the truth came to fore.Bijayani said, had the police taken the matter seriously when I lodged complaint about my mother's disappearance, the situation would have been different. But now I am happy as the truth came to fore. It will silence the people who were gossiping about my mother on our back. But my struggle will not end here. I will be satisfied when the case would reach to its logical end, she said.
