‘Never attempt Kargil again’: Army chief Bipin Rawat warns Pakistan a day before war anniversary

Indian Army Chief General Bipin Rawat | Photo Credit: ANI

Srinagar: A day ahead of the 20th anniversary of Kargil Vijay Diwas, Indian Army chief General Bipin Rawat on Thursday warned Pakistan against attempting any such misadventure in the future. Speaking in Jammu and Kashmir’s Drass region, General Rawat expressed confidence that the enemy will never attempt any such thing again.

"I am quite sure the adversary will never attempt this again. This (Kargil War) was a big misadventure by Pakistan Army in 1999... My warning to Pakistan is, do not ever attempt such a misadventure anytime in future," the Army chief said in no uncertain terms.

Commenting on Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s recent remarks that the February 14 Pulwama terror attack was “indigenous” and that his country was not involved, General Rawat said India is aware of the facts on the incident.

“We are aware of the truth. So, we don't have to get carried away by any statement. The truth is known to us and our establishment,” the Army chief told reporters.

He added that Indian intelligence agencies have enough proof of what conspired in Pulwama attack, in which 40 personnel of the Central Reserve Police Force were killed. Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terror group had claimed responsibility for the deadly attack.

The Pulwama terror attack had triggered an unprecedented spike in tensions between India and Pakistan. On February 27, the Indian Air Force carried out pre-dawn air strikes in Pakistan’s Balakot, where JeM was running a massive terror camp.

A day later, Pakistani Air Force jets attempted to violate Indian air space and dropped four bombs when they were chased away by IAF jets.

The Army chief’s remarks have come a day before India marks 20 years of success in the Kargil war of 1999, when terrorists aided by Pakistan Army had infiltrated into Indian territory and captured heights.

India had launched Operation Vijay to claim its territory back and it culminated successfully on July 26. The day ever since is celebrated as Kargil Vijay Diwas.
