Dehradun: 5 boys flee homes after being barred from playing PUBG; rescued from Delhi

a three-member team was formed to crack the case. | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Two of these boys were found at a restaurant where they were looking for work Rest three were found at the Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station The police noticed that five of the cases were of the same locality and sons of these families were missing

Dehradun: As many as five boys left their respective homes after their parents denied them to play online video games like PUBG and Free Fire. The boys were aged between 11 and 15-year-old one of them was Class 10 student and rest were Class 7 students. After a thorough investigation, the accused were rescued by the police from the national capital on Wednesday.

The issue came to light after five separate complaints were lodged with the Rajpur city police between July 11 and July 22. In all these complaints, the parents of the children claimed that their son had been missing for the past two few days. The police noticed that five of the cases were of the same locality and in every case, the sons of the family were missing.

According to a report, when the cops interrogated the families and asked if something prompted the boys to flee from home, all of them had the same answer that they stopped them from playing online video games.

Superintendent of the city police, Shweta Choubey said that the parents initially checked with their relatives and friends and when they realised that the boys had not gone there, they approached the local police. Following multiple complaints lodged at the station, a three-member team was formed to crack the case. Choubey added that the minors had tried to communicate their relatives and friends and working on these initial clues, the police traced the boys in the capital.

Reportedly, two of these boys were found at a restaurant where they were looking for work and rest three were found at the Hazrat Nizamuddin railway station. However, the boys were returned to the family members after completing the rescue operation.

Youth scolds younger brother for playing PUBG, stabbed with scissors

In a case reported from Thane, Maharashtra a minor allegedly murdered his elder brother after the latter scolded him for playing PUBG. The deceased was a 19-year-old who was attacked by a pair of scissors. The incident came to light on June 29 this year.

Reportedly, when the victim asked his brother to no play PUBG on his phone, the duo indulged in a heated argument. In a fit of rage, the 15-year-old accused allegedly banged his brother's head against the wall and started stabbing him with scissors. The deceased was immediately rushed to the hospital but the doctors declared him brought dead on arrival.

However, the accused has been booked under Section 302 (punishment of murder) of the Indian Penal Code.


