TMC councillor present when students, professor attacked in West Bengal’s Hooghly by party supporters

TMC councillor was present at the spot | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Subrata Chattopadhyay, Professor of Nabagram Hiralal Paul College in Konnagar said he had sustained injuries on my face and head CCTV footage confirmed the presence of TMC councilor at the spot where the clash took place TMC state chief Trinankur Bhattacharya said he doesn't know if the student who thrashed the teacher belongs to their student union

Kolkata: It is now clear without doubt that a Trinamool Congress councillor was present when students and a college professor were thrashed by a union member of Trinamool Chhatra Parishad (TMCP) in West Bengal's Hooghly district.

The students were forced to chant “Mamata Banerjee Zindabad” and “Trinamool Zindabad” and when a professor tried to mediate a ruckus between them he was thrashed by students belonging to TMC students union.

A CCTV footage accessed by Times Now confirmed the presence of TMC councillor at the spot where the clash was reported.

Subrata Chattopadhyay, Professor of Nabagram Hiralal Paul College in Konnagar said he had sustained injuries on my face and head. He further said that he will lodge a police complaint at Uttarpara police station.

“The student union members always behave in an unruly manner but I can't name them. If I do so I will not be able to step in the campus," he told IANS.

The professor said that student union members had behaved rudely with senior female students of the college after which he tried to intervene along with other teachers to resolve the issue.

"While they apologised, the union members asked them to utter 'Mamata Banerjee Zindabad' and 'Trinamool Zindabad'. Our students denied, for which one girl student of MA was slapped," IANS quoted Chattopadhyay as saying.

Rejecting the professors’ claim, TMC state chief Trinankur Bhattacharya said he doesn't know if the student who thrashed the teacher belongs to their student union.

Condemning the acts, he said the party is inquiring into the matter adding that people who are at fault will definitely be punished.

Recently, at least four students of Kalyani College in Nadia suffered serious injuries after a fight broke out between ABVP and TMC students. After the fight, student leaders from both sides blamed each other of violence on the campus lodging police complaints against each other.

The fight broke out after a group of ABVP supporters allegedly started removing TMCP flags from the campus. This led to the students from TMC to retaliate with bombs and other weapons.

Both sides also blamed each other for bringing in outsiders to create trouble on the campus.

According to eyewitnesses, a large number of outsiders started stone pelting while others entered the campus and hurled crude bombs in the presence of cops.

Students from both the union had been wooing freshers who had arrived at the college for seeking admission.
