Parineeti Chopra: I won't take up films with easy roles

Bollywood

Parineeti Chopra

Jabariya Jodi

Ishaqzaade

After delivering back-to-back flops like Daawat-e-Ishq, Kill Dil, Meri Pyaari Bindu and Namaste London,actressis waiting for that one solo hit film under her name. After facing constant failure, Parineeti had even taken a break from the film industry. She returned after almost one-and-a-half years and her new positive attitude has become the talk of the town.In a chat with NBT, she touched upon various topics such as why she agreed to do, the impact of films on Indian society and her new decision to only do roles that she has not done before."'Jabariya' means 'forced' and anything which is done with force is not good. We are spreading the same message through our film (Jabariya Jodi). In real life, God has decided to pair me up with the film industry; otherwise, I would have been working in a bank somewhere. I was working in London and I was even satisfied there, but fate brought me to Mumbai and I landed in the film industry. I am paired with different actors in different films, but this is the pairing (Parineeti and film industry) which I enjoy the most.""Before hearing the script I did not know that the concept of kidnapping grooms and getting them married forcefully exists in our country. We live in Mumbai and think that our country is progressing, but when I come across such stories, it shocks me. When I talked to Ekta (Kapoor), she told me that she wants to make a film based on this concept. I thought it is a serious issue and this film will be like her previous film Lipstick Under My Burkha, which was like a documentary. But when we came together for the narration of the film, I was laughing uncontrollably. In this film, we have highlighted the grave issues of dowry and groom kidnapping with a comic twist, which will entertain the audience, as well as educate them.""Our film is based in Patna, but the entire film is shot in Lucknow. The Uttar Pradesh government supported us a lot. It was difficult to travel all the way from Patna to Bihar with 300 people. Due to some logistical constraints, we had to shoot the entire film in Lucknow itself. So, we did a little cheating here. This is my third film which I have shot in Lucknow. Before Jabariya Jodi,and Daawat-e-Ishq were also shot here.""I have made a new rule for myself now. If I am the 'perfect casting' for a particular film, then I don't want to do it. Being the perfect casting means that people have already attached various expectations from me, or that they have seen me in a similar role previously, and hence, are offering me the role. If someone wants to cast me for such a role where they are not sure about whether I can do it, then I will accept that role as a challenge. I want to surprise and shock the audience with such different roles."

Saina Nehwal

The Girl On The Train

"I feel getting cast in the Saina Nehwal biopic is the first step towards my new rule. Being cast for the role of a sportsperson was something new for me. Someone who always plays the typical sweet girl role will now portray a national level sportsperson, who roars like a lion every time she steps into the court and wins matches for her country. On the other hand, in the Hindi remake of the film The Girl On The Train, I am playing an alcoholic and oppressed girl. Both these roles are new and challenging for me."

"I feel films have a huge impact on the society. Films have played a very important role in changing and shaping the Indian mentality because we are a very emotional lot. People learn from films. They try to look and dress up like film stars, and play filmy songs on every occasion. Films are way too connected to our lives, and even though it takes time, films play an important part in changing the society that we live in. I even have a few examples. If our film Jabariya Jodi informs atleast five people about how wrong the dowry system is and changes them, then I'll consider the film successful."
