Tremors hit Palghar district of Maharashtra, one killed

A man was killed in a house collapse as four tremors shook parts of Palghar district in Maharashtra in the early hours of Thursday, officials said.

At least half a dozen tremors of magnitude 3 or more have been recorded in the district, which is close to Mumbai, so far in July.

On Thursday, a tremor of magnitude 3.8 was felt at 1.03 am across Dahanu and Talsari tehsils, followed by another of magnitude 3.6 at 1.15 am, said district disaster management cell chief Vivekanand Kadam.

Two more tremors of 2.9 and 2.8 magnitude were recorded in Dahanu, Talsari and Boisar areas between 1.03 am and 1.15 am.

The series of tremors caused panic in the area, he added.

Rishya Meghwale (55) was killed when a cement pillar of his cattle shed collapsed in Vasavlapada village of Dahanu, tehsildar (tehsil revenue official) Rahul Sarang said.

Meghawale's wife was injured in the incident.

District guardian minister Ravindra Chavan visited the village, accompanied by district collector Kailas Shinde and Talasari MLA Pascal Dhanare, and met family members of Meghwale.

The family was provided aid of Rs 4 lakh immediately, Shinde said.

On Wednesday, a tremor of 2.8 magnitude had been recorded in Palghar, Kadam said.

In all, seven mild quakes have been recorded in the district since Wednesday, he said.

The epicenter of Thursday's tremors was near Dundalwadi village, he said.

People found it difficult to move out of their houses as it was raining heavily when the tremors were felt, the official said. In some places, people took shelter in makeshift tents.

While some school buildings and houses developed cracks due to the tremors, no major damage to property was reported in the area, officials said.

Dahanu tehsil has been experiencing tremors since November last year, most of them centered around Dundalwadi.

In February, when tremors were recorded, a two-year- old girl died after suffering a fall and hitting her head on a stone when people ran out of houses in panic.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
