Nirmala Sitharaman not the first Indian politician to fly in Sukhoi-30 - They too took off in fighter jet

Jodhpur: Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman waves before flying in an IAF's Sukhoi-30 MKI plane, in Jodhpur on Wednesday | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: Defence Minister Nirmala Sitharaman on Wednesday undertook a sortie in the Indian Air Force's frontline combat jet Sukhoi-30 MKI in the western sector of Rajasthan.

After Sachin, Dhoni and Pratibha Patil, Defence Minister Sitharaman flies Sukhoi-30 aircraft

The country's first woman defence minister described the 30-minute sortie as "wonderful".

Prior to the sortie, the minister was briefed by the pilot. She also familiarised herself with the formidable fighter jet and its cockpit.

Sitharaman today became the second woman politician to fly in a Su-30 fighter jet.

WATCH: Nirmala Sitharaman becomes the first full-time woman Defence Minister to fly in a Sukhoi-30 MKI

Here is a list of political leaders who earlier flew in the Sukhoi 30 fighter jets of the Indian Air Force:

APJ Abdul Kalam -- When then President APJ Abdul Kalam flew in a Su-30 in June 2003, he became the first head of state in India to fly in a fighter aircraft. Kalam, who was an eminent scientist, had flown the plane along with his co-pilot, and later said he became a scientist only because he could not become a pilot. He was 74 years old at the time.

George Fernandes -- In June 2003, then Defence Minister George Fernandes put on the flying suit and took off in a Su-30 fighter jet from Lohegaon Air Force Station near Pune. He was 73 years old at the time.

Pratibha Devisingh Patil -- Then President Pratibha Patil flew in a Su-30 in November 2009 from the Indian Air Force Base in Lohegaon.

Rao Inderjit Singh -- Then Minister of State for Defence, Rao Inderjit Singh flew in a Su-30 from Hindon air base, near Delhi, in August 2015.

Rajiv Pratap Rudy -- The BJP leader, who is a trained pilot, flew a Su-30 in February 2015 at the Aero India show in Bengaluru.

Kiren Rijiju -- The Minister of State for Home flew in a Su-30 from Halwara airbase in Punjab in May 2016.

Sukhoi-30 MKI is a nuclear-capable aircraft which can penetrate deep into enemy territory.


