Kargil Vijay Diwas: Vicky Kaushal announces the free screening of Uri: The Surgical Strike across Maharashtra

It was 20 years ago on this very day that India won the Kargil War against Pakistan. Hence, this day was declared as Kargil Vijay Diwas. As the nation commemorates the special day, Vicky Kaushal and makers of Uri: The Surgical Strike gave a special gift to their fans. The film based on the 2016 Surgical Strike on terrorist camps in Pakistan by Indian Army is all set to hit the screens again today and in Maharashtra, the film will be screened free of charge. Vicky took to social media to announce the same.

In a post, Vicky shared a still from the film in which we can see him as Vihaan Shergill. Clad in the army uniform along with the soldiers of the Indian force, Vicky and his team took portrayed the Surgical Strike on-screen in Aditya Dhar’s Uri: The Surgical Strike. The film is one of the biggest blockbusters of 2019 and received an overwhelming response across the world. The story of Indian army destroying the terrorist camps in Pakistan was hailed across the country and Vicky’s dialogue, “How’s the Josh?’ kept resonating for weeks.

(Also Read: Vicky Kaushal starrer URI: The Surgical Strike to re release on THIS date; Read details)

Vicky captioned the still as, “Happy and honoured to share that our Film #UriTheSurgicalStrike will be re-released only for today, July 26th, to commemorate ‘Kargil Vijay Diwas’. It will be screened for free in 500 theatres across Maharashtra. Extremely thankful to the Maharashtra State Government for their support and encouragement to this initiative by @rsvpmovies. Jai Hind.”

Check it out:

Meanwhile, Uri: The Surgical Strike received rave reviews and Vicky’s acting in the film was lauded. Directed by Aditya Dhar, the film was produced by Ronni Screwvala and is one of the most successful films of 2019. The film also starred Yami Gautam, Paresh Rawal, Mohit Raina and Mansi Parekh in pivotal roles. The film grossed over Rs 342 crore worldwide.
