Redmi 64MP camera phone, Mi A3, Poco F2 and other Xiaomi phones expected to launch in India this year

Xiaomi India has already launched several smartphones this year. For Xiaomi India 2019 started with the Redmi Note 7 series that includes the Redmi Note 7, the Redmi Note 7 Pro and the Redmi Note 7S (available just in India). The latest Note series was then followed by several other smartphones like the Redmi 7, Redmi Go, among others. The most recent smartphones from the company in India are the Redmi K20 Pro and the Redmi K20. Both these Redmi K series phones are already selling in some parts of the world including India. Recently, Xiaomi also launched its third-generation Android One smartphone aka the Mi A3 in Spain but it is yet to come to India.

We expect Xiaomi to launch the Mi A3 Android One phone in a few months in India. However, the company hasn't revealed any details about the India launch of the Mi A3 yet. Meanwhile, Xiaomi VP and India Managing Director Manu Jain has teased a 64MP camera Redmi phone. This means the Redmi 64MP camera phone is coming to India alongside China. Redmi GM Lu Weibing has confirmed the Redmi 64MP camera phone and posted some camera samples shot with it.

Alongside the Redmi 64MP camera phone there are several other smartphones that Xiaomi is preparing to launch in India soon. Let's take a quick look at everything Xiaomi can bring to India this year.

Redmi 64MP camera phone: First the phone that the company has confirmed. As noted earlier Manu Jain has already teased the Redmi 64MP camera phone in India. This means the Redmi 64MP camera phone is coming to India soon. The company is yet to reveal the India launch details of the phone. All we know so far that the Redmi 64MP camera phone will include four cameras on the back where the primary camera will use a 64MP sensor, most likely the latest 64MP Samsung sensor. The other camera details are still unknown.

The company has been posting several camera samples shot with the Redmi 64MP camera phone. Redmi GM also posted a screenshot of the camera UI of the Redmi 64MP camera phone and it shows that there's a 64MP mode right above the shutter button. The Redmi 64MP camera phone is said to shoot pictures in 16MP resolution in default. Meanwhile, Realme and Samsung have also confirmed to launch a 64MP camera smartphone but it is believed that Redmi will be the first smartphone company to launch a 64MP camera phone. The Redmi 64MP camera phone is expected to first launch in China then followed by India in the months to come.

Mi A3: Xiaomi has already launched the Mi A3 - the company's third Android One phone -- in Spain. Considering the company has launched the first two Android One phones in India we believe the Mi A3 will also come to the country very soon. As of now, there are no official words from the company on the India launch of the Mi A3.

We expect Xiaomi to bring the same international model of the Mi A3 to India as well. The Mi A3 comes packed with a 6.088-inch OLED display that offers a screen resolution of 1520x720 pixels. It is powered by Snapdragon 665 processor. This is the first smartphone to come with this Qualcomm processor. In the international market, the phone comes in two variants -- 4GB/64GB and 4GB RAM/ 128GB.

On the rear panel, the Mi A3 includes three cameras. The primary camera uses a 48MP sensor with an aperture size of f/1.79, secondary 8MP wide-angle camera sensor and third is a 2MP depth sensor. For selfies the Mi A3 brings a 32MP sensor on the front. There's a waterdrop notch where the camera sits. The Mi A3 comes packed with a massive 4030mAh battery. On the software front the phone runs Google's Android One software this means expect no Ads or third-party apps.



Poco F2: Will the Poco F2 launch at all? Well, some rumours say it will while others say it will not. The Poco F1 that launched in India last year gained wide popularity. In fact, it is still one of the most popular phones available under Rs 20,000 in the country right now. As of now, there are no official details on the launch of the Poco F2 but considering the Poco F1 was so successful we believe Xiaomi may not discontinue the Poco brand as some analysts at IDC predict. After the launch of the Redmi K20 Pro with Snapdragon 855 some rumours suggest that the Poco F2 may launch with Snapdragon 855 Plus and will price lesser than the Redmi K20 Pro. Right now, there's a lot of confusion on when or whether Poco will launch the Poco F2 in India or not.

Redmi 7 Pro: This is the only Redmi '7' series phone left for Xiaomi to launch in India. The company has already launched the Redmi Note 7, Redmi Note 7S, Redmi Note 7 Pro, Redmi 7, and Redmi 7A. Considering the Redmi 6 Pro was launched last year and gained wide popularity we believe there's definitely a successor device and it will undoubtedly be called the Redmi 7 Pro. For now, there's not a lot we know about the Redmi 7 Pro but believe the company will follow the Redmi 6 Pro philosophy for the 7 Pro, until Xiaomi decides to change its game plan. This means the Redmi 7 Pro will bridge the gap between the Redmi 7 and the Redmi Note 7S in India. It will have better specs and a higher price than the Redmi 7.

Redmi Note 8 series: Xiaomi launched the Redmi Note 5 series beginning last year and ended 2018 with the Redmi Note 6 series. If Xiaomi follows this same strategy this year as well then there's a Redmi Note 8 coming later this year. For now, there's no information about the Redmi Note 8 from the company but most definitely the Note 8 series will be much improved over the Redmi Note 7 series that's selling like hot cakes in the country right now.
