GoI must wait for SC’s verdict on Art 35A, Art 370: Omar

GoI must wait for SC’s verdict on Art 35A, Art 370: Omar

Says Kashmir gripped with anxiety in wake of unwarranted, intimidatory threats on articles

SRINAGAR, July 25: National Conference vice president Omar Abdullah today said the Government of India (GoI) should repose its faith in the apex court of the country and refrain from bullying the people of the state with the unwarranted and intimidatory threats of annihilating the Article 35A and Article 370.

He was addressing a workers' convention in Eidgah constituency in Srinagar. Omar said the untenable advisories emanating from the administration have created fear psychosis in the state in particular the Kashmir region.

“People in the valley are going through anxiety in wake of the rumour mongering set afloat by the administration. Whosoever goes to government offices is being warned to stock necessary household items and other edibles before August 15. What is worrisome is that the rumours are being set afloat by the people in administration itself. The rumour mongering has created panicky and fear psychosis among the people,” he said.

Omar alleged that people are being told to stock ration, fill their automobiles, and switch to land lines. The news that the police stations have been told to acquire bulldozers is also keeping the rumour mill churning. People have become anxious. What is it that the present government wants to achieve by spreading such rumours, he asked.

Party vice President said the GoI and the state administration is boasting about improvement in the situation in the state following a steep decline in the militant attacks, stone pelting in the valley. “But on the other hand undue rumours are being spread by the administration itself that the state will once again be on fire after August 15. What is it that the Government of India and the state wants to achieve by bullying people? It is not New Delhi that suffers whenever situation is difficult in the state. It is the people of Kashmir that bear the direct brunt of tumultuous situation. The statements emanating from union ministers, hinting towards the abrogation of Article 35A after the August 15, have also kept the rumour mills churning. The people are becoming restive," he said.

Omar said the petitions pertaining to Article 35A and Article 370 are sub-judice and that the GoI should wait for the final verdict. “Do they not believe in the final decree of the supreme court of India. Contrary to the disdain the incumbent central government has for the rule of law and the procedures established by the law of country, our party has reposed its faith in the Supreme Court. The matter is sub-judice, therefore, it should be kept aloof from politicking. I would appeal GOI to refrain from commenting on the issue unless the final verdict comes,” he said.

Party vice president was very vocal in his attack on the forces attacking the integrity of the state. “Today we are hearing that the state will be trifurcated. However let me make it very clear that any misadventure in this direction will set the state on fire. Any anticipated trifurcation of the state won’t limit itself to regions. Any whimsical attempt to trifurcate the state will eventually divide the state on religious lines. In those circumstances the state will be divided on Hindu, Muslim and Buddhist lines,” he said.

NC president further questioned the motives of New Delhi. "What do they want to suggest? Do they want to assert that the people’s decision of joining the union of India was wrong? Do they want to suggest that the “two nation theory” is right? Do they mean the struggle of Sher-e-Kashmir against two nation theory was wrong? Do they mean that the slogan of Sher-e-Kashmir on Hindu-Muslim unity was erroneous? If yes, then let them come forward and make it public. As far as our party is concerned we reject any idea of dividing the state on religious and regional lines," he said.
