[PICS] On Vijay Diwas, park constructed in Karnataka to remember sacrifice of Kargil War heroes

A park dedicated to Indian soldiers has been constructed in Karnataka's Shivamogga | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The park has been constructed within 15 days The entire country is celebrating Kargil Vijay Diwas on Friday The park is dedicated to Indian soldiers who lost their lives in Kargil War

Bengaluru: As the entire country is celebrating Kargil Vijay Diwas on Friday, a park has been constructed in Karnataka’s Shivamogga in fond memories of Kargil war heroes.

The park, which is dedicated to Indian soldiers who lost their lives in the 1999 armed conflict, will be inaugurated today on the occasion of 20th anniversary of Kargil War. Several statues of Indian soldiers have been placed inside the park to recreate 'Operation VIJAY’.

The park has been constructed jointly by Shivamogga District Collectorate and Shilpakala Academy in Bengaluru within 15 days.

Karnataka: A park dedicated to Indian soldiers has been constructed in Shivamogga that will be inaugurated today on the occasion of #KargilVijayDiwas. pic.twitter.com/V5IQAkCtNY — ANI (@ANI) July 26, 2019

"There is no such park like this in Shivamogga. The construction of this park is completed in 15 days. This park will inspire those want to serve in the armed forces," a hawaldar who served in the Indian Army for 15 years was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

The year 2019 marks the 20th anniversary of Kargil War, also known as ‘Operation VIJAY’ that took place in the high-altitude Kargil district of Jammu and Kashmir between May and July 1999. On June 26, 1999, the Indian Army successfully recaptured all Indian posts in Kargil which had been occupied by Pakistan military, bringing the conflict to an end. Since then, June 26 is celebrated as Kargil Vijay Diwas across the country every year to commemorate India's victory in the war against Pakistan.

Earlier today, President Ram Nath Kovind hailed the "grit and valour of those who defended India", while Prime Minister Narendra Modi paid tribute to the Indian soldiers, saying, "this day reminds of the courage, bravery, and dedication of our soldiers who favoured all in the defence of the motherland. Jai Hindi."

"On Kargil Vijay Diwas, a grateful nation acknowledges the gallantry of our Armed Forces on the heights of Kargil in 1999. We salute the grit and valour of those who defended India and record our everlasting debt to those who never returned. Jai Hind," the President wrote on Twitter.

PM Modi shared throwback photos of his visit to Kargil and said that visit to Kargil and interactions with soldiers were unforgettable.

“During the Kargil War in 1999, I had the opportunity to go to Kargil and show solidarity with our brave soldiers. This was the time when I was working for my Party in J&K as well as Himachal Pradesh. The visit to Kargil and interactions with soldiers are unforgettable,” he tweeted.

During the Kargil War in 1999, I had the opportunity to go to Kargil and show solidarity with our brave soldiers.



This was the time when I was working for my Party in J&K as well as Himachal Pradesh.



The visit to Kargil and interactions with soldiers are unforgettable. pic.twitter.com/E5QUgHlTDS — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) July 26, 2019

Meanwhile, several events are also planned in Delhi and Dras in Jammu and Kashmir by the Indian Army for the anniversary celebrations.

This year, the 20th anniversary of victory in ‘Operation VIJAY’ is being celebrated with the theme ‘Remember, Rejoice and Renew’.
