Rajkummar Rao feels that director Anurag Basu is a magician - find out why

Rajkummar Rao is shooting for Anurag Basu's film with Fatima Sana Sheikh | Photo Credit: Instagram

Rajkummar Rao, an actor known for his brilliant work in movies such as Aligarh and Trapped is currently shooting for his next project under the direction of Anurag Basu. The film will also feature Dangal star, Fatima Sana Sheikh. According to the reports, the actors are currently shooting for the film in Bhopal.

In a recent interview with Deccan Chronicle, when he was asked about working with Basu, Rao said, “It was great and something new. I feel Anurag Basu is a genius, he is a magician as he can transform the actors into something different,” (Also Read: Katrina Kaif and Aamir Khan have an ongoing ‘bet’ and it has a Salman Khan connection – details inside)

He also said, “I am fortunate to collaborate with him in two films. The kind of sensibility that he shows on-screen is something not many people can do. I don’t want to reveal much about my character. Just wait for the right time.”

Rajkummar Rao made his Bollywood debut with Love Sex Aur Dhokha (2010) and had his breakthrough with Shahid (2012). He then went on to work in movies such as Queen, Fanney Khan, Bareilly Ki Barfi, Omerta and many more. His versatility and honesty with the character that he plays can be seen in all of his movies. This is the reason behind him earning the admiration from the fans.

When Rajkummar Rao was asked about his upcoming projects, he said, “I want every year to be mine. 2018 has been great and I have some great ones lined up in 2019. All my films are different from each other and as an actor, I want to give something to our industry which will be remembered forever,” (Also read: Anushka Sharma opens up about working with difficult people in Bollywood)

Rajkummar’s recent project, Ek Ladki Ko Dekha Toh Aisa Laga will be hitting the screens on February 1. The movie was directed by Shelly Chopra Dhar. It also features, Anil Kapoor, Sonam Kapoor, and Juhi Chawla.
