62 personalities write open letter on 49 other celebrities' 'selective outrage' against Modi government

Actor Kangana Ranaut and filmmaker Madhur Bhandarkar

Key Highlights 62 personalities including Kangana Ranaut, Madhur Bhandarkar, Prasoon Joshi have hit back at 49 others who questioned PM Modi over mob lynching incidents. These They have raised 12 instances that include temple vandalisaion, arrest for chanting 'Jai Shri Ram'when the others were allegedly silent. Those who had questioned PM Modi included Adoor Gopalkrishnan, Mani Ratnam, Anurag Kashyap, Binayak Sen, Soumitro Chatterjee, Aparna Sen, Konkana Sen Sharma, Revathy, Shyam Benegal, Shubha Mudgal, to name a few.

Mumbai: Two days after filmmaker Aparna Sen along with 49 other eminent personalities wrote an open letter alleging that hate crimes against minorities and Dalits are on the rise in the country, 62 personalities including actor Kangana Ranaut have shot a counter letter on "selective outrage" against the PM Modi-led NDA dispensation.

In the letter, the 62 personalities termed the earlier open letter of 49 others as "an attempt to foist false narrative" with an aim to "tarnish" India's image at international level by portraying PM Modi-led NDA government's efforts in the negative light.

In the open letter, these personalities have asked why the 49 eminent personalities were silent "When tribals and marginalised became victims of Naxal terror, why did they didn't speak when separatists issued dictates to burn Kashmir's school, or when the demand for dismembering India - tukde tukde - were made."

Accusing the 49 others of "bartering" the freedom, unity, and integrity of India in the name of freedom of speech and expression, the signatories claimed that for them the former was "sacrosanct" and anyone who questions these values will be resisted.

The 62 personalities include actor Kangana Ranaut, lyricist Prasoon Joshi, classical dancer and MP Sonal Mansingh, instrumentalist Pandit Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, filmmakers Madhur Bhandarkar, and Vivek Agnihotri among others.

Those who had written the letter questioning PM Modi over the alleged rising "communal" incidents in the country included, social activists, filmmakers and artists like Adoor Gopalkrishnan, Mani Ratnam, Anurag Kashyap, Binayak Sen, Soumitro Chatterjee, Aparna Sen, Konkana Sen Sharma, Revathy, Shyam Benegal, Shubha Mudgal, Rupam Islam, Anupam Roy, Parambrata, Riddhi Sen to name a few.

Notably, the letter raises 12 instances when these 49 personalities, who raised deep concern over the growing trend of lynching by a mob in this country, were allegedly silent. These instances include the political violence in West Bengal, the arrest of those who chanted "Jai Shri Ram" in presence of Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee, the vandalisation of temples in Kaliachak, Deganga, Badhuria, Raniganj, and the recent incident of Chandni Chowk in Delhi.

The letter further mentions the passage of ordinance on triple talaq - which is being opposed in the Rajya Sabha where the number of the ruling dispensation is not in majority - and asks why the 49 personalities don't speak on the need of equality and women empowerment.

Poet Binayak Bandopadhyay who is a signatory on the letter while speaking to Times Now categorically said that the 49 personalities who wrote the open letter don't think that an alternative discourse exists in this country.








