Pune Police arrest uncle for rape, murder of two-year-old girl found in canal

The child's body was found in a canal, said police (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Locals discovered the child's body in a canal on July 23 Pimpri-Chinchwad Police have arrested the accused, a relative of the victim The child's parents are labourers and worked at a construction site in Sanghavi

Pune: The Pimpri-Chinchwad Police, on Thursday, arrested a man on charges of rape and murder of a two-and-a-half-year-old child who was abducted from her home on July 22. Officials familiar with the investigation said that the accused is a distant relative of the victim and kidnapped her from her home in a labour camp in Pune's Sanghavi area.

After he kidnapped her on Monday night, the accused allegedly took her to an isolated location where he raped her. Her body was found in a canal the next morning on July 23. An FIR was registered by police on the basis of a complaint by the girl's father, a labourer. The victim's family members hail from Chhattisgarh and were employed at a construction site in the Sanghavi area and were living at a labour camp in the same area.

Police have lodged an FIR against the accused under sections 450 (House trespass with intention to commit offence), 302 (Murder), 366 (Abduction), 376 (Rape) and 363 (kidnapping)of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) along with relevant sections of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act. Inputs suggest that four others have also been taken into custody for questioning.

Meanwhile, a post-mortem of the victim confirmed that she was sexually abused. Senior police inspector Prabhakar Shinde with the Pimpri Chinchwad police said that the victim was abducted from her house in a labour camp on Monday and found dead in a canal the next morning. The matter is under active investigation, said Shinde. It is also believed that the accused watched pornography before committing the heinous act.

Earlier this month, an additional sessions judge in Pune sentenced a man to seven years' rigorous imprisonment for the rape of a 17-year-old girl in the Katraj-Kondhwa Road area in August 2014. The accused was convicted on the basis of evidence furnished against him by the Bharati Vidyapeeth police. He was booked under sections 363, 366, 417 and 376 (2) of the IPC along with sections 3 and 4 of the 'Protection of Children from Sexual Offences' (POCSO) Act 2012.

The Supreme Court of India, on Thursday, directed the central government to set up POCSO courts in all districts with over 100 pending cases. Chief Justice Ranjan Gogoi instructed the centre to ensure the establishment of these courts within 60 days. Earlier this year, Parliament passed an amendment to strengthen the POCSO Act by including the death penalty in it.
