Kajol dons a typical Maharashtrian look for a song for Ajay Devgn’s Taanaji: The Unsung Warrior

Touted to be one of the most ambitious and expensive films in Bollywood is Ajay Devgn’s Taanaji: The Unsung Warrior. The movie which is a period film based on the life of Subedar Taanaji Malusare who fought for his king, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj and for his land. Ajay Devgn will step into the shoes of the warrior hero and will be seen perfecting the daredevil act for the ambitious project. The film has been making headlines ever since it went on the floors. It will also see off-screen husband-wife Kajol and Ajay, reunite on the big screen once again.

In the film, Kajol is playing the role of Taanaji’s wife. As per Mumbai Mirror, Kajol shot for a song for the film in which she will be seen dressed as a typical Maharashtrian wife. She will be seen wearing the Maharashtrian attire and will be seen shaking a leg in the song. As a source quoted to Mumbai Mirror, “The song was shot over a week in the last week of December and is a part of the climax. It sees Kajol dressed in a traditional Maharashtrian outfit from the 17th century, inside her onscreen home. It has her thinking about her relationship with her warrior husband and a certain situation the couple is faced with at the time. Although Ajay won’t feature in the number, there are glimpses of their past moments together.”

(Also read: Kajol to star opposite Ajay Devgn in Taanaji: The Unsung Warrior?)

Also, the song required some basic understanding of the Maharashtrian culture and language and Kajol, being half-Maharashtrian, was able to get under the skin of the character and managed to nail her expressions. The source was quoted saying, “The dance number accentuates her character’s emotional state and focuses on her facial expressions.” Taanaji marks the directorial debut of Om Raut and is being touted as the most expensive film ever made. It was last year that Ajay took to Twitter to share the news about the film going on the floors. The film is based on the Battle of Sinhagad, which was fought between Taanaji Malusare and Udaybhan Rathod in 1670. Taanaji: The Unsung Warrior is slated to release on November 22, 2019.
