Locals beat up tigress in revenge attack after giant cat mauls villagers

Tiger which mauled 10 people, lynched to death by irate villagers

Tiger which mauled 10 people, lynched to death by irate villagers

The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel

The clip shows the tigress grimacing in pain as villagers attack it with large wooden sticks at Matiana village in India's Uttar Prasesh state

Locals beat up tigress in revenge attack after giant cat mauls villagers

A shocking video shows a group of furious villagers mercilessly beating up an adult tigress in northern India.

The disturbing footage, taken at Matiana village in India's Uttar Prasesh state, shows dozens of locals using large wooden sticks to hit the tigress who lays helplessly on the ground.

The clip, taken on one of the villager's mobile phones, shows the tiger grimacing in pain as the men continued the revenge attack.

The tigress then manages to bounce back up on its four legs, scaring the villagers who back away from the giant cat.

Image: Newslions Media) Newslions Media) Image: Newslions Media) Newslions Media) Image: Newslions Media) Newslions Media)

Following the attack, the tigress suffered broken ribs along with multiple fractures and injuries all over its body.

The tigress later died from its injuries.

This comes after the tigress attacked Matiana village on Wednesday morning, injuring at least 10 people.

The victims were rushed to hospital and are still undergoing treatment.

According to reports, the villagers did not take the big cat to the veterinary clinic for treatment.

A forest department team arrived to the scene and requested to take the tigress to the hospital, but the villagers refused.

Image: Newslions Media) Newslions Media) Image: Newslions Media) Newslions Media)

The big cat's carcass was cremated after autopsy, forest officials confirmed.

Local forest officials have registered a first information report (FIR) against 31 identified villagers over the attack.

A magisterial inquiry has also been ordered into the incident.
