Kargil Diwas 2021: Here Are 20 Kargil War Heroes You Should Know About

Today is the Kargil Vijay Diwas and we have all heard of the gallantry of greats like Captain Vikram Batra, Captain Anuj Nayyar and Grenadier Yogender Yadav. But there were many more who laid down their lives during the war. It was their raw courage and steely resolve that gave India a decisive victory. Here are 20 heroes you may have not heard of before.

1. Captain Amol Kalia

Captain Amol Kalia and his team, tasked with the capture of point 5203, started their mission in the dead of the night and reached the foothill of the ice capped mountain before daybreak. The slopes of the peak were barren and covered with snow. There was not even a blade of grass to give them any cover. Captain Amol Kalia decided to launch the attack in the cover of night. Because of lack of cover, he was hit by a burst of round. Though injured he did not give up and succumbed to injuries .

Captain Neikezhakuo Kenguruse’s Mahavir Chakra medal citation reads - "He displayed conspicuous gallantry, indomitable resolve, grit and determination beyond the call of duty and made the supreme sacrifice in the face of the enemy, in true traditions of the Indian Army."

3. Lt Keishing Clifford Nongrum

The objective of the operation was to capture Point 4812 in the Batalik sector and Lt Keishing Clifford Nongrum was tasked with the climb and assault on an almost vertical cliff. When they finally reached the top of the cliff, his column encountered a fierce attack which was well entrenched in interconnected positions carved out of boulders, remaining immune to even artillery fire. For two hours, the enemy kept coming down with heavy and automatic fire. Lt Nongrum, not thinking about his own safety for one second, charged towards the enemy through the fire zone.

Operation Vijay was underway when Captain Jintu Gogoi was tasked with the eviction of enemy soldiers from ridge line Kala Pathar near LOC (line of control) in the general area of Jubar Hill complex in Batalik sub-sector. Capt Gogoi led his troops and reached the top by first light. All this while facing heavy fire from the enemy. He made sure that his platoon was out of the enemy's reach. He killed a couple of enemy soldiers but was also severely injured while performing his task and getting his troops to safety. He later succumbed to his injuries but showed incredible character and leadership qualities while carrying out this incredible act of bravery in a terrain that is almost impossible to survive in. He was posthumously awarded the Vir Chakra.

5. Naik Brij Mohan Singh

Naik Brij Mohan Singh was the commander of a 30-member team that was tasked with capturing "Sando Top" in Mashkoh Sub-Sector. Naik Brij Mohan Singh launched the assault on the near-vertical Sando Top and found a sweet spot for some foothold in the battle near the cliff. However, the march ahead was halted due to the enemy's constant shelling. Naik Singh led from the front and started assaulting the slopes of Sando Top where the enemy had taken control. The brave soul would lob grenades at them and then follow it up by physically charging at them. This left the enemy baffled, they didn't know what to do. As he went about reclaiming what the enemy had captured he got severely injured. However, not thinking about it one bit, he kept charging on and even killed two enemy soldiers with his bare hands. His act of raw courage not only helped to eliminate 5 enemy soldiers but also saved lives of his comrades.

Captain Jerry Prem Raj was tasked with launching an assault on the Twin Bumps in the Drass sector. He was able to positively identify the enemy position and directed accurate artillery fire on to it. During this, he was hit by enemy fire, but disregarded his own safety and continued to bring effective fire on the enemy. He was hit a second time by a volley of bullets and gravely injured. His bravery ensured the enemy suffered high casualties and helped minimise losses to his own force. In doing so he made the supreme sacrifice for which he was awarded the Vir Chakra.

7. Captain Shashi Bhushan Ghildiyal

Captain Shashi Bhushan Ghidiyal was the Artillery Observation Post Officer for Pimple 11 Complex. The Company Commander was injured and the second in command of the assaulting company was fatally wounded during the move to the objective when the troops were just 400 metres short of the goal. Showing his presence of mind and realising the critical situation, Captain Ghildiyal took control of the company and started directing troops. While doing so, he sustained gun shot wounds. Despite his injuries, he led his men to the objective and prevented the enemy counter attack. For his leadership and courage, Capt. Ghildiyal was awarded the Vir Chakra.

8. Subedar Raghunath Singh

Subedar Raghunath Singh was the platoon commander of Delta Company of 13 JAK Rif, and was tasked to clear area Ledge beyond Point 4875 in the Mushkoh Valley. However the company was stalled due to heavy artillery shelling and firing from a well-fortified enemy all along the 700 metre long ledge.

Seeing the gravity of situation, Subedar Raghunath Singh volunteered to lead his Company in a daring day-light mission. Showing indomitable spirit, raw courage and with determination beyond the call of duty, he led the charge of his platoon from the front and infused them with vengeance to overcome the resistance put up by the enemy. In the ensuing hand-to-hand fight, he killed two intruders and kept firing on the fleeing enemy with utter disregard to his personal safety. His action was instrumental in maintaining the momentum of the assault and forcing the enemy to retreat. Thus, the strategically important area Ledge was captured due to his heroics. He was awarded the Vir Chakra.

9. Havildar Sis Ram Gill

Havildar Sis Ram Gill and his team were tasked with raiding the enemy post "Majnu", at over 17,000 feet altitude. He led the commando team from the front and scaled the almost unscalable height despite difficult and rugged terrain. He reached the objective facing intense enemy artillery and mortar fire.

In doing so, he sustained a severe injury in the leg but continued to motivate his team and advance towards the objective. Undaunted, he himself fired sniper and LMG bursts at every opportunity resulting in the killing of one officer, two JCOs and three other ranks of the enemy. He also injured four others.

In spite of being grievously injured, he refused to be evacuated knowing fully well that his evacuation will lead to mission failure due to reduction of fighting strength. He continued to fight valiantly showing utmost dedication to duty and self sacrifice, and ensured completion of the special mission task. He finally succumbed to his injuries on 9 July 1999. He was awarded the Vir Chakra for his gallantry in the face the enemy.

10. Lieutenant Praveen Kumar

The dominant Point 5310 in the Chorbatla Sector, 3 km deep inside enemy territory, overlooked a crucial supply line. Lt. Praveen Kumar and his Ghatak Platoon, from 14 Sikh regiment, was tasked with its capture. Leading from the front Lt. Praveen Kumar divided the platoon into three and carried out detailed recce. Then it was time to cross the LC. He achieved his task without any loss of life. For his unorthodox tactics and bravery he was awarded the Vir Chakra.

11. Lt-Col R Viswanathan

Viswanathan went up the heights to recover the bodies of three of his men. He captured three bunkers but was shot in the groin and thigh. He died while being evacuated.

12. Major Padmapani Acharya

He joined the Indian Army in 1993 and was commissioned into the Rajputana Rifles. He was posted in Assam and Delhi before being sent to Kashmir.

Major Acharya and his troops had been tasked with the responsibility of capturing Lone Hill and recapturing the Tololing peak in Kargil, both of which were of utmost strategic importance.

13. Major Mariappan Saravanan

Maj Sarvanan had led a platoon up the Jubar Hills on May 29. While he was able to take back two bunkers the rest of Jubar Hills was under enemy control. Maj Sarvanan died after killing at least four of the enemy in combat.

14. Major Ajay Kumar

Major Ajay Kumar belonged to 13 Mechanised Infantry. He was killed in the Avantpur area when leading a search operation.

15. Lt. Vijayant Thapar

During the battle, Vijyant captured a Pakistani position called Barbad Bunker Pt. 4590, Tololing was the first victory for Indian army on 13th June 1999 and has gone into history as a turning point in the war.

16. Captain Haneef-ud-din

Captain Haneef was looking over the safety of his men more than himself. He took up a position and showered bullets on the enemy. In the exchange of bullets, he was badly injured. But he kept engaging the enemy until his men were safe from the enemy fire. He ran out of ammunition and was shot from all directions. He succumbed to his injuries, just 200 meters from the position they set out to capture.

He attained martyrdom at the tender age of 25. His body could not be recovered till the end of the war from the Turtuk region due to the presence of the enemy and treacherous temperature conditions and terrain.

17. Squadron Leader Ajay Ahuja

The Air Force said the officer made the supreme sacrifice for his country while remaining over infiltrators-held positions to help coordinate rescue attempts to locate Flt. Lt. Nachiketa, who had bailed out after his plane stalled due to an engine trouble.

The body of Squadron Leader Ajay Ahuja showed bullet wounds and he was most probably shot dead after baling out from his MiG aircraft which was downed by a Pakistani missile

18. Flight Lieutenant S. Muhilan

Flght Lieutenant S Muhilan was killed when his helicopter was downed by a surface to air missile. A science graduate who joined the air force through the Combined Defence Services was commissioned at the air force academy on 08 Dec 93. This young officer from Belgaum in Karnataka was a thorough professional with over one thousand hours on helicopters.

19. Sergeant and Flight Engineer Raj Kishore Sahu

One of Retaliatory actions by the enemy forces his helicopter got hit. The damage caused was massive and the aircrew had no time to take any emergency manoeuvres. The helicopter crashed and Sgt Raj Kishore Sahu with 3 other soldiers were martyred. Sgt Raj Kishore Sahu was a valiant air warrior and a committed soldier who laid down his life in the service of the nation.

20. Captain Sumeet Roy

Captain Sumeet displayed exemplary leadership and extraordinary courage at a young age of 21 years and became a source of inspiration for his troops. He was posthumously awarded the Vir Chakra for his contribution towards the capture of Point 4700.
