It Took Malaika Arora's Blood, Sweat & Tears To Shoot The Iconic Song Chaiyya Chaiyya. Literally!

Malika Arora might not have a string of movies under her belt but she manages to stay relevant and consistently so. From modelling assignments to reality shows, she has been keeping herself busy with a lot of interesting projects. And when she wants to take a break from work she lets her hair down by partying with her girl gang.

twitter

Recently, she substituted for her good friend Kareena Kapoor as a judge on the dancing reality show Dance India Dance: Battle of the Champions where she reminisced about the experience of shooting her iconic song Chhaiyya Chhaiyaa on a moving train. The song was an anthem back in the day and was a visual delight for many. The 1998 film Dil Se directed by Mani Ratnam starring SRK, Manisha Koirala and Preity Zinta is a cult classic but the song is still somewhat more popular than the picture itself.

daily world

Sharing trivia from the shoot of the very same song, Malaika revealed that it wasn’t as easy as it looked. To shoot the sequence, she had to be tied to a rope for safety because the dance was performed on a moving train. Once the rope was removed she, she started bleeding. She said,

"I fell several times while shooting for 'Chaiyya chaiyya'. I would sway right and left owing to the strong wind, and to avoid that, the team tied me with the train with a rope through my ghaghra. This was meant to help me balance and (stay in) sync with the train's motion. Unfortunately, when I removed the rope, I discovered I had cuts along my waistline. I was bleeding, and everyone was worried."

All this discomfort aside, this AR Rahman made Malaika a dancing star in Bollywood.

It was only after this very song that Malaika got her big break in the film industry post which she went on to do many hit songs like Maahi ve, Munni badnaam and Hello hello among others.

Like they say what doesn't kill you only makes you stronger. Malaika is an example of just that, right?
