Punjab CM orders for double promotion to forgotten Kargil War hero after seeing his plight

Kargil war veteran Satpal Singh managing traffic in Punjab

Key Highlights Satpal Singh is a recipient of Vir Chakra for his acts of valour in Kargil War He was serving as traffic police since he was discharged from the Army in 2010

Amritsar: Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh on Friday decided to order a double promotion for decorated Kargil War soldier Satpal Singh who has been serving in the traffic police as a mere senior constable since getting discharged from the Indian Army in 2010. The Congress leader also slammed the coalition government of Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in Punjab under which Satpal Singh was recruited.

Captain Amarinder Singh took to his Twitter handle and said, "Have promoted Vir Chakra awardee Satpal Singh of the Kargil War from senior constable to ASI. He deserves special treatment, which previous Akali Dal govt didn’t deem fit to give him at the time of his recruitment in 2010. This is the least we can do for our brave soldiers."

Have promoted Vir Chakra awardee Satpal Singh of the #KargilWar from senior constable to ASI. He deserves special treatment, which previous @Akali_Dal_ govt didn’t deem fit to give him at the time of his recruitment in 2010. This is the least we can do for our brave soldiers. https://t.co/OUHuosvSSA — Capt.Amarinder Singh (@capt_amarinder) July 26, 2019

Satpal Singh's condition came to the Chief Minister's notice after a video of the war veteran surfaced on social media. In the video, 46-year-old Satpal Singh could be seen managing traffic in a small town of Punjab. The CM was notified that Satpal Singh has been managing traffic from the past nine years as a senior constable in Punjab Police.

After seeing the video on Friday morning, Captain Amarinder Singh immediately ordered the promotion of Satpal Singh, who also belonged to the Chief Minister's battalion, from senior constable to Assistant Sub-Inspector in Punjab Police.

An official spokesperson said, "Satpal Singh, No. 2116/SGR, who joined Punjab Police after his discharge from the Army, has been awarded a double promotion to be named Assistant Sub Inspector following direct orders from Captain Amarinder Singh in recognition of his valiant contribution during the Kargil war."

It should be noted that Satpal Singh was posted in Dras sector of Kashmir during Operation Vijay and he was part of the team that helped the Indian Army recapture Tiger Hill from the Pakistani defence forces. During the Kargil War, he also killed Captain Karnal Sher Khan, who was later conferred the Nishan-e-Haider - Pakistan's highest gallantry award.
