Why did Krishnadevaraya imprison Rama on Sony SAB’s Tenali Rama?

MUMBAI: Sony SAB’s historical entertainer Tenali Rama never fails to woo the audiences with its gripping story, fun-filled humor and interesting characters. In the upcoming episodes, the witty duo, Rama and Mulla Nasiruddin are plotting different ways to find solutions to the strange demands made by Krishnadevaraya (Manav Gohil) and his royal guest, Shehzada of Tehran. The episodes further bring various twists and turns and the most shocking turn of events in the show for the viewers.

Mulla Nasiruddin is baffled by the strange demand made by Krishnadevaraya, of creating a ladder that reaches the moon. Mulla Nasiruddin seeks Rama (Krishna Bharadwaj) for an idea to solve the riddle and decides to create an unusual story around it to impress the King. On the other hand, Rama and Mulla Nasiruddin as a joke plan to test Shehzada and Krishnadevaraya for a change and give them a challenge where they ask them to sell an ordinary pot at an exorbitant price. Rama is shocked when, the King and Shehzada figure out a way to sell the pot by offering both, Rama and Mulla Nasiruddin for free along with the pot. Fearful of being sold to someone, Rama apologizes and reveals that it was merely a joke.

However, in a shocking turn of events, Krishnadevaraya gets furious after learning about the prank and sentences both Rama and Mulla Nasiruddin to prison for crossing the line and disrespecting their King and his respected guest. The entire Darbaar is stunned.

What will happen now? How will Rama, along with Mulla Nasiruddin, make his way out of this?

Krishna Bharadwaj, essaying the role of Tenali Rama said, “Intense circumstances await for Rama and it will be as exciting for our viewers to watch as it was for us while shooting for these episodes. So stay tuned for the upcoming episodes and gear up for the events that will unfold.”

Manav Gohil, essaying the role of Krishnadevaraya said, “Unusual and unique situations will be presented in the upcoming episodes. We thoroughly enjoyed shooting for them. The story gearing towards a shocking twist and our viewers will completely enjoy it. I also want to take this moment to thank our viewers for immense love and support they are giving us.”
