Tripura BJP Is Following Mamata Banerjee's Lead on How Not to Hold Panchayat Polls

With the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party in Tripura winning 85% of the 6,646 panchayat seats uncontested, the elections to the three-tier panchayat body scheduled on July 27 seem to be just a formality.

The three-tier panchayat body includes the gram panchayat, panchayat samiti and zila parishad. On July 27, only a section of rural voters will be able to exercise their franchise for the 15% seats that will go to polls. The Bharatiya Janata Party believes that this massive victory – without polls even taking place – is due to the people-oriented policies of the Biplab Deb government in the state and Narendra Modi government at the Centre.

Whatever the BJP says, it is definitely not a healthy sign for democracy if the ruling party manages to win 85% of the seats uncontested. However, the saffron party says that this is not uncommon in Tripura, as during the Left Front era, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) too used to win seats uncontested. The BJP is right; the then ruling CPI(M) also used to win seats because nobody else stood – but never in such a massive way.

In the last panchayat elections held in 2014, the CPI(M)-led Left Front had won 20.5% of the seats uncontested. Even the state election commissioner has said that historically, opposition parties’ participation in the panchayat polls has never been so low. This negates the BJP’s view that nothing uncommon is happening.

Already, there have been allegations from both the CPI(M) and Congress against the BJP for not allowing their candidates to file nominations and later intimidating them to withdraw from the process. The CPI(M) has said that the BJP forced as many as 121 party candidates to withdraw their nominations. There have even been reports of clashes between supporters of the BJP and opposition parties. These reports also negate the BJP’s claim that the opposition had no takers for contesting polls.

Elections are vital in a democracy. But the question is, does an election where 85% of the seats are won unopposed by the ruling party strengthen democracy? Absolutely not. Last year, in West Bengal, Trinamool Congress won 34% of the total seats uncontested in the panchayat polls marred by heavy political violence, prompting the opposition – BJP, Left and Congress – to accuse Mamata Banerjee’s party of attacking democracy.

The opposition, including the BJP, even went to the Supreme Court, which too expressed shock over 34% of the seats being won uncontested. The BJP then created a ruckus about Banerjee’s government suppressing the democratic process. The irony is that the BJP today is following the same path.

This is not the first time the BJP government led by Biplab Deb has faced the allegation of attacking democracy in the state. After the change of guard last year, there were large-scale defections of Left representatives from rural bodies, resulting in more than 50% of the panchayat seats being vacant. While it may be argued that Left leaders moved to the BJP to secure their own political future, such large-scale defections were unprecedented and raised eyebrows.

Later, the BJP won 96% of the seats for rural body by-polls uncontested. Then too, the nomination process was marred by clashes between BJP and opposition parties. Supporters of the saffron party even clashed with supporters of the Indigenous Peoples Front of Tripura, a partner in the government. The same process was repeated in the civic by-polls (which had to be held after Left representatives resigned) in December last year. A whopping 99.37% of the seats were won by the BJP – raising more questions about the electoral process.

After the BJP’s massive victory in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections, Prime Minister Narendra Modi had highlighted the importance of the opposition in a democracy. He is absolutely right. However, in Tripura, his own party’s leaders and supporters seem to want to silence the opposition’s voice. The BJP, including Modi himself, has been critical of Banerjee for turning the West Bengal panchayat elections held last year into a farce. But today, the same thing is being repeated in Tripura.

It’s true that the situation in Tripura is less violent than what was seen in West Bengal. Having said that, no one can ignore the fact that rural elections will be held in only 15% of the seats. The BJP in Tripura shouldn’t take voters for guaranteed, as Mamata did last year. It cost her party heavily in the Lok Sabha elections. Had the TMC allowed other parties to contest, the results could have provided the ruling party a glimpse of rural voters’ moods. Instead, the TMC not only missed an opportunity but also earned voters’ disrespect.

Sagarneel Sinha is a freelance writer interested in politics, Indian mythology and philosophy. He tweets at @SagarneelSinha.
