Nation salutes it martyrs!

The nation observes the 20th anniversary of Kargil War today. It has been 20 years since the Indian Army, with the help of the Indian Air Force (IAF), wrested back the glaciated heights of Kargil, in the Ladakh sector, from the Pakistan army. The Kargil War, which lasted a little over two months, ended 26 July 1999, and in which 527 brave soldiers attained martyrdom fighting for our country.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi today shared pictures of his visit to the area during the conflict and his interaction with the soldiers. ‘During the Kargil War in 1999, I had the opportunity to go to Kargil and show solidarity with our brave soldiers,’ he said on Twitter. The Prime Minister said in 1999, he was working for the BJP in Jammu and Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh.

Giving a sense of pride to whole nation, raised by their mothers on the stories of their brave-heart fathers who sacrificed their lives in the 1999 Kargil war, sons of three war heroes have joined their regiments in the Army.

“July 26 is immortalised as ‘Kargil Vijay Diwas’ and represents a saga of glorious victory of the nation in the Kargil conflict fought from May-July in 1999. Indian Army soldiers fought legendary battles in Dras, Kaksar, Batalik and Turtok Sectors. We salute the courage, valour and sacrifices of our martyrs and heroes.

The Indian Army responded to the intrusion with ‘Operation Vijay’, fighting battles on rugged terrains and difficult peaks.

The Indian Air Force had joined the operation with their ‘Operation Safed Sagar’ under which, the IAF for the first time used high-precision bombs to target the enemy.

The Mirage-2000 aircraft played a crucial role in the battles fought during the war and also hit enemy targets bunkered in at the Tiger Hill.

On this day, the nation salutes those soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the motherland. Pakistan had initially denied it had any role in the conflict and said India was facing off with Kashmiri freedom fighters. However, it awarded its soldiers medals for the conflict later. Let’s resolve to cherish the Indian Army that fought against all odds and brought glory to the nation on this day, two decades ago.

Related
