Working with Saif Ali Khan is like a fun masterclass: 'Sacred Games' actress Kubbra Sait gushes over her co-star

Kubbra Sait was filming with Saif Ali Khan for Jawaani Jaaneman in London when we had a chat with her about her latest web series, RejectX. The movie is her second project starring the Baazaar actor — she shot to fame after playing Kuku in Sacred Games, which also starred Nawazuddin Siddiqui. The actress spoke to After Hrs about the experience of working with Saif, her new show, upcoming projects and Kabir Singh director Sandeep Reddy Vanga’s slap comment. Excerpts...

What made you sign RejectX?

To begin with, it was director Goldie Behl’s infectious energy and positive spirit towards the project. Working on set in Thailand was the best time I’ve had. It was just a few days but they were amazing.

Tell us something about your character...

Anushka is a counsellor. What I love about the role is that the age-gap between the students and her isn’t much, so it is like two friends talking to each other. While my character tries to help others with their problems, she is personally quite messed up.

How was it working with Sumeet Vyas after Tripling?

This is our third project together. Sometimes it used to be funny as I’d look at him and know he was going to laugh about something. We would both crack up and everybody had to control us for the next 10 minutes. It was great to work with an actor who never forgets that every job he does is different. I love how effortless he is when the cameras roll.

Kuku was a bold character. Do you think the perception of such roles is changing in India?

There are different industries that co-exist. So, just because we do not consume a particular kind of stuff, it does not mean it is bold. But is there a story to the character? As a viewer, does the part move you in any way? If it does, I don’t think I’m doing a bold role or being experimental. I’m just doing my job as an actor and being comfortable with it. This is the time to create such content as the whole world is looking at India. We have so many stories to tell and we should not restrict ourselves.

Are you excited about Sacred Games 2?

More than just an actor in it, I’m a fan of the show. So, I’m waiting for the second season. I want to see what they have done after my death (laughs).

Do you think digital content is taking over films?

No. There is always going to be a universe that exists for experiential viewing. Larger-than-life films are always going to get that audience. You will never want to watch Mad Max, Star Wars, etc. at home but go to a theatre for the experience. The only challenge web series have is creating good content constantly, where people will have an urge to watch the show no matter where they are.

You recently took a dig at Sandeep Reddy Vanga’s slap comment...

I have nothing against the movie being made nor do I have anything against Kabir Singh, the character. I have an issue when the father of the project turns around and justifies slapping each other. The minute you stop differentiating between a character and yourself, we have a problem. More importantly, it may work for you but if you turn around and say this is how it is and if you haven’t experienced this then you have not felt love, then that idea is not working for me.

What can the audience expect from you in 2019?

I am excited about RejectX. I’m pretty thrilled about Jawaani Jaaneman.

How is it working with Saif Ali Khan?

He is a sorted and patient actor. With the kind of experience he has, working with him is like a fun masterclass. It is amazing to see a senior actor like him stay back for the last cue so that his co-actor is comfortable.
