Kargil Vijay Diwas: How Indian Army overcame all odds to recapture Tiger Hill and Tololing 20 years ago

Jammu | Jagran News Desk: 20 years have gone since India overpowered the Pakistani infiltrators in the Kargil region with a three-pronged attack, leaving Pakistan with no other option but to move back to its territory. The Kargil War of 1999 escalated after the Pakistani army were detected at the Kargil ridges, keeping an eye over the NH1, which acts as the lifeline of India for supply and logistics.

The Pakistan army, however, has planned this attack on India in 1998 itself and it is also believed that the proposal for such an attack was given by previous Pakistan Army chiefs to Pakistani leaders but the proposals had then been shelved fearing an all-out war. Even the then Pakistani prime minister Nawaz Sharif claimed that he had no knowledge of such an attack till he got a call from his Indian counterpart Atal Bihari Vajpayee.

Click Here For All Updates On Kargil Vijay Diwas 2019

In 1999, ‘Operation Badr’ was launched by the Pakistani armed forces with an aim to cut off links between Kashmir and Ladakh forcing India to negotiate a settlement of the Kashmir dispute. Initially, Pakistan pinned the blame of the attack on Kashmiri insurgents but the documentary evidence from the casualties proved Pakistan Army's direct involvement in the attack.

The armed conflict between India and Pakistan in Kargil and elsewhere along the Line of Control (LoC) was taking place just months after Vajpayee and Sharif signed the Lahore Declaration in February 1999. The February conference was aimed at deescalating the tensions that had existed since May 1998 over the Kashmir issue, but the issue further flared up after with the Kargil war.

The three phases of the Kargil War include the infiltration by the Pakistani armed forces, to occupy strategic locations to bring NH1 within its control. In the second phase, India was seen identifying the infiltration and responding to it while the third phase saw major battles between Indian and Pakistani forces.

The war also witnessed a number of violations of pacts between India and Pakistan from the Pakistani army side including the ‘Gentleman’s agreement’ which was signed due to the inhospitable conditions in the area which has mountains up to 18,000 feet high with harsh wind and -60 degrees Celsius temperatures in winter. It was part of a "gentleman's agreement" that the armies of India and Pakistan will not occupy posts from 15 September to 15 April each year. But Pakistan breached the trust to gain an upper hand in the Kashmir conflict.

The Indian Army got to know about the infiltration after a local shepherd tipped them off about the Pakistani Army invading into the Mushkoh Valley, the Marpo La ridgeline in Dras, in Kaksar near Kargil, in Batalik sector, in Chorbatla sector, and in Siachen's Turtok sector.

Looking at the extent of infiltration, the Indian Army launched ‘Operation Vijay’ and mobilised 2,00,000 troops in the region. The Indian Air Force also launched its ‘Operation Safed Sagar’ joining the Indian Army in May 1999. The Mirage-2000 aircraft played a crucial role in the battles fought during the war and also hit enemy targets bunkered in at the Tiger Hill. With both taking control of the situation, the Indian Navy too strategically mounted pressure on the enemy through Operation Talwar, patrolling aggressively of the Pakistani coasts.

With Pakistan having a watch on NH1, from over 130 of their occupied observation posts, the main aim thus for India was to regain control of the hills overlooking NH 1. Over the next two months, India regained control of these hills overlooking NH 1 before it turned to push the intruders back across the LoC.

Seeing such a heavy retaliation from India, Pakistan had to move back and seek help from America to mediate in de-escalating the tension on the border. However, the then US President denied intervening until Pakistan withdrew its forces from the Indian side of the LoC. Pakistan also had to bow down to international pressure along with the sustained retaliation from Indian forces and move back to its territory.

The Indian Army in collaboration with the IAF launched its final attack in July 1999 clearing all infiltrators from the area. The war ended on 26 July 1999 which showed the capabilities of India to the world and has since been celebrated as the Kargil Vijay Diwas.

Posted By: Talib Khan
