Branded as thief, 14-year-old boy lynched in Delhi, police arrest four

Victim's family alleges that accused Mukesh killed him over previous rivalry. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim was tied, locked in a room and thrashed until he fell unconscious Boy succumbs to his injuries at Babu Jagjivan Ram Hospital Victim's family alleges that accused Mukesh killed him over previous rivalry

New Delhi: In yet another case of vigilante justice reported from New Delhi, a 14-year-old boy was brutally beaten after he was branded a thief. The incident has been reported from Adarsh Nagar area of the national capital on Friday.

The boy later succumbed to his injuries at a hospital. The police have arrested four people including a man in whose house the boy had allegedly entered. Mukesh, the owner of the house in Lal Bagh, alleged that he saw the boy leap out of his house.

According to a report, Mukesh caught the boy and raised an alarm to alert the neighbours. The neighbours and the owner of the house tied the boy, locked him in a room and thrashed him until he fell unconscious. The police were informed about the incident at around 8.30 am.

Later, a team of policemen from Adarsh Nagar police station reached the spot and rushed the boy to Babu Jagjivan Ram Hospital, where he was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). According to doctors, the minor suffered internal injuries and died on Friday evening. The police later sent the boy's body for autopsy.

The boy stayed with his parents at JJ colony near the accused's house in Lal Bagh. Police have charged four people with culpable homicide. Police said they are searching for other accused persons who had attacked the child. Police further said they did not find anything on the boy belonging to Mukesh.

However, the parents of the victim have accused Mukesh of murdering the child over a previous rivalry in the locality. According to the family of the boy, he was sleeping at home at the time that his attacker Mukesh states as the time the boy allegedly entered his house. Police are trying to weave the sequence of events to figure out the truth.

In a similar incident, a 20-year-old man was beaten to death on suspicion of stealing a mobile phone from a shop in Prem Nagar area of Rohini in June this year. The incident occurred when one person named Amit, who runs a mobile phone shop on Mubarakpur Road, thrashed the youth for allegedly stealing the phone.

The victim is said to have stolen the phone and a CCTV camera DVR from Amit's shop last month. The shopkeeper later managed to acquire the CCTV footage showing the youth stealing the gadgets. When the victim once again visited Amit's shop along with his accomplice, the duo was chased and caught by the shopkeeper. The two youths were brought to the shop where they were allegedly brutally thrashed by Amit and other shopkeepers.
