Varun Dhawan faints on the sets of Street Dancer; shoots for 18 hours to wrap up the film as per schedule

We all know that Varun Dhawan is one of the hardest working actors in the industry and when it comes to his films and commitments, this Kalank actor can go the extra mile to give his 100 percent. Post Kalank, Varun Dhawan has been busy with the shooting of Remo D’ Souza’s Street Dancer 3D and since it is a dance film and looking at Remo’s previous films, we are sure that it is no mean task to shoot for a dance film. After ABCD and ABCD2, needless to say that the level of dancing will get difficult and after shooting in Punjab, Dubai and London, for the past few weeks, the cast of the film has been rehearsing in Mumbai for the final dance face off.



Now, that Varun Dhawan is unwell is known to all because the actor shared on social media but despite his health, he was shooting and rehearsing for the film so that it wraps up on time. But according to a report, the actor collapsed on the sets of the Remo D'Souza-directed dance drama in Film City on July 23. According to a report in Mid-Day, Varun was battling cold and fever for a long time but he continued to shoot knowing that his portions had to be wrapped up before July 26. But it so happened that on Tuesday, before filming a gruelling dance sequence with his co-actors, Varun, while rehearsing, got dizzy and fainted. Next, the doctor was summoned and Varun was diagnosed with low blood pressure and advised him bed rest for few days.

Later, the shoot was called off but after recuperating, Varun knew that they had lost on a day and therefore, he did a double shift so that the film wraps up as per schedule. "Knowing that they had lost out on a day, Varun told Remo sir that he would do a double shift. He reported to the set at 1 pm and worked till 7 am on Friday morning.” As we speak, the shooting of the film has wrapped up and yesterday, the cast and crew of the film had a party where Shraddha Kapoor, Raghav and others were seen having a whale of a time.

ALSO READ: Varun Dhawan shares an adorable picture with his mom on her birthday; Check it out
