Cracks in buildings spark fresh fears among Shahberi residents

NOIDA: With the onset of monsoons, several buildings in Shahberi have started showing signs of a weak structure and poor finish this year, leaving residents worried about their safety.The Greater Noida Industrial Development Authority (GNIDA), meanwhile, is set to conduct a structural audit of all buildings in the area and submit a report to the chief minister within a month on the ones that are weak and need to be demolished. The CM has also instructed the administration to stop registration of property in Shahberi, officials said.One of the residents who recently moved into his flat in APS Ashiana 2 in Shahberi said that the walls have developed cracks and the woodwork is coming out. Several walls also have seepage with the plaster wearing off.“We moved into the building in September 2017 and there was a collapse in 2018. Now there are cracks in the walls in our flat too. At least two flats in the building have such damages. We have invited trouble by buying this property in Shahberi that builders advertised as Sector 4 of Noida Extension,” said Sachin Raghav, a resident.Officials said that in a meeting held on Wednesday, UP chief minister Yogi Adityanath had asked the Authority to rope in experts from IITs to test the strength of buildings and demolish only those that are weak. “The CM has ordered that the structural integrity of all buildings be checked as soon as possible. The Authority is writing to all IITs asking for quotations to conduct a survey of the area,” said an official from GNIDA.The Authority is expected to relocate residents and make alternative arrangements before starting the demolition drive. Additionally, the Authority has also been asked to figure out what can be done with the buildings that are found to be safe enough.One of the options discussed was to let residents stay in smaller buildings that are found to be strong enough. The residents, however, may be asked to submit an affidavit stating that they will be living in these buildings at their own risk. The CM had also asked that all involved builders be booked under the National Security Act.Looking at historical images from Google Maps , the CM has asked that a list of officials be prepared who were handling the area between 2014 and 2017 when maximum construction took place. The Authority has been asked to fix accountability of not just the GNIDA, but also administrative and police officers who may be involved in allowing the illegal construction in Shahberi.There are 1,453 buildings in Shahberi area. These include 426 residential buildings with three or more floors that are builder apartments wherein several flats have been constructed and sold.
