Varun Dhawan shoots for 18 hours after fainting on Street Dancer 3D sets

After Kalank, Varun Dhawan is gearing up for his next release Street Dancer 3D- a dance drama. Varun, along with his co-star Shraddha Kapoor, has been going through a lot of hard work in intensive dance practice sessions. It came as a shock to his fans, when the actor recently fainted on the film sets while shooting for a dance number. But he came back to the sets, after taking just a day off from work.

According to a report in Mid-Day, Varun, who had been dealing with health issues for the past few days, shot for 18 hours (1 pm to 7 am) after returning to the sets, to make up for the one-day loss.

"Varun was battling with cold and fever for a long time, but continued to shoot nonetheless, well aware that his portions had to be wrapped up before July 26. On Tuesday, he was to film a gruelling dance sequence with his co-actors. Following intense prep, he was shooting for the number when he got dizzy and fainted," a source told the newspaper.

"An alarmed Remo (D' Souza- Street Dancer 3D director) sir immediately called for the doctor, who diagnosed Varun with low blood pressure and advised him bed rest for few days. Naturally, Remo sir called off the shoot for the next two days," the source added.

The report suggested that Varun took a day off from work after Remo cancelled the shoot. But after coming back, the 32-year-old actor did a double shift by working from afternoon to next day's morning.

"Knowing that they had lost out on a day, Varun told Remo sir that he would do a double shift. He reported to the set at 1 pm and worked till 7 am on Friday morning," the source said.

This is not the first time, when the Main Tera Hero actor pushed himself to shoot for the remaining portions of his film. Earlier, Varun had refused to take a break when he injured his knees during the dance rehearsals of his upcoming film Street Dancer 3D.

"He’s been learning some really tough Bhangra moves along with other dance forms like Urban and Street hip-hop. On Tuesday, while rehearsing with Rahul Shetty, Dharmesh and Tashan from UK, he twisted his knee. Varun refused to take a break and simply had his left knee taped to support the muscles and carried on," a source from the rehearsals told Mumbai Mirror.

Meanwhile, Shraddha Kapoor also twisted her ankle while rehearsing for the film. She had posted a photo on her Instagram story, in which her on-set physiotherapist was seen applying cold compressions on the ankle.

Directed by Remo D' Souza, Street Dancer 3D will hit the screens on January 24, 2020.

ALSO READ | Shraddha Kapoor gets injured on Street Dancer 3D sets. See pic

ALSO READ | Varun Dhawan and Shraddha Kapoor to face global dancers in final dance-off in Street Dancer 3D

ALSO READ | Varun Dhawan injures knee while rehearsing for Street Dancer 3D
