How India stifles dissent and curtails freedoms under draconian laws? – KashmirWatch

Law amended to declare anyone a `terrorist’.

Amjed Jaaved

India has a slew of draconian laws under which it carries on its reign of terror in `disturbed’ and peaceful states like. These laws, inter alia, include Armed Forces’ Special Powers Act, Public Safety Act, Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, and National Investigation Agency (NIA) Act. Local and international human-rights organisations have condemned these laws. They have documented detention of children, older people and the disabled in custody incognito without trial. Amnesty documented several cases of custodial deaths, rapes, and arson. In a bid to enhance the jurisdiction of the anti-terror-probe agency NIA, the legislature has amended (July 24, 2019) the National Investigation Agency Act and the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act. Now, they are empowered to declare anyone a `terrorist’, at home or abroad. Even a telephonic conversation with a dubious fund-giver could be a ground for being so declared. The Naxalbaris, pro-Khalistan activists and Kashmiris are the obvious targets.

Licentiate Indian army

An Indian-army major Leetul Gogoi was caught red-handed in the company of a teenage pramour in a Srinagar hotel. He was let off with a slap on wrist _ loss of six months’ seniority. He was charged with `fraternizing’ with a teenager Kashmiri woman on Facebook under a fake identity. The Indian army-chief had earlier awarded him a commendation certificate for driving a jeep in Srinagar streets with a Kashmiri protester tied to his jeep-front. The Statesman (editorial April 2, 2019) commented: (a)

`The Army would do well to bring its considerable expertise in psychiatric medicine to bear to determine possible linkages in the deviant behaviour of the officer who gained worldwide notoriety for the “human shield” incident in Srinagar in 2017, and the same man flouting prescribed regulations by entering into a questionable relationship with a young Kashmiri woman a year ago’. (b) It is `a blatant violation of basic human rights and the military’s strict code of conduct that encouraged Major Letul Gogoi to play the Cassanova role: at no stage has there been any suggestion of the officer being “honey trapped”’. (c) Local police registered no FIR. (d) `The “commendation” of Gogoi willy-nilly sent out the message that dissent would be crushed with force _ the origin of the trouble was a protest during a by-poll to the Lok Sabha from Srinagar. Gen Bipin Rawat has frequently suggested there are military solutions to most disputes, including electoral ones. By commending what Major Gogoi did the Chief of the Army Staff voted for intolerance’. Gogoi’s crimes coupled with Indian army-chief’s nods explain why Kashmiri youth are being radicalized.

Circumventing fundamental rights

Without regard for constitutional guarantees concerning fundamental rights, Indian legislature enacted draconian laws, ostensibly to meet threats to national security. The laws should have been reviewed and abrogated if `extraordinary circumstances’ vanished. But, as time passed, they were enlarged and extended.

National Safety Act

National Safety Act (NSA) was employed to arbitrarily arrest 160 Muslim men in Uttar Pradesh with connivance of chief minister Yogi Adityanath.

Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act

In August, the (UAPA) was used to arrest five human rights activists, by accusing them of being “Naxals” operating against the state. Well-known persons including poets and teachers were arrested simply for showing sympathy for the oppressed Naxalbaris. In 2000, the NSA was used in Uttarakhand to target two civil rights activists Jasodhara and Abhijit Dasgupta, who ran the NGO, Sahayog. They had published a booklet, AIDS aur Hum, promoting sexual health. For nearly a month before the offices of Sahayog were ransacked, both staff and trainees at their field office roughed up, and leading activists arrested, the local media in the region had been carrying on a campaign against the group, targeting in particular the booklet. The NSA simply served as an excuse to humiliate the activists and hold them to account in the name of public decency.

NSA was brutally applied to those who protested military’s gross human rights violations. In 1992, Niloy Dutta, Parag Kumar Das and Ajit Bhuiyan were arrested in Guwahati under unspecified sections of the NSA. It was alleged that they were disrupting the process of peace-building in Assam and were involved in “anti-national” activities that threatened the sovereignty of the country. They were the founding members of Manab Adhikar Sangram Samity (MASS), which had been compiling evidence of military atrocities during `operation Rhino’. It had sent three groups fully equipped with audio and video gadgets to three zones of the slate to compile cases of army atrocities. Braving severe restraints imposed by the army and civil authorities, these groups had succeeded in recording cases of arrest, torture, molestation, rape, killing and so on. With painstaking effort they compiled a comprehensive 65-page report enlisting the cases of army atrocities, which included 13 cases of death in army camps, seven cases of rape, as many as 120 cases of brutal torture, 139 cases of illegal detention and 63 cases of indiscriminate army raids in villages, unlawful public beatings and torture, all with specific dates, places and blow-by-blow accounts of the incidents, fully substantiated by physical evidence.

After the November 26, 2008 terrorist attacks in Mumbai, the UAPA, 1967 was so amended as to serve as the primary anti-terrorist law, just four years of eye-wash repeal of the Prevention of Terrorism Act. Basic architecture of the UAPA and POTA is the same. The provisions for arrest under the amended UAPA were as vague as they were in POTA. The 2008 UAPA Amendment extends the maximum period of pre-charge detention to 180 days. The UAPA has been grossly misused. Delhi University professor G N Saibaba, and his comrades, were arrested on the allegation of being Naxals. The prosecution charged the professor of `waging war against the country and supporting the ideology of a banned organisation, CPI (Maoist)’. No arms and ammunition could be recovered from the hapless professor. Notable dalits (oppressed) activists, including Sudhir Dhawale, Surendra Gadling, Shoma Sen, Mahesh Raut and Rona Wilson were arrested under the UAPA, for being associated with Maoist“Elgar Parishad”. They were accused of being Maoists or Naxals who delivered inflammatory.

Public Safety Act

It is being used in Kashmir to arrest innocent people dubbed as “suspected militants, following Burhan Wani’s death in 2016. Most of the FIRs are “open FIRs.” The police appends the words “and others” to arrest anyone, not named in an FIR.

TADA. POTA with embedded persecution

The POTA was preceded by the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985 (TADA). By mid-1994, 76,166 people had been arrested under TADA but less than 4% were actually convicted. There was public outcry on arrest of 28 dalit and adivasi (tribal) agricultural workers in Uttar Pradesh under POTA) in February 2003. The arrestees were dubbed `Naxalites’. Some of those arrested were later shot in a fake “encounter” with security forces.

Persecution is inbuilt in POTA s in predecessor. Only one per cent of 76,000 people arrested under TADA were convicted. POTA was used to arrest landless or land-poor dalits and adivasis accused of being Naxalites, Kashmiris fighting against oppressive Indian rule or Muslims accused of working in tandem with Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence.

Patriotism

Draconian laws are enforced under veneer of patriotism. It is rightly said ` Patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel’ (Samuel Johnson). “Patriotism is your conviction that this country is superior to all other countries because you were born in it” (George Bernard Shaw).

“Guard against the impostures of pretended patriotism’ (George Washington).

“When a whole nation is roaring patriotism at the top of its voice, I am fain to explore the cleanness of its hands and purity of its heart (Ralph Waldo Emerson).” “The feeling of patriotism – It is an immoral feeling because, …each man under the influence of patriotism … commits actions contrary to his reason and conscience …To abolish war it is necessary to abolish patriotism” (Leo Tolstoy). “One of the great attractions of patriotism…we are able, vicariously, to bully and cheat. … With a feeling that we are profoundly virtuous (Aldous Huxley).” “It is lamentable, that to be a good patriot one must become the enemy of the rest of mankind (Voltaire).”

Inference

During his visit to the USA, Pakistan’s prime minister expressed resolve to uproot terrorism from his country. It is unfortunate that India twisted his words to justify further tightening of so called anti-terrorism laws in India.

India must understand that draconian laws are incompatible with a constitutional democracy. India is a conglomerate of insurgent areas, now states. They coalesced as India was then tolerant.

Mr. Amjed Jaaved has been contributing free-lance for over five decades. His contributions stand published in the leading dailies and magazines at home and abroad (Nepal. Bangladesh, et. al.). He is author of seven e-books including Terrorism, Jihad, Nukes and other Issues in Focus (ISBN: 9781301505944). He holds degrees in economics, business administration, and law. His article `Rampant corruption in India’ is archived with Transparency International, `Belt-Road initiative moderndiplomacy.eu‘, with Kennedy Centre, USA, `Chanakya’s Misprint on India’s foreign policy” with People’s Review Nepal.
