Jaish Terrorist From Pak Who Made Explosives Shot Dead In J&K: Police

Munna Lahori was shot dead along with his local associate in an encounter in Bona Bazar area.

Highlights Munna Lahori was shot dead along with his local associate in Shopian

He had killed several civilians in Kashmir valley, the police said

Over 960 terrorists have been killed in J&K in the last five years

A most wanted Jaish-e-Mohammed terrorist was shot dead in an encounter with security forces in Jammu and Kashmir's Shopian today, the police said. Munna Lahori, the Pakistan-based terrorist group's leader in south Kashmir area, was shot dead along with his local associate in an encounter in Bona Bazar area.

Munna Lahori was responsible for two car bomb attacks on security forces, and also had killed several civilians in Kashmir valley, the police said. "He was involved in car blast attack on security forces convoy on March 30 at Banihal. He was also involved in car blast on Army vehicle at Arihal Pulwahma last month," Jammu and Kashmir police chief Dilbag Singh said.

The police launched a cordon and search operation based on specific information about the presence of terrorists in the Bona Bazaar area of the south Kashmir district, a police official said, adding that the operation turned into an encounter after the terrorists fired at the search party.

This terrorist from Pakistan was known for IED making and responsible for series of civilian killings in the local area. JeM had used him for recruitment also in the belt. https://t.co/pRycbNIGks - J&K Police (@JmuKmrPolice) July 27, 2019

Over 960 terrorists have been killed in Jammu and Kashmir in the last five years, according to the government. During a discussion in the Lok Sabha, Union Minister of State for Home G Kishan Reddy recently said that the security forces were taking proactive action against terrorists, as per the government's zero tolerance policy towards terrorism.

"Due to concerted and synergised efforts of security forces, 963 terrorists have been neutralised in the state of Jammu and Kashmir since 2014 till June 2019. However, during these operations, 413 security forces personnel have also lost their lives," Mr Reddy said, replying to a written question.

Terror incidents in Kashmir have reduced by 86 per cent in the last decade as compared to previous decade, he said.

Mr Reddy also said the number of terrorist incidents has substantially reduced between April 1, 2009 and June 30, 2019 as compared to the previous decade.
