After fainting on Street Dancer 3D sets, Varun Dhawan shoots for 18 hours at a stretch: Report

After fainting on Street Dancer 3 sets, Varun Dhawan shoots for 18 hours

Key Highlights The shoot of Street Dancer 3D wrapped up today Street Dancer 3D stars Varun Dhawan, Shraddha Kapoor, Nora Fatehi and Aparshakti Khurana among others Directed by Remo D'Souza, Street Dancer is scheduled to arrive in cinemas on January 24, 2020

Earlier in the day, Varun Dhawan took to his social media handles to share unseen behind-the-scenes glimpses from the sets of his next movie, Street Dancer 3D. The 32-year-old actor wrapped up the shoot of the forthcoming flick today and via his post, thanked 'the dancers from all around the world for making the film happen.'

He also mentioned that he loved being on the film's director Remo D'Souza's sets in his adieu post. Another set of reports revolving around the movie today claimed that the Kalank actor fainted on the sets of the movie and was later diagnosed with low blood pressure.

The same report went on to state that after the shoot was cancelled by the director for the next two days, Varun returned after a day and worked overtime in order to make up for the lost time. A source close to the development was quoted as saying, "Varun was battling cold and fever for a long time but continued to shoot nonetheless, well aware that his portions had to be wrapped up before July 26. On Tuesday, he was to film a gruelling dance sequence with his co-actors. Following intense prep, Varun was shooting for the number when he got dizzy and fainted. An alarmed Remo sir immediately called for the doctor, who diagnosed Varun with low blood pressure and advised him bed rest for few days. Naturally, Remo sir called off the shoot for the next two days."

Apparently, Varun didn't want the film to suffer due to his ill health. Therefore, he returned to the sets after a day's rest and pulled an 18-hour-shift the next day. Varun reportedly told the director that he would do a double shift in order to make up for the day lost. The Sui Dhaaga: Made in India actor reportedly reached the set at 1 pm and worked until 7 am the next morning (Friday).

The source went on to tell the tabloid that he also squeezed in a commercial shoot in his schedule the same day. He reportedly couldn't cancel the ad shoot as the officials had acquired the venue's permissions. Street Dancer 3D is slated to arrive in cinemas on January 24, 2020.
