AH-64E Apache Guardian helicopters: All you need to know

AH-64E Apache Guardian helicopter | Picture courtesy: Boeing

Key Highlights India has signed a $2.2 billion contract with the US government and Boeing for a total of 22 Apaches All the 22 Apaches will be delivered to India by the end of 2020 India has also placed another order for six Apache helicopters for the Army IAF's first unit to get Apache will be 125 Helicopter Squadron deployed at Pathankot

New Delhi: Known to the world as one of the most advanced multi-role combat helicopters - the AH-64E Apache Guardian helicopters are set to be inducted into the Indian Air Force and the Indian Army. Its first batch consisting of three to four AH-64Es has arrived in India and the following assembly will be sent to Pathankot airbase, near the India-Pakistan border, for the final induction into service.

What's the deal?

India has signed a $2.2 billion contract with the US government and Boeing for a total of 22 Apaches and 15 CH-47F Chinook heavy-lift helicopters. While the first batch of Chinooks was inducted into the IAF in March this year, the first batch of the attack helicopters will reportedly be inducted later this year.

Further, under the follow-on clause, India has placed an order for six Apache helicopters for the Army at an estimated cost of $930 million.

When will Apache helicopters arrive in India?

As per the contract, all the 22 Apaches will be delivered to India by the end of 2020. IAF's air and ground crew have already undergone training on the helicopter at Fort Rocker, Alabama, US. These trained men will lead the operationalisation of the Apache fleet in the IAF.

According to a report, IAF's first unit to get Apache will be 125 Helicopter Squadron deployed at Pathankot while the name of the second unit to get the attack helicopters is not clear, it'll be stationed at Jorhat airbase in Assam.

What are the features of Apache helicopters?

*Apache is fitted with two high-performance turboshaft engines, which allows for a maximum cruise speed of over 284 kilometres per hour.

*It can be armed with laser-guided precision Hellfire missile, 70-millimetre rockets, and a 30-millimetre automatic cannon.

*It's capable of transmitting, receiving battlefield pictures, and thus providing an edge in joint operations of IAF and Army.

*Apache is designed for all kinds of missions - including the stealth ones.

*It's equipped with infrared systems for bad weather and can undertake day-night missions.

Why Apache was needed?

India currently operates Russian Mi 35 attack helicopter but the chopper was specifically designed to carry troops into enemy territories whereas Apache is a dedicated attack chopper. The Mi-35 helicopters were inducted into the IAF in 1990 and are now on the verge of retirement.




