Suspected to be child-lifters, two Congress leaders thrashed in Madhya Pradesh

Representational Image | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Two Congress leaders thrashed in MP on suspicion of being child-lifters The villagers had blocked the roads over rumour that a child kidnapper gang was moving around A case of assault was registered by police

Bhopal: Two Congress leaders were thrashed by a group of people in a village in Madhya Pradesh’s Betul district after they were suspected to be child kidnappers.

The incident happened on the intervening night of Thursday and Friday in Nawal Singhana village when Betul district Congress general secretary Dharmendra Shukla and another local Congress leader Dharmu Singh Lanjiwar were returning from Kesai.

The villagers had blocked the roads by laying tree branches following rumours that a gang which kidnapped children was moving around in the village.

When the Congress leaders saw that the road has been blocked, they tried to turn around, thinking some robbers had blocked it, and were waiting to ambush them, police said.

However, they could not escape as the mob chased them down, surrounded their car and beat them up, assuming that they were child-lifters, Shahpur police station in-charge Deepak Parashar said.

A tribal leader, Lalit Baraskar who was also along with the Congress leaders was also thrashed by the villagers. The mob also vandalised the car that the Congress leaders were travelling in.

All three somehow managed to escape and informed police about the incident, Parashar said, news agency PTI reported.

The villagers, however, managed to flee the scene as soon a police team reached there.

A case of assault was registered against Dilip Barkade, Nathu Barkade, Mukteshwar, Manish and Dinesh Vishwakarma, but no arrest has been made yet, the officer said, adding further investigation is underway.

In the recent past, several incidents of a mob attack over suspicion of child kidnapping have been reported in Madhya Pradesh’ villages.

Earlier this month, a 21-year-old man was tied up and thrashed by locals in Saikheda area on suspicion of being child kidnapper.

"Subodh Chaube, 21, is a resident of Udaipur in Raisen district. He had come to Saikheda to meet his friend Deepak Tiwari. Locals got suspicious of him when he was asking around for directions. So they tied and beat him up," Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Rajesh Tiwari was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.
