EXPLAINED: Why Amarinder Singh seeks deployment of additional central security forces in Punjab

Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Punjab faced the active phase of Khalistani separatist movement fuelled by Pakistan from the early '80s to 1993 Punjab CM Amarinder Singh, based on the reliable intelligence inputs, has stated there is a rise in terror activities in the state Fearing revival of militancy in state, Amarinder Singh has sought five companies of central security forces for the state

The security situation of Punjab, which shares a long border with Pakistan, has always been challenging. Besides being an epicentre of militancy and a breeding ground for the Khalistani movement in the 80s and 90s, the state is yet to fully free itself from the separatist activities of members of various banned organisation like Babbar Khalsa International (BKI), Khalistan Commando Force (KCF) and International Sikh Youth Federation (ISYF) etc.

Punjab suffered the active phase of Khalistani militancy from the early 80s to 1993 - young Sikhs being misled on the path of demand for a separate nation for the Sikhs. It was the clash between Nirankari followers and extremist Sikhs which claimed the life of 13 people in 1978 and the murder of the Nirankari spiritual leader, Baba Gurbachan Singh in1980 that led Punjab into the bloody phase of militancy.

In the last couple of years, a peculiar development which has given sleepless nights to senior officials of the Punjab government is the increase in militant activities.

Concerns of the Punjab government:

Right after assuming the office of the chief minister in March 2017, Punjab CM Amarinder Singh, based on reliable intelligence inputs, warned about covert attempts by vested interests to revive the Khalistani movement.

The chief minister’s concern pertaining to an upsurge of militancy can be appreciated in the pretext of a recent uptick in incidents like communal attacks, targeted killings, attack a police station in Jalandhar and blast on the religious congregation of Nirankaris near Amritsar.

Elaborating on the so-called 'Referendum 2020', Amarinder Singh - in a written answer to Huffpost said that the activity is the evil design or conspiracy of a banned Sikh militant organisation, Sikhs For Justice (SJF) to drag Punjab back into the dark days of terrorism.

Amid the growing threat of a resurgence of militancy especially in the post-2015 period, which could again foment disruptive situation in Punjab, Amarinder recently wrote to the Home Minister Amit Shah, asking for more central forces. The Chief Minister hopes that the additional forces would help deal with any major challenge arising out the misadventure of groups sympathising with Khalistani movement.

|R|

For Punjab- the state which has already been grappling with challenges like rising incidents of drug abuse, smuggling of various items like drugs, weapons and counterfeit currency it was probably the Hobson's choice for the veteran politician of the state and current chief minister Amarinder Singh to seek Union government help.

As a matter of fact, what lends weight to the demand of the Punjab CM is that he heads the region which apart from sharing a rather porous border with the inimical state – Pakistan, has also been the focal point of militant activities which over the years have developed global connections. Pakistan not only aids the smuggling of drugs into Punjab but it also covertly supports Khalistani militants and helps them coalesce overcoming international borders.

Khalistani supporter Gopal Singh Chawla, a top leader of Pakistan Sikh Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (PSGPC), is routinely seen hobnobbing with the ISI and Pakistani army's high and mighty. Amarinder Singh, a former army man and a veteran politician, is well acquainted with the tendency of the deep state in Pakistan to foment trouble inside India's border regions. Recently, dangling the carrot of Kartarpur corridor before Sikh devotees, the Pakistani army allowed Chawla to be a prominent part of the proposed passage talks until India demanded and succeeded in ousting him from the group.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
