IAF gets lethal firepower as Boeing delivers four AH-64E Apache attack helicopters

In a major boost to its firepower, the Indian Air Force finally received the first batch of four Apache helicopters on Saturday, two months after US aerospace major Boeing formally handed over to the IAF the first attack chopper at its production facility in Arizona.

The first batch of the Boeing AH-64E Apache Attack Helicopters were delivered to the IAF at the Hindan air base, four years after a multi-billion dollar deal between India and US was finalised.

Another batch of four choppers will be delivered next week. Apaches are considered the world’s most lethal attack helicopter will give significant combat capabilities to the IAF.

The first Apache Guardian helicopter was formally handed over to the IAF at Boeing production facility in Mesa, Arizona, USA on 10 May this year.

IAF had signed a contract with US Government and Boeing in September 2015 for 22 Apache helicopters.

Selected aircrew and ground crew have undergone training at the training facilities at US Army base Fort Rucker, Alabama. These personnel will lead the operationalisation of the Apache fleet in the IAF.

The helicopter has been customized to suit IAF’s future requirements and would have significant capability in mountainous terrain. The helicopter has the capability to carry out precision attacks at standoff ranges and operate in hostile airspace with threats from ground, a government statement in May said.

The ability of these helicopters, to transmit and receive the battlefield picture, to and from the weapon systems through data networking makes it a lethal acquisition, the Ministry of Defence said. These attack helicopters will provide significant edge in any future joint operations in support of land forces, it added.

"The first four of 22 Boeing AH-64E Apaches have arrived in India. The world’s most lethal attack helicopter will give significant combat capabilities to IAF," Boeing said.

Besides a 22-helicopter deal with the IAF, the Defence Ministry in 2017 approved the procurement of six Apache helicopters along with weapons systems from Boeing at a cost of Rs 4,168 crore for the Army.

"The arrival of the Apaches, ahead-of-schedule, validates Boeing's commitment to delivering on its promise of modernising India's defence forces. Boeing has ensured high rate of mission readiness and increased operational capabilities through its current partnerships with the IAF," Boeing said in a statement.

"By 2020, the IAF will operate a fleet of 22 Apaches, and these first deliveries are ahead of schedule," Boeing said.

"It is the only available combat helicopter with a spectrum of capabilities for virtually any mission requirement. For the AH-64 E, this includes greater thrust and lift, joint digital operability, improved survivability and cognitive decision aiding. It is uniquely suited to meet the commander's needs, including reconnaissance, security, peacekeeping operations, and lethal attack - in both land and littoral environments - all without reconfiguration," it said.

Advanced Multi-role Helicopter

The company said AH-64 Apache is the world’s most advanced multi-role combat helicopter and is used by the US Army and a growing number of international defence forces.

Boeing has delivered more than 2,100 Apaches to customers around the world since the aircraft entered production.

The US Army Apache fleet has accumulated (as of Jan 2015) more than 3.9 million flight hours since the first AH-64A was delivered to the US Army in 1984, it said.

AH-64E Apache Technical Specifications

Length - Maximum Level Flight Speed

Height - 15.24 ft (4.64 m)

Wing Span - 17.15 ft (5.227 m)

Primary Mission Gross Weight - 6,838 kg

Vertical Rate of Climb - More than 2,000 ft per minute

Maximum Rate of Climb - More than 2,800 ft per minute

Maximum Level Flight Speed - More than 150 knots (279 kilometers per hour)
