Police raids ten illegal dance bars in Odisha under 'Operation Dance Bar'

The women detained by the police were later released after proper identification (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Raids were conducted at ten bars 96 women were detained in the raids

Bhubaneswar: The Odisha police rescued 96 women from ten different dance bars in the state on Saturday, July 27. The raids were conducted under 'Operation Dance Bar' by a joint team of five police stations. The police raided dance bars in Laxmi Sagar and Cuttack Road.

The women detained by the police were later released after proper identification. Some of the women hailed from Odisha while some of them were from West Bengal, Mumbai, Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh.

Anup Sahu, Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) said, "We had received complaints that a lot of bars in the city were engaging women without any valid license. We carried out 10 different raids across the city and rescued 96 women. "

Sahu further added, "We will submit prosecution reports to the licensing authorities and government over the permit issue with these bars. None of the bars had a license to engage women. Many of them did not even have police permission to use loudspeakers. "

State Bar Secretary said that the raids were in contradiction with the law. He said, "A 2008 Act bars engagement of women in bars while Odisha Excise rules 2017 allow the same. We had applied for permits but have not received any. The permit is provided within four weeks of appreciation."

78 women rescued from illegal dance bars in Bengaluru

The Central Crime Branch of Bengaluru raided bars in the city and rescued 78 women in the month of April. The officials detained over 100 customers during the raids. The raids were conducted at Bridge Night 6 Bar on Brigade Road and the Night Queen in Kalasipalya.

The officials arrested the manager and cashier of Bridge Night 6 Bar. The manager was identified as Ashok Reddy and the cashier was identified as Sachin K. The officials arrested Mohan P from the Night Queen Bar.

Women forced to dance at bar in Bengaluru to 'entertain customers'

In June this year, the Central Crime Branch of Bengaluru raided a bar named Chef Regency Inn and arrested 53 people. The officials rescued 74 women from the bar and confiscated Rs 1.04 lakh cash.

It was alleged that the customers could shower cash at the female employees at the bar and could dance with them by paying extra money. The women working at the bar were forced to dance there to keep the customers entertained and to lure more customers.
