Pakistani IED expert, local terrorist killed in Jammu and Kashmir encounter

SRINAGAR: In a major breakthrough, security forces gunned down dreaded Pakistani terrorist Munna Lahori, a top commander of Jaish-e-Muhammad, in an encounter in south Kashmir’s Shopian district on Saturday. Lahori was an expert in making IEDs and was responsible for a series of civilian killings in the area and attacks on security forces elsewhere in J&K.Another local Kashmiri terrorist was also killed in the gunfight. He has been identified as Mir Zeenat Ul Islam of Turkawanghom in Shopian.On credible inputs that some terrorists were present in the Banday Mohalla Bonbazar area of Shopian town, a cordon-and-search operation was launched jointly by SOG and Army in the wee hours of Saturday, a police spokesman said. During the search operation, the hiding terrorists fired upon the search party. The fire was retaliated, leading to the encounter and subsequent killings of the two terrorists, he added.“Bodies of the two terrorists were retrieved from the site of the encounter,” the spokesman said, adding that while Lahori belonged to Jaish, Zeenat was a member of Hizbul Mujahideen Both the terrorists were wanted by law for their complicity in several crimes, including attacks on security establishments and civilian atrocities, he said.“Lahori was involved in planning and executing a series of attacks on security establishments and many other civilian atrocities in the area. He played a major role in the IED blast on security forces in Arihal area of Pulwama on June 17 this year in which two security personnel were killed,” the spokesman said.The slain Jaish terrorist was also responsible for two car blast attacks targeting security force vehicles this year — one at Banihal in Ramban on March 30 and the other at Arihal in Pulwama on June 17, he said. Lahori was involved in recruiting locals into terrorist ranks,” he added.On Zeenat, he said, several criminal cases were registered against him. One such case pertained to abduction and killing of one Irfan Hameed of Zainapora.Meanwhile, an army soldier was killed in cross-border firing initiated by Pakistan to facilitate infiltration of terrorists in Machil sector of frontier Kupwara district of north Kashmir on Saturday.Reports said that the Pakistani army targeted Indian posts along the LoC in the sector. Indian troops retaliated in equal measure. However, a soldier was killed and another injured in the exchange of fire. The slain soldier was identified as lance naik Rajender Singh of 57 RR.
