US resumes military sales with $125m F-16s support deal

WASHINGTON: The United States has approved $125 million for Pakistan to provide technical support to its fleet of F-16 aircraft, practically ending a freeze on military assistance to the country.

“The US State Department has made a determination approving a possible Foreign Military Sale (FMS) to Pakistan for Technical Security Team (TST) in continued support of the F-16 programme for an estimated cost of $125 million,” said an official notification sent to the US Congress on Friday.

The approval was announced days after a White House meeting between Prime Minister Imran Khan and US President Donald Trump, which sought to “reset” troubled US-Pakistan ties. Army Chief Gen Qamar Javed Bajwa accompanied the prime minister and remained in Washington after his departure as well for a series of meetings with US defence officials.

Another official notification said the Trump administration has also approved an Indian request to provide $670m worth of support for its C-17 transport planes. Apparently, India will provide the funds for these support services.

The support programmes for the two South Asian rivals were both approved by the State Department and announced simultaneously by the US Defence Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA).

American decision comes days after White House meeting between Imran and Trump

The US media, while reporting the resumption of military sales to Pakistan, called the prime minister’s July 20-23 visit to Washington as “ice-breaking”. During his three-hour stay at the White House, the prime minister also had a one-on-one meeting with President Trump. Later, in an unprecedented 47-minute joint press talk, President Trump offered to mediate between India and Pakistan to help them resolve the 70-year-old Kashmir dispute.

Pakistan had earlier requested a continuation of technical support services, which includes US government and contractor technical and logistics support services. The request also includes related elements of logistics support to assist in the oversight of operations in support of the Pakistan Peace Drive advanced F-16 programme. The total estimated programme cost is $125m.

“This proposed sale will support the foreign policy and national security of the United States by protecting US technology through the continued presence of US personnel that provide 24/7 end-use monitoring,” the notification to Congress said.

“The proposed sale of this support will not alter the basic military balance in the region,” it added, in a bid to assuage possible Indian irritation. Pakistan used the F-16 fighter jets to bring down an Indian aircraft that had intruded into the Pakistani territory a day after India bombed a civilian facility in Balakot in February.

India urged the United States to stop Pakistan from using the F-16s against its air force, but Washington rejected New Delhi’s complaint, saying relevant bilateral agreements allow Islamabad to use the US-built fighter jets in its defence.

The principal contractor for the $125m support programme is Booz Allen Hamilton Engineering Services LLC, Fairborn, Ohio.

Implementation of this proposed sale will require the assignment of 60 contractor representatives to Pakistan to assist in the oversight of operations as part of the Peace Drive F-16 programme.

The DSCA informed Congress that “there will be no adverse impact on US defence readiness as a result of this proposed sale”.

This notice of a potential sale is required by law and does not mean the sale has been concluded.

Almost all such requests, however, are approved after a debate.

Even in case Congress rejects the proposal, the administration can still use a waiver to provide the requested services.

Early last year, the Trump administration halted all military support programmes for Pakistan after accusing Islamabad of not helping Washington in achieving its objectives in Afghanistan.

But during the prime minister’s visit to Washington, both sides announced they were now on the same page on Afghanistan.

The prime minister said that he would soon meet Taliban leaders in Islamabad and persuade them to hold direct talks with the Afghan government. President Trump thanked him for Pakistan’s support that enabled direct talks between the US and Taliban delegations in Doha, Qatar.

Since the prime minister’s return, the Taliban have conveyed their wilingness to visit Islamabad to meet Mr Khan while President Trump has dispatched his top general and a senior diplomat to Kabul to brief the Afghan government.

On Friday, the DSCA informed Congress that India has asked to buy spare parts and test equipment for their Boeing C-17 transport planes, and is seeking personnel training, among other things, “for an estimated cost of $670 million”.

“India needs this follow-on support to maintain its operational readiness and ability to provide Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief (HA/DR) assistance in the region.

“India will have no difficulty absorbing this support into its armed forces,” the agency announced.

Published in Dawn, July 28th, 2019
