George, a street-fighter committed to anti-Congressism

New Delhi, Jan 29 : A fierce socialist who fought for workers - be it the taxi drivers of Mumbai or railway employees, George Fernandes rose from the streets to become one of the towering personalities and remained a bitter and staunch critic of the Congress and the Nehru-Gandhi family's "dynasty politics" after battling the Emergency of 1975-77 imposed by Indira Gandhi.

But he also remained a puzzle as he backed the Janata Party government under Morarji Desai in Parliament on the "dual membership" issue and overnight switched to Choudhry Charan Singh, who formed a government with Congress backing in 1979. In his steadfast fight against the Congress, Fernandes did not mind joining forces with the Bharatiya Jana Sangh and later BJP.

Fernandes, 88, campaigned for the rights of the poor and the working class and left a mark with his passion, articulation, personal warmth and popularity in multifarious roles as a trade union leader, politician and a Union Minister.

A man with simple habits and tastes, he was a nine-time member of the Lok Sabha and a one-term member of the Rajya Sabha. He shot into national limelight after he defeated Congress stalwart S.K. Patil in the 1967 general election. It was a victory that earned him the reputation of a "giant killer".

Born on June 3, 1930 at Mangalore in Karnataka, Fernandes was free thinking from an early age when he had staer Narendra Modi and Congress President Rahul Gandhi led the nation in paying homage to Fernandes.

Kovind said Fernandes epitomised simple living and high thinking and was a champion of democracy during the Emergency period and beyond.

Modi said Fernandes resisted the Emergency tooth and nail. His simplicity and humility were noteworthy.

Gandhi, whose family Fernandes opposed throughout his political career, said he was sorry to hear about his death and offered his condolences to the family and friends.

Fernandes, a long-time socialist, rose to political prominence when he led the Bombay Taxi Unions Association and defeated the "uncrowned king of Bombay" S.K. Patil, a Congress heavy-weight, in the 1967 general election.

A firebrand, Fernandes, only 37 then, campaigned tirelessly, covering large swathes of the constituency with his workers. And when the results were declared, he unseated the 'king' with 48.5 per cent of the votes.

Fernandes later won the 1977 Lok Sabha polls from Muzaffarpur in Bihar even while in jail and became Industry Minister in the Janata Party government of Morarji Desai. He was responsible for driving out Coca-Cola from India in keeping with his socialist credentials but the drink made its re-entry later.

He served as Railways Minister in the V.P. Singh government from 1989 to 1990 and was instrumental in setting up the Konkan Railway project, connecting Mangalore and Bombay.

In 1994, Fernandes formed the Samata Party, which later allied with the Bharatiya Janata Party. He was appointed convenor of the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) and was the Defence Minister in the Atal Bihari Vajpayee government for two terms, between 1998 and 2004.

His term was eventful as it witnessed the Kargil war and the Pokhran nuclear test. He was forced to resign on allegations of a scam in purchase of coffins during the Kargil war for bringing bodies of soldiers but returned to the Vajpayee cabinet after a clean chit from the Phukan Commission of Inquiry.
