Mumbai: Portion of hotel’s ceiling near JJ Hospital collapses, 17-year-old boy injured

Heavy rains brought down a portion of a building in South Mumbai on Sunday | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Portion of a hotel located in a building near JJ Hospital collapsed on Sunday Incident took place at around 4 am today, officials said

Mumbai: A 17-year-old boy was injured after a portion of a ceiling collapsed at a hotel near JJ Hospital in south Mumbai in the wee hours of Sunday.

The incident took place at the Neelgiri Hotel located in Nand Vilas building at Maulana Shaukat Ali road near JJ Hospital at around 4 am today.

Fortunately, the hotel had been evacuated by the authorities recently following the tragic collapse of a 100-year-old dilapidated building in Dongri earlier this month, in which at least 13 people were killed, Times Now reported.

The injured person had been admitted to JJ Hospital where he was currently undergoing treatment.

The city has witnessed several rain-related incidents in the last two days as heavy rains lashed Mumbai and its suburbs since Friday.

On Saturday, the Santa Cruz observatory recorded 219 mm of rain, with the city and its adjoining suburbs as well as Thane, Badlapur and Navi Mumbai receiving torrential rains since Friday.

Owing to the heavy rains, Mahalaxmi Express was marooned on flooded tracks near Badlapur in Thane resulting in more than 1,000 passengers getting stranded on the train.

The passengers were finally rescued on Saturday afternoon after multiple agencies, including the NDRF, Army, Navy, Air Force and railway teams, led the rescue efforts.

According to the Central Railways, the passengers undertook their onward journey from Kalyan to Kolhapur in a special train that left Kalyan at around 6 pm yesterday.

The heavy downpour in the city caused 11 flights at the Mumbai Airport to be canceled while nine other flights had to be diverted to the nearby airports.

On the other hand, the India Meteorological Department (IMD) has predicted “heavy to very heavy” rainfall in isolated places in Mumbai, Thane, Palghar and Raigad region for the next two days.

The weatherman has issued a red alert for the Mumbai and its adjoining regions for Sunday and Monday, with “extremely heavy rainfall” expected to lash isolated places in the city.

The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) has said that it was prepared for the heavy downpour and asked the citizens to stay alert as well.

A civic body official told a news agency, "BMC has alerted its citizens about the possibility of extremely heavy rainfall tomorrow accompanied by lightning during the day. The civic machinery, including the Disaster Management Cell, has been put on alert."

The official added, "We appeal to citizens to be careful and avoid venturing into the sea, and not to open manholes.


