MP: RSS activist murders labourer to fake his own death in order to claim Insurance money

Bhopal: RSS activist Himmat Patidar has been on the run after he allegedly faked his own death to claim ‘Insurance money’ by conspiring Murder of a labourer who had worked for him two years ago.

The MP police are now on the manhunt for Patidar as he cruelly murdered labourer Madan Malviya and later burned his face to pass off as dead to claim the Rs 20 lakhs insurance money in Ratlam district, Indian Express reports.

Home Minister Bala Bachchan on Monday said the Police established the identity after conducting DNA tests on the burnt face-deceased body found in an agriculture field owned by Patidar owned in Kamed village on January 23 was Malviya’s and not of RSS activist Patidar as initially believed.

According to sources, Patidar left his home the previous night around 1.30 am after he told his family that he was going to switch on the water pump to irrigate the field but never returned.

The very next morning a face-burnt body bearing injury marks on the neck was found in Patidar’s agricultural field.

His cousin, Suresh Patidar, who is also a district-level RSS functionary, lodged a complaint with the Bilpank Police Station said the police.

The saffron party used this incident to accused Congress in the wake of earlier two murders BJP functionaries.

The Opposition BJP had accused the Congress government of deteriorating the law and order situation in the state and burned effigies of Chief Minister Kamal Nath and Bachchan in state-wide protests.

After the DNA results came out, Bachchan on Monday asked if Chouhan will also visit the house Malviya, a Dalit.

“The BJP’s original character has come to light. Himmat Patidar has turned out to be killer. BJP workers are taking the law into their hands but the party is passing the blame to us,’’ Bachchan said in Bhopal.

Ratlam SP Gaurav Tiwari reporting on the case said the labourer Malviya had also left his home around 9.30 the previous night but never returned.

Investigating the murder case, the police found that the water pump at the field where Malviya worked was running and not switched off while the one at Patidar’s field was not switched on.

The police found Patidar’s mobile phone, an Aadhaar card, an ATM card and a pocket diary with details of insurance, fixed deposits and loans near the deceased body found in the field while his motorcycle, shoes and a blood-stained belt was also found nearby.

Malviya’s shoes were found around 500 meters from the crime scene.

A post mortem was carried out on the body which revealed the victim was strangulated to death and then attacked four times with a sharp weapon. The face was later burnt.

Investigations also revealed that the mobile phone was used till 4.30 am but call records, text messages and photographs in the WhatsApp gallery was deleted.

No others injury marks were found on the body.

All evidences pointed out at two murders as two persons went missing the same night. Malviya’s family too confirmed the deceased body’s underwear was Malviya’s but not the other clothes.

Matching the DNA samples taken from Malviya’s parents and the deceased’s body proved it was malviya who was murdered.
