NIA raids locations of 4 businessmen in Jammu and Kashmir’s Baramulla [DETAILS]

Security personnel during search operations in Jammu and Kashmir's Baramulla district | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The NIA sleuths raided the residences of four traders engaged in cross-LoC trade India had in April 2019 suspended cross-LoC trade, which was launched in October 2008 Former J&K CMs, Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah, had slammed the MHA's decision to suspend cross-LoC trade

Srinagar: The National Investigation Agency (NIA) on Sunday carried pre-dawn raids at four places in Baramulla town of Jammu and Kashmir. The operation was conducted by the NIA sleuths with the help of the Jammu and Kashmir Police and the Central Reserve Police Force.

The NIA sleuths raided the residences of four traders engaged in trade across the Line of Control (LoC).

Security personnel could be seen posted outside the four locations at the time of raids.

On Wednesday, the NIA had conducted a raid at the house of Muhammad Afzal Mir, a businessman, in Aripanthan village of Budgam district. Six locations, including the residence of president of Cross-LoC Traders Association, Tanveer Ahmad Wani, were raided on Tuesday.

The Agency has already taken into custody several separatist leaders and local businessman Zahoor Watali in connection with its probe into identifying the terror funding route in the Kashmir Valley.

Notably, India had in April 2019 suspended cross-LoC trade, which was launched in October 2008, in the wake of the terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir’s Pulwama on February 14.

The Ministry of Home Affairs said that the mechanism, which was launched as a key confidence-building measure between New Delhi and Islamabad, was being misused by Pakistan-based elements to smuggle arms as well as illegal currency to stir terrorism in India.

"The government of India has received reports that cross-LoC trade routes in Jammu and Kashmir are being misused by Pakistan-based elements. This misuse involves illegal inflows of weapons, narcotics and currency," an MHA order had read.

"The LoC trade mechanism is, therefore, being suspended pending the putting into place of a stricter regulatory regime. This is to ensure that only bonafide trade takes place, for the benefit of the people of Jammu and Kashmir, through this mechanism," it had added.

The MHA, in the statement, had also said: “Reports have been received that the LoC trade is being misused on a very large scale. It has been revealed that the trade has changed its character to mostly third party trade and products from other regions, including foreign countries, are finding their way through this route.”

"Unscrupulous and anti-national elements are using the route as a conduit for hawala money, drugs and weapons, under the garb of this trade," it had added.

Former Jammu and Kashmir chief ministers, Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah, had slammed the Ministry of Home Affairs' decision to suspend cross-LoC trade.
