Big setback for govt; Interpol refuses to issue Red Corner notice against Zakir Naik

Controversial Islamic preacher Zakir Naik addresses a press conference through Skype in Mumbai, on July 15, 2016 | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Zakir Naik is wanted in India in money laundering cases and for delivering hate speeches Interpol has for the third time refused to issue a Red Corner Notice against radical preacher Dr Zakir Naik In a letter dated July 22, Interpol said Naik is “not subject to an Interpol Red Notice or diffusion”

New Delhi: In yet another setback for the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) government, Interpol has for the third time refused to issue a Red Corner Notice against radical preacher Dr Zakir Naik.

The global police body cited lack of evidence and any proof of wrongdoing as the reasons behind its decision to not issue the notice. Interpol has further instructed all its offices to delete all data on Dr Naik from its files.

The decision was taken by the Commission for the Control of INTERPOL's Files in its 109th session, which took place from July 1-5, 2019.

In a letter dated July 22, Interpol said Naik is “not subject to an Interpol Red Notice or diffusion”.

India had on June 12 formally requested Malaysia to extradite the Mumbai-based preacher, who is wanted in India in money laundering cases and for delivering hate speeches.

Notably, Naik has been residing in Malaysia for around two years now in order to avoid arrest by the Indian authorities. Cases were filed against Naik following a terror attack on Holey Artisan café in Dhaka, Bangladesh, in 2016. In the meantime, the Enforcement Directorate has charged Naik with a Rs 193 crore money laundering case.

The NRI tele-evangelist had on June 11 issued a statement expressing his willingness to return to India if the Supreme Court assured him in writing that he would not be taken into custody till he is actually convicted.

"Despite allegations and complaints, there is not a single verdict against me in any court anywhere in India or the world. The recent history of India is replete with cases of Muslims being arrested and put in jail for eight-20 years before being declared innocent by the court. Knowing this record of the Indian agencies, I would not like to take a chance of ruining my life and my unfinished work," Naik had said.

"I want to hasten up clearing my name from fictitious charges by the Indian agencies, they continue an exercise steeped in injustice and unfairness and are trying to put in jail irrespective of whether I am guilty or not... without trial and without hearing," Naik had claimed.

"Any rational mind will see that the Indian agencies are not being driven by their duty of solving a crime but by the will of their political bosses. Fortunately for me, Interpol is not driven by Indian politics. Somehow they are not convinced about my 'crime' the way Indian agencies have been claiming," Naik had added.

On June 10, Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad had underlined that his country reserved the “right not to extradite" Naik if the controversial preacher is not going to get a free trial in India.
