Agra judge on ego trip forces cop to undress; how such acts tarnish judiciary's image

After the matter reached the Allahabad High Court, the judge was given a transfer to Bundelkhand. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Agra court judge orders policeman to strip in court Judge was upset with the cop for not giving his car a pass Upset with humiliation, cop tenders resignation

New Delhi: No matter how small a job a person is involved in, the 'dignity of an individual' is paramount as mentioned in the Preamble to the Constitution of India. The recent incident where an Agra court judge ordered a policeman to strip in full view of the court, for not giving way to the judge's car, is violative of the said cop's right to live with dignity and is deplorable, to say the least.

The behaviour of the Agra judge was highly unbecoming of his position and presents a case of VVIP culture in the judiciary.

On Friday, July 26, a 58-year-old constable, on the verge of retirement, was asked to take off his uniform by Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate Santosh Kumar Yadav. The policeman was on the duty to transport undertrials to the court.

The humiliation meted out to the cop for half an hour prompted him to tender his resignation and take voluntary retirement.

The matter became public after Uttar Pradesh Director General of Police (DGP) tweeted his displeasure about the entire episode. Agra Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) also shot off a letter to Allahabad High Court's Registrar General seeking appropriate action against the judge.

As the matter reached the Allahabad High Court, the judge was transferred to Bundelkhand. However, the action taken against the judge does not seem enough. The Registrar General of the Allahabad High Court should have, instead, asked the judicial officer to apologise to the policeman. More than the alleged violation of the rules, it was the ego of the judge that prompted him to pronounce the 'punishment' to the elderly cop.

This was not the first time when a person holding a position of power has been accused of such a shameful behaviour.

In September 2013, an IPS officer thrashed three of his juniors with an iron rod after they reportedly did not inform the officer about the arrival of a senior Samajwadi Party leader who was waiting for him. The incident took place in Moradabad where Rajesh Modak was posted as the superintendent of police. The state home department had suspended the errant officer later.

Just like erring civilians assaulting public officials are severely dealt with, there is a need to deal with senior government officials humiliating and assaulting those they are higher in position or rank to severely. The punishment could include dismissal from service and or a hefty fine.
