BJP supporter accused of murdering TMC leader found dead in West Bengal’s Hooghly, situation tense

BJP workers in Kolkata | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights The saffron party had also organised several protest demonstrations across the state against the killings of its workers with some party leaders demanding President's Rule in West Bengal The resurgence of the BJP in the state is a major cause of concern for Mamata Banerjee Both the parties have been at loggerheads after BJP's massive rise in the state

Kolkata: A BJP supporter was allegedly murdered and his dead body was recovered from a canal in Goghat in Hooghly district in West Bengal. The victim identified as Kashinath Ghosh was accused of allegedly murdering Trinamool Congress leader Lalchand Bagh in Nakunda village along with 26 other BJP members.

The BJP has blamed the TMC for the murder but the latter denied the claim. Meanwhile, cops have been deployed in the area to control the situation.

Ghosh’s wife called it a planned murder demanding strict punishment and if possible death sentence for the accused.

After the 2019 Lok Sabha elections results were declared, West Bengal witnessed unprecedented poll violence with the BJP and the TMC blaming one another. Both the parties have been at loggerheads after the BJP's massive rise in the state winning 18 out of 42 Lok Sabha seats.

While the BJP state leadership claimed that 19 of their workers were murdered by the state’s ruling Trinamool Congress workers since the poll results were announced on May 23, the TMC has rejected the allegations.

The saffron party had also organised several protest demonstrations across the state against the killings of its workers with some party leaders demanding President's Rule in West Bengal.

Last month, the Centre sought a report from the West Bengal government on measures it took to stop political violence in the state and action taken against the culprits.

However, Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee rejected the allegation saying that her state was peaceful adding that such an advisory should be sent to the Yogi Adityanath-led BJP government in Uttar Pradesh over the encounters in the state.

In its report, the MHA said the number of incidents of political violence in West Bengal increased from 509 in 2016 to 1,035 in 2018, with 773 incidents already being reported so far in 2019.

“Correspondingly, the death toll rose from 36 in 2016 to 96 in 2018 while 26 deaths have already taken place in 2019,” IANS quoted the MHA as saying.

Reacting to the MHA’s report, Trinamool secretary general Partha Chatterjee accused the saffron party of trying to use the home ministry for hatching political conspiracy and destabilising the TMC government.

The resurgence of the BJP in the state is a major cause of concern for Mamata Banerjee and with next Assembly elections just round the corner, the saffron party is desperate to expand its base in Didi’s bastion.
