CPI Ker secy rejects allegations of being soft on police

CPI Kerala Secretary Kanam Rajendran Sunday rejected charges that he was "soft" in his reaction to the recent lathicharge by police on party workers, including an MLA, during a protest by them in Kochi.

Rajendran also said three CPI workers arrested in connection with pasting posters against him in Alappuzha over the lathicharge issue have been expelled from the party.

In a related development, police said they have registered a case against Muvattupuzha MLA Eldho Abraham, CPI District Secretary P Raju and nearly 80 others on the charge of attacking the police during the protest march in Kochi on July 23.

Rajendran, whose party is a ruling LDF partner, said it was on his demand Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayani has ordered a probe into the lathicharge on the party workers.

"Swift action was taken. We are waiting for the District Collector's report," he told reporters here in response to a question.

He also dismissed the allegation he was not criticising the actions of Vijayan.

"I have always criticised whenever it was required. But it does not mean that every morning I should wake up and start abusing the Chief Minister," Rajendran said.

The CPI workers had taken out a march to the IG office in Kochi protesting against a police officer who allegedly took a biased stand in connection with a recent clash between activists of All India Student Federation (AISF) and Student Federation of India (SFI).

Many workers and leaders of the Left party, including its Muvattupuzha MLA Eldho Abraham, suffered injuries in the lathicharge, CPI leaders had alleged.

On the expulsion of the three CPI workers, Rajendran said they were not following the ethics of the party.

They were arrested for triggering 'hate' by pasting posters against Rajendran at the CPI District Committee office of Alappuzha demanding his removal allegedly due to his soft stand over the lathicharge issue.

"Those who have pasted the posters were not the followers of the party ethics and morale. If there is some issue, they can always criticise anyone in the party meetings," Rajendran said.

The police had used lathis and water cannons when the marching CPI workers tried to break through barricades near the IG office.

Police Sunday said cases have been registered against the CPI workers, including the MLA and District secretary, in connection with the protest march.

While Abraham had alleged he suffered a fracture in hand, police have denied it citing a medical.

Alleging that the police was trying to establish that they did no wrong, he has said there were photographic evidences to prove their 'atrocities' against him.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
