Delhi elderly couple murder: Son of masseuse staged crime scene to make it look like a 'suicide'

The masseuse and her son confessed to having committed the crime. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

New Delhi: After the decomposed bodies of an elderly couple were found in a flat in East of Kailash in south Delhi on Saturday, the police arrested the couple's 50-year-old masseuse and her 17-year-old son on Monday. The police suspected the masseuse's involvement after interrogating her and scanning the CCTV footage of the building.

The elderly couple, who was identified as Virendra Kumar Khaneja (77) and Sarla Khaneja (72), was murdered by the minor boy on January 18. Investigating officers said that the motive behind the murder was robbery. Initial investigation made the cops suspect the masseuse as she could not answer some questions- why she did not inform anyone that the couple did not answer her knocks for around a week and why the safety latch of the entry door was unlatched. On scanning the CCTV footage of the Mount Kailash building, the police found out that the masseuse did not come to the complex after January 18.

Also Read: Burglary takes place in Punjab National Bank in Trichy; gold, cash worth crores looted from 5 lockers

Chinmoy Biswal, deputy commissioner of police (southeast), while talking to Hindustan Times, said that the juvenile spent around 24 hours inside the house, during which he murdered the elderly couple, stole cash and jewellery and made arrangement to make the incident look like a suicide pact. The woman's hands were loosely tied and scattered naphthalene balls near the bodies lead the police to suspect that it could have been a suicide pact.

On interrogating the masseuse's son, the cops were able to recover around Rs 9 lakh cash, jewellery, the couple's phones, camera and other valuables. The accused woman, who had been employed at the house for seven years, had planned the robbery with her son after she saw the cash in the house. The masseuse and her son confessed to having committed the crime.
