Deployment of 10,000 fresh troops sparks fear in IHK

Tensions in Indian-held Kashmir (IHK) rose on Sunday over the weekend deployment of at least 10,000 paramilitary troops to the troubled region despite authorities’ assertions the move was routine.

India maintains a deployment of 500,000 soldiers in the Muslim-majority Himalayan region.

The region has seen a resurgence of hostilities in recent years, while locals are fearful about the loss of special privileges after India’s Supreme Court last year began hearing a case challenging a constitutional provision.

Officials said the movement of troops – set to rise to 20,000 – was to relieve exhausted personnel deployed since local civic polls last year and now monitoring an annual Hindu pilgrimage.

“Troops have been working constantly for seven months. Some have to go on leave and some for training outside,” Director General of Police Dilbagh Singh told an international news agency.

“We have requisitioned for 200 companies (20,000 troops), more might arrive.”

A senior security official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said the deployment was to guard against possible protests about a decision or event, without giving further details.

He added that India’s security set-up in IHK was “being re-oriented like never before”.

Locals told the news agency they were worried Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government wanted to set aside a constitutional provision – Article 35A – which would allow Indians from outside the disputed territory to buy land there.

Security official says deployment is to guard against possible protests ‘about a decision or event’

The deployment follows the uproar sparked by US President Donald Trump after he claimed during a meeting with Prime Minister Imran Khan that Modi asked him to mediate in the Kashmir dispute. India has long insisted the issue can only be resolved bilaterally, and strenuously denied Trump’s claims.

Meanwhile a top dissident commander was killed on Sunday during an operation in the southern part of the Indian-held Kashmir (IHK), the region’s police chief said.

Police chief Dilbagh Singh said that Munna Bihari was killed with a local associate after a nightlong operation in Shopian town.

Singh said the commander was known for bomb-making and a series of attacks on the Indian forces in the area.

In February, a suicide bombing killed 41 Indian troops in IHK, prompting tit-for-tat airstrikes between the two countries.

Occupied Kashmir was brought under New Delhi’s direct rule in June 2018 after Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) withdrew support for its local partner and dissolved the elected local government.
