Morning digest: Yediyurappa to face floor test today, Congress questions Centre’s airport privatisation process, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day.

BJP expected to have a smooth sailing in Karnataka trust vote

The disqualification of all rebel MLAs seems to have removed any element of uncertainty from the trust vote Karnataka Chief Minister B.S. Yediyurappa will seek on Monday.

Congress questions Centre’s airport privatisation process

The Congress on Sunday attacked the Union government over its airport privatisation process and alleged that the Adani group was being favoured in the entire exercise.

Conflicting views pervade BRICS Ministers’ meeting

For a meeting set to articulate the voice of emerging countries, the BRICS Foreign Ministers’ gathering here on Friday could not have started on a more discordant note.

India should ensure Industry’s support to RCEP deal: Australian envoy

Australia’s High Commissioner, Harinder Sidhu says political will to conclude the deal must be matched with persuading Indian industry.

Army’s first Integrated Battle Groups to be structured by end of next month

The new concept of Integrated Battle Groups (IBGs) which the Army plans to create as part of overall force transformation is close to implementation, a senior Army source said. IBGs are brigade-sized, agile, self-sufficient combat formations, which can swiftly launch strikes against adversary in case of hostilities.

Naga register will shield State from outsiders, says Nagaland Deputy Chief Minister

Nagaland’s Deputy Chief Minister Yanthungo Patton has defended the government’s decision to compile a register of indigenous Naga inhabitants, arguing that it will help to safeguard the State from outsiders.

Caught riding helmetless in Chennai? Get tea and a talk on safety

With many motorists in the city still unwilling to wear helmets, Chennai’s Traffic Police are now resorting to innovative ways to cajole them into falling in line.

Editorial | Sexism in Parliament — On Azam Khan's remarks in the Lok Sabha

India needs more women in legislatures to combat the likes of Azam Khan

Comment | It’s time for India and Pakistan to walk the talk

Given the various breaches, the Simla Agreement could do with a makeover, writes V. Sudarshan

Motorsport | Max Verstappen wins crazy German Grand Prix

Red Bull's Max Verstappen won a wet and crazily chaotic German Grand Prix littered with crashes and safety car periods on Sunday with Mercedes' Formula One leader Lewis Hamilton failing to score.
