Foxed by station name, Rohingya caught

Jalpaiguri: What’s in a name? Perhaps everything. Four Rohingya Muslims on their way from Bangladesh to Delhi got caught because they tripped up on near-similar railway station names.

The four, including three women, had boarded the Kolkata-bound Kanchanjungha Express from Agartala in Tripura and were supposed to get down at New Jalpaiguri station and then board a Delhi-bound train. But they got down at Jalpaiguri Road station on Sunday, unaware that the two stations were located 35km apart. By the time they realised their mistake, RPF had got hold of them.

Muhammad Rafique (20), his wife Anwara Begum (18) and two cousin sisters Dildar Begum and Yasmin Ara had crossed into the Indian mainland from Bangladesh’s Comilla district through the Akhaura border area on Friday evening. All four, from Rangoon in Myanmar, were living in a refugee camp at Kutupalong in Cox’s Bazar, Bangladesh from 2017.

Having reached Agartala in the evening, they spent the night at the railway station and later boarded Sealdah-bound Kanchanjangha Express. Their destination was Anand Vihar area in Delhi, where Rafique’s elder sister Raizuma Begum had been living for the past couple of years. Raizuma too is an illegal infiltrator.

“Being from Myanmar and having come from Bangladesh, they did not realise Jalpaiguri Road was not New Jalpaiguri. They got off the train and were inquiring about trains to Delhi at the station. From their style of talking, people suspected them to be outsiders and we were informed. They are in our custody now. We will hand them over to Maynaguri GRP,” said Sunil Kumar, station-in-charge of RPF.

Rafique said: “We were going to Delhi for a better life. Many of us are working there. We were living a pathetic life at the Kutupalong refugee camp.”

“All this happened because of similar names of the stations,” he lamented.

RPF found a UNHCR certificate from Rafique’s possession that said he was a refugee from Myanmar. But the three women did not have any documents that could show their identity.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
