Friend held for murdering former Congress leader, kin cry frame-up

Ludhiana: Three years after the body of Youth Congress leader Arun Kumar, 27, a resident of Sunet village, was found in Sidhwan Canal, the Sarabha Nagar police on Saturday night arrested his childhood friend on the charge of murder.

Police said Ravi Kumar, 27, also a resident of Sunet village, along with his accomplices, murdered Arun over an old rivalry and dumped his body in Sidhwan Canal.

Crying frame-up, Ravi’s family said they would approach the court.

Arun had gone missing on July 28, 2016, after he left home on his bike. His family told police that someone had come to their house and Arun left with him. The same day, his bike was found abandoned near Verka milk plant on Ferozepur Road. On July 30, 2016, Sarabha Nagar police had registered a case under Section 346 (wrongful confinement) of the Indian Penal Code against unidentified accused.

On July 31, 2016, Arun’s body was found floating in Sidhwan Canal near Ayli Bridge. His viscera was sent to a laboratory to know the cause of death and at the time the police proceeded with Section 174 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

However now after three years, the Sarabha Nagar police called it a murder case. Sarabha Nagar stttation house officer sub-inspector Madhu Bala said Ravi, who ran a pan vend, killed Arun over an old enmity. Ravi and his friends had earlier fought with Arun’s paternal aunt which was the reason of their rivalry. She said the police had added Section of 302 (murder) of the IPC in 2017, but could not trace the accused.

On how police reached the accused after three years, the SHO said, “On July 25, Arun’s mother Santosh gave a statement that they suspected Ravi. After recording her statement, Ravi was detained and during interrogation he confessed to have committed the crime.”

When asked about any evidence against Ravi, the official said now police would collect it. Cops claimed that the post-mortem had ascertained head injury as the cause of death.

Contrary to police’s claims, Arun’s brother, Sachin Kumar, said, “We never suspected Ravi of killing Arun. He was a friend of Arun and they had no rivalry. We are shocked over Ravi’s arrest.”

Sachin said they had approached the Punjab and Haryana high court in 2016 against the police inaction. The police in 2017 registered a murder case on the basis of viscera report. “We also gave some names of suspects, but cops found nothing against them,” he added.

Ravi’s brother Pradeep Kumar, too, accused the police of implicating the former. He said, “Ravi and Arun were childhood friends. There was no rivalry. The police are framing Ravi as they have not been able to solve the case. We will approach the court against them.”



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
