The Shillong Times

Doctor prescribes condom for stomach ache

Ranchi: A doctor who allegedly prescribed condom to a woman who was suffering from stomach pain is facing a probe. A class 4-grade woman employee went to Asraf Badar for stomach pain treatment on July 23 at the Ghatshila government hospital of West Singhbhum district here. Asraf who works on contract in the hospital allegedly prescribed condoms to the woman. The woman went to a medical shop with the prescription where she informed by the shopkeeper that the prescribed medicine was a condom. The issue was raised by Jharkhand Mukti Morcha legislator Kunal Sarangi in the assembly after the woman complained about the matter to senior doctors. Based on the complaint, a medical team with one psychiatrist was constituted to probe the entire issue, which began the probe on Sunday. “Based on the complaint of the woman, a medical team has been constituted which has started the probe,” Shankar Tudu, in-charge of the Ghatshila sub-divisional hospital, told reporters. The doctor in question has denied the allegation. (IANS)



‘Golden baba’ at Kanwar Yatra

Meerut: Sudhir Makkar, now known as ‘Golden Baba’, has been the centre of attraction in the ongoing Kanwar Yatra here in Uttar Pradesh. He wears gold ornaments that weigh more than 16 kilos. “I have been participating in the Kanwar Yatra for the past 26 years and till last year, I wore 26 kilos of gold but I have reduced them because of poor health,” he said. Golden Baba further said: “Initially I used to wear 2-3 grams of gold ornaments but today I wear kilos of gold ornaments. I have never asked for any contribution or loan for these ornaments, I have spent my own money to buy them.” The ornaments include a collection of chains, lockets of deities, rings and bracelets. Golden Baba has a group of his own consisting of around 250-300 men and basic facilities like food, water and ambulance are always available during his Kanwar Yatra. (IANS)



2 suspended for TikTok video

Rajkot: Two police constables were suspended in Rajkot in Gujarat for shooting and uploading a video on social media video app TikTok while on duty, an official said on Sunday. A former traffic warden had posed on the bonnet of the police control room (PCR) van driven by a constable while another policeman was shooting the video, the official said. “Two constables of A-division police station were suspended after they were found to be involved in recording a video using a PCR van while on duty. They uploaded the video on Tiktok,” A-division police inspector N K Jadeja said. An inquiry ordered by police commissioner Manoj Agarwal revealed that constable Amit Pragji was driving the van and constable Nilesh Poonabhai was recording the video from a distance, he said. Both Pragji and Poonabhai have been placed under suspension, he said. “The video was shot around a month and a half ago in Ramnath Para police line locality,” Jadeja said. The action comes a few days after woman Lok Rakshak Dal constable Arpita Chaudhary was suspended for recording a video of her dancing inside a police station in Mehsana and uploading it on TikTok. (PTI)



Sand artist wins US award

Bhubaneswar: Renowned sand artist from Odisha, Sudarsan Pattnaik, has won the People’s Choice Prize at International Sand Sculpting Championship 2019 held in Boston city of the US. Pattnaik sculpted a sand art on plastic pollution with a message “Save the Ocean”, which brought him the achievement. The festival started on July 26 and concluded on July 28. Including India, there were 15 sculptors from around the world who participated in this festival. Belgium got sculptor’s choice and Canada got the jury’s choice prize. “I have created sculpture on ‘Stop Plastic Pollution’ with the message “Save the Ocean”. Happy to see lots of people voted for my sculpture,” said Pattnaik. Pattnaik, who is known for his sand sculptures on social awareness, has participated in more than 60 international sand sculpture championships across the world and won many awards for the country. A Padma Shri recipient, he is also a Guinness World Records holder. (IANS)
