PM: J&K people prefer development to bombs

laxmi@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, July 28

Noting that people of Jammu & Kashmir prefer development over bombs, Prime Minister Narendra Modi, in his monthly “Mann Ki Baat” address, lauded the efforts of the state officials in organising a community mobilisation programme ‘Back to Village’ and stressed the need for online monitoring of such programmes.

The PM said the programme held in June saw enthusiastic participation of villagers everywhere, including in very sensitive and remote villages, as government officials reached out to them to discuss development schemes. “It shows how keen people of Kashmir are to join mainstream of development... Such programmes and people’s participation in them show that people of Kashmir want good governance. This also proves the dictum that the power of development is stronger than the might of bullets and bombs,” the PM said. Senior officials reached the doorsteps of villagers across 4,500 panchayats, including sensitive villages in Shopian, Pulwama, Kulgam and Anantnag districts, he said.

The PM also noted that over 3 lakh pilgrims completed the Amarnath Yatra since July 1 and said it has already surpassed the number of devotees during 60 days in 2015. He also hailed the hospitality of the people of the state and said it would boost tourism.

Describing the moon mission as “game-changer”, Modi said, “My dear countrymen, I strongly believe that you would have felt immensely proud of India’s achievement beyond the skies in outer space. The successful launch by our scientists despite the early setback is unprecedented.”

“Chandrayaan-2 is Indian to the core. It is purely Indian in heart and spirit. We are now eagerly waiting for September when lander ‘Vikram’ and the rover ‘Pragyan’ will land on the lunar surface,” he added.

Announcing a science quiz for school students, he said, “I urge the schools, parents, and teachers to work hard to make their school victorious in the quiz that we are organising. Children, who score the highest, would be rewarded with an opportunity to witness the moment of the landing of Chandrayaan-2 in Sriharikota on September 7.”

In his 25-minute address, Modi asked people to celebrate August 15 with special preparations and find out new ways to observe Independence Day. “You must ponder over the fact how August 15 could be celebrated as a folk-festival and also as a people’s festival.”

Assures flood-hit

Speaking of floods in different parts of the country, he said the Centre in tandem with states is working at a “lightning pace” to provide people relief and succour

He said the water conservation issue has stirred the nation and lauded Meghalaya for framing a water policy and Haryana for encouraging farmers to shift to cultivate crops that need less water

Quiz for students

PM Narendra Modi urged school students to take part in a science quiz on August 1. He said, "I urge the schools, parents, and teachers to work hard to make their school victorious in the quiz that we are organising. Children, who score the highest, would be rewarded with an opportunity to witness the moment of the landing of Chandrayaan-2 in Sriharikota on September 7.”
