Crime Capital? Why is Delhi Police failing to control crime

Is the Delhi Police victim of squabble between Delhi and central government? | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Delhi registers 13% increase in murder cases in one year Is the Delhi Police victim of squabble between Delhi and central government? Gang wars have almost become a routine on Delhi streets

New Delhi: Being the guardians of law and order in the nation's capital, Delhi Police has been privileged to get the best training and equipment in the country. But despite all this, the police force has been struggling to prevent Delhi from being given the dubious distinction of being called India's crime capital.

On May 19, gang war rocked the streets of Delhi. Two people were shot dead in broad daylight in west Delhi’s Dwarka Mor. In June, five people were killed in separate incidents, including a 17-year-old boy in a span of just 15 hours. An elderly couple was found murdered at their residence in Vasant Vihar.

These were some of the instances where the city police seemingly failed to contain the crime. The situation seems to be alarming. A recent data released by Delhi Police has sent alarm bells ringing over the rising crimes in the capital city.

The data revealed that the city has recorded a 13 per cent rise in murder cases compared to last year. The Delhi Police has filed 283 murder cases till 15th July 2019, compared to 250 murder FIRs in the corresponding period last year. This constitutes a rise of 13 per cent in the murder cases. The city police had been on tenterhooks after a recent spate of killings especially in the gang wars that are now seen spilling onto the streets of Delhi. Also, there has been an increase in the number of registration of FIRs in murder cases/suspicious deaths in cases of unidentified bodies, a step ordered by the courts.

According to a report, till July 15, Delhi police have file 58 murder cases as against 37 last year. 30 per cent of the murders last year were due to sudden provocation. But this year such cases have gone down to only 20 per cent and were the result of petty issues. Family disputes, enmity, and financial discords were the reasons for half of the murders in the city this year, the police data suggests. Police data further reveals that while over 26 per cent of killings were the results of personal enmity, 15 per cent were killings took place due to family disputes, and 9 per cent crimes were due to financial issues.

The data further reveals that police managed to arrest the accused in 86 per cent of the cases till July 2019. While the city police claimed to solve 86 per cent of cases last year. Meanwhile, there has been no respite from vehicle theft in the city in the current year. Over 24,000 cases of vehicle theft were reported in 2019 as against 23,923 till July 2018. There is also a massive rise in crimes categorised as 'other thefts'. Such crimes have gone up from 67,760 cases in 2018 to over 1 lakh cases in 2019.

Data shows that snatching incidents have also gone up drastically, with nearly 4,000 cases registered till July 2019 as against 3,524 last year. But there seems to be a relief for the force after the reduction in the kidnapping, attempt to murder and dacoity cases. According to Delhi police data, the incidents of dacoity has come down from 14 in 2018 to 9 this year. Similarly, there has been a reduction in the attempt to murder cases which have gone down from 301 in 2018 to 259 this year.

As Delhi police accept its own failure in containing heinous crimes, what is that thing which is preventing the police in giving its full? There is no denying that the city's police have been stuck in a political tug of war between the Arvind Kejriwal-led Delhi government and the Centre. And if that is the reason that is impacting the performance of the capital police, then there is a need for the Delhi and the central government to sort out the matter and give a relief to the city residents. Or is it the much-delayed police reforms that can help the cops in breaking free from political interference and serve the people better?




