Painter gets life term for killing wife

Ludhiana: A local court has sentenced a painter to life imprisonment for murdering his wife. A fine of Rs 20,000 has also been imposed on the convict, Deepak Kumar.

On November 22, 2015, police had booked Deepak, 32, a resident of Babu Ram Wali Gali, Ghumar Mandi, and his brother Vipan Kumar for killing his wife Sushma and disappearance of evidence.

As per prosecution, Sushma’s brother Sanjay Kumar, a resident of Hoshiarpur, had said in his police complaint, “Sushma, 27, had married Deepak in 2011 and the couple had a 3-year-old son. After getting drunk, Deepak would beat up Sushma. The issue was taken up with the panchayat many a time, but every time it brokered peace.”

Around midnight on December 21, 2015, Sanjay received a phone call from his relatives living near his sister’s house. “They told me that Sushma had died. I, along with my brother Sanjeev Kumar and other relatives, went to Sushma’s house. Her body was lying on bed and a dupatta was tied around her neck. A part of the dupatta was hanging from the hook of a ceiling fan. The room had broken pieces of bangles,” he added.

“I inquired on my own and found that Deepak and Vipan had strangulated Sushma and cooked up her suicide story,” Sanjay said.

On November 22, 2015, Deepak and Vipan were arrested near railway station.

During the case trial, the accused pleaded implication.

The defence counsel said the ligature mark on the body was V shaped, which showed that it was death due to hanging and not by strangulation.

While observing that the contention was devoid of merit, the court held that prosecution witness Dr GS Bhinder, who was posted as medical officer at civil hospital and had conducted the post-mortem of the deceased, had deposed that it was not mandatory for the ligature mark to be V shaped only in cases of hanging. “Even otherwise defence counsel has not been able to show that V shape ligature mark can be there only in cases of death due to hanging and not due to strangulation,” the court added.

The defence counsel submitted that the complainant has deposed that Sushma’s son told him that the accused committed the murder, but her son has not been examined as a witness.

While turning down the contention, the court held that it was devoid of any merit because as per prosecution, her son was aged around three at the time of the incident.

The court, however, acquitted Vipan as the prosecution could not prove its case against him.

The court observed that no witness has deposed that he has seen the body hanging with the dupatta from the ceiling fan hook. The witnesses have only deposed that the body was lying on bed. It held that in these circumstances when there was no direct evidence of Sushma’s body found hanging, the court, keeping in view the testimony of Dr G S Bhinder in the light of medical jurisprudence, was of the opinion that it was a case of death due to strangulation and not due to hanging.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
