PM Modi to appear in special episode of Man vs Wild on Discovery with Bear Grylls

PM Modi with Bear Grylls in a promo of the episode. The episode will premiere on Discovery India on August 12. (Screengrab)

Prime Minister Narendra Modi is all set to appear on a special episode of popular wildlife show Man vs Wild with British presenter Bear Grylls. The program will be broadcast at 9 pm on August 12 on Discovery India.

Grylls said that the global broadcast will see the “unknown side of PM Modi” as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation. “People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM Narendra Modi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 9 pm,” he tweeted.

People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 @ 9 pm. #PMModionDiscovery pic.twitter.com/MW2E6aMleE — Bear Grylls (@BearGrylls) July 29, 2019

In a press release by Discovery, PM Modi is quoted as saying that the show presents him the opportunity to showcase to the world India’s rich environmental heritage and stress on the importance of environment conservation. “For years, I have lived among nature, in the mountains and the forests. These years have a lasting impact on my life. So when I was asked about a special programme focussing on life beyond politics and that too in the midst of nature I was both intrigued and inclined to take part in it. For me, this show presents a great opportunity to showcase to the world India’s rich environmental heritage and stress on the importance of environment conservation and living in harmony with nature. It was a great experience spending time in the jungle once again, this time with Bear, who is blessed with indefatigable energy and quest to experience nature at its purest,” his statement read.

On March 10 this year, The Indian Express had reported that Grylls was in Dhikala in the Jim Corbett tiger reserve in Uttarakhand around February 14, the day of the terror attack in Pulwama. On that day, the Uttarakhand Forest Department had cancelled all tourist bookings for the Dhikala forest rest house because of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to the state.

Grylls had posted a few tweets prior coming to India which were later deleted. “And it is a GREAT day in India! Am coming there soon to shoot something very special…”, one of his tweet read, followed by a ‘Shh’ emoji. It was deleted.

On February 12, Grylls posted a selfie apparently taken on board his flight to India: “On my way for an adventure in a country I love…” This post, too, was later deleted.

On February 16, Grylls replied to @PMOIndia’s February 15 tweet about the PM paying homage to the Pulwama victims. “A truly tragic day — my heart goes out to you India,” he posted on Twitter, with emoticons of a heart and folded hands.

Neither Grylls or Discovery or Uttarakhand Forest Department had confirmed about a film crew being allowed inside the Corbett tiger reserve on February 14 at that time.
