Sidharth Malhotra and Parineeti Chopra’s food trail in Lucknow

Itishree.Misra@timesgroup.com and Akash.Wadhwa@timesgroup.comA complete foodie at heart, actress Parineeti Chopra , who was in Lucknow on Saturday to promote her latest film with co-actor Sidharth Malhotra , had to literally control herself to not eat too much. When the two in fact, sat down for an exclusive tasting, arranged by Lucknow Times, of the several dishes prepared with famous Lakhnawi Dussehri mangoes, they did not waste time in tasting the wonderful dishes even while lamenting that their calorie count for the day was going for a toss. “It looks like a mango fest, what is this!” exclaimed Parineeti while eyeing the mango dishes. “So I am actually going to eat each and every dish made of mango! Seeing all these dishes only makes me so happy. Itne dinon se grilled veggies jo main kha rahi hoon, I actually want to try all these dishes. This mango drink looks like a martini...so cool. It is party time for us!” she said excitedly while Sidharth wanted to know all about the dishes and what they were and bombarded the hotel chef to tell him about them. “This spread looks amazing. Main toh aaj aam jaisa lag bhi raha hoon. But seriously, we shot in Malihabad but couldn’t have magoes then, thankfully ab khane ko mila gaya hai.”Having lost oodles of weight, Parineeti says she now doesn’t obsess over food as much as she used to. “I used to be a complete foodie but not any more. I eyed the food laid here and then I moved on. I think this comes with growing up. Most of my life I have actually not given my health or my body the respect that I should have. And I think that was one weakness that I needed to work on the most. Today I respect myself and fitness much more. Yes, you should have a cheat day but the lifestyle change should also come. Earlier I used to only look at taste, but now I look at tasty and healthy options. The wake up call for me was when I didn’t have the stamina to even shoot for four hours. I really became unhealthy. But I still have miles to go...”she says.Jabariya Jodi is the third film Parineeti shot for in Lucknow. Ask her about the experience of shooting in the city so many times and she says, “I have such a huge sense of familiarity now with this city. My first ever solo film, Ishaqzaade was shot here. So obviously that instant bonding happens with the people and the place that you shoot at. To come back to Lucknow for Dawat-e-Ishq and then coming back again for Jabariya Jodi, has made Lucknow the Indian city which I have traveled to the most. After Mumbai, this is my most favourite city. There is a reason why so many films are being shot in Lucknow, because it is really-really Bollywood friendly. It really supports film shootings and so we actors also love coming back here. Even if we are shooting outdoors in Lucknow, we are fine because the crowd is always in control. I always know now that shooting in Lucknow is going to be a good experience. Even food wise, every time I come to Lucknow to shoot or to promote my film, I enjoy a lot of good Lakhnawi food.”Sidharth and Parineeti also feasted on baati-chokha in Lucknow (BCCL/ Pics: Aditya Yadav)For Siddharth, however, it was his first experience of shooting a film here. “It was my first time in shooting here and Lucknow gives you such a lovely texture of heartland India. We had shot for the film in different parts of the city and on different streets. So we pretty much utilised every part of the city in our film even though Jabariya Jodi is based in Patna. But because our producers found it very easy to shoot here, we shot in this city. And there are so many films being shot here. With this speed Lucknow will soon become the new Mumbai,” shared Sidharth.Parineeti Chopra in Lucknow(BCCL/ Aditya Yadav)Recalling how she explored the city before the release of Ishaqzaade, Parineti says, “At that time I remember Ladies Versus Ricky Bahl hadn’t released and nobody really knew me. So after pack-up, I used to go out and roam around Lucknow. I have visited the Bada and Chhota Imambara, the malls, I used to go to Rumi Gate and have ice creams, I would just do all those normal things as a regular tourist. I have such amazing memories and pictures of that time. But now everything has changed. We are talking about all this seven years later. I have not really experienced Lucknow like that again. Now it is always going out in Lucknow as an actor with the security. I also remember shooting a lot in Residency where the people who work there knew me because we have spent so much time together,” she says, adding, “Lucknow is a really modern yet old city. It still has proof of all the Indian culture that was once there. The beautiful Indian monuments are still standing. It is amazing to see a city like Lucknow which has a blend of both the worlds.”Having shot three films in the city, Parineeti rues that she hasn’t got to play a proper Lakhnawi girl. “In Ishaqzaade, I never got to play a proper Lucknowite as it was a very modern character with a different accent, in Dawat-e-Ishq, I had a Hyderabadi accent, and in Jabariya..., I play a Bihari, so now I really wish to play a Lucknowite with a proper accent of this city.”Sidharth Malhotra in Lucknow (BCCL/ Pics: Aditya Yadav)Even Sidharth wishes to come back to the city soon. “Kudos to the state government for making Lucknow so shoot friendly. Even today we got to know that several actors are shooting for different films here. So it wouldn’t be a surprise if I came back here soon for another film. In fact, I’m sure I will,” shares Sidharth. Recalling the days spent shooting for the film in Lucknow Sidharth says, “Actually, I feel lucky about getting a chance to shoot in Lucknow, in this wonderful city. I’m really happy that we shot here in Lucknow. I missed Lucknow when I got back to Mumbai,” he adds.The two shares that they have encountered several fan moments while shooting in Lucknow. “I remember how several fans used to wait outside our hotel for days till we met them as we used to leave for the shoot early in the morning and come back late in the night,” shares Parineeti, adding, “They would always try to catch us out side the hotel. So when one day, I wasn’t shooting while Sid was, I made it a point to meet them and sit with them for sometime. Lucknow fans showered us with so much of love,” smiles Parineeti, while Sidharth agrees with her. “I remember when we were shooting here there was this group of girls from the city who brought me a cake and had made collage of my pics. As an actor, that’s what you want. People’s love and appreciation and that we got a lot of from the people of Lucknow.Later, the actors visited a restaurant to have baati-chokha, the famous Eastern UP and Bihari dish. “This is so yum!” said Parineeti as she helped herself to one while Sidharth remembered how he had the dish when he bgean shooting for the film. “That was the first time in my life I had had litti-chokha and I had loved it then.” The two actors then met a few fans and had pictures clicked with them.Leaving behind and taking some good memories from Lucknow both Parineeti and Sidharth hoped that they would be back in Lucknow soon.— Itishree.Misra@timesgroup.com and Akash.Wadhwa@timesgroup.com
