Bear Grylls: PM Modi to feature on show 'Man Vs Wild'

India- where you find lush green forests, diverse wildlife, beautiful mountains and mighty rivers. Watching this… https://t.co/bWk0iITeBb — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) 1564389681000

People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wildern… https://t.co/d7rtPDdngm — Bear Grylls (@BearGrylls) 1564378737000

NEW DELHI: Prime Minister Narendra Modi will feature on the show " Man Vs Wild ' in an attempt to create awareness about animal conservation and environmental change.The episode on Discovery Channel featuring the Prime Minister along with survivalist and adventurer Edward Michael Grylls, popularly known as Bear Grylls , is shot in Uttarakhand's Jim Corbett National Park and throws light on the importance of protecting wildlife.Speaking about the show, PM Modi said, "For years, I have lived among nature, in the mountains and the forests. These years have a lasting impact on my life. So when I was asked about a special show focusing on life beyond politics and that too in the midst of nature I was intrigued to make part in it."He added that the show was a "great opportunity to showcase to the world India's rich environmental heritage and stress on the importance of environment conservation and living in harmony with nature."Grylls, on his part, said he was "truly honoured" to spend time with the Prime Minister. He also shared a 45-second promo of the special episode on Twitter in which Modi is seen interacting with him, riding a dingy and putting together a spear."You are the most important man in India. my job is to protect you," Grylls said in the video, covering the Prime Minister with a jacket.In response, Modi thanked the'Man Vs Wild' host for coming to India and sharing the promo. "India- where you find lush green forests, diverse wildlife, beautiful mountains and mighty rivers. Watching this programme will make you want to visit different parts of India and add to the discourse of environmental conservation. Thanks, Bear Grylls for coming here! @DiscoveryIN," Modi said.On Monday, the Prime Minister released the All India Tiger Estimation Report 2018, according to which the country at present has 2,967 tigers. The census in 2014 had pegged the number at 2,226, while the 2010 census said the number was 1,706 and the 2006 census number stood at 1,411. Lauding the efforts, Modi said, "Today, we can proudly say that with nearly 3,000 tigers, India is one of the world's biggest and most secure habitats."The programme will be telecast on August 12 at 9pm.
