Father Killed In Jail & Aunt Dead In Mishap, Is Unnao Rape Victim Paying Price For Accusing BJP MLA?

There are many things in our country that discourage poor people from raising their voice against the blatant injustice they face every day. The system has made inequality so smooth that it looks quite normal to the citizens of India. Those who somehow gather the courage to stand up against this structural violence against them, are often subjected to further misery.

This is what probably has happened with the Unnao rape victim in Uttar Pradesh, who decided to take on the high and mighty in the Yogi Adityanath ruled state. She was allegedly raped by BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar. But her misery did not end there. Since the victim decided to seek justice she has been losing family members.

The latest attack could have taken her own life. She's currently battling the injuries she sustained in what is said to be a collision between a truck and a car in which she was travelling.

Is it a coincidence, or a conspiracy to silence her forever?

The incident took place in Rae Bareli district when the rape victim was traveling with her aunt, another relative and lawyer.

ANI

They were returning from Rae Bareli prison after meeting the rape victim's uncle, who was jailed in a forgery case.

The truck, which had its number plate smeared with black paint was overspeeding and was driving on the wrong side when the accident happened on NH-31.

Two of the occupants on the car, the rape victim's aunt and another relative were killed on the spot while the victim and her lawyer are battling for their lives. They were traveling without the court-designated police security at the time of the accident.

Despite all the circumstances suggesting that it was a planned attempt to murder UP DGP OP Singh said the accident did not appear like a case of conspiracy or intent to murder but added that a probe was on.

The driver of the truck who fled the scene has been arrested.

This is not the first time the family of the woman who had filed the rape complaint against Sengar has been targeted.

BCCL/ FILE

On 8 April 2018, just a day after the woman tried to self immolate outside the residence of Uttar Pradesh chief minister Yogi Adityanath, her father died in police custody under suspicious circumstances. It is alleged that the father was beaten up by Sengar's brother in police custody resulting in the death.

Just months later Yunus Khan, a key witness in the case died under mysterious circumstances.

Even the victim wasn't spared. On December 27, UP Police registered an FIR against her for forgery. Her mother and uncle Mahesh were also booked in the case. On Sunday they had gone to visit Mahesh in jail.

BCCL/FILE

Despite the nationwide outrage caused by the incident Senger who arrested by the CBI and is now behind the bars continues to enjoy the patronage of the BJP.

He has not been expelled by the party and another controversial BJP leader from Unnao, MP Sakshi Maharaj had recently visited Sengar in jail to thank him for his support during the Lok Sabha Elections.

The case dates back to June 2017, when the girl, who was a minor at the time approached Sengar a relative, to seek a job. He then allegedly kidnapped and raped her inside his home.
