Modi in Man vs Wild: Congress says PM was busy shooting film as 40 jawans died in Pulwama attack

Bear Grylls and PM Modi in a still from the Man vs Wild episode. (Image: Discovery Channel)

As soon as the clip of PM Narendra Modi's adventure trip in the forests of Uttarakhand was released, the Opposition hit out at the PM for shooting the 'Man vs Wild' episode for Discovery Channel on the day when 40 CRPF jawans were killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

Congress spokesperson Shama Mohamed said, "When 44 CRPF jawans were martyred in #Pulwama, PM #Modi was having the time of his life shooting for this programme. He was enjoying it so much, that he continued shooting even after being told of the heinous attack! See him laughing carelessly in the trailer!"

PDP chief and former Jammu and Kashmir CM Mehbooba Mufti mocked PM Modi over the show.

She said, "At the risk of sounding repetitive, the PM surely is a pioneer in innovative PR skills that seem to strike a chord with every generation."

On Monday, adventure show host Bear Grylls released a clip of the upcoming 'Man vs Wild' episode featuring PM Modi and him on an adventure trip in the forests of Uttarakhand.

When 44 CRPF jawans were martyred in #Pulwama, PM #Modi was having the time of his life shooting for this programme. He was enjoying it so much, that he continued shooting even after being told of the heinous attack! See him laughing carelessly in the trailer! https://t.co/5hSQtJov4h July 29, 2019

At the risk of sounding repetitive, the PM surely is a pioneer in innovative PR skills that seem to strike a chord with every generation. https://t.co/VdW1fbWcCY Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) July 29, 2019

The two can be seen riding dinghies, walking in the dense forests of Jim Corbett National Park and sharing a laugh.

PM Modi was in Corbett, shooting for 'Man vs Wild' episode when the Pulwama attack happened. PM Modi did not go to Corbett during or after the Pulwama attack.

In the days after the devastating attack on February 14, Opposition led by Congress and Rahul Gandhi trained their guns on PM Modi and said he was out to shoot a film while the jawans died in a terror attack.

After the Opposition onslaught, the PMO had clarified with a detailed itinerary of PM Modi.

The Prime Minister was in Uttarakhand to address a rally in Rudrapur, his journey was interrupted by rain. He spent 3 hours at the Jim Corbett National Park in the afternoon and also a tiger safari, an eco tourism zone and a rescue centre.

The PMO also said that all through the journey he was monitoring the developments in Pulwama and later cancelled his Rudrapur visit and returned to Delhi via Bareilly.
