Saaho: The makers of Prabhas-starrer are making it large with detailed action scenes!

Mumbai: After treating us with the magnificent visuals of Prabhas studded trailer that recently was released and having our minds boggled with the remarkable action sequences, Prabhas is all set to amaze us once again with the extravagant visuals and action scenes with his upcoming next, Saaho.

Saaho is the most anticipated upcoming action film of the Industry as it hails to have two expert action directors brought on board to shoot its action sequences in Dubai as well as in Italy.

The blueprint of Abu Dhabi's action sequences were the brainchild of the action director, Pen Zhang. The scene was crafted in a 10-acre artificial desert set created by the makers of the film, wherein Prabhas took on 100 international fighters like a no man's job.

Having one action director for the movie wasn't enough for the makers of Saaho, that they brought another International action director Kenny Bates on board to create the chopper scene.

Talking about the chopper scene been shot in Italy, a source close to the Saaho team said, “It involved helicopter stunts and we had planned to shoot it in India. But it was difficult getting permission, so the team flew to Europe where an Italian military helicopter was sourced. Experts were on the sets throughout the shoot to ensure that safety measures were in place."

The chopper scene has both the actors Prabhas and Shraddha Kapoor. After watching the splendid pairing of Prabhas- Shraddha in the movie's teaser as well as the trailer, we are sure that they are going to nail the chopper scene with perfection.

With a power punch like that loaded with new action sequences with every frame, Saaho sure is the movie to look out for! While Prabhas looks every bit of a fierce heartthrob, Shraddha is also killing it with her oomph factor.

Saaho is one of the biggest films which has been made on a massive scale, starring Prabhas, an actor who enjoys pan India appeal. Paired with Shraddha Kapoor, the movie is being shot in three languages, Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu, simultaneously. The movie also has a superlative ensemble cast of Jackie Shroff, Neil Nitin Mukesh, Mandira Bedi, Chunky Panday, Mahesh Manjrekar, Arun Vijay, Murali Sharma, amongst others- all the more reasons why the delay does deter the spirit of the audience who are looking forward to the release.

'Saaho' is a high octane action thriller which is presented by T-Series, produced by UV Creations and directed by Sujeeth and is set to hit the theatres on August 30, 2019.
