Utopia in the kingdom: What you need to know about Saudi crown prince's plan to build a $500 billion megacity

Utopia in the kingdom: What you need to know about Saudi Crown Prince's plan to build a $500 billion megacity

Key Highlights Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman is considered as the de-facto ruler of Saudi Arabia MbS has faced international pressure after writer Khashoggi was murdered in the kingdom's consulate

New Delhi: Saudi Arabian Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman is expecting investors to invest money in his 500 billion dollar megaproject for Neom, a city built in the desert. According to a news report, some of the key proposals for this project expect that robots will replace humans and teachers will teach genetically-enhanced students through hologram technology.

The details show that it will have artificial intelligence (AI)-equipped surveillance cameras. The key highlights from the report include cloud seeding, dystopian surveillance, genetic engineering, robots, flying taxis, fake moon, etc. The cloud seeding technique will be used to create a temperature climate so as to make it rain. The dystopian surveillance will be set up in order to ensure the safety of the citizens by installing cameras, drones and facial recognition. The report has cited plans from Softbank to create "a new way of life from birth to death reaching genetic mutations to increase human strength and IQ".

It has also highlighted the robot maids, robot cage fights for people's amusement, robot dinosaurs for an amusement park. In 2017, the de-facto leader of Saudi Arabia, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman said, he wants to attract the "world's greatest minds and best talents". As mentioned in the report, Mohammed bin Salman, popularly known as MbS, "envisions Neom the largest city globally by GDP and wanted to understand what he can get with up to USD 500 billion investment."

The report has noted that a lot of factors have stopped Saudi Arabia from attracting international businesses such as corruption, the legal system, etc. Also, alcohol is banned, the rights of women are restricted and homosexually is illegal.

It may be noted that the crown prince is considered as the de-facto ruler of Saudi Arabia, the world's leading oil exporter. He is the eldest son of then Prince Salman bin Abdul Aziz Al Saud's third wife, Fahdah bint Falah bin Sultan. He acquired a bachelor's degree in law from King Saud University, post which he worked for several state bodies. He was appointed as a special adviser to his father in 2009, who was serving as the governor of Riyadh at that time. His rise to power began in 2013 when he was named head of the crown prince's Court.

During an interview in October 2017 with an international publication, MbS said there will be 12 small cities and towns next to the sea and other six or seven, some of it in the valley, some in the mountains, towns, and one huge industrial zone, one huge port, three airports, one global big airport. "So there are a lot of huge different projects in Neom. Neom is like a small country in a big country. So the first town in an area we call the 'Neom Riviera' will be there in 2020. Most employees will move there. I am pushing to have it in 2019, I don’t know if I will succeed in that," he further added.

"We really don't have details about anything in Neom, which is why we don't know how viable it is," said Steffen Hertog, associate professor in comparative politics at the London School of Economics and Political Science.

According to a report, the government-owned company that's developing Neom said it received positive feedback after meeting with "senior business leaders from Asia, Europe and the US" for opportunities in energy, tourism, water infrastructure and technology attracting significant interest.

Developers of Neom in a response to questions last week said, "Companies understand that we are building not only a region but a commercial powerhouse and they want to be a part of it." On the relocation of the people, they said, "Over 20,000 people will need to be moved based on current estimates. The relocations will be done as apert of an established process that is being worked on with the World Bank," further adding, "Residents will be compensated and there will be a number of social programs in place to support them."

The crown prince has faced international pressure after US-based Saudi writer Jamal Khashoggi was murdered in the consulate of the kingdom in Istanbul in October 2018. Last month, the United Nations (UN) said that Jamal Khashoggi had been the victim of a deliberate, premeditated execution, an extrajudicial killing for which the state of Saudi Arabia is responsible.
