PM Narendra Modi lauds Jharkhand villages for water conservation efforts

Villagers of Aara and Keram made Jharkhand proud: Raghubar Das

RANCHI: The twin villages of Aara and Keram in Jharkhand shot to limelight on Sunday when Prime Minister Narendra Modi lauded their water conservation efforts in his 'Mann ki Baat' programme.Modi lauded Meghalaya , too, for becoming the first state to frame its own water policy and the Haryana government for giving impetus to crops that consume less water. "Water conversation has stirred the heart of Indians these days," he said while praising media for its "innovative campaigns" for water conversation.Talking about Aara and Keram villages which are located 40 km from Ranchi, Modi said the residents have set an example through their 'shramdaan'. They have channelled the water flowing down the mountains to their fields. "Their act also made the two villages self-sustainable in terms of tackling water and irrigation woes," the PM said.This is the second time in the past two months that the state has found a mention in 'Mann ki Baat'. Last month, Modi heaped praises on Dilip Kumar Ravidas, the village mukhiya of Lapung panchayat in Hazaribag's Katkamsandi block for his work to conserve rainwater.Even before the state government rolled out its Jal Shakti Abhiyaan (water conservation drive), the villagers of Aara and Keram joined hands to move loose boulders from the forested hills and make 700 small checkdams all along the slope of the hill to the river.“When it rains, the dams hold the water, preventing soil erosion. The water flowing down from the hill is channeled in a way that it flows into river and to fields through different routes. Now, sufficient water is available for the fields and for drinking purpose as well,” Gope added.Chief minister Raghubar Das acknowledged the efforts of residents of the two villages. “They (villages) have made the entire state proud nationally,” he said, thanking Modi for appreciating Jharkhand.Apart from the water conservation work through joint efforts, the villagers have also taken up several self-sustaining and development activities. In 2016, during a chance visit to social worker Anna Hazare’s Ralegoan Sidhi village in Maharashtra, they were impressed with the watershed management and other initiatives.Ramesh Bediya, who heads forest management in the two villages, said, “The visit motivated us to do something similar in our villages. In 2017, our village became liquor-free and we also resolved to curb felling of trees. Moreover, we formed teams to clean our villages on a daily basis and also created a series of dobas (small ponds) to conserve water.”Ormanjhi block development officer Abhinav Swarup termed Aara and Keram as model villages. “They are shining examples of how the residents, through public participation, are turning their villages into self-sustainable ones. The government is extending full support to them through its various schemes as and when required. For example, through MNREGA, they created about 45 dobas a couple of years back on 32 acres of land, which is now helping them sow crops round the year,” Swarup said.
