Watch: A stray cattle barging into IIT Bombay’s classroom — and it has stirred up a storm on social media

A stray cattle entered the lecture hall of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay.



The video showed how the students tried to drive away the cow but she chose to go her own way — entered the lecture hall from one side and left from the other.



Recently, a leopard entered the campus building to get a roof during rains.

Cow entering IIT BOMBAY without clearing JEE Advanced?? . A cow entering an IIT Bombay classroom https://t.co/i7taJ2TPOd — Mayur Borkar (@imayurborkar) 1564367253000

Advertisement

IIT Bombay

Advertisement

Advertisement

A stray cattle entered the lecture hall of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay, one of the country’s most prestigious institutes of higher education, leaving students perplexed. The video has gone viral on Twitter.Not surprisingly, the incident has embarrassed the authorities at the country's premier engineering institute.It is not clear from the video when the incident occurred and officials are inquiring about it before issuing a statement, anspokesperson told news agency IANS.The video showed how the students tried to drive away the cow but she chose to go her own way — entered the lecture hall from one side and left from the other. Adding to the trend, Twitter users have been commenting on the video saying that “the cow entered the classroom without clearing JEE Advanced exam.”“Surprisingly, the animal entered a classroom on the first floor. It must have probably entered through one of the slopes that internally connect the lecture halls on various floors,” Hindustan Times reported quoting an IITian.This isn’t, however, the first time that an animal has interrupted and entered the campus. Recently, a leopard entered the campus building to get a roof during rains, IANS reported.In fact, a student from the college campus was attacked by stray bulls on his way to the lab, the Hindu reported on 13 July 2019.
