Man vs Wild: PM Modi to feature in Man vs Wild with Bear Grylls

Man vs Wild: PM Modi will be featured with ace adventurer Bear Grylls in a special Man vs Wild episode on the Discovery Channel. The PM Modi Bear Grylls episode, shot in Jim Corbett National Park will air on August 12 at 9 pm. The special show will be broadcasted in 180 countries across the world.



Man vs Wild PM Modi episode air date: August 12, 2019



PM Modi will venture into the wilderness with Bear Grylls, popular adventurer and host of 'Man vs Wild’ show in a unique association. The Man vs Wild episode will premiere on August 12 on the Discovery Channel. The special Man vs Wild episode, shot in Jim Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand, will be broadcasted in 180 nations across the world, simultaneously in five languages- English, Bengali, Hindi, Tamil and Telugu on 12 Discovery Channels.



Speaking on his association with Man vs Wild, PM Modi said that "For years, I have lived among nature, in the mountains and the forests. These years have a lasting impact on my life. So when I was asked about a special programme focusing on life beyond politics and that too in the midst of nature I was both intrigued and inclined to take part in it.”

"For me, this show presents a great opportunity to showcase to the world India's rich environmental heritage and stress on the importance of environment conservation and living in harmony with nature. It was a great experience spending time in the jungle once again, this time with Bear, who is blessed with indefatigable energy and quest to experience nature at its purest," Modi added.

Bear Grylls shared a sneak peak into the special episode on his official twitter account in which PM Modi is seen riding a dingy and learning how to put together a spear. The 45-second promo promises a frank and freewheeling journey into the wild. The special episode is likely to throw light on India’s wildlife, wildlife conservation effort and impact of environmental change.

Bear Grylls was seen saying in the video, “You are the most important man in India. My job is to keep you alive.” Bear Grylls termed it as an honour to be taking Modi, the leader of the world’s largest democracy, on an adventure into the Indian wilderness.
