Modi in Man vs Wild: PM was shooting film during Pulwama attack, Congress hits out at Modi

Home >> Delhi Modi in Man vs Wild: PM was shooting film during Pulwama attack, Congress hits out at Modi

PDP chief and former Jammu and Kashmir CM Mehbooba Mufti mocked PM Modi over the show.

Hours after PM Modi`s clip with bear Bear Grylls was released the opposition has slammed PM for shooting the `Man vs Wild` episode for Discovery Channel on the day when 40 CRPF jawans were killed in the Pulwama terror attack.

Congress spokesperson Shama Mohamed said, "When 44 CRPF jawans were martyred in #Pulwama, PM #Modi was having the time of his life shooting for this programme. He was enjoying it so much, that he continued shooting even after being told of the heinous attack! See him laughing carelessly in the trailer!"

When 44 CRPF jawans were martyred in #Pulwama, PM #Modi was having the time of his life shooting for this programme. He was enjoying it so much, that he continued shooting even after being told of the heinous attack! See him laughing carelessly in the trailer! https://t.co/5hSQtJov4h Shama Mohamed (@drshamamohd) July 29, 2019

PDP chief and former Jammu and Kashmir CM Mehbooba Mufti mocked PM Modi over the show.

She said, "At the risk of sounding repetitive, the PM surely is a pioneer in innovative PR skills that seem to strike a chord with every generation."

At the risk of sounding repetitive, the PM surely is a pioneer in innovative PR skills that seem to strike a chord with every generation. https://t.co/VdW1fbWcCY — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) July 29, 2019

On Monday, adventure show host Bear Grylls released a clip of the upcoming `Man vs Wild` episode featuring PM Modi and him on an adventure trip in the forests of Uttarakhand.

The two can be seen riding dinghies, walking in the dense forests of Jim Corbett National Park and sharing a laugh.

PM Modi was in Corbett, shooting for `Man vs Wild` episode when the Pulwama attack happened. PM Modi did not go to Corbett during or after the Pulwama attack.

In the days after the devastating attack on February 14, Opposition led by Congress and Rahul Gandhi trained their guns on PM Modi and said he was out to shoot a film while the jawans died in a terror attack.

After the Opposition onslaught, the PMO had clarified with a detailed itinerary of PM Modi.

The Prime Minister was in Uttarakhand to address a rally in Rudrapur, his journey was interrupted by rain. He spent 3 hours at the Jim Corbett National Park in the afternoon and also a tiger safari, an eco-tourism zone, and a rescue center.

The PMO also said that all through the journey he was monitoring the developments in Pulwama and later canceled his Rudrapur visit and returned to Delhi.
