Indian prime minister teams up with Bear Grylls in Man vs. Wild

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi at a press conference following a meeting with Kyrgyz President Sooronbay Jeenbekov (not seen) in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, June 14, 2019. EPA-EFE/FILE/IGOR KOVALENKO

A close up view shows Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi delivering the keynote address during the opening dinner of the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS) 17th Asia Security Summit in Singapore, June 1, 2018. EPA-EFE/FILE/WALLACE WOON

British adventurer and television host Bear Grylls, star of the television programme Man vs. Wild, answers questions at a press conference in Sydney, Australia, Mar.4, 2011. EPA-EFE/PAUL MILLER AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND OUT

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi is set to appear on television, venturing out in wilderness with Bear Grylls, the host of the widely popular adventure series Man vs. Wild that will be telecast in August.

The announcement of Modi featuring in the show was made by the host of the program on Monday, triggering enthusiasm as well as criticism against the prime minister.

Modi will be seen with Grylls, a former member of the British special forces, as they make their way through Indian jungles and survive wild animals in an episode of the program to premiere on Aug.12 on Discovery channel.

"People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation (and) environmental change,” tweeted Grylls along with a teaser of the episode.

The short video shows Grylls skydiving out of an airplane and landing in the middle of an Indian forest before the prime minister arrives in an SUV.

"An ace adventurer who redefines the rules of survival unites with the leader of the world´s largest democracy," said the introduction to the clip.

Grylls is heard telling Modi that he is "the most important man in India" and his job was to keep him alive, before showing glimpses of the duo wading through a makeshift raft on water, with a rudimentary spear, and making it through a jungle teeming with wild animals like as tigers, rhinoceroses and deer.

"India – where you find lush green forests, diverse wildlife, beautiful mountains and mighty rivers. Watching this programme will make you want to visit different parts of India and add to discourse of environmental conservation,” tweeted Modi, in response to Grylls' post.

The announcement has been met with significant enthusiasm by news channels, along with ruling party workers and supporters of the prime minister, who earlier this year was reelected by the country of 1.3 billion people with an overwhelming majority.

However, the video has also prompted criticism from several quarters, amid allegations that the shooting for episode had taken place when a terror attack against Indian security forces left over 40 of them dead in Kashmir.

Modi’s critics allege that the shooting of the program was done even after the news of the deadliest attack in decades broke out in the media.

On Feb. 14, a suicide bomber rammed a car laden with explosives into a bus carrying Indian paramilitary troopers in the disputed Kashmir region. The attack raised military tensions between India and Pakistan and brought the two South Asian neighbors to the brink of war.

"Watch PM @narendramodi on an epic adventure of a lifetime exactly during the moment when 40 jawans (soldiers) faced one of the deadliest terror attacks in Pulwama (of Kashmir)," tweeted the women's wing of the opposition Indian National Congress party.

Modi's was also criticized for alleged neglect of environment and natural resources in his policies during his previous tenure.

Communist Party of India's politburo member Kavita Krishnan claimed Modi was "enacting a law enabling forest officials to kill forest communities" and hit out at Grylls for letting him "use you to cover all this up”.

Modi is the second world leader to appear on Grylls' show after then United States President Barrack Obama in December 2015, when they trekked in the Alaskan wilderness.

sc/ssk
