Pictures From Christopher Nolan’s ‘Tenet’ Reveals Dimple Kapadia’s First Look

Dimple Kapadia is an evergreen actress best known for her roles in Bobby and Dil Chahta Hai. So when the news came that this beauty was to be a part of internationally acclaimed director Christopher Nolan’s next film, we couldn’t keep our cool.

As luck would have it, leaked photos from the set of their film reached the internet and we can spot Dimple and The Dark Knight director Christopher Nolan together on set.

Nolan’s upcoming film is titled Tenet. The leaked pictures are from the sets of the film set up in Estonia, giving us a first glimpse of the veteran Indian actor in the Hollywood production.

Take a look at the images:

Dimple Kapadia & Dir Christopher Nolan from #TENET shooting spot.



First schedule of Shooting in Estonia ends today.



Second schedule will begin next month in Italy.



July 17 2020 release! pic.twitter.com/WQ5QdhsbGT — Elite Review (@ElitesReview) July 29, 2019

In the pictures, the Indian actress can be seen chatting with her director, Christopher. The film is currently being shot in Estonia which is assumed to be the first schedule of the shoot. However, these are all guesses as the project is being kept under wraps and away from attention.

What we know about the rest of the cast

The film is said to be another “event” film from Nolan who is known for his personal and distinctive films. His last film was Dunkirk, which was critically acclaimed and won multiple Oscars. Tenet, like all of Nolan’s previous films, is marked with high levels of secrecy, apart from the obvious fact that the plot is being kept under lock and key. Some unverified rumours have claimed that the movie is an espionage thriller.

Speculations about the cast and crew have also been rife. According to reports, Tenet stars BlacKKKlansman star John David Washington, the new Batman Robert Pattinson, Elizabeth Debicki, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Clémence Poésy, Michael Caine, and Kenneth Branagh.

Dimple Kapadia to star in Christopher Nolan's spy-thriller movie titled #TENET.



The movie will release on July 17, 2020. pic.twitter.com/zEBJGvE75d — Sir Jadeja fan (@SirJadeja) May 22, 2019

Caine has been a constant in all of Nolan’s films since Batman Begins and Branagh has previously worked with the director in Dunkirk. Nolan’s Interstellar and Dunkirk director of photography (DoP) Hoyte van Hoytema returns, but his regular composer Hans Zimmer has been replaced with Ludwig Göransson, who won an Oscar for Black Panther.

Tenet is set to be shot in six more countries around the world, including India, with a shoot in Mumbai reportedly scheduled for September. The film will release in theatres worldwide on 17 July 2020. Till then here are some more snippets from the sets:

FIRST LOOK at Dimple Kapadia on the set of #Tenet, with lead John David Washington, Christopher Nolan and Hoyte van Hoytema.



They’re using Panavision 65mm cameras here. Based on the set videos from Tallinn, I suspect the action scenes are shot in IMAX and the rest is 65mm film. pic.twitter.com/U8jZISJGv0 — Adam Khan (@AdamKhan100) July 27, 2019
