Heroes rescue hundreds from stranded train in India

I write to you in reference to your article India floods: Hundreds rescued from stranded train (July 27).

Your article about the Indian floods shed light on the plight of hundreds of people who were rescued from inside a train that had been stuck amid the floods for hours.

The Mumbai-Kolaphur Mahalaxmi express train was stranded a few kilometres away from the capital after a nearby river overflowed its banks, owing to heavy

rains. The floods paralysed the train completely and the ­passengers were ­understandably ­panicked and feared for their lives.

Thankfully the National Disaster Response Force came to their rescue. More than 600 people were saved from the floods, including nine pregnant women. I saw pictures of the rescue mission and the NDRF seemed like modern-day supermen to me.

I would like to thank all the NDRF team members for their lifesaving efforts in India.

K Ragavan, Bengaluru

Condolences to Neil Kumar's loved ones

I write to you in reference to your article Promising UAE student shot dead in US robbery (July 28). This is such a tragic story. I send my sincerest condolences to his grieving family and friends. May Neil Kumar rest in eternal peace.

Neha Khandwani, Dubai

Heatwave is pushing travellers further up north

I write to you in reference to Hayley Skirka's article A 484% increase: UAE travellers rush to chilly Helsinki for Eid Al Adha holidays (July 28). Parts of Europe reached a scorching 40 degrees, so it is

no wonder that people are going further north for their foreign holidays.

My parents told me that all the AC units were sold out in the Netherlands. Scandinavia is the place to be during the heatwave. I have been there before and I must say that I love it!

Ellen de Boer, Dubai

Is Tiffany Trump sending a message to her father?

I write to you in reference to Farah Andrews's article Who is Michael Boulos? Meet Tiffany Trump's Lebanese boyfriend (July 28). Tiffany Trump is dating a Lebanese-Nigerian, at a time when her father is making it harder and harder for non-Americans to stay in the US. The irony of this situation is apparent for all to see.

Name withheld by request
