‘What is BJP waiting for?’: Priyanka Gandhi Vadra asks party to expel Unnao rape-accused MLA

2/3

The Uttar Pradesh police on Monday filed a murder case against BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and nine others after the Unnao rape survivor's family filed a complaint, alleging "conspiracy" behind the Sunday's car crash in which the rape victim was severely injured as the opposition leaders and civil society expressed anguish and outrage over the entire incident.

The FIR was filed a day after the car in which the 19-year old rape survivor, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an overspeeding truck in Rae Bareli, killing two members and leaving her and the advocate critically injured.

Sengar, a four-time MLA from UP's Bangermau, is an accused in the rape case and was arrested last year in April.

Apart from evoking sharp reactions from Congress leaders --Rahul Gandhi, Priyanka Gandhi Vadera-- and West Bengal chief minister Mamata Banerjee who attacked the BJP government, the incident was also raised in Parliament with Samajwadi Party leader

Ram Gopal Yadav alleging that an attempt was made to "kill" the rape victim, leading to brief adjournment of Rajya Sabha.

Yadav said the security personnel provided to her was not with the victim at the time of the accident and registration plate of the truck involved was covered with grease.

"FIR has been registered under the Indian Penal Code's sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder), 506 (criminal intimidation), 120b (criminal conspiracy) against 10 named persons, including the BJP MLA, and 15-20 others," a police officer said.

It was registered at the Gurubuxganj police station in Raebareli, police said.

The case was registered on a complaint from the rape survivor's uncle Mahesh Singh, who is lodged in the Raebareli jail, police said.

He alleged that the MLA got the car hit on Sunday. "I am sure that the car was hit for killing all of them by the BJP MLA and his men," Singh said in his complaint.

The mother of the victim, speaking to reporters in Unnao had alleged: "It was not an accident but a conspiracy to eliminate all of us." Talking to reporters, District Magistrate, Raebareli, Neha Sharma said, "I myself with SP visited the Raebareli jail and met Mahesh Sharma. He had given application for parole and as he is resident of Unnao it has been forwarded to the Unnao DM." "He also gave two other applications. One for registration of FIR on which it has already been registered and the other for CBI probe into the matter. This application has been forwarded to Principal Secretary, Home," Sharma added.

The UP government is ready for a CBI probe into the accident involving the Unnao rape victim, if a request is made, Director General of Police O P Singh said.

"The truck was over-speeding and it was raining also. Prima facie, appears to be an accident, but a detailed unbiased probe is on in the matter," Singh told reporters in Lucknow.

"The state government is ready for recommending a CBI probe into the Sunday's mishap in Rae Bareli if the victim's mother or any relative makes any request in this regard," Singh said.

Besides the BJP legislator, his brother Manoj Singh Sengar, Vinod Mishra, Haripal Singh, Naveen Singh, Komal Singh, Arun Singh, Gyandendra Singh, Rinku Singh and Awadhesh Singh have been named in the FIR.

According to Dr Sandeep Tiwar, Incharge of Trauma Centre (KGMU), the condition of the survivor and his lawyer Mahendra Singh is "critical and both of them are on ventilator".

Tagging a media report of the accident, Rahul Gandhi tweeted,"Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao. A new special education bulletin for Indian women. Don't ask questions if a BJP MLA is accused of having raped you." While, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra described the incident as shocking, SP chief Akhilesh Yadav sought a CBI probe.

Meanwhile, the Delhi Commission For Women chief Swati Maliwal met the Unnao rape survivor at a Lucknow hospital and said she should be airlifted to Delhi for better treatment as she is "critical". She also wrote a letter to Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath in this connection.
