Congress asks Discovery to disclose shooting timings of 'Man Vs Wild' episode featuring PM Modi

PM Modi with Man Vs Wild host Bear Grylls I @BearGrylls | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights Congress asked Discovery to make public the timings of the shooting of the special episode Congress had earlier claimed that PM was busy shooting a film when the Pulwama terror attack took place The special episode, featuring PM Modi has been shot in India's Jim Corbett National Park

New Delhi: The release of a promotional video of Discovery channel's "Man Vs Wild" special episode featuring Prime Minister Narendra Modi has once again brought to the fore Congress party's allegations that the PM was busy shooting a film when the Pulwama terror attack took place in February this year.

The Congress party on Monday asked the Discovery channel to make public the timings of the shooting of the special episode.

Earlier today, the host of the Discovery channel show, Bear Grylls took to Twitter to announce PM Modi's appearance on the show and also released a 45-second-long clip of the special episode. “People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 @ 9 pm. #PMModionDiscovery,” he tweeted.

People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 @ 9 pm. #PMModionDiscovery pic.twitter.com/MW2E6aMleE — Bear Grylls (@BearGrylls) July 29, 2019

The special episode, featuring PM Modi has been shot in India's Jim Corbett National Park. It will be telecasted on August 12 in more than 180 countries across the world on Discovery network of channels.

Reiterating his party’s earlier allegation, Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari asked the Discovery channel to put it out in the public space the day and timings of the shooting of the episode.

Tiwari further said that PM Modi addressed a gathering on February 14 when Pulwama terror attack took place, however, he did not condemn or condole the death of 40 CRPF jawans who lost their lives in the incident.

"If the Prime Minister was aware, then it reflected gross insensitivity by not condemning the incident on the first occasion that he got, the first occasion was the public meeting that he was holding and now with this particular film ready to be telecast on August 12," Tewari was quoted as saying by news agency PTI.

"I think it is incumbent upon the Discovery Channel to really put it out in the public space that on that particular day, for how many hours and from what time to what time, did the shooting of this particular film took place," he added.

Congress spokesperson Randeep Surjewala had earlier alleged that when the entire country was mourning the deaths of the CRPF jawans, Prime Minister Modi was busy shooting for a film at Corbett National Park.

Earlier today, after the release of the teaser, PM Modi said that the episode will contribute to the discourse of environmental conservation.

"India- where you find lush green forests, diverse wildlife, beautiful mountains and mighty rivers. Watching this programme will make you want to visit different parts of India and add to discourse of environmental conservation," he said in a tweet.

In a statement released by Discovery Channel, PM Modi said, “For years, I have lived among nature, in the mountains and the forests. These years have a lasting impact on my life. So when I was asked about a special programme focussing on life beyond politics and that too in the midst of nature I was both intrigued and inclined to take part in it.

He also added that the gave him a great opportunity to showcase to the world India’s rich environmental heritage and stress on the importance of environment conservation and living in harmony with nature.
