A whodunit crash shakes India

Unnao rape survivor was travelling in a Swift with relatives and her lawyer when their car was hit with a truck with smudged number plates

A truck with its registration plate smeared torpedoes a car carrying a teen rape survivor, her lawyer and two relatives.

The crash occurs more than a month-and-a-half after her sister had alleged that the family was under pressure to strike a deal with the jailed sex-assault suspect, BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar.



DISSECTING EVIDENCE

For the police in Uttar Pradesh, there are numerous exhibits from the scene of Sunday's wreck in Raebareli -- and off it -- to dissect.

The 19-year-old rape survivor and her lawyer are critical in hospital. Her two relatives have died from injuries.

For now, police have recorded an FIR naming Sengar, his brother and eight others in connection with the wreck that the victim's family and opposition leaders allege was orchestrated by the jailed lawmaker.

The FIR also mentions 15-20 people as unknown suspects. The charges include murder, attempt to murder, threats, and conspiracy.

The victim family has demanded a CBI investigation.

THE UNNAO CASE

Two years ago, the minor from Unnao accused the MLA of rape.

A year ago, she attempted self-immolation outside chief minister Yogi Adityanath's home. But a day later, her father was found dead in police custody.

Sengar was arrested on April 13, 2018 and sent to jail pending trial.

RECREATING THE MYSTERY CRASH

The teen, whose rape case had drawn national attention last year, was travelling in a Swift car to meet her uncle in Rae Bareily's district jail on Sunday.

Police admit she was without her security cover assigned to her by state authorities.

"As there was no space in the car, the survivor did not take the security personnel with her," Uttar Pradesh police chief OP Singh said.

The crash took place some 50 km from Lucknow at around 1.30 pm on Sunday.

Suspicions over the accident mounted because a) the hit passengers included the Unnao rape survivor; b) the culprit truck's registration plate was smudged, and c) the victim's security was not accompanying her.

India Today TV also secured a video that carried her sister's message, recorded on June 8, that a Sengar aide had been pressuring the family for a compromise over the rape case.

POLICE VERSION

Earlier, the state DGP insisted the Rae Bareli crash prima facie appeared to be an accident.

He, however, added that police would support the family if they sought a CBI probe.

"Every angle is being investigated, but prima facie, it appears to be an accident," he told reporters.

The owners of the truck, according to the police chief, had defaulted on a vehicle loan. They blackened its registration plate apparently to avoid the attention of the lenders, the DGP insisted.

Meantime, its driver and his helper have been arrested, their call records are being probed, police said.

On Monday, forensic teams arrived at the scene of the crash. They have collected evidence from the spot, police sources said.

FAMILY ALLEGES FOUL PLAY

The mother of the injured rape survivor has accused the jailed MLA of murder attempt on her family.

"I have got to know that Kuldeep Singh Sengar got it done. He has a phone inside the jail. He is doing everything sitting inside the jail," she alleged.

The survivor's uncle, Mahesh Singh, currently in the Rae Bareli jail, has written to district authorities, demanding a CBI investigation into Sunday's fatal crash.

POLITICAL UPROAR

On Monday, opposition protests over the incident forced adjournment of the Rajya Sabha.

In a series of tweets, Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi accused the state's BJP government of favouring Sengar.

So a woman is allegedly raped by a BJP MLA. Her father is beaten up and dies in custody. A key witness dies mysteriously last year. Now her aunt who was also a witness is killed and her lawyer is critically injured in an accident caused by a truck with blackened number plates. July 29, 2019

She herself lies grievously wounded in hospital from the same accident. The accused continues as a BJP legislator, and the BJP State Government has the audacity to run a campaign??? Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 29, 2019

Does it have no moral duty towards its citizens anymore, or was that never on its agenda anyway?#Unnao Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 29, 2019

What is the BJP waiting for? Why has this man not been expelled from their party even when his name is in the latest FIR in the Unnao Rape Case?#BJPSackSengar pic.twitter.com/cTpQ0HbFNT Priyanka Gandhi Vadra (@priyankagandhi) July 29, 2019

The BSP's Mayawati sought the Supreme Court's intervention, calling the crash part of a conspiracy. The SP's Akhilesh Yadav targeted the state government.

"Police are saying the accident happened because of rains. They are speaking the language of those who are sitting above them in government. The Samajwadi Party had raised the victim's voice back then and it did the same in parliament today," he said.

AIMIM chief Asaduddin Owaisi remarked that the incident aimed at silencing the rape survivor.

"The victim had clearly stated that she wants CBI inquiry. This is no accident. this is an attempt to shut the mouth of justice for that girl. Everyone wants justice in this case. Justice has been killed in UP," he said.

WHO IS SENGAR

Sengar, the accused MLA from the BJP, is a four-time legislator representing Bangarmau constituency in the state assembly.

Currently, he is in Sitapur district jail in connection with the Unnao rape case.
