Post Balakot, IAF’s defence acquisitions in top gear; deal to buy R-27 air-to-air missiles finalised [DETAILS]

File image of Mirage 2000 fighter jets | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Rs 7,500 crore worth of defence purchases cleared over the past two months Deal to purchase R-27 air-to-air missiles finalised Defence purchases for IAF put on fast-track since Balakot air strikes in February this year

New Delhi: In a big boost to the Indian Air Force, defence purchases to the tune of Rs 7,500 crore have been finalised over the past two months by the government. The acquisitions include those of missiles, precision-guided bombs and hi-tech avionics.

According to sources, the IAF is procuring Russian air-to-air missiles that will make the Sukhoi fighter jet fleet more lethal. The R-27 air-to-air missiles would be fitted on the Su-30MKI combat aircraft.

"A contract has been signed with Russia for the acquisition of R-27 air-to-air missile to be fitted on the Su-30MKI combat aircraft fleet of the Indian Air Force," government sources were quoted as saying.

As per sources, these missiles would boost Sukhois’ capability to take on enemy aircraft at long ranges. The R-27 missile is a medium-to-long-range air-to-air missile which was developed for the MiG and Sukhoi fighter jets by Russia.

The missiles are being purchased as part of the 10-I projects under which the three services are required to have critical weapon systems and spares for a specified minimum period, which is called War Wastage Reserve (WWR).

In June, India had inked an agreement with an Israeli firm to purchase SPICE 2000 guided bombs at a cost of Rs 300 crore. It may be recalled that SPICE bombs had played a key role in the February 26 air strikes by India in Pakistan's Balakot, in which a terror training camp of the Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) was destroyed. The air strikes had followed the JeM's suicide terror attack on a CRPF convoy in J&K's Pulwama on February 14, in which 40 security personnel were killed.

A day after the IAF air strikes, Pakistan had sought to retaliate but the attempt was thwarted by an alert Indian Air Force. The Pakistani jets, which had attempted to violate the Indian airspace in Jammu and Kashmir, had dropped four bombs while being chased back.

Ever since the Balakot air strikes and Pakistan's retaliation a day later, the government has sped up IAF's modernisation efforts. The aim is to increase the Air Force's combat prowess and the focus is to first address IAF's short-term needs.

As part of the measures, the government has sped up efforts to integrate BrahMos supersonic cruise missiles on Sukhoi fighter jets.

A review of the February 26 air strikes deep inside Pakistan had come to the conclusion that had India possessed superior air defence system as well as strike capability, Pakistan would not have even thought about retaliating the next day.

This thinking has forced the government to take urgent steps to strengthen the IAF's overall combat capability.
