Misplaced paranoia: Census data on immigration suggests fears of illegal immigration are overblown

Belated release of migration data for Census 2011 has thrown up an interesting trend. In the decade ending in 2011 immigrants from Bangladesh, measured by both place of birth and previous residence, declined in absolute numbers. Official data on immigration from Bangladesh is consistent with anecdotal evidence. An argument which has gained currency is that the economic motive for Bangladeshis to cross the border into India began to decline with an improvement in economic conditions at home. Data, from eight years ago, lends credence to it. This is important given that the fear of being swamped by illegal immigration is triggering poor policy decisions.

If anything, Bangladesh has economically performed better since Census 2011. It has grown at over 7% over the last few years. IMF estimates that it’s likely to grow faster than India in 2019-20, at over 7.5%. Consequently, it’s reasonable to assume that underlying causes for illegal immigration from Bangladesh are weakening. However, Indian politics remains hostage to demons of the past. That only vitiates the atmosphere within India and extracts a price from Indians. To illustrate, the Centre recently asked the Supreme Court to extend the deadline to finalise Assam’s NRC because it feared errors of both inclusion and exclusion.

The apex court did extend the deadline but did not accept the Centre’s plea for reverification. It could mean that genuine citizens now face the prospect of disenfranchisement. For sure, government must not tolerate illegal immigration. But as Assam’s NRC exercise showed, an atmosphere of paranoia may end up hurting Indian citizens. Both politics and policy need to be situated in today’s context. It would also help if Census data on these crucial issues are released without long lags. Many suspect the delay is because the figures bust the fearmongering myths around illegal immigration.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email This piece appeared as an editorial opinion in the print edition of The Times of India.
