Ayushmann Khurrana roped in for Anubhav Sinha's next cop-drama. Read details

Follow us on Image Source : INSTAGRAM Ayushmann Khurrana roped in for Anubhav Sinha's next cop-drama

Ayushmann Khurrana is definitely the new hit-machine in Bollywood. The actor who became the talk of the town with back to back hits like Badhaai Ho and Andhadhun last year has signed his next project and after Ranveer Singh, fans will see Ayushmann Khurrana in a cop avatar. Reports suggest that Ayushmann has signed his next film which is a cop drama by Mulk director Anubhav Sinha.

The latest reports in Mumbai Mirror suggest, “A chunk of the film will be shot in Kanpur. Like other Ayushmann-starrers this one too is high on content and on a socially-relevant topic. It is based on a true incident and Ayushmann will play a cop for the first time.” The buzz also claim that filmmaker Anubhav Sinha is currently busy with the pre-production of the film and Ayushmann will start shooting for it after completing his current projects. If reports are to believed it has been titled Kanpur Dehaat, and the makers are looking to release it in the last quarter of the year. Isn’t it exciting?

While interacting with Mumbai Mirror earlier, Ayushmann Khurrana was asked about the Anubhav Sinha film and he neither denied nor confirmed the news. He said, “Yes, I am in talks with Anubhav for a film but we have still not finalised on a lot of stuff.”

Ayushmann Khurrana is flooded with projects after the last year proved to be so productive for him. Currently, he is busy shooting Ekta Kapoor’s Dream Girl and has also signed up for Dinesh Vijan’s Bala. Talking about how he ruled 2018 with his performance, Ayushmann revealed that he has always believed that the script is the true star of a film. He said, "I am audience made star. But I believe the real star (of a film) is the script, it is the script that makes you a star. I want to give the audience something unconventional every time, something novel. As an actor it is a great space to be in.”

More Bollywood stories and picture galleries

For all latest news and updates, stay tuned to our Facebook page
