Death penalty of Pune BPO rape and murder convicts commuted to life sentence

Duo’s advocate argued that there was delay in issuing execution warrant



Twelve years after the crime committed, Bombay High Court on Monday commuted the death sentence to life imprisonment, with 35 years in jail, of two convicted for the rape and murder of an IT firm employee in November 2007. The verdict came after the President in 2017 had rejected a mercy plea by the convicted duo — Purushottam Borate and Pradeep Kokade — for the rape followed by murder of the 22-year-old woman more than a decade ago.



This is for the first time the HC has commuted death sentence to life imprisonment due to delay in execution and solitary confinement of the convicts, which makes it a landmark judgment ever passed by Bombay High Court.



The convicts had approached Bombay High Court in April this year, contending that there was an inordinate delay of 1,509 days, or more than 50 months, in the execution of their death sentence, which was a violation of their fundamental rights, seeking commutation of the death sentence. The duo had moved a criminal writ petition in the Bombay High Court through, seeking to halt their execution after the sessions court issued a death warrant fixing June 24 as the date scheduled to hang them. Their advocate Yug Choudhary said that the two were illegally kept in solitary confinement in Yerwada Central Jail for seven years after their conviction, which caused violation of the provisions in the Criminal Procedure Code.



The two men were sentenced with death penalty by the Pune sessions court on March 20, 2012, and since they have continued in solitary confinement, they underwent more than eight years of such a confinement in violation of Article 21 of the Constitution. In their petition, it was also submitted that issuance of death warrant ex-parte without any opportunity to them is bad in law and unsustainable.



While explaining the delay in each proceeding, advocate Choudhary argued, “The sessions court held them guilty in 2012 and the appeal was dismissed by the high court in 2012. The Supreme Court also dismissed their appeal in May 2015; the sentence of death ought to have been executed within 90 days. Time taken thereafter is unconstitutional. Thereafter, they presented mercy petitions to the Government of Maharashtra, but it was rejected in January 2016.”



Advocate General AA Kumbhakoni, however, opposed the argument, saying that the duo was not in solitary confinement and added that there has been a delay since the period required to collect material cannot be viewed in isolation.



Justice Bhushan Dharmadhikari and Justice Swapna Joshi, while commuting the death sentence, observed that the means of communication like telegram or express letter used years ago highlight the need of utmost speed and hence use of fastest mode of communication then available. In the 21st century, it has to be email, video conferencing or fax telephone. Not employing these devices in digital era would be considered a deliberate delay and against one’s fundamental rights. Additional punishment resulting from avoidable delay is unconstitutional, they said.



The crime, which sent shock waves in IT circles in Pune, took place on November 1, 2007, when the victim was on her way to work in a cab driven by Borate (then 26). Borate was expected to drop the victim to her workplace at Hinjawadi, and his friend Kokade (then 20) was in the cab with him at that time.



The verdict was then upheld by the Bombay High Court and later by the Supreme Court. The duo was booked under section 302 (murder), 376 (ii)(g) (gang rape) and 404 (dishonest misappropriation of property possessed by deceased person at the time of his death) and 120-B (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code.


