Veteran star Dimple Kapadia spotted shooting for Christopher Nolan's film Tenet in Estonia; Read Details

Veteran actress Dimple Kapadia took the Bollywood industry by a pleasant surprise in May this year when reports of her being cast in a Christopher Nolan movie surfaced. Not only did Dimple leave fans surprised, Bollywood celebs too were excited about the prospect and wished her luck. The film titled Tenet, which also stars Hollywood actors like Robert Pattinson, John David Washington and the legendary Michael Caine, is being filmed in Estonia since quite sometime. And recently some on set location pictures made its way to the Internet.

In the pictures, we got a glimpse of Dimple Kapadia while filming her scenes. Not just that, accompanying Dimple was Christopher Nolan as they walked around the location. By the sea, the location looked extremely picturesque. In one of the photos, we also got a glimpse of co-star John David Washington and Dimple Kapadia standing side by side.

Dimple looked quite different as she was sporting almost grey to blonde-like hair. The 'Bobby' star was wearing head-to-toe white and was carrying a printed shawl draped around her arms. Maintaining a calm pose, Dimple looked completely immersed into the scene as Nolan was spotted instructing the duo.

While talking to Mid Day earlier, Dimple Kapadia's manager had revealed that Dimple got the part after Christopher Nolan and the casting director saw her audition tape and earlier work. He added, "Dimple has never auditioned before. So I had to sit her down and make her understand that the idea of casting people, basis their taped auditions, is to understand if they fit the part. But they are respectful when someone is reluctant and are willing to watch tapes of their previous work."

After wrapping up in Estonia, the film's schedule will move to Mumbai in September. Tenet is so far being described as a "massive, innovative, action blockbuster", but plot specifics are under wraps, reported IndieWire.
