Morning Digest: CCD founder V.G. Siddhartha goes missing in Mangaluru, 15 killed as Pakistani army plane crashes into residential area in Rawalpindi, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day.

Founder of the Cafe Coffee Day chain of coffee shops and son-in-law of senior BJP politician and former Karnataka CM S.M. Krishna, V.G. Siddhartha, went missing in Mangaluru on Monday evening.

Fifteen people were killed when a small army plane crashed into a residential area in the Pakistani city of Rawalpindi near the capital Islamabad, a rescue official told AFP early Tuesday.

The National Commission of Minorities (NCM) has refused to entertain a plea to declare Hindus a “minority community” in those States where they do not form a majority of the population.

An empowered Group of Ministers (GoM) constituted last year to suggest measures to combat lynchings will continue functioning. It will be headed by Home Minister Amit Shah, said a senior government official.

The Uttar Pradesh government on Monday night recommended a CBI probe into a road accident in which the Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer were critically injured and her two aunts killed.

Madhya Pradesh's Pench sanctuary and Kerala’s Periyar sanctuary emerged as the best managed tiger reserves in the country, according to an evaluation of India’s 50 tiger sanctuaries released along with the 4th National Tiger Estimation (Tiger census) on Monday.

In a first-of-its-kind exercise, about 1 lakh students of government colleges in Rajasthan on Monday appeared in an examination which was virtually a test of their honesty.

There are concerns over how the State government plans to solve the issue of stateless citizens after the NRC exercise

The Indian captain believes the sport’s longest format really needs a boost.

The Enforcement Directorate questioned V. Shashikant, former MD, United Breweries Holding Limited (UBHL), in connection with the Vijay Mallya case on Monday.

She patrols the Kaziranga National Park to curb poaching and illegal trade

The Human Resource Development (HRD) Ministry has received more than 77,000 comments and letters on the draft National Education Policy (NEP), according to HRD Minister Ramesh Pokhriyal Nishank.
