Unnao rape: In a two-week-old letter to SC, teen's family alleges threats from accused MLA's henchmen

Two days after the Unnao rape survivor's car accident, a letter written by her family to the Supreme Court has come out. In a letter dated July 12, the rape survivor's mother, sister and aunt alleged that they were being constantly threatened by the men of accused Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA Kuldeep Sengar.

Two incidences on July 7 and 8 were quoted by the family members in the letter addressed to the chief justice. They said that Kuldeep Sengar's brother Manoj Singh and his accomplice Shashi Singh's husband and son had come to their home and threatened them with dire consequences if they don't withdraw their case against the MLA.

Frustrated with the harassment, the survivor's mother urged the Uttar Pradesh police to take up her case.

Constant complaints of threats by the survivor's mother were heard by the people in the village which both the survivor and the MLA are residents of.

The 19-year-old woman, who alleged rape by Kuldeep Sengar, had once allegedly attempted self-immolation outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence asking for justice.

High Court, CBI, Uttar Pradesh Home Secretary and DGP, all were said to be on alert after the complaints. She was even given security. However, on the day of the accident, which is now suspected to be a murder, the police personnel deployed with the victim was not present with her.

What more has strengthened the speculation of the accident being a pre-planned crime is the blacked-out number plate on the truck that rammed the survivor's car.

On Sunday, the teen victim, along with her two aunts and a lawyer was heading to Raebareli when a truck had rammed into the car they were traveling in. They were going to meet her uncle who is lodged in a district jail there.

The victim and her lawyer are battling death at King George’s Medical University (KGMU) Trauma Centre in Lucknow.

(With inputs from Shivendra)
