CBI to probe Unnao Rape survivor’s accident; BJP MLA Sengar booked

NEW DELHI: BJP MLA Kuldeep Sengar , who is in jail, and his aides have been booked on charges of murder and attempted murder by the UP police on Monday, a day after the Unnao rape victim and her family met with a road accident in Rae Bareilly that left her critically injured. The case is being transferred to the CBI This comes after the victim’s family had complained recently about the pressure and threats they were facing from Sengar’s aides to strike a compromise in the rape case against the MLA.Mahesh Singh, the rape victim’s uncle who is in Rae Bareli jail, wrote a complaint to the police saying his family, while visiting him in jail earlier in July, spoke of threats from the MLA’s aides to “go back on their statements in court and settle for a compromise or your entire family will be eliminated one by one.”UP police has recorded this in the FIR. The FIR also quotes Mahesh Singh as saying the cops posted for the security of the victim had tipped off MLA Sengar's men and intentionally not accompanied her when the incident happened Singh’s wife Pushpa was among the two women killed in Sunday’s incident while the family was coming to jail to meet Mahesh Singh.UP director general of police, OP Singh, said it was a “prima-facie case of pure road accident” and that a speeding truck had hit the family’s car. The truck driver and the owner’s mobile records are being scanned to find any link with Sengar or his aides.Mahesh Singh was convicted on July 2 to 10 years by a fast-track court in Unnao on charges of murderous assault on the MLA’s brother Atul Sengar over 15 years ago. Atul Sengar is also in Lucknow jail on charges of murder of the rape victim’s father. The CBI charge sheets against MLA Sengar and his brother are before court but the trial is yet to start in both the cases. Both the rape victim and her deceased aunt Pushpa were crucial witnesses to the CBI in the rape case. The rape victim’s lung is said to be failing and she is on life support at Lucknow’s KGMU Hospital.A CBI team visited her in hospital. Another intriguing point is that while 10 UP policemen were tasked with providing security to the family, no vehicle was provided to them as this is only done for Z and Z-plus level protectees. The UP DGP said the rape victim had refused to take the security men along on Sunday saying there was no space in their private car. The BJP is yet to expel Sengar from the party despite the rape allegations surfacing last April.
