Teenager in love with brother-in-law kills pregnant sister in Jabalpur with multiple stabs

A 19-year-old girl killed her pregnant elder sister in Madhya Pradesh's Jabalpur by stabbing her multiple times as she wanted to marry her sister's husband. She has fallen in love with her brother-in-law.

The incident took place on July 27 in Kaithra locality of Shahpur Nagar in Jabalpur. The teenager accused, identified as Shatakshi Rajput, allegedly committed the crime with the intention of marrying her elder sister's husband.



The murder took place when Abhilasha, the victim, went to the washroom where Shatakshi stabbed her in the neck and stomach with a knife. The victim collapsed on the bathroom floor.

She was rushed to the hospital after neighbours found out about the incident. But she succumbed to her injuries.

Police have said that this was Shatakshi's third attempt to murder her sister. During interrogation, the accused admitted that she murdered her sister to stay with her brother-in-law. She also said that she had tried to kill her sister on Friday night and Saturday morning as well, but failed to do so.

After killing 27-year-old Abhilasha, Shatakshi was spotted by the neighbours trying to flee the house with a cloth covering her face. The neighbours immediately informed the police, who rushed to the spot.

Police traced Shatakshi using her mobile phone's location. Abhilasha's husband provided the police with Shatakshi's mobile number.

She was nabbed and sent to jail after she was produced in court.

Additional Superintendent of Police Rai Singh Narwariya said that the accused was being questioned and she has confessed to the crime. He also said that the police have recovered the weapon and clothes used at the time of the crime and the family of the victim has been questioned in the matter.

ALSO READ: Sorry, no bed: Two Kolkata govt hospitals turn down accident victim who may lose leg

ALSO WATCH: Injured man left upside down on ambulance stretcher in Thrissur, dies
