Unnao rape survivor's uncle gets parole for last rites of family members: 10 updates

Delhi:

Unnao rape survivor is on ventilator and fighting for her life at the trauma centre located at the King George's Medical University hospital in Lucknow. Doctors say that the 19-year-old has suffered grievous head and leg injuries. However, they added that her condition is stable at the moment. The Unnao rape case rocked Lok Sabha today with the Opposition demanding statement from Union Home Minister Amit Shah. As the rape survivor’s accident probe reveals several twist and turns, here are 10 latest updates from the Unnao rape case:

1: The girl is on life support. Her lawyer is also admitted to the Intensive Care Unit where his condition is said to be critical.

2: The girl’s family members today began their sit-in protest right outside the trauma centre. They were agitating against UP government’s inhuman approach of not releasing the girl’s uncle for the last rites of other family members killed in the crash. The uncle of teh survivor has been granted parole.

3: Several media reports have said that the truck involved in the deadly crash belonged to the brother of Samajwadi Party leader.

4: According to an India Today report, the truck is said to be Devendra Pal. He is the is the elder brother of Samajwadi Party leader Nandu Pal.

5: On Tuesday, the Uttar Pradesh Government has sent a formal request to Government of India to transfer the Unnao rape survivor's road accident case to the CBI.

6 Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra continues her stinging attack againt the BKP for sheltering Kuldeep Singh Sengar, the prime accused in the Unnao rape case.

7: Priyanka took to Twitter today and wrote, “Why do we give people like Kuldeep Sengar the strength and protection of political power and abandon their victims to battle for their lives alone? This FIR clearly states that the family was threatened and apprehensive. It even mentions the possibility of a planned accident.”

8: The car in which the rape survivor, her family and lawyer were travelling was hit by an over-speeding truck in Rae Bareli on Sunday, killing two members while leaving her and the advocate critically injured, police said. Meanwhile, 5-member team of the CBI has reached the trauma centre where the rape survivors is undergoing treatment.

9: A woman belonging to Makhi police station area in Unnao had alleged that Sengar, a four-time MLA who represents Bangermau in the UP Assembly, raped her teenage daughter at his residence in 2017. The case had come to light after the victim allegedly attempted self-immolation outside Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath's residence.

10: The National Commission for Women on Monday urged the Uttar Pradesh police to ensure a free, fair and speedy probe in the case in which a BJP MLA is an accused. NCW chairperson Rekha Sharma said a team of the Commission will visit the victim and her family members in Unnao on Tuesday. They will also hold a meeting with the Uttar Pradesh police to get details of the probe, Sharma said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
