Congress Asks Discovery Channel To Specify Shoot Timings Of ‘Man VS Wild’ Episode With PM Modi

When Bear Grylls, the man who is known for his gruelling expeditions, released a video of his popular show Man VS Wild that featured India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi, everyone went berserk. That came as a surprise to a lot of people. The meme-town got a new topic and almost everyone has been discussing about about it since yesterday.

People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 @ 9 pm. #PMModionDiscovery pic.twitter.com/MW2E6aMleE — Bear Grylls (@BearGrylls) July 29, 2019

This took a political turn soon after Congress attacked PM Modi. The political party said that the PM was busy shooting an episode as 40 Jawans died in Pulwama attack. From Congress spokesperson Shama Mohamed to PDP chief and former Jammu and Kashmir CM Mehbooba Mufti, everyone took a dig at him.

When 44 CRPF jawans were martyred in #Pulwama, PM #Modi was having the time of his life shooting for this programme. He was enjoying it so much, that he continued shooting even after being told of the heinous attack! See him laughing carelessly in the trailer! https://t.co/5hSQtJov4h — Shama Mohamed (@drshamamohd) July 29, 2019

At the risk of sounding repetitive, the PM surely is a pioneer in innovative PR skills that seem to strike a chord with every generation. https://t.co/VdW1fbWcCY — Mehbooba Mufti (@MehboobaMufti) July 29, 2019

Now, it is being said that Congress has asked Discovery Channel to specify the dates on which the episode featuring Prime Minister Narendra Modi was shot. The episode will premiere on television on August 12 and will be shown in more 180 countries via Discovery channels.

Screengrab

Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari said that when Pulwama terror attack took place earlier this year, PM Modi had addressed a public meeting at 5:15 on that day, but he didn’t address the incident at all.

“If the Prime Minister was aware, then it reflected gross insensitivity by not condemning the incident on the first occasion that he got, the first occasion was the public meeting that he was holding and now with this particular film ready to be telecast on August 12. I think it is incumbent upon the Discovery Channel to really put it out in the public space that on that particular day, for how many hours and from what time to what time, did the shooting of this particular film took place,” Tewari told reporters.

The episode is shot at Jim Corbett. Watch the trailer below.

"India- where you find lush green forests, diverse wildlife, beautiful mountains and mighty rivers. Watching this programme will make you want to visit different parts of India and add to the discourse of environmental conservation," the PM had tweeted.

Also Read: This Is What India Thinks Of Prime Minister Narendra Modi Appearing On Man Vs Wild With Bear Grylls!
