Yediyurappa-led BJP govt ends Tipu Jayanti celebration in Karnataka; Congress calls the order ‘communal’

File picture: A child dressed up as erstwhile Mysore (Mysuru) ruler Tipu Sultan during the 269th birth anniversary celebrations of the 18th century controversial ruler, in Bengaluru, on Nov 10, 2018

Key Highlights In Karnataka, the BJP government has ended the birth anniversary celebrations of Tipu Sultan Tipu Sultan is a controversial figure in Karnataka's Kodagu district Former Karnataka CM Siddarmaiah described the BJP government's decision a big crime

Bengaluru: Three days into power, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government in Karnataka on Tuesday announced that there would be no birth anniversary celebrations of Tipu Sultan, the 18th-century ruler of the erstwhile Mysore Kingdom, in the state from this year.

The "Tipu Jayanti" celebrations event was launched by the Congress in 2015 and the BJP had been opposing it since then.

The Yediyurappa government today issued an order ending the "Tipu Jayanti" celebrations on the basis of a letter written by Virajpet MLA KG Bopaiah to the Karnataka CM.

In the letter, Bopaiah had urged Yediyurappa to cancel Tipu Jayanti celebrations organised every year by the Karnataka Kannada and Culture Department. The Virajpet MLA's letter brought to the fore opposition to such celebrations, especially in Karnataka's Kodagu district.

While speaking to reporters, Yediyurappa said: “Some MLAs had submitted a petition about the celebration of Tipu Jayanti. After analysing the previous incidents caused due to the celebrations, we've decided not to celebrate Tipu Jayanti after cabinet discussion.”

Meanwhile, former chief minister Siddarmaiah described the BJP government's decision a big crime, saying Tipu was Mysuru king and a patriot, who fought against the British.

“I only started Tipu Jayanti celebrations. People of Karnataka had accepted it because Tipu was a man who fought against British rule. According to me, he was the first freedom fighter of this country. Since he's a historical man who fought against Britishers, we had decided to celebrate him. Tipu is a man of the minority community, BJP is against minorities in this country. They aren't secular. I oppose it.”

Notably, the celebration was initiated by the Siddaramaiah-led Congress government as an annual event on November 10, 2015, despite opposition from the BJP.

Later, the Congress-Janata Dal (Secular) coalition government led by HD Kumaraswamy continued the celebrations. The Congress-JD(S) government, however, collapsed on July 23 after losing the vote of confidence in the Karnataka Assembly.

The BJP came to power and on July 29, Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa won the floor test in the Karnataka Assembly by voice vote.

Last year, the BJP, which was in opposition at that time, had protested against the celebration of the 269th birth anniversary of erstwhile Mysore (Mysuru) ruler Tipu Sultan, calling the ruler a "religious bigot".

Tipu Sultan (1750-1799) was the eldest son of Sultan Hyder Ali. He is hailed as the "Tiger of Mysore" for protecting his kingdom against the advances of the British East India Company. A section of Indians hails him as a hero who stood up to the British. There are various other narratives in historical records that say Tipu ordered his army to carry out jihad, rape and convert women of defeat enemies (certain erstwhile kingdoms in Kerala and Karnataka) by force and is also said to have taxed non-Muslims in Mysuru rather harshly. It is reported that Tipu's sword in a museum in the UK has some rather ambiguous matter about infidels, non-believers and jihad written in Persian on its handle.

Tipu was killed in 1799 during a battle with the British Army while defending his fort at Srirangapatna.
