Police raids at SP leader Azam Khan`s Jauhar University in Rampur

Home >> Lucknow Police raids at SP leader Azam Khan`s Jauhar University in Rampur

Lately, around 26 FIRs have been registered against the Rampur Member of Parliament in land grab cases.

Troubles mounted for Samajwadi Party leader Azam Khan after the police raided the Jauhar University in Rampur days after the Sub-Divisional Magistrate’s office ordered the removal of the varsity gate claiming that it was built on government land.

According to a reports, police forces from multiple police stations in Rampur reached the varsity premises on Tuesday morning. However, the reason behind the raid is not known yet.

The SDM court’s order on July 25 claimed that the university gate was built on a plot of land that belongs to state-owned Public Works Department, ordering the removal of the gate within 15 days on claims that it has blocked the road outside.

The court had added that if the gate is not taken down within 15 days (which ends on August 9), the structure will be demolished by state authorities. Along with that, the order also stated that the court imposed a one-time penalty of Rs 3,27,60,000 (Rs 3.27 crores) on the SP leader who is the life-time chancellor of the Jauhar University. The SDM court simulatenously imposed a penalty of Rs 9,10,000 every day for 15 days till the gate occupies the PWD land.

Lately, around 26 FIRs have been registered against the Rampur Member of Parliament in land grab cases. The Uttar Pradesh government has also included his name in the state government`s ‘land mafia’ list on their official portal for such offenders.

The FIRs have been registered against Khan and a person named Ale Hasan, who is a former Deputy Superintendent of Police and current Chief Security Officer of the varsity, based on complaints by local farmers.

Azam Khan has time and again accused the state government, ruled by the Bharatiya Janata Party, and said it in the media that he was being targeted because he had defeated the BJP candidate from Rampur (Jaya Prada). “Since I won the (Lok Sabha) election against BJP (from Rampur), I am being targeted. All the allegations levelled against me are false. They (state machinery) can investigate if they wish to. There are enemies all around me.”
