Lynchings in India: 101 letters penned in blood, trashing protest by 49 eminent citizens, sent to PM Modi

File picture: Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights As many as 49 celebrities wrote an open letter to PM Narendra Modi expressing their concerns over lynching incidents Sixty-two celebrities, on July 26, wrote a counter open letter slamming an earlier open letter by 49 personalities Hindu Mahasabha spokesperson Ashok Pandey said that the issue of "so-called mob lynchings" was being raised to malign India

Aligarh: Days after 49 eminent personalities wrote a letter to Prime Minister Narendra Modi on the lynching of minorities and hate crimes in the country, the All India Hindu Mahasabha has launched a counter-attack.

Urging the PM to take strong action against the 49 personalities, the Mahasabha posted 101 letters written in blood, saying "such traitors should be charged with sedition and all their national awards should be withdrawn".

On July 23, filmmakers Shyam Benegal, Mani Ratnam, Aparna Sen, and Anurag Kashyap, vocalist Shubha Mudgal, historian Ramchandra Guha, and 43 other famous personalities wrote a letter to the PM, expressing concern at the growing number of "religious identity-based hate crimes" in India.

They had also mentioned: "Regrettably ‘Jai Shri Ram’ has become a provocative 'war cry' today that leads to law and order problems, and many lynchings take place in its name. It is shocking that so much violence should be penetrated in the name of religion."

On July 26, some 62 celebrities, including actress Kangana Ranaut, had written a counter open letter, saying that the "document of selective outrage comes across as an attempt to foist a false narrative with the intention of denigrating ethos and norms of our collective functioning as a nation and people".

Meanwhile, Hindu Mahasabha spokesperson Ashok Pandey told reporters on Tuesday that the issue (of "so-called mob lynchings" of Dalits and the Muslims) was being raised to malign the country.

This "conspiracy should be unveiled and those spreading the canard of mob lynchings should be put to task", added Pandey.

He further said that the human rights groups that are trying to become the “champion of minorities and Dalits” were always “silent when Hindus were targeted in the Kashmir Valley or when terrorists were spilling Hindu blood”. He alleged that such groups were trying to "divide the country".

In the meantime, another Hindutva group has threatened to launch an agitation in Uttar Pradesh while seeking the suspension of Aligarh District Magistrate Chandra Bhushan Singh for banning religious functions on streets, including chanting of Hanuman Chalisa.

Hindu Jagran Manch’s state president, Surendra Singh Chauhan, expressed his ire over the filing of a police case against the outfit’s state general secretary Surendra Singh Bhagor.

Bhagor had threatened the DM with dire consequences over the ban order.
