J&K: Soldier killed in Pakistan ceasefire violation, India retaliates strongly

Rajouri: Smoke billowing out from the hills after shelling from Pakistan side at Nowshera sector of Rajouri district on Wednesday. PTI Photo

An Army soldier was killed on Tuesday as Pakistani troops continued to violate the ceasefire and resorted to unprovoked mortar shelling and small arms fire along the Line of Control in Jammu’s Rajouri district.

The two sides also exchanged mortar firing and heavy artillery in Kashmir’s Kupwara – the first time that heavy artillery has been used in the district since the two countries agreed to a ceasefire along the LoC.

The deceased soldier has been identified as Naik Krishan Lal (34) of Ghagriyal in Akhnoor. An Army spokesperson said Lal had been posted in the Keri Battal area of Rajouri district’s Sunderbani sector.

Defence Ministry spokesperson Lt Colonel Devender Anand said that the Indian Army responded strongly, inflicting heavy damage to Pakistan Army posts and soldiers.

He did not give details, but said that Lal is survived by his wife Shashi Devi. “Naik Krishan Lal was a brave, highly motivated and sincere soldier. The nation will always remain indebted to him for the supreme sacrifice and devotion to duty,” he added.

Sources said that Pakistani troops initiated the ceasefire violation in Rajouri around 12 noon. The Indian Army retaliated and there was intermittent exchange of mortar shelling and small arms fire between the two sides.

Official sources said that in the afternoon, Pakistani soldiers fired mortars and heavy artillery towards Indian posts and villages in Kupwara’s Tangdhar sector.

“Unprovoked ceasefire violation including calibre escalation (artillery fire) by Pakistan in Tangdhar sector since 130 hours today,” a defence spokesman said in Srinagar. “Own troops retaliated strongly resulting in heavy casualties on enemy side.”

While intermittent shelling between the two sides continued till late evening, villagers said they had to return to the under-ground bunkers after over a decade.

“The exchange of fire was intense from both sides. Pakistani shells landed deep inside our villages,” said a Tangdhar resident over the phone. “The people living close to the border shifted to safer places and also went into underground bunkers, which are in bad shape as they haven’t been used in a long time.”

Sources said that following the exchange of mortars and artillery, traffic on the Kupwara-Tangdhar road was stopped for some time.

In the evening, there were reports of ceasefire violation by Pakistan in Uri sector of Baramulla as well. Sources said that Pakistani soldiers fired mortars towards Indian forward positions in the Mohura area, which was retaliated by Indian troops.
