Meghan Markle’s organic shawl for baby Archie ‘made in Indian factory where workers paid just 37p an hour’

MEGHAN Markle wrapped baby Archie in an organic shawl made in an Indian factory where workers are paid just 37p an hour, it has been claimed.

The Duchess of Sussex was pictured cradling her three-month-old son in the Erawan Cotton Dohar - a traditional Indian summer blanket - as she cheered husband Prince Harry on at the polo earlier this month.

7 The Duchess of Sussex wrapped baby Archie in the shawl, claimed to have been made by workers who are paid just 37p an hour Credit: Getty - Contributor

The £33 shawl is sold by Malabar Baby - a Hong Kong based brand that offers organic baby clothes for eco-conscious mums.

But it has since been claimed the patterned shawl was made by textile company Nayika in Bagru, a small town near Jaipur in India's north.

The Mail Online today reported workers in the factory are paid 6,000 rupees per month - equal to £70 - for a 48 hour week. This equates to 37 pence per hour.

One worker, Aruna Regar, 50, said she was shocked to find out the blanket had been used by a member of the Royal Family - and sold for what amounted to two weeks' wages for her.

She said: "The blanket almost costs what I earn in two weeks and that's difficult for me to believe. We struggle to make ends meet and life is very difficult for us. Our conditions in the factory are good and we are not treated badly.

"But our biggest problem is the money that we earn, it's a pittance. I'm very happy that such an important person is using my blanket because it means there will be more orders for the company and continued work for us."

The blanket almost costs what I earn in two weeks and that's difficult for me to believe Factory worker Aruna Regar

She said she knew of the Queen, but was not aware of Meghan Markle, Prince Harry or their newborn son.

It comes after former actress Meghan was announced as the guest editor for the September issue of Vogue this week.

But the 37-year-old left herself off the cover over fears she would look "boastful" - instead highlighting 15 women who "break barriers".

Earlier this year she joined Harry, 34, on stage to urge 12,000 screaming young fans to “wake up” and act “on the damaging impact our ways of living are having on the world”. The Duke had taken a chopper from London to Birmingham just two days before.

The couple have also used their Instagram account to urge their followers to "save the planet" days after figures showed carbon emissions from royal travel has doubled.

The duchess is said to be extremely conscious about the environment, even electing to paint her son's nursery with vegan paint.

7

Meanwhile in India, Mrs Regar lives with seven family members in two rooms with limited electricity and water. The home's toilet is reportedly a hole in the ground.

The grandmother, whose husband works to cut organic cloth for the product, said being environmentally-minded was not a priority for her.

She explained: "We do not understand things about saving the planet or what is or is not organic. For us it is all about work and survival."

The couple work 48 hour weeks, with 25 minutes for lunch.

But they said they were pleased someone famous had used their blanket - hoping the royal couple may come to visit them in India.

Orders have reportedly increased since Meghan bought the organic blanket, with claims that demand has increased fourfold.

According to the brand's website, the blanket is "three layers of soft natural cotton sewn together" and features a "hand block-printed center layer with natural delicate cotton voile on both sides".

The blanket's design has been finished off with a chic mustard-yellow trim.

It is currently available to ship to the US - but not the UK - indicating it may be a gift from one of Meghan's American friends.

Anjali Harjani, the founder of Malabar Baby, said: "Malabar Baby is a small, family run business that prides itself on producing high quality products which are slow made in small batches. Its founder is passionate about encouraging people to buy less and buy better quality, but offering products at an accessible price point so they can be enjoyed by all which is why prices start from $18.

"Malabar Baby worked hard to research the finest factories, both in terms of quality of craftsmanship but also respect for their staff, to produce our collections.

"Many of the factories it works with go further and are part of a collective that come together to reduce environmental impact and preserve the art of hand block-printing. It works with factories owned by women where staff have been employed for many years, being paid fairly and working in good conditions.

"The art of block-printing goes through many skilled artisan hands and it is proud to be a part of preserving this tradition.

"The dohar blanket takes between 5 - 7 days to make and requires the work of highly skilled pattern cutters and block printers to produce.

"The dohar is sold for $42 / £33 which is far less than other similar products but Malabar Baby have maintained the price in order that more children can enjoy it."

Malabar Baby was founded by Indian-American Anjali Harjani-Hardasani, who moved from New York to Hong Kong in 2014.

The Palace declined to comment.

Behind-the-scenes video shows Meghan Markle at work guest-editing Vogue’s September issue

7 Prince Harry was spotted chatting to his wife and newborn Credit: Max Mumby

7 Prince Harry stands by his wife's side after the polo, with their son wrapped in the blanket Credit: Splash News

7 The blanket has seen a huge spike in interest since Meghan used it to wrap up Archie Credit: Getty - Contributor

7 Meghan and Harry introduce their son Archie to the world after he was born in May Credit: Rex Features

7 Similar factories to the one which Meghan Markle's baby shawl was made in Bagru, which is known for block textile printing Credit: Alamy

Meghan Markle takes baby Archie to cheer on Harry at polo while Kate Middleton and her kids support Wills as brothers face off in charity match

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368. You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
