Elderly couple found dead at residence in south Kolkata; no arrests made yet

. The forensic team is currently working at the crime scene. | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights The incident happened in South Kolkata's Netaji Nagar area The woman's body was tied with a rope around her neck and a pipe inserted through her throat Post-mortem reports in the case are still awaited

Kolkata: An elderly couple was found dead at their residence lying in a pool of blood in South Kolkata's Netaji Nagar area on Tuesday morning. The local police are investigating the matter and no one has been detained so far.

The couple was identified as Dilip Mukherjee and Sapna Mukherjee, who were found lying on the first floor of their two-storied building. The Police Joint Commissioner Murlidhar Sharma told news agency PTI that Sapna's body was found lying in a pool of blood near the door in the entrance of the first floor. Her body reportedly tied with a rope around her neck and a pipe inserted through her throat. Meanwhile, her husband was found dead on the bed inside another room.

Another police officer told PTI that the incident most likely happened on Monday night. As per the preliminary investigation in the case, it seems that one or two people had entered the house as the house was entirely ransacked. The forensic team is currently working at the crime scene.

The police added that the two were smothered to death and the exact reason would only be known after the post mortem report is released. However, the police are interrogating the ground floor tenants of the couple's house, the domestic help and the local residents.

Reportedly, the domestic help alleged that some local promoters were making threatening calls to the childless-couple to sell off their house. She claimed that the couple was very well behaved and had nobody to look after them. However, further investigation in the case is underway and the post-mortem reports are awaited.

In a similar case reported from Kolkata in May 2019, a newly-married couple was found dead at Visva-Bharati University campus located in Birbhum district of the state. The couple's bodies were found near Cheena Bhavana which is located within the university campus.

The deceased were identified as 18-year-old Somnath Mahato and 19-year-old Abantika. The police officials reportedly claimed that the deceased were students of Srinanda High School at Bolpur. A senior police officer of Bolpur police station said that it appears to be a case of suicide but it can be confirmed only after the post-mortem examination report arrives.

However, the police was investigating the case and university officials were trying to figure out how the couple enetered the campus area late in the night.
