Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India seizes spurious goods worth INR 49 lakh

Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India have seized spurious goods in major raids throughout the country.

Also Read: Honda ADV 150 officially unveiled at GIIAS 2019

Last month, the Indian arm of the Japanese two-wheeler brand, with the help of local Police, conducted four raids in North and East, and successfully seized counterfeit Honda parts worth INR 49 lakh. The raids were conducted in Delhi and Cuttack where the company seized 10,462 counterfeit items such as spurious parts, accessories, scooter guard kits, fake packaging machines and label printing machines.

Delhi Police conducted raids in Bawana Industrial Area and Karol Bagh market areas. Cuttack police raided the premises of two service centres running under fake Honda brand name at Sector 9 and Chandi road.

Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India created the Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Enforcement team in 2017 to act against such traders, manufacturers and suppliers of counterfeit parts.

Till now, IPR Enforcement team has conducted 15 raids across cities like Delhi, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Bengaluru, Chennai, Secunderabad, Hyderabad, Gandhinagar, Cuttack and Gadhi Hasaru (Gurgaon). In the 15 raids, the team seized over 94,000 counterfeit spare parts, accessories and other items. The total value of items seized since 2017 is estimated worth almost INR 2 crore.

Genuine spare parts and accessories go through rigorous testing and development before they are made available to the customers. The cheap replicas of the spares could lead to severe damage to the vehicle. Honda Genuine Parts come with a tamper-proof MRP label that features a hologram. Details of how to identify Honda Genuine Part are available on the company’s website.

In other updates, Honda is reportedly working on expanding its product portfolio with the launch of the Forza 300 maxi-scooter. The new vehicle will arrive in India via the CBU route and retail at a premium price tag. Expect the Forza 300 to carry an on-road price of approximately INR 7 lakh.

Also Read: Honda Forza 300 maxi-scooter - All you need to know

Internationally, Honda is going to unveil the 2020 Africa Twin soon. Leaked specifications have confirmed that the 2020 model would pack a relatively bigger engine and carry CRF1100L tag. The increased displacement will lead to more power and torque.

NOTE: Images used for representation purpose only
