Finance minister, are you worried now?

AKHILESH BHARGAVA BY INVITATION



During a recent interview with The Economic Times, Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman was told that there are renewed concerns about India’s economic growth and muting of recent corporate results, and that consumer demand is receding. She was asked whether she was worried about the deteriorating economic scenario. Sitharaman said that she would not say that she was worried, but that she would be watching developments closely. This got me worried.



Despite visible signs of an across-the-board stress and slowdown in the economy, our FM was not really that concerned. The question to her was: what is the calamity that should occur that would get her worried, for suitable policy measures to be initiated to revive and reform the economy? The unfortunate news of the missing VG Siddhartha (VGS), the dynamic founder of Café Coffee Day, India’s largest coffee outlet chain, also rated to be the sixth largest in the world, has come on the heels of the interview.



Here’s an entrepreneur whose family owns over 12,000 acres of coffee plantations, is the largest exporter of coffee beans from India, who recently sold his 20 per cent stake in Mindtree for a reported consideration of Rs 3,300 crore, and whose flagship company CCD was said to be an acquisition target of Coca Cola. To top it all, his father-inlaw, former Karnataka CM SM Krishna, is a top-ranking politician of the ruling party. Yet, the despair and disturbance of dealing with the system are being reported to have driven him to jumping into a swollen Netravati river near Mangaluru.



His last letter—we really hope it isn’t—signed on July 27, makes for a painful and poignant reading.



Here is a person who set up successful businesses that provided direct employment to more than 50,000 people and created immense shareholder wealth, and yet, he regrets that he failed to create the right profitable business model, despite working hard over 37 years. If his business model was not profitable, then I wonder what the definition of a profitable business in India is.



Is it one founded on crony capitalism, with the proximity to the system that gives unethical profits? Or, is it one that is set up by a brave entrepreneur like VGS, battling market forces? The former seems to be the benchmark of profitability in India and, by that measure, all of us entrepreneurs who do not have the proximity to the system have failed in our entrepreneurial endeavours. No wonder we remain dwarf entities, as Chief Economic Adviser Krishnamurthy Subramanian said in the 2019 Economic Survey.



VGS further mentions in his letter that he was facing payment pressures from a private equity investor. This can happen to anyone, but what compounded his woes was that the director general of the income tax department unfairly attached his shares twice, due to which he faced a serious liquidity crunch. And that is what led to his fateful crisis.



It is unfortunate that even though the income tax department loses a majority of its cases in appellate courts, it still routinely resorts to coercive recovery measures in respect of such disputed demands, unmindful and insensitive to the fact that its harsh recovery measures could be fatal to an enterprise.



The system was indifferent and insensitive to him, in its quest to pursue recovery targets, even if it meant the end of the road for the taxpayer.



As an honourable man, VGS tearfully begged for forgiveness and takes responsibility for all his actions, which he says that his colleagues, family and auditors were unaware of, but reassures them that his assets are far in excess of his liabilities.



It is the case of an honourable and honest man, sensitive to his commitments, losing against an insensitive system, a helpless plight that all of us entrepreneurs face today.



And if that is the predicament of a dynamic, affluent and well-connected Indian entrepreneur, what would be the fate of others who are not so well financially endowed is anybody’s guess. I hope that the FM is now a worried person, with this wretched testimony of what ails the Indian economy.



(The writer is the business editor of HW News Network)


