Morning digest: Body of Café Coffee Day owner V.G. Siddhartha found, Truecaller bug sparks fears of hacking, and more

A select list of stories to read before you start your day.

The body of V. G. Siddhartha, founder of Café Coffee Day, who went missing near the Netravathi bridge here on July 29 was found on the banks of the river near Hoigebazar early on July 31, according to Sasikanth Senthil S., Deputy Commissioner, Dakshina Kannada.

Several Android phone users, who have installed the Truecaller app, were in for a shock on Tuesday when they received text messages saying their registration for the Unified Payment Interface (UPI) app has started, and their bank account was linked to ICICI Bank’s portal for UPI transactions.

The Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG), in its first ever audit of the Goods and Services Tax, has said the government had failed to try out the system before its rollout, leading to inadequate compliance mechanisms, and lower tax revenues. The report was tabled in Parliament on Tuesday.

The Congress MP talks about his views on the process of electing the new Congress President, the image of the party, and whether he would have to pay the price for speaking out

11 of 20 biggest cities in the country are facing extreme risk of scarcity, according to Water Stress Index

A letter purportedly written by V.G. Siddhartha, chairman and managing director of Cafe Coffee Day, that surfaced hours after he went missing near Mangaluru on Monday evening, said financial troubles and harassment from Income Tax authorities had led him to “succumbing to the situation”. But the Income Tax Department is raising doubts over his signature in the letter.

The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has registered a case of alleged corruption against U.K.-based Rolls-Royce, its Indian arm, a company located in Singapore and unknown officials of the Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL), ONGC and GAIL, in connection with contracts worth thousands of crores.

Rajan Lohia produces about 25 lakh kilograms of tea annually from his three estates in eastern Assam’s Dibrugarh and Sivasagar districts. Of this, only 2 kg has struck gold.

Five people, including two cops, were killed and 38 others injured on July 30 in a powerful blast targeting a police vehicle in Quetta, the largest city of Pakistan’s troubled Balochistan province.

When data is monetised, as the Economic Survey advocates, it becomes toxic and harms public interest

After an intense spell of virtually non-stop ODI action on either side of the Indian Premier League (IPL), many would have thought that all-format regulars would be given a break for the limited-over leg of India’s series against the West Indies, starting August 3.
