Kareena Kapoor Khan reveals she is dying to play a double role like Sridevi in Chaalbaaz

Kareena Kapoor Khan | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Kareena Kapoor Khan is currently in London with husband Saif Ali Khan and son Taimur Ali Khan. The beauty has two films in the offering - Good News with Akshay Kumar and Angrezi Medium with Irrfan Khan.

Who isn't inspired by Sridevi. She was a legend whose body of work is worth taking lessons from. So it comes as no surprise that even Kareena Kapoor Khan looks up to her; to an extent that she is now hoping to play a double role like how Sridevi played in Chaalbaaz. Yes, during the recent episode of Dance India Dance, where she plays one of the judges, Bebo made a candid revelation on how she's watched Chaalbaaz almost 35 times and that she is 'dying to do a double role.'

"I have always wanted to do films like where I could play twins like Seeta Aur Geeta or Chaalbaaz", she said going on to point out that her sister Karisma Kapoor has been a part of many films like Judwaa and Saajan Chale Sasural where she had to deal with the confusion of two dopplegangers. "But I have not been offered a double role ever which is quite strange. I am dying to do one", said Bebo proving how desperately she is waiting to play a 'judwaa' on-screen.

If only filmmakers seriously take a note of this and approach Kareena with a double role. I mean, just imagine how amazing it would be to see Bebo being two times prettier on screen in two different roles! Anyway, one finds it difficult to get enough of admiring her irrespective of whether it's on-screen or off-screen.

Meanwhile on the work front, Kareena currently has two films in the offering - Good News co-starring Akshay Kumar and Kiara Advani releasing next year and Angrezi Medium with Irrfan Khan and Radhika Madan releasing next year. Apart from these two films, she of course has Dance India Dance 7 that she'll continue judging until the end of this season and her multiple endrosements and magazine shoots that she keeps featuring in every now and then.

The beauty is currently in London with husband Saif Ali Khan and her star baby Taimur Ali Khan.

Keep watching this space as we bring you more updates.
