Shah claims chit-fund owners buying Mamata''s paintings; TMC issues defamation notice

uttara@tribuneindia.com

Kolkata/New Delhi, January 29

Bharatiya Janata Party president Amit Shah launched a scathing attack against the Trinamool Congress government in West Bengal on Tuesday claiming Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee's paintings were brought by chit fund owners for crores of rupees.

Vowing to uproot the Trinamool Congress (TMC) government in West Bengal, he said if the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) formed the next government in the state, it would ensure that each and every defrauded investor in chit funds got back their money.

Shah said at his rally: "Are you all aware of Mamata Banerjee's qualities? She is a very good painter. Even if someone is a great painter, how much would his paintings cost? (Rs) 10,000, (Rs) 20,000, (Rs) one lakh or (Rs) 10 lakh. But her paintings were brought by chit fund owners for crores of rupees".

"So, will the chit fund owners ever be arrested if the person, whose paintings they had brought, is the chief minister?," he asked a public rally at Kanthi in East Midnapore district of West Bengal.

Claiming that over 25 lakh people of the state had lost their life's savings due to the chit fund scam, Shah said if the BJP came to power in West Bengal, all the money that was looted would be recovered.

"Give us one chance. We will ensure the recovery of the money looted by the chit funds. They (TMC) cannot do it. We will do it," he said.

The BJP president said the upcoming Lok Sabha election would be about restoring democracy in the state.

"Narendra Modi will be elected as the prime minister again after the Lok Sabha election. But in West Bengal, the polls will be about restoring democracy," he said.

"I am sure that in the coming Lok Sabha polls, we (BJP) will ensure the immersion of the TMC government in the state. On the day of (vote) counting, you will witness the fall of the TMC government. The (vote) counting of the Lok Sabha polls will be over by 1 pm and by 2 pm, the government in Bengal will fall," Shah said.

"If you want to make Bengal free of cow smugglers and infiltrators, then you have to elect the BJP. Only Narendra Modi and the BJP government can do it," he added.

Listing the development projects of the Modi government, Shah alleged that the TMC dispensation in the state was not letting these initiatives reach the people as Banerjee was afraid that it would bolster Modi's popularity.

"The West Bengal government has come out of the Ayushman Bharat scheme. When the poor in other states will be able to avail the health insurance benefits under the scheme, those in Bengal will be deprived of it," he said.

Banerjee and the TMC government were only changing the names of various development projects initiated by the Modi government and trying to steal the credit of the Centre, Shah alleged.

Defamation

The TMC was quick to react. The Banerjee-led party dismissed Shah's charges as "baseless" and alleged that the "BJP is trying to malign our party".

They later issued a defamation notice to Shah.

Senior TMC leader Chandrima Bhattacharya, minister of state for health in West Bengal government, accused Shah of trying to malign the TMC supremo's image by "uttering lies".

"I have issued a defamation notice against BJP national president Amit Shah for his defamatory and malicious remarks against Mamata Banerjee," she said.

Clashes

There were unconfirmed reported of violence ad arson after the Kanthi rally, with both TMC and BJP accusing the other of vandalism.

TMC accused BJP of ransacking their office in Kanthi and claimed clashes broke out when they retaliated.

"When our supporters were returning from Amit Shah's rally they were attacked by TMC activists. This is a shame. We condemn it," BJP state president Dilip Ghosh said.

The BJP meanwhile, claims TMC vandalised and torched buses in which BJP party workers were travelling in after the rally.

Senior TMC leader Suvendu Adhikari claimed that the BJP is trying to disturb peace and stability in the district.

"BJP workers attacked our party offices and this led to retaliation by our workers. If our party office is attacked are we going to offer sweets?" he said.

Parties’ sources said three people were wounded in the clashes. However, there is no confirmation from West Bengal police. There is also no information on which party the three who were wounded belonged.

Union Home Minister Rajnath Singh, also a senior BJP leader, is believed to have spoken to Banerjee the phone to voice his concern about the reported “large scale violence and arson against people who participated in the rally”. Sources said he asked her to take action against those involved. PTI/TNS
