All new generation Hyundai Grand i

Hyundai is all set to launch the all-new 2019 Grand i10 in India on the 20th of next month. Here's everything you need to know about the third-gen model.

Exterior

Spy shots suggest that the 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 will look sportier and funkier but have similar proportions. Compared to the existing Hyundai Grand i10, it won't be much different in terms of dimensions. Unlike in the second generation, there won't be two different wheelbase versions. This means that European customers will find the new generation model much bigger. The redesigned model will boast projector headlamps, likely with integrated LED DRL, and LED fog lamps too. The new headlamps will be sleeker, and the Cascading grille too will flaunt a new look. The exterior equipment will include machine-cut alloy wheels as well.

Interior

With the next lifecycle makeover, the Hyundai Grand i10/Hyundai i10 will once again raise the bar in terms of interior design and equipment. Everything from the dashboard to the centre console, instrument panel, infotainment system and steering wheel will be newly designed. One of the main highlights will be the floating touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto and even some connected car technologies. It will likely be the same unit offered in the Hyundai Venue, but with some features omitted. The seating space will likely be improved with design enhancements.

Engines and transmissions

In India, the 2019 Hyundai Grand i10 will be offered with the upgraded, BS-VI compliant version of the 83 PS 1.2L Kappa VTVT petrol engine and the 75 PS U2 1.2L CRDi diesel engine at launch. Later, the 66.3 PS 1.2L Dual VTVT petrol-CNG should also be introduced, albeit in upgraded, BS-VI form. While the standard transmission will be a 5-speed manual unit just like in the previous generation model, the optional transmission will be a 5-speed automated manual unit instead of a 4-speed automatic unit. The AMT will be the same unit that is offered in the Hyundai Santro.

Expected price

The prices of the current Hyundai Grand i10 start at Rs 4.98 lakh. Expect the all-new Hyundai Grand i10 to cost from around INR 5.25 lakh (ex-showroom).

[Image Source 1: bobaedream.co.kr]

[Image Source 2: autocarindia.com]
