8th Sikh left out of Kargil clip, ‘pained’ veteran raises matter

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Ajay Banerjee

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, July 30

Two days after a short video clip to mark 20 years of the Kargil war was released, the Army is facing “pained” veterans, who have pointed out that the Eighth Battalion of the Sikh regiment was not given its “due” in the 8.55-minute video while describing the famous battle of Tiger Hill.

Lt Gen GS Shergill (retd), who was the Colonel Commandant of the Sikh regiment, in a Facebook post said, “A major issue overlooked by everyone (the filmmakers) was the contribution of the Eighth Battalion of the Sikh regiment in the capture of Tiger Hill. Only two battalions got battle honour for Tiger Hill and Eighth Sikh was one of those.” The other one is the 18 Grenadiers and is mentioned in the film.

Lt Gen Shergill, who retired in October 2015, told The Tribune, “We (the battalion) were the first to battle at Tiger Hill. You cannot refer to the battle without mentioning Eighth Sikh. I am pained that’s why I raised the matter and this is not against the organisation (Army).”

The Tribune sent a query to the Indian Army asking why Eight Sikh is not mentioned in the movie. The Army has responded saying, “The audio visual clip is a motivational documentary representative of the national effort, including that of all services.

The contribution of all units and formations, including that of Eighth Sikh, is well documented with theatre and battle honours. The valour and gallant actions of units, including Eighth Sikh, have been highlighted on the official Army social media platform during the Kargil’s Operation Vijay narration.”

On Tuesday afternoon, the Army headquarters contacted Lt Gen Shergill and spoke to him. The retired General, whose earlier Facebook post saw several veterans backing his cause, posted another message on his page saying, “They (Army headquarters) rang up and assured necessary amendments will be made and we will be informed immediately after the action.”

Meanwhile, the Army has corrected an error in the initial print of the movie. The mention of 1 Bihar was missing in capture of “Jubar top”, the same has been added, after a retired brigadier sent off a protest letter, saying the capture of the peak had been wrongly credited to 1/11 Gorkha Rifles.

Army assures amendment

The Army headquarters rang up Lt Gen GS Shergill (retd) and assured him that necessary amendments would be made in the movie and he would be informed immediately after action
