With schools set to re-open, government in a fix to shift flood-hit

GUWAHATI: For thousands of inmates at flood relief camps in Assam , the beginning of the school session from Thursday presents a familiar predicament. The annual cycle of devastating floods in the state usually coincides with summer vacation, making it easy for government authorities to turn schools into relief camps. When the vacation ends, the education department has a difficult choice to make."We are in a very difficult position. Classes will begin on August 1, before which classrooms need to be cleaned. At the same time, we cannot ignore the plight of those who have been putting up at relief camps set up inside schools," Jyotshna Rani Barman, inspector of schools in the Barpeta district circle and district mission coordinator of Sarva Siksha Abhiyan told TOI on Tuesday."Eventually, we issued instructions to clean up schools from where relief camp inmates have left in the last couple of days. In schools where flood-affected people are still taking shelter, we are looking for ways to hold classes in rooms that are empty. It may not be the healthiest environment to have classes, but we have been left with no option," Barman added.Across the state, hundreds of government schools have been turned into relief camps. Nearly 31,000 flood-affected people have taken shelter in relief camps in six districts - Barpeta, Chirang, Kamrup, Morigaon, Nagaon and Jorhat. Barpeta has been the worst hit by the second wave of floods, with 22,413 inmates taking shelter in relief camps - the highest in the state - with 184 schools - from elementary to senior secondary - being used as relief camps.Commissioner and secretary of the state education department, Preetom Saikia, said, "The department is yet to assess how bad the situation in schools is."The problem, however, has been a persistent one. "For years, government schools have been used as relief camps during floods. We are not asking the government to drive the inmates away, but urgent measures need to be taken to build shelters in flood-prone areas as an alternative in case the third wave of floods hits Assam," Ratul Chandra Goswami, principal secretary of Assam State Primary Teachers' Association, said.The threat of a third wave of floods looms in the air during the prolonged monsoon in Assam till the end of September every year.
