Twin murders jolt West Bengal: Couple found chopped in pieces, stuffed in suitcases

Police investigation is underway into both the double murders (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Couple gagged to death, pipe inserted through wife's throat in Narendrapur Aparna, Pradip Biswas found murdered at residence in South 24 Paraganas Two twin murders within 24 hours rock state of West Bengal

Kolkata: A bone-chilling instance has come to light from the state of West Bengal where a couple was found murdered in gruesome conditions. The bodies of Pradip and Alpana Biswas was found at a home in South 24 Paraganas district of the state. Local police have registered a case and initiated an investigation into the matter.

The Biswas' had been living as caretakers in the home their bodies were recovered from. A police official familiar with the incident said that the owner of the home rarely visits the residence and regularly communicated with Alpana and Paradip over the telephone. When his calls went unanswered in the past couple of days, the homeowner contacted Pradip's brother Joy.

Joy went to the residence and discovered two large suitcases inside the bathroom with an unbearable stench emanating from them. He alerted local police officials who arrived at the spot and opened the suitcases only to find the bodies of the couple stuffed inside them. While the bodies were sent for post-mortem, police registered a case in this regard and launched an investigation. The area has been cordoned off and a dog squad along with forensic experts has been dispatched for the crime scene.

This incident comes less than a day after a double-murder was reported from Narendrapur in West Bengal. In this case, the bodies of an elderly couple were recovered from their residence in a two-storied building at Netaji Nagar. The victims have been identified as Dilip and Sapna Mukherjee. The wife's body was found near a door at the entrance with a rope tied around her neck and a pipe inserted through her throat. Meanwhile, the husband's body was found on a bed in the room.

A preliminary investigation has led police officials to believe that the murders took place last night after two-three unidentified people barged into the couple's home allegedly to rob it. A forensic examination of the scene of the crime is underway, said a police officer adding that the residence was ransacked. Investigators also have reason to suspect that the two were gagged to death.

A post-mortem of the bodies is being conducted even as police officers are questioning shopkeepers and tenants living in or working out of the same building as the victims. The timing of both of these brutal double murders has rocked the state of West Bengal with citizens concerned for their safety and questions being raised at the preparedness of West Bengal police.
