Tiger, burning bright

Way back in 1794, William Blake had written a poem which began with the lines ‘Tiger, tiger, burning bright,/ In the forests of the night.’ A little over two centuries later, as the whole world was weeping over the rapid reduction in the tiger population, India too was struggling to save the existing tiger population. There was even a campaign called ‘Save the tiger’, with conservationists and governments joining hands to take every possible step to prevent the king of the jungle from becoming history. This week, as the Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi unveiled the results of the Tiger Census Report, India has come out victorious in its battle to save the majestic animal – the tiger population in the country has jumped from 2,226 in 2014 to 2,967 in 2018. This is indeed a 33 per cent increase in a span of just four years, and what is more a matter of pride is that India is now home to about 75 per cent of the world’s total tiger population. This amazing jump in the total number of tigers also means that India has achieved its own target of doubling the tiger population four years ahead of the target year. India had in 2006 fixed a target of doubling the country’s tiger population – which was then only 1,411 – by the year 2022. While the country was expecting to reach the 2,822 figure only in 2022, the actual total has already gone up by 145 even as four years are still left. Prime Minister Modi, while congratulating the conservationists for this grand success, has also said that India is today the safest and biggest habitat for tigers anywhere in the world. With the total world tiger population currently standing at 3,950, India has left behind all the other countries having tigers – like Russia, Indonesia, Nepal, Malaysia, Thailand, Bhutan and Bangladesh – far behind. Assam too has reasons to rejoice. The state today has 190 tigers as in 2018 in comparison to 167 in 2014. Kaziranga National Park, which is also part of Project Tiger, in fact continues to be the safest habitat for tigers in the entire country. What, however, needs to be taken care of at this moment of joy is that the country needs more care for the tiger habitats. Animal corridors are already in danger in many states, including in Assam, while the prey base for tigers also requires to be given a serious look.
