Congress worker hacked to death by bike-borne assailants in Thrissur

Congress worker hacked to death by bike-borne assailants in Thrissur

Congress alleges that SDPI is behind the attack.

news Crime

A Congress party worker belonging to Thrissur district in Kerala succumbed to his injuries on Wednesday after being attacked by a group of assailants. 40-year-old Noushad, resident of Punna in Chavakkad, and three other Congress workers were attacked by a group of men on Tuesday night.

According to reports, a group of 10 people came on bikes and stabbed the Congress workers. Though the Congress workers were rushed to the hospital, Noushad passed away on Wednesday morning. The three other Congress workers who were attacked are undergoing treatment at a private hospital in Thrissur.

Members of Congress party in the area allege that Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) is behind the attack.

Chavakkad police told TNM that a case has been registered and a probe has been launched into the attack.

Leader of opposition and Congress leader Ramesh Chennithala said that the government must take this seriously and put an end to the political killings in the state.

Taking to Facebook, Chennithala said local Congress party leaders in the area have alleged that SDPI was behind the attack. “This attack should not go unchecked. A top-level police inquiry should be conducted into the incident and the assailants should be brought before the law.”

Following the incident, Congress party has declared a hartal at Guruvayur in Thrissur.

Kerala is no stranger to political killings. According to reports, there have been about 20 political murders in the state since 2016. In February, two Youth Congress workers, Kripesh and Sharath Lal, were attacked and killed by three persons who came on motorcycles in Kasaragod’s Periya. A local CPI(M) committee member in Kasaragod Peethambaran A, was arrested in connection with the murder accused of planning the crime.

In July 2018, Abhimanyu, a member of SFI and a student of Maharajas College in Kochi was killed allegedly by members of the Campus Front of India (student wing of SDPI). A year on, however, the investigating officers are yet to nab all the accused in the incident.
