This Is How The ‘Taarak Mehta’ Team Celebrated Their 11-Year Anniversary

Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah completed 11 years of on-air time this week and the team threw a party to celebrate the occasion.

The cast and crew gathered to watch a video presentation that showcased their journey of 11 years. Munmun Dutta, who plays the role of Babita took to social media to share the photos. “What a surreal journey it has been. Blessed!!” she shared. The team also had a cake cutting ceremony.

“I miss Disha Vakani” shared Dilip Joshi

Speaking to the Times of India about the newest milestone, Dilip Joshi, who plays Jetha Lal on-screen shared, “I am missing Disha Vakani (who plays his on-screen wife, Daya) a lot today. I have worked with her for almost 9 and a half years and it is not a short period. I feel she is still with us, it's just that her priorities have changed now. She is a mother now and her priorities have obviously changed and today on this occasion we all are missing her.”

Disha took a maternity break in 2017, and while speculations are on that the actress will be getting replaced nothing has been confirmed just yet.

“Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah has changed my life. All the love and blessings that I have got in my career has been only after doing this show. I got recognition because of this show. I have worked a lot in this industry and have done multiple projects, but after doing Taarak Mehta... people's perception towards me changed. I would like to thank God for the opportunity that he gave me through this show,” Dilip added.

The journey so far

TMKOC went on-air in 2008 and is one of the longest-running shows on India TV with over 2,700 episodes. Apart from Mumbai, the show has been shot in various international locations including Paris, London, Hong Kong, and recently in Singapore too.

The show is based on the column Duniya Ne Undha Chashma written by humourist Taarak Mehta. During the success party, Dilip thanked him as well. “I would also like to thank Taarak Mehta, the humourist. In the television industry, if the characters are impressive, the show is automatically loved by people and he had written these characters in 1972. All the characters are lovely and till today people love them.”

Congratulations, team TMKOC.




