Jeep Wrangler JL to be launched in India on 9 August

FCA India has confirmed that it will launch the Jeep Wrangler JL on 9 August 2019. The company is taking the fourth generation of its iconic model much more seriously compared to the outgoing model.

While the old Jeep Wrangler (JK) is available in only one basic grade, the Jeep Wrangler (JL) will likely be available in at least two equipment lines. The range comprises Sport, Sport S, Sahara and Rubicon trim levels and also a Moab special edition. The Sahara and Rubicon grades have been spied on test, while the Moab edition is reported to be included in the range here. The Sahara test mule was equipped with the exclusive Overland pack. The old model was offered in only the 5-door 'Unlimited' version, and it remains to be seen if the all-new model will be offered in the 3-door version as well.

The Jeep Wrangler is still a body-on-frame vehicle, a characteristic strongly associated with an SUV. Various weight reduction measures have been made to boost fuel economy. The iconic off-roader continues to utilise the proven five-link coil suspension configuration. New shock tuning, hard points, and body mount strategy have improved the ride comfort, body-roll, and handling significantly, though.

The fourth-gen model features an evolutionary design. The headlamps with those more sophisticated graphics and LED tech, the LED fog lamps offering crisp white lighting, the LED turn signals (front), the gently swept back top of the keystone-shaped front grille, the more rakish windshield, the body-coloured sport bars and the LED tail lamps are some of the tell-tale signs of the redesigned model.

Changes are rather more significant on the inside, where most elements adopt a more car-like design and functionality. There's a lot of new equipment on offer. Passive keyless entry, push-button starter featuring a weather-proof surround, seats with adjustable bolster and lumbar support, longer armrests, 7-inch TFT LED MID and 8.4-inch touchscreen infotainment system with Apple CarPlay, Android Auto and satellite navigation are some of the highlights of the comfort and convenience features. Safety is taken care of by features like Trailor Sway Control (TSC), Hill Start Assist (HSA), Tyre Pressure Monitoring Display, Electronic Roll Mitigation (ERM), Electronic Stability Control (ECS) and more.

The Jeep Wrangler JL is made with three engine options, and an engine start-stop system is standard. The first is a 2.0-litre turbocharged petrol engine developing 272 PS and 400 Nm of torque, paired with an 8-speed automatic transmission. The second option is a 3.6-litre naturally aspirated petrol engine good for 284 PS and 347 Nm, coupled to a 6-speed manual transmission or an 8-speed automatic transmission. The final option is a 2.2-litre diesel engine producing 200 PS and 450 Nm of torque, linked to an 8-speed automatic transmission.

The Jeep Wrangler JL packs the Command-Trac 4x4 system with 2.72:1 crawl ratio in the Sport, Sport S and Sahara trim levels, the Rock-Trac 4x4 system with a low-gear ratio of 4:1 and Tru-Lok front and rear locking differentials, and the Selec-Trac 4x4 system with Track-Lok limited-slip rear differential.

Also See: Jeep Grand Compass (7-seat Jeep Compass) - IAB Rendering

The Jeep Wrangler JL's prices may start in the INR 65-70 lakh (ex-showroom) range.
