Kerala youth, who joined ISIS in 2017, killed in US drone attack in Afghanistan

File photo of Muhammad Muhasin | Photo Credit: Times Now

Key Highlights Muhammad Muhasin was a native of Edappal town in Malappuram He was involved in terrorist activities at Khorasan province in Afghanistan The news of Muhasin’s death was conveyed to his family through a WhatsApp message

Malappuram: A resident of Kerala who reportedly joined the militant group Islamic State (IS) two years ago has been killed in a US drone attack in Afghanistan.

The youth, identified as Muhammad Muhasin, was a native of Edappal town in Malappuram district in Kerala. He was killed along with a key commander of the Islamic State, Huzaifa-al-Bakistani in the Khorasan province of Afghanistan on July 18.

The news of Muhasin’s death was conveyed to his family through a WhatsApp message, which also warned of possible adverse aftereffects for the family if this was communicated to the police or any other investigation agency.

The text in the Malayalam language said, "Your brother was seeking martyrdom. Allah has fulfilled his wish as per his aspiration. He was martyred 10 days ago in a drone attack by the American forces."

"Please do not reveal this to the police, otherwise they will come to your home and start bothering you. Your brother doesn't want this," the message read, news agency ANI reported.

Meanwhile, on receiving the confidential information in this regard, National Investigation Agency officials reached Malappuram and conducted a probe.

Muhasin, who joined the IS in October 2017, was involved in terrorist activities at Khorasan province in Afghanistan.

In 2017, Muhasin, who was then a final year student in an engineering college in Thrissur, left home saying he was going to Bengaluru.

Subsequently, his family filed a missing-person complaint with the police who registered a case, conducted a probe and found that he had left for Dubai.

As per the relatives, the IB had visited them and informed them that Muhsin had joined the Islamic State.

Over the last few years, several people from the state, including women, have joined the ISIS. Most of the people who joined the militant group from Kerala belong to the Kannur city of the state, according to government data.

The data, accessed by the agency, also states that at least 40 people including eight women, from Kannur, joined ISIS on June 15.

The data further reveals that over the last few years, 98 people from Kerala joined the Islamic State, out of which 38 were killed and 60 are still alive and fighting for the terrorist organisation.

Apart from Kannur, several people from Kasaragod, Kozhikode, Malappuram, Palakkad, Eranakulam and Thrissur have joined the ISIS in the recent past. A majority of them were influenced by the ISIS through social media.

Last month, reports came in that head of Kerala ISIS module Rashid Abdulla reportedly died in a US bombing in Afghanistan more than a month ago. Abdulla, who used to actively spread IS ideology on social media, was spearheading a group of 21 people from Kerala.

An unidentified IS operative from Khorasan province in Afghanistan informed through Telegram app that Abdulla was killed in a “random bombing” by the US forces.

Abdulla, who was from Kasaragod district of Kerala migrated to Afghanistan, IS stronghold, along with his wife two years back. He was inclined towards ISIS by its propaganda material available online around 2014.
