Eating at the Cheesecake Factory Is Medically Inadvisable

Food at chain restaurants has a lot of calories, who knew?

Every year, the Center for Science in the Public Interest unleashes a list of the “worst” foods available at chain restaurants around the country, meaning those with “1,500 to 2,300 calories and at least a day’s worth of sugar, salt, or saturated fat.” The tone is condescending, geared toward snarkily associating poor health with fatness (“So what if 70 percent of adults are already overweight or obese? So what if those meats boost the risk of colorectal cancer?” it asks of an over-meated burger at Chili’s) rather than analyzing why and how people would choose to order the Country Boy breakfast at Cracker Barrel, or encouraging chains to offer a wider variety of options.

However, it generally is a good thing to know the nutritional makeup of foods, so if you order the cinnamon roll pancakes at the Cheesecake Factory, know that a serving of three contains 2,040 calories and over a day’s worth of sodium. They also describe Sonic’s Peanut Butter Master Shake as like eating “15 Oreos blended with half a cup of lard.” Which is honestly impressive! Anyway, don’t tell them that high-end restaurants use ungodly amounts of butter.

And in other news...

Iggy Azalea is back in the news after being shocked that she wound up paying $64 for a grilled cheese in Las Vegas. “I just got the bill and they charged me and extra 10.08 for knifes and forks which aren’t included free here,” she tweeted. The sandwich didn’t even look that good. [Page Six]

Indian coffee tycoon V.G. Siddhartha was found dead two days after he went missing. [CNN]

Las Vegas is in the middle of a grasshopper invasion, so one local pizzeria is putting them on pizzas. [News 3 Las Vegas]

The UK just experienced its hottest day on record, which led to thousands of chickens dying of heat on a poultry farm, though the farm had recently been found to be in breach of standards during inspections. [The Lincolnite]

Zomato, an Indian restaurant search and food delivery app, took a stand against a man who tried to get a refund because he found out his driver wasn’t Hindu. India recently re-elected Narendra Modi as Prime Minister, whose party, the BJP, holds right-wing, Hindu nationalist positions and has bolstered anti-Muslim prejudice. Zomato, however, responded “Food doesn’t have a religion. It is a religion.” [BBC]

Sarah Jessica Parker is launching her own line of Sauvignon Blanc (is Sauvolo Blahnik anything?). [Food & Wine]

McDonald’s is introducing spicy chicken tenders and a spicy chicken sandwich to the menu. [Buzzfeed]

Esquire speculates on what happens when #whiteclawsummer ends. Hard green tea? [Esquire]

Impossible Foods can’t make meatless meat fast enough for consumer demand, so it’s partnering with a meat company OSI. [CNN]

Dunkin’ is moving forward with those paper cups. [Environmental Leader]

LeBron James sang a little song to his tacos.
