Is Sarah Todd replacing George Calombaris on MasterChef?

Popular MasterChef contestant Sarah Todd has said she's keen to be involved in the revamped version of Channel 10's hit cooking show, should the opportunity arise.

The 2014 finalist told Confidential, 'I feel very thankful about being on the show.

'If there was any opportunity to be a part of it (in 2020, of course, I would say yes.)

Something to smile about? The former model certainly has the looks and experience to step into a judging role on MasterChef

'That said, I’m still learning and working hard on my own projects,' she added.

It's been a tumultuous week for Channel 10's long-running cooking show.

Network bosses decided to dump judges Matt Preston, George Calombaris and Gary Mehigan after contract negotiations broke down.

Now studio heads are said to be considering rolling out an all-star version of MasterChef for the 2020 schedule, which will give former contestants another crack at the coveted title.

The three amigos: Judges Gary Mehigan, Matt Preston and George Calombaris have been chopped from Masterchef after contract negotiations broke down

Since appearing on MasterChef, Sarah's career has gone from strength to strength

The former model has shot five television shows, released The Healthy Model Cookbook and become a culinary sensation overseas.

At the moment, the French-trained chef divides her time between Australia and India, where she has restaurants in Mumbai and Delhi.

In January, Sarah looked on in horror when flames engulfed her beloved Indian restaurant, Antares, a 250-seat open-air beach club, located on Vagator Beach in tourist hub Goa.

Yummy mummy: In January, Sarah looked on in horror when flames engulfed her beloved Indian restaurant, Antares, a 250-seat open-air beach club, located on Vagator Beach in tourist hub Goa. Single mum Sarah and her son Phoenix, 7, pictured at her beachside restaurant Antares in Goa, prior to it burning down

'The restaurant was my great pride,' single mum Sarah told WHO magazine at the time.

'It took four years to build up, and just a few minutes to turn to ash.'

After a tumultuous future looks bright for Sarah.

It's just been announced she'll take part in an all-female line-up of food icons at the Australian Open Chef Series in 2020.

Sarah will joined by famed author Donna Hay, and talented chefs Analiese Gregory and Duangporn ‘Bo’ Songvisava.

Together, they'll each host lavish dinners during the Grand Slam tournament.
