Coffee Day makes SV Ranganath interim chairman

Coffee Day Enterprises, which owns the Café Coffee Day (CCD) chain, has rejigged its top management by appointing non-executive independent director SV Ranganath as interim chairman and one of the company’s early investors Nitin Bagmane as the chief operating officer. The two will join chief financial officer R Ram Mohan on a newly formed executive committee to manage operations.The restructuring was triggered by the death of CCD founder and chairman VG Siddhartha , known as the ‘coffee king of India’. He was found dead on Wednesday after going missing on Monday. Coffee Day, in a statement on Wednesday, also said the authenticity of the purported letter written by him is unverified. “While the authenticity of the letter is unverified and it is unclear whether these statements pertain to the company or the personal holdings of VG Siddhartha, the board took serious note of the same and resolved to investigate this matter,” the company said in an exchange filing. The company also said that it has appointed Cyril Amarchand Mangaldas as its legal counsel to advise it on the matter.Bagmane is a director with Tanglin Developments, the real estate business of the company, since its inception. Ranganath, a 1975-batch IAS officer from Karnataka , has held many offices and was also the chief secretary of the state.“Having closely worked with Siddhartha, Nitin knows his business objectives well. As the company transitions into this new phase, I feel Nitin will follow the trajectory, look to stabilise the ship first and give confidence to the employees and customers,” said Ranjan Biswas, partner at accounting firm EY. The firm has been associated with CCD for a considerable period of time.Siddhartha, whose body was recovered on Wednesday morning from the shores of the Nethravathi river near Mangaluru after 36 hours of search operations, had in his note said he was under pressure from lenders and a private equity player, and had alleged harassment by tax authorities. Nearly two years ago, Siddhartha’s home and businesses were raided by tax authorities, who claimed they had uncovered evidence of illegal income. Siddhartha, however, had denied that.
