Conservationists battle poaching, terrain & falling prey base in Northeast

GUWAHATI: Tiger count in the North East Hills and Brahmaputra Plains Landscape (NEHBPL) shows an alarming trend as falling prey base, lack of implementation of anti-poaching laws and difficult terrain pose a great challenge to conservationists striving to save the big cat.While there's Assam on one hand having the highest number of big cats (estimated 190), on the other hand are the states of Mizoram and Nagaland which have recorded no traces of the big cat. Thus, the Status of Tigers in India-2018 report suggests immediate requirement of conservation efforts to save the big cats in northeast. The Buxa Tiger Reserve in northern West Bengal too does not have any tigers in the park. Arunachal figures also portray a grim picture. The state has 29 tigers according to the report which is just one tiger more than the 2014 estimate.As the report places the northeast hills in the 'critically vulnerable' category, the region needs 'immediate conservation attention'. "In areas where tigers have not been recorded or the population has declined, restoration needs to proceed by improving protection, augmentation of prey and reintroduction of tigers from appropriate source," the report added. Experts believe that falling prey base due to hunting and inadequate enforcement of strict anti-poaching laws could have contributed to low tiger count in the hill states of northeast. Namdapha is a great example as the report suggests that poaching in the tiger reserve remains a potential threat to tiger conservation.National Tiger Conservation Authority's (NTCA) management effectiveness evaluation (MEE) has put Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram in the category of 'fair' (41% to 59% rating). The MEE report is an indication of the health of tiger reserves and also lists measures to ensure strengthening of conservation efforts. Arunachal Pradesh has three tiger reserves - Namdapha, Kamlang and Pakke - of which the first two have been rated 'fair' while the remaining one has been rated 'good'. Mizoram's Dampa is also in the 'fair' category. According to experts, the hilly terrain in Arunachal, Mizoram and Nagaland was a great hindrance to the tiger estimation process. "The 29 tigers estimated in Arunachal Pradesh are done through DNA analysis of tiger scat. Because of the difficult terrain, camera traps could not be used extensively," the expert added.
