Vicky Kaushal to join Indian Army jawans at Indo-China border of Tawang, shares pic from Arunachal Pradesh

Actor Vicky Kaushal, who was last seen in Uri: The Surgical Strike, will be spending a few days with the Army Jawans in Tawang, Arunachal Pradesh and shared his excitement on Twitter. Sharing a picture with the jawans on Instagram, Vicky wrote, “Elated to be getting an opportunity to spend a few days with our Indian Army posted at 14,000ft altitude at the Indo-China border of Tawang, Arunachal Pradesh. #JaiJawaan.”

Vicky’s last release, Uri, went on to be the biggest hit of his career and the year 2019 until it was beaten by Shahid Kapoor’s Kabir Singh. He will now be seen in two biopics -- that of freedom fighter Sardar Udham Singh and 1971 war hero Field Marshal Sam Manekshaw.

Titled Sardar Udham Singh, the film is directed by Shoojit Sircar and written by Ritesh Shah and Shubendu Bhattacharya. It follows Singh, the revolutionary who assassinated Michael O’Dwyer, the former Lieutenant Governor of Punjab in British India in 1940, to avenge the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh massacre.

“It was my dream to work with Shoojit Sircar. I am glad I got the opportunity to work with him in a film on Shaheed Udham Singh. It is a great honour but a big responsibility at the same time. The shoot will resume from October and I am excited to start that process,” Vicky told reporters on the sidelines of NBT Utsav Awards.

He will also be seen playing Manekshaw in Sam, which will be directed by Meghna Gulzar and written by Bhavani Iyer. Manekshaw was the chief of the Indian Army in 1971 when India fought the Bangladesh Liberation War with Pakistan.

Also read: Why Sonakshi Sinha, Parineeti Chopra, Sidharth Malhotra need Khandaani Shafakhana, Jabariya Jodi to be hit

“I had heard stories of him from my parents because they are from Punjab. During 1971, they saw the war closely... When I read the script and got to know more, I was blown away. He was truly a legend this country had. It’s an honour of the highest order to get an opportunity to play this part,” he added.

While both the films chronicle the journey of personalities of national importance, when asked if he has become the face of patriotism, Vicky said, “As an actor when you are choosing stories, you are not looking for similar roles, or if patriotism is there or not. If you are moved by a good story, you are inclined to do the film.”

(With PTI inputs)

Follow @htshowbiz for more
