Delhi: Two men murder neighbour after he denies them money for alcohol

The incident came to light when the police found a body in the bushes near the district park area (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Chander Khan was allegedly murdered as he refused to give money for alocohol A case has been registered under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC)

New Delhi: A man was allegedly murdered by his two neighbours after he denied them money for alcohol. The accused were arrested on Wednesday, July 31. The incident took place in Delhi's Shakurpur area. The accused have been identified as Giri Raj and Pawan.

The deceased was identified as Chander Khan. The incident came to light when the police found a body in the bushes near the district park area. An investigation was launched into the case after the police took the statement of the deceased's sister. The accused have been booked under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Raj and Pawan have been arrested.

The police said, "We have recovered blood-stained clothes of the accused. They have disclosed that they demanded money from the deceased for alcohol as it was his turn to pay but as he refused to give money, they throttled him."

Delhi man shot by neighbour with unlicensed pistol for partying too loud

In March this year, a man allegedly shot at his neighbour for partying too loud in Delhi's Vasant Kunj area. The accused was identified as Neeraj. Neeraj was booked under Section 307 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and the Arms Act.

The victim was identified as Mohit Chhabra. Chhabra was partying with three of his friends. Neeraj's wife got disturbed by the noise, after which, she went to the terrace and asked Chhabra to stop the party. Following this, the two had a heated argument.

When Neeraj learned about the argument, he went to the terrace with his pistol and shot at Chhabra. Neeraj was arrested from his house and was taken to Vasant Kunj police station. The police said that Neeraj had used an unlicensed pistol to shoot at the victim.

Drunk man abuses neighbour, stabs his brother for objecting

In June this year, a man allegedly started abusing his neighbour and when the neighbour's brother objected, he stabbed him. The victim, Shambhu had gone to his brother's house to attend his nephew's birthday party. Following the incident, the police arrested the accused Sujeet and recovered the knife used by him.

The victim's brother was identified as Sujinder. Allegedly, Sujeet came to Sujinder's house in an inebriated state and started abusing him. When Shambhu objected to Sujeet's foul language, he flew into a fit of rage and stabbed him. The accused, Sujeet was arrested when he was trying to flee to Bihar.
