Unnao case: SC orders transfer of all cases to Delhi; asks state govt to pay Rs 25 lakh compensation to victim

SC to hear Unnao case today | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The victim is on ventilator at a private hospital in Lucknow SC asked CBI to complete investigation in seven days

New Delhi: The Supreme Court on Thursday ordered all cases related to the Unnao rape case to be transferred to Delhi, in a major embarrassment to the Uttar Pradesh government. The designated judge in Delhi will commence the trial on a day-to-day basis and complete the trial within 45 days, the SC said in its order. the apex court also asked the state government to pay a compensation of Rs 25 lakh to the victim.

"We have also considered the question of interim compensation to the victim, as an interim measure, we direct the UP government to pay Rs 25 lakh as compensation to the victim," CJI said. "We also direct security and protection to the victim, her lawyer, mother of the victim, the four siblings of the victim, her uncle, and immediate family members in the village in Unnao," he further said.

The apex court also set a seven-day deadline for the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to finish probe in the matter of the accident of the rape survivor on July 25.

The Supreme Court heard the Unnao rape case, wherein the family of the victim had written to the Chief Justice of India (CJI) saying that they were under 'threat'.

The top court also asked the King George's Medical University (KGMU) - where the survivor and her lawyer are undergoing treatment - to form a panel of doctors to determine if both the patients were in a condition to be air-lifted to AIIMS in Delhi for further treatment and inform the court.

#Breaking #Exclusive | We are satisfied with the SC order. Our only demand is that our uncle should be released at the earliest, and Kuldeep Sengar must be given death sentence: Unnao Survivor’s sister tells @swatij14. | #BJPSacksSengar pic.twitter.com/LsWupua5Ys — TIMES NOW (@TimesNow) August 1, 2019

The SC is expected to pronounce its order in the case at 2 pm today.

The CJI, on Wednesday, took suo moto cognizance of the letter and said that he will 'try to do something constructive in this destructive atmosphere'. The court also asked Secretary-General of the court to explain why there was a delay in producing the letter before the CJI.

On Wednesday, CJI Ranjan Gogoi asked the SC registry to reply within a week as to why there was a delay in acting upon the letter which was written on July 12.

"People came to my house and issued threats asking me to take back cases. Otherwise, the whole family will be put in jail in fake cases," reads the letter.

On Sunday, the car that the victim was travelling in was rammed by a truck with a wiped number plate. While two of the victim's relatives died on the spot, the rape survivor and her lawyer suffered critical injuries. According to latest reports, the Lucknow hospital where they are being treated said that the duo is 'stable'.

On Wednesday, the victim's uncle alleged that the accident was carried out by expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, the main accused in the case. My entire family has been eliminated. I have been framed in fake cases. Kuldeep Singh Sengar has got everything done. I have all the evidence," the victim's uncle had claimed.

Meanwhile, the CBI has filed a case against Sengar and 10 others in the accident case. The teenage girl was allegedly raped by the MLA at his Unnao residence on June 4, 2017, when she had gone to seek a job. While the police refused to file a case against Sengar, the victim and her family tried to immolate themselves in front of UP CM Yogi Adityanath's residence. The rape case was also transferred to the CBI after public outrage.
