Rare manuscripts languish in cash-strapped SSU library

VARANASI: An 11th century Devnagri manuscript written in gold ink, a rare treasure found only at the 228-year-old Sampurnanand Sanskrit University (SSU) here, is slowly and steadily losing its lustre.Not these glittering words alone, more than 1.11 lakh ancient documents on palm leaves, parchment and bhojpatra (birch tree bark) are crying for attention at Saraswati Bhawan library on the varsity campus.A chemically treated cloth is generally used to wrap manuscripts so that they survive the elements, particularly moisture. At the SSU library, this special red fabric is in tatters. Also, pest control hasn’t been done for over a decade in the stack room that houses one of India’s oldest, largest and richest collections of manuscripts.Saraswati Bhawan has a collection of ancient documents in 27 different scripts, including 88,808 in Devnagri, 13,736 in Bangla, 1,451in Maithili and 1,101 Grantha. Under the care of just two employees, this rare collection is battling for survival.“Manuscripts found here are remarkable and unique. Many are written in gold and silver ink on birch bark, wooden tablets and palm leaves. Research scholars from the Americas, Germany and Japan come here to study them, which is why there is a pressing need for conservation,” said librarian Suryakant Yadav.According to Yadav, all the manuscripts are around 400 years old and are in a brittle condition. They need and deserve special attention, but are denied the same in the absence of adequate staff and owing to paucity of funds, he said.Manuscript in-charge and deputy librarian Prem Chandra Mishra said the library had another proud possession — the handwritten version of Bhagvad Purana or Shrimad Bhagavatam, dating back to 1134 AD. “It is written in red, black and gold, and is one of our most valuable possessions. But, amid various constraints, we are unable to take proper care of it,” he added.The only silver lining is that the collection has been microfilmed with the support of Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, Delhi. However, owing to lack of funds, it has not been digitised yet.SSU vice-chancellor Rajaram Shukla said they had written to the state education department and also the University Grants Commission for digitisation of manuscripts. “The varsity is reeling under an acute financial crisis and digitisation of such a vast collection is not possible without financial support,” he stressed.Once the rare manuscripts get a virtual avatar, they can be easily accessed and read. “In microfilming, the size of the written text cannot be increased or decreased for convenience of reading,” professor Shukla added.
