NCLT bins Ruia bid for Essar Steel

The Ruias are hoping to challenge the NCLT order — and will be basing their argument on a ruling given by Supreme Court Justices R.F. Nariman and Navin Sinha in the case of Brilliant Alloys. The same bench had delivered last week’s judgment that upheld the constitutional validity of the IBC code in its entirety.

Last December, the apex court had permitted Brilliant Alloys to withdraw from the resolution process under Section 12A even though the application for such a withdrawal had been made long after the invitation for EoI from potential bidders.

The Chennai bench of NCLT had shot down Brilliant Alloys’ proposal.

“The only reason why the withdrawal was not allowed, though agreed to by the corporate debtor as well as the financial creditor, was because Regulation 30A states that withdrawal cannot be permitted after issue of invitation for EoI. This regulation has to be read along with the main provision Section 12A which contains no such stipulation. Accordingly, this stipulation can only be construed as directory, depending on the facts of each case. We allow the settlement that has been entered into and annul the proceedings,” the order on Brilliant Alloys read.

“We believe that our offer of Rs 54,389 crore is the most compelling proposal available to Essar Steel creditors. It seeks to repay all classes of creditors and fulfils the IBC’s overriding objective of value maximisation that has been established time and again by courts at all levels. We submitted the proposal under the recently introduced Section 12A of the IBC and the recent judgment of the Supreme Court has established that the section’s provisions are applicable retrospectively. We are awaiting a copy of the full NCLT order, and will take a call on the next step after we have thoroughly gone through the contents,” Essar Steel said.

However, legal sources pointed out that there was a fundamental difference between the Essar Steel and the Brilliant Alloys’ cases. The financial creditors and the corporate debtor (Brilliant Alloys) had agreed to withdraw from the resolution process. In the case of the Ruias, the proposal to withdraw came from the corporate debtor and not from the financial creditors.

“The only manner in which an insolvency process may be withdrawn is in accordance with Section 12A of the IBC, which requires 90 per cent consent of the CoC. The application has to be filed by the operational/financial creditors. These conditions were not met in the petition filed by Essar Steel Asia Holdings, which is spearheading the Ruia bid,” a legal source said.
