Supreme Court orders Rs 25 lakh compensation, CRPF security for Unnao rape survivor

The Supreme Court has ordered transfer of all five cases linked to the Unnao rape survivor, including the Rae Bareli accident case, to a CBI court in Delhi. The judge who will hear the cases will be named later by the SC.

The court also ordered that the probe in the accident case be finished within seven days. However, it allowed the investigating officer to extend the probe by a maximum seven days in exceptional circumstances that too with the permission of the Supreme Court. A day-to-day trial to be completed within 45 days was also ordered.

Watch: SC order on Unnao rape survivor explained: Compensation, security and more

The counsel of the survivor’s family has been asked to tell the court if the family wanted to shift the survivor from the Lucknow hospital to any other hospital in the country for better and advance treatment.

Uttar Pradesh government was ordered to pay the survivor, by tomorrow, an interim compensation of Rs 25 lakh.

Also Read: Unnao rape survivor’s case in SC: What she’s been through since June 2017

Supreme Court also handed over CRPF the task of providing security to the survivor; her lawyer and her family members; including her mother, four siblings, uncle Mahesh Singh and his immediate kin. Court has asked to be informed by tomorrow if its security order was being complied with. Tomorrow, the SC will also hear a request, to move out the uncle of the survivor from Rae Barelli jail to Tihar, over security concerns.

Supreme Court order, however, allows the accused in all the five cases to approach it for any modification or cancellation of its order since it was delivered without hearing the accused (ex-parte) due to the peculiar circumstances of the case.

Supreme Court also ordered an inquiry into the reasons behind the delay in placing the survivor’s family’s letter written to the court, before the chief justice. The probe into the conduct and processes of the SC’s registry will be done by the Secretary General of the apex court. This inquiry will be supervised by a sitting the SC judge and will have to be completed within seven days, said the SC order.

Also Read: Before car crash, Unnao rape survivor’s family sent 36 SOS messages in 15 months

The first case being probed by the CBI is of survivor’s alleged rape by BJP’s Uttar Pradesh MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar on June 4, 2017, when she was a minor and the second one is to investigate if Sengar had a hand in the July 28 accident in Rae Bareli that critically injured the rape survivor and her lawyer and killed two of her aunts, including the one who was a witness in the original rape case.

The Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer, who are currently being treated at King George’s Medical University, are stable, the hospital said on Thursday.
