'Shame!': Jaya Bachchan slammed online for laughing while protesting for justice for Unnao rape victim

SP MP Jaya Bachchan was snapped laughing during a protest for justice for Unnao rape victim

Key Highlights SP MP Jaya Bachchan faced flak for laughing during a protest for justice for Unnao rape survivor SP and TMC MPs had staged the protest in front of the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Parliament on Tuesday Unnao rape survivor is currently battling for life after a deadly car crash on Sunday

New Delhi: Actor-turned-politician and Samajwadi Party MP Jaya Bachchan has faced flak on social media after photographs of her smiling and laughing while participating in a protest seeking justice for Unnao rape survivor went viral online.

On Tuesday, Samajwadi Party and Trinamool Congress MPs had gathered near the Mahatma Gandhi statue in Parliament to protest and demand justice for the teen rape survivor, who was in a critical condition after a deadly car crash on Sunday.

Senior leaders, including Bachchan and SP leader Ram Gopal Yadav, were among those who participated in the protest within Parliament premises.

However, pictures showing Bachchan laughing and smiling with fellow Parliamentarians during the protest have not gone down well with netizens, who slammed the veteran actor-turned-politician for failing to not behaving in an appropriate manner during a sombre event.

One of the Twitter users wrote, "The seriousness of their protest against #UnnaoCase is reflecting in their smiles."

Another tweeted, "Kitna serious protest chal chal rha hai...ye hai hamari parliamentarians, inko bs salary, aur sarkari sukh suvidha se matlab hai (Such a serious protest going on. These are our Parliamentarians..they only want salary, and government perks.)

Another user simply tweeted, "Shame!" in response to the picture.

Filmmaker Ashok Pandit also berated Bachchan over the pictures saying that he "did not expect this from her." He stated that politicians laughing at the protest were an "insult" to the Unnao rape victim.

Kitna serious protest chal chal rha hai...ye hai hamari parliamentarians, inko bs salary, aur sarkari sukh suvidha se matlab hai#JayaBachchan @SrBachchan @yadavakhilesh @samajwadiparty pic.twitter.com/RQiZS2H5N7 — Vikash Singh (@Victor02631) August 1, 2019

Jaya bachchan protesting and demanding justice for #unnaohorror Rape victim. Look at her face, seems she's in deep pain,suffering, agony, affliction and discomfort. pic.twitter.com/ghfmbuwe8x — Dr. Pratiksha Rathore (@Drpratiksha1) July 31, 2019

The 19-year-old girl from Unnao had accused expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar of raping her at her residence in 2017 when she was a minor.

Sengar was booked in the rape case in 2018 and was jailed.

On Sunday (July 25), a truck driving on the wrong side of the road rammed into the car in which the rape survivor, her lawyer and her two aunts were travelling near Rae Bareli.

The teenager and her lawyer were critically wounded in the incident, while her two aunts were killed.

Under pressure from opposition parties and the public, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) on Thursday expelled Sengar from the party's membership.

Meanwhile, on Thursday, the Supreme Court ordered the transfer of all cases related to the Unnao rape to Delhi and ordered the trial to be finished in 45 days. The SC bench, led by CJI Ranjan Gogoi, also asked the CBI to finish the probe in the victim’s accident case within seven days.

The apex court also asked the Uttar Pradesh government to pay a compensation of Rs 25 lakhs to the victim.


