India's ruling party expels rape accused lawmaker in Uttar Pradesh - Xinhua

Source: Xinhua| 2019-08-01 18:27:30|Editor: Xiaoxia

Video Player Close

NEW DELHI, Aug. 1 (Xinhua) -- India's ruling Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) Thursday expelled its lawmaker in Uttar Pradesh, Kuldeep Sengar, who is accused of raping a minor girl from Unnao, party officials said.

"Lawmaker Kuldeep Sengar who was suspended earlier has now been expelled from the party," a BJP leader in New Delhi said on the condition of anonymity.

The expulsion of Sengar from BJP came days after the rape victim was critically injured along with her lawyer and two of her aunts were killed in a road accident.

The rape victim's family and opposition lawmakers alleged the accident was a deliberate attempt to kill her.

Officials said three police personnel, including two women cops, appointed for the security of the rape survivor have been suspended in connection with her road accident. The trio was not with the victim at the time of the accident.

Sengar who is currently in jail was booked by India's premier investigating agency Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) on Wednesday along with 10 others on charges of attempt to murder in the accident case of the rape survivor. Sengar has already been charge-sheeted by CBI for rape and is currently in jail after being arrested on April 13 last year.

Chairperson of Delhi Commission for Women Swati Maliwal Thursday said the fight for justice has to be on until Sengar is expelled from the UP Legislative Assembly (lawmaking body) and convicted for his heinous acts.

Meanwhile, India's Supreme Court Thursday transferred all five cases linked to the case from Uttar Pradesh to Delhi.

The top court ordered the local government of Uttar Pradesh to pay a compensation of 36,219 U.S. dollars to the survivor by Friday.

The apex court also said the CBI's probe into the car crash must be completed in seven days and the rape case in 45 days.

The victim in her earlier statement to the police had said that she was sexually assaulted by Sengar when she went to his home to seek a job in 2017.
