For The Very First Time The Indian Army’s Holding A Recruitment Drive For Women

In a first, the Indian Army is going to host a massive rally to recruit women into the Military Police, a Soldier General Duty in the non-commissioned ranks. The first one kicks off in Belgaum, Karnataka on August 1 and will last for 5 days. The rally aims to recruit female candidates across Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, and the UTs of Lakshadweep, and Andaman and Nicobar islands.

Over 15,000 candidates registered from the Southern states, out of which 3,000 have been shortlisted on the basis of their matriculation marks. Selected candidates will then have to pass the physical fitness test and later clear medical tests administered by a panel of Army doctors. Once past these, they will be eligible to sit for a written test at the army recruiting office. The written exam will be held on October 27, 2019. Successful candidates will then be enrolled via a merit list into the military police corps in December 2019.

The Army has released 100 pan-India vacancies for women this year in just this category. These vacancies are likely to be filled over the next five years to meet the requirements of the Indian Army. Currently, women are allowed in only certain verticals in the Army, namely medical, legal, educational, signals, and engineering wings.

Back in 2018, the Chief of Army Staff, General Bipin Rawat drew ire when he said women are not fit for combat: “So, now I make her a commanding officer. She is commanding a battalion. Can that lady officer be away from her duties for 6 months? Do I put a restriction on her to say that in that command tenure you will not be given maternity leave? If I say that, there will be ruckus created [sic].” He added that women leading jawans would be problematic: “What will happen if there is just one woman and rest around her are just jawans. She is very much a commander so she has to do everything. She will have to go for operations. But even today we don't have that acceptance. Even today our jawans come from villages, so that acceptance will take time.”

We’re glad that no one paid heed to him!




