BS-VI Honda Activa 125 TVC shoot begins as launch nears

Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India’s brand ambassador and Bollywood actor Akshay Kumar has posted a photograph revealing that the TVC of the upcoming Activa 125 BS-VI is being shot. His wife, Twinkle Khanna, an author, newspaper columnist, a film producer and a former Bollywood actress, will also feature in the commercial.

Also Read: Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India seizes spurious goods worth INR 49 lakh

The BS-VI compliant Honda Activa was unveiled in June, while its launch is scheduled to take place towards the end of the second quarter of FY2019-20 (September). This will be the first BS-VI compliant product from the HMSI.

The new Honda Activa 125 uses 26 new patent applications. The BS-VI compliant model uses PGM-FI Honda Eco Technology (HET) along with the Honda Enhanced Smart Power (eSP). The power and torque output figures are yet to be announced but we do not expect to see a massive change in the numbers. For reference, the BS-IV compliant model that is currently sold in the country draws 8 BHP of maximum power and 10.54 Nm of peak torque from its 124.9 cc single-cylinder, air-cooled motor. The new Hero Mastro Edge 125's new fuel injection mill, makes 9.1 BHP and 10.2 Nm, and the maximum power of its engine is 0.4 BHP more than that of the carburettor variant.

The BS-VI model will come with the Idling Stop System for better fuel economy. The system automatically turns OFF the engine when the vehicle has come to a halt. Starting the scooter again does not require the push of the starter button. The rider can simply press the brake lever and accelerate to start the vehicle. Hero MotoCorp already uses the feature (Idle Stop-Start System or i3S) on select scooters and motorcycles.

Other key features on the upcoming Honda Activa 125 include a new silent start system and semi-digital instrument console. The ride related information on the new instrument console includes real-time economy, average fuel consumption, ECO indicator and distance to empty. The odometer, service due indicator, malfunction light and the clock are available on the digital screen, while the speedometer continues to use an analogue meter.

Also Read: Honda CB300R secures better sales than CBR250R

Updated styling cues include a redesigned LED position lamp and new signature accents in the form of front chrome chest and Activa 125 logo on the tail lamp. The 125 cc model will arrive in six colour options - Rebel Red Metallic, Black, Heavy Gray Metallic, Midnight Blue Metallic, Pearl Precious White and Majestic Brown Metallic.
