Resident doctors' strike in Delhi: What to do in an emergency case?

Doctors take to streets in protest outside AIIMS on Thursday | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Rajya Sabha passed the National Medical Council Bill, 2019, today Resident doctors have called for a nationwide strike in protest The Bill seeks to replace the Medical Council of India (MCI) Act, 1956

New Delhi: The upper house of Parliament today passed the contentious National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill, 2019. The proposed Bill has sparked nationwide protests by resident doctors led by the Indian Medical Association (IMA). Students from Safdarjung Hospital blocked the roads and held demonstrations in front of the country's premier medical institution, the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).

Claiming that the Bill aims to "empower quacks", resident doctors have threatened an indefinite strike against the NMC Bill, 2019. The Bill proposes to institute a body to carry out functions which were once supervised by the Medical Council of India (MCI). The MCI was dissolved in 2010 in the wake of allegations of corruption levelled against its then-president Ketan Desai by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). As part of the protest against the Bill, resident doctors are expected to go on strike starting Friday. If visiting a health care centre or state-run hospital during the strike, here is what patients can do to avoid any tragedies.

With a total strength of close to three lakh members, IMA is leading the protest against the NMC Bill, 2019, along with FORDA, the United Resident and Doctors Association of India (URDA) and the Resident Doctors Association of AIIMS (RDA-AIIMS). According to a statement by the president of the Federation of Resident Doctors' Association (FORDA), resident doctors will not be working in outpatient departments (OPDs), emergency wards and intensive care units (ICUs) as a mark of protest against the NMC Bill, 2019. However, contingency plans to deal with the inflow of patients have been issued by authorities of various hospitals. For this purpose, concerned faculty will ensure the smooth functioning of the maternity operation theatres, labour rooms and general and private wards which fall under the ambit of the inpatient department.
