Madhya Pradesh BJP accuses Congress of horse-trading

BHOPAL: After two BJP MLAs decided to break rank and vote with the Kamal Nath-led coalition government and recent allegations by a tribal lawmaker that Congress had approached him with money to cross vote in the assembly, BJP has stepped up its attack accusing the Congress of horse-trading."Many BJP lawmakers have complained to the leadership that Congress leaders were approaching them and trying to lure with huge money and favour. This is unethical and undemocratic. But, BJP MLAs have refused the offers and stayed as a strong rock with the party", said BJP state president Rakesh Singh, on Thursday.The saffron party's attack came after speculation went rife that some more BJP lawmakers can jump the fence to join the Congress. It was rumoured that Congress was eyeing on BJP MLAs Sanjay Pathak (Vijayaraghogarh), Dinesh Rai (Seoni), Prahlad Lodhi (Pawai) and Sudesh Rai (Sehore) and trying to open a conversation with them.Recently, BJP leaders had also alleged that the Congress-led state government was trying to pressurise BJP leaders who were into business. Several companies belonging to the BJP lawmakers have been raided by the agencies at the instance of Congress government. This was all done to compel them to join the old party, said sources.Reacting on the rumours, Sanjay Pathak said that he would remain with BJP and there was no question of his returning to Congress. Several other leaders also joined the chorus and reached BJP state head-office on Thursday as a mark of showing solidarity with the party. Leader of Opposition (LoP) Gopal Bhargava said that Congress was involved in cheap politics but, BJP MLAs are like a hard cut which could never be cracked."Congress had alleged that BJP was poaching its MLAs in several states. But, now the Congress itself involved in cheap politics. Congress was trying to lure BJP MLAs with poor economic background and those who represent the weaker sections. But, the BJP MLAs are a hard nut to crack. Congress leaders would lose their teeth but could not entice the BJP MLAs", said Bhargava.As the verbal duel between Congress and BJP intensified, Congress leaders attacked BJP for making tall claims before their two MLAs supported the old party. Congress minister Jitu Patwari reacted sharply on Bhargava's statement saying, "As of now the Congress has broken two teeth of BJP. In future, the party would soon lose all its teeth".
