BJP finally sacks rape accused MLA Kuldeep Sengar

New Delhi: Amid outrage and Opposition’s demand for Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath’s resignation over the Unnao rape victim’s accident, the BJP on late expelled its jailed lawmaker Kuldeep Sengar, accused of raping a minor girl from Unnao two years ago and killing two members of her family.

The BJP top brass summoned its state unit chief Swatantra Dev Singh, who met national president Amit Shah. Mr Singh, sources said, apprised Mr Shah on the state police’s action in the case so far and both leaders also discussed the Supreme Court’s decision to transfer all cases connected to the rape case to Delhi.

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra tweeted: “Grateful to the SC for taking cognisance of the ‘Jungle Raj’ being unleashed in UP... Meanwhile, the BJP finally acknowledges having empowered a criminal and takes some action to correct itself and move in the direction of justice for a young woman who has suffered immeasurably.” Congress workers in the state also performed a ‘havan’ for the well being of the rape survivor and for those killed in Sunday’s collision.

In a damage control mode, former minister in the Yogi Adityanath government and BJP MP, Ms Rita Bahuguna Joshi asserted that the party has “no sympathy for the accused in this case” and wants justice for the rape victim. “We are keenly wanting to save the life of the child (girl). We want justice to come to her.

Sengar has nothing to do with the party as of now. In UP, we want to punish the criminals, it doesn’t matter who is involved in it. CBI is looking into the matter, which itself is overburdened with several cases.

We hope that action will speed up. The UP govt has worked a lot to improve law and order situation and strong action is needed...Action on Sengar has been taken by party. But you also know whose vehicle was involved in it,” said Ms Joshi.

The Unnao rape victim, her family members and her lawyer lawyer were critically injured and two of her aunts killed when their car was hit by a speeding truck in Uttar Pradesh’s Rae Bareli district last week. The family had alleged that the accident was an attempt to eliminate her and the family. Sengar was arrested last year in April after the victim accused him of raping her at his residence in 2017 when she was a minor.
