60-year-old fruit trader: 3 arrested for murdering fruit trader over business rivalry; body dumped in canal

LUDHIANA: A 60-year-old fruit trader who had gone missing on January 20 was murdered by his competitors over business rivalry . On Tuesday, the Ramgarh police arrested three accused, while one is absconding. The police have also recovered the vehicle used by the accused in the crime. According to police, the accused dumped the body of the elderly man in Sirhind Canal near Katana Sahib, which is yet to be recovered.The accused have been identified as Shehnwaz Khan of Kohara, 28, a fruit trader, his brother Shehzad Khan, 21, and his 16-year-old accomplice. While the absconding accused is Manoj Kumar.On January 20, Yashpal Gulati, 60, of Sahnewal had gone missing on which the police initially registered a case under section of 346 (wrongful confinement in secret) of the IPC.In-charge at police post Ramgarh sub-inspector Harbhajan Singh said that the accused and the deceased were known to each other for years, both of them fruit traders. Shehnwaz nurtured rivalry against Yashpal as he used to sell fruit at cheaper price to shopkeepers due to which Shehnwaz was facing loss in business. Therefore, Shehnwaz planned to eradicate Gulati and involved his brother and two others in the crime.The sub-inspector added that the accused sent his minor aide to the victim on January 20 impersonating as buyer and placed an order of eight crates of bananas. The delivery was supposed to be made in village Heeran on January 21. As decided, Yashpal reached there and delivered banana. For payment, the minor asked Yashpal that his employer is sitting in Tata Manza car parked near them. The minor accused made Yashpal sit in the car where another accused Manoj Kumar strangulated the victim with a piece of cloth with the help of minor, while Shehzad kept on driving the car to their plot.After reaching the plot they found that Gulati had not died yet. Following this Shehnwaz and Shehzad, who were already present there, stood up on an iron road after keeping it on neck of the victim. The duo kept on pushing the rod till the death of the elderly trader. The accused buried the body in the plot and escaped from there.The official added,“At night the accused dug up the body and dumped it in canal near village Katana Sahib. After that accused Shehnwaz started approaching the same shopkeepers where Yashpal used to make fruit deliveries and asked them to give order of fruits to him stating that Yashpal would not return now. When police came to know about, we doubted Shehnwaz."Meanwhile, Yashpal Gulati's family also shared that Shehwaz used to threaten Yashpal over rivalry. The accused were rounded up for questioning on Monday who confessed their crime.
