LILLEY: Trudeau's team still blames Indian government for disastrous 2018 trip

When I read the quote from Gerry Butts the other day, I thought it was fake. In no world would a top Liberal launch a full on attack on a foreign government while talking to a journalist.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

But it was real, a fact I confirmed with National Post columnist John Ivison.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or LILLEY: Trudeau's team still blames Indian government for disastrous 2018 trip Back to video

Ivison has a new book coming out next week, Trudeau: The Education of a Prime Minister , in which he details how Butts viewed the disastrous trip to India in February 2018.

You may recall the trip saw that Trudeau and his family dressed “too Indian for an Indian” as one media outlet in India described it. That was the same trip where Sophie Trudeau was photographed next to Jaspal Atwal, the man convicted of trying to assassinate a visiting India politician in British Columbia in the 80s.

Atwal was invited on the India trip by a Liberal MP, his name added to the list of people to get coveted invites to key dinners and receptions by the prime minister’s office.

And yet how did Butts assess the trip? He blamed the Indian government.

“We walked into a buzzsaw — (Narendra) Modi and his government were out to screw us and were throwing tacks under our tires to help Canadian conservatives, who did a good job of embarrassing us,” Butts told Ivison.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or

Now just to be clear, Butts made those comments to a journalist writing a book while he was still Principal Secretary to Trudeau. Ivison estimates the conversation happened last October.

It’s one thing for Butts to think those things, another to voice them in a way that he knows will be made public. It’s also the most tone-deaf assessment of the trip I’ve seen since Sophie Trudeau went on TV and blamed the staff for those outfits.
