Consumers can relax. BBMP can’t fine you for using plastic

Bengaluru

BBMP

plastic was banned

plastic bags

By Y Maheswara ReddyBBMP’s byelaws will have to be amendedIt seems the BruhatMahanagara Palike (BBMP) did not do its homework when it decided to start penalising consumers for using plastic, starting August 1. The plan has now been put on hold ashas to first amend its byelaws.Three years afterin Bengaluru, BBMP was hoping to crack down on consumers to enforce total elimination of plastic. It wanted to fine consumers Rs 500 if they were caught carrying“We deferred the plan of imposing penalty on consumers caught using plastic in the city from August 1 since the civic body is yet to amend the byelaws for this purpose,’’ Mayor Gangambike Mallikarjun said while addressing a meeting of health inspectors from 198 wards in the city. The Mayor had called a meeting on Thursday to invite suggestions and recommendations from all stakeholders, including leaders of all political parties in the BBMP Council.“We attended the meeting convened by Mayor Gangambike. We have submitted our suggestions to the BBMP Commissioner. I expect the BBMP authorities to take measures for amending the byelaws. We are hopeful that the BBMP will come out with new byelaws soon,’’ BJP leader in the BBMP Council Padmanabha Reddy said.The BBMP has launched an awareness programme emphasizing the need to enforce the ban on plastic in the city from July 15. The civic body has involved school students in the awareness programme. The BBMP health department employees, accompanied by marshals and local police, have been conducting raids on various markets in the city. They have seized banned plastic and also imposed penalty on plastic manufacturers and traders.It may be recalled that state-wide ban on plastic came into effect in March 2016 and the BBMP has issued a circular to penalize those manufacturing, supplying, storing, transporting, selling and distributing plastic in the city. BBMP claims to have seized around 4,000 kg of plastic from traders and manufacturers and has collected Rs 16 lakh in penalties.The fine on consumers was supposed to be the proverbial last nail in the coffin for plastic in Bengaluru.Environmentalists, therefore, are not happy with the BBMP postponing the plan to penalize individuals.“It has become a habit for BBMP authorities to make announcements without thinking on the civic body’s preparedness to implement those announcements. I hope the BBMP authorities amend the byelaws to impose penalty on consumers for using plastic without any delay,’’ said NS Ramakanth, a member of Solid Waste Management Round Table.Coming down heavily on the civic body for not fixing the segregation of waste at source, Malini Parmar, an environmentalist, has blamed lack of political will as the main hassle for the BBMP to implement the ban on plastic.
