Help, her husband among 5 held for SC lawyer’s murder in Noida

NOIDA: A domestic help and her husband were among five people arrested in connection with the murder of a 60-year-old Supreme Court lawyer at her home in Sector 31 last month.Kuljeet Kaur, the lawyer, was found dead with dry blood around her nose and hands and legs tied with a piece of cloth in her bedroom on July 3. Her sister Divya, who had come to Kuljeet’s house unable to reach her on the phone, was the first to spot the body. The lawyer was murdered on the night of July 1.Police said the main accused, Sanju Shahi, had come to know that Kuljeet lived alone and had amassed huge wealth. He and his wife Manisha placed themselves as domestic helps in the lawyer’s house and stayed in the servant’s quarters. They conducted a recee for a week and on the night of July 1, laced Kuljeet’s tea with sedatives. When Kuljeet did not become unconscious even after having the tea, the couple allegedly throttled her to death. Four others, including a minor girl, helped them decamp with Kuljeet’s Honda Amaze car, cash and jewellery.Police said Kuljeet had been living alone in her house in B block of Sector 31 ever since her husband, who was also a lawyer, passed away in December 2018. Her sister Divya had lodged a police complaint against Sanju and Manisha, pointing out that they had been hired only a week earlier and had been missing since the murder.“Sanju and Manisha, both from Nepal, had been hired only a week before Kuljeet Kaur’s murder. We put their phone numbers on electronic surveillance and it showed their locations near the Nepal border. However, they were caught near the Chilla flyover in Noida on Thursday,” said Vaibhav Krishna, the Noida police chief.Sanju has reportedly told interrogators that his friend Chandrapal and his wife Rita, who are also from Nepal, had worked at the lawyer’s house earlier. They had told Sanju that Kuljeet had acquired a lot of wealth over the past few years and it was easy to target her since she lived alone. “He (Sanju) was told that the lawyer had jewellery worth Rs 2-3 crore. They hatched the plan and sent Manisha to her house to be employed as a domestic help. She then involved her husband too,” Krishna said.After they had observed Kuljeet’s daily routine and places where valuables are kept, they decided to go ahead with their plan on July 1. “They told us that after consuming the sedative-laced tea, Kuljeet did not become unconscious. So, they called the others — Rita, Chanderpal, Kapil and a minor girl — tied her hands and legs, and strangled her to death. They then stole the jewellery, her mobile phones, cash and fled in her Honda Amaze car,” said Krishna, adding that the accused had abandoned the sedan near Ecotech 1 area in Greater Noida.Police have recovered the stolen mobile phones, three chequebooks, debit cards, a laptop and some jewellery from the accused. “It has also come to the fore that the accused couple were involved in a prostitution racket in Delhi-NCR and Sanju had been to jail in 2016 for rape. In the recent case, they have been booked for murder and robbery,” Krishna said.
