Kerala: Man accuses neighbour of murdering his kittens, eating one of them

Stephan alleged that he saw an injury mark on one of his kittens when it came home (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Sanju Stephan accused his neighbour of killing his kittens According to Stephan, his neighbour cooked and ate one of his kittens The Gandhi Nagar police are probing the incident

Kottayam: The Gandhi Nagar police station in Kerala's Kottayam registered a complaint about the alleged murder of two pet kittens on Friday. A man named Sanju Stephan approached the police saying that his neighbour shot his two kittens and ate one of them.

Stephan is a resident of SH Mount in Kottayam and he works as a collection executive. The police have registered the aggrieved's complaint and an investigation has been launched by the police.

Stephan alleged that last week, he saw an injury mark on the stomach one of his kittens when it came home. Kunjayi, the kitten, succumbed to her injuries two days later. He recalled hearing a gunshot the day Kunjayi had come home injured. After the kitten died, Stephan buried her at his house.

A few days after Kunjayi got injured, Stephan's second kitten Susanna went missing. According to Stephan, his neighbour shot Susanna and cooked her as a meal.

In an attempt to seek justice for his pets, Stephan has submitted a copy of his complaint with Friends of Animals and the animal husbandry department. He has also approached animal activist Maneka Gandhi in relation to the incident.

Thane man files police complaint of cat's murder

In January this year, a man went to the Rabodi police station to lodge a complaint about the murder of his pet cat. A resident of Thane's Vrindavan society, Nilesh Malviya said to the police that he had been looking for his cats for over seven months. Allegedly, his daughter found the cat dead within the premises of the society.

Malviya alleged that his cat died as it had been hit by someone. He then went to the police station and lodged a complaint of murder. The police registered a complaint under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) against an unidentified person.

Pet cats go missing, were to be served in biryani as local delicacy

In February last year, the police rescued more than a dozen cats Hyderabad's Balaji Nagar who were allegedly going to be cooked and served as biryani. The police sprung into action after many residents of the area complained that their pet cats had gone missing.

Shiranee Pereira, People for Animals (PFA) co-founder said, "Most of these pets are trapped by narikuravas (gypsies) for their meat that is sold to roadside eateries. This has been happening for at least two decades now."

A senior police officer involved with the case said, "Police officers approached narikuravas under the pretext of being prospective cat meat buyers. However, getting information from them was not that easy as the meat is not sold to everyone and strangers asking for cat meat are usually not entertained. " After an investigation, the police nabbed some of the gypsies and rescued the cats found with them.
