Akshay Kumar To Follow Karan Johar’s Footsteps & Pen His Own Autobiography?

Akshay Kumar is gearing up for the release of Mission Mangal, but we won’t deny from the fact he’s a constant in terms of making headlines for one reason or another. While his choc-o-bloc schedule is to be highly credited for it, this time it’s different. The actor indeed has had a fabulous journey in Bollywood, but has he ever thought of penning it all into an autobiography? Read on.

Advertisement

In a recent interview with Mumbai Mirror, the actor spoke in length about his upcoming movies, women-related issues, Bachchan Pandey’s clash with Lal Singh Chaddha and much more. But what caught our attention was when asked if he’s planning to come up with an autobiography of his own. “Arre, nahin yaar! Autobiographies are for those who have achievements to write home about. I’ve only done some small films, maybe if I do something big… But before that, if I retire, I definitely won’t because then panne khaali rakhenge kya?,” he responded. Khiladi is clearly down to earth and if this isn’t the proof, we don’t know what is!

Previously celebs like Karan Johar, Gulshan Grover are amongst others have penned their autobiographies. In fact, KJo’s book led to a lot of controversies as he wrote about his feud with B’Town members like Ajay Devgn-Kajol, which was solved after a long span.

Advertisement

Recently it was unveiled that Akshay Kumar is the only Indian to find a spot in the Forbes list of the world’s highest paid actors, among 99 other international celebrities.

Securing the 33rd rank with earnings worth $65 million, Akshay has surpassed popular international figures such as Rihanna, Jackie Chan, Scarlett Johansson, Chris Evans and Katy Perry.

According to Forbes, the “Kesari” actor pulls in at least $5 million and up to $10 million per film. He also minted millions from endorsing around 20 brands, including Tata and Harpic.

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
