'Close relative of Punjab CM lauded Gen Dyer's action in

Akali Dal member and Union Minister Harsimrat Kaur Badal Friday claimed that a close relative of Punjab Chief Minister Captain Amarinder Singh had lauded the role of General Dyer, who was involved in the Jallianwala Bagh massacre, describing it as a "correct" action.

This invited strong reaction from opposition Congress.

During the debate on the Jallianwala Bagh National Memorial (Amendment) Bill, 2019, in Lok Sabha, Badal also alleged that members of the Congress were involved in the 1984 riots against Sikhs and one of them is currently a Chief Minister.

Badal claimed that an ancestor of the Punjab chief minister had wrote a letter to General Dyer after the 1919 massacre in Amritsar saying his action was "correct and the Governor General approved it".

"I am telling you truth, a recorded history. This was the same Congress whose ancestors were shaking hands and dinning with those who carried out the Jallianwala Bagh massacre," she said showing some pictures and papers to the chair.

Badal's comments invited sharp reaction from the Congress benches, trying to shout down Badal.

The Congress countered Badal shouting slogans and made counter allegations. At one time, a few members of the Congress were seen showing placards about "drug mafia" in Punjab.

The Union minister launched the attack after Congress MP Gurjeet Aujla said the NDA government wants to re-write the history by removing the Congress president from the trust.

"This government wants to distort history, destroy history. You cannot remove the sacrifice of the Congress in the country's freedom struggle," he said.

As Aujla attacked the ruling BJP and like-minded organisations for "not taking part in the freedom struggle", the ruling party members countered him with slogans.

"You have no contribution to the country's freedom struggle. Why do you want to control the memorial," he alleged.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
