Master Charles Cannon, founder of Nelson County spiritual center, dies

Master Charles Cannon, the founder of the Faber-based Synchronicity Foundation for Modern Spirituality, died Jan. 24 at his foundation residence.

Cannon, 73, was born in Syracuse, New York. He studied Vedic Indian mysticism and meditation as a youth and as an adult. In 1983, he founded the Synchronicity Foundation, where he developed different meditation techniques and lifestyle guidelines and built a community of monks and followers in Nelson County and around the world.

Cannon had been diagnosed with what he termed “a rare blood disease” that could not be cured. He chose to stop treatment to spend his last days with others at the foundation, according to foundation Facebook posts.

“We at the Synchronicity Foundation extend our appreciation for everyone in our international spiritual family who have been aware of and [are] participating in this process over the past brief period,” the foundation posted on its website.

“My choice has always been to let my life experience flow. In treating the rare blood disease in my body, we recently reached a point where it became obvious that medical technology was only capable of extending the duration of my life by severely compromising the quality of my life,” Cannon said on the foundation’s website.

“The doctors told me I had a choice. I said no to what had become desperate manipulation and yes to life. I said, ‘I’ll flow with it. No more manipulations. We did the best we could.’ It was time to move on in the natural way of things and this is what has happened,” he wrote.

Cannon was a Western disciple of mystic teacher Paramahansa Muktananda and trained for 12 years in orthodox Vedic/Tantric methods. He was ordained a monk in the Vedic Order of Sannyasins, according to the foundation’s website.

Synchronicity and Charles received criticism over the years, being labeled a cult and accused of taking money from its members, many of whom are wealthy.

In 2016, Sandra “Catherine” Marks, who operated a fortune-telling operation in Albemarle County, was found guilty of defrauding people of more than $5 million and sentenced to 30 months behind bars by a federal judge.

Marks’ defense attorney, Bill Dinkin, claimed his client worked with Cannon and that Synchronicity led wealthier clients to Marks’ offerings of spiritual counsel.

“If not for Synchronicity, she’d probably be reading palms for $35,” Dinkin said in a 2016 court filing.

Federal officials never implicated the foundation in Marks’ scheme and Synchronicity officials denied any wrongdoing. They said Marks befriended them and “fraudulently manipulated us to gain access to our wider audience.”

Cannon and the foundation maintained close ties to mystic communities around the world. In 2008, Cannon and about two dozen Synchronicity community members were on a retreat in Mumbai, India, when terrorists attacked several sites in the city, killing nearly 200 people.

Synchronicity residents Alan Scherr, 58, and his 13-year-old daughter Naomi were killed in the attack at Mumbai’s Oberoi Hotel.

Cannon and Kia Scherr, Alan’s widow and Naomi’s mother, worked on several projects promoting peace and forgiveness after the attacks. They also asked the Indian government not to execute the only terrorist to be taken alive in the attacks.

India executed the man, Mohammad Amir Ajmal Kasab, in 2012. He was 24.

Synchronicity members said on the foundation website that they are mourning Cannon and plan to continue with his teachings.

“The courageous way he welcomed the dying of his physical body presents a threshold crossing opportunity for everyone, his final gift in this incarnation,” they wrote.

“Grief is perfectly natural and our tears represent the gratitude we feel for all that Master Charles has given us over the years,” they wrote. “We grieve, we weep, and we embrace this next chapter in our own lives.”

Bryan McKenzie is a reporter for The Daily Progress. Contact him at (434) 978-7271, bmckenzie@dailyprogress.com or @BK_McKenzie on Twitter.

Get local news delivered to your inbox! Subscribe to our Daily Headlines newsletter. Sign up! * I understand and agree that registration on or use of this site constitutes agreement to its user agreement and privacy policy.
