Thousands of troops moved to Kashmir after intel inputs of possible terror attack in J&K on August 15: Sources

Security personnel in Kashmir | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Sources say troops being moved to Kashmir amid inputs on major terror attack in Valley Sources say Pakistan-based terrorists plotting to target Amarnath Yatra on August 15 J&K administration today issued an advisory to Amarnath yatris to curtail their stay and leave the state immediately

Srinagar: Amid growing panic in Jammu and Kashmir over the sudden movement of troops to the Valley, sources have told Times Now that reinforcements are being sent in the apprehension of a major terror attack in the state.

It has been learned that Pakistan-based terrorists are uniting across the border to target the annual Amarnath Yatra on August 15, India’s Independence Day.

Sources said the terrorists could be plotting to carry out a major attack on Amarnath Yatra on August 15, the day it will culminate, to coincide with Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s first Independence Day speech of his second term.

The inputs came on a day when the Army said that Pakistan-based terrorists were plotting to target the ongoing Amarnath Yatra. The Army said a huge cache of arms and explosives, including a Pakistan-made mine, have been recovered along the yatra route over the past few days.

The Army’s warning had prompted the administration of Jammu and Kashmir, currently under President’s Rule, to issue an advisory to Amarnath Yatra pilgrims and tourists to ‘curtail’ their stay in the Valley and leave immediately.

A senior Army official, however, assured that the security apparatus was fully geared up to foil any such attempts. The Amarnath Yatra is due to end on August 15; it had commenced on July 1.

General Officer Commanding (GoC) of Army's 15 Corps Lt General KJS Dhillon said Pakistan and its Army were desperate to disrupt peace in Jammu and Kashmir.

"Last three to four days, we were getting specific and confirmed intelligence inputs that terrorists led by Pakistan and Pakistan Army are trying to target the Shri Amarnath ji Yatra which is going on," Dhillon said.

He added that joint teams of security forces had recovered weapons, ammunition and explosives on the twin routes of Baltal and Pahalgam leading to the holy cave.

"We had some major successes during the searches. Some IEDs were recovered which have been neutralised. The searches have yielded an American M-24 (sniper) rifle and an anti-personnel mine with Pakistan Ordnance factory markings on it, which clearly indicates that Pakistan is involved in terrorism in Kashmir," he said.

"I can assure you on behalf of the security forces here that this will not be allowed to happen. Designs of Pakistan and its army will be foiled at all costs. Nobody can disrupt peace in Kashmir. This is our promise to people of Kashmir and everyone in the nation," he added.

The advisory issued by the J&K administration, meanwhile, read: "Keeping in view the latest intelligence inputs of terror threats, with specific targeting of the Amarnath Yatra, and given the prevailing security situation in the Kashmir Valley, in the interest of safety and security of the tourists and Amarnath yatris, it is advised that they may curtail their stay in the Valley immediately and take necessary measures to return as soon as possible."

Coinciding with the movement of over 38,000 troops to the Valley, the advisory to Amarnath yatris created panic among locals in Jammu and Kashmir. Local political parties, including the National Conference and the Peoples Democratic Party, said the ‘unprecedented’ advisory has created panic in the Valley.

"Seriously? You think an official order telling tourists to leave immediately will not cause them to run from the valley as fast as they can? Which tourist will hang around after seeing this order. The airport & highway will be choked with people leaving," NC leader Omar Abdullah tweeted.

"Although this unprecedented order would seem to suggest a genuine fear of a massive terror strike directed at Amarnath ji yatris or/and tourists this will do nothing to dampen the sense of fear & foreboding that prevails in the valley at the moment," he added.

There has been speculation among local politicians that the Union government might be planning to abrogate Article 35A that provides special rights to the citizens of Jammu and Kashmir.
