Two villages 'pool' hill water, bid goodbye to dry days

RANCHI: Aara and Keram, twin villages on Ranchi's outskirts, shot to fame recently when PM Narendra Modi chose them for praise during his monthly 'Mann ki Baat' programme. The villages, Modi said, had channeled and conserved rainwater flowing down from a nearby hill, using it for drinking and irrigation purposes.Local residents said they were inspired after a visit in 2016 to Ralegaon Siddhi, the native village of social activist Anna Hazare in Maharashtra . Today, Aara and Keram have enough water even when monsoon plays truant.Ramesh Bediya, head of the village forest conservation committee, said in three months since February, they managed to create around 650 check-dams to channel water running down from Domba Pahar.He said, "We first approached the government (MNREGA department) to approve the project. They hailed our plan but asked us to wait as the model code of conduct was in place due to the Lok Sabha polls. However, we began building minor check-dams by using loose boulders from the hills and forests here. Altogether 150 people worked on this in turns." The move has also helped them grow crops round the year.Suraj Karmali, a resident of Aara village, said, "Earlier, I only used to do farming during the kharif season. Last year I took up vegetable farming too as there is enough water."Aara and Keram are idyllic, as well as ideal villages. What's helped them, the villagers said, was their faithful devotion to the "six principles for development" - shramdaan (mass movement), nasha-bandi (no alcohol), nas-bandi (family planning), charai-bandi (no uncontrolled grazing), kulhad-bandi (no felling of trees) and lota-bandi (no open defecation ). The two clusters are "alcohol and tobacco free", as some posters loudly proclaim.One cannot miss notice boards put up at various places that announce adherence to the six principles. Every resident has to live by these rules, failing which the gram sabha imposes a fine of Rs 1,001 at the first offence, with subsequent violations leading to severance from government schemes.
