Breaking News August 3: Two-day training programme for BJP MPs begins

New Delhi:

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath will visit Ayodhya today. This is his eighth visit ever since he was picked for the top post of India’s largest state. He is scheduled to attend a function to mark the death anniversary of Paramhans Ramchandra Das. Meanwhile, amid panic among residents following a fresh order of the Jammu and Kashmir government asking tourists and Amarnath yatris to leave the Valley at the earliest, Governor Satya Pal Malik said there are “no plans to abrogate Article 35A of Constitution” giving special powers to the state.

Check all the live updates here:

10.22 pm: Centre is lying on J-K situation, says Cong leader Digvijaya Singh.

10.15 pm: Mumbai International Airport Pvt. Ltd. (MIAL) PRO: Flight operations are normal with delays of 15 minutes in arrivals and 30 minutes in departures.

10.00 pm: Indian Army: Calibre escalation does take place during such ceasefire violations. Each side aims to ensure it's moral ascendancy & domination over Line of Control. However, Indian Army ensures that targets are only military and the terrorists who are supported by Pakistan Army.

9.45 pm: Baghpat: A sub-inspector died and three constables were injured after the jeep they were travelling in rammed into a speeding truck on Delhi-Saharanpur road yesterday late night. Case has been registered.

9.30 pm:

Delhi Police today conducted a security check at Connaught Place ahead of Independence Day. pic.twitter.com/RMiNWDo9e1 — ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

9.15 pm: Chamoli: One dead and five injured after a pipe burst at the Jal Power Corporation Limited powerhouse in Kalp Ganga River, Joshimath. The pipe had burst allegedly due to the heavy pressure of water. Investigation underway.

9.00 pm: In the last 36 hours, Indian Army has foiled an infiltration attempt by a Pakistani BAT (Border Action Team) squad in Keran Sector. 5-7 Pakistani army regulars/terrorists eliminated, their bodies are lying on the LoC, not retrieved yet due to heavy firing. (Source: Indian Army)

8.45 pm: Today at about 8:15 PM, Pakistan initiated unprovoked cease fire violation by firing of small arms and shelling with mortars along LoC in Mendhar sector in Poonch district. Indian Army is retaliating.

8.30 pm: Airports Authority of India: 6126 passengers reported at Srinagar Airport today for travelling out of valley. Out of this, 5829 passengers travelled by 32 scheduled flights. Remaining 387 passengers accommodated in 4 IAF Aircraft&flown to destinations like Jammu, Pathankot&Hindon

8.15 pm:

Maharashtra: Waterlogged and flooded streets continue to affect normal life in parts of the state. Visuals from Virar. pic.twitter.com/BCN2GtqZN0 — ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

8.00 pm: Unnao rape case: Delhi's Tis Hazari court has issued production warrant against accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar and Shashi Singh asking them to be produced before it on August 5, 12.30 pm. Hearing in the case will be resume from Monday.

7.45 pm: Maharashtra: River Godavari flowing above danger level in Nashik following heavy rainfall in the state.

7.30 pm: Ex-K'taka CM HD Kumaraswamy: I'm thinking of going away from politics. I came to politics accidentally. I became CM accidentally. God gave me opportunity to become CM twice. I wasn't there to satisfy anyone. In 14 months I did good work towards state's development. I'm satisfied.

7.15 pm: Gujarat: Fire broke out in platform number 2 and 3 of Vadodara Railway station due to short circuit, earlier today. No casualties reported. The fire has been successfully doused off.

7.00 pm: Chhattisgarh: Seven naxals were killed in an encounter with security forces in Sitagota jungle, Rajnandgaon, earlier today. Arms and ammunition recovered.

6.45 pm:

#WATCH: Ashish Singh, BJP MLA from Bilgram-Mallanwan says, "kathinaion se guzar rahe hain hum sab ke bhai aadarniya Kuldeep Sengar ji. Samay ka kaalchakra kaha jaega, phir bhi hum sabki shubhkamnaein hain jitni kathianein hain us se ladkar wo apka netritv karne pahuchenge" (02.8) pic.twitter.com/02TLhBai9Y — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 3, 2019

6.30 pm: Mehbooba Mufti,PDP:Workers of all political parties should come together so that a message can be given to Centre that they can't toy with J&K's special position.Recent developments in J&K have created fear among people&it's unfortunate that Centre isn't issuing a clear statement

6.15 pm: Chhattisgarh: 2 naxals surrendered at 80 Battalion CRPF Camp, in Jagdalpur today. The naxals have been provided Rs 10,000 cash each from the govt and other material of basic needs.

6.00 pm: Sumedh, President, Federation of Resident Doctors Association (FORDA), India: A meeting of all Presidents of Resident Doctors Association with FORDA has been scheduled for 8 PM today.

5.45 pm: Federation of Resident Doctors Assn(FORDA),India: Meeting with Health Min was held. Minister&officials clarified apprehensions regarding certain clauses of NMC Bill.They informed that interests of medical fraternity won't be hampered&doubts regarding Bill will be clarified in Act

5.30 pm: Ghulam Nabi Azad, Congress: The advisory that was issued by Home Ministry yesterday is worrisome and people of the entire nation as well as of Jammu&Kashmir are scared. No govt has ever asked tourists to go back. Such thing has never happened.

5.15 pm:

#WATCH Chhattisgarh: District Reserve Guard (DRG) jawans cross an overflowing stream in Sukma, while undertaking 'Operation Monsoon' - the anti-naxal operations in Monsoon. pic.twitter.com/bpe0YZn5or — ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

5.00 pm: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh, in Hyderabad: On issues like terrorism, we have been successful in making the world understand that terrorism is terrorism for everyone. We have told the world that nothing short of zero tolerance is acceptable on this matter.

4.45 pm: Jammu and Kashmir Police on today's Sopore encounter: Two Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists neutralised in the encounter. Arms and ammunition recovered.

4.30 pm:

Regional Meteorological Centre, Mumbai: Extremely heavy rain at isolated places very likely in Mumbai, Thane, Palghar, & Raigad, today. pic.twitter.com/1N5VZCOq3L — ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

4.15 pm: Assam: Convict Govind Singhal sentenced to death, his mother Kamala Devi Singhal and sister Bhavani Singhal sentenced to life imprisonment by a court in connection with the murder of student Shweta Agarwal in Guwahati in 2017.

3.50 pm: Case registered against Bhojpuri actor Pawan Singh at Mumbai's Malwadi Police Station u/s 354 (word, gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a woman) & 509 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty) of IPC on the complaint of a Bhojpuri actress.

3.45 pm: Central Railway, Chief Public Relations Officer: Services are running between Vashi and Panvel & CSMT-Bandra/Goregaon on harbour line, Thane-Kalyan/Karjat/Kasara/Khopoli on main line, Transharbour line and Belapur/Nerul-Khakopar section.

3.30 pm: Unnao: A team of CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) reaches the residence of the Unnao rape survivor's lawyer, who is admitted in Lucknow's KGMU after being injured in accident, for investigation.

3:25 pm: Convict Govind Singhal sentenced to death, his mother Kamala Devi Singhal and sister Bhavani Singhal sentenced to life imprisonment by a court in connection with the murder of student Shweta Agarwal in Guwahati in 2017.

3:10 pm: A team of CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) reaches the residence of the Unnao rape survivor's lawyer, who is admitted in Lucknow's KGMU after being injured in accident, for investigation.

Unnao: A team of CBI (Central Bureau of Investigation) reaches the residence of the Unnao rape survivor's lawyer, who is admitted in Lucknow's KGMU after being injured in accident, for investigation. pic.twitter.com/iBPgvdpAbl — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 3, 2019

3:00 pm: All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi, Registrar (Academic Section): Members of RDA/SU are directed to resume their duties with immediate effect, failing which strict action like suspension/termination of services, vacation of hostel accomodation, etc may be taken.

2:45 pm: A two-day training programme for all BJP MPs began here Saturday, during which ruling party lawmakers will be addressed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Home Minister Amit Shah, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh and party working president JP Nadda.

2:30 pm: They had planned to contact a BAT (Border Action Team) operation against Indian troops along forward posts of Barood, Sher, Shakti & Kaiyaan.

2:20 pm: A team of CBI arrives at Sitapur District Jail for questioning the accused Kuldeep Singh Sengar, in connection with Unnao rape case.

2:14 pm: 4 people drowned in Pandavkada waterfall, in Kharghar of Navi Mumbai today. Police and fire dept are present at the spot. Body of one person has been recovered, search is underway for the remaining three.

1:45 pm: Three suspected persons apprehended by Army and handed over to police for questioning in Hisar yesterday, after they were caught clicking pictures inside the Cantonment there. Interrogation still underway.

1:30 pm: 2nd terrorist killed in encounter identified as Manzoor Bhat, he was affiliated with proscribed terror outfit Hizbul Mujahideen. He was involved in several terror crimes & attacks on security establishments. Arms & ammunition recovered.

1:00 pm: IPS officer Ajay Hilori appears before Special Investigation Team (SIT) for questioning in connection with IMA ponzi scam.

12:50 pm: A meeting between Indian High Commission officials and Kulbhushan Jadhav did not materialise on Friday amid differences between India and Pakistan on the terms of the consular access to the retired Indian Navy officer who is on death row.

12:45 pm: Special Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Court grants 3-day remand custody of accused the truck driver and cleaner to CBI: Unnao rape survivor's accident case.

12:30 pm: We have been very progressive in Vidarbha. We have done work to supply electricity to all the farmers. We have started 90 irrigation projects. We have worked for all fields, from roads to industry: Maharashtra CM Devendra Fadnavis.

12:25 pm: Shopian encounter: One more terrorist killed. Operation being concluded.

12:30 pm: Fire broke out at Navrang building in Abdul Rehman Street, earlier today. Firefighting operations underway. A firefighter has been moved to a hospital due to suffocation.

11:10 am: The former vice-president of Maldives, Ahmed Adeeb who was detained by Tuticorin Port (Tamil Nadu) Authority on 1st August, has been sent back to Maldives today.

11:05 am: BJP State President Ravinder Raina will hold a meeting with party's J&K core group today.

11:00 am: A Pakistani intruder has been apprehended by BSF near Ferozepur in Punjab. Concerned authorities are questioning him about his whereabouts and intentions. Nothing objectionable recovered from him: Border Security Force.

10:50 am: Prime Minister Narendra Modi arrives at Parliament for the two-day training programme called 'Abhyas Varga' which is being organised for all BJP MPs from Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha.

10:35 am: 7 Naxals killed in an encounter with District Reserve Guard (DRG) in Sitagota jungle under Bagnadi Police Station in Rajnandgaon. Arms and ammunition recovered. Operation is still underway: DM Awasthi, Director General of Police, Chhattisgarh.

10:20 am: The trains on trans-harbor and 4th corridor towards Kharkopar on Central Railway are running smoothly. However, due to intense rains, trains on main & harbor line are running at cautious speed, hence delayed.

10:05 am: A woman was allegedly given 'triple-talaaq' by her husband over the phone in Mewat. Ajay Veer Singh, SHO Nagina Police Station, Mewat says, "FIR registered under section 4 of Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Marriage) Act, 2019 & other sections."

10:00 am: Trump warns China of substantial increase in import tariffs.

9:55 am: Machail Yatra to Goddess Durga shrine in Kishtwar district of Jammu & Kashmir has been suspended.

9:50 am: Ravi Kishan BJP MP from Gorakhpur & Gautam Gambhir BJP MP from East Delhi, arrive at Parliament Library Building for the two-day training programme called 'Abhyas Varga' which is being organised for all BJP MPs from Lok Sabha & Rajya Sabha.

9:45 am: A fire broke out at a biscuit factory in Konatanapadu village, Kankipadu, Krishna district early morning, today. 6 fire tenders present at the spot. More details awaited.

9:20 am: Level-2 fire breaks out in Sayyad Building on 95 Nagadevi Cross lane in Masjid Bandar area. More details awaited.

9:00 am: All government schools to remain closed in Thane today. Thane Municipal Corporation has issued the orders in view of continuous rainfall in the city.

Maharashtra: All government schools to remain closed in Thane today. Thane Municipal Corporation has issued the orders in view of continuous rainfall in the city. pic.twitter.com/tQPX5TXLXV — ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

8:45 am: Resident Doctor's Association & Students' Union of All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi:We remain steadfast in our decision to continue ongoing indefinite strike against certain provisions of NMC Bill. However, emergency services to resume at AIIMS with immediate effect.

8:30 am: One terrorist killed in exchange of fire between terrorists and security forces in Malmapanpora area of Sopore.

8:15 am: Amarnath Yatra 2019: 704 devotees (596 via Baltal axis & 108 via Pahalgam axis) have completed the pilgrimage to the holy shrine as of 2nd August.





For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
