Ready to offer deputy CM post, will be glad to have Aaditya Thackeray in government: Devendra Fadnavis

Q: On which issues will BJP be contesting the polls?

Q: Are there still doubts over your alliance with Shiv Sena?

Q: There is speculation Sena may demand the deputy CM’s post and

may be offered the post

Q: How many seats out of 288 will the allies win this time?

Q: Your views on the influx of leaders from the Opposition into BJP-Sena, which is being termed ‘maha bharti’ (big inflow)

Q: Sharad Pawar is accusing BJP-Sena of engineering defections with threats of raids by Enforcement Directorate (ED) and other agencies

Q: How is your government going to tackle the slowdown in economy?

Q: There is criticism over projects like the bullet train and Shivaji Maharaj statue as a huge amount of money is being spent on them

MUMBAI: As chief minister Devendra Fadnavis prepares to seek a second term, he faces many challenges like an unpredictable partner ( Shiv Sena ) and slowdown in economy. He has embarked on a Maha Janadesh Yatra in the run-up to elections, and Vaibhav Ganjapure spoke with the 49-year-old CM on various topics while travelling in his special van from Wardha to Nagpur. Excerpts from the exclusive interview…A: Unlike the Opposition, our focus will be only on the development we have carried out in the state. People can see the change in the last five years of our rule in comparison to Congress-NCP’s. There is absolutely no anti-incumbency in Maharashtra. By and large, the people know that we’ve given them good governance, we’re good people who can be trusted.A: We’ve made it clear BJP, Sena and its allies would contest together at any cost. It’s not our tradition to sideline our old partners even though we are the bigger party. We’ve agreed to contest on equal number of seats, may be around 130-140, and the rest would be left for other allies.A: We never had any problem with that. We are ready to offer it even now. Aaditya would be the first one to contest polls from the Thackeray family and we would be glad to have him in governmentA: In the 2014 polls, it was Sena who broke the alliance and fought separately. The BJP contested 144 seats and won 122. Now, we will need to settle for half the seats while leaving some for our smaller partners. I can’t predict the number, but our win would certainly be a historic one. This I can say with confidence.A: I will not term it ‘maha bharti’. And, now, we have pasted the board of ‘houseful’ on our doors... However, we will allow a few VIPs to join us depending on their clean track record, integrity, work done and popularity among the masses. In the coming days, few more big leaders are likely to join us.A: The entire Opposition needs to seriously introspect why people have rejected them. It’s their party leaders who are approaching us as they know the fate of their parties. In fact, they (Pawars) should answer why their names always figure in one or the other inquiry and why allegations of corruption were made against them. Their names were cropping up in scams even when their own government was ruling at the Centre and state.A: It is not that big as is being talked about. The slowdown is bound to happen after changes in the tax regime and tightening of screws against economic offenders. After frauds during the Congress-NCP regime, banks have become more cautious while lending. Recently, the central government decided to infuse Rs 70,000 crore capital after which the banks would lend more money.Maharashtra is already numero uno in terms of investments and we’re making efforts to invite industries in all regions like Nandurbar, Gadchiroli, etc. Out of PM Modi’s dream of $5 trillion economy, Maharashtra would contribute $1trillion.A: I think both projects are necessary. A mega project like the bullet train would give a big fillip to the economy and generate jobs. We’re getting a huge loan of Rs 1 lakh crore at just 0.5% from Japan… they’re also transferring 100% technology so that the train can be made in India. It will boost demand of iron, nuts and bolts and cement, among other ancillary industries, and fuel GDP growth. Regarding the Shivaji statue, some things cannot be valued in money; it’s the pride of the state.
