Cops revisit highway murder

Ludhiana: Three days after highway robbers shot dead a woman after stealing her jewellery, police are revisiting the sequence of events before and after the incident, and checking their facts with her husband’s statement.

Radhika Gaba (39), a home-maker of Tajpur Road, had died after the highway gang allegedly fired at her after she resisted their move to loot her and her husband Rakesh Gaba (42) near Bija close to Khanna on Monday night, while they were on their way back home from Chandigarh in their car. Police had later booked the unidentified four accused under sections 302 (murder), 392 (punishment for robbery), 34 (act done with common intention) of the IPC, and 25/27 of the Arms Act.

A senior police officer confirmed that they were carrying out a nuanced probe into the matter, and were tallying her husband’s statement with evidence on the ground. He added that Rakesh had still not provided them details about the exact location of the spot where the incident took place. Ludhiana Range DIG Ranbir Singh Khatra said they were probing the matter from various angles.

Police officials said the couple had dinner at an eatery near Sirhind after 10pm, and after that, Rakesh had called his nephew on the phone at around 11.05pm. The incident took place at 11.15pm. The police are wondering why Rakesh stopped his vehicle after about 20 minutes of having dinner, and with the same amount of time remaining to reach home.

Cops said they had CCTVs installed at some place, but they could not see motorcycle riders following the car the couple was travelling in. They added that police also believes it was not possible for highway robbers to strike at the road stretch, which had two checkposts on the way.

Cops said Radhika’s mother, who had shifted from Amritsar to the neighbourhood where her daughter lived some years ago, has supported the highway attack version of her son-in-law. They added that the couple did have some matrimonial issues a few years ago, but those were resolved by a mediator who has died.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
