Premier Health Center: A Pioneering Med-Tech Savant Transforming the Face of Healthcare Diagnostics

We adopt a 360-degree model in our laboratory services and offer a comprehensive array of tests across a wide spectrum of specialization

Lab department services with advanced imaging solutions

Customized health packages

Corporate health screening services & diagnostic workshops

Healthcare memberships

Today’s corporate culture is more of a dog-eat-dog, where only the fittest survives. But this results in a host of lifestyle diseases and health challenges that professionals have to deal with. PHC recognizes that while around 46 percent of workforce in corporate India suffers with stress-related ailments, the need for more employee-centric policies are rising. Thus, the company has developed several corporate packages to deal with the crisis. Its consultants customize programmes according to organization requirements and deliver competitive wellness packages for 10-1000 employees.Right from screening and delivering corporate-level reports, highlighting cases that may require immediate supervision, to providing employee-individual reports with details of their general wellness (physical, social and mental well-being), this diagnostic center is the definite go-to for every corporate establishment seeking unprecedented diagnostic services. Assuring a seamless experience, Pradeep avers, “Based on the reports, we arrange for talks by industry experts to create awareness and counsel employees. Through this and our array of corporate healthcare initiatives, we are committed to ensuring your staff remain in the pink of health for enhanced workplace productivity”.“We take ownership and responsibility for our actions, and are committed to serving with the highest standards of ethical conduct. The well-being of our clients is of paramount importance, and we will always respond with compassion,” adds Pradeep. To ensure flawless services and safety of its clients, the diagnostic center maintains dedicated power back-ups for uninterrupted services of the tests and procedures. It is under this assurance of quality services that PHCs clients can avail more benefits. Its exclusive customer loyalty program includes an array of offerings, be it ‘Health Buddy Cards’, affordable health packages ranging from master health checks, premier executive health checks, women health checks, child & senior citizen health checks or its exclusive pre-marital and pre-employment check-ups. PHC further facilitates online reporting systems, SMS notification for report collection and complaint management system (CMS) to record its patient’s feedback.PHC senses a responsibility towards the society, and hence helps the poor and needy, where diagnosis remains out of reach. Pradeep avers, “The service policy of PHC is to have tie-ups with various NGOs and non-profit organizations to do free medical camps. Our creativity and ingenuity fosters innovation and growth in the field of diagnostics, where we acknowledge that trust enables us to go beyond expectations and cater to the masses”. It provides adequate training to their employees in adherence to proven procedures, and total commitment to meeting & exceeding their customer requirements.Inspiring the healthcare segment with its exhaustive service portfolio, PHC’s exclusive approach to diagnosis is creating an impact in the field of diagnostics. It’s presence in 30 locations in Chennai with an expansion plan of reaching 100 branches by 2022 across Tamil Nadu is proof of its commendable contributions through which it envisions to create a healthy future. Pradeep concludes, “Our vision for the future aims to propel a disease-free society through better diagnostics of disease and timely prevention through health screening by focusing mainly on reliability, responsibility, assurance and empathy towards our clients”.
