Kashmir turmoil: Tension may escalate with Pak in Kargil: Govt issues advisory

Panic has gripped Jammu and Kashmir as speculations grew in the Valley about some possible major decisions regarding the state's special status. Former CM Mehbooba Mufti said the state government's advisory to Amarnath pilgrims and other tourists to curtail their visit "immediately" in view of the security situation in the state, has created chaos and confusion among people.

However, Governor Satya Pal Malik said "unnecessary panic" was being created by linking the curtailment of Amarnath Yatra with other issues, and requested political leaders to ask their supporters to maintain calm and do not believe in "exaggerated rumours". Malik had said that there were no plans to abrogate Article 35A.

KASHMIR TURMOIL UPDATES:

10:49 PM: Tension may escalate with Pak in Kargil: Govt issues advisory for officers

All district officers, sub-divisional magistrates, tehsildars and other sectoral officers are hereby directed not to leave their respective stations under any circumstances without prior approval of the district magistrate/deputy commissioner, Kargil. No officer shall keep his/her mobile on switched off mode, the notice read.

10:33 PM: Railways waives cancellation charges for passengers travelling from J&K

The railways has decided that no cancellation charge will be taken from passengers till Tuesday morning if they cancel reserved tickets booked for their journey originating from Jammu, Katra and Uddhampur stations, sources in the ministry said on Saturday. Only clerkage charge shall be taken, they said.

10:11 PM: India has deployed Bofors guns on the Line of Control (LoC). Bofors guns have been deployed along the LoC to target terror infrastructure across Pakistan.

10:07 PM: In the past 36 hours, a number of attempts have been made by Pakistan to disturb peace in the Valley and target Amarnath Yatra. A BAT attempt was made on one of the forward posts in Keran sect and foiled by alert troops resulting in neutralising of 5 to 7 Pak regulars/terrorists. In the Valley, four hardcore JeM terrorists were neutralised. The recovered cache of a sniper rifle, IED and mine with Pak markings clearly indicate complicity of Pak in terror activities. The security forces will continue to respond to all nefarious activities along LC and hinterland: Army

08:37 PM: Airport Authority of India (AAI) issues a statement on the Amarnath Yatra passengers leaving Kashmir.

Further to the advisory issued by J&K Govt, 6126 passengers reported at Srinagar International Airport today for travelling back out of the Valley. Out of this total 5829 passengers travelled by 32 scheduled flights. Remaining 387 passengers were accommodated in 04 no of IAF Aircraft and flown to the various destination like Jammu, Pathankot and Hindon: AAI

All the possible support has been extended at the Srinagar airport by ensuring the safety and security of the passengers. All passengers were flown out of the valley in a planned and systematic manner. The entire operation was conducted smoothly by AAI officials in close coordination with IAF, J&K Police, CRPF, BSF, the airlines and State Authorities: AAI

07:43 PM: Ministry of Civil Aviation has advised airlines to rein in the surging airfare, for pilgrims returning from Amarnath Yatra.

07:35 PM: PDP core group meeting underway. The meeting is chaired by Mehbooba Mufti at her residence.

06:10 PM: J&K Guv on meeting with Omar Abdullah and others

They've gone satisfied. Whatever they expected from me I did. As far as I know, there's no inclination that something's going to happen here. I don't know about tomorrow. That's not in my hands. But till today there's nothing to worry: Governor Satya Pal Malik

06:03 PM: There's nothing to worry: J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik

J&K Guv SP Malik on situation in J&K: It's normal. Only rumour mongering is going on. It's a very routine thing here. If you sneeze at Lal Chowk, it becomes an explosion when it comes here. Unnecessary panic is being created by vested interests, specially some political parties. pic.twitter.com/0Q5DbapMeb ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019



06:00 PM: The J&K government requests IAF to airlift Amarnath Yatra pilgrims

On Jammu and Kashmir government's request, the Indian Air Force (IAF) would airlift Amarnath Yatra pilgrims out of the Valley. Ten C-17s operating between Kashmir and different parts of the country to ferry CRPF, SSB and BSF troops to the state. The Air Force is making preparations to evacuate the Amarnath Yatra pilgrims from Srinagar. The yatris have been asked to curtail their pilgrimage as per state government directions.

5:47 PM: No leaves without permission: Srinagar hospital issues advisory to staff

05:36 PM: Australia issues travel advisory to its citizens travelling in India

Australia has issued a travel advisory to its citizens travelling in India after the Jammu and Kashmir government released a security advisory for the Amarnath pilgrims and the tourists.

"We advise against all travel here due to the very high risk. If you do travel, you should typically seek professional security advice. Be aware that regular travel insurance policies will be void and that the Australian Government is unlikely to be able to provide consular assistance," the advisory read.

05:10 PM: Home Ministry preparing for misadventures from the last 30 hours: P Chidambaram

05:09 PM: Congress will take the Kashmir matter in Parliament on Monday: Anand Sharma

05:04 PM: Centre can't toy with J&K's special status: Mehbooba Mufti

Workers of all political parties should come together so that a message can be given to Centre that they can't toy with J&K's special position. Recent developments in J&K have created fear among people&it's unfortunate that Centre isn't issuing a clear statement: Mehbooba Mufti

05:03 PM:

I was witness to 3 foreign tourists who had boarded our flight to Srinagar change their mind about the trip after seeing the government order. They walked up to the crew & demanded to have their bags offloaded. Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) August 3, 2019





04:59 PM: After the UK, Germany, too, issues travel advisory for citizens

After the United Kingdom issued a travel advisory for its citizens against travelling to Jammu and Kashmir, following the government's security advisory in the state, Germany, too, has reportedly issued a similar travel advisory for its citizens.

The same Germany that was so satisfied with the improvement in the security environment that they organised the Zubin Mehta concert in Srinagar a few years ago now issues a travel advisory to stop nationals from visiting the valley. https://t.co/DViwCbZdSz Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) August 3, 2019





04:34 PM: People in Ladakh, Kashmir scared: Ghulam Nabi Azad

People of Kashmir and Ladakh are very scared ever since home Ministry's advisory was issued. This has never happened in the past even after high militancy in the Valley, Ghulam Nabi Azad said while addressing a press conference

04:33 PM: Amarnath Yatra was never stopped even during height of terrorism in J&K: Congress

Never ever in the past, during MMS, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Narsimha Rao's time, did the govt ask the pilgrims to curtail their stay and come back. This kind of situation never arose in the past. This is unprecedented: Ghulam Nabi Azad

04:28 PM: UK has allegedly issued travel advisory, asking citizens not to travel to J&K post the security advisory

UK issues a travel advisory asking citizens not to travel to J&K post panic created by government of India pic.twitter.com/VKeERxc83i Swati Chaturvedi (@bainjal) August 3, 2019



16:04 PM: After Omar Abdullah, Mehbooba Mufti and Sajad Lone demand govt's clarification

Sajad Lone and Mehbooba Mufti, too, have demanded the government's clarification on its series of orders for the Kashmir Valley. Taking to Twitter, Sajad Lone said that the government needs to clarify the orders it has issued.

"I believe there is a dire need for the central government to clarify what is happening out here. It is strange. We the inhabitants of the land don’t have the remotest idea of what is going to happen," Sajad Lone tweeted.

Mehbooba Mufti accused the government of spreading chaos in the Kashmir Valley and demanded that it clarifies the security advisory it has issued for the Amarnath pilgrims and the tourists.

03:56 PM: Sopore encounter: 2 JeM terrorists killed

The security forces have killed two Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) terrorists in Sopore, Jammu and Kashmir. The security forces have also recovered arms and ammunition. Identities of the terrorists are being ascertained.

03:43 PM: Government spreading chaos in Kashmir Valley: Mehbooba Mufti

Former J&K Chief Minister Mehbooba Mufti has accused the government of spreading chaos in the Kashmir Valley. "If everything is ok then why are there are these orders. Why NIT students are asked to go. Chaos is being spread by the government. I am saying that all the mainstream parties should unite and save the identity of J&K," Mehbooba Mufti said.

03:18 PM: Ibrahim Azhar, JeM chief Masood Azhar's brother, resurfaces in PoK, reports claim

Reports of Ibrahim Azhar (JeM chief Masood Azhar's brother) resurfacing in PoK came alongside further intercepts that confirmed that a group of 15 trained JeM cadres had reached JeM camps in Markaz, Sanan Bin Salma, Tarnab Farm, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa after completing their 'Askari' training camps in Jamrud area of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa in Pakistan. It is believed that all 15 of these terrorists are being prepared for infiltration in Jammu and Kashmir, sources said.

Sources: Reports of Ibrahim Azhar (JeM chief Masood Azhar's brother) resurfacing in PoK came alongside further intercepts that confirmed that a group of 15 trained JeM cadres had reached JeM camps in Markaz, Sanan Bin Salma, Tarnab Farm, Peshawar, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa... (1/2) ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

03:16 PM: Need for Central govt to clear what is happening, says Sajad Lone

Peoples Conference chief Sajad Lone tweeted, "I believe there is dire need for the central government to clear what is happening out here. It is strange. We, the inhabitants of the land, don’t have the remotest idea of what is going to happen."

I believe there is dire need for the central government to clear what is happening out here. It is strange. We the inhabitants of the land don’t have the remotest idea of what is going to happen. Sajad Lone (@sajadlone) August 3, 2019

02:34 PM: 3 JeM operatives were positioned in terror launch pads in Nezapir sector of PoK, sources claim

According to latest reports, three JeM operatives were positioned in terror launch pads in Nezapir sector of PoK, opposite Indian post of Shahpur sector in Poonch. They had direct operational backing of Pakistani SSG (Special Service Group) commandos deployed in this area.

Sources: According to latest reports, 3 JeM operatives were positioned in terror launch pads in Nezapir sector of PoK, opposite Indian post of Shahpur sector in Poonch. They had direct operational backing of Pakistani SSG (Special Service Group) commandos deployed in this area. ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

02:11 PM: Kashmir Polytechnic college students asked to vacate immediately

Kashmir Polytechnic college students who are residing in hostels have been asked to vacate immediately.





01:57 PM: Terrorist activities increased on border, claim sources

Sources have said that terrorists are planning suicide attacks in Jammu and Kashmir.

01:54 PM: There's more than what meets the eye: Former Uttarakhand CM on Kashmir situation

Former Uttarakhand CM Harish Rawat, while talking to India Today TV, said, "It is highly irresponsible on government's part to create this kind of panic in Jammu and Kashmir where there's already so much tension. Parliament is in session and the government didn't even bother to apprise other parties."

Harish Rawat also said, "Terror threats have always been there in the valley. Many ministers are telling us that they're going to do something big in the valley. On the other hand, the Home Minister is saying something else. I think there's more than what meets the eye."

01:46 PM: J&K leaders spreading rumours, says state Legislative Assembly Speaker Nirmal Singh

J&K Legislative Assembly Speaker Nirmal Singh said that the leaders in the state [Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah] were spreading rumours. "This exercise has been done to safegaurd the people of state and pilgrims from terror threats," he said.

01:34 PM: Tell party workers to maintain calm, don't believe rumours, says J&K Guv to leaders

Jammu and Kashmir Governor S P Malik has asked political leaders in the state to tell their supporters to maintain calm and not to believe "exaggerated rumours" being circulated in the valley.

The Governor said this to a delegation of political leaders of various parties led by PDP president Mehbooba Mufti, an official spokesman said here in a statement late Friday night.

The Governor requested the political leaders to ask their supporters not to mix up matters, to maintain calm and not believe exaggerated rumours being circulated all around.

The Governor himself had clarified matters on Article 35-A in Baramulla on Thursday and the day before in Srinagar, the spokesman said.

01:32 PM: Governor Satya Pal Malik in meeting with political leaders led by Omar Abdullah

J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik in a meeting of a delegation of political leaders led by Omar Abdullah, National Conference: Force movement is to counter heightened threat perception & some rotation. Nothing with the state govt on modifying any constitutional provisions. (File pics) pic.twitter.com/0sRjjrW6W1 ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

01:21 PM: NIT Srinagar suspends classes indefinitely

National Institute of Technology (NIT) Srinagar has suspended its classes till further orders in view of the uncertain situation in Kashmir.

"This is for the information of all the students of the institute that the class work for all courses stands suspended till further orders," an order issued by the Registrar of NIT on Friday read.

"The above notice stands issued in accordance with the instructions received from the District Administration Srinagar," it added.

CLICK HERE TO READ MORE

01:12 PM: Want Centre to issue statement on Monday during Parliament, says Omar Abdullah

Omar Abdullah said, "After yesterday's order, the situation in valley is tense and people are hoarding outside petrol pumps and grocery stores. And in addition to that government’s order to ask tourists and Yatris to leave which has never happened before nor has any tourists been attacked."

He also said, "We asked Governor if it’s about Article 35A, Trifucation or 370, but he said that there is nothing like that. We want Centre to issue a statement on Monday during Parliament. We want to hear from Parliament so that people here get clarification."

01:05 PM: PM assured Article 35A won't be touched, says Omar Abdullah

Omar Abdullah said that the Governor Satya Pal Malik as well as PM Modi has assured them that the Article 35A won't be touched.

01:01: PM: Met Governor to get clarity, says Omar Abdullah

In a press conference, former J&K CM Omar Abdullah said that he met Governor Satya Pal Malik to get clarity on the situation. "We're not getting any answers," Omar Abdullah said.

"There is a lot of speculation on trifurcation as well," Omar Abdullah said. He also said that the Centre should assure people not to panic.

12:58 PM: Airfares soar on flights out of Srinagar

Airfares for flights from Srinagar this weekend have shot up to abnormally high levels after the Jammu and Kashmir state government issued an advisory urging pilgrims to curtail their Amarnath Yatra and return as soon as possible.

For a one-way direct flight from Srinagar to Delhi, even low-cost airlines such as IndiGo, SpiceJet, GoAir and AirAsia are charging between Rs 10,000 to Rs 22,000, according to travel portals. The normal rates generally hover around Rs 3,000.

Similarly, from Srinagar to Jammu, the current flight rates are around Rs 16,000. Other places like Amritsar, Chandigarh, Jaipur also witnessed a jump in airfares ranging between Rs 10,000 to Rs 19,000.

Web portals of several airlines with flights from Srinagar on Saturday and Sunday showed that all virtually all seats have been sold with just a few remaining.

12:52 PM: Article 370, 35A has disrupted peace among people of J&K: State BJP chief

Following an emergency meeting between BJP core members, state BJP chief Ravindra Raina said that Article 35A and 370 have always disrupted the peace among people of Jammu and Kashmir.

He also warned against the panic that the political leaders of the state have been trying to spread. He said that the party leaders have been asked to cooperate with the Centre.

12:39 PM: Govt asks Telugu students in NIT Srinagar to vacate campus, KTR promises help

TRS working president KTR on Twitter said, "Been receiving some anxious messages from Telugu students of NIT, Srinagar as Government of India has asked for campus to be vacated and asked students to leave immediately. Be rest assured, Government of Telangana will assist you in safe return. Have alerted our officials to reach out and help."

Been receiving some anxious messages from Telugu students of NIT, Srinagar as Govt of India has asked for campus to be vacated & asked students to leave immediately



Be rest assured, Govt of Telangana will assist you in safe return. Have alerted our officials to reach out & help KTR (@KTRTRS) August 3, 2019

He also tweeted, "Any student/parent wanting assistance, please call our Resident Commissioner Sri Vedantam Giri at 011-2338 2041 or on his mobile +91 99682 99337 at Telangana Bhavan, New Delhi."

Any student/parent wanting assistance, please call our Resident Commissioner Sri Vedantam Giri at 011-2338 2041 or on his mobile +91 99682 99337 at Telangana Bhavan, New Delhi KTR (@KTRTRS) August 3, 2019

12:28 PM: Govt should have provided security to pilgrims, says Manish Tewari

Congress spokesperson Manish Tewari tweeted, "J&K facing Pakistan-sponsored militancy since October, 1947. Worst period - 1990 - when VP Singh PM supported by BJP and Communists. Neither in October-47 nor in 1990 did the Indian state surrender to Pakistan like today. Government should have provided security to pilgrims/tourists rather than asking them to cut and run."

J&K facing Pak sponsored Militancy since Oct 1947. Worst Period 1990-whenVP Singh PM supported by BJP &Communists.Neither in Oct-47 nor 1990 did Indian State surrender to PAK like TODAY. Govt should have provided security to Pilgrims/ Tourists rather than asking them to CUT& RUN Manish Tewari (@ManishTewari) August 3, 2019

12:10 PM: BJP plans to unfurl tricolour across Kashmir on August 15

BJP state chief says that they have decided to unfurl tricolour across valley on August 15.

12:08 PM: Omar Abdullah arrives at Governor's house

Jammu & Kashmir: Former J&K Chief Minister and National Conference leader Omar Abdullah arrives at Raj Bhawan in Srinagar to meet Governor Satya Pal Malik. pic.twitter.com/OGNZejWhX7 ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

11:57 AM: State BJP core group meeting begins

11:39 AM: Omar Abdullah to address a press conference at 01.00 pm at Gupkar, Srinagar

11:33 AM: Rapid Action Force (RAF) reaches Jammu

Jammu & Kashmir: Rapid Action Force (RAF) reaches Jammu. pic.twitter.com/Ei6VcMbyzr ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

11:30 AM: Will meet Governor at noon with NC delegation, says Omar Abdullah

Former Jammu and Kashmir CM Omar Abdullah tweeted, "Will be taking a delegation of JKNC colleagues to meet Governor Malik at 12 noon today."

Will be taking a delegation of @JKNC_ colleagues to meet Governor Malik at 12 noon today #Kashmir Omar Abdullah (@OmarAbdullah) August 3, 2019

11:02 AM: BJP state chief Ravinder Raina to hold meeting with party's J&K core group on Saturday

Jammu & Kashmir: BJP State President Ravinder Raina will hold a meeting with party's J&K core group today. pic.twitter.com/ueMtGLs5Eb ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

10:53 AM: DGCA closely monitoring ticket prices of flights from Srinagar

10:43 AM: Situation improving in Kashmir but tourists and Amarnath pilgrims leaving valley

The situation is improving in the valley, but tourists and Amarnath pilgrims are leaving #Kashmir as per the directions of the government. @Ashraf_Wani brings more in this report from #Srinagar#ReporterDiary

More Videos: https://t.co/FAHzdjSiWA pic.twitter.com/jQuiS1KLTr India Today (@IndiaToday) August 3, 2019

10: 20 AM: BSF arrests Pakistan intruder along Indo-Pak border near Firozpur, Punjab

Border Security Force on Saturday said, "A Pakistani intruder has been apprehended by BSF near Ferozepur in Punjab. Concerned authorities are questioning him about his whereabouts and intentions. Nothing objectionable recovered from him."

Border Security Force: A Pakistani intruder has been apprehended by BSF near Ferozepur in Punjab. Concerned authorities are questioning him about his whereabouts and intentions. Nothing objectionable recovered from him. pic.twitter.com/s2AiwNL4fG ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

10:10 AM: Machail Yatra to Goddess Durga shrine in Kishtwar suspended

Angrez Singh Rana, District Commissioner, Kishtwar, said, "Machail Yatra to Goddess Durga shrine in Kishtwar district of Jammu and Kashmir has been suspended."

Angrez Singh Rana, District Commissioner, Kishtwar: Machail Yatra to Goddess Durga shrine in Kishtwar district of Jammu & Kashmir has been suspended. pic.twitter.com/6W189CXzRl ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

09:46 AM: Airlines waive off cancellation fee, advised to fly extra flights

Air India has decided to give a full fee waiver on rescheduling and cancellation for all its flights to and from Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir till August 15.

Several other airlines including IndiGo, Spicjet and Vistara have also decided to give a full fee waiver on rescheduling and cancellation for all its flights to and from Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir till August 9.

Read: Kashmir terror threat: Airlines waive off cancellation fee, advised to fly extra flights

09:44 AM: No fresh leaves for CRPF personnel in Kashmir, sources claim

Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel posted in Kashmir may not get any new leaves at a time when a cloud of panic has spread across Kashmir Valley over security-based threats.

The government, citing security-based threats and possible terror attacks, on Friday asked Amarnath yatra pilgrims and tourists to cut short their stay in the Valley and leave as soon as possible.

Read: No fresh leaves for CRPF personnel in Kashmir, those on leave could be called back: Sources

09:19 AM: Amarnath Yatra curtailed by govt for first time

With terror threat looming large on Amarnath Yatra, only 704 pilgrims visited the Amarnath shrine on Friday. The pilgrims were taken by choppers. Today, zero convoys left from either Pahalgam or Baltal axis. First time ever, the yatra was curtailed by the government.

09:09 AM: Have sufficient stock of essentials including food, fuels and medicines: DM Srinagar

District Magistrate Srinagar Shahid Choudhary, in a tweet, said, "In Srinagar district we have sufficient stocks of all essentials including food, fuels and medicines. Roads are open, replenishment is routine. People are requested to avoid hoarding and panic shopping."

In #Srinagar district we have sufficient stocks of all essentials including food, fuels and medicines. Roads are open, replenishment is routine. People are requested to avoid hoarding and panic shopping Shahid Choudhary (@listenshahid) August 2, 2019

08:53 AM: 704 devotees have completed Amarnath pilgrimage on August 2, 2019

#AmarnathYatra 2019: 704 devotees (596 via Baltal axis & 108 via Pahalgam axis) have completed the pilgrimage to the holy shrine as of 2nd August. (file pic) #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/ggQo38v4XT ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

08:51 AM: One terrorist killed in encounter with security forces in Sopore

08:40 AM: Encounter taking place in Malmapanpora area of Sopore

One Army personnel injured in exchange of fire between terrorists and security forces in Malmapanpora area of Sopore. Operation underway.

Baramulla: One Army personnel injured in exchange of fire between terrorists and security forces in Malmapanpora area of Sopore. Operation underway. #JammuAndKashmir pic.twitter.com/QUmL8TEU4U ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

8:00 AM: Governor Satya Pal Malik said a pure security measure is being mixed up with issues with which it has no connection which is the cause of the panic. He requested the delegation of leaders that met him on Friday to ask their supporters "not to mix up matters, to maintain calm and not believe exaggerated rumours being circulated all around".

Friday evening, truckloads of provisions carried by the paramilitary forces were seen in Srinagar as ground forces were reportedly told to be ready for a Valley-wide clampdown within the next 24 hours. As the state administration and Central security agencies have been put on high alert, Kashmiris have started preparing for a long hours of curfew, as the locals believe so.

Meanwhile, DGCA asked Indian airlines to be prepared to operate extra flights to and from Srinagar to fly out Amarnath Yatris and tourists from the Valley.

Earlier on Friday, a press conference was addressed by the Corps Commander of the Army and the DGP in which details of the weapons and ammunition recovered in the state was given. Details of the seriousness of the threats that are there were also given. They also mentioned that the security forces were going to tackle these threats head-on and will not allow them to succeed.It is in this context, the government had issued an advisory asking Yatris and tourists to return as soon as possible.
