The flawed era of GDP is finally coming to an end

At the time, Kuznet warned against the misuse of his metric, writing that “the welfare of a nation can scarcely be inferred from a measure of national income.” He might have known its limitations – but he couldn’t control how misunderstood GDP would one day become.

“Every economist knew that GDP was not a measure of welfare, when I was being taught in the 70s,” says Arthur Grimes, professor of wellbeing and public policy in the school of government at the Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand. But over the decades it has become increasingly mischaracterised as the key indicator of a nation’s progress.

Part of the confusion is that there is actually a correlation between economic growth and wellbeing, especially at the early stages of a country’s development, explains Jan-Emmanuel De Neve, director of the Wellbeing Research Centre at the University of Oxford, and associate editor of the UN World Happiness Report. “Pure economic indicators of growth correlate with people’s well being up to a certain level,” he says. But with increasing economic development, “it really, really tapers off.” Beyond a certain point, GDP no longer captures the nuances of citizens’ happiness. “It’s probably not a coincidence that nations like New Zealand, the UK and other relatively well-off countries are moving beyond GDP,” says De Neve. “Growth for the sake of growth is no longer translating to further wellbeing.”

The Kingdom of Bhutan grasped earlier on than either of these countries that the contentedness of its citizens could be an alternative marker of success. “When we talk about Gross National Happiness we are not against GDP,” says Zangmo. “We’re just saying that the ultimate end goal is wellbeing and happiness of the people. And GDP is just one of the means.”

The national survey uses some traditional socioeconomic measures of wellbeing, such as living standards, health, and education. But it also incorporates some more unusual elements, such as culture, community vitality, and psychological health (which encompasses spirituality). Respondents’ happiness is ranked based on their scores across the various domains. Then, the results are broken down by age group, gender, and district, providing a granular reading on citizens’ experiences.

Whether this citizen-minded approach is working, so far, is harder to disentangle from the data. Between the first survey in 2010, and the second in 2015, Bhutan’s Gross National Happiness grew by 1.8 per cent. That was shaped in part by a noticeable spike in living standards registered in the survey, as well as a 20 per cent surge in access to electricity and healthcare. “[Bhutan] also had a massive, electrifying reduction in poverty” – declining from over 20 per cent to 8.2 per cent today, says Sabina Alkire, director of the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, and co-developer of the Alkire-Foster measurement method which the government of Bhutan adapted to build its GNH Index.
