JeM's Zeenat Naikoo, Hizbul's Manzoor Bhatt gunned down in Shopian encounter; 2 soldiers martyred

Representational image | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Security forces on Friday launched a cordon-and-search operation in Pandoshan area of Shopian based on a tip-off 2 terrorists from JeM, Hizbul gunned down. Two soldiers were also martyred in the operation Naikoo, a JeM commander, was one of the most wanted militants in the Valley

New Delhi: A top commander of the dreaded Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) militant group, Zeenat Naikoo, was gunned down in an encounter in South Kashmir’s Shopian district in Pandoshan area, the J&K police said after the conclusion of the operation which lasted over 24 hours. The J&K Police said another terrorist, Manzoor Bhatt, was gunned down in the encounter.

The security personnel, on Friday, had launched a cordon-and-search operation based on a tip-off about the presence of terrorists in the Pandoshan area of the south Kashmir district.

Bhatt was affiliated with the proscribed terror outfit Hizbul Mujahideen and was involved in several terror activities and attacks on security establishments in the past. A cache of arms and ammunition was recovered from the slain terrorists. Interestingly, Zeenat ul Islam Naikoo was eliminated at a spot just kilometres away from where four policemen were killed in a terror attack perpetrated by him.

The operation although declared successful, came at a heavy cost as two security personnel were martyred in the gun battle. A soldier and a sepoy Rambir Singh of the 34 Rashtriya Rifles were killed in the 24-hour-long encounter.

Naikoo was believed to be one of the most important JeM militants in Kashmir who played an important role in the expansion of JeM locally.

Two soldiers injured during the encounter in Pandoshan village of Shopian were shifted to a hospital for medical treatment but succumbed later. On July 31, two terrorists were gunned down by security forces in Kanzalwan village of Gurez sector.

The encounter comes in the backdrop of a security threat in the state following an advisory issued by Principal Secretary, Home, Shaleen Kabra, to travellers in order to their curtail Amarnath Yatra and return home.

The Army held a joint press briefing with J&K Police DGP in Kashmir on Friday and said a huge cache of arms and ammunition has been recovered along the twin routes of Amarnath Yatra that led up to the holy cave. General Officer Commanding of Army's 15 Corps Lt General KJS Dhillon said Pakistan and its Army were desperately trying to disrupt peace in the Valley using terrorists. He said the security forces, over the past few days, recovered a number of weapons and explosives, including a Pakistan-made mine and an American M-24 (sniper) rifle, along the yatra route.
