Mimi Chakraborty asks Nusrat Jahan 'how is the honeymoon'; TMC lawmaker's reply wins internet

First-time MPs and Bengali actors Mimi Chakraborty and Nusrat Jahan | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights TMC MP Nusrat Jahan tied the knot with Nikhil Jain in June this year Nusrat Jahan and Mimi Chakraborty are active on social media Chakraborty and Jahan won the Lok Sabha elections from Jadavpur and Basirhat seats respectively

New Delhi: First-time MPs and Bengali actors Mimi Chakraborty and Nusrat Jahan never shied away from sharing their pictures and updates about their day-to-day lives on social media. The actor-turned-politicians, who are active on Instagram, often connect with their fans by sharing several posts on the social media.

Jahan who tied the knot with Nikhil Jain in June and has been enjoying a holiday, recently shared pictures from her vacation on her social media.

In one of the pictures, the actor-turned-politician wore a black and white striped top and paired those up with bridal bangles, giving a ‘desi’ touch to her look.

She captioned the image: “Its better to have ur head in the clouds and know where u are.. paradise has nvr been abt places,it exists in moments, in connection, in flashes across time.. pic courtesy hubbilicious @nikhiljain09.”

Commenting on the photo, Jahan’s close friend Chakraborty wrote: “Honey how is the honeymoon.”

Jahan replied: "Honey and moon is great... but sun is shining too bright here..!! Expect some colour on me bonua.

The Trinamool Congress MPs were earlier trolled for the western clothes they wore on the first day of their visit to Parliament.

Chakraborty and Jahan, who won the Lok Sabha elections from Jadavpur and Basirhat seats respectively, shared photos of their first day in the Parliament on social media, only to face criticism.

Young parliamentarians' pictures did not go down well with the social media users as one of them commented, "this is not film shooting" on their pictures.

"This is not a place for a photoshoot. This is a place where you should fight for the people's rights and legislate for the country. You don't belong here,” a person commented on their posts.

Ever since the two Bengali actors plunged into politics, they have been in the eye of a storm and facing flak for one or the other reasons.

Earlier, Jahan was issued fatwa by a Muslim cleric group for wearing sindoor and not wearing a 'burqa' at her oath-taking ceremony in Parliament on June 25, terming the practices “un-Islamic”.

She hit back at the fatwa against her, saying she represents an "inclusive India". “I represent an inclusive India, which is beyond the barriers of caste, creed and religion.” “As much as I respect all religions, I still remain a Muslim and no one should comment on what I choose to wear,” she had tweeted.

Jahan won the elections by 3,50,369 votes while Chakraborty registered victory by a margin of 2,95,239 vote.
