Newsmakers of the week: Karan Johar’s party with Deepika, Ranbir, Vicky to Dia Mirza’s separation from husband

As we head towards a new week, it is important to rewind and see who made news in B-town this week. Talking about this week, it began with a bang as Karan Johar dropped a video from his house party where Deepika Padukone, Ranbir Kapoor, Vicky Kaushal, Arjun Kapoor, Malaika Arora, Varun Dhawan, Natasha Dalal, Shahid Kapoor, Mira Rajput and more were present, The party video was in the headlines as an MLA accused the bollywood stars of doing drugs.

Post this, most part of the week remained quite normal but the big news came on Thursday when Dia Mirza announced separation from husband Sahil Sangha after 11 years of togetherness and 5 years of marriage. Also, during this week, Govinda claimed that James Cameron offered him the blockbuster hit, Avatar and he rejected it. So, without further adieu, let’s dive right into the 5 top newsmakers of this week.

1. Karan Johar’s party video

Karan Johar dropped a party video and showed us what happens when a room is full of the best of Bollywood’s stars like Deepika Padukone, Ranbir Kapoor, Vicky Kaushal, Arjun Kapoor, Malaika Arora, Varun Dhawan, Natasha Dalal, Shahid Kapoor, Mira Rajput. But soon the harmless fun video turned into a huge argument on social media between the Shiromani Akali Dal MLA, Manjinder Sirsa and former minister, Milind Deora. Sirsa accused the Bollywood A-listers of doing drugs at the KJo’s party and demanded a dope test from them. However, Milin Deora claimed that there were no drugs at the party and asked the MLA to apologise. The fan following of the stars also was divided on social media with some supporting them and others opposing them.

2. Dia Mirza-Sahil Sangha separation

On Thursday, actress Dia Mirza and her husband Sahil Sangha announced separation after 11 years of togetherness and 5 years of marriage. The two released a statement on social media and mentioned that they would remain friends but will be parting ways. Later, a rumour made its way to the reports about Judgementall Hai Kya writer, Kanika Dhillon being responsible for Dia and Sahil’s split. But, Kanika slammed the rumours and also got support from Dia who took a stand for Kanika and tweeted in her favour. Dia quashed all reports of any third person’s involvement. The Lage Raho Munna Bhai actress asked the media for some privacy.

3. Govinda’s announced that James Cameron offered him his blockbuster film, Avatar

In an interview with India TV, Bollywood actor Govinda surprised everyone by stating that Hollywood filmmaker, James Cameron offered him his blockbuster film, Avatar. Not just this, Govinda also claimed that he rejected the film as the director wanted him to shoot for 410 days and also paint his body blue. On hearing his announcement by Bollywood actor, social media went berserk and trolls targeted the Hero No 1 actor. Many memes were doing rounds during the week on Govinda’s claim about James Cameron’s Avatar.

4. Sushmita Sen and Rohman Shawl wedding rumours

A report came out this week claiming that Sushmita Sen and beau Rohman Shawl might be tying the knot in the month of November or December. As per the report in Vogue, Rohman has already popped up the question about marriage to Sushmita who has agreed to it. Reportedly, the couple is planning to get hitched by November or December this year. While Sushmita or Rohman haven’t said anything on this, they continue to shower love on each other on social media via comments and photos.

5. Kareena Kapoor Khan says she wants to do a double role like Sridevi in Chaalabaaz

As per a report that came out this week, Kareena Kapoor Khan claimed to have seen Chaalbaaz 35 times and mentioned that she was surprised that no filmmaker had ever come up to her with a double role. Bebo said, “I’ve always wanted to do a film where I could play twins like Seeta Aur Geeta or Chaalbaaz.” While the actress is currently in London with her son Taimur and husband Saif, Kareena has been travelling every week to Mumbai to shoot for her dance reality show. The Good News star confessed in the report, “I have not been offered a double role ever, which is quite strange. I’m dying to do one.”
