Disc Brake variants of Honda Aviator, Activa 125, Grazia and CB Shine recalled

Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India has recalled the CBS-equipped disc brake variants of the Aviator, Activa 125, Grazia and CB Shine over to fix a front brake master cylinder. The recall affects 50,034 units of the four models mentioned above that were manufactured between 4 February to 3 July this year.

Also Read: Honda CB300R secures better sales than CBR250R

The Indian arm of the Japanese two-wheeler brand said in a statement that the suspected quality issue in the front brake master cylinder might cause difficulty in the rotation of the front wheel. This may further lead to wheel jam in an extreme situation. The company will inspect, and if required, replace the suspected part.

Below is what HMSI said in the recall statement:

With customer safety and comfort its utmost priority, Honda as a pre-cautionary measure, will voluntarily inspect these models manufactured between February 4 to July 3, 2019. Company will replace the suspected part, if required, on free of cost basis irrespective to the affected vehicles warranty status.

In other updates, Honda Motorcycle and Scooter India has seized spurious goods in major raids. The company’s Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Enforcement team, along with local police, conducted four raids in North and East and seized counterfeit parts worth INR 49 lakh. The list of counterfeit items included spurious parts, accessories, scooter guard kits, fake packaging machines and label printing machines. The IPR Enforcement team has conducted 15 raids and seized over 94,000 counterfeit spare parts, accessories and other items with an estimated value of INR 2 crore till now.

Meanwhile, the company is working on creating a promotional video for its upcoming product, the Honda Activa 125 BS-VI. The new scooter should arrive in our market by September-end. The new Honda Activa 125 packs as many as 26 new patent applications. HMSI revealed the vehicle in June this year but it is yet to release the specifications.

Also Read: 2020 Honda CRF1100L Africa Twin teased

The BS-VI Honda Activa 125 will come equipped with PGM-FI Honda Eco Technology (HET), Honda Enhanced Smart Power (eSP) and Idling Stop System. The BS-IV Honda Activa 125's 124.9 cc single-cylinder, air-cooled motor is tuned to produce 8 BHP of peak power and 10.54 Nm of max torque. The outputs of the BS-VI version will not be very different.
