'Don't travel to Kashmir': UK, Germany, Australia issue advisory after terror threat in J&K

2/4

Travel to Kashmir is strongly discouraged.

Strongly discouraged from traveling to Jammu and Kashmir due to a recent security alert. Travelers staying in Kashmir (especially the Kashmir Valley and the Armanath Yatra Pilgrimage Route) are advised to leave Jammu and Kashmir.

Terrorism



The security situation in India remains tense against the backdrop of numerous serious terrorist attacks in recent years. This is especially true in the context of public and religious holidays and major events.

It must be assumed that New Delhi and other major cities in the country are the focus of terrorist activities. There is still a tendency that even touristy places are increasingly targeted by the terrorists.

In the state of Jammu and Kashmir bomb attacks have been carried out in recent decades and also recently, which claimed many lives. Individual actions directed against foreigners, including abductions, can not be ruled out in the entire region. Partly curfews were imposed.

Be especially attentive to busy places (visiting markets and public places, crowds of people, government buildings and national landmarks) and special events.

Domestic situation

Travel to the Kashmir area, including Srinagar, is not advised.

In the state of Jammu and Kashmir, terrorist acts of violence and unpredictable conflicts between demonstrators and the police or the army are also taking place. Since September 2016, there have also been renewed armed clashes between Indian and Pakistani troops as well as with various separatist groups along the international border and the ceasefire line (LoC).

In the Jammu area, the security situation is basically stable. However, unpredictable violent clashes between protesters and security forces are also possible there.

In the part of Ladakh the security situation is basically stable. However, individual terrorist activities can not be ruled out. In the direct border regions, clashes can occur between Indian and Pakistani and Indian and Chinese security forces.

Keep yourself informed about the security and infrastructure situation.

Travel, if necessary, only by air to Srinagar.

Be especially careful when traveling to the western parts of the Ladakh region.

Do not travel alone or with an unidentified guide through these areas, stop by car and do not camp in secluded spots.

Let us advise you on the selection of trekking routes on site by trustworthy and knowledgeable local guides.

Avoid the immediate border areas with Pakistan and the People's Republic of China in Ladakh.

Avoid larger crowds.

Always follow the instructions of local authorities and security forces.
