Home Minister Amit Shah Likely To Visit Jammu And Kashmir Before Independence Day Amid Increase In Troop Deployment

Home Minister Amit Shah is likely to visit Jammu and Kashmir for a couple of days after the conclusion of the Parliament session on August 7.

Considering the current climate and security concerns in the valley after the curtailment of the Amarnath Yatra, the Home Minister might visit the state before Independence Day on August 15.

Earlier in the day, speaking to Republic TV, Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik reiterated that there is no 'imminent panic' in Kashmir, assured that in case of any development he would keep people in the loop and shunned the rumours of trifurcation. He asserted that Pakistan is deliberately keeping the 'borders hot' by heavy shelling with the motive to show it to US President Donald Trump.

READ| Kashmir: Intel Note On Pakistan Army-backed JeM & LeT's Reconnaissance Activities And Targets Accessed

He said, "I've assured people there is nothing to panic about. According to my communication with leaders in Delhi, there is no eminent panic. As long as the deployment of security officers is concerned, they've been here since the elections. Now they want to go and new forces want to come in. You must have seen in Srinagar, there has been more jet sortie in the past be week. Pakistan is deliberately keeping the borders hot. There has been so much shelling in the past 4-6 days that we had to use such heavy weapons, because they want to show Trump that this is a dispute. This is not related to us. There were rumours of trifurcation, but all these things will happen from the Parliament, this cannot happen in a day. I don't see why people should be worried about."

Apart from the security concerns by Pakistan Army backed terrorism, Congress along with PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti have been fearmongering over the situation.

Addressing the media on Saturday, Ghulam Nabi Azad said that the deployment of security forces in the valley was 'worrisome' and created fear in the people's minds. "There were close 35,000 extra troops sent to Jammu and Kashmir despite there being the least number of casualties of forces and civilians, barring the Pulwama attack. The maximum number of tourists, Amarnath Yatris and labourers are going to Kashmir. In this scenario, sending 35000 troops is worrisome. And people of the entire nation as well as of Jammu and Kashmir are scared. No government has ever asked tourists to go back. Such a thing has never happened before. When the senior police officer sent a wireless message to police forces to tell them that their equipment will be supplemented and more security forces will be sent to the districts to be used along with the local police, this is happening for the first time."

Meanwhile, NC leader Omar Abdullah has raised his concerns over the affected tourism industry in the state after the United Kingdom issued an advisory of people traveling to Jammu and Kashmir.

READ| J&K: Omar Abdullah Worries About 'tourism Industry' Setback In The State Amid Security Advisory Issued By Govt
