Unnao rape victim 'critical' due to pneumonia; lawyer taken off ventilator support

New Delhi:

In its latest medical bulletin on the health of the Unnao rape survivor and her lawyer, who met an accident on July 29, the King George Medical University hospital, Lucknow, on Saturday said both of them are stable now, but not completely out of danger.

The 19-year-old victim has further developed fever due to pneumonia and is also being administered medication for controlling blood pressure. She is being given oxygen through a tube inserted in her windpipe.

The lawyer, on the other hand, has been taken off the ventilator support, but is still critical as he suffered head injuries. Both the victim and her lawyer are still unconscious.

READ | Unnao rape case: CBI questions expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar

"The 19-year-old is still on life support but her lawyer, who too was injured when their car was hit by a truck in Rae Bareli district on July 27, is breathing without ventilator," Sandeep Tiwari, King George's Medical University Trauma Centre incharge, was quoted as saying by media.

Medical bulletin of Unnao rape survivor & her lawyer by King George Medical University hospital, Lucknow: The lawyer is breathing without ventilator support. Both of them are unconscious. https://t.co/5VWWpVAzx8 — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 3, 2019

The victim and her lawyer are under round-the-clock observation, doctors at the trauma centre said, adding that KGMU is fully equipped to provide best treatment to the patients. Based on their lastest health update, the Supreme Court will decide on Monday whether the victim should be moved to AIIMS hospital in Delhi for better treatment.

While the victim and her lawyer suffered critical injuries in the July 29 accident, her two aunts were killed. One of the aunts was a prime witness in the 2017 Unnao rape incident.

READ | Unnao Case: Sensational twist on blackened number plate puts truck owner in dock

Meanwhile, the rape victim's family has filed a complaint alleging conspiracy behind the crash. The CBI, which has taken over the investigation into car crash as well as the rape cases, booked 10 people, including expelled BJP MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, for murder.

Sengar is currently lodged jail and is also the main accused in the Unnao gangrape case. On Thursday, the BJP expelled Sengar from the party following opposition's allegations of shielding the accused legislator.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
