CBSE 10th 12th Board Exam 2019 Admit Cards for regular students out on cbse.nic.in –check major instructions

CBSE 10th 12th Board Examination 2019 Admit Cards released | Photo Credit: Representative Image

New Delhi: Central Board of Secondary Education, CBSE has released the CBSE 10th 12th Board Exam 2019 admit cards/ roll numbers. The roll number for the regular candidates have been made available for download by the schools on cbse.nic.in. Students are required to get in touch with their respective schools or institutions to collect the admit card. Important instructions regarding CBSE Admit Cards are provided below.Class 10 and Class 12 examination will commence from February 15, 2019 onwards.

Students are advised to note that some reports suggest that the CBSE has only released Class 10 Admit Cards at present and that CBSE Class 12 roll numbers or admit cards would be released soon. Instructions for students is provided below. Related News | CBSE Board Exams: After Hindi, Class 12 Humanities practicals being considered for internal assessment

CBSE Board Exam 2019 Admit Cards: Important instructions for students

When collecting the admit cards from the school, students should check and make sure of a few things. Remember, your teachers would ask you to sign the admit cards and then hand them over to you. Please ensure that your CBSE Admit Cards have

Your School Principal’s signature.

Your signature

Names of all the subjects you had opted for along with the correct subject code

Correct spellings of your personal information

Your photograph

Check other instructions for students

Candidates appearing for the CBSE Class 10, Class 12 Board exam need to check few of the other instructions as well.

No candidates will be allowed to enter the exam centre after 10 am.

Candidates should go in school uniform and with school identity card along with the identity card issued by the school.

Candidate should not carry mobile or any electronic items and all barred items to the exam centre.

Before appearing for the exam, candidates should read the amended rules for unfair practices.

Official Notice on Important Instructions

In case the admit card is without photograph, your school would provision for the same or stamp the photograph after pasting the same. Students and parents are advised to check for all these. Remember, an unsigned admit card would not be permissible and students may not be allowed to enter the examination centres.
