Indian Army foils Pakistan BAT attack, guns down 5-7

The Army foiled attempts by Pakistan's Border Action Team (BAT) on Saturday to infiltrate into Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir and killed at least five to seven intruders. BAT comprises personnel from special forces of the Pakistani Army and state-sanctioned terrorists.



"A BAT attempt was made on one of the forward posts in Keran sector (Kupwara district) and foiled by alert troops resulting in neutralising of five to seven Pakistani regulars/terrorists," said the Army. Pakistan armed forces had made a similar infiltration attempt on the intervening night of July 31 and August 1.



"In the last 36 hours, there have been a number of attempts by Pakistan to disrupt peace in the Valley and target Amarnath yatris," said the Army in a statement. At least four bodies were seen in close proximity of an Indian post in the sector, said the Army, adding that search operations and attempts to retrieve the bodies were being continuously interfered with by Pakistani troops deployed in the area.



Pakistani troops also violated ceasefire by resorting to mortar shelling and small arms firing on forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Poonch district at around 8:15 pm on Saturday. The firing started in Mendhar sector and was met with strong and effective retaliation. Heavy exchange of fire was underway when the last reports were received.



The Army said there has been a spurt in infiltration activities and BAT attempts, in addition to the frequent Cease-Fire Violations, along the Line of Control and in the hinterlands of the northernmost state. The Army has dealt with these challenges with the utmost professionalism and responded in a calibrated manner to target terrorists and Pakistan Army's complicity, the force said.



"Instead of taking irreversible and credible actions against terror activities emanating from its soil," said the statement. "Pakistan is deliberately resorting to a malicious campaign of use of cluster ammunition by the Indian Army,"



Earlier in the day, the Pakistani military released pictures showing cluster bombs, they claim, were being used against civilians by the Army. "Allegations of the firing of cluster bombs by India is yet another Pak's lie, deceit and deception," the Army responded, "The Pakistan army regularly attempts to push terrorists through infiltrations and supplies a multitude of weapons to assist them. India, during numerous Directorate of Military Operations level talks, has maintained the right to respond. Such responses are only against military targets and infiltrating terrorists, who are aided by the Pak Army."
