Indian Army rejects Pakistan’ claims of ‘cluster bombs’ attack on its territory, calls it ‘lie and deceit’

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: The Indian Army on Saturday refuted a claim by Pakistan that it used “cluster bombs” in the latter’s territory, which Islamabad termed as violation of international convention.

Director General ISPR Major General Asif Ghafoor tweeted today, claiming that the Indian security forces used cluster bombs. He used his allegation to invoke the Kashmir issue, saying that “Kashmir runs in the blood of every Pakistani.”

“Use of cluster bombs by Indian Army violating international conventions is condemnable. No weapon can suppress determination of Kashmiris to get their right of self determination. Kashmir runs in blood of every Pakistani. Indigenous freedom struggle of Kashmiris shall succeed,IA,” DG ISPR tweeted.

Responding to Pakistan’s narrative, which comes a day after the intel sources warning of Pakistan-based terrorists planning terror attack on Amarnath Yatra pilgrims, the Indian Army said the security forces have only been retorting to the attempts by Pak-sponsored terrorists who try to sneak into Indian territories.

“Pakistan army regularly attempts to push terrorists through infiltrations and opens up with multitude of weapons to assist them. India during numerous Directorate of Military Operations level talks, has maintained the right to respond,” the Indian Army was quoted by ANI as saying.

“Such responses are only against military targets & infiltrating terrorists who are aided by the Pakistan Army. Allegations of firing of cluster bombs by India is yet another Pakistan's lie, deceit & deception,” it added.

On Friday, the Jammu and Kashmir administration called of the Amarnath Yatra two weeks ahead of schedule over a terror attack alert by the security forces. It further asked tourists and yatris to leave the state as soon as possible in view of the prevailing security situation.

The decision sparked uncertainty in Jammu and Kashmir which was already on the edge in view of the reinforcements of troops being sent to the Valley over the poast few days.

While 28,000 para-military personnel were inducted in the Valley over the past week, around 32,500 troops will be disengaged from yatra duties and moved to Kashmir. There are already 35,000 troops stationed in the Valley and their number will rise to almost 90,000 now.

Relations between India and Pakistan have been on the edge since the February 14 Pulwama attack by Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror group which killed 40 CRPF personnel.

India launched a counter-terror operation against a JeM training camp in Balakot on February 26.

The next day, Pakistan Air Force retaliated and downed a MiG-21 in an aerial combat and captured its pilot, who was handed over to India on March 1

Posted By: Abhinav Gupta
