Why crime finds fertile ground in Haryana

sanjiv@tribunemail.com

Sushil Manav in Chandigarh

Crime is invariably the centrepiece of any reportage on Haryana and it is a disturbing statistic that a state with a population share of 2.06 per cent is ranked fourth on the country’s crime chart. State interventions notwithstanding, the crime files just keep on increasing. If more number of cases being registered is an indication of an efficient and responsive law and order machinery, what explains the proliferation of incidents of crime despite the “crackdown”? What is about Haryana that makes it fertile ground for crime and criminals?

The year 2014 witnessed 79,947 incidents of crime being registered under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and 35,522 under the Special and Local Laws (SLL) in Haryana. The figure rose to 84,466 and 47,523, respectively, in 2015 and shot up to 88,527 and 54,584 in 2016, according to the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB).

Haryana Police data of the past two years presents an even more distressing picture. The numbers swelled to 97,392 cases under IPC and 31,564 under SLL in 2017 and 1,08,522 cases under the IPC and 26,880 under the SLL in 2018.

This is in sharp contrast to neighbouring Punjab, which records less than half the number of crimes committed in Haryana every year and is ranked number 24 in the crime chart.

For sociologists, a very obvious reason is the large-scale migration abroad from Punjab, primarily for monetary considerations, unlike Haryana, where villagers are still largely dependent on land and agriculture. This explains Punjab’s relative prosperity and also why youth have fewer reasons for drifting towards crime.

Proximity to Delhi has been advantageous to Haryana, but the state has had to pay a huge price for it as well. Its long border with Uttar Pradesh, Delhi, Rajasthan and Punjab also helps criminals to operate easily and escape.

Social activist Krishan Swaroop Gorakhpuria says the surge in prices of immovable property close to Delhi gave birth to a new breed of criminals — organised mafia — who would encroach upon others’ property or remove encroachers for money.

“Gangs of musclemen keep mushrooming in the districts close to the national capital for the business of encroachments and forcible removal of encroachments. In the process, if some of them end up handing fatal blows to those resisting their actions, the person is prosecuted and jailed. From here starts the journey into the world of crime and then there is no looking back,” he says.

Gorakhpuria also considers the rise of “Bhai Saab” culture in Haryana in the past few decades as being responsible for the rise in crime. “Since 1970s, sons of various CMs, ex-CMs and influential ministers, referred to as ‘Bhai Saab’, have been running a parallel force of young supporters. They get complete patronage and many who have no other work to do end up in the world of crimes as they know ‘Bhai Saab’ will save them in case of police action,” he stresses.

Acquisition of land around Delhi for urban development also pushed many youths towards crime. “Many got huge amounts when their land was acquired for development of new Gurugram and later, for the SEZs during the Congress government from 2005 to 2014. While the money received as compensation went in buying luxury cars and building palatial houses, youths rendered jobless or without productive work because of this found easy outlets in criminal activities,” reasons Gorakhpuria.

Prohibition and the rise of crime

Many in Haryana consider prohibition as the genesis of the state’s crime culture. The liquor ban was implemented from July 1996 to April 1998 and it contributed towards generating a new army of criminals. “Prohibition imposed during Bansi Lal’s regime criminalised an act which was never considered a crime in society. Certain villagers, even the grocery sellers, used to stock two or three bottles of liquor for sale. When prohibition was introduced, a number of youths came into this business as the demand was immense. Those who were arrested came out of jails with the tag of outlaws after remaining for long with hardened criminals. This created a huge army of a new breed of criminals who after the lifting of prohibition took to other crimes,” says a social activist.

Social mores of the crime culture

Former Home Minister Sampat Singh, who comes from the hinterland of Haryana, cites both social and law and order reasons for the spurt in crimes.

“In our society, people are not ready to give any freedom to their daughters, but seldom bother what their sons do. If their daughter returns home late by a few minutes, she will have to face a volley of questions, but in case of the son, even if he comes after spending a night outside, the mothers will worry more about whether he got food outside or not. Parents hardly try to find out where their sons spend their time and who they meet,” says Singh.

He feels the slogan of “Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao” is no more relevant for Haryana, because here there is a need to save sons from venturing into the world of crime by making them get a good education.

“Girls know it well in our society that they are to be with their parents for only a few years of their lives. After this, they have to be at the mercy of their husbands and in-laws. The only thing that can guarantee them self-dependence is education. But boys are told from their childhood that they are to inherit all the agricultural land. They never feel the need of education and spend their time idling, often coming into contact with the outlaws. Dwindling landholdings due to division in families is also driving the youth towards criminal activities,” Singh adds.

The former Home Minister believes that misuse of the police force by those in power is much to blame for the present state of affairs. “Governments change with time, political parties also change, but the system of appointing police heads, even in districts, has not changed. They are appointed based on the likes and dislikes of political bosses,” he says.

On crime becoming an accepted reality in the state, Gorakhpuria remembers that some six decades back people would not marry their daughters in a village where any murder was reported. “Even keeping firearms was considered a crime of sorts. But now, people have no qualms about their own children indulging in such activities.”

Porous borders, and a bit of history

With years of experience behind him, Rajbir Deswal, a retired IPS officer practising as a high court lawyer, feels that Haryana’s crime scene is largely impacted by its location and history.

“The state has borne the brunt of foreign invaders. Obviously they weren’t as charitable to their subjects in close neighbourhood, thereby developing in them a tendency of belligerence and revolt. Still, the Haryanvi society was a peace-loving society till the recent trends set in, owing to urbanisation and industrialisation. Add to this prohibition and the property boom. Semi-arid zones of Punjab and Rajasthan around Bhiwani, Hisar, Sirsa and Fatehabad found a fertile ground for smuggling of poppy husk and drugs. Districts along the Yamuna saw a proliferation of clandestine activities like mining and cow smuggling,” Deswal explains.

He also blames the arms factories of adjoining Uttar Pradesh for contributing to the crime culture in Haryana, along with Delhi’s spillover of crime — kidnappings and abductions, besides murders and dacoity.

‘No space for the other’

In the patriarchal Haryana society, there is no space for respect of others’ rights, particularly when it comes to women. Violation of rights is not considered bad while domestic violence is an accepted reality. The society, too, resorts to victim blaming rather than condemning the violator. —Jagmati Sangwan, All india women democratic association\

‘Beta Padhao’ needed

The slogan of ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’ is no more relevant for Haryana, because it needs to save its sons from venturing into crimes by making them get good education. Girls know they will be at mercy of husbands, and only education will guara-ntee self-dependence. —Sampat Singh, Former Home Minister
