India, Pakistan Trade Charges, Fire Shells Across the Border

New Delhi: The India-Pakistan border remained volatile on Saturday, with intensified firing of both ammunition and words across the Line of Control. While the Pakistan army and government accused India of using cluster bombs during cross-border firing, the Indian military asserted that bodies of possible Pakistani special forces commandos were spotted on the Indian side.

The border has witnessed heavy exchange of fire between Pakistani and Indian troops over the last week, with both sides accusing each other of ceasefire violations.

But Saturday saw an escalation in the rhetoric, even as the Kashmir Valley remained tense over rumours about impending action by the Indian government.

According to the Pakistan army’s media wing, Inter-Services Public Relations, India used cluster ammunition to target civilians in Neelum Valley on the night of July 30-31.

The ISPR statement said that since cluster bombs are prohibited under the Convention on Cluster Ammunition, India has violated Geneva Convention and international humanitarian law.

Use of cluster bombs by Indian Army violating international conventions is condemnable. No weapon can suppress determination of Kashmiris to get their right of self determination. Kashmir runs in blood of every Pakistani. Indigenous freedom struggle of Kashmiris shall succeed,IA. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) August 3, 2019

Pakistan released photos claiming to show cluster bomb shells, which are basically ammunition that fragment into smaller bomblets.

Foreign minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi also echoed the allegations, but added that India was escalating the situation in order to stall the Afghan peace talks.

In an interview to DawnNewsTV, Qureshi expressed apprehension that “some forces would play the role of “spoilers” in view of the worsening situation in Indian-occupied Kashmir and as the Afghan peace talks entered a ‘critical stage’.”

Stating that these concerns have been conveyed to the United Nations secretary-general, Qureshi sad that India has been in a “state of panic” since US President Donald Trump’s offer to mediate.

“I fear that [India] is in search of a false-flag operation… which it can use to again point fingers at Pakistan,” the Pakistani foreign minister stated.

Also read: Is the US-Pakistan Transactional Relationship Back on Track?

Along with Qureshi, even opposition leaders like People’s Pakistan Party chief Bilawal Bhutto Zardari accused India of using cluster bombs.

According to Pakistani media, foreign secretary Sohail Mehmood briefed representatives of P-5 countries about India’s alleged use of cluster bombs in Islamabad.

Just In: Ambassadors of Russia, China, France and UK briefed at Pakistani Foreign Secretary Sohail Mehmood, representatives of P5 countries based in Islamabad briefed on use of Cluster bombs by India at LoC on Civilian pouplation. #Pakistan #India #LoC — Anas Mallick (@AnasMallick) August 3, 2019

India brushed off the claims, accusing Pakistan of a propaganda war. “Allegations of firing of cluster bombs by India is yet another Pak’s lie, deceit and deception,” said an Indian army spokesperson.

He added that Pakistan has been regularly using cross-border firing as a cover to infiltrate terrorists into Kashmir.

“India during numerous Directorate of Military Operations level talks, has maintained the right to respond. Such responses are only against military targets & infiltrating terrorists who are aided by Pak Army,” said the statement.

India has claimed that Pakistan has made a concerted attempt to push terrorists and raise the temperature in Kashmir.

Indian Army sources stated that there had been an attempt by a ‘Border Action Team” (BAT) to attack one of the forward posts in Keran sector. It had been foiled after “5 to 7 Pakistani regulars or terrorists” were killed.

Aerial photographs of four dead bodies, which have still not been recovered, have been released. Army officials described them as “terrorists/Pakistan SSG personnel” and said they are clearly seen on the Indian side.

In the last 36 hours, Indian Army has foiled an infiltration attempt by a Pakistani BAT (Border Action Team) squad in Keran Sector. 5-7 Pakistani army regulars/terrorists eliminated, their bodies are lying on the LoC, not retrieved yet due to heavy firing. (Source: Indian Army) pic.twitter.com/gBa89BuQ0M — ANI (@ANI) August 3, 2019

As per reports, there has been continuous shelling from Pakistan army posts in the Keran sector, which has made it difficult to recover the bodies.

Just before midnight in the subcontinent, the Pakistan army denied that there were any bodies on the Indian side.

Indian allegations of cross LOC action by Pakistan and possession of bodies are mere propaganda. Such blatant lies / staged dramas are Indian disinformation manoeuvre to divert world attention from increased atrocities by Indian Occupation Forces inside IOJ&K. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) August 3, 2019

There were also reports of mortar shelling and small arms fire by Pakistan in the Balakote area of Poonch district. According to the Indian Army, Pakistan started heavy firing in violation of the 2003 ceasefire agreement without any provocation at around 8:15 pm.

Earlier, the Indian Army claimed on Friday that a cache of sniper rifle, IED and mines with Pakistan markings were recovered. Besides, four Jaish-e-Mohammad operatives were also reported to have been killed.

At a press conference, Chinar Corps commander K.J.S. Dhillon had said that there was “confirmed intelligence reports that terrorists backed by Pakistan and its army are trying to disrupt Amarnath Yatra”.
