Hurt Govinda on trolls not believing he rejected Avatar: Aapko vishwas nahi karna toh mat kijiye

Govinda says that he is ok with people don't want to beleive him.

Govinda made headlines recently when the actor revealed that he was offered James Cameron's blockbuster film Avatar. The 55-year-old actor said that he turned down the film because the director wanted him to shoot for 410 days and also paint his body. This piece of news not only raised many a eyebrow but also invited a plethora of memes and jokes on the internet. The Coolie No 1 actor, who is not active on social media, slammed the trolls for refusing to believe his claims.

In an interview to Bombay Times, Govinda said that he stands by his statement on Avatar. Talking about it, he told the daily, "I am not active on social media, but my daughter Tina keeps me in the loop. I am fine with people wondering how someone like Govinda could refuse a James Cameron film. I can understand where they are coming from. I respect that thought. They are entitled to have that opinion, but to say how come Govinda got that offer in the first place, is wrong. It's not like meri aukad nahi hai. It's prejudiced behaviour."

"Chai wala aagey kaise badh sakta hain? TV actors films mein kaise aa sakte hain? This is that same elitist, superiority complex. Yeh galat hai. Aapko vishwas nahi karna hai toh mat kijiye, but don't say things like this," added Govinda.

When asked how James Cameron got to know about him, Govinda said, "I was a superstar then. He must have seen my films, but I am not too sure about that."

The Dulhe Raja actor said that he turned down the film even after being offered a huge amount for the film.

"There was a sardarji, who knew me well, and belonged to the medical world. He was my senior, and Dev sahab's (Dev Anand) friend. He was also one of the financers of the film (Avatar). James Cameron and he met me in London, where I was narrated the story of Avatar. In a way, while I was talking to him, I suggested the title to him. Mere muh se woh shabd (Avatar) nikal gaya aur unhone pakad liya. However, I refused the film. The sardarji even complained to Dev sahab that I had refused this big Hollywood film despite the massive money that I was offered for it. Dev sahab even called me and asked about it," added the actor.

Ever since the news of Govinda being offered Avatar made headlines, many thought it to be a joke.

Ok... #Govinda might have suggested #JamesCameron to name the movie #Avatar. I'm ready to accept that as a fact. But I decline to accept that he also offered #Govinda the lead role. No. There is no way I can believe that.

Also: I just can't imagine #Govinda as #Avatar pic.twitter.com/LEd9Yx7Qsg Trusha Tungare (@trusha_tungare) July 29, 2019

But Govinda is unfazed by naysayers. "People making a laughing stock of me is not new. I was mocked even at the beginning of my career because I dared to become an actor. They thought, I am from Virar gaon, yeh kaise hero banega! Even after my films did well, a certain section of people believed iska success toh fluke hai. I became Govinda because of my hard work. I had to look after my entire family, so acting was more than just a passion for me. It was my means of survival. The struggle was to succeed with whatever limited means I had," added the actor.

While the internet is flooded with jokes on the actor's claim, Govinda is fine with netizens not believing him.

ALSO READ | Govinda: I gave Avatar title to James Cameron but turned down role in it

ALSO READ | Govinda says he turned down Avatar by James Cameron. So Internet made the best jokes and memes
