North Karnataka rain: Wall collapse kills one

Barrages submerge

Boat service stopped

HUBBALLI: One man was killed in a house collapse and a youth was washed away in flood related incidents in North Karnataka on Saturday. Hundreds of families have been affected by the flood in Belagavi, Vijayapura, Bagalkot, Raichur, Bidar and Haveri districts.Venkata Laxman Vagge, 60, of Dhannur (K) village in Basavakalyan taluk in Bidar district was killed on Friday night after the roof and wall of his house collapsed on him. He was alone in the room while his family members were sleeping in other rooms. Though he died immediately, others came to know about it only in the morning.Shivanand Shankar Naik, 25, a resident of Ankalagi village in Gokak taluk was washed away in a stream. Ankalagi police with the help of locals were searching for him till late evening.With increased threat of floods, the Belagavi district administration has called the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) and State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) to take up rescue operations. An SDRF team is engaged in shifting families from villages affected by floods while the NDRF team is yet to arrive.An SDRF team used boats and rescued more than 100 people from Harit Nagar in Manjari village in Chikkodi taluk which has surrounded by the Krishna water The team also shifted families from Malawad village in Kagawad taluk, Yadur, Yadurwadi and Kallol villages in Chikkodi taluk on Saturday. In Athani taluk, 150 people from Saptasagar village, 18 from Nadi Ingalgaon, 28 from Shirhatti and 25 people from Naganur PK were shifted to safer places.The Naganur-Kudal barrage constructed across Varada River in Haveri district has submerged due to the drastic increase in inflow in the last four days.The catchment area of Varda in Sirsi, Banavasi and other places are receiving good rain and the flood situation has created panic among people. Naganur-Kudal barrage connects Hanagal and Haveri via Kallapur, Haravi, Kudal, Naregal, Maranabidu, Bommanahalli and Haranageri. People who usually take this bridge are forced to travel a longer distance via Vardi and Sangur villages to reach Haveri.Connectivity between Devagiri and Mannangi has also been cut after another barrage submerged. People are now traveling through NH-48 to reach Savanur and other villages.Inflow in the Tungabhadra has increased due to which boat service between Havanur and Hamsi villages has been shut. Now, villagers of Hamsi and Shakar must travel an additional 15km if they need to reach Guttal town. The district administration has issued a flood alert to people living near river banks.Due to heavy quantum of water entering the Krishna river and Almatti dam, more water is being released from KPCL and canals. On Saturday, the recorded inflow was 2,22,113 cusecs while outflow was 2,39,521 cusecs. Water level reached 518.31 metres as against the highest of 519.6 metres. Both Vijayapura and Bagalkot district administrations pressed officials to rescue operations from Friday itself.The Raichur district administration supplied food packets to 1,049 people belonging to 298 families who were stuck in six islands in Raichur and Lingasguru taluks. An alert has been issued banning entry of people near river banks as the Krishna is in spate. With water levels increasing, the national highway at Devasugur is expected to get submerged at any time.For the past one week, Bidar and Kalaburagi districts have received good rain. In Bidar, 41.6 mm rain was recorded in the past 24 hours.(With inputs from Belagavi, Vijayapura, Bagalkot, Bidar, Raichur and Haveri districts)
