Pakistani troops hinder Indian Army effort to recover bodies of Pak's BAT personnel killed in attempt to infiltrate in J&K

Srinagar, Aug 4 (IBNS): Pakistani troopers have made constant bids to hinder the search operations and attempts to recover the bodies of Pak's Border Action Team (BAT) personnel killed by the Indian Army when they foiled the Pakistan Army’s infiltration attempt on the intervening night of July 31-Aug 1 in Keran Sector of Jammu and Kashmir, official sources said.

The Indian soldiers foiled the attempt by Pakistan's Border Action Team (BAT), inflicting heavy causalities on the infiltrating terrorists and BAT personnel.

The encounter left at least four killed while they were trying to infiltrate into India and strike a forward post in the Keran sector, sources told IBNS.

"Four bodies of possibly Pak SSG Commandoes or may be some of the terrorists have been seen on our side of Line of Control (LoC), in close proximity of own posts," the army sources said.

Search operations and attempts to recover bodies are being continuously interfered by Pakistani troops deployed in the area, sources said.

Meanwhile, media reports claimed that the Pakistani Army has been offered to approach the Indian side with white flags and take the bodies for last rites. Pakistan is yet to respond.

On Saturday, four Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) militants were killed in an encounter which took place in Jammu and Kashmir's Sopore on Saturday.

Incriminating materials including arms and ammunition were recovered from the encounter site.

Image: Bodies of four Pak infiltrators spotted by Indian Army

The encounter took place in the backdrop of intelligence inputs on terror threats.

The Indian Army on Friday said that intelligence reports have revealed that terrorists backed by the Pakistan Army are trying to disrupt the Amarnath Yatra. In an advisory given by the Jammu and Kashmir government, all tourists have been asked to leave the valley.

The army said snipper rifle and landmine were recovered on the path where the pilgrimage takes place.

The Army made the revelations at a time when the country is gearing up to celebrate the August 15 Independence Day.

Earlier, Intelligence sources told IBNS that a Pakistan emboldened by the visit of Prime Minister Imran Khan to the United States, has reactivated its terror launch pads against India in the Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (POK) with plans to trigger something big in Kashmir.

"Terror launch pads in PoK, which were dismantled and pushed back to interior, have now been reactivated," sources told IBNS.

According to Indian sources, Jaish-e-Mohammad chief Masood Azhar's brother Ibrahim Azhar had been relocated to PoK to oversee the affairs.
