SDPI member held for murder of Congress worker in Thrissur

SDPI member held for murder of Congress worker in Thrissur

The arrest comes four days after Noushad was stabbed by a group of bike-borne assailants on Tuesday night.

news Crime

A worker of Social Democratic Party of India (SDPI) has been arrested for the murder of Congress party worker Noushad of Thrissur district in Kerala. Forty-year-old Noushad and other three Congress workers were attacked by a group of assailants on Tuesday night. Noushad, who was stabbed in the attack, succumbed to injuries on Wednesday while he was undergoing treatment at a private hospital in Thrissur.

On Saturday, Chavakkad police arrested 26-year-old Mubin PM in connection with the attack. Police officials confirmed to TNM that Mubin was a member of SDPI. Soon after the death of Noushad, local Congress leaders and the Leader of Opposition, Ramesh Chennithala, had come out openly stating that SDPI members were behind the crime.

According to the police, Mubin is one of the prime accused in the crime. He has been charged under section 149 (unlawful assembly) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). “He took part in the crime but is being questioned in detail to find out whether he was part of planning the murder. Accordingly, more charges will be slapped on him,” an official at the Chavakkad police station told TNM.

Noushad was the booth president of the Congress in Chavakkad, Thrissur.

According to reports, Mubin was arrested from Guruvayur KSRTC bus stand premises on Saturday. About 10 men, who came on motorcycles, had attacked three Congress workers Bijesh, Nishad and Suresh, in addition to Noushad, on Tuesday night.

Though the police stated that the reason for the murder was yet to be ascertained, reports state that attack was following a ruckus between the Congress and SDPI in the area. Reports also state that because of Noushad’s influence in the area, many SDPI workers left the party and joined the Congress, which is also speculated to be one of the reasons for the attack.

Ramesh Chennithala had raised criticisms that no accused have been arrested days after the murder. Hours before the SDPI worker was nabbed in the incident, Congress party members took a march towards the Chavakkad police station on Saturday, protesting the delay in arresting the accused.

Read: Congress worker hacked to death by bike-borne assailants in Thrissur
