Pakistan PM Imran Khan accuses India of violating international law

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan on Sunday accused India of violating international humanitarian laws by "attacking innocent civilians" across the Line of Control near Jammu and Kashmir.

Imran Khan also implored the United Nations Security Council to take note of the situation.

"I condemn India's attack across LOC on innocent civilians & it's use of cluster munitions in violation of int humanitarian law and it's own commitments under the 1983 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. UNSC must take note of this international threat to peace & security," Imran Khan said in a tweet.

I condemn India's attack across LOC on innocent civilians & it's use of cluster munitions in violation of int humanitarian law and it's own commitments under the 1983 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons. UNSC must take note of this international threat to peace & security. — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 4, 2019

Also read | Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists manage to infiltrate LoC, security forces on alert

The statement by the Pakistani PM comes after India upped vigil and defence on the LoC to thwart inflitration attempts by Pakistan's Border Action Team (BAT).

Imran Khan, who recently met United States President Donald Trump in Washington DC, reiterated his stand that the two nations should let the US mediate in the Kashmir dispute.

"President Trump offered to mediate on Kashmir. This is the time to do so as situation deteriorates there and along the LOC with new aggressive actions being taken by Indian occupation forces. This has the potential to blow up into a regional crisis," Imran Khan said.

The Indian Army on Saturday said that it has foiled an attack by Pak BAT on a forward post along the LoC in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir, killing five to seven intruders. However, the Pakistan has denied the claim.

Pakistan Army spokesman Maj Gen Asif Ghafoor on Saturday night denied the Indian claim as "mere propaganda" and said that India was "trying to divert attention of the world form the situation of Kashmir."

Similarly, the Foreign Office also issued a statement at about mid-night to reject the claims by India.

"We reject Indian allegations of cross-LOC action by Pakistan and possession of bodies," FO said.

The Indian Army has offered to the Pakistan military to take possession of bodies of its personnel who were killed in the inflitration attempt.

The sources said that the Pakistan Army has been asked to approach the Indian Army by raising white flags and take possession of bodies which are lying on the Indian side of the LoC.
