'It's not a fatwa': Sanjay Suri lashes out at journalist over Amarnath advisory, shares tale of his father's murder

'It's not a fatwa': Sanjay Suri lashes out at journalist over Amarnath advisory, shares tale of his father's murder

Slamming the journalist, Suri wrote: “As far as business worries, at least its an Advisory and not a Fatwa ! My father ran a successful sawmill, killed at home, business Kaput . Mother a successful botanist running a nursery, business Kaput . Lakhs running businesses , businesses Kaput.

On Sunday, actor Sanjay Suri lashed out a journalist who slammed the advisory asking Amarnath Yatra pilgrims to return. The journalist had tweeted that the advisory had hit hotel owners in Kashmir which led Suri to share a gut-wrenching tale of how terrorists killed his father.

Slamming the journalist, Suri wrote: “As far as business worries, at least it's an Advisory and not a Fatwa ! My father ran a successful sawmill, killed at home, business Kaput. Mother a successful botanist running a nursery, business Kaput. Lakhs running businesses , businesses Kaput.

He also wrote: “Just wish Governments were in better state of preparedness in 1989/1990 , we would have saved 29 years of bloodshed, hopelessness, displacements and tragedies for all concerned.” Suri has often talked about his father’s death.

He had once said in an interview: “It was a very painful time. I was 19 years old and we couldn't even cremate my father in Srinagar. We packed whatever we could and came to Delhi in just five hours, with my father's body, and cremated him the next day. It was so shocking for all of us." In 2009, when he visited the Valley he had said that he was pained to see the condition of the place he grew up in.

In 2015, he had tweeted: “25 yrs gone! Kashmiri Hindus who complete 25 years in exile today. #25YearsofKPExile #displaced #LostHome”

As far as business worries, at least its an Advisory and not a Fatwa ! My father ran a successful sawmill, killed at home, business Kaput Rajdeep. Mother a successful botanist running a nursery, business Kaput Rajdeep. Lakhs running businesses , business Kaput Rajdeep!!! https://t.co/rEnLPmbF64 — sanjay suri (@sanjaysuri) August 4, 2019
