Indo-Pak Conflict: Pak's actions are louder than words, a series of broken dialogue and ceasefire violations

While Pakistan PM Imran Khan seems to be rooting for peace and harmony, the ceasefire violations at the border have a different story to tell. | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights US President Donald Trump said that he would help the two countries and was willing to "intervene" In the past six months, Pakistan has violated the ceasefire 1,248 times along the LoC

New Delhi: The rift between India and Pakistan has been a burning issue for years. It made it to the news recently after US President Donald Trump announced that he was willing to ‘intervene’ in the matter to help the two nations initiate dialogue. India has always categorically denied any mediation in the Kashmir dispute and has maintained that a solution can be worked out only between India and Pakistan with no intervention of any kind from other countries.

The tensions at the border hold testimony to the sour ties of the two countries. While the LoC stands for Line of Control, one of these two countries does not seem to have a clear understanding of the concept. A clear example of the same is repeated ceasefire violations.

On July 1, Defence Minister of India said in the Rajya Sabha that Pakistan has violated the ceasefire 1,248 times along the LoC in the past six months. Answering to BJP leader Vijay Pal Singh Tomar, Defence Minister Rajnath Singh said, "All violations of ceasefire and infiltration are taken up with Pakistan authorities at the appropriate level through the established mechanism of hotlines, flag meeting, Directorate Generals of Military Operations talks as well as diplomatic channels between the two countries."

One might note that with a history of conflicts and the terror attacks on Indian soil, the diplomatic ties between the two countries have been compromised. When Donald Trump initially offered to 'talk' out the differences, Pakistan was quick to give him a nod, fully knowing that India would not even consider such a preposterous proposition.

On the other hand, Pakistan PM Imran Khan congratulated the Prime Minister Narendra Modi after his government resumed its tenure this year. While Khan seems to be rooting for peace and harmony, the ceasefire violations at the border have a different story to tell. PM Narendra Modi, on the other hand, assured the country that India will not tolerate any unwarranted tension fuelled by the neighbouring nation.

The history of failed dialogue

In 2008, India broke off talks with Pakistan after the Mumbai terror attack. Soon after Pakistan government's confession that the attacks were partly planned in their country, attempts were made to revive the conversation. The then PM, Manmohan Singh, however, continued to adopt a stringent approach towards Pakistan.

In 2014, talks began again after Narendra Modi became the Prime Minister of India but the dialogue died after Pakistan was seen holding parallel talks with separatists in the Valley.

On August 1, 2019, Pakistan even summoned Deputy High Commissioner of India to discuss the ceasefire violations by India, claiming that they had killed two of its civilians. In May this year, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan met with the External Affairs Minister of India during the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) summit. While the meeting of the two representatives shows a willingness to initiate dialogue, the rising tension at the border might be a difficult hurdle to cross.

While the two nations have been public about their conversation, the question that arises here is that is it time for the two countries to adopt back-channel diplomacy and act in confidence of each other or is the public dialogue efficient of functioning?

The need of the hour is to adopt a more 'practical' approach to their policies. On one side, the neighbouring nation is making efforts to revive the conversation, and on the other, regular ceasefire violations are also being implemented. With its words not syncing with its actions, Pakistan is breaching the LoC and the trust of India.
