Army rubbishes Indian claims over 'LoC clash'

Indian allegations of cross LOC action by Pakistan and possession of bodies are mere propaganda. Such blatant lies / staged dramas are Indian disinformation manoeuvre to divert world attention from increased atrocities by Indian Occupation Forces inside IOJ&K. — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) August 3, 2019

Use of cluster bombs by Indian Army violating international conventions is condemnable. No weapon can suppress determination of Kashmiris to get their right of self determination. Kashmir runs in blood of every Pakistani. Indigenous freedom struggle of Kashmiris shall succeed,IA.



— DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) August 3, 2019

India in it's war frenzy is not only sabotaging regional peace but also committing gross human rights violations along the LOC. I urge the nations of the world to take strict notice of the ongoing situation in IOK and LOC. https://t.co/IQCotv472O



— Shah Mahmood Qureshi (@SMQureshiPTI) August 3, 2019

Use of cluster bombs by Indian Army in Kashmir is outrageous. India continues to flout international conventions in its bloody attempt to stifle aspirations of the people of Kashmir. The world continues to ignore human rights catastrophe. This must change if we are to have peace.



— BilawalBhuttoZardari (@BBhuttoZardari) August 3, 2019

Strongly condemn use of cluster bombs in Indian occupied Kashmir by India security forces. International community must take notice on India atrocities. Voices of Kashmiris can’t be bombed into silence, they will get louder & stronger.



— Ahsan Iqbal (@betterpakistan) August 3, 2019

After New Delhi claimed to have repelled an attack by Pakistani troops along the Line of Control (LoC) which resulted in casualties, the military's media wing has come out rubbishing them as "mere propaganda."The Director-General of the Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) Major General Asif Ghafoor categorically denied that the army had initiated cross-border fire and the bodies of Pakistani soldiers had been found by Indian troops in held Kashmir.Earlier in the day, the Indian army claimed it had “successfully foiled” a “border action team (BAT) operation by the Pakistan army” in the Keran sector, according to Times of India.“Five to seven … Pakistan Army [men] were killed in the unsuccessful BAT operation that began on the night of July 31,” according to the report. The Indian report claimed that four bodies were lying inside the occupied territory.The ISPR, however dismissed this as mere propaganda meant to deflect from the Indian regime's atrocities in occupied Kashmir.He also condemned the use of cluster munitions by the Indian Army along the Line of Control (LoC) targeting the civilian population.His remarks came after two civilians were martyred and 11 injured along the LoC. The attack took place on the night of July 30/31.He further stated that "no weapon can suppress the determination of Kashmiris to get their right to self-determination".Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi condemned the civilian casualties and the human rights violations along the LoC. He urged that world leaders intervene in the ongoing situation in the Indian-occupied Kashmir (IoK).The Foreign office also rejected “Indian allegations of cross-LoC action by Pakistan and possession of bodies”.Prominent politicians including Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) Chairman Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari and Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) leader Ahsan Iqbal condemned the ongoing brutality by in the occupied valley.Iqbal, taking to social media, urged the international community to take notice of the matter.
