Unnao rape: Kuldeep Singh Sengar being shifted to Delhi, will be produced in Delhi's Tis Hazari Court today

Kuldeep Singh Sengar | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Delhi's Tiz Hazari court had issued a production warrant against Sengar and his accomplice to be produced before it on August 5 The lawmaker was expelled from the BJP this week after the Uttar Pradesh government came under fire for not providing enough security to the victim The 19-year-old victim has been placed on ventilator support and remains critical

Sitapur: Unnao rape accused Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar and his aide Shashi Singh are being taken to Delhi from Sitapur District Jail where they will be produced in Delhi's Tis Hazari Court tomorrow. This development comes after the court on Saturday issued a production warrant against Sengar and his accomplice to be produced before it on August 5.

Speaking to the media, Sengar claimed that the opposition parties are trying to implicate him. On being asked about the accident and the victim's condition, the lawmaker said that he will pray to God for her well-being.

The case is related to the rape of a minor girl by Sengar at his residence in Unnao on June 4, 2017, when she had gone to meet the lawmaker seeking a job. Apart from the rape case, another case of murder was filed against Senagr after the rape survivor met with an accident on July 28.

#WATCH Unnao rape case accused Kuldeep Sengar: Main BJP ka karyakarta tha, aur mein jis dal mein rehta hoon bahut imandari se rehta hoon. Mujhe sab pe bharosa hai... sab rajneetik sazish hai. Meri bhagwan se kamna hai ki vo (Unnao rape survivor&her lawyer) thik ho jayen. pic.twitter.com/311AOtYdbf — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 4, 2019

Earlier today, the CBI carried out searches at the residence of the expelled MLA and other accused in connection with the Unnao rape victim's accident case.

The raids were spread across 17 places in four districts of Uttar Pradesh - Lucknow, Banda, Unnao, Fatehpur.

Sengar, nine others and 15-20 unidentified persons were booked for murder by the CBI in the accident case after the car in which the victim was travelling was hit by an over-speeding truck in UP's Raebareli. The accident led to the death of her two aunts while grievously injuring the lawyer and the victim.

Sengar was expelled from the BJP this week after the Uttar Pradesh government came under fire for not providing enough security to the victim.

The lawmaker, who was previously lodged in Sitapur jail, was also grilled by a three-member CBI team in connection with the accident.

Meanwhile, the 19-year-old victim has been placed on ventilator support and remains critical as she has contracted pneumonia while her lawyer has been taken off the ventilator, but according to the doctors, he is still not out of danger.

In Raebareli, a CBI team is probing the case by recreating the sequence of events which led to the accident and they also questioned the driver, the cleaner and the owner of the truck.

During questioning, Devender Kishore Pal, the owner of the truck said he had no connection with the MLA or any of his people adding that the vehicle lost the balance due to rainfall and hit the car.

Pal had been summoned to the CBI office in Lucknow for investigation and had earlier told news agency ANI that he had painted the number plate to avoid paying EMI instalments.
