Sonbhadra clashes: Yogi Adityanath government removes district magistrate, superintendent of police

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath | Photo Credit: ANI

Lucknow: The Yogi Adityanath-government has removed a senior police officer and the district magistrate of Sonbhadra besides initiating departmental action against them in connection with last month’s incident.

Speaking to media at his residence, Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister on Sunday said that the government has shunted out Sonbhadra’s District Magistrate Ankit Agarwal and Superintendent of Police Salman Taj Patil over clashes in which 10 people were killed in July 17.

“Action has been taken against Sonbhadra's District Magistrate Ankit Agarwal and Superintendent of Police Salman Taj Patil. They have been removed from their post with immediate effect and departmental action has been initiated against them,” Adityanath said.

The chief minister further said that besides these two, the state government has also ordered action against 13 other officials.

“Action has also been taken against eight gazetted and seven non-gazetted officers,” he said, adding a special investigation team (SIT) will also be formed to investigate the case.

UP CM Yogi Adityanath on Sonbhadra incident: Action has also been taken against 8 gazetted and 7 non-gazetted officers. A Special Investigation Team (SIT) will also be formed in the case. https://t.co/KwCpfNiNIc — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 4, 2019

On July 17, 10 people were killed after clashes broke out between tribal farmers and village chief Yagya Dutt and his associates in Ubbah village of Sonbhadra district.

Earlier, Uttar Pradesh CM had visited the bereaved families of people who were killed in clashes and announced ex-gratia for the kin of the deceased.

Adityanath announced a compensation of Rs 18.5 lakh to the bereaved families of the deceased and Rs 2.5 lakh to individuals who got injured in the clashes. He had also assured that the state administration will act against the accused at the earliest.

The Congress party had earlier cornered the UP government over the incident and said the Adityanath government has become infamous for "all crimes that happen in the state be it murder, atrocities against women, and robbery."

A huge political debate was also triggered after Congress general secretary from eastern UP Priyanka Gandhi Vadra was detained while she was on her way to meet the family members of the victims.

“I came to meet the poor tribal people bearing the brunt of a massacre. Being a servant of the people, it is my religious duty and also a moral right. I am steadfast in my decision to meet them,” she had tweeted.

Condemning her detention, the Congress party had tweeted: ““The arrest of Congress General Secretary Priyanka Gandhi, who was going to meet the victims of the Sonbhadra massacre, is the worst example of the dictatorship of the Yogi Adityanath government. We are determined to bring the victims to justice and are not afraid of these gimmicks of the BJP government.”

However, she later visited the family members of the victims and announced a compensation of Rs 10 lakh to the kin of the person who died in the incident.
