Bengal Pre-Poll Violence: Given the stakes, BJP and TMC won’t give each other any quarter

TOI Quick Edits are written by a team of seasoned journalists from the Times of India's Edit Page and TOI-Online who respond to important news stories as they develop. The team comprises senior journalists with wide-ranging interests who debate and opine on the news and issues of the day. LESS ... MORE

Minutes after BJP president Amit Shah finished a rally in Bengal’s Contai town, clashes erupted between Trinamool and BJP supporters. A Trinamool office was ransacked, vehicles ferrying BJP workers were set on fire and three people were injured in the violence. In the run up to the Lok Sabha polls such incidents are expected to increase as BJP makes a push for Bengal’s 42 seats. The plan is that BJP’s gains in Bengal will help the party mitigate the losses it is expected to suffer in northern states due to anti-incumbency.

But Bengal CM Mamata Banerjee isn’t one to face the challenge lying down. From organising a rally of potential Mahagathbandhan leaders to fighting with BJP over venues for rallies, she is hardly intimidated by the BJP poll machinery. Plus, she is banking on the work her government has done in road building, electrification and basic infrastructure to harvest a favourable poll result.

BJP, on the other hand, has been attacking Mamata for the syndicate raj under her regime and goondaism of the Trinamool cadre. But BJP’s ace seems to be the Citizenship (Amendment) Bill. While the bill has sparked off widespread protests in north-east states over its proposal to grant citizenship to Bengali Hindu migrants from Bangladesh up to December 2014, the issue is gaining some traction in Bengal. This is because unlike the north-east, there is no ethnic dimension to the citizenship debate in Bengal. This allows BJP to pitch the bill as a pro-Hindu legislation.

And given that certain sections perceive the Trinamool as appeasing Bengal’s Muslims, there could be some sympathy for BJP’s position. But Mamata has also been working to counter BJP’s Hindutva pitch through moves such as releasing funds to Puja committees during last year’s Durga Puja celebrations. Plus, she is likely to play the Bengalis versus outsiders card to her advantage.

Taken together, if BJP wants to increase its tally in Bengal it will certainly have its task cut out. And the citizenship bill is a gamble that could backfire if it is perceived as encouraging migration. And given that BJP doesn’t have a prominent Bengali leader in its ranks, Mamata still holds the advantage here. She will certainly fight fire with fire. But failure to control violence surrounding various elections in the state reflects very poorly on her government. It must do better.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email
