38-year-old sharpshooter arrested from Delhi's Jamia Nagar; country-made pistol recovered

The officer added that a country-made pistol along with a live cartridge was confiscated from the accused. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused was identified as Ible Hassan alias Dilshad Hassan was arrested in four murder cases earlier and was previously involved in 16 other criminal cases The accused was arrested by the police in 1999

New Delhi: In a case reported from the national capital, a 38-year-old-man, suspected to be a sharpshooter of Abdul Naseer gang was arrested from southeast Delhi's Jamia Nagar area on Friday. The police confirmed the arrest on Sunday.

The accused was identified as Ible Hassan alias Dilshad, a resident of Abul Fazal Enclave in Jamia Nagar area. The accused hails from Hapur district of Uttar Pradesh. The local police said that Hassan was arrested in four murder cases earlier and was previously involved in 16 other criminal cases. Reportedly, in June this year he came out on a bail and he was planning to lead the gang in absence of Abdul Naseer.

Reportedly, Naseer has been absconding after a case was registered against him under Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA). Additional Deputy Commissioner of Police (Southeast) Kumar Gyanesh told news agency PTI that the accused was arrested on Friday and the action was taken following a tip-off and he was eventually nabbed from the Abul Fazal Enclave. The officer added that a country-made pistol along with a live cartridge was confiscated from the accused.

During the preliminary investigation, the accused told the police that he was earlier a grocery vendor but started indulging in criminal activities to make easy money. The accused was arrested by the police in 1999 and later he joined Abdul Nasser gang. He then began indulging in extorting money, gambling and land grabbing of disputed properties in the Trans Yamuna area.

Accused has been involved in criminal cases, in 2014, Hassan along with his gang members killed one Akil Mama in the Jafarabad area of the national capital. In this case, Akil's brother Zahid was the witness. Meanwhile, in 2015 Hassan along with his associates threw chilli powder in the eyes of PSO and killed Zahid too.

However, further investigation in the case is underway.

In a case reported in June this year, during a major crackdown on criminal gangs in the national capital, the Police arrested 15 members of Kapil Sangwan in possession of firearms from outer Delhi's Goyala Dairy area.

The gang was earlier booked in over 20 cases criminal cases including murder, attempt to murder, extortion and abduction. Acting on a tip-off the police conducted a raid at a house in Najafgarh area where the accused had gathered to celebrate and party on the release of their leader - Kapil Sangwan.

The police officer added that around 50-60 people were partying in the house when the raid was conducted. While the police were conducting the operation, a sub-inspector was stabbed on his left hand. However, the accused members were arrested, the police had seized nine pistols and 64 rounds from their possession. Also, 12 out of 15 arrested have criminal records against them.
