Monsoon hits India, leaves 6 dead in Maharashtra, creates flood-like situations in Gujarat, Andhra, Karnataka

Rains continued to wreak havoc across India especially Maharashtra, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh. The situation is expected to be critical in Western India for the next 24 hours.



The Maharashtra government has also issued an advisory in the state, with schools closed in many districts and citizens asked to step out of home only if essential.



The continuing heavy flood in Godavari river affected over 74,000 people in parts of East and West Godavari districts in Andhra Pradesh on Sunday.



1. At least six persons were killed in Mumbai and Satara as rains continued to clobber large stretches of Maharashtra, especially the coastal Konkan region, on Sunday, hitting train services badly.



2. IAF helicopters rescued 58 people in Thane and boats were deployed to rescue around 400 people stranded in Mumbai suburbs, officials said.



3. As per the BMC, all private and public schools and colleges will remain shut tomorrow in Mumbai. Some government offices providing emergency and essential services will remain open. Private office staff may move out only if essential.



4. Thousands of outstation passengers were stranded at various stations in Mumbai, Thane and Palghar as the train services were disrupted, while hundreds more were stuck in incoming trains that have been halted at various locations en route.



5. The flood situation in Bihar showed signs of improvement on Sunday as the water level in four rivers receded and no fresh casualty was reported from any of the 13 deluge-hit districts, officials said.



6. Pune received heavy rains on Sunday with district authorities issuing an advisory asking people to be alert as the situation could turn critical.



7. Incessant rain in the last few days caused landslides in Kohima, Nagaland leaving four people injured.



8. Downpour is likely to lash several parts of Odisha for next four days while the situation in rain-battered Malkangiri district eased on Sunday with water receding from submerged areas.



9. Hundreds of villages in North Karnataka were inundated following release of over 2 lakh cusecs of water from Koyna dam in neighbouring Maharashtra on Sunday and torrential rainfall in the region prompting the administration to rope in the Army for relief works.



10. Heavy rains continued to lash Vadodara in Gujarat on Sunday though the situation had eased considerably as the water level in Vishwamitri river was receding, said district authorities.





11. Delhi recorded a high of 35.8 degrees Celsius, two degree above the normal, while the skies remained generally cloudy during the day, according to the Meteorological (MeT) department. It said the city received 0.6 mm rainfall.

12. The Indian Air Force on Sunday airlifted 45 persons stranded in their flood-hit village in Navsari district in south Gujarat. Over 5,000 people were shifted from low-lying areas in Navsari district since early Sunday morning due to surge in water levels of Ambika and Purna rivers due to heavy rains.



13. Heavy rains and release of water from Gangapur dam into the Godavari river caused a flood-like situation in some areas of Maharashtra's Nashik district on Sunday.
