Indo-Pak tensions flare again

India claims to foil a major infiltration bid by a Pakistani team of army regulars and militants in Kashmir; '5-7 infiltrators' killed

Imran Khan summons NSC meet as Pak army alleges India using cluster bombs on civilian in PoK

Locals in Kashmir fear troops buildup may be linked to scrapping Kashmir's special status

Fears of an impending curfew in the disputed region of Kashmir ratcheted up tensions yesterday, as nuclear rivals India and Pakistan traded accusations of military clashes at the de facto border.

Kashmir has surged back into the spotlight in recent days, just months after a deadly militant attack on an Indian paramilitary convoy claimed by a Pakistan-based group sparked cross-border airstrikes.

The nuclear-armed rivals have controlled parts of the Himalayan region since the end of British colonial rule in the subcontinent in 1947.

The recent spate of tensions started last weekend after New Delhi deployed at least 10,000 troops, with media reports of a further 25,000 ordered to the region.

The government has introduced other security measures -- including a call to stock up food and fuel -- over terror threat claims.

The measures have sparked growing panic among residents with long queues outside petrol stations, food stores and cash machines. Most petrol stations have reportedly run dry.

Authorities could impose an indefinite curfew on residents as early as Sunday night, a police official told AFP.

Meanwhile, India and Pakistan have traded tit-for-tat accusations of attacks across the Line of Control, the de facto border dividing Kashmir.

The Indian army yesterday said it had foiled an attempt by a Pakistani team of army regulars and militants to cross the Line of Control, killing "five to seven" attackers.

Pakistan denied the claims, describing them as "baseless" as it accused India of using cluster bombs against civilians, killing two people -- including a four-year-old boy -- and critically injuring 11 others. New Delhi has denied the charge.

Pakistan's Prime Minister Imran Khan yesterday accused India of taking "new aggressive actions", saying it could "blow up into a regional crisis".

He called for a meeting of the country's national security committee to review the situation in Kashmir.

Pakistan has accused India of using cluster bombs on civilians in Pakistan occupied Kashmir. The use of cluster bombs on the Neelum Valley over the past few days has caused multiple fatalities and injuries to several others, including minor children, Dawn reported quoting Pakistan military sources.

Kashmir is a popular tourist destination for foreigners and Indians, who visit the picturesque valley in their tens of thousands every year.

But tourists and students have been scrambling to leave since the government said they should depart "immediately", amid new intelligence about "terror threats" to a major Hindu pilgrimage in the region.

While the Indian military and the state government have highlighted the security risk, Kashmiri and opposition politicians in New Delhi are concerned the extra troops were deployed for other reasons.

There are fears PM Narendra Modi's Hindu nationalist government could carry out a threat to scrap the region's special status under the constitution.

Local political leaders warn that cancelling constitutionally guaranteed rights -- which mean only state domiciles can buy land in the region -- could spark unrest in the Muslim-majority state.

Media reports said Modi's close aide, Home Minister Amit Shah, was meeting with top officials Sunday and was reportedly planning a trip to the region.

Rebel groups have for decades fought against Indian soldiers deployed in the part of Kashmir controlled by New Delhi, seeking the territory's merger with Pakistan or outright independence.
