Indian Army foils infiltration attempt by Pak BATs: All you need to know about Pakistan's soldier-terrorist army

The BAT generally comprises special forces personnel of the Pakistani Army and terrorists and has a history of trying to infiltrate India. (Reuters file photo)

Kashmir remains on edge as authorities have stepped up security deployment at vital installations and sensitive areas amid heightened terror threat and flare-up of hostilities with Pakistan along the Line of Control (LoC).

Indian Army has once again foiled an attack by Pakistan's notorious Border Action Team (BAT) on a forward post along the LoC in Keran sector, killing five to seven intruders.

Not only at Keran, the Indian Army also successfully fought off BAT incursions at three other locations too -- Gurez, Machil and Tangdhar.

There have been four infiltration bids by the Pakistani BAT teams and terrorists in one week.

The BAT generally comprises special forces personnel of the Pakistani Army and terrorists and has a history of trying to infiltrate India. Here are some recent skirmishes where BAT teams tried to enter India:

August 1, 2019: Army foils an attack by Pakistan's Border Action Team (BAT) on a forward post along the Line of Control (LoC) in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir, killing five to seven intruders.

December 31, 2018: Pakistan BAT teams make major attempt to strike a forward post along the LoC in Kashmir's Naugam sector on New Years' Eve. The firefight started by Pakistan met with strong retaliation from the Army. Two people likely to be Pakistan soldiers killed.

October 21, 2018: Two heavily armed Pakistani intruders and three soldiers killed in a gunfight after the Army foils an infiltration bid along the LoC in Sunderbani sector of Rajouri district.

September 18, 2018: Border Security Force (BSF) jawan Narendra Singh murdered and mutilated by Pakistani BAT teams near the International Border in Samba district. Singh's death led to the cancellation of Indo-Pak foreign minister-level talks in September.

BSF constable Narendra Singh.

February 18, 2018: A BAT team, comprising Pakistani regulars and terrorists, tries to sneak in from across the LoC in Gulpur area of Khari Karmara sector. Attack repulsed by Army leaves one terrorist dead, 2 injured.

December 23, 2017: Pakistani troops open fire on an Indian Army patrol, killing a Major and three soldiers, along the LoC in Keri sector of Jammu and Kashmir's Rajouri district. Bodies found to be mutilated by BAT team which infiltrated almost 400 metres across the border.

Indian security personnel killed in attack on Keri sector.

November 5, 2017: Security forces foiled an infiltration attempt by the Pakistani BAT near the LoC in Kashmir's Uri sector, killing two militants.

September 16, 2017: Pakistan's BAT tries to infiltrate with 7 to 8 armed intruders in Kupwara district, attacks Indian post. India successfully repulses the attack.

June 22, 2017: Two Army jawans are killed while foiling an infiltration bid from across the Line of Control in Poonch. The infiltration bid was supported by Pakistan's Border Action Team which sneaked in 600 metres. BAT was armed with special daggers and headband cameras to mutilate and record the attack on the Indian Army.

May 26, 2017: Indian Army patrolling team attacked by Pakistani BAT in Jammu and Kashmir's Uri sector. Two BAT attackers killed in the action by alert soldiers of the Indian Army.

May 1, 2017: Under the cover of heavy mortar fire, Pakistani BAT along with a team of at least 5-6 non-state actors sneaks 250 metres across the Line of Control (LoC) into the Krishna Ghati sector and beheads two Indian security personnel.

The two Indian army personnel killed in Krishna Ghati skirmish.

In 2016, BAT mutilated and killed an Indian soldier in the Machil sector near LoC.

In 2013, BAT killed, beheaded and mutilated Lance Naik Hemraj and injured constable Rajinder Singh (BSF).

In 2008, a soldier of 2/8 Gorkha Rifles was captured by BAT and was beheaded after a few days.

In 2000, seven Indian soldiers of Ashok Listening Post were killed when Ilyas Kashmiri led a raid in Nowshera sector.

What are BAT teams?

Pakistan's Special Services Group (SSG) forms the core of BAT, which conducts cross-border operations and raids across the LoC. BAT teams include commandos from the Pakistan Army and terrorists (who can be disowned when caught). Members receive training from both Pakistan's Army and its Air Force.

How well trained is BAT?

BAT is trained for eight months by Pakistani Army and for four-week by Pakistan's Air Force.

BAT members include commandos of Pakistani Army and terrorists. They are experts in guerrilla tactics and work along with Pakistan's special service group.

Terrorists are included in BAT so that Pakistan can disown them when caught.




