Big J&K call? Mehbooba Mufti, Omar Abdullah under house arrest

Jammu and Kashmir continued to remain clueless on Sunday, with confu sion prevailing in all the districts of the state following an order by the home department asking tourists and Amarnath pilgrims to leave the Valley.

Just after midnight, authorities placed former chief ministers Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah under house arrest and imposed Section 144 in Srinagar and Jammu. At the time of going to print, top state officials were in a meeting with the Governor at Raj Bhavan.

Schools and colleges across Srinagar, Jammu and major districts of the state will remain closed till further orders. During the day, people queued up outside petrol stations and stores to stock up essentials.

THROTTLING TERROR 35,000 – Additional troops have been moved to Valley following intel inputs about terror threats



– Additional troops have been moved to Valley following intel inputs about terror threats Bofors guns responding to ceasefire violations



Pak BAT raid team gunned down



Govt helping tourists and students move out of Kashmir



IAF’s giant C-17 plane airlifting Amarnath yatris

Earlier, Union home minister Amit Shah's meeting with National Security Advisor Ajit Doval, Union home secretary and chiefs of Intelligence Bureau and R&AW added more fuel to the uncertainties.

Mainstream political parties in J&K, including the NC and PDP, sought time from President Kovind and PM Modi.

"All the parties would be united in their resolve to protect and defend identity, autonomy and special status of the Jammu and Kashmir against all attacks and onslaughts whatsoever," said senior NC leader Farooq Abdullah reading the statement.

Abdullah added, "Any modifications, abrogation unconstitutional delimitation or trifurcation of the state will be seen as an aggression against the people of Jammu and Kashmir."

Asserting that Amarnath Yatra has never been abandoned, even during the worst times in the 90s and 2000s, Abdullah appealed to the people to keep calm and maintain peace.

The situation along the line of control (LOC) and the International Border remained hot as there was little let-up in artillery firing. Responding to Pakistan's 120 mm fire, the Indian Army unleashed its Howitzers 155 mm Bofors guns.

"Severe firing is going on [along LoC] since past many days during which we had to use Bofors guns and there are terrorists on launch pads," J&K Governor Satyapal Malik said.

During the past couple of days, the Army has foiled attempts to cross over fidayeens into India by Pakistan's Border Action Team (BAT) in Uri, Gurez, Handwara and Poonch sectors, gunning down 6 to 7 intruders.

Indian fighter aircraft SU 30K continued to carry out sorties along the border to maintain vigil and serve a warning to Pakistani forces.

Meanwhile, the government worked overtime to help Yatris, tourists and students move out of the state. As many as 6,216 pilgrims and tourists took the air route on Saturday to leave the state. The numbers included 320 tourists airlifted by the Indian Air Force's giant C-7 Globemaster plane.

More than 35,000 central armed forces have arrived in J&K to deal with terror threats. Last week, the Army had displayed an M-24 sniper rifle, landmines with markings of Pakistani army along with a telescope recovered from a terror cache along the Amarnath route.

Police sources said their top officials would be given satellite phones for communication if the government is forced to clamp down on mobile networks to quell unwarranted panic.
