Forces come together to tackle nature’s fury

Squadron leader

Titwala

At least 58 people, including 16 children, stranded at Ju-Nandkhuri village in Khadavli area in Thane district were rescued from their waterlogged homes by the Indian Air Force.The state government asked the IAF for help in rescuing the stranded villagers around noon. An Mi 17 helicopter was sent from Santacruz for the rescue mission.Subhash said the operation was challenging due to the weather but the IAF managed to rescue all of them. The 58 people were given food and first aid and brought to Thane Air Force base. “We made two sorties -one at 12.40 pm and other at 2.45 pm,” said a defence spokesperson.In another operation, the IAF chopper flew to rescue 15 marooned villagers in Buranda in Palghar but returned as it could not locate them due to heavy rain and poor visibility.“Thane district received around 250 mm of rainfall in one day. We have declared holiday on Monday for schools as a precautionary measure,” said Thane Collector Rajesh Narvekar.There was waterlogging around the three rivers Bhatsa, Kalu and Ulhas. In Kalyan, waterlogging was reported at Yogi-Dham area, Waldhuni area, Kolsewadi police station was underwater and several parts ofand Shahad. All major roads leading to Kalyan and other nearby villages were blocked due to waterlogging, including the major Kalyan-Bhiwandi road and Kalyan-Murbad road.A 23-year-old man was feared drowned in Dharavi creek on Sunday. Around 10 am on Sunday, Raja Mehboob Shaikh had gone towards Dharavi creek with friends. According to the statement given by his friends to the rescue personnel, he had swum 35 feet into the creek before losing his stamina, after which the friends could not spot him.“They told us they tried to look for Shaikh and called us around noon when they couldn’t spot him. We searched the area with the help of local police and his friends for three hours, but could not find him,” said an official from the fire brigade.The state government has asked schools and colleges across Mumbai city, Mumbai suburbs, Thane, Navi Mumbai, Palghar and Raigad to be closed today. Red alert has been issued by Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) in Thane, Palghar and Mumbai districts. The civic administration has issued a directive to citizens to not leave their homes on Monday, if possible.
