Delhi polls 2019: Sop shower as battle for Delhi hots up

Rain may have been below expectations in Delhi this monsoon, but the downpour of election freebies is only going to get heavier!

With the National Capital set to go to the polls in February, the AAP government has in recent weeks made a number of promises, including free rides for women on Metro trains and state-run buses and free electricity for monthly consumption of 200 units.

Stakes are high. Naturally, there are ripple effects. BJP has rushed in its counter list of vote-catchers, including "greater relief" to people and a possible housing dole, in its attempt to steal Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal's thunder, Mail Today has learnt. Congress is yet to get its act together, still smarting from its Delhi leader

Sheila Dikshit's death last month.

Addressing a gathering of visitors at his residence on Sunday, Kejriwal dared BJP and Congress to announce a free electricity scheme, like his government did last week, in poll-bound Maharashtra and Haryana where elections are due later this year along with Jharkhand and Jammu & Kashmir.

"BJP and Congress are not able to understand if they should support it or oppose it. They are calling it an election stunt. They are contesting elections in Maharashtra and Haryana, I challenge them to do a similar election stunt," he said.

"Water, power, hospitals, schools and transport for women must be free for a dignified life. BJP should clarify its stand. It's election time. Let them do the same," the AAP chief said.

Delhi's ruling party has also approved a fresh fleet of Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) buses after a gap of nine years and promised property ownership titles to the residents of unauthorised colonies. In response to a question on the timing of the announcements the CM said on Thursday that it takes time to make big decisions. "Like, for example, it took time to bring the power discoms in good shape," he said.

BJP COUNTER

BJP has not been in power in the National Capital for more than two decades. But it saw a ray of hope when the Lok Sabha election results were announced in May. The party won all seven seats. An extrapolation of Lok Sabha numbers showed BJP is a winner in 65 of the 70 Assembly segments in Delhi. Its vote share went up from 47 per cent in 2014 to 56.6 per cent in 2019.

Delhi BJP chief Manoj Tiwari accusing the CM of resorting to political stunts asserted that his party's work at the Centre and the success of PM Narendra Modi's leadership will certainly help. He claimed that the Delhi government's free power decision was, in fact, a result of BJP's efforts. "We welcome the move.

However, the more important question is: when will Kejriwal return Rs 8,500 crore looted in the name of overpriced fixed electricity charges? It was only after BJP raised the issue that Kejriwal announced the poll sop," Tiwari said.

"Arvind Kejriwal is announcing freebies in view of elections. We are studying these sops. BJP will give greater relief to the citizens of Delhi. BJP wants more relief," he said.

Leader of the Opposition in the Delhi Assembly, Vijender Gupta, said BJP will offer "bigger things" for voters. "People of Delhi are not fools. They know he is making these announcements to get votes. We know how Modiji and BJP have provided houses for poor and health schemes, which Kejriwal's government stalled. People will have to decide if they want free houses or free electricity," Gupta said.

CONGRESS FACTOR

With five of its seven candidates finishing second in the Capital in the Lok Sabha polls, Delhi Congress sensed resurgence. But it has been in disarray and has not made any announcements after Dikshit's death. "We cannot say anything about future plans as long as we do not have a president," said a Delhi Congress leader.

Having no president at the national level too has made matters worse for the party in the Capital. There has been no replacement after Rahul Gandhi quit the post last month. Fighting a prestige battle in the city it ruled for 15 years until 2015, Congress had been finishing third in election after election since Kejriwal took over as Chief Minister. In the 2014 Lok Sabha polls, Congress ended up third in all seats, with many saying that the party has been wiped out from Delhi.

But Congress' higher vote share in 2019 should worry AAP, a party that decimated it in the 2015 Delhi elections by winning 67 out of the 70 seats. The present vote share of Congress (22.4 per cent) is better than its shows in the 2015 Assembly elections and the 2017 municipal polls.

"Kejriwal's government is indulging in election gimmicks by announcing doles, including free electricity, now to fool people. He should come clean on his governance in the last four and a half years," said Delhi Congress spokesperson Ramakant Goswami.

EXPERT TAKE

After coming to power in Delhi in 2015, Kejriwal's government had announced a 50% subsidy on monthly power consumption of up to 400 units and 20,000 litres of free water per month to all households, two key pre-poll promises of his party.

Then, AAP enjoyed a disproportionate support base which has declined in the past five years, according to political experts. While the party, they said, continues to enjoy the support of economically poor sections, it is not that popular with the middle and upper classes.

"These populist measures will not damage AAP's vote bank. It will be consolidated for sure. But I believe AAP might lose support among upper middle-class voters," said Sanjay Kumar, Director at the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies (CSDS). "Modi factor will be at play too. If you ask me now, it is a close triangular fight in Delhi," he said.

A worry for the ruling AAP is that its vote share has come down from 33.1 per cent in the 2014 Lok Sabha polls to 18.1 per cent in 2019. In the 2013 Assembly polls, AAP polled 29.7 per cent of the total votes, which went up to 33 per cent in the 2014 Lok Sabha elections and 54 per cent in the 2015 Assembly polls.
