Preaching retired judges seldom look back at their conduct during judgeship

All judges, who have illuminated jurisprudence with landmark judgments, have to retire. Post-retirement, most do not carry the halo of their popular judgments. They prefer the quietness of retired life without attempting to bask in the reflected glory of their judgments.They prefer fading into the evening of their lives, eschewing the lure of pontification. They do not need appreciative claps at public lectures by holding forth on ‘judging the judges’, a popular contemporaneous topic. They carry with them, into their retirement, judicial discipline, rectitude and a sanguine disposition without forgetting the cardinal truth – ‘to err is human’.They know that for every finger they point at judges or the judicial system, four will point back at them. Despite their brilliance and fame earned through eloquent judgments, they are not popular with social activists or activist lawyers. They seldom got invited to deliver lectures for they lack the ability to preach. But there are exceptions.Justice Ajit Prakash Shah recently delivered a 25-page lecture on ‘Judging Judges: Need for Accountability and Transparency’. He was appointed as an additional judge in Bombay high court by the P V Narasimha Rao government (there was no collegium system then) on December 18, 1992, after consultation with Justice L M Sharma, who was Chief Justice of India from November 18, 1992 to February 11, 1993.In his lecture, Justice Shah was right when he said, “Judges do not have pre-set moral codes embedded in their brains that dictate their behaviour the moment they sit on the bench. Indeed, they are as human as the lawyers, plaintiffs, defendants, criminals, witnesses and police before them. To attribute a greater morality to them merely because of the nature of their office is false and dangerous.”Justice Shah became chief justice of Madras HC on November 12, 2005, and on May 7, 2008, he was appointed CJ of Delhi HC, the constitutional post from which he retired on February 12, 2010. As CJ of Delhi HC, he shot into fame with his pioneeringjudgment in July 2009 decriminalising Section 377 of Indian Penal Code, which for more than a century punished the LGBT community.After the judgment, he became the most talked about judge in the country and a darling of social activists, activist lawyers and, of course, the media. Despite the brilliant judgment and years as chief justice of two prominent HCs, he failed to earn a berth in the Supreme Court as a judge.By the time he entered the zone of consideration for selection as an SC judge, the collegium system was well entrenched and appointments to the apex court were made collectively by the CJI and his four most senior colleagues.The collegium considered his name a few times, but not favourably. We do not know whether it riled him. But the two categories of activists lost no time in making a villain out of Justice S H Kapadia for opposing Justice Shah’s elevation.Activists circulated stories of alleged differences between Justices Kapadia and Shah from their Bombay HC days as the reason for the former’s opposition to Shah’s elevation to the SC. Only a few knew what actually dissuaded the SC collegium from recommending Justice Shah’s name to the government — a four-page letter dated September 12, 2008, by advocates of Madras HC giving details of allegations against Justice Shah and opposing his appointment as an SC judge.The advocates had sent the letter to then President Pratibha Patil, then Vice-President Hamid Ansari, then PM Manmohan Singh , then CJI K G Balakrishnan and his colleagues Justices B N Agrawal, Ashok Bhan, Arijit Pasayat and Kapadia.What holds true for the 2008 complaint against Justice Shah is his own statement in the recent lecture, “Without passing judgment on the truth or falsity of the allegations, I must admit there are certain stark facts that stand out which demand consideration.”The 2008 complaint talked about a film actress and also about chamber hearing, instead of open court hearing, in a case relating to a builders’ lobby and how a property worth hundreds of crores of rupees was sold for a song. The advocates had earnestly requested for “a proper inhouse inquiry or proper investigation” into the allegations. Then CJI Balakrishnan did not order an inquiry.No social activist or activist lawyer ever demanded an inquiry, as it would have dimmed the judge’s halo that was shining bright with effusive praise for his LGBT judgment. No doubt , he was a fine judge. But didn’t he have his failings?That is why Justice Shah probably said in his lecture, “Judges must be constantly reminded of what is appropriate behaviour throughout their career, so that the role that is cast upon them — of administering impartial justice — is never compromised.”In its July 18, 2018, judgment in Shanti Bhushan vs Supreme Court, the apex court expanded on ‘what a judge should be’. Justice A K Sikri wrote, “We live in an age of accountability. What is required of judges is changing. Judgments of the courts are widely discussed, debated and even criticised. In this age of technology, open society and liberal democracy, coupled with varied nature of cases raising complex issues which are decided by the courts, including ‘hard cases’, any outcome whereof may be susceptible to criticism, as both views may appear to be equally strong.“In that sense, judiciary walks the tightrope of independence. It has also become a regular feature that even laymen, who are constitutionally illiterate, enter such debate and evaluate the outcomes influenced by their emotions, rather than on legal or constitutional principles.“The world is changing fast. However, the fundamental qualities which the public seek in a judge have remained the same, as these are eternal verities, which will never change. These are wisdom, patience, a sense of practical reality, fairness and balance, independence of mind and knowledge of law, moral courage or fortitude, and a total commitment that justice should be administered according to law. At the end of the day, it is the virtue of righteousness, impartiality, objectivity and scholarship which a judge commands to ensure respectability to his judgment.” That is too idealistic, Justice Shah will agree even long after his retirement.
