Surrounded by cops, gangster shoots self

editorial@tribune.com

Our Correspondent

Abohar, August 4

Five armed assailants today targeted senior Akali leader and former chairman of Abohar Improvement Trust Prahlad Neol at his Khatwan village residence and fired about 15 rounds.

As his security personnel retaliated, the miscreants escaped in an SUV, bearing Haryana registration number. However, the guards and several villagers chased the SUV that was noticed moving towards Sherewala village. Later, the SUV overturned after hitting the boundary wall of a structure. The miscreants continued firing at those chasing them.

Soon police personnel reached the spot and cordoned off the cotton fields where the miscreants were hiding. Senior police officers monitored the search operation, but some miscreants reportedly escaped towards Rajasthan.

One person was, however, found dead. He was carrying a copy of his Aadhaar card, which identified him as Rajpal of Pandori Waraich village of Amritsar district, which as per cops was incorrect.

Inspector General of Police MS Chhina told the media that the deceased was identified as Jagvir Singh Jagga of Desupura in Tarn Taran. He was a notorious gangster, drug smuggler and a sharpshooter against whom several cases were registered in Tarn Taran, Muktsar and Fazilka districts.

The police seized a Scorpio vehicle, 0.9 mm US-made pistol, 20 cartridges, Rs 78,450 and a mobile phone. They said the gangster killed himself after finding no way to escape.

His accomplice, who was nabbed by the police, has been identified as Jatinderpal Singh of Sunder Nagari in Abohar. He hails from Ghallu village on the Abohar-Fazilka road. The police seized .30 bore China-made pistol and 25 cartridges from him.

Investigation revealed that Jitender was a classmate of notorious gangster Lawrence Bishnoi, who had been shifted to Bharatpur jail after he threatened film star Salman Khan in Jodhpur.

Two farmers Hari Krishan and Ujjwal of Sherewala village were admitted to the civil hospital at Abohar. They were reportedly injured in firing by the miscreants.

Chhina said investigations indicated that Lawrence had planned the attack on Prahlad and told Jatinder to meet his gang members at Rajpura village on the Punjab-Rajasthan border to reach Khatwan village. The number plate on the SUV used by the gang was found to be fake. “We will provide security to the Akali leader,” the IG said.

He said Lawrence was trying to revive activities after his right hand man Ankit Bhadoo was killed in an encounter.

Meanwhile, former Chief Minister Parkash Singh Badal spoke to Prahlad over the phone and condemned the attack. He told senior police officers to take stern action against the culprits and nab those who fled.
