NMC will push healthcare into jeopardy

The passage of National Medical Commission (NMC) Bill in the Lok Sabha on July 29 will always be a black day in India’s healthcare history. No doubt the Medical Council of India (MCI) had lost its credibility, more so after the exposure of corrupt practices by its the then president Dr Ketan Desai. There were several reports of connivance of some higher-ups in the medical council with private medical colleges. This had caused disenchantment among the persons concerned in the medical fraternity and civil society who had demanded revamping of the body. They had also submitted suggestions to the government on this point. There was need to take effective measures to correct the wrong-doings in the medical council. But the NMC tabled the bill in the parliament and passed it in a hush hush manner, which is fraught with several negative implications in the coming period.

The MCI was essentially a democratic body with representatives from the medical fraternity through elections, as well as representation from various state bodies. The NMC, on the other hand, has 80% appointed members with no space for democracy. They are likely to be puppets of the government in future. Any decision of the NMC could be thwarted by the government. This is killing the autonomy of such a prestigious constitutional institution, as has been done with several other organizations in the recent past. The NMC is a totally bureaucratized and centralized body with powers to forcefully implement regulations in states without considering the interests of the state. This will kill the concept of federalism in the country.

The whole exercise is to give a free hand to the private sector in medical education, because the government will have fee regulation of only 50% seats. Rest would be left to the whims of managements of private medical institutions. The central government will reserve the right to grant permission to medical colleges without minimum requirements, not considering the opinion of NMC.

Another totally unwanted clause is the introduction of National Exit Test (Next) for MBBS graduates from medical colleges in India. This will put those students who have cleared the MBBS exam to unnecessary burden before getting a licence to practice. Graduates who have already cleared the exam are denied the chance to appear for a second attempt to get a PG seat. Moreover, no second chance to improve marks to get a better PG seat for those who are yet to take the final year exam will be allowed. Marks of one time will be the criteria for PG admission lifelong. Since the Next will be clubbed with Foreign Medical Graduates Examination (FMGE), the chances of Indian graduates getting a PG seat will be much reduced.

The clause of compulsory meetings with councils of Ayush to develop an inter-disciplinary curriculum is nothing short of moving towards a bridge course. The parallel entry to practice modern medicine via a new cadre of community health workers will bring down the standard of healthcare and lead to undesirable practices. Foreign citizens will be allowed to practice in India without any conditions, regulations, or licence. This will, in the long run, put our population at risk through the involvement of various multi-national pharmaceutical companies.

There were much expectations as the health minister is a doctor himself. Passage of such a bill under his nose raises a finger as to the ideology working behind it. This bill has to be opposed tooth and nail, with an appeal to the parliamentarians in the Rajya Sabha not to toe the party line but keep their eyes open in the wider interest of the countrymen.

Writer is ENT surgeon and co-president of International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War (IPPNW), and a recipient of Nobel Peace Prize 1985



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
