Commando in CM’s security shot

vinaymishra188@gmail.com

Tribune News Service

Mohali, August 4

A 25-year-old commando, who was posted in Punjab Chief Minister Capt Amarinder Singh’s security, was shot dead allegedly by the owner of a Chandigarh-based disco in the wee hours of Sunday.

The victim, Constable Sukhwinder Kumar of Punjab Police, was shot in front of ‘Walking Street’, a night club at Phase 11, around 3.15 am.

The suspect, Sahil who runs a discotheque at Sector 9, Chandigarh, allegedly opened three fires on the victim following a tiff inside the club over a petty issue.

A bullet pierced into Sukhwinder’s chest, near the heart, which proved fatal for him. One of the bullets grazed his stomach. “The third fire missed the target. The victim was about to sit in his car when Sahil opened fire at him,” said DSP Ramandeep Singh.

The suspect used a .32 bore pistol in the crime. Sources said two-three members of the his group were also carrying weapons.

According to an eyewitness, Sahil was under influence of liquor at the time of the incident.

Sukhwinder was rushed to IVY Hospital where he was declared brought dead at 3.35 am. The police came to know about the incident around 4 am.

Deputy Superintendent of Police Ramandeep Singh said Sahil, who was with his five friends, including a girl, fled the spot after the incident. The police said he was accompanied by Atul, Ashish, Vanshika and two other friends, who were yet to be identified.

Sukhwinder was with his two friends, Manpreet, aka Patwari, and Chhottu.

The DSP said both the groups had a tiff over some petty issue on the dance floor of the club around 2.30 am. “Sukhwinder cautioned Sahil, which led to an altercation. Sahil and his friends were thrown out of the club after the tiff. Then, they waited for Sukhwinder to come out. When the victim came out of the club, Sahil opened fire at him,” said the DSP.

Sahil, a native of Amritsar, is said to be a resident of Kharar, while Sukhwinder Kumar was living at the Commando Complex in Phase 11 here.

A case of murder and under appropriate sections of the Arms Act has been registered against Sahil and his friends at the Phase 11 police station.

“We have deputed teams to nab the accused. Raids are being conducted at their possible hideouts,” said the DSP.

The police have reportedly rounded up three persons, including two owners of the night club.

Heartrending scenes were witnessed at the police station when the victim’s parents, along with other relatives, reached there. “We couldn’t believe that our son is no more,” said the grief-stricken parents. The victim’s cousin fell unconscious at the police station.

Bullet ruptured artery of the victim’s heart

The postmortem of the body was conducted at the Civil Hospital in Phase 6, Mohali. According to sources, one of the bullets had pierced the chest and ruptured an artery of the victim’s heart due to which he died immediately.

SUKHWINDER WAS THE ONLY SON

Constable Sukhwinder Kumar, a native of Fazilka, was the only son of his parents. His father Baljit Raj is an ASI posted at Muktsar. The victim was unmarried. He had joined the Punjab Police in 2016.

AREA SHO SUSPENDED

Mohali SSP Kuldeep Singh Chahal has suspended Inspector Jagdev Singh, SHO of the Phase 1 police station under which the club site fell. “We took action against him for his negligence. First, the night club was operational beyond the permissible time. Secondly, the club was being visited by persons carrying weapons,” said the SSP.

DISCOTHEQUE SEALED, OWNERS BOOKED

Sajan Mahajan and Akshay Kumar, two partners of Walking Street, have been booked under Section 188 of the IPC at the Phase 11 police station. SSP Kuldeep Singh Chahal said the club had been sealed and their license has also been cancelled. “Now they would not run the night club in future,” said the SSP. They had been booked for violating norms earlier too. The SSP said he would recommend closure of the suspect’s club at Chandigarh.

DC TO BAN CLUB OPERATIONS PAST MIDNIGHT

After finding the night club running at 3 am and allegedly serving liquor to its customers, Mohali Deputy Commissioner Girish Dayalan is all set to impose a ban on running of such establishments after midnight. “I will pass an order to impose the ban tomorrow,” said Dayalan.
