Kushanava Choudhury sings Calcutta with the heart of a modern epic poet

Calcutta speaks of time and space in epic proportions.

The whole thing is epic in that land of ancient culture, rich tradition and ethnicity.

At the turn of the last century, when India was ruled by the British, Calcutta was the capital of their Raj. Today, the past overlaps the present. In that iconic place in West Bengal, reality fades into legend.

But what defines Kolkata? Its history? Its landmarks? Its culture and people? The city is historically important, lasting and complex.

Perhaps the question should be, who defines it? Many writers did portray the bustling metropolis.

Today, Kushanava Choudhury, a young American writer of Indian descent, celebrates the city he loves as a unique place apart from the futuristic New Delhi or the glittering Mumbai.

In his debut travel book ‘The Epic City: The World on the Streets of Calcutta’ (Bloomsbury), Choudhury captures the heart and the soul of the city. Readers hear the sounds, see the colors and smell the fragrances together with the bad odors of what the author considers one of the most interesting cities in the world.

I met Mr. Choudhury in Milan at the Hotel Michelangelo last week. He was in Italy to present his ‘Città Epica. Il Mondo Sulle Strade di Calcutta”, the Italian edition of his erudite essay just released by EDT publishing house.

Calcutta suffers from poverty and overcrowding. That’s a fact. Choudhury himself admits that it is no easy place to live in India. “It can be a living hell”, he says. But the seduction and the nourishing character of the place are real. “There is nowhere else like it in the world. The texture is incredible: The atmosphere in the streets, the rich tapestry of the local culture, the people, the monuments, the great street food,” he says.

Choudhury was born in Buffalo, New Jersey but was raised in Calcutta. His parents were Indian scientists, “torn between nation and vocation. Twice they moved to America, twice they moved back,” he says.

“We move around a lot when I was a kid,” he says. “We settled in the US when I was 12. My childhood was spent in Calcutta. That milieu was my childhood. You have nostalgia for your childhood, haven’t you?”

After earning a degree from Princeton, he went back to Calcutta to work as a newspaper reporter at The Statesman.

He engaged with the city, participated in it, fought for it and protected it. He talked to the blue-collar workers who lost their jobs. “The manufacturing sector declined and that world vanished for them. It was heartbreaking to watch.”

“Walking, witnessing, being in public and talking with strangers are elements that define what Aristotle defined a good life,” he says.

“How do we make a good life? Two thousand years ago, Aristotle had asked that question,” writes Choudhury. “We human beings are not meant to live exclusively indoors. We need to hear the symphony of the street, feel the pavement at our feet,” he says. “The life outside our door beckons us to a destiny larger than the lonesome murmurs of our souls. To live the good life, Aristotle had said, you have to make a world in public, with strangers. Standing at Chowringhee at dusk, I felt gratitude at that moment for the life that I had made.”

Then the writer returned to the US, but only temporarily, to pursue a Ph.D. in political theory from Yale University.

In the book, his experiences in Calcutta and the intimate relationship with his wife Dubra converge.

“One of my first memories of Durba is of seeing her in a coffee shop in New Ha-ven, curled up in a big armchair, reading a novel,” he writes. “We had met as Ph.D. students at Yale and become friends. She was studying anthropology while I studied political theory.”

Durba had grown up in New Delhi. “Her father was Bengali and his side of the family all lived in Calcutta. Yet when we eventually became a couple, in the cosmopolitan cocoon of graduate school, our common background seemed almost incidental.”

But in less than a year, they were back to Calcutta. “I had finished my Ph.D. at Yale. Durba and I married in New Jersey. We moved back so that I could write a book about the city, while she finished writing her Ph.D. dissertation on trans-formations in rural Bengal.”

“Yet, moving to Calcutta was not like buying a summer house in Provence,” says the scholar. “It was not one of those fantasies that couples in America nurture together while folding the week’s laundry or watching Netflix. In fact, only one half of our couple had wanted to move at all. Durba had arrived reluctantly and, as time wore on, her frustration with the city, and with me, only grew.”

The reader feels the writer is in the grip of something.

He is both drawn to Durba and the city. It is an attraction, the essence of eros in a city where the couple “felt like actors who had wandered off the set of an indie romantic comedy and onto an instructional video shoot for the Taliban”. Choudhury says that the lack of privacy was real at the beginning. “That’s why in Calcutta people develop the capability of writing love letters. How do you communicate with your girlfriend otherwise?”

As well, the author feels and experiences ‘philia’ in Calcutta. A sort of friendship love, companionship with others as equal partners in a community. Also agape, Christian love or a kind of selfless love consisting in benevolence towards the poor and the underprivileged are perceived in Calcutta.

The embodiment of love was expressed by Mother Theresa—now Saint Theresa of Calcutta — and the Missionaries of Charity, a religious order she established in 1950. “I met Mother Theresa. She represented the redeeming element of Calcutta” says Choudhury, his eyes sparkling with joy. “I was a kid. She gave me a card with her inspiring aphorisms on kindness, love, and charity.” To meet with that little woman yet giant spirit was a touching experience. “She was very humble and kind. I have a lot of respect for her.”

French writer Dominique Lapierre was spiritually transformed by the ocean of human misery governing the Calcutta’s worst slum situated between a railway embankment, Calcutta-Delhi highway and two factories’ going by the name ‘Ananda Nagar’ which means ‘City of Joy’.

In the internationally best-selling book ‘The City of Joy’, he portrayed a city that is baleful, wretched and looking up to the West for help. This is possibly a partial view.

Choudhury’s fascination with the city is instead broad yet oscillating be-tween emotions of proximity and distance.

He celebrates the ‘epicity’ of the city like a modern Homer. He sings his tumultuous song to Calcutta.

So did an amazing Nobel laureate poet from Kolkata, Rabindranath Tagore. Even today in Calcutta Rabindrasangeet – Tagore’s songs – are sung and transmitted through generations.

In Calcutta, “Tagore, of course, is omnipresent. His pensive bearded visage, looking like a Bengali version of Michelangelo’s God, can deter even a piddle emergency. After all, he was Asia’s first Nobel Laureate, our Shakespeare, our Homer, our Moses,” Choudhury says.

Another Bengali’s star is Ramakrishna: “A village mystic and Kali devotee who travelled to the city, Ramakrishna became the patron saint to the nineteenth-century Bengali bourgeoisie. Venerated in life and deified in death, his image is on sweet-shop calendars and cab-drivers’ dashboards across the city,” Choudhury says.

“There are many others on the murals, among them scientists, bomb-throwers and saints. The only post-colonial faces you can’t piss on belong to Satyajit Ray, Mother Teresa and Amartya Sen. The rest all lived during the two centuries of British rule, as if the colonial oppressors left, and Calcutta ceased to produce great men and women.” And he adds: “At Budh-Bikel adda, writers told me that was the reason why no great literature was being produced any more: because there were no great traumas, no great events. Nothing had happened…”

Calcutta is not focusing on physical growth, nor the implementation of an ambition modernizing agenda.

Kolkata is not New Delhi where you constantly feel surrounded by the future. New Delhi has the grandeur of an ancient city whose new completed buildings are ready for future use. In Calcutta, there is no futuristic décor.

“Yet, the Bengalis still believe Calcutta is the center of the world. The city is still the Omphalos Mundi for its residents,” he says.

But how culturally vibrant is Calcutta today?

“There is decadence in Calcutta as it lives in the past but that splendid, multifaceted culture is still there,” he says.

“Those incredible delicacies you eat, the people you associate with, the things they tell you when they do adda, their constant chatting on any subjects elevated to an art form, all of that make you realize that the city is very lively,” he says.

Life is in the neighborhoods. “India is in his villages”, said the Mahatma Gandhi. And the neighborhoods’ festivals in Calcutta are amazing!” he says.

Life is interconnected. “The rich kids go to the best private schools, the poor kids maybe don’t even go to school but they share the same common culture. They sing the same songs.”

I have personally never seen Calcutta, but now I have the impression it shares affinity with colorful Naples in Italy, such a beautiful city full of excess, culture, and contradictions.

Choudhury agrees with Amitava Ghosh when in the book The Calcutta Chromo-some wrote that Calcutta has more secrets than any other cities.

Then he adds: “I used to take Calcutta wherever I went. I wondered what was driving me back. Now, I have more the control but the pull or magnetism is still there.”

“Even here in Milan, if I watch these yellow trams, they remind me of Calcutta…”

Mr. Choudhury is like a tree whose roots are firmly in Kolkata, yet with branches spread out to the world.

At the beginning Choudhury’s wife despised Calcutta. “Her hometown, New Delhi, is the India of 8 percent GDP growth,” he writes. “New Delhi is India’s capital, the hub of a rapidly modernising nation-state. Calcutta lacked what Durba considered the basics of her Delhi-ite life. To her, Calcutta felt closed, impenetrable, provincial.”

But later on, as a woman, Durba felt safe in Calcutta. “Yes, of course, she did, because everybody knows how to deal with each other. I was on a metro one day and realized that everybody knew how to behave in case of pickpockets”. Locals integrate empathy and generosity in their daily life. “Calcutta is not Los Angeles or New York where people think only about their private interest and nobody will help if something bad happens to you in a public space.”

The author’s gaze scans the streets of Calcutta. The city is real and beautifully speaks for itself in its static slow dance. She makes Choudhury repeat her many discourses through a narrative that swings along with verve and pace.

‘The Epic City’ is a literary barometer, indicating the present state and variations of the poetical atmosphere of Calcutta. A city that is worth loving.

Mr. Choudhury is currently writing a book on Kerala. “Pepper originated in the Wayanad plateau of Kerala,” he says. That black gold was the Roman spice of choice, and in the Middle Ages, the most valuable commodity traded between India and Europe. “Pepper was the spice that built Venice,” he says.

By Mariella Radaelli

Representative for Italy (New Delhi Times)

Twitter : @marielrad

Like this: Like Loading...
