Rajya Sabha passes historic legislation to divide Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories

Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 in Parliament

Key Highlights HM Amit Shah says government has scrapped Article 370 from J&K with a Presidential notification The government proposes to divide the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories Jammu and Kashmir will be a Union Territory with Legislature Ladakh will be a Union Territory without Legislature

New Delhi: The Rajya Sabha on Monday passed the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 that proposes to divide the northern state into two Union Terriroties - J&K, a Union Territory with Legislative Assembly, and Ladakh, a UT without Legislative Assembly. The Bill was passed with 125 votes in its favour and 61 against, while one MP abstained.

Earlier in the morning, Union Home Minister Amit Shah informed the Rajya Sabha that Article 370 has been scrapped with a Presidential notification. The move marked the end of special status for the state of Jammu and Kashmir. Shah further introduced the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 and subsequently, a debate was held on the legislation.

While the Opposition benches, led by Leader of Opposition (LoP) Ghulam Nabi Azad, opposed the move to scrap Article 370, Shah justified the decision saying he was ready to answer all the questions of the Opposition on the matter. "Article 370 hatane mein ek second ki bhi deri nahi karni chahiye," Shah said as Azad alleged that the BJP has 'murdered' the Constitution of India. Parties such as AIADMK and TDP said that they would support the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019. The Bill was also tabled in the Lower House of the Parliament, Lok Sabha, today but discussion and voting will be held on Tuesday.

Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 in Rajya Sabha - As it happened

8:00 pm: Terming Home Minister Amit Shah's speech in Parliament as "extensive and insightful", PM Modi has tweeted Shah's entire speech. It's being reported that PM Modi met HM Amit Shah for more than half an hour after the speech.

Home Minister @AmitShah Ji’s speech in the Rajya Sabha was extensive and insightful. It accurately highlighted the monumental injustices of the past and coherently presented our vision for the sisters and brothers of J&K. Do hear. https://t.co/ho7PPzyz5w — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) August 5, 2019

6:49 pm: Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 passed in Rajya Sabha. A total of 125 MPs voted in favour of the Bill, 61 against and one MP abstained.

6:41 pm: Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu says there is some technical problem in the electronic voting system. Now, voting will take place through slips for all MPs.

6:40 pm: Voting underway. 11 members will vote through slips while the rest will be through electronic voting system.

6:31 pm: Voting now underway in Rajya Sabha on Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019. Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu calls for division of votes on the Bill.

6:24 pm: Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019, has been passed in the Rajya Sabha. This Bill aims to implement 10% Economically Weaker Section (EWS) quota in Jammu and Kashmir.

6:22 pm: The Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 is now being taken up in the Rajya Sabha for voting.

6:15 pm: Home Minister Amit Shah makes a big statement in Rajya Sabha; he says once the situation normalises in Jammu and Kashmir, they would make efforts to restore the states of 'State' in Jammu and Kashmir.

"How long will J&K remain a Union Territory? To that, I have an answer. When the right time comes, then Jammu and Kashmir will revert to being a State. We don't want J&K to remain a Union Territory forever. It may take time but it will become a state once again, one day," Amit Shah said, adding "We will not let Kashmir become Kosovo".

6:13 pm: Amit Shah adds in Rajya Sabha: "Jawaharlal Nehru ji also said '370 ghiste-ghiste ghis jaayegi, magar 370 ko itne jatan se sambhalke rakha, 70 saal hue, ghisi nahi'. Everyone accepts it's a temporary provision, but can temporary continue for 70 years? When will it go, how will it go?"

6:03 pm: Terrorism cannot be wiped out from Kashmir Valley till Articles 370 and 35A exist, says Amit Shah. "41,894 people have died due to terrorism in Jammu and Kashmir. What has Articles 370 and 35A given other than death and destruction? Those who are saying there will be bloodshed in Kashmir, they have sent their kids to London and other countries to study," the minister said.

"Ayushman Bharat scheme is there but where are the hospitals? Where are doctors and nurses? (In Kashmir) those supporting 35A please tell me which famous doctor will go and live there and practice? He can neither own land or house nor his children can vote.

"Ghulam Nabi Azad said inter-state marriages are taking place. If a J&K girl marries a man from Odisha, will she and her child get any rights in J&K? You're happy that inter-state marriages are taking place. Even though there is no law, but set them free, J&K will mix with India in true sense."

5:49 pm: "We don't believe in politics of religion or votebank politics? Do only Muslims live in Kashmir? What do you want to say? Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists all live there. If Article 370 is good, it is good for all; if it is bad, then it is bad for all," says Home Minister.

5:45 pm: Home Minister Amit Shah says in Rajya Sabha that the people of Jammu and Kashmir want democracy. He adds Article 370 was responsible for poverty in the state. "I want to tell the people of J&K what damage 370 and 35A did to the state. It's because of these sections that democracy was never fully implemented, corruption increased in the state, that no development could take place," the minister said.

5:37 pm: The Trinamool Congress MPs have walked out of Rajya Sabha. TMC MP Derek O'Brien said, "From 11 am this morning, we've been seeing procedural harakiri. We can't see this anymore, the constitutional immorality."

5:35 pm: Home Minister Amit Shah is now replying to the debate on Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 in the Rajya Sabha. The Bill will be put to vote after the minister's reply.

5:25 pm: Union Home Minister has introduced the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 in the Lok Sabha. The Bill will be debated upon tomorrow.

5:20 pm: The Government will introduce the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 in the Lok Sabha today. However, the Bill will be taken up for debate and voting tomorrow.

4:50 pm: Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman says the decision to scrap Article 370 was not a sudden one. "It is something the country has been waiting for the last 70 years. Even our manifesto mentioned the need to abrogate Article 370, so it is not something we brought out suddenly like a rabbit from a magic hat," she said in the Rajya Sabha.

4.40 pm: Speaking in the Rajya Sabha, Congress leader Kapil Sibal said history will judge whether today's decision was historic or not. "Today, we should think about why we're here and what should democracy involve. I know the Bill will be passed as you have manufactured a majority. Therefore, we can do nothing about it. While you call this a historic moment, only history will judge whether it was historic or not."

4.00 pm: P Chidambaram,Congress in Rajya Sabha: "Momentarily you may think you have scored a victory, but you are wrong and history will prove you to be wrong. Future generations will realize what a grave mistake this house is making today."

3.48 pm: The NCP will abstain from voting on this bill, says Nationalist Congress MP Vandana Chavan in Rajya Sabha.

3.33 pm: RG Yadav, SP says, "If you wanted to remove article 370 then you should have done only that, why did you abolish statehood and made it a UT? World history is witness that any attempt to suppress ppl through force has always failed. You should have taken people into confidence at least."

3.21 pm: Telugu Desam Party supports the Union Govt as it seeks to repeal Article 370. "I pray for the peace and prosperity of the people of J&K," says N Chandrababu Naidu.

3.00 pm: Rajya Sabha Chairman Venkaiah Naidu earlier today: "I have received letters of resignation from Surendra Nagar, Sanjay Seth(SP MPs) and Bhuvneshwar Kalita(Congress). Resignations have been accepted."

2.54 pm: "Shameful that you have turned J&K into a non-entity by making a Lt Governor there, so that you can appoint even a peon or a clerk, sitting here(Delhi)," says Ghulam Nabi Azad.

2.49 pm: "I can only say, constitutionally it is sound, no legal and constitutional fault can be found in it. Govt has carefully studied the matter. As for the question, if it's a political decision, I have nothing to say on that," says Subhash Kashyap, a constitutional expert.

2.22 pm: The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 will be tabled in Lok Sabha on Tuesday

2.13 pm: TK Rangarajan, CPI(M) calls it 'black day'. "Indian constitution has been raped by BJP govt. You didn't consult people of J&K-Ladakh. You dissolved Assembly, you don't want to hold any election. You've taken another 35000 Army people there. You're creating another Palestine," says Rangarajan.

1.39 pm: "I think the Government of India should have taken them (leaders of the valley) into confidence which unfortunately the govt didn't do. And then they should have taken the decision (to revoke 370)," says NCP chief Sharad Pawar.

1.30 pm: Former Attorney General Soli Sorabjee on Bill moved in Rajya Sabha today, to revoke Article 370: "I don't think there is anything revolutionary here. It's a political decision even though it is not a wise decision."

1.28 pm: MDMK calls it a day of 'shame'. MDMK leader Vaiko in Rajya Sabha: "I am opposing this Bill (Article 370). This is a day of shame, shame, shame...this is a murder of democracy."

1.04 pm: Shiv Sena hails abrogation of Article 370, says PoK, Balochistan next. "Aaj Jammu & Kashmir liya hai. Kal Balochistan, PoK lenge. Mujhe vishwaas hai desh ke PM akhand Hindustan ka sapna poora karenge," says Sanjay Raut, Shiv Sena in Rajya Sabha.

1.00 pm: Indian Army and Indian Air Force have been put on high alert, following revoking of Article 370 and other decisions announced by Government of India in the Parliament today.

12.57 pm: AIADMK party supports the two resolutions, Reorganisation Bill & the Reservation Bill.

12.48 pm: BJD MP, Prasanna Acharya in Rajya Sabha: "In real sense today, Jammu & Kashmir has become a part of India. My party supports this resolution. We are a regional party but for us the nation is first."

12.26 pm: HM clarifies that under 370(3) the President, through a notification can declare that this article seizes to exist. Since assembly dissolved, the President's notification can be massed by simple majority by parliament.

Copy of the Indian Constitution torn in Rajya Sabha today by PDP MP Mir Mohammad Fayaz. Rajya Sabha Chairman M Venkaiah Naidu directed him to leave the House after this incident. pic.twitter.com/Mq1p9Nuovu — ANI (@ANI) August 5, 2019

12.25 pm: HM Amit Shah in Rajya Sabha, "This is not the first time, Congress in 1952 and 1962 amended article 370 through a similar process. So instead of protesting please let me speak and have a discussion, all your doubts and misunderstandings will be cleared, I am ready to answer all your questions."

12.24 pm: Jamyang Tsering Namgyal, BJP MP from Ladakh, "I welcome the Bill on behalf of everyone in Ladakh. People there wanted the region to be a Union Territory. People in Ladakh wanted that the region is freed from the dominance & discrimination of Kashmir, that is happening today."

12.22 pm: BSP gives full support to the bill says Satish Chandra Mishra, BSP MP, in Rajya Sabha. "Our party gives complete support. We want that the Bill be passed. Our party is not expressing any opposition to Article 370 Bill & the other Bill," he said.

12.06 pm: HM Amit Shah in Rajya Sabha: Under the umbrella of Article 370 three families looted J&K for yrs. Leader of Opposition (GN Azad) said Article 370 connected J&K to India, it's not true. Maharaja Hari Singh signed J&K Instrument of Accession on 27 Oct 1947, Article 370 came in 1954

11.58 am: "Article 370 hatane mein ek second ki bhi deri nahi karni chahiye," says HM Amit Shah in Rajya Sabha.

11.50 am: Leader of Opposition Ghulam Nabi Azad says that the opposition 'condemns' the decision to scrap Article 370 and alleged that the BJP has 'murdered' the Constitution of India. Shortly before, PDP's Mir Fayaz and Nazir Ahmed Laway were asked to go out of the house(Rajya Sabha) after they attempted to tear the constitution.

"I strongly condemn the act of 2-3 MPs(PDP's Mir Fayaz and Nazir Ahmed Laway who attempted to tear constitution). We stand by the constitution of India. Hum Hindustan ke samvidhaan ki raksha ke liye jaan ki baazi laga denge, but today BJP has murdered constitution," Azad said.

11.41 am: The Union Territory of Ladakh will be created without Legislature, while the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be created with Legislature.

11.39 am: "Today marks the darkest day in Indian democracy. The decision of J&K leadership to reject two-nation theory in 1947 & align with India has backfired. Unilateral decision of GOI to scrap Article 370 is illegal & unconstitutional which will make India an occupational force in J&K," says Mehbooba Mufti.

11.36 am:

11.24 am: Uproar in Rajya Sabha after resolution revoking Article 370 from J&K moved by Home Minister Amit Shah.

11.20: Resolution revoking Article 370 from J&K moved in Rajya Sabha.

11.19 am: Union Home Minister Amit Shah in Rajya Sabha: I am ready for all discussions by the leader of the Opposition, the entire opposition and the members of the ruling party over Kashmir issue. I am ready to answer all questions.

11.07 am: Ghulam Nabi Azad, Congress in Rajya Sabha: "Entire valley is under curfew, political leaders including three former chief ministers are under house arrest. There is a war-like situation in the state, so this should be discussed on priority."

11.03 am: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh arrives at the Parliament; Union Home Minister Amit Shah to speak in Rajya Sabha shortly.

Delhi: Defence Minister Rajnath Singh arrives at the Parliament; Union Home Minister Amit Shah to speak in Rajya Sabha shortly. pic.twitter.com/QMcfQUgUBO — ANI (@ANI) August 5, 2019

10.52 am: DMK MP, TR Baalu has given Adjournment Motion notice in Lok Sabha over Kashmir issue.

10.50 am: Union Home Minister Amit Shah arrives at the Parliament. He will speak in Rajya Sabha at 11 am and in Lok Sabha at 12 pm today.

Background:

Earlier, the Union Cabinet met at Prime Minister Narendra Modi's residence and reportedly deliberated upon the plans regarding the Kashmir issue.

Mainstream political leaders in the Valley including National Conference leader Omar Abdullah and PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti were reportedly put under house arrest. Abdullah and Mufti took to Twitter to express their anguish over the developments in the state. In a mark of protest, PDP's Rajya Sabha MPs Nazir Ahmad Laway and Mir Mohammad Fayaz protested in Parliament premises over the situation in Kashmir.

National Conference leader Omar Abdullah took to Twitter and said, "I believe I'm being placed under house arrest from midnight tonight & the process has already started for other mainstream leaders. No way of knowing if this is true but if it is then I'll see all of you on the other side of whatever is in store."




