Chaitra Teresa John, Kerala IPS officer who raided CPI(M) office in Thiruvananthapuram, 'given a clean chit'

File picture: Union Minister for Finance and Corporate Affairs Arun Jaitley presents the best Lady Outdoor Probationer trophy to Chaitra Teresa John, IPS Probationers, at the Dikshant Parade of the 68th Batch of IPS probationers | Photo Credit: IANS

Thiruvananthapuram: Chaitra Teresa John, the IPS officer who had raided the Communist Party of India (Marxist) district office in Thiruvananthapuram at midnight on January 24, has been given a clean chit after an internal investigation found that she did not commit any error, a report said on Tuesday.

A probe was ordered against John after she raided the CPI(M) office in connection with a stone-throwing case at a police station. According to IANS, Additional District General of Police Manoj Abraham, who was asked to report on John's action, has submitted a report to Kerala Police chief Loknath Behra, giving the Kerala cadre officer a clean chit.

The probe was ordered on the basis of a complaint filed by CPI(M) district secretary Aanavoor Nagappan. Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) Chaitra Teresa John had last week received a tip-off that those involved in the case were hiding in the CPI-M district office. However, she could not find anyone there.

After the search operation, Kerala Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan, who also holds the Home portfolio, summoned the Kerala-cadre IPS officer. She was later stripped of her post.

Talking to Times Now, Karnataka-cadre IPS officer D Roopa said that she was “in the awe of the action taken by Chaitra Teresa John”. “When officers think multiple times and still never venture to take prompt action, Chaitra did the fair thing,” added D Roopa, who blew the whistle on preferential treatment for VK Sasikala in a Bengaluru jail.

"When we join IPS, we take oath, swear by Constitution tht we will uphold Law of the Land. Dear .@IPS_Association, if it's an issue of Convention Vs Rule of Law, this young girl must get our extensive support. Else we let down our young officers acting promptly," D Roopa tweeted.

Chaitra Teresa John was given the additional charge as DCP during the Sabarimala pilgrimage season in December.

On Wednesday night, a gang of Democratic Youth Federation of India (DYFI) workers pelted stones at the Medical College (Police) Station. Led by John, a police team then raided the CPI(M) office at Mettukada.
