J&K to be divided into two UTs; Ladakh MP welcomes decision, says people wanted freedom from discrimination

A security personnel stationed in Kashmir | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The union territory of Ladakh will be without legislature like Chandigarh The union territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be with legislature like Delhi

New Delhi: After moving the resolution to revoke Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir, Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday proposed the division of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories - Ladakh and Jammu and Kashmir. The Home Minister proposed that the union territory of Ladakh will be without legislature while the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be created with the legislature.

Home Minister Amit Shah said that the Ladakh division of J&K has a large area but is sparsely populated with very difficult terrain. Before making the big announcement, he stressed that there has been a long pending demand of people of Ladakh to give it the status of union territory to enable them to realise their aspirations.

Further explaining its proposal to bifurcate the state, the government added, "Further, keeping in view the prevailing internal security situation, fuelled by cross border terrorism in the existing state of Jammu and Kashmir, a separate Union Territory for Jammu and Kashmir is being created. The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir will be with the legislature."

In simpler terms, the union territory of Ladakh will function like Chandigarh where no state-level elections are held and is directly controlled by the Central government. As stated by Leader of Opposition and senior Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad, Ladakh is primarily divided into two districts, Leh and Kargil.

On the other hand, the union territory of Jammu and Kashmir will function like Delhi which is entitled to state-level elections and is controlled by the state government only. It should be noted that the police of a union territory with legislature reports to the Ministry of Home Affairs and not to the state government.

Apparently, the people of Ladakh have welcomed the proposal to bifurcate the state. BJP leader and Ladakh MP Jamyang Tsering Namgyal lauded the Prime Minister Narendra Modi-led Central government's decision to turn Ladakh into a union territory separate from Jammu and Kashmir.

"I welcome the Bill on behalf of everyone in Ladakh. People there wanted the region to be a Union Territory. People in Ladakh wanted that the region be freed from the dominance and discrimination of Kashmir, that is happening today," said the BJP MP.
