Jammu and Kashmir to be Union Territory, says Amit Shah in Rajya Sabha

New Delhi:

In an unprecedented move, Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday moved a bill proposing bifurcation of the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh. Shah said that J-K will have its own legislature. He also proposed that Ladakh to be a Union Territory as well minus the legislature.

Earlier, Shah said that Article 370 - which grants special status to Jammu and Kashmir - will be removed. The Opposition-led by the Congress said that the timing of such a resolution was not right.

HM Amit Shah: Jammu and Kashmir to be a union territory with legislature and Ladakh to be union territory without legislature pic.twitter.com/nsEL5Lr15h — ANI (@ANI) August 5, 2019

“Entire valley is under curfew, political leaders including three former chief ministers are under house arrest. There is a war like situation in the state, so this should be discussed on priority,” Ghulam Nabi Azad said in the Rajya Sabha.

To this Shah replied, “I am ready for all discussions by the leader of the Opposition, the entire opposition and the members of the ruling party over Kashmir issue. I am ready to answer all questions.”

Earlier, the Home Minister attended a meeting on Cabinet Committee on Security (CCS) at Prime Minister Narendra Modi's official residence. The meeting was also attended by NSA Ajit Doval, Union home secretary Rajiv Gauba and external affairs minister S Jaishankar.

Constitution(application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order 2019 pic.twitter.com/ueZWl8VU59 — ANI (@ANI) August 5, 2019

Reacting to it, Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) leader Mehbooba Mufti described the Modi government's decision to scrap Article 370 of the Constitution as "the darkest day in Indian democracy".

"Decision of J&K leadership to reject 2 nation theory in 1947 & align with India has backfired. Unilateral decision of GOI to scrap Article 370 is illegal & unconstitutional which will make India an occupational force in J&K," the former Chief Minister tweeted.

"It will have catastrophic consequences for the subcontinent. GOI's intentions are clear. They want the territory of J&K by terrorising its people. India has failed Kashmir in keeping its promises," she said.

Meanwhile, Jammu and Kashmir has been on the edge following deployment of additional security forces in the state last week.

The administration of Jammu and Kashmir, which is under President's rule, has ordered curtailment of annual Amarnath Yatra and asked pilgrims and tourists to leave Kashmir Valley, citing terror threat. Mobile internet services were suspended across the Valley as a precautionary measure to maintain law and order, police said.

The authorities have also ordered the closure of schools and colleges in Jammu on Monday as precautionary measure and restrictions have also been imposed in Srinagar under Section 144 CrPC. Local cable TV channels have also been shut across the Valley and internet services across sensitive areas will remain blocked until further orders.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
