Developments in Kashmir: Selective blindness! This is how Pakistani media reported the issue

With security being beefed up in J&K and internet services being snapped, the entire country has been waiting for the final result of this massive build-up (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Jammu and Kashmir is now a Union Territory under Legislative Assembly Home Minister Amit Shah proposed the resolution to scrap Article 370 in the Rajya Sabha today The Pakistani media reported selectively on the issue and chose to capitalise on India's sensitive situation

New Delhi: The Rajya Sabha boomed with voices when Home Minister Amit Shah moved the resolution of scraping Article 370 today. According to the most recent development, the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir is now a Union Territory with the Legislative Assembly. Uproar in the Upper House was observed when Shah made his proposals while speculations about the repercussions of this decision started doing the rounds.

With security being beefed up in J&K and internet services being snapped, the entire country has been waiting for the final result of this massive build-up. While the media houses in the country were on their toes to keep the citizens well-informed, India's neighbour did not leave a chance to capitalise on the issue. With people of India being vulnerable during this sensitive time, Pakistani media decided to report on the issue with a vision 'conveniently' coloured by their political biases.

The Rajya Sabha's meeting made it to the front pages of various e-papers and websites from Pakistan as panic rose in India. A leading media house wrote, "The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) in India has consistently advocated an end to occupied Kashmir special constitutional status, which prevents outsiders from buying property there, arguing that such laws have hindered its integration with the rest of India."

The same portal covered the reaction of Foreign Minister of Pakistan Shah Mahmood Qureshi and his statements on the "increasing Indian aggression in Kashmir". While the reactions of politicians like Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah found their way in Pakistani reports, the reports did not pay any heed to the fact that the security personnel were deployed in the Valley over suspicion of terrorist attacks.

A clear example of biased reporting, the Pakistani media conveniently placed the spotlight on Pakistani leaders condemning the situation instead of taking a balanced stand. From the number of security personnel deployed in the Valley to the internet services being snapped, reports published in the neighbouring country did not have any mention of a cache of arms being found or a Pakistan-made mine being discovered.

The headline of a leading media house read, "India imposes curfew in Srinagar, suspends internet service". The misleading headline indicates that a 'curfew' has been imposed in Srinagar while the administration official notice says that Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC) has been imposed in J&K and not a curfew.

Strategically capitalising on the situation, an article said that a meeting would be held in Islamabad to discuss the scenario on India occupied Kashmir (IoK). Another online article read, "It's a war-like situation with mobile phones and internet services shutdown and several Kashmiri leaders under house arrest." A digital portal mentioned that the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) is "deeply concerned" over the situation in India.

The article quoted the tweet posted by Syed Ali Geelani, All Parties Hurriyat Conference leader that read, "Indians are about to launch the biggest genocide in the history of Mankind. May Allah protect us." Another article by the same source read, "Eleven Kashmiris were also killed on the Pakistan side of Kashmir. Pakistan has accused India of using cluster ammunition along the Line of Control. On Sunday, it released evidence in the form of pictures and videos of the bombs in the civilian settlements. UN observers also visited the bombs sites."

The truth, meanwhile, is that on Saturday, the Indian Army had foiled an attack by Pakistan's Border Action Team (BAT) on a forward post along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir’s Keran sector. India has offered Pakistan to approach with white flags and take back the bodies of the five to seven intruders of their BAT team.

While some Pakistani reports merely speculated on the ongoing situation in Kashmir, some of their media houses painted a one-sided story. The question that arises here is if the Pakistani media is willing to provide a true and balanced report to its people or is it hoping to benefit unduly from the development in the neighbouring country.
