Police press trigger again, arrest 5 goons in 2 days in Bhubaneswar

BHUBANESWAR: A day after arresting two anti-socials following an encounter here, the commissionerate police on Sunday arrested three others in two similar operations in the city on Sunday.While Sipun Kabi and Harekrushna Swain were shot at and injured near Tankapani Road around 2.45 am, Ravi Rao was arrested following an encounter in Bharatpur area around 10 pm.Police said Kabi, Swain and Rao were associates of Arun Mallick and Vevekananda Nayak, who were arrested after being shot at near Tankapani Road in the early hours of Saturday. Kabi, Swain and Rao were involved in the recent series of loots in Mancheswar, police said. Police said Rao had also masterminded some robberies and attack on a police constable here recently.“We received credible information about the presence of Kabi and Swain in an apartment in Dhauli. When our personnel reached there, the duo tried to flee in a bike towards Badagada. When our personnel tried to intercept them near Tankapani Road, the accused opened fire. In retaliation, our personnel shot at them. They received one bullet each on their legs,” deputy commissioner of police, Anup Kumar Sahoo, said.A six-member team of police officers fired four rounds on Kabi and Swain, sources said. They were taken to Capital Hospital with bullet injuries and later moved to SCB Medical College and Hospital in Cuttack . Police said both were stable. A pistol, a toy gun, a bullet and Rs 50,000 in cash were seized from them. Police also came to know that the duo would manufacture spurious liquor. Police seized huge quantities of foreign liquor bottles from their rented house.The three encounters and arrest of five goons within a span of 24 hours come in the backdrop of public outrage over last week’s loots in Mancheswar. Police had drawn flak after the miscreants unleashed terror at different spots there on July 30 and executed four robberies. The following day, locals had staged a demonstration at Rasulgarh Square and sought the immediate arrest of the accused.Apart from the encounter arrests, police on Saturday banished an anti-social — BK Kriteswar Sarangi — from Bhubaneswar for at least a year. The first-of-its kind banishment is aimed at keeping habitual offenders at bay and preventing crimes in the city.
