Pakistan reaction on Kashmir: Kashmir throwback: How India pipped Pakistan to the subcontinent's crown jewel

Kashmir, which stands of the verge of a momentous transformation following the Centre's move to revoke Article 370 and Article 35(A) that gave the state a special status, has a more curious post-partition history than most Indian states.It is in the turbulent post-partition months that the genesis of the state's uneasy relations with the Union of India lies.Kashmir's accession to India, in October 1947, came about only after months of political parleys, behind-the-scenes machinations and a short but bitter war. Here is a story to put India's long-standing Kashmir pain in perspective.Maharaja Hari Singh was the king of Kashmir at the time of partition — a Hindu ruler of a predominantly Muslim state. As the geographical lines were being drawn to separate India from Pakistan, Hari Singh was fervently hoping to keep control of his kingdom.He even went to the extent of looking at the possibility of a declaration of independence. Lord Mountbatten, India's last governor-general, however dissuaded him from doing it and advised him to heed the wish of the people.The Maharaja expressed strong reservations when Mahatma Gandhi visited Kashmir on partition eve. Sardar Patel was also constantly lobbying with Hari Singh and successive PMs of the state to make sure Kashmir remained with India.The Maharaja had a lot of bad blood with popular Kashmiri leader Sheikh Abdullah. The latter had launched the Quit Kashmir agitation against the Maharaja and was jailed, only to be released a few months later.Mohammad Ali Jinnah , the founder of Pakistan, also had his own plans for Kashmir. He believed Kashmir would easily fall into Pakistan's bag owing to factors such as a common religion, geographical proximity and long-established economic links.Jinnah, however, failed to strike a bond with Abdullah, who was by far the most popular leader in the state, because Jinnah wanted to be sole decider of the fate of all Muslims in the region. Nehru one-upped Jinnah in this most crucial aspect by forming a close personal bond with Abdullah and many of his partymen in the National Conference. Nehru's love for the state ran deep and he knew that Sheikh Abdullah would be the key if India were to have Kashmir.With this end in view, Nehru backed Abdullah when the latter began his stir against the maharaja's despotic rule. Gandhi and Patel lent support from the background.Maharaja Hari Singh soon found his position becoming more and more untenable.On August 12, 1947, he made India an offer for a "Standstill Agreement" which failed to materialise as Patel wanted a more detailed discussion on it. Pakistan, on the other hand, immediately said yes to Hari Singh's offer.Things, meanwhile, were moving quickly on the other side of border after the partition. Pakistani PM Liaquat Ali Khan began making plans for armed intervention in Kashmir using "demobilised Army personnel, willing serving army personnel and tribesmen". The leadership of the North West Frontier Province (NWFP) was also tapped with a view to mobilising lashkars for the planned invasion.According to an ex-IB official who wrote a story for ET: "It was a self-financing operation, as no remuneration was to be paid, but tribals were free to plunder non-Muslims and retain the loot. An operation launched after snubbing Sheikh Abdullah and without taking into consideration support of Kashmiris was bound to fail. The swift Indian response also amazed Pakistan’s political and military leadership."The attacks finally occurred in end-October 1947. On October 22, the maharaja's soldiers were crushed and slaughtered by tribesmen from NWFP who were marching towards Srinagar.Realising that keeping the marauders at bay was beyond his troops, Maharaja Hari Singh finally requested the Government of India to send in the military. India accepted the offer of accession, and advised the maharaja to establish an emergency administration headed by Sheikh Abdullah.Indian troops were airdropped at the Srinagar airport on October 27 and the area was freed of raiders in a few hours.In the meantime, in Baramulla, the tribal raiders were wreaking havoc — indulging in widespread killings, rapes and loot. In the ensuing battle, Lt Col Dewan Ranjit Rai, who led the first battalion of Sikh Regiment, lost his life, but the whole area was secured by the end of that day.Furious at this setback, Jinnah soon ordered Pakistani troops to march towards Srinagar, but was eventually persuaded to abandon the mission by Field Marshall Auchinleck, supreme commander of both Indian and Pakistani armies.On the intervening night of October 30-31, the lashkars made their last determined push for Srinagar airport. This too was beaten back by Indian forces.Pakistan never forgot the humiliation. And it never forgave.
