Abolition of article 370: Mixed reactions in Bhopal

The Central government's decision to abolish Article 370, which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir, on Monday evoked mixed reactions in the Madhya Pradesh capital where many citizens hailed the move as "long overdue" while some felt it would worsen the prevailing situation in the Himalayan state bordering Pakistan.

Earlier in the day, Union Home Minister Amit Shah informed the Rajya Sabha that Article 370 has been scrapped with President's assent and also moved a bill to divide the northern state into two Union territories--Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

"The decision to abolish Article 370 should have been taken a long time ago. The government deserves applause for taking a decision to abrogate it. The people of the country will welcome this decision which is also important for the country's security," said Kailash Tyagi, a professor of Military Science, who heads Madhya Pradesh Pradhyapak Sangh.

Arera Colony resident Kamal Rathi feels altering the Constitutional status of Jammu and Kashmir would have no bearing on the lives of the common residents in that state.

"Rather, the government should focus on the economy because I believe that even after this decision no industrialist will set up any unit in Jammu and Kashmir," Rathi said referring to the government's reasoning that the alienation of Kashmir for decades has thwarted the growth of private industry.

Dharmendra Gupta, a lawyer, termed the withdrawal of the special status as a "historic decision".

"We feel proud about this decision. The country had been facing problems (in J&K due to its special Constitutional status) since the last 70 years. I wanted to thank Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah," said Gupta.

Social worker Ishwar Jhamnani said the Modi government has displayed a "strong resolve" in the interest of the country.

"The Congress lacked a strong will power due to the compulsions of the vote bank Jammu and Kashmir could never join the mainstream because of certain Congress leaders," the Sindhi gentleman said, adding that his family had undergone the pains of Partition.

Abdul Jabbar, who has been fighting for the cause of the Bhopal gas tragedy survivors, wondered how could the government take such a "big decision" without taking the people of Kashmir into confidence.

"How could they take such decision without taking Kashmiris into confidence. This move has caused panic in Kashmir. This will further worsen the situation there," he observed.

The maverick political decision by the government was aimed at treating Jammu and Kashmir like any other state and ending decades-old separatist movement.

Revocation of the Article 370 was one of the electoral promise of the BJP.

As per the new arrangement, the proposed UT in Ladakh will have no legislature like Chandigarh while the other UT of Jammu and Kashmir will have a legislature like Delhi and Puducherry.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
