As the Valley fully integrates with India, we look back at how India demolished Pakistan’s Kashmir claim

VK Krishna Menon at the United Nations | Photo Credit: YouTube

Key Highlights Kashmir has been the bone of contention between India and Pakistan since Independence Pakistan tried to foment unrest in Kashmir as early as 1948 Pakistan peddled lies about Kashmir to the international community

Ever since Independence, Kashmir has been the bone of contention between India and Pakistan. The newly formed Islamic Republic could not digest the fact that a Muslim dominated province had acceded to India. The timing and terms of the accession have also been under the lens for decades; it was the mischief of Pakistan – of sending in army regulars disguised as tribals who were on an invasion campaign – that perpetuated Maharaja Hari Singh to run for aid to the Indian government, though he had been non-committal about aligning with either India or Pakistan till then.

Due to the haziness of available details of the sequence of events at that moment, the Indian Army’s action to aid Kashmiris and the Nehruvian blunder to halt operations mid-way, generations have tried to figure out exactly transpired then and whose stand has the maximum validity.

Amidst this fog of perception stands out one narrative – momentously historic, irreproachably accurate and impeccably logical. It was the case made on the behalf of India by the astute diplomat and later India's defence minister VK Krishna Menon. The year was 1957 and the location was the United Nations Security Council.

As Pakistan peddled lie after lie on Kashmir to the international community, Menon demolished the arguments, point by point, in what is considered the longest speech the history of the international body.

Lore has it that Menon was so involved in putting forth the convincing defence of India’s moves in that speech that lasted nearly 8 hours, that he fainted midway through due to exhaustion but returned to present India’s righteous stand with vigour.

Here is the list of what Pakistan claimed, and how Menon countered that with such panache that it won him the sobriquet “Hero of Kashmir”.



A Pathan infiltrator captured near Baramulla in November 1947 | Pic Credit: AP

What Pakistan claimed: Kashmiri population wanted freedom and had rebelled against India in 1947.

Menon’s argument on behalf of India: It was Pakistan which wanted to take over Kashmir illegally and deliberately fomented trouble.

Krishna Menon's statement: “On 4 September (1947), on the basis of a telegraphic report submitted by the Chief of Staff, Major-General Scott, the Kashmir Government protested by telegram to the West Punjab Government against armed Muslims from Rawalpindi district infiltrating into the State… On 17 September – we are now only one month from Independence – a band of 400 armed raiders, twelve miles south-east of Ranbirsinghpura drove away herds of cattle belonging to State nationals. On 18 September, railway service between Sialkot and Jammu was suspended by Pakistan authorities without any reason and in contravention of the standstill agreement. Armed gangs entered Kashmir in Palandri (Poonch), across the State border. On 28 September hundreds of armed men with service rifles, automatics and spears attacked a Kashmir State patrol near Chak Harka. On 30 September hundreds of armed Pathans entered Dhirkot Than inside the State territory. On 3 October, the Jammu and Kashmir Government protested telegraphically to Pakistan against hundreds of armed people from Murree Hills in Pakistan operating in Poonch – part of which is now occupied by Pakistan...That is the second violation (by Pakistan) of the standstill agreement.

On 4 October armed men renewed their activities in the Chirala area and near the Jhelum river and fighting between the raiders and the State forces began. Now we have reached a state of war. On 10 October two sections of the Pakistan Army followed by an armed gang attacked Pansar village in Jammu. I submit with great respect and a sense of responsibility that what I have now read out is one of the key points in the consideration of the whole of this question – that is to say, Pakistan informed us that they were not involved in this matter.”



Indian Sikh troops posted at Baramulla take positions to force away tribal invaders from Srinagar | Pic Credit: AP

What Pakistan claimed: Pakistan had raised the Kashmir issue on humanitarian grounds. It was extending moral to its Muslims brothers against Indian suppression.

Menon’s argument on behalf of India: It was Pakistan that started the violence and fomented trouble. India was also at fault on some occasions, but these happened only after Pakistan lit the first flame and unrest. And whenever India tried to bring peace to the Valley, it was impeded by Pakistan.

Krishna Menon’s statement: “The political importance is that if the Kashmir territory were aligned with Pakistan by kinship, by links of blood, race or religion, that was a strange way of showing that friendship – by invading its country; and the rapine and plunder of the raiding force continued up to Baramula, which is only a few miles from Srinagar. The town was sacked and burned.”

Menon continued: “The Security Council resolution had asked for information with regard to any material change in the situation. I read again from the Commission’s report: ‘At the 19th meeting on 20 July, a confidential cable was drafted and dispatched informing the Security Council of the presence of Pakistan troops in Kashmir. The Commission adopted a resolution requesting the Secretary-General of the United Nations to appoint a military adviser.’ It was the presence of these troops – which had been denied all along, but was admitted by the Foreign Minister of Pakistan when the Commission arrived in Karachi – that created a new state of affairs.”



Maharaja Hari Singh | Pic Credit: Youtube

What Pakistan said: Maharaja Hari Singh sign the accession document in favour of India under duress. It did not represent the sentiment of the people of Jammu and Kashmir.

Menon’s argument on behalf of India: Kashmir was always a part of India and has deep cultural and political roots with India. It never practices orthodox Wahabi Islam and had a syncretic Sufi culture.

Krishna Menon’s statement: “On 22 October, the Jammu and Kashmir Prime Minister telegraphed the Prime Minister of the North-West Frontier Province – that is, a province of Pakistan – and the Deputy Commissioner of Rawalpindi, both in west Pakistan, about people armed with modern weapons infiltrating from Hazara and Rawalpindi districts in west Pakistan into the State and asked them to stop the infiltration.

The invaders continued their progress along the Jhelum Valley road towards Srinagar. (Srinagar is the summer capital of Kashmir, founded about 2,300 years ago by the great Emperor Asoka.)

Their triumphant march was temporarily stemmed at Uri, a town fifty miles from Srinagar, by the demolition of a bridge and the gallant resistance of about 150 men under the command of a Brigadier of the Kashmir Army who was killed fighting a memorable last-ditch battle. The raiders managed to construct a diversion about a mile long, requiring considerable engineering skill, since, according to Dawn of Karachi of 7 December 1947, it was completed in two days – that is to say, in this invasion the Pakistan sappers or engineer regiments – their REME – must have participated. It was not possible for them to do otherwise. A fact will be noticed here to which I will refer later. These men were resisted only by the national militia, by the local populations. They were not welcome as the liberators. They fought a last-ditch battle; they resisted these people.”

“On 24 October the Maharaja, who is the head of the State, appealed to India for military help...He is the head of the State and, according to the Constitution, the only person competent to sign an accession; nobody else can do it. May I halt here for a moment. Until now no one from India, neither Army, nor Ministers, nor anyone, has gone into Kashmir to persuade the Maharaja. No police have been sent. We did not put any pressure on him; if I may interpolate, in a previous period Lord Mountbatten, on behalf of the Government of India, told the Maharaja of Kashmir, ‘You will accede to Pakistan if you wish and we will not take it as an unfriendly act’ because the Government of India at that time was concerned about not having these States suspended in a vacuum.

On 26 October 1947, the Maharaja asked for protection – I shall deal with that letter when we come to the question of accession – and he offered accession to India.”



Tribal invaders arrested by Indian troops during the unrest of 1947 | Pic Credit: AP

What Pakistan said: Due to its Muslim majority population, Jammu and Kashmir should have become a part of Pakistan in line with the two-nation theory.

Menon’s argument on behalf of India: The state of Jammu and Kashmir could accede to either India or Pakistan, just like the rest of the states, depending on which side the monarch decided in line with the will of principality’s people.

Krishna Menon’s statement: “There is a statement of what Lord Mountbatten actually did say which appears in Mr Khan Noon’s statement, and we want to deal with that. It says: ‘The Viceroy and Governor-General, Lord Mountbatten, who represented the suzerain – the King of the United Kingdom and Emperor of India – however, advised the Princes of India on 25 July 1947 that in deciding the question of accession, they must pay due regard to the communal composition, the wishes of their peoples and the geographical location of their States.’ I am not willing to rely on my memory in regard to this carefully considered document. We have done all the research we can; we are familiar with the subject. There is no such statement of that character. What is more, the statement does not refer to communal representation.”

What Pakistan said: Pakistan has called for a plebiscite on the matter.

Menon’s argument on behalf of India: The UN Commission in 1948 had amended the earlier UN Security Council Resolution 47 related with the plebiscite. In the UN document, the word ‘plebiscite’ was not used. Moreover, the will of the people also related to the voices of those residing in Jammu and Ladakh and most importantly those who are living in Pakistan-occupied-Kashmir.

Krishna Menon’s statement: “Why is that we have never heard voices in connection with the freedom of people under the suppression and tyranny of Pakistani authorities on the other side of the cease-fire line? Why is it that we have not heard here that in ten years these people have not seen a ballot paper? With what voice can either the Security Council or anyone coming before it demand a plebiscite for a people on our side who exercise the franchise, who have freedom of speech, who function under a hundred local bodies?”
