Drunk Driving Accident: Kerala IAS Officer Venkitraman Suspended

New Delhi: Two days after his arrest on charges of driving in an inebriated state, the Kerala government on Monday suspended IAS officer Sriram Venkitaraman. On Saturday, Venkitraman was involved in a collision that resulted in the death of a journalist.

K. Mohammed Basheer, the bureau chief of the Malayalam daily Siraj was killed when his stationary bike was rammed by a car driven by the IAS officer.

The order suspending the 33-year-old IAS officer was issued by chief secretary Tom Jose.

“The Government views the matter seriously and accordingly Shri Sriram V, IAS (KL 2013) is placed under suspension with immediate effect under Rule 3(3) of the All India Services (Discipline & Appeal) Rules, 1969”, the order said.

The Kerala police came under fire for “inaction”, after eyewitnesses said blood was not drawn from Venkitraman though he appeared to be inebriated. Blood was eventually drawn nine hours after the accident.

Also Read: Kerala IAS Officer Arrested After Killing Journalist in Drunk Driving Accident

The opposition Congress has demanded the suspension of the officer, who was arrested and remanded to 14 days judicial custody on Saturday.

Venkitaraman was admitted to the surgical ICU of the Thiruvananthapuram Medical College Hospital on Sunday. He was shifted there from a private hospital where he had got himself admitted, soon after the accident. While the extent of injuries he sustained is not known, police said his left hand was in a plaster.

Kerala minister calls IAS officer a ‘disgrace’

Coming down hard, Kerala minister E.P. Jayarajan called Venkitaraman a “disgrace” to the civil service, saying he resign on his own.

He was speaking at a condolence meeting organised in remembrance of Basheer, the journalist who was killed in the collision.

“The government is not going to protect any culprits. We will not spare those who have attempted to help the accused. The IAS officer is a disgrace to the profession. He must accept his mistake and resign from the post,” Jayarajan said.

The state’s power minister M.M. Mani also said the government will do “everything possible” to help Basheer’s family.

(With PTI inputs)
