Bangladesh eyes solution, India for further survey of Muhurir Char

Bangladesh eyes a solution to the long-standing dispute with India over a two-kilometre stretch of the international boundary line along the cross-border river Muhurir, in the upcoming home minister-level meeting.

The Indian government, on the other hand, wants a fresh survey on it, Bangladesh officials said.

The dispute over the land held back implementation of the 1974 Mujib-Indira land boundary agreement even four year after the exchange of instruments of its ratification between the two nations over the exchange of enclaves, the officials added.

In the meeting, scheduled to be held on August 7 in New Delhi, Bangladesh home minister Asaduzzaman Khan would meet his Indian counterpart Amit Anilchandra Shah to discuss issues and concerns of mutual benefit.

The home ministry officials said that a 16-member Bangladesh team was scheduled to leave Dhaka on August 6 and return in the night of August 8, on a reciprocal invitation from the Indian home ministry.

The members of the Bangladesh delegation would include two secretaries of the ministry, the chiefs of Bangladesh police, Border Guard Bangladesh, Coast Guard and department of immigrations and passport, among others.

On Sunday afternoon, Indian high commissioner to Bangladesh Riva Ganguly Das called on the home minister Asaduzzaman Khan at the ministry for an hour and formally informed him about the latest development on the bilateral talks.

Meanwhile, the authorities of the two countries had demarcated the disputed Muhurir Char with wooden pillars, nearly 200 yards away from Belonia land port in Feni.

The issue could not be settled to date as India is pushing for a fresh survey, said home ministry officials in Dhaka.

According to Border Guard Bangladesh officials, out of 92.14 acres of Muhurir Char land, Bangladesh has got 71.94 acres and the rest 20.20 acres have gone to India after the area was demarcated with wooden pillars in accordance with the 2011 protocol.

From 1979 to 1999, BGB and Indian Border Security Force exchanged gunfire in at least eight incidents over movement of civilians along Muhurir Char.

A female villager was killed in BSF shooting on January 2, 1994, according to BGB officials.

All outstanding issues except for the dispute over Muhurir Char have already been settled under the LBA that came into effect with the exchange of instruments of the LBA between the two countries in June 2015.

India demanded a fresh survey of the bordering area along the meandering border river while Bangladesh wants the issue settled according to the 1977-78 survey as the Muhurir shifted inside Bangladesh, devouring a huge area in Feni, due to solid embankment and spurs built on the Indian side, officials said.

The border guidelines worked out by the two countries prohibit building such embankments and spurs that could change the course of bordering rivers.

The two sides signed 1,174 strip maps to resolve unresolved patches of their land boundary.

A senior official at land records and survey directorate told New Age that India was pressing Bangladesh to set the present mid-stream of the Muhurir River as the boundary line for which it demanded a fresh survey, which was not acceptable as the embankment built by India had changed the course of the river.

Bangladesh wants the issue to be settled according to the 1974 land boundary agreement and the 2011 protocol which do not allow any such changes in the map, he added.

The demarcation of the boundary as per the interim strip maps is supposed to be completed by the survey departments of the two governments by June 30, 2016 as set out in the instruments of the ratifications of the 1974 LBA and its 2011 protocol.

Bangladesh shares a 4,156 kms land boundary with India.

‘We will also discuss the construction of border fencing by the Indian government as we believe both the countries should be informed of any such installation,’ observed one of the home ministry officials set to attend the talks.

Other issues including the cooperation between law enforcement agencies of both the countries and to curb trans-boundary crimes would be discussed in the meeting.

About the dispute over the National Register of Citizen in the Indian state of Assam, the Bangladesh home ministry decided not to discuss the issue as it was an internal matter of Indian.
