Unnao rape victim airlifted to Delhi, admitted in AIIMS Trauma Care

New Delhi:

The 19-year-old Unnao rape survivor, who suffered critical injuries in a car-truck collision last week, on Monday was airlifted from Lucknow to New Delhi with the Traffic Police providing a green corridor from the IGI Airport for her speedy shifting to the AIIMS Trauma Care. An ambulance carrying the rape survivor left airport at about 9 pm and reached the hospital around 9:18 pm this evening, covering a distance of around 14 km in just 18 minutes. The development comes following Supreme Court directives in this regard.

Speakig to the media, a senior police officer said, "On the advice of AIIMS doctors, the journey of the ambulance carrying the injured person was facilitated by providing free passage. The ambulance left T-1 airport at 9 pm and reached the AIIMS Trauma Centre at 9.18 pm".

Unnao rape survivor was flown from Lucknow to be admitted in AIIMS Trauma Care, Delhi. On the advice of doctors of AIIMS, the journey of the ambulance carrying her was facilitated by providing free passage. Ambulance left airport at 9 pm & reached AIIMS Trauma Care at 9.18 pm. — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 5, 2019

READ | Unnao Rape Case: CBI searches residence of expelled BJP leader Kuldeep Singh Sengar, other accused

The victim was brought to AIIMS Trauma Centre from T1 via Thimmaya Marg, Parade Road, GGR, Dhaula Kuan loop, Ring Road, Moti Bagh flyover, Hyatt flyover, under Raj Nagar flyover and Jhandu Singh Marg to the hospital through emergency gate, the officer addded.

According to sources, a team of doctors is monitoring her treatment at AIIMS Trauma Centre. She and her lawyer suffered critical injuries on July 28 when the car, in which they and two others were travelling, was hit by a truck in Rae Bareli. Two of her relatives were killed in the accident.

The CBI, which has taken over the investigation into the road accident, has booked 10 people for murder, including Uttar Pradesh MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who is already in jail, charged with the rape of the Unnao woman in 2017 when she was a minor.

(With inputs from agencies)

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
