PIC: Aamir Khan’s Daughter Ira Khan Goes BOLD For Photo-shoot, Flaunts Her Curves

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Ira Khan (@khan.ira) on Aug 4, 2019 at 8:31pm PDT

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Ira Khan (@khan.ira) on Aug 4, 2019 at 7:23am PDT

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Ira Khan (@khan.ira) on Mar 14, 2019 at 10:36am PDT

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Ira Khan (@khan.ira) on Jun 29, 2019 at 8:04am PDT

Aamir Khan’s daughter Ira Khan has taken the internet by a storm after she shared a picture from her new photo-shoot on social media. The star kid has made several hearts skip a beat with her bold photo-shoot. Ira flaunted her toned body wearing a red crop top and denim shorts. She can be seen holding a bag in one hand in her jaw-dropping photo. The 21-year-old sported multiple braids in her hair and oozed confidence as she posed for the camera. Interestingly, we can see another model holding one of Ira’s thighs while she poses for the perfect shot. Ira captioned the photo as, ‘’Who are you? August 2019.Photography: @photographybyroozbeh Hair: @coleenssalon Makeup: @coleenssalon @nehasinghartistry Stylist: @amybillimoria Venue: @invincibleboudoir Special thanks to Sarika, Seher Hegde, Samriddh Jain #whoareyou #art #fashion #photography #photoshoot #personality #personalityisfluid,’’ Check out her post right here!A day before, Ira Khan had shared a post on Instagram and introduced the theme ‘Who are you?’She wrote, ‘’ Who are you? I've never had an answer to that question but at different points in my life, I've been overwhelmed by the question or at peace with not having figured out the answer just yet. The exciting moments are when you realize you can choose who you want to be and just how many things you want to be. And also that no one thing defines who you are. In this piece, fashion is my tool of exploration. But its just that.. one of the many ways to explore this idea.’’Ira Khan recently confirmed her relationship with musician Mishaal Kirpalani . She even shared a video with her beau in which the two lovebirds were seen dancing together.On ‘Koffee With Karan’, Aamir Khan had revealed that Ira was keen on joining Bollywood. "I'm not quite sure what she has in mind but I suspect that she likes the world of cinema and filmmaking. So maybe that's where she would want to go, I don't know," the ‘Laal Singh Chaddha’ actor was quoted as saying on ‘KWK 6’ by Bollywoodlife. For the uninitiated, Ira Khan is Aamir Khan and his first wife Reena Dutta’s younger child. She has an elder sibling Junaid Khan.Although Ira has stayed away from media galore, she is quite active on social media. The star kid keeps on sharing pictures on Instagram and has over 78 thousand followers.Watch this space for more updates!
