J&K (Reorganisation) Bill 2019: How parties voted to bifurcate state

1/3

The reorganisation bill was passed with support from several opposition parties, which, surprisingly, included AAP, BSP and TDP. Members of BJD, AIADMK, and YSR Congress also supported it.

During the discussions on reorganisation bill in Rajya Sabha, BSP MP Satish Chandra Mishra said, "Our party gives complete support. We want that the Bill be passed. Our party is not expressing any opposition to Article 370 Bill and the other Bill."

BJD member Prasanna Acharya announced the party's decision to support the resolution in the House, putting the "nation first" and said Kashmir become an integral part of India in "real sense" after the abrogation. "In a real sense, Jammu & Kashmir has become a part of India today. My party supports this resolution. We are a regional party but for us, the nation is first," Acharya told Rajya Sabha.

Supporting the resolution, AIADMK's A Navaneethakrishnan cited late Jayalalitha to emphasize that she always wanted the special provision to go. "Amma (as Jayalalitha was popularly known) was well known for upholding sovereignty and integrity. So AIADMK party supports the two resolutions, Reorganisation Bill and the Reservation Bill," he told Rajya Sabha.

TDP chief N Chandrababu Naidu, whose party left the Modi government over special status to Andhra Pradesh, voiced his support for the scrapping of Article 370 on Twitter.

"Telugu Desam Party supports the Union Government as it seeks to repeal Article 370. I pray for the peace and prosperity of the people of Jammu and Kashmir," the former Andhra Pradesh chief minister tweeted.

AAP convenor and Delhi Chief Minister Arvind Kejriwal, who has been at loggerheads with the Centre, took to Twitter to announce his party's decision to support the government on the resolution.

Kejriwal said, "We support the government on its decisions on J&K. We hope this will bring peace and development in the state."

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Y S Jaganmohan Reddy-led YSRCP also supported the resolution in the House.
