Parametric design – The changing face of architecture in the modern world

Parametric design as the name suggests, is a design that is guided by a set of parameters that influence the final outcome of design based on how they are tweaked or manipulated. Starting as a simple form, the parametric shapes build upon one another, slightly modifying itself as it is generated, in every turn and move, generating geometry which would have been impossible to produce using the more conventional modes of design. Many architects have adopted this style to create buildings that look amazingly complex and are a spectacle to behold. Parametricism goes a long way back during the 1940’s wherein an Italian architect, Luigi Morreti demonstrated the design of a stadium exhibited at the 1960 parametric exhibition at the 12th Milan Triennial. The form of the stadium was derived by manipulating 19 parameters including viewing angles and the economic cost of concrete. Antonio Gaudi, a Spanish architect revered all over the world created, perhaps the world oldest analogue inverted model, of a chapel using strings, weighed down by bird shots. Gaudi could manipulate various shapes of the chapel by varying the weights on the strings.

As an architect, I feel more drawn to parametric architecture owing to the flexibility and zillions of options it generates. The best examples of designs are found in nature and often the designs are generative in nature producing complex patterns that look abstractly chaotic but with an order that is governed by a set of rules which form the nature of the pattern. Bio- mimicry or replicating natures design in our lives would have been almost impossible if not for the emergence of parametric tools in computer-aided designs. Moreover, it is possible to produce several iterations of a design by simply changing a few parameters using a few clicks of the mouse.

This lets the designers have a stronger influence on key design decisions by offering and analyzing more options and providing qualitative feedback. Let us take the case of a building façade into consideration. If the designers want to give a façade skin that resembles the pattern found on the surface of a leaf, it would be almost impossible to do the same. Additionally, fine-tuning the skin to match the openings so that they don’t interfere with the view is another challenge in itself. By adapting a parametric modelling technique, the façade would be built on the surface wherein all the other factors controlling the openings on the building surface are also keyed in using their relevant parameters and the relationship could be adjusted so that the pattern would automatically adjust itself to give the optimum view possible. This is the power that parametric design offers. Offering a far cry from the regular geometric shapes, it takes the same and produces endless iterations by making tweaks to the form and subsequently producing a form derived using additive, subtractive and scalable geometry among other parameters.

Late Zaha Hadid, a well-known architect famous for designing abstract and parametrically complex building forms is among the many architects of the modern century who has adapted this technique for her design endeavours. In her Parametric space installation at Copenhagen, she has collaborated with Danish design office Kollision, research studio CAVI and motion designers Wahlberg to create a parametric form that offers an experience for people to partake. The exhibition features glowing funnels inspired by nature that bulge down from the ceiling to greet visitors. Chhatrapati Shivaji International Airport Terminal 2 in Mumbai, India, designed by Skidmore Owings and Merrill and completed in 2014, serves over 40 million people yearly and is an epitomic take on parametric architecture.

I strongly believe that, as designers, we have explored regular forms in almost every way possible and to adapt to a technique which will offer me more options at the click of a button with the magnificent capacity to produce generative designs is the new architectural order of the century.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
