Kashmir Article 370: Militancy fears loom now?

A HIGH-level security review team is closely monitoring inputs from Jammu and Kashmir, across the country and the western border after Union Home Minister Amit Shah's historic announcement in Rajya Sabha on Article 370, Article 35A and reorganisation of Jammu and Kashmir.

The government is monitoring activities across the LoC at launch pads in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK). The intelligence agencies and security forces are also monitoring activities in the Valley.

"The threat of Pakistan military-jihad complex (MJC) retaliating is very real. This could be either in the form of calibrated ceasefire violations at the LoC to a high visibility terror strike either in the Valley or across the country," Lieutenant General Vinod Bhatia, a former Director General of Military Operations (DGMO), told India Today TV.

The LoC has seen heightened activities in the past weeks. The ceasefire violations that began in Poonch and Sunderbani sectors, south of Pir Panjal, also escalated to mortars and field artillery. But India has now sent out a clear signal as 155 mm howitzers were fired in response to the Pakistani ceasefire violations.

"The message to Pakistan was very clear. India was willing to climb the escalatory ladder to tell Pakistan to back off. Additional forces are to strengthen the security grid. Even if some troops may have to be moved there is a contingency to have additional forces to fill the gap," sources said. Shah and National Security Advisor (NSA) Ajit Doval held a series of meetings with the heads of the intelligence agencies and security forces deployed in the Valley.

In an exclusive conversation, J&K Governor Satya Pal Malik told India Today TV, "In the past few days, Su-30MKI fighter jets have been carrying out combat air patrols (CAPs) over the Kashmir skies." The IAF has intensified its flying operations across the western theatre to ensure that Pakistan Air Force (PAF) does not attempt any misadventure. The Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) are working in tandem with the Indian Army to ensure that Pakistani forces, terrorists or radicalised local elements don't have any misadventure.
