‘We want to do non-Bollywood music at the level of Bollywood’: Jackky Bhagnani on launching his record label

Jackky Bhagnani’s bio on an online encyclopedia describes him as a music curator, apart from an actor and a producer. Not surprising then, he has launched his own record label, Jjust Music, to promote budding artistes. Jackky says, “I’m a dancer in my head. Even when I was a fat kid, I used to love dancing. I’ve always liked being part of music, as a producer or actor —whether Chaar Baj Gaye (F.A.L.T.U, 2011), Suno na Sangemarmar from Youngistaan (2014) or Kamariya (Mitron, 2018).” The company has signed The Doorbeen, Prakriti and Sukriti Kakar, Jasleen Royal and Darshan Raval among others. Here, Jackky talks about his plans, acting and production.

What made you launch the record label?

It’s a healthy environment for music. Dad (producer Vashu Bhagnani) used to be one of the largest manufacturers of audio cassettes, so, I know that if we distribute CDs and tapes, it’s difficult to start a label. But now, you can reach out to a larger set of audience through digital streaming.

What are your plans for the venture?

The idea is to make the music scene healthy, build a community and sign up people on an exclusive or non-exclusive basis. I want to live up to the name of the label—there are two Js in it. One stands for ‘just’ music where we don’t speak of anything else, and the other is about ‘just’ or fair music for artistes. I want to do everything under the sun. Music will stay in the front and everything else will come later. We will try to make money but not at the cost of compromising with the art.

Artistes prefer going independent because labels don’t give them creative freedom...

See, I’m an actor first and then a businessperson. So, I understand that if I don’t give creative freedom to artistes, they will never be able to express themselves completely. I happen to be the owner, but that has nothing to do with my opinion. I will come in as an audience and tell the musicians whether I like the song or not and then it’s their call. If there is a difference of opinion, then one has to convince the other. If I say it will be only my way since I’m the founder, then there’s a clear problem. It also changes the idea of fair music.





What made you sign up The Doorbeen as the first artistes?

There’s an interesting story behind this. A couple of friends introduced me to Lamberghini before its release when I was producing Taapsee Pannu’s Dil Junglee. I thought it was a brilliant song and should be used in the movie, but it didn’t work out. However, I still had my heart set on them. Even after the song, they remained unexplored as artistes. So, I reached out to them. They liked our philosophy and came on-board.

Ranveer Singh is promoting rap and Varun Dhawan, hip hop dance. Why the interest in underground art?

All of us love music. We want to do non-Bollywood stuff at the level of Bollywood. In India, when we say ‘independent’, people think, yeh chhota hai. So, from the audio to the video, I want people to see that it’s a big song, no matter where it is from.

Since you’re an actor, would you be featuring in the videos as well?

Of course! I love dancing. I can dance on bhajans also. So, I will 100 per cent do something.

Would you get your friends from Bollywood to be in the videos as well?

I will approach them. I know how actors think — if the song is good and if it’s going to be shot well, they would be happy to be a part of it.

What’s happening on acting front?

Once you are on the set as an actor, you are detached for three or six months. And at this point, I am focussing on the label and production. Once that’s on autopilot, I’ve already identified what I want to do next.

As a producer, you have announced projects with Nitin Kakkar (Filmistaan), Rahi Anil Barve (Tumbbad) and Vijay Lalwani (Karthik Calling Karthik). Are you looking at content-driven movies?

We have always been known to be mass-entertainers and we will continue to be that. Coolie No 1 is already on its way. But because times are changing, and I come in as a younger producer, I thought that we should also do content-rich cinema. We will do all kinds of genres except for adult films — Dad has asked me to not to do those.

Are you ready for comparisons with the original Coolie No 1?

Like the original, the adaptation is also being directed by David Dhawan and it stars my favourite actor at this point, Varun. I think it’ll be outstanding. Right now, I really can’t say much about the film. We have an announcement coming soon, and it’s going to be exciting.
