After a roaring success of URI: The Surgical Strike: Yami Gautam felicitated by the BSF Jawans

Recently, Yami Gautam, along with Vicky Kaushal, visited the Wagah Border on India’s 70th Republic Day, and paid a tribute to the BSF Jawaans and later, the BSF Jawans felicitated the actress for her contribution and excellent performance in the film. That’s right! The BSF regiment in Amritsar felicitated the actress and gave her a token of appreciation for her remarkable performance and for being a part of the film.

Yami, who was truly touched with the kind gesture, said, “BSF is the first line of defense of our country and it gives me immense pride to have met them in person and be in their company. It was kind of them leaving me overwhelmed to have given me this love and to the team. Wherever we have traveled with the film, especially meeting the men who serve our country have showered us with a great deal of appreciation and love. They have been unanimously happy with the essay of those in armed forces and the incredible role they play in our society.” After visiting the Wagah Border, Yami had posted a picture with Vicky Kaushal on social media and her caption read, “The JOSH was unbeatable today for the Republic day celebrations at the Wagah Border, Attari. Thank you @bsf_india and everyone for such a surreal experience !! @vickykaushal09 @adityadharfilms @rsvpmovies.”

ALSO READ: Vicky Kaushal starrer Uri: The Surgical Strike declared tax free in Uttar Pradesh

Uri: The Surgical Strike is Yami’s second film to enter the 100 crore club, first being Hrithik Roshan’s Kaabil. In the film, while Vicky is seen as an army officer who fronts the attacks, Yami Gautam essays the role of an intelligence officer. Recently, the cast of Uri met the President of India in Delhi, and later, the Vice President of the country, M Venkaiah Naidu, watched the film along with some soldiers of the Indo-Tibetan Border Police personnel.



Uri is a fictional story based on the Indian Army’s surgical attacks on unarmed terrorists in the border post of Uri in Jammu and Kashmir and the film is directed by debutant director Aditya Dhar. Uri stars Vicky Kaushal, Yami Gautam, Paresh Rawal and Kriti Kulhari in lead roles. While mid-range films often struggle to reach Rs 50 crore mark but according to trade pundits, Uri has the chance of crossing Rs 200 crore mark super soon, having already reached the Rs 150 crore mark.
