Fire breaks out in Zakir Nagar building near Jamia Nagar in Delhi; 6 dead, 11 injured [VIDEO]

Fire broke out in a multi-storey building in Zakir Nagar in New Delhi | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Fire broke out at a residential building in Zakir Nagar, Delhi on Tuesday Five people were killed in the fire, while 11 were injured Several cars and motorcycles were also gutted in the blaze

New Delhi: In a tragic incident, at least six people were killed and 11 injured after a fire broke out in a multi-storey residential building in Zakir Nagar in New Delhi in the wee hours of Tuesday.

The fire broke out at a five-storey building located in Zakir Nagar, a heavily-populated area near Jamia Millia Islamia University in the national capital.

At least 20 people had been rescued from the spot and around seven cars and eight motorcycles were burnt in the blaze, reports said.

Delhi Fire Service: 5 people dead & 11 injured in a fire that broke out in a multi-storey building in Zakir Nagar, late last night. pic.twitter.com/9ERr91u80i — ANI (@ANI) August 6, 2019

Eight fire tenders were rushed to the spot after the blaze broke out at around 2 am when most of the residents of the building were fast asleep. The fire was later doused by the fire officials.

Doctor Mala, Chief Medical Officer (CMO) of Holy Family Hospital, where the patients are being treated said, “5 patients are in the intensive care unit (ICU), some are in the ward and one is in Pediatric ICU.”

Among those injured were the ones who jumped off from the building in a bid to save themselves from the blaze.

The cause of the fire is yet to be ascertained, though a few reports suggested that the blaze could have broken out in an electricity box in the building.

Last month, over 100 people were rescued after a fire broke out in a three-storey building in the Janakpuri area in Delhi. The blaze had erupted from the electric meter of the building and had subsequently spread to the cables.

While the basement of the Janakpuri building was empty, the ground floor used for stilt parking. Around 45-50 staff and 30 customers were evacuated from the State Bank of India branch located on the first floor of the building, while 2 people were evacuated from a computer lab of Aakash Institute which was also on the first floor.

Fire officials rescued 50 students and 15 staff members from Vidyamandir classes from the second floor. The third floor of the building housed an office of Bansal classes, from where five people were rescued.




