Kareena Kapoor Khan and her manager Poonam Damania have parted ways after working together for 10 years?

Kareena with her manager Poonam | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Kareena Kapoor Khan is currently in London with Saif Ali Khan and Taimur Ali Khan. It's left to see who will step into Poonam Damania's shoes to manage Kareena's work, hereafter

Behind every successful actor, there's a manager who makes sure their talent is always seen in the good light and that he/she is making headlines for all the right reasons. Poonam Damania too played a major role in shaping up Kareena Kapoor Khan's career for almost a decade right from managing her movies to endorsement deals to lighting up her Instagram with some of the hottest shoots of Bebo. However unfortunately, looks like their journey ends here as the latest talk doing the rounds is that of how Poonam has ended her association with Kareena in the wake of quitting her talent management company, last month.

Reveals a source close to a Mid-Day, "Poonam's exit from the company (Matrix owned by Reshma Shetty) happened last month. Many had seen it coming as the differences between her and the agency suits had been building up for a while now. Her second in command, Naina Sawhney too has left the organisation. Poonam's next move is being keenly watched by the industry insiders with buzz suggesting that she may launch her own talent management firm. The idea of joining the rival celebrity management agency, KWAN, as a senior partner cannot be ruled out either. While this puts a question mark on Kareena's professional equation with Poonam, their personal rapport remains unaffected."

Below are a few posts by Poonam featuring Kareena Kapoor Khan

View this post on Instagram Happiness A post shared by Poonam Damania (@poonamdamania) on Jul 12, 2019 at 1:11am PDT

View this post on Instagram Stunning as ever #kareenakapoorkhan for @danceindiadance.official , A post shared by Poonam Damania (@poonamdamania) on Jun 26, 2019 at 11:57pm PDT

View this post on Instagram A post shared by Poonam Damania (@poonamdamania) on Jun 24, 2019 at 11:43pm PDT

View this post on Instagram Hello from Tuscany from the Pataudi's A post shared by Poonam Damania (@poonamdamania) on Jun 2, 2019 at 7:34pm PDT

View this post on Instagram The Diva first time on Indian Television @danceindiadance.official @zeetv @raftaarmusic @boscomartis #BattlesoftheChampions #DanceKaJungistaan #danceindiadancebattleofthechampions #DanceIndiaDance #Superstar #Season7 A post shared by Poonam Damania (@poonamdamania) on May 29, 2019 at 12:04am PDT

Although an official announcement on the same is yet to be made but if at all this is really true then we wonder how would things turn out for Kareena hereafter. For all that you know, she might re-associate with Poonam after the latter launches her own talent management firm. Or what if the decision to part ways is still not final?

Kareena is currently in London with Saif Ali Khan and Taimur Ali Khan. She's also been filming Angrezi Medium since the last one month along with her weekly trips to Mumbai to shoot for Dance India Dance 7 given that she's the celebrity judge this season.

Keep watching this space as we bring you more updates on this story.
