From Partition to history in a stroke, how Indian newspapers covered Centre’s move on Article 370

In a major announcement on Jammu and Kashmir, Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Monday announced the government's proposal to revoke Article 370 and proposed the bifurcation of the state into two union territories.

The Centre's move in an attempt to usher in development is seen as a bold and far-reaching decision that seeks to redraw not only the map bit also future of a region that has been at the centre of a protracted militancy movement.

Amit Shah's big announcement in the Rajya Sabha on Monday amid uncertainty in the Valley, massive troop build-up and suspension of Amarnath Yatra secured a place in the history and front pages of newspapers.

We take a look at today's front pages.

The Telegraph with 'Partition' as its headline in all caps chose to go forward without any photo. Instead, it placed a buffering icon sandwiched between a question on shutting down an entire state with 'try later' answer below it. On its side, The Telegraph quoted opposite sides of the spectrum -- Amit Shah and Omar Abdullah.

The Indian Express, in its newspaper, called the government's move 'History, in one stroke'. It also used the 8-column photo of Prime Minister Narendra Modi congratulating Amit Shah to tell the Monday story.

Hindustan Times, one of the largest-read newspapers in India, decoded Centre's move on Jammu and Kashmir in nine steps on its flap and listed the practical implications of the decision.

On the front page, Hindustan Times, like The Telegraph, announced the move with the headline 'Territory of the Union'. It used a photo of the Jawaharlal Nehru-Maharaja Hari Singh handshake with the Rajya Sabha moment of Amit Shah and Narendra Modi to highlight the historical importance of the decision.

The Times of India chose to lead with 'Kashmir is now Union's territory' headline. This was again done in all caps to highlight the significance of the historic announcement. Like The Indian Express, ToI also placed quotes of Narendra Modi and Mehbooba Mufti on top of its front page.

In the box, below the lead headline, ToI defined what has happened and what it means using header 'India's North Pole shifts to Centre'. In the box was a photo inserted of a deserted Srinagar road while New Delhi made the move on Monday.

THE HISTORIC MOVE TO KILL ARTICLE 370

Fulfilling an electoral promise of the BJP, Union Home Minister Amit Shah announced the decision in the Rajya Sabha, which approved both the resolution and the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation bill.

The government's move sent a wave of jubilation among BJP supporters and others, but provoked outrage from the National Conference and the People's Democratic Party.

As Amit Shah moved the resolution in the Rajya Sabha that Article 370, which allowed Jammu and Kashmir to have its own Constitution and prohibited outsiders from buying land and property in the state, will no longer be applicable, there were also fears that the government's decisions would change the demographic profile.

According to the resolution moved by the Home minister, Article 370 ceases to be operative from Monday itself.

"The president on the recommendation of Parliament is pleased to declare as from 5th of August 2019, all clauses of the said Article 370 shall cease to be operative... ," the resolution stated.

Amit Shah also moved a bill proposing bifurcation of J-K into two union territories -- Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh. Shah said the union territory in Ladakh will have no legislature like Chandigarh. The other union territory of Jammu and Kashmir will have a legislature like Delhi.

READ | Article 370: US urges all stakeholders to maintain peace, stability along LoC

WATCH | Article 370: J&K stripped of special status, Modi govt redraws map
