Radhika Apte ditches her fear of being dropped in the middle of an ocean

Radhika Apte believes that learning is an ongoing process and learning new skills helps in developing better, as a person. The actress has recently learned deep-sea diving and she shares her experience of her new ventures, so far. The actress started her diving journey last year when one of her director friends introduced it to her. Within a night Radhika made a decision that this is something which she would want to attempt. Her first dive was at the Maldives, talking about it Radhika shares, “My first dive was at a depth of 60 meters, and as I made my descent, I grew profoundly conscious of the sheer expanse of the seas. Then, as I swam past exotic, aquatic creatures, it felt meditative. Taking in all of this can be a humbling experience, and you realize your insignificant presence in this university.

“The experience of observing marine life and corals at such close quarters is a sensory experience like no other. I was bitten by the diving bug, and have, since, hunted for opportunities to explore marine life at other popular diving spots around the world. Aside from the Maldives, I’ve dived in the Dead Sea and in Egypt. From being mesmerized by the tiniest of creatures in their natural habitat to swimming with sharks, sea lions, and dolphins, my underwater adventures have been educational and euphoric on equal parts.” she further adds.

Advertisement

The underwater diving experience is very different and soothing on which Radhika says, “The first thing that occurs to you as you descend is how surreal this experience is. Time slows down, and you swift your focus to negotiations changing currents and temperatures”. All the activities like these are very risky and prone to mishaps, Radhika was no exception to it and had her share of it, recollecting one the situations the actress shares, “I’ve also had my shares of misadventures. The most memorable scare was when we were caught in a down current — this is a situation where one feels that one is swimming upwards, but is actually being pushed downwards by the current. Since I was with seasonal professionals, I was able to get through it without any injuries. With proper and training and adhering to the fundamentals, diving is, after all, a fairly safe recreational spot.”

“The greatest takeaway has been that fear only exists in our thoughts. It’s a product of one’s imagination and, more often than not, not real at all”, shares her takeaway from the experience. Radhika Apte’s versatility as an actor and honest persona are the most endearing traits of her. Our very own Indie star, known for her brave choices of films has spread her charms with top-notch roles- be it films or OTT platforms. The actress who has been constantly seen on the digital space has also been lovingly called ‘omnipresent’ all across. On the work front, Radhika will be next seen in a Hollywood project namely Liberté and also a Bollywood film named Raat Akeli Hai for which she shot in Lucknow recently.

(To receive our E-paper on whatsapp daily, please click here. We permit sharing of the paper's PDF on WhatsApp and other social media platforms.)

Advertisement

Published on: Tuesday, August 06, 2019, 09:18 AM IST
