Jammu and Kashmir live updates | Students, political parties protest move to scrap J&K's special status

The Central government on Monday, August 5, ended Jammu and Kashmir’s special status by extending all provisions of the Constitution and split the State into two Union Territories — Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh. The former will have a legislature but the latter will not.

The move was proceeded by cancelling the Amarnath Yatra, sending thousands of security forces into Jammu and Kashmir and snapping communication lines. Promiment J&K leaders like Mehbooba Mufti and Omar Abdullah were put under house-arrest on Sunday night. They, along with others, were formally arrested late on Monday.

There have been protests from all quarters regarding not only the amendment of Article 370 but also the way in which the bifurcation was announced. A large number of political, including those from the Opposition have welcomed the move.

Here are the live updates:

Move triggers fears in the northeastern region

The Centre’s move to revoke Article 370 has triggered apprehensions in the northeastern States enjoying similar constitutional safeguards. The Constitution bestows special provisions under Article 371A for Nagaland, Article 371B for Assam, Article 371C for Manipur, Article 371F for Sikkim and Article 371F for Mizoram.

Former Mizoram Chief Minister Lal Thanhawla said the move by the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance was a “red alert” for the people of the northeast.

Kashmiri groups in U.K. react with sadness and joy

The news of the Indian government amending Article 370 that gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir received a mixed reaction from Kashmiri groups in the U.K. with some terming it as a “sad day” while others hailing it as a “historic day”.

“It is a sad day for people of Jammu and Kashmir, because our State of Jammu and Kashmir is officially decimated by the government of India, said Dr. Shabir Choudhry, president of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the United Kashmir Peoples National Party.

Students in Delhi protest

Several students gathered at Jantar Mantar on Monday to stage a protest against the move. The group of protesters, including Kashmiris residing here, shouted slogans and waved banners against the government’s decision.

The agitation was carried out under the vigilance of the police and paramilitary forces. Behind the Delhi Police barricades that cordoned off the street, protesters voiced their opinions.

Twenty-four-year-old Sharika from Kashmir expressed her fears of not being able to communicate with her family back home. She wondered whether she would be able to go home for Id.

Protesters in Bengaluru decry move

A collective of progressive groups and people from Jammu and Kashmir held a protest in Bengaluru on Monday against the Union government’s move to abrogate Article 370 of the Constitution, and bifurcate the State into two Union Territories.

The protest was disrupted by another group which tried to storm the protest venue. They were immediately detained by the police and later released.

A Kashmiri student held a handwritten note: “Oh dear Modi! At least let me communicate with my family! I have not been able to contact my family for two days now. I fear what has happened to them.”

Punjab bans celebrations, protests

Apprehensive of an adverse reaction from Pakistan to the developments in Kashmir, the Punjab government on Monday prohibited any kind of celebrations or protests that could vitiate the atmosphere.

Chief Minister Amarinder Singh directed the police to be prepared to thwart any attempts by Pakistan to create disturbances.

The Chief Minister was reviewing the law and order situation in the wake of the revocation of Article 370 in Kashmir. Top police and civil brass attended the meeting, which took note of the volatile situation.

Left parties protest amendment to Article 370

The Left parties staged a demonstration at the Jantar Mantar in Delhi, slamming the Modi government for scrapping Article 370 and demanded that the earlier status of the state be restored.

The government on Monday abolished Article 370 that gives special status to Jammu and Kashmir and moved a separate bill to bifurcate the state into two separate union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

The protesters included senior Left leaders like CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yechury, Prakash Karat, CPI general secretary D Raja, CPI(ML) general secretary Dipankar Bhattacharya, Brinda Karat and Atul Anjan among others.

Coming down heavily on the government, Yechury said abolishing Article 370 was an attack on the democracy which was done “secretively” by the ruling BJP.
