Gold worth Rs 70 lakh seized at Cochin airport, six nabbed

KOCHI: The officers of directorate of revenue intelligence (DRI) seized 2kg of gold worth Rs 70 lakh from Cochin International Airport Limited (Cial) on Monday morning. DRI sleuths nabbed six persons, including an international passenger, two Cial ground handling workers and three gold dealers in connection with the seizure.Officers said gold was seized from the smoking room near emigration while the two ground handling staff were trying to hide it in their shoes.The passenger was identified as Najeeb Ismail, a native of Vamanapuram in Thiruvananthapuram . He was a passenger of Dubai-Kochi Emirates flight that landed in the airport at 3.30am. The ground handling workers were identified as Amal Bhasi and Midhun P N, both residents of Angamaly and contract staff of Celebi Ground Handling. The three dealers who waited outside to receive the gold were identified as Azees, Rahul and Jayakrishnan, all residents of Thrissur The gold, four bars of 500g each, was smuggled into the airport by Ismail from Dubai . He reportedly carried the gold bars in his pocket and entered the smoking room near emigration and kept the gold beneath a waste bin in the room before leaving the airport. Bhasi and Midhun, who are drivers of passenger buggy inside the terminal, came to the smoking room. DRI officials nabbed them while they were trying to hide the gold in their shoes. Others were nabbed from outside the terminal based on the information collected from them.According to the officers, they have received tip-off about gold smuggling happening at Cial with the help of airport staff, and suspected staff were under DRI surveillance. Both Midhun and Bhasi were among the suspects but the officers were not clear about their modus operandi. Their arrest is yet to be recorded. A probe has been launched to find out if more staff are involved in smuggling.Meanwhile, Cial spokesperson said that Celebi had been asked to terminate the contract of the two staff after seizing their Airport Entry Permits (AEP).
