Modi will win more than 400 seats if India goes to polls today: Yashwant Sinha on Article 370 impact

Delhi:

Yashwant Sinha, the fiery critic of the Narendra Modi government, has called the scrapping of Article 370, 35A in Jammu and Kashmir as a ‘pure political step’, which has nothing to do with the state. In view of the former Finance Minister, the Modi government’s Kashmir move is directed towards key state elections this year. However, he also viewed it as political gamechanger. In an unprecedented move that is likely to spark unrest in the Valley, the Narendra Modi government on Monday scrapped part of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that gives special status to Jammu and Kashmir. (KASHMIR LIVE UPDATES)

Also Read: Article 370: US 'takes note' of Jammu and Kashmir split, calls for 'peace along Line of Control'



Union Home Minister Amit Shah also moved a resolution in the Lok Sabha for bringing a bill to reorganise the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories of Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh amid a walkout by opposition parties. The Lower House of Parliament will take up the Article 370 and 35A today at 11 am. In an interview to NDTV, Yashwant Sinha said that should India go to polls today, Narendra Modi-led BJP will ‘beat Rajiv Gandhi’s record’. He said that Modi will win more than 400 seats if India goes to polls today. It should be noted that after the assassination of then Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, her son Rajiv Gandhi had won 400 plus seats in the 1984.

Also Read: Article 370 revoked: What does this viral PHOTO of Amit Shah's documents reveal

Revoking Article 370 is an unwise step, which will cause more trouble in the restive Valley. “The only doctrine of the state is that the will of the people will prevail and will of the people of Jammu and Kashmir is not with the government of India on this issue,” Sinha was quoted as saying by Bloomberg Quint. Sinha had earlier slammed the Modi government for its note ban decision. Reacting on a report, Sinha had tweeted, “Demonetisation was done despite the reservations of the RBI. Urjit Patel signed the resolution of the RBI BOARD more than a month after demonetisation. Govt. caught lying again.”

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
