Body of Class three student with throat slit found in hostel washroom, Andhra Police launch probe

Police are investigating the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Students found the child's body on Tuesday morning The incident has come to light from Challapalli town, in Krishna district Deep injuries were found on the boy's neck, said police

Hyderabad: In a shocking incident which has come to light from the state of Andhra Pradesh, a student of the third standard was murdered inside the hostel at a residential school in Challapalli town, in Krishna district on Tuesday morning. His fellow hostel mates found the child's body in the hostel washroom and immediately alerted authorities.

The matter has now been brought to the attention of local police who have launched an investigation in this regard. Preliminary inputs suggest that the boy's body was found in a pool of blood in the bathroom on the ground floor of the residential school's hostel in the early hours of August 6.

An officer familiar with the investigation said that injuries were seen on the boy's neck. These injuries seem to be a deep gash made with a sharp instrument, added the officer. According to a report, police have reason to believe that the victim's family was engaged in a dispute with residents of the village. However, it is still unclear whether the child's murder was the result of the purported dispute or a fight between students.

At present, there are 897 pre-matric hostels operating across the state. Out of these, 692 BC Welfare hostels house boys while 205 are housing facilities exclusively for girls with the exception of 13 integrated hostels. Each of these facilities has the capacity to house about a hundred students. With a police investigation into the matter still underway, more details are awaited as this is a developing story.

The incident brings back memories of a similar tragedy which had come to light from Gurugram in September of 2017 when a seven-year-old child was found dead in the washroom of a leading school. As the result of a preliminary probe, police arrested a school bus conductor on the basis of circumstantial evidence and the records of his previous employment.

However, the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) launched a fresh probe into the boy's death and discovered that the conductor was innocent of the charges made against him. Another student of the eleventh standard then confessed to the crime. It was also found that the culprit committed the heinous act in order to delay the parent-teacher meeting which was supposed to take place the next day. Sleuths with the premiere investigating agency said that the culprit confessed to his crime in the presence of his own father and an independent witness.
