Kashmir: A bold move

The BJP-led government on Monday took a bold step and abolished Article 370 of the Constitution that so long gave special status to Jammu and Kashmir. The government also moved a separate Bill to bifurcate the state into two separate union territories, one called Jammu and Kashmir, and the other Ladakh. Inserted in the Constitution of India on October 17, 1949, Article 370 had so long exempted Jammu & Kashmir from the Indian Constitution itself, except for Article 1 and Article 370 itself, had kept a provision of permitting J&K to draft its own constitution and had even restricted Parliament’s legislative powers in respect of J&K. It may be recalled that when India attained Independence, Kashmir was a princely state like so many other areas of the subcontinent including Manipur and Tripura. But Raja Hari Singh, who had initially decided to remain independent and sign standstill agreements with India and Pakistan, later had to sign an Instrument of Accession with India after Pakistan sent in hordes of tribesmen as well as Armymen in plainclothes and literally overran Kashmir for several weeks. Hari Singh signed the Instrument of Accession on October 26, 1947 and Governor General Lord Mountbatten accepted it on October 27, 1947. The reality that many fail to understand is that India regarded the accession as purely temporary and provisional, as stated in the Government of India’s White Paper on J&K in 1948. But then, many accuse Nehru for failing to find a permanent solution – when so many other princely states had actually proudly merged with India without much ado – leading to insertion of Article 370, though the first article of Part XXI of the Constitution bore the heading ‘Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions’. While some had interpreted Article 370 as temporary in the sense that the J&K Constituent Assembly had a right to modify/delete/retain it – it decided to retain it – another interpretation was that accession was temporary until a plebiscite. While section of people is always out to find faults with the government that was given a massive mandate only a few months back, it fails to understand Article 3 of the J&K Constitution declares J&K to be an integral part of India. Some also fail to realize that in the Preamble to the Constitution, there is no claim to sovereign Jammu and Kashmir at all. Moreover, Article 370 is not only part of the Constitution, but also part of federalism, which is the basic structure of India. That exactly is why the court has upheld successive Presidential Orders under Article 370. The decision came at a time when J&K had plunged into a state of uncertainty, especially with the government building up a massive security bandobast and asking all non-locals – including the Amarnath pilgrims – to leave the state as early as possible. There is definitely a possibility of Pakistan playing mischief, especially after it had suffered major loss of face in the Balakot incident. Islamabad has already issued a statement saying India’s move to change the legal and constitutional status of J&K was not acceptable to it. Reiterating its position that J&K was an ‘internationally recognized disputed territory’, Pakistan has even gone to the extent of saying it would exercise all possible options to counter the ‘illegal steps’ taken by India. Meanwhile, as former J&K chief minister Mehbooba Mufti has described August 5 as the darkest day for Kashmir, another former CM Omar Abdulla has called it a ‘betrayal of trust.’ Veteran BJP leader LK Advani on the other hand has congratulated Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah for ‘the historic decision’ to revoke Article 370. Calling it a bold step towards strengthening national integration, Mr. Advani said the decision has been a part of BJP’s core ideology since the days of Jan Sangh. The Left parties have, by nature called it ‘murder of democracy’, while Aam Aadmi Party leader Arvind Kejriwal has supported it. Former Foreign Secretary Nirupama Menon Rao on her part said that time had come for this substantive decision by the Government of India on Kashmir, and that continuation of status quo was untenable because Pak-supported insurgency since 1990 had demonstrated that. In Parliament, as the opposition Congress attacked the government, Union Home Minister said, Article 370 & 35A have damaged J&K. ‘It is because of these Sections that democracy was never fully implemented, corruption increased in the state, that no development could take place. We don’t believe in politics of religion, what vote-bank politics? Only Muslims live in Kashmir? What do you want to say? Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs, Jains, Buddhists all live there. If Article 370 is good it is good for all, if it is bad then it is bad for all,’ he said. That is an interesting summing-up.

Also read: Revocation of Article 370: 10 significant factors with and without the special status
