Saaho New Poster: Arun Vijay As Vishwank Needs No 'Bloody Introduction' To...

Saaho has been in the news since it’s inception and has created extreme buzz and much hype. The Prabhas and Shraddha Kapoor starrer has seen a major positive upheaval wherein the fans are going insane with every song release and every poster release.

Advertisement

After the much exciting poster release of Neil Nitin Mukesh, the next one to join the scintillating cast is actor Arun Vijay. Looking extremely mysterious yet dapper in the new poster, Arun Vijay is giving us serious heartthrob vibes.

In the poster, Arun Vijay is giving us major chills while piercing through the screens with his dashing avatar for Saaho and his stern and serious look is stealing everyone’s attention. After seeing this look fans can’t wait to see what role will he be playing but are awaiting the movie to catch him on the screens.

Arun Vijay is a Tamil actor who has starred in a variety of action, suspense and thriller films. He is an acclaimed actor known for playing negative roles and has won several awards for that. After giving major hits in the Tamil film industry, it will be noteworthy to see what the actor will be bringing to the screen with Saaho. From the trailer itself, the power packed action sequences have not given us a moment to behold our breath and the character poster is another from the trail of outings.

The film is a multi starrer and as the makers continue to drop new character posters, the hype is getting more real by the day. All the character posters are creating excitement amongst the masses and all the stars look stellar in their respective avatars.

Advertisement

Having Prabhas, an actor who enjoys pan India appeal paired with gorgeous Shraddha Kapoor, the movie is being shot in three languages, Hindi, Tamil, and Telugu, simultaneously.

The movie also has a superlative ensemble cast of Jackie Shroff, Neil Nitin Mukesh, Mandira Bedi, Chunky Panday, Mahesh Manjrekar, Arun Vijay, Murali Sharma, amongst others.

‘Saaho‘ is a high octane action thriller which is presented by T-Series, produced by UV Creations and directed by Sujeeth and is set to hit the theatres on August 30, 2019

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
