Pakistani Actress Mahira Khan is Upset with Indian Government's Decision to Revoke Article 370 - Here's What She has to Say

In a historic decision taken by the Indian Government, Jammu & Kashmir will no longer enjoy special privileges. Centre has decided to revoke Article 370 from the Indian Constitution thereby making the former state a Union Territory with legislation and Ladakh a separate UT without legislature. While the citizens of India are busy hailing this great move by the government, Pakistan is not really impressed with this new decision for obvious reasons. After Veena Malik voiced her concern over scrapping of Article 370, Mahira Khan too, expressed her grief for the residents of J&K. Veena Malik’s Distasteful Tweet with a Picture against the Indian Army Enrages Twitterati.

The Raees actress took to her Twitter account to share her views on the issue and she's clearly upset with the verdict. 'Have we conveniently blocked what we don’t want to address? This is beyond lines drawn on sand, it’s about innocent lives being lost! Heaven is burning and we silently weep. #Istandwithkashmir #kashmirbleeds', she tweeted while expressing her views. Article 370 Revoked: Here's How Bollywood Reacted to the Historic Decision Taken on Jammu and Kashmir - Read Tweets.

Check out Mahira Khan's tweet

Have we conveniently blocked what we don’t want to address? This is beyond lines drawn on sand, it’s about innocent lives being lost! Heaven is burning and we silently weep. #Istandwithkashmir #kashmirbleeds — Mahira Khan (@TheMahiraKhan) August 5, 2019

Pakistani celebs were banned from performing in India after the Uri attacks in 2016 post which actors like Mahira Khan and Fawad Khan had to lose working opportunities in Bollywood. The ones who wondered if the matter will cool down with time clearly ignored its intensity and only an ignorant will still hope for them to come back.

(The above story first appeared on LatestLY on Aug 05, 2019 07:27 PM IST. For more news and updates on politics, world, sports, entertainment and lifestyle, log on to our website latestly.com).
