Odisha: Criminals held after encounters

BERHAMPUR/KENDRAPADA: A 28-year-old criminal allegedly involved in at least 13 cases, including murder, under different police stations in Ganjam district was arrested by police following an exchange of fire near Sahapur under Aska police station on Monday.The accused, identified as Guru Prasad Swain of Gangapur village under Badagada police station, sustained bullet injuries in his left leg and is undergoing treatment at MKCG Medical College and Hospital here.In Jagatsinghpur district, gangster Bikram Pal, alias Don, 35, of Panapali village, involved in many cases including extortion, robbery and theft, suffered gunshot injuries in early hours of Monday in an encounter with police. tnnThe exchange of fire took place in a casuarina forest at Kankaradia village under Kujang police station of Jagatsinghpur district.A Mauser, two live ammunition and a motorcycle without registration number were seized from his possession, police said. One of his accomplices managed to escape from the spot. tnn"We have identified his aide, who is also a criminal involved in several heinous crimes, including murder. We have launched a manhunt to nab him," said sub-divisional police officer, Aska, Suryamani Pradhan.During patrolling, police tried to stop them near Charimaili Chhaka while they were going on the motorcycle. But they sped away. When police chased them, they hurled bombs and opened fire on police. "Two police personnel sustained multiple injuries and they were admitted to Aska hospital," said inspector in-charge, Aska police station, Pitabas Dharua. Their condition is stated to be stable, police added. Police retaliated by firing one round, he said.Besides dacoity, robbery and attempt to murder cases under different police stations, including Aska, Bhanjanagar , Sorada and Badagada, Swain was also allegedly involved in the murder of Sanyashi Bisoi, a contractor, at Badagada on May 4, 2018.He along with his associates had allegedly hacked Bisoi to death, police said. Since then, Swain was on the run. He was allegedly involved in the loot of Rs 10 lakh from a cattle trader near Bhanjangar recently.
