Recalling every Samsung Galaxy Note device launched before Note 10

Samsung is all set to unveil its latest flagship on Wednesday in New York.

Over the years, Samsung Galaxy Note has established itself as a powerful and productivity device.

Samsung Electronics is all set to unveil its latest flagship on Wednesday in New York. The latest Galaxy smartphone is all set to carry the legacy of Galaxy Note series to the next level.

Over the years, the Samsung Galaxy Note has established itself as a powerful and productivity device. And rightly so!

The Galaxy Note is known for its raw power. Moreover, it is the only premium smartphone to come with an S Pen, which debuted with the first Galaxy Note launched in 2011. As of 2018, the Galaxy Note9 S Pen with Bluetooth Low-Energy (BLE) support makes the stylus more versatile than ever before

Galaxy Note has a huge and loyal fan following in India, thanks to its industry-leading performance and productivity.

Since the launch of the first Galaxy Note in 2011, each Galaxy Note device has added more innovations that have become extremely popular among users. It was with Galaxy Note that Samsung Knox debuted in 2013. Samsung Knox provides a secure environment for data and apps across all Galaxy devices, from smartphones to tablets to wearables.

Galaxy Note4 was the first Galaxy smartphone equipped with a fingerprint scanner located in the display's home button in 2014. More recent models have seen the introduction of a wider range of biometric authentication, such as iris and facial scanners, enhancing usability and security.

Galaxy Note edge (2014) was equipped with the world's first curved display for improved grip and increased real estate.

Timeline of Galaxy Note’s major innovations

Galaxy Note: Samsung’s first phablet, revolutionized large-screen phone

Galaxy Note2: Besides a huge display, it supported new air view stylus gestures

Galaxy Note3: First smartphone to have USB 3.0 for faster data transfers; first Note to have a full HD resolution

Galaxy Note4: Samsung’s first QHD smartphone; first feature film in 4K resolution (Cai Lan Gong) was shot on Note4

Galaxy Note5: First S Pen with a clickable auto-eject mechanism

Galaxy Note8: Won DisplayMate and DxOMark awards for best display and camera

Galaxy Note9: BLE-enabled S Pen; up to 1TB storage

Galaxy Note9, launched in 2018, is a beast of a device delivering all-day battery (4,000mAh), up to 1TB storage (enough room for all your favourite photos, videos and apps), speed and power.
