PrintPack 2019: Tresu to highlight ink supply system and Flexo Innovator

Tresu Group, along with its Indian representatives CGSASP, will showcase its automated ink supply programme for output on the flexographic label and packaging presses, and Flexo Innovator - an inline flexo printing and converting machine for paperboard applications.

Tresu’s Ancillary division will highlight its programme of chamber doctor blades and ink supply systems for optimising print quality, waste elimination and increasing machine uptime.

Helene Gleerup, head of marketing and communications, Tresu Group, said, “Using Tresu’s unique “pressure control technology”, the chambers eliminate air contamination and micro-foaming, to ensure clean, uniform print on the substrate. A long-life rubber seal system provides an airtight enclosure, preventing leakage, and maintains consistent ink pressure. Ink quality is assured by a liquid barrier, formed between the rotating anilox rolls and the chamber, preventing air from entering the cells during production."

Tresu’s chamber programme is available for all web widths between 185mm and 6000mm.

For web widths from 1600mm to 6000mm, Tresu provides its MaxiPrint concept chamber which features an integrated cleaning nozzle with a robustly designed water-shot mechanism for fast, efficient cleaning of the chamber and the anilox roll.

Tresu will also highlight its FlexiPrint range of products which includes FlexiPrint Basic and FlexiPrint Reservoir.

The FlexiPrint Reservoir SAVEink chamber doctor blade is aimed for narrow-web flexo applications up to 80mm width.



Tresu FlexiPrint Reservoir SAVEink chamber doctor blade, for narrow-web applications

Tresu will also highlight its F10 iCon ink supply system that regulates ink flow, pressure and viscosity, to ensure a constant, accurate ink density on the printed substrate without air

"Flexographic ancillary technologies from Tresu, including chamber doctor blades, circulators and conditioners, can be integrated with offset and digital presses to apply an appealing matte, gloss and textured varnish to commercial and packaging print-work, that too consistently and accurately,” added Gleerup.

Tresu’s Flexo Innovator flexo printing machine enables high-speed packaging production for folding carton board, paper, laminates and metallic substrates.

According to Gleerup, with its customised line configuration, in web widths from 670mm to 1700mm, the Flexo Innovator can integrate water-based, solvent and UV-curable inks, as well as value-adding complementary processes, including double-sided printing, gravure coating (double-sided), inkjet, cold foil and lamination.

The Flexo Innovator has a speed of up to 800metre/minute.

Kunal Gandhi, managing director, CGSASP, said, “While the packaging printing market in India is strong and vibrant, we are increasingly competing against regions with high levels and fresh investment.

“Rising quality standards and demands for fast-turnaround times with shorter run lengths require modern equipment and systems. Tresu’s retrofittable chamber doctor blades, ink supply and other ancillary equipment are ideal for improving production efficiency and competitiveness.”



Hall 9 Stall G12

The countdown to the PrintPack India 2019 has begun. The six-day show with more than 480 exhibitors and over 24,500 sqm of booked floorspace is set to commence on 1 February 2019 at the India Expo Centre in Greater Noida.
