China provokes India, says move to create Ladakh as separate UT undermines Chinese territorial sovereignty

China reacts to India's moves on Jammu and Kashmir | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights China says concerned about developments in Kashmir Asks India and Pakistan to maintain calm Slams move to create Ladakh, says it undermines China's territorial sovereignty

Beijing: A day after the central government revoked Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir by way of a Presidential order and moved legislation in Parliament to divide the state into two Union Territories, China has reacted by voicing concern. It further alleged that India was modifying its domestic laws to undermine China's territorial sovereignty.

Asking India and Pakistan to exercise restraint, Beijing said it was concerned about the situation in Kashmir. Foreign ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying asked for avoiding any actions that "unilaterally" change the status of the region and add to tensions between the two nuclear-armed neighbours.

"China is seriously concerned about the current situation in Kashmir," Hua said in a written statement issued to the media. The spokesperson was reacting to media questions about firing on the de-facto border in Jammu and Kashmir (Line of Control) and New Delhi’s move to scrap Article 370 that accorded special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

"China's position on the Kashmir issue is clear and consistent. This issue is a legacy of history between India and Pakistan, which is also the consensus of the international community," Hua said. "The parties concerned should exercise restraint and act with caution, especially to avoid actions that unilaterally change the status quo and exacerbate the tension," she added.

The Chinese official further asked India and Pakistan to "peacefully resolve relevant disputes through dialogue and consultation and safeguard regional peace and stability”.

Reacting to New Delhi’s move to divide the state of Jammu and Kashmir and create a separate Union Territory of Ladakh, the western section of which lies on the Sino-Indian border, the Chinese foreign ministry said India’s move undermines China's territorial sovereignty, which is unacceptable.

"China always opposes India's inclusion of Chinese territory in the western section of the China-India boundary under its administrative jurisdiction. This position is firm and consistent and has never changed. The recent unilateral revision of domestic laws by the Indian side continues to undermine China's territorial sovereignty, which is unacceptable and will not have any effect," the Chinese ministry said.

It urged the Indian side "to be cautious in its words and actions on the boundary issue, strictly abide by the relevant agreements reached between the two sides and avoid any move that further complicates the boundary issue".

Last month as well, China had issued a statement on Kashmir and asked India and Pakistan to take steps to peacefully resolve the issue and other disputes. The statement came in response to US President Donald Trump's mediation offer on Kashmir. India rejected the mediation offer stating that Kashmir is a bilateral issue between India and Pakistan.
