Article 370 debate: Who said what as Modi govt scraps J&K's special status, divides it in 2 UTs

Article 370 of the Indian Constitution has always triggered heated and polarising debates but perhaps never as heated and polarising as the ones witnessed in the last two days. The Bharatiya Janata Party-led NDA government under Narendra Modi has dared to do something that no government dared in the past 70 years i.e. move a proposal to scrap the special status given to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Indian Constitution.

Not only has the government decided to render Article 370 meaningless in regards to Jammu and Kashmir, but it has also decided to divide the state into two Union territories - Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh. This means Jammu and Kashmir, which has been a state for decades, will now cease to be so.

Both these propsals were approved by Parliament over the last two days.

The Congress has accused the Modi government of highhandedness and said it is "murdering" democracy and the Indian Constitution. Several others have criticised the government for the manner in which it went about pushing its decisions in Parliament. On the other hand, the BJP has found support from parties like the BSP, BJD and YSR Congress (all in the Opposition).

ALSO READ | Article 370 powers gone, J&K to become 2 UTs as Lok Sabha okays Modi govt's move

Here is what the who's who of Indian politics said on Article 370, Kashmir and the Modi government's decision.

THOSE IN FAVOUR

PM Narendra Modi:

"Home Minister Amit Shah ji's speech in the Rajya Sabha was extensive and insightful. It accurately highlighted the monumental injustices of the past and coherently presented our vision for the sisters and brothers of J&K. Do hear."

PM Modi is expected to address speak on Article 370 and decisions taken by his government on J&K tomorrow.

Amit Shah (Union home minister):

"Those who instigate the youth of Kashmir, their own kids study in London and the US. Let them educate their kids in the schools in Kashmir Valley then they will know what Article 370 is. These are the people who do not want the youth to progress. The Modi government wants to hug the youths of J&K."

"Article 370 alienated the youth of Kashmir and pushed them towards terrorism. It is due to Article 370 that more than 41,000 people have died in J&K."

Mayawati (Ex-UP CM and BSP president)

Former Uttar Pradesh chief minister and Bahujan Samaj party president Mayawati has supported the Modi government's decision to scrap special status to Jammu and Kashmir. Mayawati said the BSP hopes that the decision taken by the central government will benefit the people of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh.

Jyotiraditya Scindia (senior Congress leader):

"I support the move on Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh and its full integration into Union of India. Would have been better if constitutional process had been followed. No questions could have been raised then. Nevertheless, this is in our country's interest and I support this."

Milind Deoria (former Mumbai Congress chief):

"Abolishing Article 370 of the Indian Constitution could well be dubbed Modi Sarkar 2.0's demonetisation moment. For the sake of peace and development in Jammu and Kashmir, I hope this decision plays out more favourably than demonetisation did."

THOSE AGAINST

Rahul Gandhi (former Congress president):

"Kashmir's mainstream political leaders have been jailed at secret locations. This is unconstitutional and undemocratic.

It's also short-sighted and foolish because it will allow terrorists to fill the leadership vaccum created by GOI.

The imprisoned leaders must be released.

"National integration isn't furthered by unilaterally tearing apart J&K, imprisoning elected representatives and violating our Constitution. This nation is made by its people, not plots of land.

This abuse of executive power has grave implications for our national security."

Farooq Abdullah (former J&K CM and Union minister):

Farooq Abdullah on Tuesday accused Union Home Minister Amit Shah of "lying" that he has not been detained. He said, "Home ministry is lying in Parliament that I'm not house arrested, that I am staying inside my house at my own will."

Abdullah said they (the government) want to "murder" them. "As soon as the gate will open and our people will be out, we will fight...we'll go to the court. We're not gun-runners, grenade-throwers, stone-throwers, we believe in peaceful resolutions. They want to murder us. My son (Omar Abdullah) is in jail."

ALSO READ | Article 370: Congress divided over abrogation of special status to Jammu and Kashmir

Mamata Banerjee (West Bengal CM and chief of Trinamool Congress):

"I am talking about the procedure in which these resolutions were adopted. We cannot support this bill, neither can we vote for it. What they have done is not democratic," Mamata Banerjee said.

She added, "They (government) should have discussed the matter in an all-party meeting before taking such a step."

Sitaram Yechury (General Secretary of CPI(M)):

"The Modi government has dealt a severe blow to our constitutional order by unilaterally scrapping Article 370 and other provisions of the Constitution and dividing the state of Jammu and Kashmir."

MK Stalin (President DMK):

"The decision by the Centre to repeal Article 370 and re-organise Jammu and Kashmir with many state leaders under house arrest and through a pliant Governor goes against the grain of democracy and constitutionalism. This is a dark day in the history of Indian federalism."

WHAT PAKISTAN HAS SAID

Imran Khan (Pakistan's prime minister):

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan addressed a joint session of Pakistan's Parliament on Tuesday and said the Narendra Modi government's decision to scrap J&K's special status "will result in another Pulwama-like terror attack".

He alleged that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) took the decision acting upon the "racist" ideology of its founding fathers "who sought to designate Muslims as second class citizens".

Chaudhry Fawad Hussain (Pakistan minister):

"Modi Govt is trying to make Kashmir another Palestine by changing the population demography and bringing settlers into Kashmir, parliamentarians must stop fighting on trivial issues lets respond India by blood, tears, toil and sweat, we must be ready to fight if war is imposed."

General Qamar Javed Bajwa (chief of Pakistan Army):

"...fully support Government's rejection of Indian actions regarding Kashmir. Pakistan never recognised the sham Indian efforts to legalise its occupation of Jammu and Kashmir through article 370 or 35-A decades ago; ...efforts which have now been revoked by India itself. Pakistan Army firmly stands by the Kashmiris in their just struggle to the very end. We are prepared and shall go to any extent to fulfil our obligations in this regard."

WHAT OTHERS HAVE SAID

The US:

"We are closely following the events in Jammu and Kashmir. We take note of India's announcement revising the constitutional status of Jammu and Kashmir and India's plan to split the state into two union territories. We call on all parties to maintain peace and stability along the Line of Control," US State Department Spokesperson Morgan Ortagus said.

The UAE:

"The UAE has taken note of the Indian government's decision of non-operationalisation of some sections of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution related to the state of Jammu and Kashmir. The reorganisation of states is not a unique incident in history of independent India and that it was mainly aimed at reducing regional disparity and improving efficiency. It is an internal matter as stipulated by the Indian Constitution," Dr Ahmad Al Banna, the UAE ambassador to India, was quoted as saying by news agency ANI.

ALSO READ | Article 370: Sonia Gandhi bemused as Adhir Ranjan bowls a reverse swing on Kashmir

Organisation of Islamic Cooperation:

"The OIC reiterates its call upon the international community to rise up to its responsibility for the peaceful resolution of Jammu and #Kashmir dispute through the democratic method of a free and impartial plebiscite in accordance with relevant UN Security Council resolutions."

United Nations:

UN Secretary General Antonio Guterres' spokesperson Stephane Dujarric said, "We are very concerned about the rise in tensions. As for the Secretary General's role, he has often expressed his position on that and his position remains the same," a reference to the UN chief's position that his offices are always available should "both sides" ask for it.

Amnesty International:

"The unilateral decision by Government of India to revoke Jammu and Kashmir's special status without consulting J&K stakeholders, amidst a clampdown on civil liberties and communications blackout is likely to increase the risk of further human rights violations and inflame tensions."

ALSO READ | Congress's Jyotiraditya Scindia backs Modi govt move on Article 370, J&K bifurcation

ALSO WATCH | Full speech: Amit Shah has the last words on Article 370 debate
