[TWEET] Ahan Shetty and Tara Sutaria starrer RX-100 remake goes on floors in Mumbai

Ahan-Tara starrer RX-100 remake goes on floors in Mumbai | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Ahan Shetty and Tara Sutaria starrer RX-100 remake went on floors today The movie will mark the debut of Suneil Shetty's son and is being directed by Milan Luthria

After star kids, Ananya Pandey, Janhvi Kapoor, and Sara Ali Khan's debut in the film industry, Suniel Shetty's son Ahan Shetty is all set to dip his toes in Bollywood with the remake of the hit south film RX-100. Ever since its inception, the Milan Luthria directorial has been garnering headlines and for all the good reasons. Along with Ahan Shetty, the flick will also star Tara Sutaria, who made her Bollywood debut with Punit Malhotra's Student Of The Year 2.

According to the latest updates, the shooting of the Ahan and Tara starrer went on floors today and the actors first shoot location was a theatre in South Mumbai. Trade analyst Taran Adarsh revealed the same with a tweet on social media that read, "Ahan Shetty - son of Suniel Shetty - begins his journey in #Hindi films... His debut film - the #Hindi adaptation of #Telugu film #RX100 - begins filming today at a South Mumbai theatre... Costars Tara Sutaria... Directed by Milan Luthria... Produced by Sajid Nadiadwala."

Check out the tweet below:

Ahan Shetty - son of Suniel Shetty - begins his journey in #Hindi films... His debut film - the #Hindi adaptation of #Telugu film #RX100 - begins filming today at a South Mumbai theatre... Costars Tara Sutaria... Directed by Milan Luthria... Produced by Sajid Nadiadwala. pic.twitter.com/GU94TuBfJK — taran adarsh (@taran_adarsh) August 6, 2019

Film exhibitor Akshaye Rathi wished the debutant all the luck on his first day of the shoot. His tweet read, "Here’s wishing #AhanShetty the very best on his first day of shoot! Even if he is half as nice a person as his father @SunielVShetty (which I am sure he is), he’d earn a hell lot of love & blessings in the years to come! #RX100"

Here’s wishing #AhanShetty the very best on his first day of shoot! Even if he is half as nice a person as his father @SunielVShetty (which I am sure he is), he’d earn a hell lot of love & blessings in the years to come! #RX100 — Akshaye Rathi (@akshayerathi) August 6, 2019

The movie has been titled Tadap, and in a recent interaction with a leading daily, director Milan Luthra opened up about his forthcoming film and was quoted as saying, "While Ahan Shetty begins shooting for Tadap today, his co-star Tara Sutaria will join him and the team at a later date. However, she will be present for lunch on the first day, but isn’t a part of the shoot."

Another report claimed Ahan's character runs a cinema theatre and to find the perfect match, the makers recced several theatres including Navrang, Aurora, Deepak and Novelty. Finally, the team decided to go with Central Plaza, as it is neither vintage nor swanky.

Meanwhile, RX-100 was helmed by Ajay Bhupathi and starred Kartikeya Gummakonda and Payal Rajput in lead roles. The Telugu movie released last year.
