Mobile slaughterhouses for Bakr Eid? BMC mulls over options

The suggestion also included that the vehicle can be equipped with a cold room so that animals can be slaughtered in a clean environment. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A similar initiative has been taken by the Sharjah Municipality of United Arab Emirates The residents can book their appointments to avail the service A veterinarian can also be on board for supervising the process

Mumbai: The Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) has received a request to start mobile slaughterhouses services for the upcoming festival of Bakrid. A similar initiative has been taken by the Sharjah Municipality of United Arab Emirates.

According to sources, the new mobile slaughterhouse on wheels will ease pressure on the civic body. A veterinarian can also be on board for supervising the process, the portable slaughterhouse can also be equipped with tools and complete with water supply, drainage pipes and shelves with hangers.

In order to maintain the hygiene level of the slaughterhouse, the cold temperature should be maintained, so that the slaughtering process won’t be affected by the heat of the summer weather. The suggestion also included that the vehicle can be equipped with a cold room so that animals can be slaughtered in a clean environment.

It also stated that the vehicle can drive down to the residences of those who are looking to make the ritual sacrifice during the festive period. The residents can book their appointments to avail the service. The request was put forward by men named Irfan Machhiwala and Farooque Dhala.

They also requested that the service can be requested at a nominal fee by which BMC can earn revenue. The civic body can transform some buses into mobile slaughterhouses to meet some of the public’s demands. These buses can be modified and equipped with all slaughter and veterinary requirements.

The request also mentioned that the mobile slaughterhouse could be equipped to slaughter smaller animals such as goats and sheep, customised with the three sections for sacrifice including a section to cut the carcasses and then delivered to the owner. In order to maintain hygiene in the process, the slaughterhouse should be well equipped with a water supply and drainage with a corner for garbage disposal.
