Vengeful arsonist set fire to love rival's Mercedes

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the latest crime news direct to your inbox with the Derbyshire Crime newsletter

A jealous arsonist who deliberately set fire to a love rival’s Mercedes car has escaped an immediate prison sentence.

A court heard how Daniel Walford was drunk when he phoned his partner and told her “I am going to do something stupid”.

Her response was to tell the 31-year-old “whatever it is don’t do it”.

But when she returned home she found police and the fire service in her street and discovered that her former boyfriend’s car, which was parked outside her property, had been set alight by Walford.

A revenge attack

Handing him an 18-week jail term, suspended for 18 months, magistrates told him: “This was a revenge attack, you were drunk and it was pre-meditated.”

Emma Heath-Tilford, prosecuting, said the offence took place in Overdale, Matlock, on the evening of August 27 last year.

She told Southern Derbyshire Magistrates’ Court how the woman and Walford had been in a relationship at that time for around five months.

But she still saw her former partner as she and him have children together and, on the day of the offence, he had been at her home seeing them.

'I'm going to do something stupid'

Miss Heath-Tilford said: “At around 6.30pm he (the ex-partner) was looking at catching a train to get him back to his address and leaving his car (outside her home).

“She and the children got into her car and drove him to a nearby station.

“She later told police at that point the defendant and the man had never met and there had been no issues between them.

“But as she drove back to her address she called the defendant as she’d had a missed call from him.

“As she spoke to him he said to her ‘I am going to do something stupid’ to which she replied ‘whatever it is don’t do it’.”

Miss Heath-Tilford said that when she arrived back at her home in Overdale, Matlock, the police and fire service were there and the woman’s ex-partner’s car had been set alight.

She said Walford, of Delhi Close, Burton, was linked to starting the fire by a member of the public who had gone to put the flames out at the time of the blaze.

£3,000 of damage to Mercedes

She said the total cost of the damage was estimated to be around £3,000 and that the woman ended her relationship with Walford immediately.

He pleaded guilty to one count of arson at an earlier hearing and his sentencing was adjourned so that probation reports could be prepared.

Amjad Ibrahim, for Walford, said his client had a number of mental health issues and had been diagnosed with ADHD.

Terrified of going to jail

He said: “He is a person whose mind is not 100% right.

“If he had been sober and had taken his medication this would never have happened.

“He is absolutely petrified of the prospect of going to prison.”

As well as the suspended jail term, Walford was ordered to pay £500 compensation, £85 costs and a £115 victim surcharge.

He was also ordered to attend 14 rehabilitation activity requirement days.
