J&K is now free from shackles: PM Modi hails passage of J&K Reorganisation Bill in Parliament

Prime Minister Narendra Modi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights A momentous occasion: PM Modi after passage of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill 2019 PM Modi said that the Bill will ensure integration and empowerment in J&K The Bill seeks to bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir in two Union Territories: Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh

New Delhi: Elated by the passage of Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 that seeks to bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir in two Union Territories, Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday, August 6, lauded the people of Jammu, Kashmir, and Ladakh for their “courage and resilience”.

The prime minister also launched a blistering attack at critics of the Bill, asserting the “vested interest groups” never cared for people’s empowerment and emotionally blackmailed them.

“Together we are, together we shall rise and together we will fulfil the dreams of 130 crore Indians! A momentous occasion in our Parliamentary democracy, where landmark bills pertaining to Jammu and Kashmir have been passed with overwhelming support!” he said in a series of tweets.

Special congratulations to the people of Ladakh! It is a matter of great joy that their long-standing demand of being declared a Union Territory has been fulfilled. This decision will give impetus to the overall prosperity of the region and ensure better developmental facilities. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) August 6, 2019

“I salute my sisters and brothers of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh for their courage and resilience. For years, vested interest groups who believed in emotional blackmail never cared for people’s empowerment. J&K is now free from their shackles. A new dawn, better tomorrow awaits!” he added.

The Lok Sabha earlier today passed the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019 that seeks to bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir in two Union Territories: Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh with majority votes in favour. Further, the lower house of Parliament approved the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Second Amendment) Bill, 2019 that proposes to extend the 10 per cent quota to economically weaker sections of the society in J&K in jobs and educational institutions. Both the bills were passed by the Rajya Sabha unanimously.

Prime Minister Modi underscored that both Bills will ensure integration and empowerment and help bring the youth into the mainstream.

“These steps will bring the youth into the mainstream and give them innumerable opportunities to showcase their skills and talents. Local infrastructure will significantly improve,” the PM said in another tweet.

Congratulating the people of Ladakh, the PM tweeted, “Special congratulations to the people of Ladakh! It is a matter of great joy that their long-standing demand of being declared a Union Territory has been fulfilled. This decision will give impetus to the overall prosperity of the region and ensure better developmental facilities.”

The Prime Minister further said that key Bills are a fitting tribute to "Sardar Patel, who worked for India’s unity, Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar, whose views are well known and Dr SP Mookerjee who devoted his life for India’s unity and integrity."

He further praised the Opposition parties for keeping aside their ideological differences and voting in favour of the Bills.

In Parliament, political parties rose to the occasion, overcame ideological differences and took part in a rich debate that increased the pride of our Parliamentary democracy. For that, I congratulate all MPs, various political parties and their leaders. — Narendra Modi (@narendramodi) August 6, 2019

“People of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh would be proud that MPs overcame differences and discussed the future of these regions as well as ensuring peace, progress and prosperity there. The widespread support can be clearly seen in the final numbers,” he added.
