Punjab: Man in custody shoots self with service weapon of ASI; cop suspended

LUDHIANA: A medical practitioner (RMP) Nardeep Singh arrested for drug peddling on Monday, has allegedly shot himself in police station Samrala using 9mm pistol- service weapon of an assistant sub-inspector (ASI) in Tuesday morning. The ASI was questioning him to get case file ready to present accused in court, for a few minutes ASI left the room and meanwhile the accused shot himself dead. The weapon was kept by ASI in the table drawer.Following the death, kin of deceased staged protest outside police station by blocking Ludhiana- Chandigarh state highway demanding murder case against the cop. The kin also alleged that the police have murdered Nardeep. After this incident, the ASI Rajinder Singh has been suspended with immediate effect and a departmental inquiry has been marked against him by Khanna senior superintendent of police (SSP), Gursharandeep Singh Nardeep Singh, 47, of Village Manjaliyan of Samrala, who runs a clinic in his village was arrested by Samrala police on Monday. The police also recovered 70 intoxicating pills, inclduing 40 tramadol and 40 gm narcotic powder.Superintendent of police (detective) of Khanna, Jasvir Singh said the incident occurred at around 11:30am. ASI Rajinder Singh, who was investigating officer in Nardeep's case was supposed to take him to produce before court. Before that, ASI took him to his room on first floor to complete the case file. Both were inside the room for almost one hour. Meanwhile ASI came downstairs to get some documents, while his service weapon was in the table drawer. In next few minutes Nardeep took out the weapon and shoot himself in head.Soon after the incident, senior officials followed by forensic experts reached on spot.Paramjit Kaur, wife of deceased alleged that her husband has been murdered therefore the SHO inspector Sukhvir Singh and investigating officer ASI Rajinder Singh should be booked under murder charges.She also alleged that the police are trying to make it look like a suicide.With these allegations the kin staged a protest for almost three hours. Meanwhile the police tried to pacify them stating that judicial inquiry has been marked."When by late afternoon magistrate visited spot, the family get pacified and ended protest. The family has not agreed to accept the judicial inquiry report" added SP Jasvir Singh.
