Cong a divided house as some key leaders back govt on J&K

NEW DELHI: Congress GenNext leaders and former MPs Jyotiraditya Scindia and Deepender Hooda gave their full-throated backing to the Narendra Modi government’s decision to turn Article 370 into a dead letter, at sharp variance with party leader Rahul Gandhi who strongly criticised the move.The cracks in Congress, already under strain over recent defections and a power vacuum following Rahul’s decision to quit as party chief, widened, with Scindia and Hooda — seen to be close to the Gandhi scion —differing over as crucial an issue as Article 370 and Jammu and Kashmir The statements came a day after Congress chief whip in Rajya Sabha Bhuneswar Kalita quit in protest against the party’s opposition to the undoing of Article 370 and reflect a serious drift over a major political issue where it might find itself far removed from popular support for the move. Kalita, an old loyalist, held key party responsibility in Rajya Sabha.The developments have again — as they did over the party’s opposition to the bill to ban triple talaq and its failure to stall amendments to the RTI Act — brought into focus the need for a review and reorientation that goes beyond tactical adjustments in Parliament.Scindia tweeted, “I support the move on J&K and Ladakh, and its full integration into Union of India. It would have been better if constitutional process had been followed. No questions could have been raised then. Nevertheless, this is in our country’s interest and I support this.”In a similar comment, Hooda said, “It has been my belief that Article 370 has no relevance in 21st century and it should be scrapped. It is in the interest of national integrity and of people of Jammu and Kashmir who are inseparable part of our country. But it is the government’s responsibility that the decision is implemented in the atmosphere of peace and trust.”Given their proximity to Rahul, their comments appeared a virtual revolt. Crucially, the comments came after Rahul tweeted, “National integration isn’t furthered by unilaterally tearing apart J&K, imprisoning elected representatives and violating our Constitution. This nation is made by its people, not plots of land. This abuse of executive power has grave implications for our national security.”Their unambiguous support to the BJP government’s decision followed similar enthusiastic comments from Congress spokesman Abhishek Singhvi , former MPs Milind Deora and Jyoti Mirdha, UP MLA Aditi Singh and former MP and ex-general secretary Janardan Dwivedi.The growing dissent in the party provoked Ghulam Nabi Azad , who is the face of Congress opposition to the government’s move, into strongly snubbing his colleagues. “Those who do not know the history of Jammu and Kashmir and the party, I have nothing to talk with them. They need to study the history of J&K and Congress, and then they should remain in the party,” the leader of opposition in Rajya Sabha told reporters in Parliament complex.Caught off-guard by the government’s move on Article 370 on Monday, Congress instinctively opposed the decision, treating the constitutional provision as party legacy built into the process of integrating J&K with India in the tumultuous post-Independence phase. The party also possibly considered the virtual revocation of the article going down badly with sections of Muslims across the country.However, there was realisation within that the government move would have tremendous public support and Congress would come across as opposing the cementing of J&K’s bond with the country, a sensitive issue with the rest of India in view of the border state’s history of separatism and terrorism.The party stance has left its members worried that it would hurt their political prospects.
