Charged in drugs case, RMP ‘shoots self’ in police station

editorial@tribune.com

Gurminder S Grewal

Khanna/Samrala, August 6

A registered medical practitioner (RMP) of a nearby village, who was arrested by the Samrala police with intoxicant tablets and powder last evening, was allegedly killed inside the Samrala police sation in a mysterious firing incident. However, the police termed it as a case of suicide and said the doctor shot himself dead with the service revolver of an ASI.

The deceased have been identified as Nardeep Singh Sethi (46), a resident of Manjali Kalan village, near here. After the incident the family members and a number of villagers gathered in front of the Samrala police station and blocked traffic demanding probe into the death of the doctor.

The SSP, Khanna, GS Grewal, ordered a judicial inquiry into the matter.

As per information, Nardeep was taken out from the lock-up at about 9.30 am by an ASI, Rajinder Singh, who took him to his room for some questioning and to complete documents to present Nardeep in the court regarding the case under the NDPS Act. When the ASI came to the room of the munshi to bring some papers, suddenly Nardeep took out the service revolver of the ASI from the drawer and shot himself dead.

After the firing incident police personnel rushed to the site and found Nardeep dead. Soon the matter was reported to senior police officials. The SP (I), Khanna, Jasvir Singh, DSP, Samrala, and others reached the spot and started investigation.

As the news of the death of the doctor spread, people started gathering outside the police station. After the arrival of family members and leaders of different organisations there they blocked traffic on the Ludhiana-Chandigarh road in front of the police station.

Amanjot, son of the deceased, along with others demanded action against the police officials concerned and they termed the incident as murder of Nardeep. Some villagers also alleged that the RMP doctor was taken into custody by the Samrala police from his clinic at Bagli village village, although the police claimed that Nardeep was arrested during a naka near Samrala and intoxicant tablets and powder was recovered from his possession.

Meanwhile, Judicial judges reached the police station and started a judicial inquiry into the incident.

The SSP, Khanna, Gursharndeep Singh Grewal, said the ASI was suspended with immediate effect and the next course of action would be taken after the judicial inquiry. Any dereliction in duty would not be tolerated.

Third ‘suicide’
