War of the titles: After removal of Jammu & Kashmir's special status, filmmakers rush to register titles such as ‘Article 370’ and ‘Article 35A’

Srinagar

Bollywood

Pulwama

Article 370

Anubhav Sinha

Narendra Modi

Vivek Oberoi

Soon after Indian Air Force’s strike in Balakot on February 26 in response to Pakistan’s attack on CRPF personnel inproducers thronged the offices of Indian Motion Pictures Producers Association (IMPPA), Producers Guild of India and Indian Film TV Producers Council (IFTPC) to register film titles—post the success of Uri: The Surgical Strike barely a month ago, the event was identified, among other things, as premise for another potential blockbuster. Names like Pulwama: The Deadly Attack, Surgical Strike 2.0, Balakot andAttacks, among others were blocked within no time. One particularly visionary filmmaker claimed a title referring to IAF pilot Abhinandan Varthaman, who had received a hero’s welcome after being held captive across the border for 60 hours.Now, the Central Government’s decision to revoke, which granted Jammu and Kashmir special status, has elicited a similar reaction. Between Monday and Tuesday, over 50 titles pertaining to the historic move are said to have been registered at various Hindi film bodies. “Taking a cue from the success of (’s recently released Ayushmann Khurrana-starrer) Article 15, the titles ‘Article 370’ and ‘Article 35A’ are the first choice of most filmmakers. The associations have received at least 25-30 applications for them,” reveals a source close to the development, adding that the more theatrically-inclined ones have opted for titles like ‘Kashmir Mein Tiranga’, ‘Kashmir Hamara Hai’, ‘Dhara 370’ and ‘Dhara 35A’.The source goes on to reveal that top production houses are also entering the fray. “Some of them are keen to seek permission at the earliest to make a film on the event so that they can proceed with the research, cast and get other logistics in place.”Trade analyst Atul Mohan points out, “Filmmakers had rushed to register titles around the Uri attacks, Pulwama attacks and demonetisation as well. Films on such subjects pique the audience’s curiosity.”Anand Pandit, producer of the PMbiopic featuring, downplays the timing of the phenomenon by saying that he had registered the titles ‘Article 370’ and ‘Article 35A’ a month ago. “I wanted to explore why one state was granted such privileges. But after the historic redrawing of our map by our Prime Minister Narendra Modi, I have just found the perfect ending for my film. From a film based on history, it is now going to be a historic film,” he says.Filmmaker Vijay Galani also insists us that he has been working on a script set in Kashmir for a while now, and given the current political scenario, ‘Article 370’ makes for a perfect title. “Following the decision on Monday, someone suggested that I get two titles— ‘Article 370’ and ‘Article 35A’—registered. You will hear more about my film soon,” he promises.
