Unnao rape survivor still on life support

Was airlifted to AIIMS; team of five doctors formed to monitor her health



NEWDELHI The Unnao rape survivor admitted to the AIIMS Trauma Centre remains critical and is on life support system, sources at the hospital said on Tuesday. The survivor’s lawyer, who was also critically injured, was admitted to the Trauma Centre on Tuesday. The survivor has been kept in the ICU.



The Delhi Traffic Police had created a green corridor on Monday to shift the rape survivor from the Indira Gandhi International Airport to the Trauma Centre at the All India Institute of Medical Science (AIIMS), covering a distance of around 14 km in 18 minutes.



“She is sick and on life support system needing medication to support her blood pressure. The patient remains critical and is undergoing treatment under multi-disciplinary team of doctors,” sources at the hospital said.



The rape survivor, who suffered critical injuries in a car-truck collision last week, was airlifted to New Delhi from Lucknow on Monday for further treatment following a Supreme Court directive, police said.



The victim and her lawyer suffered critical injuries in the accident which took place in Raebareli. Two of her relatives were killed in the incident.



AIIMS has formed a committee of five senior doctors to monitor the health condition of Unnao rape survivor.



The team, constituted last night has onboard doctors from across the disciplines, who closely observing the health condition and treating the survivor whose condition remains critical and is on a life support system.



The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), which has taken over the investigation into the accident, has booked 10 people for murder, including Uttar Pradesh MLA Kuldeep Singh Sengar, who is already in jail, charged with the rape of the woman in 2017 when she was a minor.



Lawyer moved to AIIMS



#NEWDELHI The Unnao rape victim’s lawyer, Mahendra Singh, reached the AIIMS Trauma Centre here on Tuesday afternoon. The lawyer, injured in a July 28 truck-car crash along with the victim, was flown from Lucknow and reached AIIMS at 1.30 pm, said Manish Aggarwal, Director of the Aeromed International Rescue Services.


