41 days on, wife’s killer revisits crime spot, nabbed

Ludhiana: Visiting his previous accommodation in Muslim Colony, Sherpur Kalan, where he allegedly murdered his 27-year-old wife did a man in. Vinod Kumar (30) was arrested on Monday after giving police the slip for 41 days following the crime.

Vinod had escaped with his six-year-old daughter after allegedly killing his wife in the colony on June 26.

Acting on a tip-off, the Moti Nagar police nabbed the accused on Monday evening.

According to officials, Vinod has confessed that he strangulated his wife to death as she was involved in an illicit relationship. A mason by profession, Vinod had got married to Krishna Devi, 27, seven years back and had a six-year-old daughter from the marriage.

Inspector Pragat Singh, SHO, Moti Nagar police station, said the police was searching for the accused. A few days ago, the police got information that the accused is living in another rented accommodation in the Sherpur area.

On Monday, when police team reached the rented accommodation, the landlord said Vinod along with his daughter had gone to his previous accommodation to get some household stuff.

“The police team reached the rented accommodation at Muslim Colony where Vinod had been putting up earlier his family and nabbed him,” the inspector added.

“The accused has confessed that he strangulated Krishna to death as she had been involved in an extramarital affair for the past six months. Two months before the murder, he came to know about her relationship. He tried to deter Krishna from her affair, but to no avail. On the day of crime, they had fought over the same issue following which he strangulated her death,” said the inspector.

In the afternoon of June 26, Krishna was found dead in the one-room accommodation. A distant relative Akash saw the body in the evening and raised the alarm.

Official said after killing his wife, Vinod with her daughter reached the house of Krishna’s brother Raju at Daad village and even asked Raju’s wife about Krishna’s whereabouts, claiming that she had left the house following a fight last night. However, Raju and his wife took the matter lightly.

Vinod had been booked under Section 302 (murder) of IPC.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
