Army values & culture helped this dealer fight all battles, Auto News, ET Auto

Bengaluru: Some say no matter how far you go, you should never forget your roots. Samir Choudhry, the dealer principal of Trident Automobiles who comes from a family of army personnel, feels implementation of army culture helped him build a robust business. He built a Rs 1500 crore business in 20 years and provided employment to over 3000 people, a growth massive jump from 30 people in 1998.Samir had cleared exams to be an officer, but entered business after his father’s suggestion. He began his journey with manufacturing of a small auto component and later moved to dealership business. Samir, a firm believer in values and culture in army, started the dealership venture with his first hire being a retired officer. The idea was to inculcate regiment values and discipline in the company.At Trident outlets, there is a unique sight, where all staff will be seen gathered at one place in the dealership premises at a fixed time for prayer, followed by warm up exercises leading to chanting of national anthem before they move to their respective work stations.Adopting the strict time discipline of army, the dealerships of Trident also have very stern rules on start and end of the work which is 9:30 AM to 6:30 PM. Choudhry says to ensure the efficiency of employees, fixed timings are crucial. “We are intolerant to a great degree if people do not finish work in given time. I want people to leave home on time and spend time with family. I don’t like employees hanging around post working hours.”Choudhry has established a clear 9 hours work policy which includes lunch breaks. “Extending working hours does not make much difference as the same can be achieved if the time management is good,” he said.Another practice the dealership adheres to is aligning all the employees in one direction along with the captain just like in a navy. This implies that all the employees need to be on the same page when it comes to work as well as the training.Choudhry further explained that the company works and trains its employees as per the individual needs. “Training depends on the job an employee is given. While OEM focuses on mass training, it’s natural that individual flaws are not necessarily addressed. Thus, at Trident, employees are given training as per their weaknesses and needs,” Choudhry added.According to him, empowering employees in every way the company can has been of the key learning for this dealer in his business span of more than 20 years. He further stressed that once the objectives are being told to the workers, there is no interference from the management.“We do have a system of checks and balances along with periodic reviews, but if you ask me how much time I spend with the head of sales for a brand, it is around 6 hours a month,” he said while claiming that this system is working very well for the company.Right from the start, he and his brother had stuck to the idea of having an owned property rather than renting ones to mitigate any risk in future. All the savings from exiting manufacturing business (small components) had been used to buy a decent size showroom and service centre for Hyundai. More than half of the properties are owned by Trident presently.Over the years, Trident Automobiles have incorporated five more brands- Renault, Bharat Benz, Chevy, Honda, Isuzu apart from Hyundai. According to Choudhry, sales used to be easier 20 years back when Maruti and Hyundai were the only players. Competition had increased with other brands coming to India and that required different set of strategies. To counter this, the company analysed the demand from different regions and expanded with these brands accordingly.It’s not always been a bed of roses for Choudhry, as he also had to suffer and close down an outlet after difference with the manufacturer.“Even now we are dealing with a manufacturer who is not clear with the objective and this impacts the business. Few years back, we expanded rapidly which did not board well for us and we had to shut down operations in 5 cities,” he added saying that he would reverse the decision if he could.However, the current sales slowdown has made no major impact on this dealership as the sales remain intact. The company overall turnover fell to 1514 crore in FY19 compared to 1522 crore in FY18. While the profitability remains at 2 per cent. The company claims to have got 40 per cent of profit from sales which include auxiliary instruments like finance, insurance and accessories.Contrary to the blues across retail community, Trident claims to be in for further expansion. The company currently have a total of 41 outlets is aiming to open at least five new outlets this year. This includes one showroom each for Hyundai and Renault and three for Bharat-Benz.While in order to safeguard the impact of slowdown, the company has adopted austerity and efficiency measure. The company has gone into controlling the buying pattern of utility stuff like coffee cups etc. Now most these are bought in wholesales.
