India’s Bad Bet in Kashmir by Ramesh Thakur

Ramesh Thakur urges India to cooperate with Pakistan to resolve the Kashmir conflict, blending pragmatism with political realism. To start with, both countries could turn the International Border into “an official, open” crossing so that Indians and Pakistanis “could travel freely.” Easing restrictions would enable people on both sides to interact, boost “market integration, and cooperation” in many areas, “from tourism to environmental management.” The benefits could be enormous – “shared prosperity” and regional security.

Kashmir has been a flashpoint between India and Pakistan for seven decades. Before India revoked Kashmir’s special status, a border - the Line of Control - divided the region in two, with one part administered by India and one by Pakistan. India would like to formalise this status quo and make it the accepted international boundary. But Pakistan and Kashmiri activists rejected this plan because they both want greater control over the region.

In 1947-8 India and Pakistan fought their first war over Jammu and Kashmir. Under UN supervision, they agreed to a ceasefire along a line which left one-third of the state - comprising what Pakistan calls Azad Jammu and Kashmir, and the Northern Areas administered by Pakistan and two-thirds, Jammu, Ladakh and the Kashmir Valley, administered by India. In 1972 the ceasefire line was renamed the Line of Control.

Although India claimed that the entire state is part of India, it was prepared to accept the Line of Control as an internationally-recognised border, with some possible modifications. This plan was also favoured by the US and the UK. But Pakistan refused to accept the Line of Control as the border since the predominantly Muslim Kashmir Valley would remain as part of India. Formalising the status quo would not take into account the aspirations of those Kashmiris who have been fighting since 1989 for independence for the whole or part of the state.

Peace in the region will only be achieved when India and Pakistan are willing to make painful concessions – letting Kashmiris to have a say about the future of their homeland. In 1947 India and Pakistan agreed that the fate of the state of Jammu and Kashmir should be decided by a plebiscite. The idea was endorsed by the UN Security Council, and widely considered as a way of letting Kashmiris exercise their right of self-determination.

Kashmiris could vote to join Pakistan, which would be welcomed by Islamabad. Given the state's majority Muslim population, it was most likely that the majority of Kashmiris would vote in favour of Pakistan, and the whole state would become part of Pakistan. However such a vote would create disaffected minorities, that are culturally, religiously and ethnically diverse. The Hindus of Jammu, and the Buddhists of Ladakh have never shown any desire to join Pakistan and would protest at such a move.

The idea of Kashmir joining India would most likely destabilise the region as the Muslims of Pakistani-administered Jammu and Kashmir, including the Northern Areas, have never wanted to be part of India. If the plebiscite had been held and the majority had voted in favour of India, Pakistan would have had to relinquish control of the Northern Areas and the narrow strip of Jammu and Kashmir which it occupied in 1947-8.

A plebiscite offering the choice of union with Pakistan or India also does not take into account the Kashmiris’ aspiration for independence, which has been supported by political and militant activists since 1989. India has long since rejected the idea of holding a single plebiscite as a means of deciding the fate of the state of Jammu and Kashmir. It argues that the people have their right of self-determination by participating in elections within the state.

Kashmiris’ option of full independence from both India and Pakistan would require both Delhi and Islamabad to give up territory, which they are not willing to do. Any plebiscite likely to result in a majority vote for independence would probably be opposed by both India and Pakistan. It would also be rejected by the inhabitants of the state who are content with their status as part of the countries to which they already owe allegiance. An independent Jammu and Kashmir might also set in motion the demand for independence by other states in both India and Pakistan and lead to a "Balkanisation" of the region.

An independent Kashmir could be created from the Kashmir Valley - currently under Indian administration - and the narrow strip of land which Pakistan calls Azad Jammu and Kashmir. This would leave the strategically important regions of the Northern Areas and Ladakh, bordering China, under the control of Pakistan and India respectively. However both India and Pakistan would be unlikely to enter into discussions which would have this scenario as a possible outcome.

An independent Kashmir Valley has been considered by some as the best solution because it would address the grievances of those who have been fighting against the Indian Government since the insurgency began in 1989. But critics say that, without external assistance, the region would not be economically viable.

The Chenab formula, first suggested in the 1960s, would see Kashmir divided along the line of the River Chenab. This would give the vast majority of land to Pakistan and, as such, a clear victory in its longstanding dispute with India. The entire valley with its Muslim majority population would be brought within Pakistan's borders, as well as the majority Muslim areas of Jammu.

Unfortunately India’s ruling party under Narendra Modi pursues the agenda of a Hindu nationalist renaissance. Its supporters believe that investment would bring peace and stability to Kashmir, and turning it into a “union territory” closely supervised by Delhi would be the integration needed to develop the restive region.

Although Pakistan has a civilian government, which said it would not be seeking a military option with India over Kashmir, the country is de facto ruled by powerful top brass, whose army chief said the country's military will "go to any extent" to support people in the contested Kashmir region.

It explains why the Indian subcontinent is a tinderbox. Pakistan has the “will and the means” to give India a hard time with its “small-scale mischief.” And India will not climb up the ladder to “global prominence” with “one foot stuck” in the Kashmir quagmire with Pakistan.
