Mumbai: Better late than never, judgment in 5-year-old shooting case announced

The incident happened in the luggage compartment of the Ambernath local after one of the accused men stepped on the victim's toe (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Mumbai: Justice has been served as a group of men have been convicted for attacking a man. The incident which happened five years ago has been brought back in the news with the announcement of the judgement. The accused men have now been sentenced to life imprisonment for five years.

Five years ago, a man was shot in the luggage compartment of an Ambernath local. A sessions court has now convicted the group of men involved and has sentenced them to five years of life imprisonment for attacking the victim.

Also Read: Budget 2019: Reduce medical expenses, say senior citizens

The victim, Tabrez Jethwa was a resident of Mumbra and was 30-years-old. He was travelling in the Ambernath bound local when one of the accused stepped on his toes. After a heated argument, he was allegedly attacked by the accused men but he fortunately survived.

According to the Times of India, one of the convicts is Guddu Shaikh who goes by the name Munna. Tagged as habitual offenders by the prosecution, the accused men were arrested in January 2014 for their parts to play in various crimes.

Jethwa stated that while travelling in the local on January 7 2013, he got into the luggage compartment and was sitting on the floor when the accused men entered the train on the Vikhroli station. When one of the accused stepped on his foot, Jethwa asked him to be careful, in reply to which, the accused abused him. After Jethwa asked him to stop, he was threatened by the men. At 12.05 am, when the train reached the Nahur station, Jethwa was shot by the man who had stepped on his foot. After shooting, the accused men fled from the train.

Earlier, Munna's bail request was rejected while the other accused men were out on bail. The Bombay High Court was told in 2017 that one of the bullets was shot in Jethwa's chest and could not be removed.
