Sushma Swaraj and Sonia Gandhi – The most memorable encounters

Former External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj and Former Congress President Sonia Gandhi | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Sushma Swaraj and Sonia Gandhi have been top political leaders of our generation Both the leaders come from divergent backgrounds and represent different ideologies Sushma Swaraj took on Sonia Gandhi in direct electoral battle in Bellary in 1999

Two different women from polar backgrounds towered over the political passage of our generation. The binary of Sushma Swaraj and Sonia Gandhi evokes very different sentiments in the increasingly tangent belief systems of current day ideologies.

Sonia Gandhi represented the elite, Gandhi-Nehru family which has been the dominant force through most of the political history of Independent India. Privilege and entitlement have come naturally to them, a surname that is more valuable than talent and accomplishment. Nevertheless, their cognomen has been the glue that has bonded the oldest political party for nearly a century.

Sushma Swaraj, one of her fiercest rivals, was born into a middle-class family of RSS members in Haryana. She graduated from Panjab University and went on to become a Supreme Court lawyer; her encounter with politics started during college days when she joined Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad (ABVP) as a student leader.

Sushma was only 23 when Emergency was imposed by Indira Gandhi but took to protesting the declaration with zeal. Displaying grit and great oratorical skills, she was seen as a rising political star and by the age 25 years, she became the youngest to be inducted as a minister in a cabinet; this was Devi Lal’s ministry in Haryana in 1977.



(L-R) Sonia Gandhi, LK Advani and Sushma Swaraj | Pic Credit: BCCL



In contrast, Sonia Gandhi was a reluctant entrant into politics, happy to play the role of a housewife until she was forced to continue the legacy and claim the family mantle upon the brutal assassination of her husband Rajiv Gandhi. Barring the fact she was married into a political family, she had little interest in governance, policies and had never made a public speech.

So while Swaraj rose up the political rungs quite deliberately and through aggressive strategy, Gandhi was circumstantially catapulted into the intense national political scene of India. There was yet another landmark divergence, Sushma Swaraj was the daughter of the soil, while Sonia Gandhi had Italian antecedents and has been viewed as a ‘videshi bahu’ (daughter-in-law of foreign origin) all her life. This distinction became the most defining reason for their political disputes.





Sushma Swaraj addressing a gathering at Bellary | Pic Credit: BCCL



The first one-on-one encounter between Swaraj and Gandhi happened in the Kurukshetra of Bellary in Karnataka. Sonia Gandhi, who had recently taken the political plunge, was contesting from the family pocket borough of Amethi and the safe seat of Bellary. The BJP sprung a surprise, unleashing the dynamic Chief Minister of Delhi, Sushma Swaraj as the rival candidate. This was one of the most challenging electoral battles that Sushma could have been asked to take up, but the firebrand leader took up the assignment with fervour. She put up a tough fight, even addressing crowds in Kannada. And though Sonia Gandhi eventually won, the margin was only 56,000 votes; it was a huge achievement for Swaraj, considering the seat was retained by the Congress since 1952. By taking on the queen of the Congress in this iconic battle, Sushma Swaraj had ensured a seat on BJP’s top table.



Pic Credit: BCCL

Sushma’s efforts in Bellary also dented the Congress’ prospects in the future. Eventually, the constituency voted for the BJP in 2004 when G Karunakara Reddy contested. Sushma Swaraj upped the ante once again, and in perhaps a bitterer melee of a personal kind in 2004, when the Congress-led United Progressive Alliance won the General Elections. Speculation was rife whether Sonia Gandhi would become the Prime Minister; that was the initial thought it seemed. Sushma Swaraj whipped up public sentiment against a foreign origin woman becoming the head of the government in a country of a billion Indians! Sushma swore to shave her head, wear a white saree and live a life of a Hindu widow if this was to come to pass. Eventually, Dr Manmohan Singh was handpicked for the post, and tempers soothed, but this particular incident has become folklore.

Sonia Gandhi returned the favour, though in a smaller dose when a controversial case regarding Lalit Modi came up in Parliament in 2015 and the foreign minister’s name was dragged in it. Though Swaraj gave her clarification, the Congress’ attack on her was unrelenting and vitriolic. In a rare display of emotion, Sonia Gandhi slammed Sushma, calling her an expert in “theatrics”.

Eventually, with time, the animosity between the two seemed to have tempered down, with both exchanging pleasantries; occasionally making a laudatory remark or two about each other.



Sonia Gandhi paying last respects to Sushma Swaraj | Pic Credit: PTI

On Tuesday night (August 6) when Sushma Swaraj passed away, Sonia Gandhi was among the first to express her grief and was seen consoling Sushma’s family at their residence the next morning. Sonia Gandhi’s condolence letter to her husband Swaraj Kaushal is heartfelt and goes to show how much the acrimony between the two of our greatest leaders had diminished towards the end.
