Delhi Police arrests 3 from Ghaziabad for murder of 30-year-old man in Delhi's Nand Nagri area

However, the police arrested them from Loni in Ghaziabad. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The police officials said that some three to four men allegedly shot at the victim on Monday night outside his house The trio was absconding since Monday but later they were arrested from Loni in Ghaziabad

New Delhi: In a case reported from the national capital, three people were arrested for allegedly killing their 30-year-old neighbour in Northeast Delhi's Nand Nagri area. The police confirmed the arrests to the media on Wednesday. The accused were identified as 29-year-old Sumit, 22-year-old Raj and 31-year-old Ajay Tyagi. The police officials said that some three to four men allegedly shot at the victim on Monday night outside his house.

Reportedly, the victim was immediately rushed to the Guru Tegh Bahadur Hospital where he succumbed to his injuries. The trio was absconding since Monday. However, the police arrested them from Loni in Ghaziabad. The deceased was identified as Vicky. Reportedly as many as four cases of robbery were registered against Vicky - three in Shahdara district and one at the Nand Nagri police station.

Meanwhile, during the preliminary investigation, it was found that Sumit was involved in a tiff with Vicky's friend on Saturday, two days before the incident, Vicky had had a quarrel with Sumit. After the latter told him that Vicky was a bad influence in the area, Sumit hatched a plan to kill Vicky seeking revenge.

A senior police official told PTI that another person was also involved in the incident but currently is at large. Also, the vehicle used to commit the crime has been recovered by the police. However, Ajay and Raj also confessed that they were involved in another murder case in Meerut.

The three have been booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code and further investigation in the case is underway.

Delhi: Two men murder neighbour after he denies them money for alcohol

A similar case was registered, where a man was allegedly murdered by his two neighbours after he denied them money for alcohol. The accused were arrested on July 31 and the incident took place in Delhi's Shakurpur area. Reportedly, the accused were identified as Giri Raj and Pawan and the deceased were named identified as Chander Khan.

The police had reportedly recovered blood-stained clothes of the accused from the crime spot. They had disclosed that they demanded money from the deceased for alcohol as it was his turn to pay but as he refused to give money so they throttled him.

An investigation was launched into the case after the police took the statement of the deceased's sister. However, the accused were booked under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and both of them were arrested.


