What binds J&K to India? It’s Kashmiriyat. Article 370 merely set up an architecture of otherness, thankfully annulled

In a historic move the Modi government has ostensibly set the stage for the full integration of Jammu & Kashmir into the Indian Union by revoking Article 370 that granted special status to the state. Additionally, the NDA has also succeeded in securing the passage of a bill to bifurcate the state.

The watershed declaration has expectedly led to a major political backlash. In Parliament opposition leaders, mainly from the ranks of Congress, TMC, RJD, SP, CPM have tended to describe the NDA’s actions as a “stealthy constitutional monstrosity that has severed Kashmir from the body politic of India”. Kashmir’s mainstream politicians have ominously intoned that if the NDA believes that Art 370 is a temporary provision then so is Kashmir’s accession to India. PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti who has described the revocation as a betrayal of Kashmiri trust has remarked, “the Centre has turned Kashmir into an open jail. Those leaders and Kashmiris who chose to be with India may now regret that decision.”

But the logic proffered by these mainstream Kashmiri politicians is based on a self-serving reading of history and possibly even a distortion of law.

First, let’s examine the legal argument. Apart from the suggestion that Article 370 was born out of a political machination that violated due process, the contentious article was never meant to be a permanent provision. Article 370 (3) clearly states that the “President may, by public notification, declare that this Article shall cease to be operative … Provided that the recommendation of the Constituent Assembly of the State shall be necessary.” It is a fact that the Constituent Assembly was disbanded in 1956. But it is also a fact that before dissolution, the Constituent Assembly neither recommended the abrogation of Article 370 and nor did it advocate for it to be made a permanent feature of the Constitution.

Notable lawyers have concurred with Harish Salve, according to whom “Article 370 confers powers on the President to issue orders with the concurrence of the state government where the subject matter is not covered by the Instrument of Accession. Here, the President has obtained the concurrence of the government of J&K. So, the order is valid.”

Furthermore, since the 1950s at least 40 presidential orders have been used to extend components of India’s Constitution to the state, diluting Jammu & Kashmiri’s special status. In fact, Article 370 as it exists today has been modified so many times it has perhaps lost its significance as a provision guaranteeing functional autonomy to Jammu & Kashmir as envisaged by those who argued for it. Why were the Abdullahs, Muftis and other mainstream politicians who are today portending black days for the state, silent all those years?

Second, historically, Kashmiris rejected the “two-nation theory” and decided to accede to India not only because the Indian government and Maharaja Hari Singh agreed upon the terms of an Instrument of Accession but also because of a deeper philosophical impetus. The inherent syncretism of Kashmiriyat was always going to be at odds with the sectarian outlook of the Islamic State of Pakistan. The stakeholders who spoke for Kashmir at the time of Partition were well aware of this.

Kashmiriyat has evolved from a centuries old secularism that goes back to when the region was a seat of Buddhist monasteries and Hindu ascetics. Even Guru Nanak, it is widely believed, sought out the heavenly abode on his journeys to seek enlightenment. When Islam came to the Valley it recognised this pastiche of pluralism and gave equal space and even patronage to these other philosophical traditions. The Hazratbal shrine that houses a relic thought to be the hair of prophet Mohammad, and the Pas-Pahar or the Shankaracharya temple, were sentinels of this syncretism for centuries.

Far from tethering Jammu & Kashmir to the mainland, Articles 370 and 35A in fact militate against Kashmiriyat. The provisions of these Articles discriminate between man and woman, insider and outsider. Some have gone so far as terming them xenophobic. After all, why would you view with a jaundiced disposition the children of Kashmiri women who have married outside the state? Why are they seen as a product of an insidious miscegenation? Why deny them the right to inherit and, by extension, disincentivise Kashmiri women to marry a man of their choice?

Further, why would you deny equal rights to persecuted Hindu refugees fleeing the rapacity of a sectarian outlook in Pakistan? Why would you shackle “valmikis” who were brought in 1957 (to work as sweepers) to a pernicious and abhorrent lifelong “untouchability”? These perverse provisions under the ambit of Article 370 and Article 35A have been exalted in the Kashmiri imagination as a “special status”. In truth, Articles 370 and 35A can hardly qualify as the keystones of “insaniyat” in a modern democracy. These provisions of the Constitution are simply not morally equipped to build a just and inclusive society or deliver durable institutions in J&K.

Kashmir’s politicians today may be loath to admit it, but the reality is Kashmir lost its connect with the rest of India when in the late 1980s and early 1990s terrorists, reaping the jihadi whirlwind sown by the Pakistani deep state, drove Kashmiri Hindus out of the Valley.

Now that the NDA has dismantled the architecture of “otherness” by revoking Article 370 and its panoply of discriminatory laws Hindus, Sikhs and other faiths may hopefully return to the Valley as stakeholders and not outsiders. Kashmir badly needs to rescue Kashmiriyat. Its ghettoes are badly in need of new ideas. Migrants are key to renewal. Hope floats anew for the evolution of a “naya” Kashmir.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
