Colonel facing adultery charge under J&K law cleared by SC

NEW DELHI: Ending a provision allowing army personnel to be prosecuted for adultery, the Supreme Court quashed general court martial (GCM) proceedings against a serving Colonel in the light of its September 2018 judgment that extinguished adultery as an offence under the Indian Penal Code On September 27 last year in Joseph Shine case, a five-judge SC bench had struck down as unconstitutional the 158-year-old provision in Section 497 of IPC that punished a married man for offence of adultery — for having sexual relations with a married woman without consent or connivance of her husband. However, it had ruled that adultery could remain a ground for divorce.On the case in hand, a bench of Justices R F Nariman and Surya Kant declared Section 497 of Ranbir Penal Code, applicable to Jammu and Kashmir , as unconstitutional as its content was similar to Section 497 of IPC. The bench said RPC additionally making the wife an abettor of adultery was of no consequence as Section 497 of IPC, categorising adultery as a crime, has been held unconstitutional. “The entire Section (497 of RPC) is, therefore, declared to be unconstitutional.”The decorated officer was proceeded against by the Army since March 2016 for allegedly having two adulterous encounters with the wife of a retired Lt Colonel, who had complained against the serving officer to army authorities. Denying any physical relationship with the woman in question, the Colonel had admitted meeting her in Jammu and Srinagar at her insistence in relation to her social work.The officer, through advocate Neela Gokhale, approached the apex court and alleged that the retired Lt Colonel and his wife had marital tensions leading to the husband filing a divorce petition on grounds of adultery. But the woman patched up with her husband to save her marriage. She had initially written a letter to army authorities exonerating the Colonel of any wrongdoing, but later sought his prosecution.Gokhale said the Court of Inquiry, after examining the Colonel, the woman and her husband, concluded the adultery charges could not be proved and recommended they be dropped. “It is learnt that at the behest of Chief of Army Staff, the administrative action was withdrawn and disciplinary action was recommended,” she said.Arguing the case before the SC bench, senior advocate Meenakshi Arora said since the apex court had struck down the provision declaring adultery an offence, an identical provision in Ranbir Penal Code could not be invoked by Army authorities against the officer. The plea was opposed by senior advocate R Balasubramanian for the Army on the ground that it was a matter of discipline.Writing the judgment, Justice Nariman said, “We are of the view that nothing survives against the appellant (Colonel) on charges relatable to Section 497 Penal Code. So far as Section 63 (violation of good order and discipline) of the Army Act, 1950, is concerned, the appellant has already been acquitted, subject to confirmation... The appeal stands allowed.”Four months after the SC judgment decriminalised adultery, Army chief General Bipin Rawat had on January 10 said Army won’t take kindly to homosexuality or adultery in its ranks. “The Army is conservative. We are a family. We are not westernised, neither modernisd... We will not allow these to perpetrate into Army,” he had said.
