Shootings reinforce need for training

Winneshiek County Sheriff’s Deputy Chris Wuebker, left, and Decorah Police Officer Scott Jennings were among area law enforcement officials participating in a recent active shooter training at the Decorah Middle School. (Decorah Newspapers photo by Sarah Strandberg) Emergency personnel retrieve a shooting "victim" during the recent active shooter training. (Photo by Sarah Strandberg) An instructor from the Government Training Institute explains an active shooter drill to law enforcement officers and emergency personnel during a recent training session at the Decorah Middle School. (Photo by Sarah Strandberg) Winneshiek County Sheriff’s Lieutenant Steve Nesvik. (Photo by Sarah Strandberg • • • •

Mass shootings over the weekend have reinforced the need to prepare for the unimaginable.

Twenty people were killed Saturday at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas; the suspected shooter was arrested. Early Sunday, nine were slain in a night club district in Dayton, Ohio; police killed the gunman.

The Winneshiek County Emergency Management Agency sponsored a three-day active shooter training at St. Teresa of Calcutta School in Spillville and the Decorah Middle School earlier this summer.

The training culminated with “hands-on” training the final day with multiple “live” scenarios taught both inside and outside the Decorah Middle School.

“Several techniques and strategies where taught by experienced teachers in the hope that we’ll never need to use them,” Winneshiek Co. Emergency Management Coordinator Sean Snyder said Sunday.

“Run, hide, fight and other forms of active shooter trainings are vital for any size law enforcement, fire department and emergency medical services (EMS) personnel to conduct. History is showing that these heinous events can take place anywhere and at any time. We, emergency responders, need to remain diligent in our preparation in order to be prepared for when, not if, a tragic event like the ones around the U.S. over the past week would happen in our area,” Snyder said.



Unified response

The name of the class was “Rescue Task Force – Hostile Event Interdiction.” Snyder said the intent of the training was to give students from law enforcement, fire, rescue and EMS training on tactics, techniques and procedures specific to a unified small group response as a rescue task force during a terrorist-driven, active-shooter, or any other hostile incident.

Winneshiek County Sheriff’s Deputy Chris Wuebker was among the more than 20 law enforcement officers and emergency responders from Northeast Iowa participating in the training.

“The Winneshiek County Sheriff’s Office is always training and preparing to respond to any situation that should arise. In your time of need, we will be there. The unfortunate reality of the world we live in today requires us to prepare for these types of events,” Wuebker said.

“Thanks to Winneshiek County Emergency Management Coordinator Sean Snyder we were able to get this training and expand our thoughts and experiences with quality, hands-on training. The value of this type of training is that it opens your eyes to the overall complexity of these situations,” the deputy said.

“These types of events become a multi-agency, emergency response. We are fortunate with the relationships we have in the area. Through the training, I came to understand other pieces of the puzzle that are critical to a successful response,” Wuebker said.



Well received

Snyder said the training was well received.

“All students felt it was relevant and worthwhile,” he said.

“I would like to thank both the St. Teresa of Calcutta and Decorah School districts for hosting this training,” Snyder said.

He also thanked everyone who attended the training and their employers.

“Taking three days to attend is a big commitment,” he said.

The emergency management coordinator said he is planning to provide additional law enforcement, fire department and EMS trainings later this year.

“Through training, preparation is achieved,” Snyder said.


