Evening Brief: Elections Canada ponders if print is dead — at least for voter ads

Elections Canada is scaling back its print voter ads in favour of a larger digital footprint in this election compared to last.



Tonight’s Evening Brief is brought to you by GovGUIDE. The ultimate resource for all things #cdnpoli. Profiles on all MPs and Senators, events calendar and a brief of the day’s legislative agenda. Coming soon: Election 2019 candidates’ profiles. Click here to learn more about it.

Good evening.

The Lead

Elections Canada will rely on online platforms like social media to reach voters, devoting almost two times as much of its advertising budget for digital outlets in the upcoming election compared to the last, as it abandons print ads as its top way of reaching voters.

The agency responsible for the federal election is planning on using $3.9 million of its $12.3 million “media placement budget” to advertise on digital platforms to help inform Canadians about how to vote in the fall’s election.

Its digital advertising budget is more than twice the amount — $1.9 million this year — of what it spent on digital advertisements in the 2015 election, when ads for what it calls its “Voter Information Campaign” cost $11.3 million in total.

The agency’s budget for advertising on social media, which is included in its larger budget for digital platforms, is more than double what it spent during the last election.

Charlie Pinkerton reports.

In Canada

The NDP are calling on the Trudeau government to say how they are exactly planning to ensure Canadians have access to affordable medication after the Trump administration announced it would support importing prescription drugs from Canada to the U.S.

NDP health critic Don Davies asked Health Minister Ginette Petitpas Taylor in a letter to “immediately” reveal the specific steps the federal government plans to take to “ensure that all Canadians have confidence that the medication they need is not depleted.” Marco Vigliotti reports.

Meanwhile, Ottawa is negotiating an agreement with the Manitoba School Boards Association to accept and distribute an estimated $5.3 million in carbon tax revenue, after the funding intended for energy efficiency retrofits within Manitoba schools was rejected by Premier Brian Pallister last month.

In a statement, Environment Minister Catherine McKenna said the federal government was working with the association on an agreement and was disappointed their plan for allocating the money to schools in the province couldn’t proceed as originally planned. McKenna announced earlier this summer that Ottawa planned to put three per cent of this year’s carbon tax revenues towards projects to make schools more energy efficient. Victoria Gibson reports.

As well, a survey from Canada’s competition watchdog found more than one million households used an independent provider for their high-speed internet last year, suggesting federal rules are fostering a competitive market that benefits consumers.

The CRTC regulates rates that smaller providers buy wholesale access to large telecom companies’ networks. The Competition Bureau says customers now have a growing list of options from both independent providers and larger telecom companies that allow them to choose a plan specific to their needs. Jolson Lim reports.

After a two-week manhunt, the RCMP say it has found two bodies believed to be the men suspected of killing three people in British Columbia. The Star Calgary reports that the Mounties say the bodies were found Wednesday morning near Gillam, Man. and are confident they are of Kam McLeod and Bryer Schmegelsky.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau’s pick for the next Supreme Court of Canada justice was official appointed to the top court today. Quebec judge Nicholas Kasirer will be on the bench effective Sept. 16. Vigliotti reports.

And in case you missed it, the latest Mainstreet poll for iPolitics has found the Liberals and Conservatives neck-and-neck just two and a half months out from election day. Both parties polled around 35 per cent, with the Greens and NDP also tied at approximately 11 per cent. Vigliotti has the full breakdown.

The Sprout: Threat of African swine fever worsens

The Drilldown: Glencore mine closure to remove 20 per cent of world’s cobalt supply

In Other Headlines

Green Party unveils plan to transition oil, gas workers to renewable energy jobs (CBC News)

Dominic LeBlanc makes 1st public appearance in months since non-Hodgkin lymphoma diagnosis (CBC News)

Conservative Senator Went on Far-Right Conspiracy YouTube Channel, Twice (VICE)

Canada’s chief information officer Alex Benay leaving to join AI startup Mindbridge (Globe and Mail)

‘We need to be at the table’: nominated Indigenous candidates near 2015’s record high (Hill Times)

Internationally

U.S. President Donald Trump visited a hospital in Dayton, Ohio, the city where one of two mass shootings in the country occurred last weekend, the New York Times reports. He will also visit El Paso, Texas later today. The president was greeted by protesters in Dayton.

Trump, who critics accuse of fostering an intolerant atmosphere with anti-immigrant and racist rhetoric, began Wednesday by attacking liberals and the media on Twitter. The president also reasserted today that he is in favour of background checks on gun sales.

Reuters reports that Pakistan has expelled India’s ambassador as the crisis in the disputed territory of Kashmir escalates. The country has also suspended bilateral trade, which comes after New Delhi stripped its portion of the Kashmir region of special status that allowed the Muslim-majority state to create its own laws.

The Associated Press reports that hundreds of poor migrants have fled the territory, which continues to be under a tense communications lockdown amid fears of violence.

BBC News reports a large bombing in the Afghan capital of Kabul has killed at least 14 people and injured nearly 150. The Taliban is claiming responsibility for the attack, which comes amid peace talks between the insurgent group and the U.S.

Lastly, the broadcaster also reports that the UN is warning that third of Zimbabweans are at risk of starvation. More than five million people are in need of aid in the country, after it was battered by a recent cyclone and continues to face the effects of drought and economic turmoil. The UN is appealing for $331 million in aid.

In Featured Opinion

Manthorpe: Modi uses threat from Pakistan to justify revoking special status for Kashmir

The Kicker

RCMP have seized 100 guns after a 73-year-old man in Nova Scotia misdialed 911.

According to CBC News, the man was arrested and faces charges of unsafe storage of a firearm after police found the weapons when checking his home to ensure there was no emergency.

Police seized 94 long guns and six handguns, all legally owned but scattered throughout the man’s home.

Until tomorrow.
