Scientific evidence nails gang of five serial killers, robbers

RAJKOT: Armed with clinching scientific and forensic evidence, the Amreli police on Wednesday filed a chargesheet against a gang of five of the nine family members, including husband-wife duo , involved in serial killings and robberies in four districts.The police filed the chargesheet in the brutal murders of an old-aged couple on the outskirts of Dared village of Babra taluka on the night of June 9. Those charged were Chandu Jiliya and his wife Bavli alias Ujji, Kisan Vaghela, Falji Sadamia and Visu Jiliya. Chandu and Uji are the masterminds of all the crimes - seven murders and five robbery in Amreli, Surendragnar, Bhavnagar and Ahmedabad districts.Senior police officials said that the biggest challenge was to establish the presence of these five persons at the crime scene where they also looted gold ornaments worth Rs 1.52 lakh of the couple. This necessitated a thorough scientific probe and police collected as many as 29 DNA samples along with fingerprints that were tested in the forensic laboratory.The gang resorted to the crimes with an intention of robbery.In presence of forensic experts which included biology, physics and chemistry experts, the police reconstructed the June 9 murder from the time the gang members started from their native village Lathidad in Botad district till they reached near Dared. The murdered the couple, stole their jewellery and returned to Lathidad.In the crime scene inquest, police collected some butts of cigarettes and three fingerprint impressions.Amreli superintendent of police, Nirlipt Rai told TOI: “The statements of accused taken in police custody are not admissible in the court of law, but if the statements lead to the discovery evidence, they become admissible. We did one discovery panchnama (inquest) in which the accused made us find the clothes they had worn while committing the crime.”Blood stains and sweat were found on these clothes and after which DNA experts were roped in. The stains matched with the DNA of these arrested persons. Moreover, the DNA of the blood stains found on weapons used in murder also matched with the DNA of the victims.Engraving on utensils an important proofRajkot: In a first, the engraving on silver utensils has also been included as documentary evidence in the chargesheet. Police had found some names engraved on the utensils recovered from the accused. The practice of engraving names is common among many communities including Bharwads to which the murdered old-age couple belonged.“According to the Evidence Act, any utensils on which something is engraved are classified as document. We took the help of handwriting experts and established that the writings on the utensils were the same from where the victims had purchased them,” said Nirlipt Rai.The mobile phones of the deceased couple that were being used by the accused were also recovered.
