One found dead in flooded diamond unit

SURAT: One diamond worker was found dead and three others unconscious in a diamond unit inundated by the recent floods in Navsari on TuesdayThe workers had stayed back to care of the unit on Shanta Devi Road after it was marooned by swelling waters of Purna River.Police said reason for their death was not immediately known but the viscera samples the deceased person Mahesh Buha have been sent for forensic examination. Two of three found unconscious, who were under treatment at a private hospital, have regained consciousness and police said they will record their statement .Buha is said to be the cousin of the unit owner Raju Buha and used to look after the day-to-day functioning.Girish Pandya, superintendent of police, Navsari said, “Primary report of the postmortem indicates food poisoning as the major possibility of his death. However, we have sent the viscera for analysis and ascertain the exact reason.”The unit was closed for last three days due to heavy rains. However, Mahesh, Sanjay Muladia Dipak Chaudhary and Dinesh Chaudhary stayed back as waters had inundated front portion of unit and they were five foot deep. They were in constant touch with the unit owner over mobile phone.However on Tuesday evening, when they didn’t call, unit owner along with some others went there by boat. They found the unit locked from inside and no one responded. They broken open the door only to find four of them lying on the floor.When taken to the hospital, Mahesh was declared dead on admission whereas other three were unconscious . By Wednesday evening, two regained consciousness.PP Vasava, in-charge inspector of Navsari town police said, “Everything happened in five hours from 2pm to 7 pm on Tuesday. They had last talked to unit owner at 2pm and then everything was ok. The possible reason of death could be either food poisoning or some sort of air intoxication. Fumes emanating from the generator inhaled in large quantity might have also lead to the death .”
