Akshay Kumar in agreement with PM Modi's advice for students, says there's more to life than just exams

Akshay Kumar's Instagram post | Photo Credit: Instagram

Prime Minister Narendra Modi's 'Pariksha Par Charcha 2.0' has left Bollywood superstar Akshay Kumar mighty impressed. The actor on Wednesday took to social media and posted a video of PM Modi's interactive session held in Delhi.

Akshay shared the session on Twitter adding that this is something he relates to. The actor, who was last seen in 2.0 co-starring Rajinikanth in a pivotal role, revealed that he was never good in studies. He shared that it's because of God's grace, his parents' blessings and hard work that he managed it all well. With his own experience, Akshay also reminded students and parents that exams are just a small part of life adding that there's a lot more to life.

His tweet read as, “Something I related to...I was never good at academics but with God’s grace, my parents blessings & hard work, I think I managed pretty well. With exams around the corner, I’d like to reiterate to students & parents, there’s more to life than just exams.” (Also read: Akshay Kumar, Suniel Shetty and Paresh Rawal’s Hera Pheri 3 back on track, to hit floors by year-end: Report)

Something I related to...I was never good at academics but with God’s grace, my parents blessings & hard work, I think I managed pretty well. With exams around the corner, I’d like to reiterate to students & parents,there’s more to life than just exams.https://t.co/olZ0Bi1M6q — Akshay Kumar (@akshaykumar) January 30, 2019

With just two months to go for board examinations of 10th and 12th standards, PM Modi met with around 2,000 school students, parents and teachers to address the exam stress on Tuesday. (Also read: Akshay Kumar's excitement for Luka Chuppi song Poster Lagwa Do steals Kartik Aaryan, Kriti Sanon's thunder)

On the work front, Akshay will next be seen in Kesari. Directed by Anurag Singh, Kesari is a war drama film and stars Parineeti Chopra alongside the actor. The film revolves around the battle of Saragarhi. The actor has also begun shooting for Good News alongside Kareena Kapoor, Diljit Dosanjh and Kiara Advani in key roles.
