The Immortal Kargil Heroes

Rayyan Baig

The border between Pakistan and India is of three types, the main is the internationally recognized border known as “International Border”. The second is known as “Working Boundary” where on one side is Pakistan, along Sialkot border, and on the other side is Indian Held Kashmir. The third is known as the “Line of Control” (LOC), which runs from Kashmir till Northern Areas.

It was earlier known as Ceasefire Line but later identified between both the countries as LOC, however, it is not internationally accepted line. Except for brief periods of peace, the pinpricks continue along the LOC and both sides try to dominate each other, in 1984 in an aggression India occupied Siachen Glacier. India even doesn’t hesitate to violate the Working Boundary and engage civilian population across International Border.

The Kargil is located along LOC, en-route to Siachen; this sector extends to about 150 Km from Dras to Batalik. The terrain of Kargil is characterized by high rugged peaks up to 18,000 feet, where the temperature plunges to minus 60 degrees in winters with harsh gusts of chilled winds.

The extreme winters make the stay in this area very challenging. Prior to 1999, the Indian Army preferred vacating posts in these areas in winters and shifted to comfortable locations. In 1998 India intensified its hostile activities in Kargil sector and resorted to unusual movement and unprovoked firing. Pakistan had confirmed reports that, the Indian Army was planning to capture Pakistani posts in coming summers, which observed Indian movement on Dras-Kargil Road. To preclude any misadventure by India, like Siachen, just a few hundred Mujahedeen and irregular soldiers exploited an opportunity and instead infiltrated 10 KM across LOC. In the extreme weather and hostile terrain they occupied the posts abandoned by Indian Army, including Tiger Hill and Point 5353. The Indian Army and intelligence agencies enjoyed the cozy locations and had no clue of the situation for months together. They were taken by surprise when an Indian patrol strolling the area received fire from Pakistani soldiers. When Indian Army tried to enter the area, they received terrible shock and suffered heavy casualties. To fight these few hundred warriors the Indian Army amassed 5 infantry divisions, 5 independent brigades and 44 paramilitary battalions to Kashmir and had 60 frontline aircrafts in support. Indian Army also airlifted Bofors guns from all over India and shifted them to this area.

Despite the numerical and weapon superiority, Indian forces could not make any headway against these few hundred valiant fighters and irregular soldiers. The modestly equipped fighters fought gallantly against the hostile weather and Indian forces and gave them bloody nose.

The Indian forces struck their heads against the determined Pakistani soldiers again and again but to no avail and suffered heavy losses. The area north of Kargil, leading to Siachen, was cut off by Pakistan Army and Indian forces in Siachen were virtually chocked. The Kargil conflict embarrassed India, as Pakistan held India from the throat.For the duration of Kargil conflict, India had to shop ammunition from abroad and was spending around 6.9 million US dollars daily as war expenses.

After failing to evict the troops, the Indian Army raised their hands and requested Indian Government to seek foreign help. MrAtalBihariVajpayee,the then Indian PM, requested US and other world powers to save his country from the embarrassment. The western powers soon responded and the international pressure, especially from the US, was created to save India from said embarrassment.

Consequently, the PM Nawaz Sharif met US president on 4th Jul 1999, and as a result of this meeting the decision to withdraw the fighters was taken, and they suffered casualties during their withdrawal. It was, however, a bold tactical action by a handful of irregular troops which created strategic affects and resurrected Kashmir issue.

The Pakistani irregular troops displayed the highest standard of robustness and valor in Kargil conflict. They lived on limited supplies, away from their base, and braved the hardships of extreme weathers. Each and every soldier was an epitome of courage and bravery; a handful of irregular troops frazzled a much superior force. The Kargil warriors buried Indian haughtiness and her misconception of superiority vaporized, as she suffered more losses in Kargil conflict than 1962, 1965 and 1971 Wars. The heroism of Lalak Jan Shaheed and Captain KarnalSher Khan Shaheed became talk of the town and even Indians had to acknowledge their bravery.

The self-proclaimed hubris of Indian Army was badly shaken by just a few hundred modestly armed fighters. Kargil conflict was an utter upshot of the Kashmir dispute, and cannot be termed as the last conflict involving Kashmir. The lasting peace between Pakistan-India and the region cannot be achieved till the time Kashmir issue is not resolved as per the wishes of Kashmiris/ the UN resolutions.
