The Shillong Times

Constable shot at in Mainpuri

Mainpuri (UP):A constable who was on night patrolling duty here was injured after three men on a motorcycle allegedly shot at him early on Wednesday, police said. The incident happened around 1 am near Chauki Kathal gate when Ankit Chaudhari was patrolling along with a sub-inspector, district SP Ajai Shankar Rai said. Chaudhari was rushed to a hospital, where his condition is stable. Six people have been detained and an investigation is on, the SP added. (PTI)



2 rescued after flash floods

Shimla: Two persons who got stranded in flash floods after a cloudburst in Himachal Pradesh’s Kullu district on Wednesday have been rescued, police said. The two were travelling in a Maruti 800 car when it was washed away near New Sabzi Mandi in the flash floods after the cloudburst at Hallan Badgran, district Superintendent of Police Gaurav Singh said. They have been rescued by a district police team and the fire brigade. Both of them are normal now, Singh said. Sudden flow of water in the area was reported after the cloudburst, the SP said, adding that assessment about loss to property was being done. (PTI)



Woman electrocuted to death

Muzaffarnagar (UP): A 28-year-old woman was electrocuted to death after she came in contact with a live wire in Bhopa village in the district, police said here on Wednesday. The incident took place on Tuesday evening when Suman was using the grass-cutting machine, police said. She died on the spot, they added. (PTI)



BSF seizes 127 cattle

Kolkata: The Border Security Force (BSF) seized 127 cattle being smuggled to Bangladesh during raids in Malda, Murshidabad, North 24 Parganas and Nadia districts, said an officer. However, the smugglers escaped. “The market price of seized 127 cattle is Rs 14,63,884,” the officer said. The BSF has seized 18,767 cattle being smuggled to Bangladesh, so far this year. (IANS)



Odisha CM launches 22 projects

Bhubaneswar: Odisha Chief Minister Naveen Patnaik on Wednesday launched 22 new projects, 10 inaugurations and 12 groundbreakings, worth Rs 4,461.42 crore that will create employment opportunities for over 9,000 persons. “I congratulate all the companies on this milestone and assure everyone of complete facilitation support from the state government. These projects will usher in the next era of industrial growth in the state and will contribute towards the vision of an industrially prosperous Odisha,” said the Chief Minister. He said Odisha aspires to be one of the top three investment destinations in the country in terms of investments. “Towards achieving this vision, we have devised the ‘5T’ strategy in which transformation goals will be achieved through teamwork, transparency and technology enablers in a time-bound manner,” Patnaik said. (IANS)



Yogi’s new scheme for cow welfare

Lucknow: Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath has come up with a new scheme for the welfare of stray cattle that will also help generate employment opportunities. The state government has approved the “Mukhya Mantri Be-sahara Gau-Vansh Sahbhagita Yojana”. In Phase 1 of this scheme, the government will hand over one lakh cattle, currently in the government-run shelters, to farmers and other people ready to take care of them after the due process. The person, who takes the cattle, will be paid Rs 30 per animal per day, every month via direct bank transfer, which works out to be about Rs 900 per month. In a press release, the UP government acknowledged that keeping stray cattle in the government-run shelters is proving to be a major problem in terms of the upkeep as well as the care of the cattle. (IANS)



Mamata unveils Karuna statue

Chennai: A statue of former Tamil Nadu Chief Minister and DMK President M Karunanidhi was unveiled at the office of DMK Party organ ‘Murasoli’ to mark his first death anniversary. West Bengal Chief Minister and Trinamool Congress leader Mamata Banjeree unveiled the statue in the presence of Mr Karunanidhi’s son and DMK President M K Stalin and Puducherry Chief Minister V Narayanasamy, among others. (UNI)
