Marry, loot, scoot gang busted, four women among five arrested

Ludhiana: This crime seems to be lifted straight from a Bollywood script. The police on Wednesday claimed to have busted a gang of human traffickers involved in sham marriages, ‘Dolly ki Doli’ style.

Five persons, including four women, were arrested on Tuesday evening. Famous by the name of “Tanka Gang”, its members were all set to sell a woman to a Hisar-based man for Rs 60,000 when police raided them.

The arrested have been identified as Gurmeet Kaur, 42; Jaswinder Kaur, 40; Asha Rani, 43, of Badso village, Patiala; Rani, 45; and her husband Pala, 47, of Hisar, Haryana. For the past few months, all the accused were living in a rented accommodation in Shimlapuri.

Two more gang members, Sonia and Bala, managed to escape.

Assistant commissioner of police (Industrial Area-B) Sandeep Wadehra said, “The gang used to loot people in two ways. They approached truck drivers, who found difficult to get a bride, and offered them marriage proposals for Rs 50,000 to Rs 60,000 each. Every time they would send pictures of their accomplices, Sonia and Bala, to customers to fix the deal. They never organised proper marriages and would get an affidavit signed by both groom and bride and took money. The brides would escape from the house after collecting cash and jewellery. Thereafter, the gang would change their contacts and address. In some cases, they would sell women, who were unhappy in their marriage. These women were not aware that they were being sold. This was an inter-state gang that shifted to Ludhiana a couple of months ago.”

The police have approached Haryana and Patiala police to know the previous cases against the accused. The gang’s first case in Ludhiana did them in. The official said this time, the gang struck a deal through Gurmeet, who hails from Hisar. They sent a picture of Bala to the client, a truck driver from Hisar. He agreed to marry her and on Tuesday, he along with his family and relatives reached the city to solemnise the marriage.

Meanwhile, police came to know about it and just before the raid, Bala and Sonia escaped from the spot. When the gang was forcing another woman to marry the Hisar-based man, a police team reached the spot and arrested them. About action on the Hisar-based family, the officer said, “For them, it was a genuine marriage for which they were paying Rs 60,000 to Gurmeet for finding a bride for them. Their role is being probed though.”

A case has been registered against the accused under sections 370 (trafficking of persons) and 34 (act done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the IPC.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
