Ensure blood of slaughtered animals does not flow into Yamuna, NGT-appointed pollution watchdog to DMCs

Bakr Eid is to be observed on August 12 of this year (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights NGT appointed the commission to curb pollution into the river NDMC has initiated action in this regard while SDMC and EDMC are yet to act Bakr Eid is to be observed on August 12 of this year

New Delhi: Following a meeting in this regard on Monday, the Yamuna pollution monitoring committee has instructed all civic agencies in the national capital to ensure that the blood of animals slaughtered in slaughterhouses and during festivals does not flow into the river which is the second-largest tributary of the river Ganges. A similar notification was issued by the National Green Tribunal in September 2015.

The NGT-appointed committee reiterated its decision after the complainant in the matter moved the top green court in 2017 and 2018, alleging that the order was not implemented by Delhi's three municipal bodies. It should be noted that the complainant in this context is a political party. The complainant told the committee that animal sacrifices are being carried out in an illegal manner along Yamuna's stretch in various areas such as Khajoori, Jafarabad, Jheel Khureji and Seelampur.

You won't believe what happens to goats used for their flesh and milk!



Help prevent terrible suffering and death by signing this petition: https://t.co/RCuSp2nS2Z pic.twitter.com/761H40txg9 — PETA India (@PetaIndia) July 31, 2019

Ground reports suggest that the North Delhi Municipal Corporation (NDMC) has issued orders in adherence to the committee's directions while its counterparts in South and East Delhi are yet to initiate action along the lines. The Yamuna pollution monitoring committee has also directed the Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) to take action under the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act which is aimed at curbing pollution in the river.

On August 2, NDMC issued an order asking officials to ensure that the Ghazipur slaughterhouse is operational on the upcoming occasion of Eid. A report suggested that the civic body also urged citizens sacrificing animals in their own premises to make arrangements for the proper disposal of waster in an environment-friendly manner.

This order comes barely days after the Bombay High Court issued an order banning the slaughter of animals in private flats and housing societies on the occasion of Bakr Eid. The order has now cancelled out the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation's (BMC) decision to issue as many as 7,000 permissions to slaughter animals. These permissions now stand null and void. A bench of the HC said that action will be taken against those found slaughtering animals outside a licensed abattoir.

Earlier this year, the People for Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) urged people to turn vegan. In addition, the premiere group advocating animal rights across the globe plead the government to ensure that no cruelty is meted out to animals during the upcoming festivals. The non-governmental agency (NGO) also posted a video shot in Rajasthan's Alwar district showing goats screaming as they are pinned down and slaughtered without the administration of pain relief.
