Taliban and Kashmir: Why India should be on guard

Security has been beefed up manifold in Jammu and Kashmir in the wake of abrogation of special status to the state and intelligence inputs of terror threat. (Photo: PTI)

The decision of the Narendra Modi government to abrogate the special status to Jammu and Kashmir earlier this week came in the backdrop of a flurry of activities in Afghanistan. These developments have a direct bearing on India. India faces the risk of getting caught unawares.

Afghanistan is heading to presidential election in September. But a reviving Taliban does not want another civilian government to be elected in Afghanistan. The credibility of Afghan government of President Ashraf Ghani is, anyway, at all-time low. Taliban has given a call for boycott of presidential election.

The US is negotiating with the Taliban in Qatar's capital Doha for withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan. The US wants a guarantee from Taliban of a ceasefire long enough for its troops to wind up their operations and establishment in Afghanistan.



Pakistan is playing the role of deal broker. This means dollar dole-out for Pakistan. Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan's meeting with US President Donald Trump recently saw American dollar moving again into the country.

Trump is ready to walk an extra mile to keep Pakistan in good stead as withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan is going to be a key issue in his next year's presidential election re-run. American forces are in Afghanistan for about 18 years and Trump had promised in his first presidential run to bring them back home.

Taliban has gained strength in Afghanistan in recent months. The fact that the US is negotiating with Taliban gives it validity as an official stakeholder in Afghanistan. Incidentally, the US had entered Afghanistan to drive out the same jihadi force rejecting their stake in the country's governance.

Last month, the US, China, Russia and Pakistan issued a joint statement underscoring the need to have a peaceful agreement between the US and Taliban so that the Nato forces could be withdrawn. Iran is also engaging with Taliban. This means the only power with strategic interest in the region has been left out of the entire process, and that power is India.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah speaking in the Lok Sabha on Tuesday, when the government moved a Presidential Order to take away special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370. (Photo: PTI)

It could be déjà vu for India, which had been found wanting in 1990s when Taliban took control of Afghanistan. India did not have a channel to reach out to Taliban when an aeroplane full of passengers was hijacked to Kandahar.

After the withdrawal of Russian forces in Afghanistan in 1980s, India had backed a weak government under Najibullah, who was ousted in 1992 by Mujahideens. The new rulers fought among themselves as Taliban - with ideological base in al-Qaeda -- emerged on the scene to capture power in Afghanistan.

Taliban hanged Najibullah from a traffic post in 1996. India had not recognised Taliban and did not have any communication channel with the jihadi group which controlled about 90 per cent area of the country in 1999 when five Pakistani hijackers took Air India flight IC-814 to Afghanistan.

India ended up freeing terrorists including Masood Azhar, the founder of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) to ensure safety of the passengers. This terror outfit has been responsible for several terror incidents in India, particularly in Jammu and Kashmir.

Power to Taliban in Afghanistan translates in to more strength to al-Qaeda, which, in turn, powers Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), an outfit of Jamaat-ud-Dawa of Hafiz Saeed. All three terror organisations are backed, funded and trained by Pakistan Army and its intelligence agency, ISI.

An agreement between the US and Taliban means, fund flowing from America to all these groups directly or through the ISI. A ceasefire between the US and Taliban will also render hundreds of jihadi mercenaries jobless. This bunch of jobless Taliban mercenaries, controlled practically by Pakistan, may find their new destination in Jammu and Kashmir and other parts of India.

This is evident from al-Qaeda chief Ayman al-Zawahiri's video statement released in July. He called for upping jihadi activities in Jammu and Kashmir. The Kashmir Valley has, in recent times, witnessed a clear rising trend of pan-Islamic jihadi movement.

Islamic State flags made their way to Kashmir in 2017 and have continued to appear in sporadic manner in the Valley. (Photo: PTI file)

Flag of the Islamic State have come up a few times at some places in the Valley. Security experts say that terrorism in Kashmir Valley is more aligned today along pan-Islamic jihadi ideology than catering to local aspirations.

Reports suggest that unlike 1990s, India has tried to have some contact with Taliban to prepare itself for a post-US phase in Afghanistan. India's efforts, this time around, to have a back-channel communication with Taliban, too, does not give much confidence.

Good news is that Taliban is communicating with India but bad news is that it is not ready to guarantee a "no target" on Indians or Indian establishments in Afghanistan or Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan is said to be the spoilsport here.

Pakistan hopes Taliban will further its agenda in Jammu and Kashmir in return of its favour in ensuring withdrawal of the US troops from Afghanistan and thus paving a way for its return to power in that country.

The offensive by Pakistan in response to abrogation of special status to Jammu and Kashmir is being seen as part of the same game plan of Islamabad. It is the time for India to be on its toes and watch the jihad factory across the borders closely.
