560 people detained in Indian Kashmir as tensions rise

At least 560 people have been detained in the latest crackdown in Indian-administered Kashmir which has seen tensions rise since the Indian government stripped the region's autonomy.

University professors, business leaders and activists were among the people taken to makeshift detention centres, some during midnight raids, in the cities of Srinagar, Baramulla and Gurez, Indian media has reported.

Following the detentions, India's Prime Minister Narendra Modi addressed the nation on the radio explaining his Hindu nationalist government's decision to revoke the seven-decade long special status of the region through a presidential decree.

He said India's Kashmir region was stripped of its autonomy to free it from "terrorism and separatism" which was encouraged by Pakistan, adding that his government had made a "historic decision".

"Friends, I have full belief that we will be able to free Jammu and Kashmir from terrorism and separatism under this system," Mr Modi said.

"I have full faith that the people of Jammu and Kashmir, after defeating separatism, will move forward with new hopes and aspirations."

Tens of thousands of Indian troops have enforced a strict curfew, which includes a blackout on internet or phone services, and are allowing only limited movement.

In May nationalist leader Narendra Modi won his second term as India's Prime Minister

The developments in Kashmir have annoyed India's nuclear-armed neighbour Pakistan which announced it was downgrading diplomatic ties with them yesterday.

India's Ministry of External affairs has responded to Pakistan's actions by saying its decision to strip Kashmir of its autonomy is an "internal affair."

Read more:

China and Pakistan oppose India's plans for Kashmir

India abolishes Kashmir's special autonomy

How Kashmir's "paradise on earth" became a living hell

India also moved a bill proposing the Indian-administered part of Kashmir be divided into two regions directly ruled by New Delhi.

Pakistan has vowed to take the matter to the United Nations Security Council.

Pakistan, which has a competing claim to Kashmir, has fought two wars with India over the scenic Himalayan region.
