Delhi Police arrest teen for murder of minor boy

Delhi Police has arrested one Gautam, 19, for the alleged kidnap and murder of an eight-year-old minor boy in Delhi’s Aman Vihar. The victim and Gautam were neighbours.

On July 23 the eight-year-old minor went missing from outside his house. He was last seen around 9 pm. His disappearance was reported to the police and a case registered.

After two days the body of the missing child was found in Kiradi drain in Pratap Vihar. The body was identified by the child’s father and a post-mortem was conducted on July 26.

While the father was at Sanjay Gandhi Hospital waiting for the body to be handed over to him, he received a phone call telling him the body recovered from the drain was not that of his son.

Moreover the caller said the kidnapped boy was with him and demanded Rs 25 lakh as ransom. The kidnapper called the boy’s father a few more times. The ransom calls were reported to the police

Police analysed the call details and found that the ransom calls were made from the kidnapped boy’s neighbourhood. Investigators deduced that somebody close to the family or who knew them well was likely to be involved.

After questioning various neighbours police zeroed-in on Gautam. He was kept under surveillance. His activities were found to be suspicious and police hauled him in for questioning.

After intensive grilling, Gautam broke down and confessed to his crime.

Gautam told the police that he needed money for his studies. He is enrolled in a one-year diploma course in information technology in an institute in Rohini.

He believed that minor’s father was well off and kept cash at home. Gautam was a regular visitor to the victim’s home and on a few occasions dropped him off to school also.

On July 23 Gautam saw the boy roaming around his house at around 9 pm. He asked the boy to accompany him to the market. When they reached the Kiradi drain Gautam pushed the boy in. The area was dark and lonely and nobody saw Gautam commit the crime.

After that Gautam returned home. When he saw the boy’s family and neighbours looking for the boy, he too joined the search.

Two days later the child’s body was found.

Meanwhile Gautam, who in 2018 was accused of stealing gold jewellery, did not use his own SIM to make the ransom calls. Instead he used a SIM that someone had given him. He also roped in a friend to join him in collecting the ransom.

But luck ran out and the police arrested him.
