UPDATE: P.E.I. apple orchard owner afraid after fires, break-in

RCMP asking public’s help regarding series of events at Canadian Nectar Products in Alliston

ALLISTON, P.E.I. — The co-owner of an apple orchard in Kings County says he’s afraid to continue with the business after a series of recent incidents.

Even so, Amarjot Punia said the partners involved in Canadian Nectar Products in Alliston plan to continue operations by early March.

Over the past two months, two barns on the property burned to the ground and a residence was broken into.

“I just want to live here peacefully. It’s a small town and it’s a beautiful Island,” said Punia, who is originally from India. “But I feel scared. I ask the RCMP to please solve this so we can go back (to the orchard).”

On Dec. 14 at about 8 p.m., Kings District RCMP officers were dispatched to a structure fire where a barn belonging to Canadian Nectar Products was lost to the fire. Punia, who was on holidays in India at the time, said all the equipment inside was lost to the blaze, including two brand new tractors.

On Jan. 11, a second structure fire at the property was reported at about 9:30 p.m. Again, a barn belonging to Canadian Nectar Products was destroyed. Punia said that barn was only used as a lunchroom for employees, and no equipment was lost.

Then on Jan. 28, one of the property owners discovered a residence located on the property had been broken into and items inside the house had been damaged. The RCMP was again called in to investigate.

The RCMP would not comment further on the investigation because it is still in progress.

Punia considers the fires and the break-in to be suspicious. He said he has his own ideas of potential suspects, the names of whom he passed along to the RCMP.

He said about 10 to 12 employees worked at the orchard at the time of the fires, but they usually head home to the Montague area by 5 or 6 p.m. and did not witness any suspicious activity.

When asked about Canadian Nectar Products’ financial state, Punia said the owners have no outstanding loans from government, banks or creditors.

“Everything has been settled and nothing has to be paid,” he said in reference to previous media reports that the company had entered receivership in 2018.

Anyone with information in relation to these incidents is asked to contact the Kings District RCMP at 902-838-9300 or P.E.I. Crime Stoppers at peicrimestoppers.com or by phone at 1-800-222-8477 (TIPS).

Twitter.com/stephendbrun

RELATED
