MP officer shot dead by sarpanch’s husband: Police

A government official probing charges of financial irregularities against a village sarpanch was allegedly shot dead by her husband in Morena, 465 kms from Bhopal, police said on Thursday.

The victim, Shivcharan Shakya, a resident of Morena, was an assistant development extension officer (AEDO). Two panchayat employees accompanying Shakya suffered injuries when Ramkishor Sikarwar, the husband of Nandpura village panchayat sarpanch Aarzu Sikarwar, and his henchmen opened fire on them with pistols on Wednesday night, according to the police.

A first information report (FIR) was registered against 10 people by one of the injured employees under sections 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder) and 353 (assault or criminal force to deter public servant from discharge of his duty) of the Indian Penal Code

Asit Yadav, superintendent of police, Morena, said, “A villager had lodged a complaint against the sarpanch for her alleged financial irregularities. The allegation was that the sarpanch misappropriated government funds released for the construction of a concrete cement road in the village.”

On Wednesday, the ADEO and the other two panchayat employees reached the village and conducted a preliminary inquiry, Yadav said. “When they were returning to Morena in a car, Ramkishor Sikarwar along with nine others allegedly started firing at the vehicle. They chased the car and fired at the inquiry team several times. Later, they fled from the spot,” the SP added.

According to the police, Shakya died on the spot while the two injured were rushed to a hospital by the driver of the car.

Efforts are on to arrest suspects, who are absconding, the police officer said.

In June, a municipal officer was allegedly attacked by the chairman of the civic body and his men in Satna as he was probing allegations of corruption against him. The official later registered an FIR and the attackers were arrested.

In November last year, a team of income tax officials were allegedly attacked by an oil trader and his men in Morena during a search.
