Kartik Aaryan flaunts his chiseled body in the latest photo and makes netizens go ‘ufff’

If there is one star in Bollywood who has managed to win the hearts of the youngsters with his cool attitude and his chocolate boy looks, it is Kartik Aaryan. With his recent films like Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety and Luka Chuppi, Kartik has really managed to make a place for himself in the hearts of the people. The young actor enjoys a massive fan following on social media and also is pretty active on his handles. Be it sharing on set photos or promoting his movies, Kartik often shares stuff on social media which his fans love.

Recently, Kartik took to Instagram to share a photo of himself flaunting his chiseled body. While the actor can be seen dressed in a pair of blue jeans and a white t-shirt, Kartik can be seen striking a pose in which he is taking off his tee. While the Luka Chuppi actor often shares stunning pictures on Instagram which win over his fans, his latest photo has left female fans gasping for breath. Netizens loved the photo and took to the comments section to praise their favourite star.

(Also Read: Pati Patni Aur Woh: Kartik Aaryan & Aparshakti crack up in a BTS pic & we wonder what the joke is)

Kartik captioned the photo as, “Vegetarian Ladka.” A few days back, while shooting in Lucknow, Kartik's female fans reached the set and met the star. Photos of him posing with them were doing rounds on the internet. Meanwhile, Kartik is currently shooting for Pati Patni Aur Woh in Lucknow. Kartik has also been in the news as videos of Sara Ali Khan and him going out for a dinner in Lucknow surfaced online. Sara recently came back from Lucknow where Kartik where he is shooting with Ananya Panday and Bhumi Pednekar for his film. Pati Patni Aur Woh remake is helmed by Mudassar Aziz and is slated to release on December 6, 2019. Also, Kartik and Sara will be seen in Imtiaz Ali’s next, Aaj Kal. The film will release on Valentine's Day 2019.

Check out the photo & fan comments:
