Streaming platforms have given Bollywood story-telling a new thrust

There’s nothing more vital than content in Bollywood at present. Filmmakers are scouring tons of stories inspired by true-life events, which audiences need to know and could lap them up. The streaming platforms too have given story-telling a new thrust. With the web series boom, makers are now looking at chronicles that require attention and at the same time mint money. Here are a few series which are in the production stages and some which have already proved to be cash cows:

The first episode of the series deals with the 2006 Nithari case in Noida, where two men were arrested for serial murders, cannibalism, sexual abuse, and necrophilia. The show that premiered on Zee 5 on February 7 stars Kunal Kemmu, Maninee Mishra, Deepak Tijori, Rituraj Singh, Elnaaz Norouzi, Gopal Singh, and Sandeepa Dhar. Kemmu plays Abhay Pratap Singh, an investigating officer who heads a Special Task Force.

The first season was a hit on Netflix and the makers have announced the second season. Based on police action after the December 16, 2012 rape case, Delhi Crime has won critical acclaim. The second season will depict the Delhi police’s handling of street crimes in the national capital. The first season starred Shefali Shah, Adil Hussain, Rasika Dugal, Rajesh Tailang, and others. The makers are yet to zero in on the crew for the second instalment.

Kaafir

Directed by Sonam Nair and written by Bhavani Iyer, the series is based on true incidents. It revolves around Kainaaz Akhtar, a woman from Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK), who accidentally crosses over to India and is held prisoner under the suspicion of being a militant. After giving birth to a child while spending seven years in imprisonment, Kainaaz and her daughter are helped by an Indian journalist, who seeks to bring them justice. Starring Dia Mirza and Mohit Raina the series is available on Zee 5.

Barot House

A gripping story inspired by a real-life murder, this show features Amit Sadh and Manjari Phadnis as a couple living happily with their three children. They suddenly sense something sinister in their lives. Directed by Bugs Bhargava and written by Sanjeev K. Jha, Barot House started airing on Zee 5 from Wednesday.

Posham Pa

Starring Mahie Gill, Sayani Gupta and Ragini Gupta, Posham Pa is a psychological thriller directed by National Award winning filmmaker Suman Mukhopadhyay and written by Nimisha Misra. Based on true life events in Nagpur, the story revolves around a psychologically disturbed mother who coerced her daughters into a life of crime by murdering and abducting multiple children aged under five years old. The daughters are facing death penalty for their crimes. The series will air from August 21 on Zee 5.

Rangbaaz

This series is set in the 1990s in rural Gorakhpur and it is based on the true story of Prakash Shukla, a notorious gangster of Gorakhpur in Uttar Pradesh. The series is based on his journey from being a student to becoming one of the most-wanted criminals in India. Aired on Zee 5, it stars Saqib Saleem, Tigmanshu Dhulia, Aahana Kumra, Ranvir Shorey and Ravi Kishan.
