Modi hails 'historic decision' over Kashmir

"The government of India regrets the steps announced by Pakistan yesterday and would urge that country to review them so that normal channels for diplomatic communications are preserved," said India's Ministry of External Affairs.

"The intention behind these measures is obviously to present an alarming picture to the world of our bilateral ties. The reasons cited by Pakistan are not supported by facts on the ground."

Kashmir is at the heart of a conflict between rivals and neighbours India and Pakistan, which have fought three wars and regularly exchange fire across their de facto border.

India has for years sought action from Pakistan on terrorism even as Pakistan has maintained that Kashmir is the core issue. Tensions reached a new high after 40 soldiers were killed in February in a suicide attack claimed by Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed in Kashmir.

The Indian government's move has had domestic ramifications - it was welcomed in Jammu and most parts of Ladakh but not in Kashmir.

It has also faced flak for a communication blackout to prevent any outbreak of violence in Kashmir, where there was opposition to the removal of its special status and the bifurcation. It has also faced criticism over the arrest of Kashmir's top political leaders, including former chief ministers Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti.

At least 300 politicians and separatists have reportedly been detained to prevent protests, according to the police, the media and local leaders. Opposition parties, including Congress, have been divided in opinion over the decisions.

Senior Congress leader Karan Singh, whose father Maharaja Hari Singh was the last ruler of Jammu and Kashmir and had signed the Instrument of Accession in 1947, said he did not agree with a "blanket condemnation" of the government's decision. His comment ran contrary to criticism from Congress over the government's lifting of the special status and the communication lockdown.

"Ladakh's emergence as a union territory is to be welcomed," said Dr Singh, 88. He said many would be mortified at the development but political dialogue needed to continue and pressed for the release of the jailed leaders of the Kashmir parties.

KEY EVENTS IN KASHMIR

Here are some of the key events in Kashmir since the end of British rule:

August 1947: With the end of British colonial rule, the Indian subcontinent is divided into predominantly Hindu India and mainly Muslim Pakistan. A mass migration follows, with Hindus and Muslims moving to their country of choice, and more than a million people are killed in communal violence.

October 1947: India and Pakistan fight their first war over control of Muslim-majority Kashmir. The war ends in 1948 with a United Nations-brokered ceasefire, leaving Kashmir divided between the two countries, with the promise of a UN-sponsored referendum.

August 1965: A second war erupts over Kashmir, and India and Pakistan agree to a UN-mandated ceasefire in September.

December 1971: The third war between India and Pakistan is fought in East Pakistan, ending with the creation of an independent country, Bangladesh.

1989: Armed resistance to Indian rule in Kashmir begins. India alleges Pakistan supports local fighters with weapons and training, which Pakistan denies.

December 2001: India masses troops along its western frontier with Pakistan and the Kashmir boundary, after blaming Pakistani insurgents for a deadly attack at the Indian Parliament. The stand-off ends in October 2002 after international mediation.

September 2016: Suspected rebels sneak into an army base in India-controlled Kashmir and kill at least 18 soldiers. Indian forces later attack militant bases in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir.

Feb 14, 2019: A car bombing of a paramilitary convoy in India-controlled Kashmir kills 40 Indian soldiers. India blames Pakistan and promises a "crushing response".

Aug 5, 2019: The Indian central government changes part of the Indian Constitution and downgrades Jammu and Kashmir from one state to two territories. The changes eliminate Kashmir's right to its own Constitution, limit its decision-making power, and allow non-Kashmiri Indians to settle there.

ASSOCIATED PRESS
