Dutch MP Geert Wilders welcomes Kashmir move

Dutch politician Geert Wilders on Monday took to Twitter and hailed India's decision of scrapping Article 370 and 35A. "India is a full democracy. Pakistan is a 100% terror state. So the choice is easy. Welcome home #Kashmir. #IndiaForKashmir," Wilder tweeted.

Wilders is a Member of Parliament and the leader/Chairman of the Party for Freedom in The Netherlands. In an exclusive conversation with WION, the Dutch Parliamentarian openly welcomed the decision of the Indian government and also mentioned that it is time for the Western world to come and out in support of democratic and sovereign nation like India and forget all the rhetoric coming from terror state Pakistan.

Highlighting Home Minister Amit Shah's assertion in Parliament that democracy was never fully implemented in Jammu and Kashmir when these articles were in place and corruption was on the rise, Wilders suggested that Western countries should fully support and endorse a fellow democracy's quest for national integration.

INDIA’S A FRIEND Wilders is a Member of Parliament and the leader/Chairman of the Party for Freedom in The Netherlands



Pointed to the fact that Pakistan doesn’t deserve the West’s support as it is actively involved in supporting and propping up terrorist organisations like the Taliban, Al-Qaeda and the Islamic State (ISIS)

"Those regions and people will develop more under Indian control. India is our friend and we should support our friend." added Wilders.

He also pointed to the fact that Pakistan doesn't deserve the West's support as there is proof of the Pakistani state being actively involved in supporting and propping up terrorist organisations like the Taliban, Al-Qaeda and the Islamic State (ISIS).

"Pakistan is not a democracy. If we in the West should choose, we have to choose to support and I hope that my colleagues and other Parliaments in Europe will join me to support in the fight to end the state within a state." He highlighted the terror attacks in Mumbai which was carried out by terrorists in cohorts with the authorities in Pakistan.

On the question of Pakistani Prime Minister Imran Khan's efforts to internalise India's decision and brand it as an anti-Muslim, Islamophobic move, Wilders said, "Indeed everybody knows that in Kashmir the majority is Islamic, but after revoking of Article 35A, other people in India would be able to buy land and live there. At the end of the day, everybody, whether Muslim or non-Muslim, will benefit from less corruption and more economic prosperity."

Zee Media Newsroom
