Bombay HC refuses to relax rules on Bakri Eid slaughter in flats

The Bombay HC refused to relax rules it had passed on Tuesday regarding slaughtering of animals during Bakri Eid.



This order stated that slaughter inside individual flats and accommodations is not acceptable, keeping in mind hygiene and safety considerations. In housing societies slaughter was not restrained, provided an NOC is obtained from the society which will be dealt with by a civic official.



The intervention had pointed out that the order had mentioned a mosque as a place where slaughter was designated by the civic body. This, it said, was not allowed in Islam as the mosque is a holy place. A bench of justice SC Dharmadhikari and GS Patel said that if that is so, they will rectify it in the order.



When advocate for the intervener raised concerns before court that housing societies where the community is in a minority, may not allow slaughtering and that this would violate their minority and religious rights. Justice Patel said, "You have to stop looking at this from an individual narrow perspective. Needs of the city will trump everything else. Where entire society allows, we will allow. This will be applied to all religions."

Case File The petition had said BMC’s policy violated environmental and animal welfare laws.The bench citing hygeine concerns had stated, “In our view, the requirements of public safety, hygiene and sanitation make it impossible to accept any policy that permits slaughtering inside individual flats. The bench said that it was impossible to accept any policy that permits slaughtering inside individual flats. Bakri Eid will be celebrated on August 12.

Justice Patel further said, "They won't allow you to do it in Riyadh or Mecca. This is an international cosmopolitan city, we will go forward and not backward."



Another request was to allow to conduct sacrifice inside housing society premises with an application to the civic body made 24 hours before sacrifice, instead of the prevailing 30 days. Advocate Rizwan Merchant appearing in individual capacity told court that given the number of animals that go to abattoir, there could be logistics issues and traffic problems. He said that in the next two to three days before the festival arrives, it would not be possible to make arrangements. So, the rules be made effective for next year's festival. The court, however, did not entertain the plea.
