Minor boy tortured, forced to lick toilet seat in Madhya Pradesh

Follow us on Image Source : REPRESENTATIVE IMAGE Minor boy forced to clean toilet seat with tongue in Madhya Pradesh

A 14-year-old boy was tortured and was forced to clean the toilet seat by his tongue in Madhya Pradesh. The incident was reported from Indore and a case against the accused was filed after the police found a video of the act in the mobile phone of the man. The accused was previously arrested in a land grab case. In the video, the accused could be seen torturing the minor boy and pressurising him to give a false statement to police in an attempt to murder case.

The accused was identified as 35-year-old Mukhtyar Khan.

Commenting on the incident, Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Ruchivardhan Mishra said Khan was arrested on the orders of a local court in connection with a case related to buying land using fake documents.

When Khan's mobile phone was being examined, the video of him torturing the 14-year-old boy and forcing him to clean the toilet seat by tongue was found, she said.

Mishra said, "Khan and his associates were pressuring the minor boy to give a false statement to police that two other minor boys (both brothers) were involved in the case of his sons stabbing two months ago."

The police inquiry, however, found that these boys had nothing to do with the stabbing incident.

The SSP said four persons have been already arrested in the stabbing case of Khan's son and booked under IPC section 307 (attempt to murder).

She said, "Khan was trying to falsely implicate the two minor boys, who are the sons of a rich person, two weeks after the FIR was filed.

It is suspected that Khan was intending to extort money from the father of these boys.

An FIR has been lodged against Khan and his associates under the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act and relevant sections of IPC and IT Act. Further investigation is underway, the police added.

Also Read | West Bengal woman strangled to death over dowry

Also Read | Minor gangraped in Gurugram; seeks help from passers-by, gets raped again

Video: Bikers try to snatch woman's chain in Delhi, held
