Sidharth Malhotra finally starts shooting for Shershaah in Kargil post revocation of Article 370

Sidharth Malhotra's Shershaah to begin shooting today | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Sidharth Malhotra to begin shooting for Captain Vikram Batra biopic Shershaah today The filming was supposed to start on Wednesday but due to the delaying of heavy equipment the shoot was cancelled Besides Sidharth, Shershaah will also star Kiara Advani in the lead

Sidharth Malhotra's upcoming film Shershaah has created quite a stir ever since it was announced that a part of the movie will be shot in Kargil this week, after the revocation of Article 370. While the unrest at J&K was expected, producer Shabbir Boxwala had earlier stated that it wouldn't hamper the film's shoot.

However, the filming which was scheduled on Wednesday will begin today. The makers needed some heavy equipment that got delayed due to restrictions that were imposed by the Government as "precautionary and safety measures".

In an interview, Shabbir said, "Some of the heavy equipment, like the lighting truck and some crew members, were delayed as their route to Kargil had to be diverted via Leh instead of Srinagar, where the situation is still said to be a little tense."

The producer further revealed that there is a lot of security checking in and around Srinagar due to which the transit wasn't possible and there the route between Leh and Kargil was better. Besides this, he talked about Section 144 which was imposed in the state on Thursday. "People of Kargil, Leh, and Ladakh are basically calm and easy-going. The problem in Srinagar is also said to be not that bad. The protests are more or less peaceful. Even the police and the army don't want anyone to get hurt," he said.

Since the shoot was delayed, the producer also stated that the cast and crew got more time to prepare for the schedule and even Sidharth got some "extra time" to workout.

Shershaah which is being co-produced by Karan Johar's Dharma Productions went on floors in May. The movie is woven around the life of Captain Vikram Batra, an officer of the Indian Army who was posthumously awarded the Param Vir Chakra for his actions during the 1999 Kargil War in Kashmir between India and Pakistan. Directed by Vishnuvardhan, the film also stars Kiara Advani.

Meanwhile, Sidharth's Jabariya Jodi hit the screens today. The actor will be seen alongside his Hasee Toh Phasee co-star Parineeti Chopra.

Stay tuned to ZoomTV.com for more updates.
