Tamil Nadu: Eight history-sheeters arrested for cutting cake with sickle, planning murder

The police said that the history-sheeters were allegedly planning to kill a man after the party. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Eight history-sheeters were allegedly celebrating a birthday party on the terrace of a building The accused were planning to murder a man named Rajan after the party The prime accused, Diwakar was out on bail Diwakar had been arrested because of Rajan's complaint

Chennai: A group of 'criminals' was arrested by the police on Wednesday in Tamil Nadu for cutting a cake with a sickle. The eight accused are history-sheeters who were celebrating a birthday on the terrace of a building in Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board (TNSCB) quarter in Kasimedu, Tamil Nadu.

The police said that the history-sheeters were allegedly planning to kill a man after the party. The accused were allegedly celebrating the birthday party of a man named Diwakar. Diwakar also has criminal cases registered under his name and was released on bail on Wednesday.

The arrests were made after the police received a tip-off. The police drafted a special team to arrest the eight accused. The other accused were identified as Manikandan, Gowthan, Aravind, Madhan and Sathan. The rest of the accused have not been identified yet. The accused have cases of murder, assault and attempt to murder registered against them.

The accused were allegedly planning to murder Rajan. Rajan was the person who had filed a complaint against Diwakar. The police produced the eight accused before a court and took them into custody.

Youth 'cuts' birthday cake with gunshot in Uttar Pradesh

In July this year, the video of a youth firing shots at his birthday cake in Baghpat, Uttar Pradesh went viral on social media. The incident took place under the limits of Kotwali Baghpat police station. 10-12 youths had gathered on the rooftop of a building to celebrate the birthday of their friend. In the video, a youth was seen flaunting the country-made pistol as his friends surrounded him and cheered for the birthday boy.

The youths then placed the cake on the floor and stepped back. The youth then fired a shot aiming at the cake, following which, his friends began cheering again.

Mumbai cops celebrate goon's birthday at police station

In July this year, the video of a birthday party being celebrated at a police station in Mumbai went viral. In the video, the cops were celebrating the birthday of a criminal named Ayaan Khan. Khan has been named in cases of kidnapping and assault.

It was alleged that Khan walked into the police station with a cake in his hand and the cops decided to celebrate his birthday within the premises of the police station. In the video the incident, the youth could be seen cutting the cake while the cops sang 'Happy Birthday' for him. The cops said that all the charges against Khan had been dropped and that he had become an informer for them.
