Security beefed up at Hyderabad airport following Centre's Kashmir move

Security beefed up at Hyderabad airport following Centre's Kashmir move

GMR Hyderabad International Airport Limited (GHIAL), which operates the airport, has also declared a ban on visitors' entry into airport from August 10 to 20.

news Security

Authorities have beefed up security at the Rajiv Gandhi International Airport (RGIA) in Hyderabad in view of the security alert issued by the Centre for all the major airports in the country.

GMR Hyderabad International Airport Limited (GHIAL), which operates the airport, has issued an advisory to passengers to reach the airport early.

It has also declared a ban on visitors' entry into airport from August 10 to 20. Sources said the restrictions were imposed as part of the security arrangements ahead of Independence Day.

However, additional security measures were being taken in view of the situation in Jammu and Kashmir following the Centre's move to scrap Article 370 that gave special status to the state.

Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), which is responsible for airport security, has tightened security measures including scanning of luggage and frisking of passengers, the sources said.

As per the alert issued by Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BACS), both CISF and the police have intensified the patrolling. Police have set up additional checkpoints for vehicle checking.

Airlines were also advising passengers to reach the airport two-and-half hours to three hours before the scheduled departure of their flights.

The Union government earlier this week, revoked Article 370 and 35A of the Constitution, which provided special status to Jammu and Kashmir. They also moved a Bill to reorganise the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories – Jammu and Kashmir with a legislature, and Ladakh without one. This move was carried out byt the Centre amidst a state lockdown by snapping internet and all other forms of communication.

Article 370 exempted Jammu and Kashmir from the Indian Constitution (except Article 1 and Article 370 itself) and permitted the state to draft its own Constitution. Article 370 restricted the Indian Parliament’s legislative powers in respect of J&K. Read:

What is Article 370? What does its revocation mean for J&K, and other Indian states?

Jammu & Kashmir, Ladakh to be made Union territories: What this means

IANS inputs
