Casus belli for misadventure: Pakistan accuses India of whipping war hysteria

Major General Asif Ghafoor, Spokesperson for the Pakistan Armed Forces warns India | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Responding to Imran Khan's threatening comments of Pulwama-like incident, Chinar Corps Commander Lt General KJS Dhillon said India is prepared Pakistan Armed Forces denied making any such threat adding India trying to whip up war hysteria Pakistan ruled out using military action despite internal calls in the aftermath of India abrogating Article 370

Islamabad/New Delhi: Just a day after Pakistan ruled out a military action despite internal calls in response to India revoking Article 370 in Jammu & Kashmir, Islamabad accused New Delhi of whipping up war hysteria and trying to divert the attention away from Kashmir.

Major General Asif Ghafoor, Spokesperson for the Pakistan Armed Forces denied Indian Army’s accusations that Islamabad has threatened of “certain incidents” in Kashmir.

“Pakistan has been openly threatening about certain incidents in Kashmir. Notwithstanding we'll take care of all of them; let anyone come and try and disrupt the peace in the valley, we will have him eliminated!" said Chinar Corps Commander Lt General KJS Dhillon earlier.

Ghafoor dubbed Dhillon’s statement as “an attempt to carve out causes (casus) belli for a misadventure to divert world attention from precarious situation in Jammu & Kashmir.”

"Lately #Pak has been openly threatening about certain incidents in #Kashmir. Notwithstanding we'll take care of all of them; let anyone come & try & disrupt the peace in valley, we will have him eliminated!"- #ChinarCorpsCdr#IndianArmy #commonCausePeace @SpokespersonMoD @adgpi pic.twitter.com/uOf3ZXGGt5 — Chinar Corps - Indian Army (@ChinarcorpsIA) August 8, 2019

Lt General KJS Dhillon was responding to Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan’s statement on Monday (May 5) after that India’s abrogation of Article 370. Khan said the move was bound to spur incidents like Pulwama – referring to the terror attack in Jammu & Kashmir on February 14 this year in which at least 40 troopers of the Central Reserve Police Force were killed by a Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM) suicide bomber.

On February 27, the Indian Air Force had carried out airstrikes on a JeM terror camp in Balakot in Pakistan, killing more than 250 terrorists and their handlers.

Pakistan, on Friday (August 9), said any attempt of misadventure by India will get a stronger response than February 27 – referring to Operation Swift retort that Islamabad undertook in retaliation after Balakot airstrikes by India.

“Should there be an attempt by Indian Army to undertake any misadventure, Pakistan’s response shall be even stronger than that of 27 Feb 2019. Thousands of Indian troops have failed to suppress just struggle of brave Kashmiris for decades. Current surge won’t succeed either.” Ghafoor said in a statement on Twitter.

Pakistan may have expressed anger over India’s move to revoke Kashmir’s special status and division of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories and downgraded diplomatic ties, but it has made it clear on Thursday that it was not considering any military action.

Pakistan’s Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi said his country will not resort to military action in response to India’s decisions on Kashmir.

"Pakistan is not looking at the military option. We are rather looking at political, diplomatic, and legal options to deal with the prevailing situation," Qureshi told a press conference in Islamabad.

"We have decided to go back to the UN Security Council to challenge this Indian position, which is morally incorrect," he added.

Qureshi's comments came after India earlier this week abrogated Article 370 of the Constitution and got a Bill passed in Parliament that divides the state into two Union Territories: Ladakh without a legislature and Jammu and Kashmir with a legislature.
