Through thick & thin

shalender@tribune.com

Manpriya Singh

Debate it or admit it, beauty or at least the stereotypical idea of it has been confined to certain measurements; an all-exclusive club where anything beyond ‘US Size 2’ is not really welcomed with open arms. Be it the ramp, the red carpet, or be it a classroom of a regular school.

Jacqualine Kiara Ledlie doesn’t recall hearing her name in the school corridors at all. “It was always moti,” today she can afford to have a good laugh about it, since those days of body-shaming, whether done lovingly or maliciously by those around, are long over. With modeling assignments keeping her busy for 17 days in a month! “In fact, I’m the model for as many as 15 plus size brands,” shares the Delhi-based social media influencer, as she also gets ready for the upcoming Lakme Fashion Week’s winter festive edition, where she’ll once again be taking to ramp as a model for All’s Plus size show.

Acceptance is the key

Joining her are a host of other beauties; all ‘body positivity activists cum models cum influencers’. What truly brings the girls together is more than just an all-inclusive platform; they all faced the same situation in school corridors and classrooms, who share the same story, similar mental harassment incidents. The only difference could be in the mean nomenclatures, for one of them it was, ‘Baby elephant’ while for the other it was, ‘bulldozer’.

“Oh that’s nothing, I was even called a fat hen,” Ludhiana-based 19-year-old Shivani Tuli’s story is one of sheer grit and inspiration. But what’s heartwarming is that today she can dish out a tip or two and life lessons to any lady who is yet to fully embrace her curves. “Others will accept you only once you accept yourself,” says the cosmetology student, who was even afflicted with paralysis, but overcame that battle with her mind. “It’s all about will-power.” Local beauty pageants, regional fashion walks all figure in her resume, along with academics, since she is studying to be a cosmetologist.

Curvy girl fashion

“Loving yourself is a very personal journey, one that no one other than yourself can help you undertake,” Sakshi Sindwani, was the first blogger, vlogger if you must, to undertake the issues and subject of ‘curvy girl fashion’. Already a content creator and filmmaker who has majorly dealt with the subject of body positivity, she had gone to attend the event as an influencer. “ It was Rina Dhaka who suggested that I walk the ramp and I was not conscious at all because in that room there was so much positivity; curvy girls were wearing all the things they are not supposed to wear, for example a tube top to what not,” says the blogger from ‘Style Me Up With Sakshi’.

There is another stigma that she wants to erase. Natural body type is what people often confuse with obesity; however the two are very different. “Embracing yourself is in no way means being lazy or sloppy or not being fit. Which is why I promote fitness big time on my social media accounts,” adds the 23-year-old from a science background, who was actually studying to be a genetic engineer. “Yes, in no way we are saying eat tandoori chicken and don’t work-out,” adds Jacqualine, who is heavily into Pilates, yoga, gymming and eating healthy food.

Motivation within

Embracing yourself is about the mental transformation more than the physical one! For Amritsar based make-up artist Pranati Bhalla that transformation came when she thought of her six-year-old son. “I used to feel quite sad about my obesity till when my son turned six and I started working, which turned my life upside down. Being a plus size model I feel too confident now and can inspire people.” “Once I accepted myself, it showed in my walk, in my talk and on my face,” adds Jacqualine, and the catalyst for that mental change was Sunny Leone, who said to me as a participant of Splitsvilla show, ‘It’s not bad to be big.’

Before a model can just be a model and not a ‘plus size model’, it’s a pretty good start! manpriya@tribunemail.com
