Pakistan suspends trade ties with India. Who gains, who loses from Imran Khan's move

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has announced suspension of trade with India besides downgrading diplomatic ties and partially closing its airspace. (Photo: Reuters)

Relations between India and Pakistan worsened on Wednesday when Pakistan decided to downgrade diplomatic ties with India, recall its high commissioner from New Delhi, expel the Indian envoy to Islamabad and suspend bilateral trade.

These decisions were taken at a high-level meeting chaired by Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan in response to the Narendra Modi government's move to scrap the special status accorded to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Indian Constitution.

Pakistan has termed India's action as a violation of United Nations' resolutions on Kashmir and upped the ante to raise the matter at various international forums, including the United Nations and the Organisation for Islamic Cooperation. While announcing downgrading of diplomatic relations and suspension of bilateral trade, Pakistan also objected to India's decision of bifurcating the erstwhile state of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories.

Worsening of diplomatic relations between the two countries is not something new, especially when viewed in the immediate context of past few years. However, what is new this time is Pakistan's decision to completely suspend bilateral trade with India.

Pakistan's announcement comes nearly five months after India decided to revoke the Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status that it had accorded to Pakistan in 1996. This decision was taken in the aftermath of the Pulwama terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir where 40 Indian security personnel were killed in a suicide blast. India has alleged that the terror attack was perpetrated from Pakistan, a charge the latter has denied.

As tensions between the two nuclear neighbours escalate, IndiaToday.in brings you a data analysis that explains trade relations between the two countries and what suspension of bilateral trade means for each of them.

COMPARING ECONOMIES: WHO STANDS WHERE

According to World Bank's database on global trade, in 2017 India's GDP stood at $2,600,818 million with a per capita income of $1,800. In comparison, Pakistan's GDP was $304,952 million (i.e. 752 per cent lower than India) and it's per capita income was $1,580.

India Pakistan Exports $2,94,364 million $21,878 million No. of items exported 4,418 2,792 Imports $4,44,052 million $57,440 million No. of items imported 4,317 4,162 Ease of doing business ranking 100 147 GDP $26,00,818 million $3,04,952 million Per Capita Income $1,800 $1,580

The above table illustrates the size and nature of the two economies in 2017. But this was not the case always.

Pakistan had been outperforming India in economic growth in the first three decades after independence. "In the 1950s and 1960s, India's growth hovered around 2-3 per cent annually while Pakistan grew at around 5-6 per cent, with a per capita income significantly higher than India's," states a 2019 World Bank policy note. Since 1970s, while India was able to improve its growth rate, Pakistan's growth gradually petered, largely due to internal political instability.

With this historical context in mind, we shall now look at how the two countries trade with each other at present. Or, find out if they really trade anything significant at all?

ALSO READ | Pakistan: Playing at peace and making war

WHERE DO INDIA, PAKISTAN EXPORT TO AND IMPORT FROM

India and Pakistan are two neighbours who not only share a 3,000-km-plus land border but also are well connected with a commercially vibrant international sea route. But despite Pakistan's strategic location and India's vast resources and booming market, the two countries do not share any significant trade.

The Indo-Pak border as seen from space at night. The border is visible at night due to heavy installation of floodlights by India along the border. (Photo: Nasa)

Pakistan does not feature among India's top 35 exporters and importers. On the other hand, India does not feature among Pakistan's top 10 exporters, but stands at the seventh place in its list of top 10 countries from where it imports. (Despite the seventh position, Pakistan's import from India was just 2.95 per cent of its total imports in 2017.)

Another example that elucidates this insignificant trade relation is that in 2017, India's exports to Nigeria, Oman, Turkey, Belgium, Mexico, Egypt and Kenya was more than its exports to Pakistan with which it shares a well-connected land border.

Pakistan does not feature among India's top 35 exporters and importers. On the other hand, India does not feature among Pakistan's top 10 exporters, but stands at the seventh place in its list of top 10 countries from where it imports.

In regards to imports, India's imports from countries like Angola, Mozambique, Ghana, Peru, Botswana, Chile, Tanzania, Kazakhstan, Zambia, Morocco, Burkina Faso, Brunei, Azerbaijan, Sudan, Myanmar among others, is way more than what it imports from Pakistan.

ALSO READ | What made Pakistan open its airspace for India

The outcome of decades of hostile relations and fractured trade between India and Pakistan is that Pakistan imports far more vegetables from Indonesia, sub-Saharan Africa, far-off Canada, the US, Brazil and Australia, than it imports from its next-door neighbour India.

The World Bank database provides data on exports and imports of 16 broad product categories. Of these, there are six product categories in which India features among the top 10 countries from where Pakistan imports.

Pakistan imports 12.77 per cent of its agriculture raw material from India. This is second only to imports from China. Pakistan also imports 12.40 per cent of its total textiles and clothing, 8.22 per cent chemicals, and 6.49 per cent plastic/rubber from India.

In contrast, Pakistan is among the top 10 countries from which India imports hides and skins. As on 2017, 2.30 per cent of the total hides and skins imported by India were from Pakistan. Besides this, there are no other major products that India imports from Pakistan, the World Bank data show.

Today the bilateral trade between India and Pakistan are negligible but in the initial years of independence, despite the bloody Partition, India and Pakistan had flourishing trade ties.

"Pakistan's share of exports to India has been less than two per cent of its total exports, and for India, imports from Pakistan are not even 0.5 per cent of its total imports. This situation is in contrast to the initial trade relationship at independence, under which 70 per cent of Pakistan's exports were directed to India and 63 per cent of Indian exports went to Pakistan," the World Bank states in a policy note.

ALSO READ | Pakistan China's new colony? Leaked papers reveal Beijing's stake in economy, key projects

WHAT IF INDO-PAK RELATIONS WERE CORDIAL?

This is a question with a big if.

Had India and Pakistan shared cordial relations over the past decades, the two South Asian developing economies that are plagued with poverty, malnourishment, illiteracy and poor health infrastructure would have been spared with four wars and an unending saga of terrorism.

Today the bilateral trade between India and Pakistan are negligible but in the initial years of independence, despite the bloody Partition, India and Pakistan had flourish trade ties.

Cordial relations would have also prevented the two neighbours from dissipating themselves in an economically corroding arms race. The gigantic defence budgets of the two countries could have been diverted for health, education, infrastructure, among others.

But is all lost? Short answer: No.

ALSO READ | Pak enhancing nuclear capabilities despite a crippling economy

If the estimates of a recent World Bank policy note on Pakistan (published in March this year) are to be believed, much can still be achieved. The policy note titled 'Pakistan@100 Regional Connectivity' states that if Pakistan and India improve trade ties, Pakistan could possible increase its trade with India by 18 times as compared to the 2015 figures.

"It is clear that the potential gains from liberalising trade with India dominate the total potential gains for Pakistan; 85 per cent of the unrealised regional potential trade for Pakistan is with India, while 15 per cent is with China," World Bank's policy note states.

The authors opined that what makes this possible is the size and proximity of the Indian economy, taken along with the common cultural factors such as language.

Meanwhile, if growth rates of the two countries continue to follow the trend of the past five years, by 2047 (when India and Pakistan turn 100) India's per capita income will be 4.11 times higher than that of Pakistan.

Given Pakistan's crippling economy at present, the country is also staring at a major unemployment crisis with its burgeoning youth population, millions of who enter the workforce every year. The World Bank policy note states that just to maintain its present unemployment rate, Pakistan would require an additional 1.5 million jobs every year.

ALSO READ | US security aid to Pakistan will remain suspended pending decisive action against terror groups

Viewing Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan's decision to suspend trade with India despite this context, one wonders if he, or someone in his cabinet, has read the World Bank's policy note on how Pakistan can revive its economy by 2047 when it turns 100.

A cursory reading of the policy note shows that improving trade ties with India is the most viable option for Pakistan to help itself. Its trade with China has already peaked, is heavily tilted in favour of China and the scope for further increase is limited.

If growth rates of the two countries continue to follow the trend of the past five years, by 2047 (when India and Pakistan turn 100) India's per capita income will be 4.11 times higher than that of Pakistan.

For India, the trade dependency on Pakistan is not of such magnitude that it can significantly influence its economy. But cordial relations with Pakistan can serve India's economic interests, mainly by reducing transportation charges (i.e. if Pakistan allows transit).

Pakistan is geographically located at a strategic position between India and the energy-rich Gulf. It is a vital land link between South Asia and central Asia. If it is peaceful and Indo-Pak relations are friendly, the entire region stands to gain.

As for Pakistan, while it may have been able to capitalise upon its geostrategic position during the Cold War, but it is yet to capitalise its geographical position for economic gains which can benefit it and others alike.

Suspension of trade ties with India directly militates against such prospects.

ALSO WATCH | How China is trying to make Pakistan its new colony
