Sidharth Malhotra Finally Starts Shooting For Shershaah In Kargil Today Post Abrogation Of Article 370, Co-Producer Confirms!

Sidharth Malhotra on Friday will resume the shooting of his upcoming film Shershaah in Kargil, Ladakh, after the abrogation of Article 370. Though the filming was scheduled on Wednesday for which Sidharth even left for Ladakh on Monday but it will begin today. As some of the heavy equipment got delayed due to the restrictions imposed by the Government as precautionary and safety measures, the cast and crew had to begin the second schedule of Shershaah in Kargil today.

Movie Review: Sidharth Malhotra-Parineeti Chopra Starrer Jabariya Jodi

View this post on Instagram When mother nature comes alive! #Shershaah ???? A post shared by Sidharth Malhotra (@sidmalhotra) on Aug 8, 2019 at 1:46am PDT

Sidharth Malhotra shared this pic of himself from Kargil on his Instagram story. The Jabariya Jodi actor will be shooting for the film in Leh, Ladakh and Kargil during his 40-days long schedule. Confirming the news of the shoot being resumed from today, Shabbir Boxwala, co-producer of Shershaan, informed Mumbai Mirror, "Some of the heavy equipment, like the lighting truck and some crew members, were delayed as their route to Kargil had to be diverted via Leh instead of Srinagar, where the situation is still said to be a little tense."The producer further revealed that there is a lot of security checking in and around Srinagar due to which the transit wasn't possible and there the route between Leh and Kargil was better. Besides this, he talked about Section 144 which was imposed in the state on Thursday. "People of Kargil, Leh, and Ladakh are basically calm and easy-going. The problem in Srinagar is also said to be not that bad. The protests are more or less peaceful. Even the police and the army don't want anyone to get hurt," he said. Shershaah, which is being co-produced by Karan Johar's Dharma Productions went on floors in May. The movie stars Kabir Singh actress Kiara Advani as leading lady and is based on the life of Captain Vikram Batra, an officer of the Indian Army who was posthumously awarded the Param Vir Chakra for his actions during the 1999 Kargil War.
