PM Modi to appear on Man vs Wild: All you need to know about Bear Grylls show

The special episode of Man vs Wild is slated to premiere on August 12.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi will be sharing screen space with celebrity host Bear Grylls on Man vs Wild on Discovery Channel. The special episode is slated to premiere on August 12 and will be showcased in more than 180 countries across the globe.

Few days back, Bear Grylls had shared the teaser on his official Twitter handle which went viral on social media. He had captioned it as, "People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM Modi".

Recently, the channel released a clip where PM Modi can be seen sharing his own experiences, "For years, I have lived among nature, in the mountains and the forests. These years have a lasting impact on my life. So when I was asked about a special programme focusing on life beyond politics and that too in the midst of nature I was both intrigued and inclined to take part in it."

He also says, "My upbringing does not allow me to take a life. However, I will hold on it (the spear) since you insist."

During their adventure, Grylls asks about the need and efforts towards cleanliness of India. The Prime Minister says: "Someone from outside cannot clean my India, the people of India make India clean.

"Personal hygiene is in the culture of the Indian people. We need to develop the habit of social hygiene. Mahatma Gandhi has done a lot of work on it, and now we are getting good success in this. I believe India will succeed in this very soon."

Reportedly, on February 14, PM Modi spent some hours with Grylls deep inside the forests of the Jim Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand to shoot for the episode. The show has been shot as a means to promote awareness on animal conservation and environmental change.

The said episode will premiere on August 12 and will be showcased in more than 180 countries across the world on Discovery network of channels.

The episode will be broadcast on 12 Discovery channels simultaneously including Discovery Channel, Discovery HD World, Animal Planet, Animal Planet HD World, TLC, TLC HD World, JEET Prime, JEET Prime HD, Discovery Science, Discovery Turbo, Discovery Kids and DTamil.

People across 180 countries will get to see the unknown side of PM @narendramodi as he ventures into Indian wilderness to create awareness about animal conservation & environmental change. Catch Man Vs Wild with PM Modi @DiscoveryIN on August 12 @ 9 pm. #PMModionDiscovery pic.twitter.com/MW2E6aMleE Bear Grylls (@BearGrylls) July 29, 2019

It will be available in 8 languages including English, Bengali, Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam and Marathi.
