Two vehicles carrying illegal 15 cattle seized in Demow ahead of Bakri Eid

Demow: Ahead of Bakri Eid next week, Demow Police on Thursday seized two vehicles carrying 15 cattle heads.

Police during a routine checking at the Demow Chariali area seized the vehicles as the drivers couldn’t produce any valid documents or transport of cattle permit. It is to be noted that the bearing registration number AS 23BC 7655 and AS 06BC 3727 has been detained by the Demow police for further verification.

As per police report, the vehicles were heading from No 1 Nachani area to Demow in Sivasagar District.

It has also come to light that few local businessmen are allegedly engaged in getting cattle heads illegally from various parts of the border areas to Dibrugarh District every year.

Speaking to the media, the driver of the vehicle claimed that there was no cattle permit given to him while transporting the cattle heads.

On the other hand, it may also be mentioned that in Maharashtra, slaughter of animals in private flats and housing societies has been banned in Mumbai, the Bombay High Court said on last Tuesday after hearing a petition by animal welfare groups. In its order, which comes ahead of Bakri Id next week, the court has allowed animal slaughter only at the government-approved slaughter houses.

The high court passed the order after a public interest litigation challenged the illegal transport and slaughter of animals. After the court order, slaughter of animals during Bakri Id would also not be allowed at housing societies.

A division bench of the high court with Justice Satyaranjan Dharmadhikari and Justice Gautam Patel has also restrained the Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation (BMC) from giving permissions for slaughter inside homes.

Also Read: BSF apprehended Indian cattle smuggler along with 11 cattle heads

Also Read: 20 cattle heads seized by BSF personnel of West Jaintia Hills district

Also Read: BSF Apprehended Two Indian Cattle Smugglers along with six Cattle heads from Indo-Bangla Border
