A Muslim in Bristol: Tensions are running high

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Sign up to our daily newsletter for the latest local and breaking news in Bristol.

I was in Pakistan earlier this year when tensions between India and Pakistan brought the two nuclear-armed rivals to the brink of war after Pakistan shot down - and captured the pilot of – an Indian warplane

Now, I’m back visiting family, and again, tensions between the two nations are simmering to boiling point.

The only reason for these tensions? Kashmir - A state divided.

One part is a semi-autonomous region administered by Pakistan; we call it “Azad (Free) Kashmir” - this is where my ancestral home is.

The other is occupied by India. We call it “Jammu and Kashmir”.

Why do I make a distinction in using the word “administered” for Azad Kashmir, and “occupied” for Jammu and Kashmir? Simple. It’s a fact.

India has around 750,000 soldiers brutally occupying that tiny territory; an area the size of Switzerland. The most militarized zone on earth is not in the Middle East, it is Indian-Occupied Jammu and Kashmir! Let that sink in for a while.

To give that some context, neighbouring Pakistan's active military personnel total around 600,000. India has more than that occupying one state alone.

So, why so many Indian soldiers in Jammu and Kashmir? They are there trying to crush a decades-long struggle by the people of Jammu and Kashmir for freedom – for their UN-backed Right to self-determination.

The UN, international human rights agencies and investigative journalists have long accused Indian forces of brutality; “mass killings, torture, political repression, the suppression of freedom of speech. Kashmiris are arrested and jailed indefinitely, without charge. Some are simply “disappeared”.

The Kashmiri population is humiliated daily. Women are raped and sexually abused. Protesters are deliberately blinded using pellets fired into their faces”. India denies this but, has banned international observers, the UN, human rights agencies and media from Jammu and Kashmir. It is testimony to the power and influence of India on the global stage that there is not a bigger worldwide outcry.

1947 saw the princely state of Kashmir divided into two. By rights, being a Muslim majority state it should have seceded to Pakistan. Instead, the non-Muslim head chose to secede to India. It's been an open wound ever since. Both India and Pakistan lay claim to the whole of Kashmir. So, until the dispute is settled, both sides have accorded the respective sides of Kashmir special privileges. Land in either part of Kashmir can not be purchased by anyone other than Kashmiris. This means that people from the Punjab, for example, cannot buy land in either side of Kashmir. The same applies to greedy multinational corporations. The whole of Kashmir is internationally recognised as “disputed territory”.

Last week, India’s right-wing, Hindu-nationalist BJP Government chose to unilaterally change that and revoked the special privileges guaranteed to Kashmir. This follows years of the BJP governing party calling for Hindus across India to relocate to Kashmir and “make it Hindu”.

Kashmiris around the world have reacted with revulsion and heartbreak. The already brutal suppression of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmir has intensified. India is sending further reinforcements to the already most militarised zone on earth. Kashmiri leaders are pleading for international help, fearing an impending massacre. India is enforcing a media blackout.

As I sit here, in my ancestral lands, in Azad Kashmir - so close to the border – I can hear the intensified cross-border heavy shelling.

At the weekend, Pakistan accused India of contravening the Geneva Convention by firing a cluster bomb - a horrific weapon - into a civilian area. India denies it but, an incensed Pakistan has begun evacuating civilians from the Kashmir border. As the situation worsens, mobile network coverage and internet along that border, are intermittent.

Something terrible is about to happen in Indian Occupied Jammu and Kashmir and my heart – along with those of so many others around the world - is anxious.

What can I do? I can speak out. I ask you to do the same.

For the latest news in and around Bristol, check back on Bristol Live's homepage.
