Pakistan continues to interfere in Kashmir issue, India says 'face reality, stay away': 10 developments

Even as Pakistan continues to raise an alarm over the developments in Kashmir, no protests were reported from the Valley on Friday. (Photo: AP)

Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) witnessed another day of communication blockade as part of heightened security measures in the wake of the government's Article 370 move. However, the situation was largely normal in the Valley on Friday as restrictions were relaxed for people who went to offer Friday Namaz.

Section 144 was also withdrawn in Jammu as none of its districts witnessed any untoward incidents over the past five days. All schools and colleges in the Valley are also expected to reopen on Saturday amid tight security.

Although there was hardly any resistance in Jammu and Kashmir against the scrapping of Article 370, Pakistan again went on the aggressive today. It suspended two more transportation services-Thar Express and Dosti bus-as it continues its aggressive stance on the Kashmir issue.

Here are 10 key points you need to know about today's developments:

1) Jammu and Kashmir Governor Satya Pal Malik said normalcy will be restored across the entire Valley very soon. While no protests were reported from the Valley on Friday, some of the residents expressed concern over the government's decision to scrap Article 370, which grants special status to its residents. Some of them claimed that the move will lead to "exploitation" of the "ecologically sensitive" province.

Read: If all is well, why weren't we allowed in J&K: Left leaders after being sent back

2) Meanwhile, Satya Pal Malik said Eid will be celebrated in the Valley with minimal restrictions. PM Narendra Modi had also mentioned that the people of Jammu and Kashmir will face no difficulties in celebrating Eid. The mood, however, remains somber in the Valley in the wake of the restrictions across most parts. The restrictions, however, have been lifted in Jammu as no protests have been reported in the past five days.

3) On Friday, President Ram Nath Kovind gave his nod to the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization Bill as well. Soon after the approval, it was reported that Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh will come to existence as separate Union Territories on October 31, 2019.

4) Pakistan continued to maintain its aggressive stance on the Kashmir issue and suspended the Thar Express and Dosti bus service. It said that the decisions have been taken in line with its stand on the Indian government's move to scrap Article 370. Even as Pakistan tries to meddle in the matter, the United Nations has asked Islamabad to exercise "maximum restraint" in the matter. It was further embarrassing for Pakistan as it was slammed by Taliban for linking Kashmir issue with Afghanistan. This came after Pakistan's opposition leader in the Parliament Shehbaz Sharif drew a comparison between Kashmir and Afghanistan and said, "What kind of a deal is this that the Afghans enjoy and celebrate peace in Kabul, but in Kashmir, blood is shed? No, this is not acceptable for us."

Raveesh Kumar, MEA on Samjhauta&Thar Express trains: Actions taken by Pak unilateral.This has been done without consulting us.We've urged them to reconsider their decision.Our sense is that whatever is being done by Pak is to present an alarming picture of bilateral relationship. pic.twitter.com/sorPrQqz1u — ANI (@ANI) August 9, 2019

5) Retaliating sharply, India once again told Pakistan to mind its own business. In a press conference, Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar told Pakistan that scrapping Article 370 was within the boundaries of Indian Constitution and asked it to stay out of the "internal matter". Kumar also clarified that the actions taken by Pakistan in the wake of the government's Article 370 move were unilateral and that India had no role in it. He went on to say that Pakistan did not even inform India before stopping the Samjhauta Express yesterday and the Thar Express today. Later in the evening, Pakistan went on to suspend the Dosti bus service connecting Lahore to Delhi. "Action taken by Pakistan is unilateral, have not consulted us. Whether it is Samjhauta express, trade relationship has been done without consulting us. We have urged them to reconsider these decisions," Kumar said.

Also Read: NSA Ajit Doval approves 600 phones for troops in Kashmir to connect with family

6) Pakistan's foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi tweeted that China has supported its stand on the development in Kashmir and has offered full support. Soon after Qureshi's meeting with State Counsellor and Foreign Minister of China, Wang Yi, he said, "Pakistan shares a bond of brotherhood with China as further evidenced in the meeting today where China reassured Pakistan of its support and commitment. "Foreign Minister Wang Yi has acknowledged that India's aggressive stance on Kashmir leaves the people of Kashmir vulnerable and voiceless while also putting the entire region at risk," he added.

7) As Pakistan continues to maintain its aggressive stance, the Indian Navy has sounded an alert along the coastline, suspecting the possibility of a terrorist attack. Sources told India Today that all the naval bases and warships are on standby for any suspicious movement. Fishermen have also been advised to exercise extreme caution. The decision to put its warships on alert came in the wake of the government's decision to scrap Article 370.

8) In the political arena, former Congress whip in Rajya Sabha, Bhubaneshwar Kalita, who resigned against the party's stand on Article 370, formally joined the BJP. Kalita had resigned over Congress's stand on the government's move to revoke Article 370 and bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories. Among other things, CPI(M) leader Sitaram Yechury was detained at Srinagar airport while on his way to meet party leader MLA Tarigami. He had earlier sought permission to meet the party MLA. Not just Yechury but CPI(M) general secretary D Raja was also denied entering the city. Yechury and D Raja were later asked to return to Delhi. CPI(M) slammed the government and called the detention of Yechury and D Raja "anti-democratic".

Must See: Indian Navy puts warships on high alert, suspect Pakistan-based terror attack

9) In view of the restriction in Jammu and Kashmir, J&K governor Satya Pal Malik directed all deputy commissioners in Kashmir to reach out to people and take stock of their requirements. It was reported that the administration is trying its best to ensure an adequate supply of ration, medicines and other important items to the residents of Jammu and Kashmir, especially in the areas where restrictions are still intact.

10) Governor Satya Pal Malik also met with National Security Advisor Ajit Doval and discussed the security situation in Jammu and Kashmir. According to news agency ANI, both were satisfied with the overall situation in Kashmir, which is an indication that the restrictions could be soon lifted in most of the areas. They also discussed all the arrangements that are necessary ahead of Eid celebrations in the Valley. J&K chief secretary BVR Subrahmanyam later said that situation has been relaxed in almost 50 per cent of areas of Jammu and Kashmir. "Restrictions are preventive in nature to ensure mischievous elements do not take advantage. No Namaz in Jama Masjid as this is a problem area," he told India Today TV.
