Bigg Boss 13: Total Prize Money To INCREASE In NEW Season Of Salman Khan’s Show?

"The real reason behind Bigg Boss house being built in Mumbai and not in Lonavla is not that what other media are reporting. The makers are ready to spend money to keep their audience fully entertained. It's just that this year they made the change to bring in more popular faces. Earlier Bigg Boss offers wher put down by popular celebs just because they did not want to stay in Lonavla," the source told International Business Times India. Also READ: Khichdi’s Chakki Parekh Aka Richa Bhadra APPROACHED For Salman Khan’s Bigg Boss 13 Interestingly, the report further said that the makers have decided to increase the total prize money of the show. Unlike, the previous few seasons, ‘Bigg Boss 13’ will have total prize money of Rs 1 crore. Yes, you read that right. The winning prize has been around Rs 50 lakh from ‘Bigg Boss 6’, which was won won ‘Kasautii Zindagii Kay’ actress and ‘Nach Baliye 9’ contestant Urvashi Dholakia. The move has done in order to convince popular celebs to participate in the reality show, the report added. Although, the makers are yet to reveal the name of the contestants, seven celebs have been rumoured to be part of ‘BB 13’. The names of Sidharth Shukla, Mugdha Godse, Mahika Sharma, Chunky Panday, Devoleena Bhattacharjee, Rajpal Yadav and Aditya Narayan have been doing the rounds as confirmed contestants of ‘Bigg Boss 13’. The show is expected to go on-air from September end on Colors channel. Salman Khan will continue to host the reality show, which is expected to get shifted to late night slot in new season. Watch this space for more updates!

‘Bigg Boss’ is considered as the biggest reality show on Indian television for a reason. The show creates buzz on social media even before going on air. ‘Bigg Boss 12’ was won by TV’s popular bahu Dipika Kakar, who is currently seen in ‘Kahaan Hum Kahaan Tum’ opposite Karan V Grover. The makers are currently busy approaching celebs for the new season. Unlike ‘BB 12’, ‘Bigg Boss 13’ will reportedly only feature celebrities as contestants. ‘Bigg Boss 13’ will be shot in Mumbai and not in Lonavala. It was rumoured that the makers decided to change the location to cut down the cost. However, a report in a portal has suggested that the makers made the change to bring in more popular faces for the show. They decided to shift the location to attract more celebrities.
