Navy on high alert fearing terror attack from sea

NL Correspondent

New Delhi, Aug 09

Days after the forces were put on alert, the Indian Navy is now on a specific task to prevent what is feared to be a possible terror attack using the sea route like the November 2008 Mumbai attack.

All stations have been activated and the situation is being monitored on the western and eastern coast of India, senior officials of the Navy said.

The chain of 46 coastal radars set up after the November 2008 Mumbai terror attacks feed a constant picture to control rooms, including the Gurugram-based Information Management and Analysis Centre (IMAC).

The IMAC collates information and then makes an assessment of the threat and then tasks assets to tackle the threat.

The radar feeds and camera feeds – all in high definition real life imagery-are being scanned for any suspicious movement along the 7516 km coast line after Parliament on August 5 scrapped Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir.

Several naval assets like warships are stationed at specific locations while surveillance planes trawl the skies.

It is not only coastal cities such as Mumbai, Chennai or Kochi that are being watched, but critical infrastructure along the coast like refineries, oil depots, ports and LNG terminals and oil rigs off coast are being watched.

Also the Navy has asked the government to find a way to fund a project to install a gadget enabling ‘friend or foe’ identification on all fishing boats under 20 metres.

This needs immediate action, officials have pointed out saying there are 2.5 lakh fishing vessels, called the automatic identification system (AIS), it is mandatory on all vessels more than 20 meters length and is part of unfinished business of the coastal security plan okayed after 26/11.

The AIS is mandatory for vessels bigger than 20 metres. The transponder constantly emits a signal that is unique to the boat and the same is picked up by ground-based radars and AIS receivers. The signal identifies the boat, its owner, its registration etc.

The Indian Space Research Organisation had provided for a space-based transponder that will allow signals from boats to shore and even allow transmission of distress messages – like incoming cyclones – to be sent to fishermen at sea.

The issue is who will pay for these transponders – the fishermen are small operators and cannot afford the gadget that would cost around Rs 20,000.

Trials of the AIS transponders conducted off the coast of Gujarat and Tamil Naidu have been successful, a senior official said.
