Murder mystery of Nepal national solved, man held

New Delhi: The Delhi Police on Friday said that they have solved murder mystery of a Nepal national who was found dead in a vacant plot at Vasant Kunj in South West Delhi. To nab the culprit, the investigating agency said, dump data of more than 22,000 mobile numbers of different service providers were obtained and 240 numbers were zeroed down. Police identified the accused as Harbir Singh Pal (32) who lives in Kishangarh. He was arrested from Vasant Kunj area.



Deputy Commissioner of Police (south-west) Devender Arya said that on June 7, a PCR call was received at Vasant Kunj South police station regarding a body at a farm in Vasant Kunj. "A body of a male person aged about 30-35 years was found lying dead. Some blood stained bricks/stones were also lying near the body. One empty quarter and one empty beer bottle were also found near the body, " said DCP Arya.

DCP further stated that the empty wine bottles found at the spot were minutely checked and with the help of its bar code it was established that the bottles were purchased from a wine and beer shop of DDA Market, Vasant Kunj. The CCTV footages of the wine shop with its adjacent shop's footages were collected and analyzed, wherein the CCTV footages the deceased was spotted with one suspected person. Later after a detailed investigation, the accused was nabbed.

DCP Arya further added that Harbir Singh Pal disclosed that he is an alcoholic and on June 6, at around 8 pm, when he was consuming alcohol at the roadside in Vasant Kunj. One Nepali boy came to him and requested him to give him some wine.

"On his continue requests, he agreed to give him wine and took him to a wine shop in Vasant Kunj from where he purchased wine and beer, with some snacks and took him on his bike to a lonely place behind the hospital in Vasant Kunj," police said.

Both of them consumed alcohol there and after that they had some hot arguments between them and both of them scuffled, on which the accused took nearby lying stones and thrashed it on the head of the deceased many times, resulting in his death. After that, he ran away from the spot with the belongings of the deceased and disposed of his blood-stained clothes with the belongings of the deceased. After that, he ran away to his native village in Uttar Pradesh.
