Things to do in Mumbai this weekend

05 THINGS TO DO TODAY

Watch a drama

Romeo Ravidas Aur Juliet Devi

Dalit community

Discuss a mega corporate clash

Cyrus Mistry

Ratan Tata

Go for a late-night open mic

Laugh out loud

Pick between two painting parties

Knife Painting Party

Canvas Painting Party

03 THINGS TO DO ON SUNDAY

Catch an acclaimed film

Take your kids to this production

Savour a CKP thali

Chandraseniya Kayastha Prabhu community

Check out what can you do in Mumbai this Weekend.Directed by Sharmistha Saha,is based on two real life caste-based murders. The first is about Dalit youth Pradeep Rathod of Gujarat’s Bhavnagar district, and the second is of activist Kausalya’s husband, who was killed by her relatives because he belonged to the. The play begins with Romeo Ravidas, a farmer’s son in the village of Dumari, Bihar, who loves riding his horse, Juliet. In a peculiar turn of events, Romeo meets Kausalya in his dreams, and the story moves forward from there. To know more, book your seats.Tata vs Mistry: The Battle for India’s Greatest Business Empire by Deepali Gupta traces one of the biggest corporate clashes of recent times. In October 2016,was sacked by the board of Tata Sons, in the presence of his one-time mentor. This began the battle between the two business bigwigs. The author will be reading excerpts from the book at this event and also give her take on this face-off.Missing out on all fun open mic sessions because you are working late hours at the office? Then, this one is for you. At this open mic night (which kicks off at 11.30 pm) the stage will be open to poets, musicians and storytellers. So, get ready to share your original works at this do. Alternatively, you can encourage newbie talents in the city as a member of the audience. PS: The first round of cocktails or mocktails are on the house.A stellar line-up awaits you at this edition of Laugh it off, organised by J-Spot. Hosted by funny man Rohan Gujral, the roster includes stand-up comedians Punya Arora, Bhavish Ailani and Jeeya Sethi. In our books, welcoming the weekend with a generous dose of laughter is always a great idea.--------------------------------------------------------------At this arty party, you will learn how to paint with knives. No, not the pointy sharp ones — that’s dangerous. Here, you will use a perfectly blunt butter knife, incapable of causing any injuries. The theme for this class is the city of Paris. It is organised by Impressions Art. The cost of the workshop is inclusive of materials and refreshments.Art therapy has many therapeutic benefits which helps one relax. And, that might be one of the reasons why painting parties are a hit in the city. At this painting shindig, you’ll be guided on how to paint a serene Buddha on canvas. The cost of the workshop, organised by Paintology, is inclusive of all art material and food.-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------For the best in world cinema, head to Matteden CFC in Lower Parel on Sundays. After screening films such as Frances Ha, All About My Mother and Stand by Me, Embrace of the Serpent (2015) is up next. The Spanish language film, directed by Ciro Guerra, is dedicated to lost Amazonian cultures. The film follows two journeys — made 30 years apart — one by Karamakate, an indigenous shaman in the Colombian Amazonian jungle, and the other by Theo, a German ethnographer, and Evan, an American botanist, both of whom are searching for the rare plant yakruna.The tale of 3 Little Pigs comes to life with this play. The story is centred on three little pigs who decide to build their own homes. While the lazier pigs build their homes with sticks and straw, the third pig built a sturdy home made out of bricks. When the big bad wolf comes to destroy their homes, the houses built by the lazier pigs are easily demolished. How will the wolf destroy the third pig’s home? To find out, watch this production.Home chefs Manoj and Madhavi will introduce you to the culinary delights of theat this pop-up lunch. The cuisine focuses on spices acquired from regions of North India, as well as Madhya Pradesh. Some of the lip-smacking dishes at this spread include bombil bhaji, mutton kheema pattice and kolambi khichdi (made with prawns).To feature an event on this page, send the details and photographs toon
