Sec 144 withdrawn in Jammu

Schools and colleges will resume functioning from Saturday; state police says situation is normal in the region



SRINAGAR In what can be termed as a major relief to the people of Jammu ahead of the festival of Eid al-Adha, section 144 of the of Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC), which prohibits assembly of more than four people, was lifted on Friday.



“The order dated August 5 issued under section 144 CrPC, within Municipal Limits of Jammu district is hereby withdrawn,” read the order issued by Sushma Chauhan, District Magistrate, Jammu.



As per the order, all schools, colleges and academic institutions that are closed can resume functioning normally from Saturday.



Additional director general of police, law and order, Muneer Khan said the situation is normal in Jammu as well as in Kashmir. “In Jammu, the situation is normal. In Kashmir, the situation is under control. All steps necessary to maintain law and order will be taken,” Khan said.



Section 144 was imposed in the backdrop of the annulment of Article 370 and bifurcation of J&K into two UTs— Jammu & Kashmir with legislative assembly and Ladakh without it.



Pakistan suspends Thar Express now



A day after announcing the suspension of Samjhauta Express in the wake of the abrogation of Article 370, Pakistan on Friday said it will stop the Thar Express, a passenger train that runs between Jodhpur and Karachi, state media reported on Friday.



In a press conference, Pakistan minister of railways, Sheikh Rasheed Ahmad, announced that the Thar Express will be shut down at 12.00 am (midnight) Friday while Samjhauta Express will cease to run from Saturday, reported DND News Agency.



The decision to suspend the two trains is in line with Islamabad’s other moves to remonstrate India including suspending bilateral trade and downgrading of diplomatic relations.



Indian Railways on Thursday had clarified that the Samjhauta Express has not yet been suspended but Pakistan authorities refused to send their crew to India citing security concern. The train stood in the Wagah side of the border in Pakistan with around 110 passengers on Thursday. An Indian engine brought the train from Wagah to Attari.



The Samjhauta Express, commonly called the Friendship Express, is a biweekly train — Thursday and Monday — that runs between Delhi and Attari in India and Lahore in Pakistan since 1976 after the Shimla Accord between the two countries. The word Samjhauta means “agreement”, “accord” and “compromise” in both Hindi and Urdu.



The last time the operations of Samjhauta Express were suspended was on February 28, following the Pulwama terror attack that was carried out by Pakistan-based terror group Jaish-e-Mohammed or JeM that killed more than 40 CRPF jawans on February 14. But it was resumed shortly thereafter.



Calling its steps in Jammu and Kashmir an “entirely internal affair”, India has further rejected Pakistan’s unilateral move to downgrade diplomatic ties and asked Islamabad to review them so that normal channels for diplomatic communications are preserved.



Yechury, D Raja not allowed to enter Kashmir



CPI(M) general secretary Sitaram Yecury and CPI chief D Raja were not allowed to enter Jammu and Kashmir on Friday and were sent back from Srinagar airport after a brief detention, party sources said.



The Left leaders had gone to Srinagar to meet CPI(M) leader MY Tarigami and other party colleagues.



“They showed us a legal order which did not allow any entry into Srinagar. It stated that even escorted movement in the city was not permitted due to security reasons. We are still trying to negotiate with them,” Yechury told PTIover the phone.



Later, party sources said they have been sent back to Delhi. Yechury and Raja had written to Satya Pal Malik on Thursday informing him of their visit and requesting him to facilitate their entry.



“Both of us had written to the J&K governor requesting him that there should be no hurdles for our visit... despite that we have been detained. I wanted to meet my ailing colleague and our comrades who are here,” Yechury said.



In a statement issued by the CPI (M) politburo, the party hit out at the government over the detention, saying it was an “anti-democratic” act, which showed the ruling BJP’s “authoritarian face”.



“The politburo calls upon the people to protest this anti-democratic act of the BJP government,” the statement said. The CPI in its statements said that detention was “despicable”.



On Thursday, Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad was detained and sent back to Delhi from the Srinagar airport.



............................................................................................................................



Pak ‘nervous’ about India’s steps in J&K



NEWDELHI India on Friday said Pakistan is nervous over India’s steps in Jammu and Kashmir and asserted that Islamabad thinks it will not be able to mislead people if there is development in that region.



Ministry of External Affairs spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said steps have been taken keeping in mind the best interests of the region. PTI



China asks India, Pak to initiate dialogue



BEIJING China on Friday urged India and Pakistan to hold dialogue to resolve their disputes even as it stuck to its earlier position, asking India to stop “unilaterally changing the status quo” of Kashmir.



The Chinese response came after Pakistan Foreign Minister Shah Mehmood Qureshi arrived here to consult Beijing on the next steps to be taken. IANS



US says no policy change on Kashmir



WASHINGTON The US has said that there is no change in its policy on Kashmir as it called on India and Pakistan to maintain restraint and hold direct dialogue to resolve their differences.



“No”, replied US state department spokesperson Morgan Ortagus when asked by reporters on Thursday if there has been any change in America’s policy on Kashmir. PTI




