Delhi: Married man murders live-in partner after argument; arrested

The police said that the accused's wife did not have an objection to his relationship with Payal (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused, his wife and his live-in partner used to live in the same house The accused had an argument with his live-in partner, after which, he allegedly murdered her The accused was trying to flee when he was arrested

New Delhi: A man allegedly murdered his live-in-partner after the two had a heated argument. It was also alleged that the accused was suspecting the deceased of having another affair. The accused, Ram Das was arrested from Delhi's Connaught Place area. Das was allegedly trying to evade arrest and was on his way to New Delhi railway station when he was arrested.

The accused has been booked under Section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The accused confessed to committing the crime during interrogation. The deceased has been identified as Payal.

According to an investigation, Das is married. Das, his wife and Payal used to live together. The police said that the accused's wife and his live-in partner were living together with the consent of the former.

Differences among the two arose after Payal had an argument with Das over a plot of land that he was buying in the name of his wife. The police said that ever since the argument, Payal had been living with her sister. On the day of the incident, Payal had come to visit the accused when they started having an argument. The reason for the argument is not known.

When the argument escalated, the accused flew into a rage and hit Payal's throat with a wooden rod. After taking Payal's body and locking it inside the washroom of the house, he decided to flee but was caught by the police.

Man pushes live-in partner into gorge in Uttarakhand; victim survives

In July this year, a man allegedly pushed his live-in partner into a gorge in Uttarakhand's Pauri Garhwal district. The woman, a native of West Bengal, sustained serious injuries in the incident. The accused, Birendra Patwal and the woman had come to visit the former's village. The two had been living together in Delhi for around two years.

Patwal had allegedly told his live-in partner that he was taking her to Advani village as he wanted her to meet his relatives. The two had taken a taxi from Delhi to the village. After getting out of the taxi, Patwal and the woman started trekking towards the village.

They had just started trekking when the accused allegedly pushed her into a gorge. Following this, the accused fled the spot. The woman was rescued by a passerby who heard her cries for help. The passerby called the 108 ambulance and the woman was taken to a hospital. The woman sustained serious injuries on her legs and arms.
