How the hell did Uber just lose $5 billion in three months?

About $3.9 billion [£3.2 billion] of the shortfall was stock-based compensation that Uber recently paid its employees, so a loss was expected, but not one this large. It should not be a surprise, says Aaron Shields, executive strategy director at FITCH, a retail brand consultancy. “Uber is a company that's probably never raised so much cash and had such big losses,” he says.

The issue goes to the heart of the ride-sharing market, which is flooded with competitors. “The taxi services they are looking to disrupt or replace simply aren't profitable without regulation. What made them profitable in the first place was controlling the competition,” he says. “So it's a funny thing that these new companies are trying to take market share, assert dominance, and remove competitors from the market, but when they take away regulation there's no profit to be had and zero barriers to entry [for other competitors].”

Other monolithic firms, such as retailers Amazon and Alibaba, operate in markets with a much higher entry cost. “They can put in distribution centres, win the market with quite involved consumer products, blow competitors out, and then because of the high cost of entry these competitors stay out.”

Another issue for the ride-hailing industry, Shields explains, is the lack of “switching costs” between the various apps: the costs (whether in time, or effort) that a consumer incurs as a result of changing to another service. For instance, you might not want to lose the convenience of Amazon’s one-click shopping, or you might prefer Alibaba because you don’t want to pay for the product until it arrives at your door.

But with ride-sharing, there’s no consumer involvement like this to keep them from switching. “If I look down at my phone I've literally got six ride-hailing apps on there, and five bike-sharing apps, and drivers are the same – they'll just go with whoever is busy or wherever they can get the peak pricing,” says Shields. “The competitors on the market are taking advantage of switching costs – they’re dividing up a market and making it more saturated.”

This is a gift for consumers, he says, who now have more choice and fewer costs, but this convenience involves taking profits from the ride-hailing companies, who have to subsidise rides to keep costs down and offer drivers greater incentives.

Food delivery services are slightly better when it comes to cultivating customer loyalty. “You trust somebody to get to your food more quickly, and the broader menus ranges also come into it,” says Shields.

In a sense, says Shields, all of the ride-sharing apps are in the same unenviable boat. “You can lump Uber and Lyft in the same pile as Didi in China and Ola in India,” he says. “They’re all operating the same model and operating with the same losses, and they reduce their losses when they do things like take away some of the drivers’ profits, which Lyft did recently.”
