Novel approach to encourage reading

A book that drew the community together was celebrated on Saturday at the Simcoe branch of the Norfolk County Library.

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content

Norfolk Letters Home 1918, The Last 100 Days, the final instalment in a series created by the Norfolk Remembers Committee, was this year’s selection for the One Novel One Norfolk program, which encourages readers to share a book together.

We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or Novel approach to encourage reading Back to video

“It was a great honour to the committee, to everybody who worked on it,” Grant Smith, who edited Norfolk Letters Home 1918, said of the book being selected for the collective read.

This is the second year for One Novel One Norfolk. Participants purchased their own copy of Norfolk Letters Home or borrowed one from a library branch, then registered for the program.

Library CEO Heather King said 60 people registered and another 200 copies of the book were purchased.

“It was very successful,” she said.

King said the program gets people to the library, creates a conversation, and expands their knowledge base by picking up a book that might be outside of the genre they usually read.

Visitors to the Simcoe Library on Saturday were encouraged to contribute to the Collage of Courage and the Poppies to Remember project and to make a Valentines for Vets card. There were also refreshments made from rationing cookbook recipes.

Smith, who was born in Simcoe and grew up in Delhi, said some people were sharing their personal stories of the First World War on Saturday at the One Novel One Norfolk wrap-up.

“It’s just great to listen to,” he said.

The First World War series of books began with Smith’s 410-page hardcover book, Norfolk Remembers the Great War, 1914-1918, dedicated to the men and women who served in the Armed Forces of the British Commonwealth, which details the story of 250 from Norfolk who were killed in the First World War.
