Sacred Games 2: Here’s a recap of season 1 to prep you for the final days of Ganesh Gaitonde’s masterplan

Sacred Games was the first Indian original created by Netflix and we’re proud to say a show like this was what begin India’s journey into the world of web series. Now, come August 15, 2019, the much-awaited second season of the show starring Saif Ali Khan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui is set to release. It will take off from where the storyline was left off in season one, which released over a year ago. Since it’s been so long, it’s understandable that you may have forgotten some details that are important for season two. And so, here’s a recap of all the important things that happened in Sacred Games season one.

Episode wise recap of Sacred Games Season 1:

Episode 1: Ashwathama

The pilot episode of the series sets the basic stories for each of the characters. Sartaj Singh, played by Saif Ali Khan, is a troubled policeman. He is not taken seriously within his department and doesn’t have any respect among his colleagues. His wife has left him for somebody else and he is surviving on sleeping pills. He is looking for a big case alongside his aid, Constable Katekar, to prove his mettle. That’s when he is contacted by the biggest gangster of Mumbai, Ganesh Gaitonde. The man urges him to save the city of Mumbai, which is destined to be doomed within 25 days. This establishes the basic timeline of the series.

We all see some other key scenes in this episode. For example, in the first scene where a dig is seen falling off a highrise, will later take us to actress Zoya Mirza (Elnaaz Norouzi) and her world. We all see Gaintonde shooting Jojo Mascarenas (Surveen Chawla), after she tells him that she knew he was being taken for a ride for the past 20 days. We later learn that Jojo runs a casting agency and is also a pimp to some of her female actresses. One of her clients is Gaintonde and his men.

Through Sartaj’s flashbacks, we also get a little bit of the backstory of his reputation in the police station. The man is on a Bengali Bura case with some of his superiors, like SCP Parulkar and Majid Khan. They three are on a mission to nab an 18-year-old boy. But as they’re looking at him, Sartaj sees the “accused” Junaid who has surrendered to the police. Even still, DCP Parulkar kills him. The other two then lie on the hearing board of the case where they claim to have shot Junaid because he first fired at the police. Sartaj is not okay with this and chooses the honest route, which lands him in a whole world of trouble.

ALSO READ: Sacred Games 2 Cast: All the characters from season 2 of Netflix Original

We also learn a little about Ganesh Gaitonde as a child. His father was a Pundit and his mother was claimed to be a prostitute, who would bring other men home when his father was out begging for money for his family. This reason becomes the root cause of Gaitonde’s bullying and in frustration, he kills his mother and her lover with a huge rock as a kid. He then escapes to Mumbai and begins working at a Hindu restaurant. He finds a friend in peddler Mathu and together, the two enter the world of crime.
