Not a single bullet fired in Kashmir in last six days: J&K Police says refuting foreign media claims

Srinagar, Aug 11 (IBNS): In the wake of the abrogation of Article 370 and a consequent provisional lockdown to prevent violence, the Jammu and Kashmir Police has appealed all to not believe in rumours spread by few media that violence erupted in the state while categorically rubbishing foreign media reports of a police firing. Not a single bullet was fired in the last six days, said the top police officials in Kashmir.

"There has been no untoward incident barring minor stone-pelting which was dealt with on the spot and was nipped in the bud," Director General of Police Dilbagh Singh said.

The J&K Police clarified that "people should not believe any mischievous and motivated news regarding firing incidents in the valley."

In a statement, the Police clarified that they did not fire a single bullet in the last six days. The Jammu and Kashmir police were referring to reports in BBC and Reuters of firing and demonstrations.

"The situation is calm, and people are cooperative and restrictions are relaxed to ease the situation," the J&K Police Department said in a statement.

They stated that Srinagar and other towns remained busy with traffic and people ahead of Eid on Monday.

The Kashmir Zone police also claimed that there have been no untoward situation in the Valley.

"Situation in Valley has remained normal today . No untoward incident has been reported. At selective locations restriction was lifted temporarily," Kashmir Zone Police tweeted.

In a video statement, IGP Kashmir S.P Pani said: "This is to clarify that some international media reports claimed of firing incident. The report is wrong. No such incident has taken place. The Valley has remained largely peaceful in the last few days. I appreciate media agencies to act responsibly."

District Magistrate Srinagar Shahid Choudhury informed that more than 250 ATMs have been made functional in Srinagar.

"Bank branches also open. Advance salary on Eid eve being credited today," he tweeted.

Yes. More than 250 ATMs have been made functional in #Srinagar . Bank branches also open. Advance salary on Eid eve being credited today. https://t.co/wA86udZJBx pic.twitter.com/jMg8YqQ1LV — Shahid Choudhary (@listenshahid) August 10, 2019

SSP security of J&K police Imtiyaz Hussain said: "Situation limping back to normal in Kashmir. Administration is doing it’s best to reach out to people. Heartening to see people behaving with maturity and cooperating with Police & government institutions."

Situation limping back to normal in Kashmir. Administration is doing it’s best to reach out to people. Heartening to see people behaving with maturity and cooperating with Police & government institutions. pic.twitter.com/0r2XNmbuRK — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) August 10, 2019

The Union home ministry spokesperson Vasudha Gupta earlier tweeted. “A news report originally published in Reuters and appeared in Dawn claims there was a protest involving 10,000 people in Srinagar. This is completely fabricated & incorrect. There have been a few stray protests in Srinagar/Baramulla and none involved a crowd of more than 20 ppl."

Meanwhile, Omar Abdullah's National Conference (NC) on Saturday moved the Supreme Court against the Centre's step to do away with the special status of Jammu Kashmir and bifurcate it into two Union Territories.

The Bharatiya Janata arty (BJP) government on Monday took away the special status of Jammu and Kashmir by scrapping Articles 370 and 35A.

The government bifurcated Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories, Jammu and Kashmir with an assembly and Ladakh without an assembly.

Several Kashmir leaders including former Chief Ministers- Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti- were kept under detention.

Article 35A of the Indian Constitution allowed the Jammu and Kashmir state's legislature to define “permanent residents” of the state and also provided special rights and privileges to those permanent residents.

Article 370 allowed Jammu and Kashmir to have its own constitution, flag and right to handle its own laws except on matters that impact national security.

The decision, which received support from several opposition parties, also prompted Pakistan to downgrade bilateral trade with India. Calling its neighbour as an "alarmist", India urged Pakistan to reconsider its decision.

Several foreign nations, including key regional players like Afghanistan, have welcomed India's Kashmir move.


