Ayushmann Khurrana gets a special SURPRISE on sets of a brand shoot after bagging National Award for Andhadhun

It has been a special weekend for Ayushmann Khurrana for his 2018 release Andhadhun bagged three National Awards on Friday. This included Ayushmann winning the Best Actor. He shares the award with Vicky Kaushal for Uri: The Surgical Strike. Congratulations poured in for Ayushmann following his victory. Several fellow actors wished Ayushmann on social media. However, the actor was in for a surprise when he made his way to the sets of a brand shoot. The crew on the sets, including actress Kriti Sanon.

We've got our hands on a video from the sets of the shoot wherein the cast is celebrating his national award wins. The crew arranged for a delicious chocolate cake for the star and celebrated his win. The actor was seen extremely surprised and excited to celebrate his victory. There came a point where he quickly blew out the candles and dived into the cake.

Check out the video below:

Marking his victory, Ayushmann has penned down a special poem. The actor recalled the first day he came to Mumbai when it was pouring. He compared that day with the day the National Awards were announced. It was raining on that day as well. He added he had many dreams, like those numerous dreamers in Mumbai and maintained the enthusiasm to fulfil all of them.

Check out the poem below:

Apart from Best Actor, Andhadhun also won Best Hindi Film and Best Adapted Screenplay. Reacting to the win, Ayushmann issued a statement, "It’s truly humbling and hugely gratifying to win the coveted National Awards. As an artist, I have always tried to back disruptive content that stands out for its quality content. Today’s honour is a validation of my hard work, my belief system, my journey in movies and my reason to be an actor in the first place. Over and above my personal win, I’m thrilled that both the films that I have done - AndhaDhun and Badhaai Ho have won at the prestigious National Awards. It again validates that people of our country want to see cinema that entertains, that they can cherish, discuss and endorse."

Pinkvilla congratulates Ayushmann Khurrana over his National Award wins. Stay tuned to Pinkvilla for more updates.

ALSO READ: National Film Awards 2019 Full Winners List: Ayushmann Khurrana & Vicky Kaushal bag Best Actor award
