Kashmir: Clashes erupt between protesters and Indian forces

SHAFAQNA- A sense of coiled menace hung over the locked-down Srinagar, Kashmir’s biggest city, on Saturday, a day after mass protests erupted into clashes between kashmiris and Indian forces.

People glanced out the windows of their homes, afraid to step outside. Many were cutting back on meals and getting hungry.

Shops were shut. A.T.M.s had run dry. Just about all lines to the outside world — internet, mobile phones, even landlines — remained severed, rendering millions of people incommunicado.

A correspondent for The New York Times got one of the first inside views of life under lockdown in Kashmir and found a population that felt besieged, confused, frightened and furious by the seismic events of this week.

For the second day in succession on Saturday, Srinagar witnessed protests against the Indian government’s decision to revoke Article 370 of the constitution .

The protest took place in Soura, in south Srinagar. Paramilitary forces chased the people and fired in the air. Protesters refused to talk to the media, blaming them not showing the real picture of resistance to the world, Arab News reported.

The police detaining an activist of the Jammu and Kashmir Youth Congress during a protest against the Indian government in Jammu on Saturday.

On Friday afternoon, witnesses said tens of thousands of peaceful demonstrators were moving through the streets of Srinagar, chanting freedom slogans and waving Kashmiri flags, when Indian forces opened fire.

The huge crowd panicked and scattered. Sustained bursts of automatic weapon fire could be heard in videos filmed during the protest, and at least seven people were wounded, hospital officials said, some sprayed by buckshot in the eyes.

Afshana Farooq, a 14-year-old girl, was nearly trampled in the stampede.

“We were just marching peacefully after prayers,” said her father, Farooq Ahmed, standing over her as she lay shaking in a Srinagar hospital bed. “Then they started shooting at us”, nytimes reported.

A witness told Reuters “some women and children jumped into the water”, while another said: “They [police] attacked us from both sides.”, ALJAZEERA told.

India’s Hindu-nationalist government on Monday revoked Article 370 of India’s constitution, limiting the region’s decision-making powers and eliminating its right to its own constitution.

India sent some 10,000 additional troops to the Muslim-majority region in the lead-up to its announcement on Monday, imposing a curfew on parts of the territory, shutting down telecommunications and arresting political leaders.

Fears have been expressed about food shortages in the state. Syed Asim Ali, who returned to Delhi from Srinagar on Thursday, said his family was low on food and had been eating dried vegetables stored as emergency supplies.

Baseer Khan, the senior administrative official of Kashmir Valley, said essentials such as food, grains and meat would be delivered to different parts of the region by Sunday.

There are also fears about access to healthcare. One doctor at a hospital emergency department in Srinagar said patient numbers had drastically reduced last week. “On an average day we see over 1,000 patients, but now less than 100 manage to reach here,” the doctor told Agence France-Presse, theguardian told.
