Indian floods leave 93 dead while Pakistan monsoonal rains claim at least 17 lives

South Asia has been hit hard with torrential rains, with at least 93 dead and more than 400,000 left homeless in India and another 17 people dead in Pakistan.

Monsoon rains have inundated much of Pakistan, leaving large parts of the southern city of Karachi underwater and causing at least 17 deaths as of Monday.

Rescue official Anwar Kazmi said seven people died from electrocution and three people died after a roof collapsed in Karachi. The downpour and flooding began overnight, with authorities reporting more than 180 millimetres of rain in the port city.

A motorcyclist rides through a flooded street after heavy monsoon rains in Karachi on August 1, 2019. Picture: AFP

Police officer Idrees Khosa said five people died in a flash flood and another two were electrocuted in Punjab province, which also saw heavy rains. Pakistan struggles to cope with the yearly monsoon, which runs from July to September and causes flooding across South Asia.

NEARLY 100 KILLED IN INDIA

At least 93 people have been killed and more than 400,000 displaced in floods and mudslides following days of torrential rains in southern India.

In the worst-hit state of Kerala the death toll rose to 57 by Sunday, Chief Minister Pinarayi Vijayan tweeted.

That was an increase from 42 deaths reported since Aug. 8. More than 165,000 people left their homes for relief camps.

National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) personnel help move flood victims to safer areas in Wayanad district, in the southern Indian state of Kerala. Picture: NDRF via AP

The Press Trust of India news agency reported that another 31 people have been killed in rain-related accidents in neighbouring Karnataka.

At least five others were reported dead in Tamil Nadu state. Kerala suffered catastrophic floods a year ago when heavy downpours killed 223 people and drove hundreds of thousands from their homes.

Indian army soldiers and volunteers transport flood victims to safer areas in Kodagu district, in the southern Indian state of Karnataka. Picture: AP

South Asia has continued to face rain-related disasters during the current monsoon season, with 160 people killed last month in northeastern India, Nepal and Bangladesh.
