Alert issued in Delhi ahead of Independence Day, 17 places rendered as sensitive: Report

New Delhi:

The Delhi Police has been put on alert after security agencies provided it inputs about a possible attack on the Red Fort in Old Delhi ahead of Independence Day on August 15, according to a report.

India Today, quoting security agencies, reported that a terrorist attack may take place within 3 kilometres radius of the Red Fort. Around 17 places in the national capital have been rendered as sensitive. A security alert has also been issued at all the airports in the country, including those in Delhi, the report added.

The report added that two-four terrorists may enter with Afghanistan passport. Delhi’s neighbouring states have also been asked to take a strict vigil at all the bus stands en-route to Delhi.

Meanwhile, the Gujarat government has asked the police to remain alert and enhance security to thwart any unwarranted situation in the state during the Eid and Independence Day celebrations next week, officials said.

The move comes days after the Parliament approved a resolution abrogating special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution and a bill for splitting the state into two union territories.

While Eid-ul-Adha will be celebrated on August 12, the Independence Day is celebrated on August 15. Gujarat Chief Secretary JN Singh along with state DGP Shivanand Jha on Friday held a video-conference session with top police officials, including police commissioners, district SPs and Range IGs, of the state to brief them about various security measures they are required to take during the upcoming festivals.

A senior police official said the focus of the video-conference was to increase vigil and keep a close watch on the movements near the border.

While most of the instructions were meant for the entire state, some of them were also given to the SPs and Range IGs of those districts which are along the coastline and near the Indo-Pak border.

"Bordering districts as well as those along the coastline were asked to remain extra alert as drug peddlers use those routes to smuggle narcotics into the state.

"To get first-hand information about the suspicious movements in the sea, police have been asked to remain in touch with the fishermen," the officer said on the condition of anonymity.

(With PTI inputs)

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
