BJP leader found murdered in his house, friend held

Jhansi: A BJP leader, who was the booth-level president of the party, was found murdered in his house in Hamirpur district on Sunday morning. In the evening, the police were able to crack the case and arrested a friend of the deceased who after interrogation confessed his involvement in the crime.According to police, victim, Rakesh Singh (35), was found lying in a pool of blood in his house on Sunday morning in village Pachkhura under Barua Sumerpur police station. He was axed to death on the intervening night of August 10/11 while he was sleeping in the courtyard of his house. At the time of the incident, he was alone in the house as his wife had gone to her parental house with children, the police said.After getting information of the incident, senior administration and police officials, including DM, Hamirpur Abhishekh Prakash, and SP, Hemraj Meena, reached the spot along with dog squad and a forensic team.After gathering vital clues, the police arrested Vivek Singh alias Mantri, a close friend of the victim, who after intense grilling by the police, confessed that he had been planning to kill Rakesh for the last several days, and when he saw him alone in the house, he killed him with an axe which he, later on, threw in a dry well.Despite being friends, the accused was having grudge against the victim. "It was because of Rakesh that I was separated from my family. I was also jailed for six months for possessing illegal arms and that too because of him. As Rakesh had pushed me on the brim of penury, I decided to eliminate him", Vivek confessed to the police.As per locals, victim Rakesh was a social person who did not have grudge against anyone. Unfortunately, it was the fourth murder in his family. Before him, his two nephews and his brother-in-law had also been murdered in different incidents, they said. SP, Hamirpur, Hemraj Meena said, “We have arrested the accused, and have rewarded the police team for cracking the case within hours of the crime”.
