India flood death toll hits 147 after heavy rain and landslides left hundreds of thousands homeless

Advertisement

The death toll from floods in the Indian states of Karnataka, Kerala and financial hub Maharashtra has risen to 147, state authorities said on Sunday, as rescue teams raced to evacuate people and waters submerged parts of a world heritage site.

Heavy rain and landslides forced hundreds of thousands of people to take shelter in relief camps, while train services were cancelled in several flood-hit areas.

In the southern state of Kerala, at least 57 people were killed in rain-related incidents while over 165,000 people were in relief camps in the state, state authorities said on Sunday.

Scroll for video

The death toll from floods in the Indian states of Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra (pictured, the army carry an child to safety) has risen to 147, state authorities said on Sunday, as rescue teams raced to evacuate people and waters submerged parts of a world heritage site

Heavy rain and landslides forced hundreds of thousands of people to take shelter in relief camps, while train services were cancelled in several flood-hit areas (pictured, waterlogged Jamkhandi Taluk at Belgaum district of Karnataka)

In the southern state of Kerala, at least 57 people were killed in rain-related incidents while over 165,000 people were in relief camps in the state, state authorities said on Sunday. Pictured: Indian military personnel during a rescue operation in the flood affected area in Kodagu district, Karnataka

Rescue workers shift a body from the debris left after a landslide at Kavalappara in Malappuram district of the south Indian state of Kerala

A woman clears out the water from her flooded house at Paravur on the outskirts of Kochi, in the southern state of Kerala on Sunday

Indian National Congress Party president Rahul Gandhi (unseen) visited the landslide site at Kavalappara-Bhoothanam, in Malappuram district of Kerala state, where many people are still trapped and rescue operations still going on

'Several houses are still covered under 10-12 feet deep mud. This is hampering rescue work,' state chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan said.

Authorities worried rescue operations would be hit by thunderstorms and rainfall predicted in some parts of Kerala.

Last year, more than 200 people were killed in Kerala and over five million affected in one of worst floods in 100 years in the state.

A man in a wheelchair is lifted using a makeshift frame by the Indian military during a rescue operation in Chikkamagaluru district in Karnataka

Authorities worried rescue operations would be hit by thunderstorms and rainfall predicted in some parts of Kerala. Pictured: Commuters battle their way through floodwater near Srirangapatna in Mandya district, Karnataka

Seasonal monsoon rains from June to September are a crucial lifeline for agrarian Indian society, delivering 70 per cent of the country's rainfall, but they also bring in their wake death and destruction every year. Pictured: National Disaster Response Force rescue team in Sangli

In Karnataka (pictured, Chikkamagaluru district), several structures at world heritage site Hampi, an ancient town, were flooded

A farmer removes paddy crops from a flooded field at Dholka, some 25miles from the western city of Ahmedabad on Sunday

While Karnataka, Kerala (pictured) and Maharashtra have been the worst hit this year, several other states including Gujarat, Assam and Bihar have also seen heavy damage due to floods

Seasonal monsoon rains from June to September are a crucial lifeline for agrarian Indian society, delivering 70 per cent of the country's rainfall, but they also bring in their wake death and destruction every year.

In Karnataka, several structures at world heritage site Hampi, an ancient town, were flooded.

So far 60 people have died in rain-related incidents, said state chief minister B S Yediyurappa, adding nearly 227,000 people were staying in relief camps.

So far 60 people have died in rain-related incidents in Karnataka (pictured), said state chief minister B S Yediyurappa, adding nearly 227,000 people were staying in relief camps

A woman carries her belongings as she walks past the potholes following floods at Haripur village in Sangli district in the Maharashtra on Sunday

A farmer helps his cattle to wade through floodwaters across a road near Jamkhandi Taluk at Belgaum district of Karnataka state. India's main opposition Congress party called on Prime Minister Narendra Modi to provide relief packages

Indian National Congress Party president Rahul Gandhi (left) visits the landslide site at Kavalappara-Bhoothanam, in Malappuram district of Kerala state, where many people are still trapped and rescue operations still going on

While Karnataka, Kerala and Maharashtra have been the worst hit this year, several other states including Gujarat, Assam and Bihar have also seen heavy damage due to floods.

In Maharashtra, where the death toll stood at 30, the flood situation was improving, according to state-run All India Radio, though authorities said it would be difficult to restore rail services in some flood-hit areas within the next two weeks.

India's main opposition Congress party called on Prime Minister Narendra Modi to provide relief packages.

Citing media reports, the Congress party said so far this year 446 people have been killed in six flood-hit states including Assam, Bihar and Gujarat.

'Despite the mammoth loss of lives and displacement caused due to floods, the government is failing to realise the gravity of the flood fury,' the Congress party said in a statement on Sunday.

Citing media reports, the Congress party said so far this year 446 people have been killed in six flood-hit states including Assam, Bihar and Gujarat. Pictured: A boat in waterlogged Jamkhandi Taluk at Belgaum district of Karnataka

Farmers help each other as they leave a field of decayed cotton crops at Nesda village of Ahmedabad district, some 25 miles from Ahmedabad on Sunday

'Despite the mammoth loss of lives and displacement caused due to floods, the government is failing to realise the gravity of the flood fury,' the Congress party said in a statement on Sunday. Pictured: Soldiers evacuate flood-affected people to a safer place in Sangli district in the western state of Maharashtra
