Eid-ul-Zuha to be celebrated today in Goa

Panaji: Muslims in the state will celebrate Eid-ul-Zuha on Monday with traditional fervour and gaiety. Eid prayers will be offered at the Jama Masjid in the city at 8.30 am.

Eid prayers will be offered at the Inam complex prayer hall at 8.15 am, Panaji Market Noori Masjid at 8.00 am, Tonka masjid at 8.15 am, kabrastan at 9.00 am, Taleigao masjid at 8.30 am and at the Bhatulem masjid at 9.00 am.

The prayers will also be offered at the Old Goa-Sao Pedro masjid at 8.30 am and Betim mosque at 8.30 am

At the Porvorim mosque, the Eid prayers will be offered at 8.30 am and 9.00 am.

Eid-ul-Zuha is celebrated for three days in many households. On the occasion, Muslims slaughter a lamb, sheep, goat or a camel to honour the

sacrifice of Ibrahim.

The meat is then distributed amongst the poorest of poor Muslims so that they too can celebrate the festival.

Governor Mridula Sinha and Chief Minister Pramod Sawant on Sunday extended greetings to the people of Goa on the occasion of Eid-ul-Zuha.

The Governor in her message said that Eid-ul-Zuha or Bakri ld, the festival that commemorates the readiness of lbrahim (Abraham) to sacrifice his son in order to prove his obedience to the almighty, is observed by Muslims around the world, where men, women and children step out in all their finery.

It is a festival that is celebrated with traditional fervour and gaiety in India and in the entire world. It is also called as the feast of sacrifice and is one of the most significant Islamic festivals. The festival signifies forgiveness and charity and induces harmony and a feeling of brotherhood amongst the members of the community.

Sinha further said that it is an appropriate occasion for us not only to remember that all religions preach love and affection on a universal basis, but also renew our pledge to practise these ideals in our day-to-day life regardless of religion, caste and community. It is this strength of heart, purity in faith and willingness for obedience in the almighty that every religion preaches and teaches us.

The Governor further said, “Let us, on this auspicious and important occasion, renew our pledge to live together in peace, amity, friendship and mutual understanding. I pray that the celebration of ld-ul-Zuha bring greater peace and friendship among the people.”

The Chief Minister in his message said, “’Eid Mubarak’ to all fellow Goans, especially to Muslim brothers and sisters on this special day. May this festival enhance the spirit of peace and togetherness in our society.”
