Maharashtra Flood: Heavy Rain Likely In Flood-Hit Kolhapur And Satara Today; Death Toll Rises To 40

Meanwhile, with the recovery of five more bodies, the death toll in the Thursday's boat capsize tragedy in Sangli district has gone up to 17, officials said. Around 105 teams of the Army, Air Force, Navy, National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), the Coast Guard, State Disaster Response Force (SDRF), police and local officials are carrying out rescue operations in the western Maharashtra region, officials said. While 54 teams are posted at Kolhapur, 51 teams are working in Sangli.

The Met department has predicted heavy rains on Monday at isolated places in Pune, Kolhapur and Satara districts of Maharashtra, which are affected by severe floods. According to the regional centre of the India Meteorological Department (IMD), intensity of showers will reduce further on Tuesday, which will help in carrying out rescue operations. Similar forecast is also issued for coastal Ratnagiri and Sindhudurg districts which have been receiving excess showers for the last seven days. "Rest of Maharashtra would receive very light to light rains during the rest of the week," the IMD said. Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Sunday conducted an aerial survey of flood-hit areas in Satara, Sangli and Kolhapur districts in Maharashtra where 40 people have lost their lives since the unprecedented deluge swamped the region, causing largescale destruction and displacement of over four lakh people. Even on the seventh day, the flood situation showed a marginal improvement as the water levels in the worst-hit Sangli and Kolhapur districts have been receding slowly. This is despite more than five lakh cusec of water discharge from Almatti dam on Krishna river in neighbouring Karnataka and light showers in the districts. An official from the Chief Minister's Office (CMO) said Devendra Fadnavis brifed Shah on Sunday morning about the current flood situation and the measures undertaken in the southern regions of Western Maharashtra. "We have been sending a daily dossier on the flood relief measures and coordination among various rescue teams to the Union Home ministry," he said.
