Siliguri festival to boost film trade in North Bengal

Siliguri: In a bid to promote tourism and encourage filmmakers to shoot in the region, Film Federation of India, in association with Bengal’s tourism department, will host a first-of-its-kind global cinema festival here from August 21.The 4-day festival will screen 36 feature and 24 short films under national and inte-rnational categories at three auditoriums — Dinabandhu Manch, Rabindra Bhavan and New Cinema.FFI president Firdausul Hasan said the festival was being held here to bring back the golden era of filmmaking in Bengal and the initiative would highlight tourist spots in north Bengal and encourage filmmakers to shoot there.“We have chosen Siliguri so that the delegation can visit tourist spots where films can be shot. We hope this promotes film tourism and filmmakers get access to untouched spots. We will be bringing the festival to tier II and III cities across India so that people from there can watch quality movies from across the globe,” said Hassan.“The inaugural ceremony on August 21 will feature performances by actor-dancer Indrani Dutta and percussionist Bickram Ghosh at Matigara. On August 22, there will be a fashion show featuring designers and models from India, Bangladesh and Nepal,” Hasan added. The festival will be attended by leading actors, producers and directors, including Rituparna Sengupta, Swastika Mukherjee and Gargee Roychowdhury. T P Agrawal will be festival chairman.“The first film to be screened is Shabana Azmi’s ‘5 Rupiya’ and there will be a premiere of a Bangladeshi film, ‘Hasina: A Daughter’s Tale’. The festival will also represent regional films,” Hasan said.Tourism minister Gautam Deb said the festival would boost tourism in the region. “The festival will be the first of its kind in north Bengal. Our government is keen on supporting film shooting in this area,” he said.Rituparna Sengupta, the face of the event, said: “Bengal was the destination for filmmaking across India. Several iconic movies have been shot in north Bengal. The region has an indigenous capacity, but all the revenue is going outside. Recently, I was shooting for a Hindi movie called ‘Basuri’ in Jalpaiguri. We were fascinated by its natural beauty. The idea of this festival is to encourage filmmakers to come to this region and make films. We are grateful to the minister without whom it would not have been possible.”
