Madhya Pradesh: Man dies in police custody, 6 officers booked

Although, the man was immediately rushed to a local hospital where he was declared brought dead by the hospital staff. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident happened in Bel Garha district of Gwalior The man was immediately rushed to a local hospital where he was declared brought dead

Bhopal: After a man died in the police custody, Madhya Pradesh police on Sunday registered a case against six of its police personnel in connection with the case. The incident happened in Bel Garha district of Gwalior. The deceased was identified as Suresh Rawat.

The police have registered a case under section 302 (punishment for murder) of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). The deceased's younger brother filed a complaint with the police and in the FIR he stated that due to a land dispute, his elder brother and the person who owns the adjacent farm went to the police to file complaints against each other.

Reportedly, the police officials registered the complaint moved by the other person and demanded a sum of Rs 20,000 from his brother, the complainant added. He further alleged that after his brother denied to give the demanded sum, the accused police officers thrashed him. He also claimed that the deceased's shrieks could be heard outside the police station and due to the brutal beating he died on the spot.

Although, the man was immediately rushed to a local hospital where he was declared brought dead by the hospital staff. As soon as the man was declared dead all the police officers allegedly fled the spot. However, the police probe in the case is underway.

Detained over dispute, heart patient dies in custody of Uttar Pradesh Police

In a similar case reported from Uttar Pradesh, a man allegedly died in the police custody earlier this month. The deceased-Rakesh Baghel's family claimed that he died due to the negligence of police officials. Deceased was a heart patient and was discharged from the hospital a day before the police detained him.

Reportedly, the deceased's daughter told the media that her father was taken by the police regarding a land issue. Reportedly, the post-mortem of the deceased was being conducted and the matter was being investigated. The family alleged that despite severe health conditions, the police detained the man. And when the family reached the police station, the man was lying on a bench. The police sprinkled water on his face but they did not call the ambulance.

However, the probe in the matter is underway.


