Has Kartik Aaryan planned a special surprise for Sara Ali Khan’s birthday? Find out

Birthdays surely bring in sweet surprises for anyone from all the near and dear ones. Even for our Bollywood actors, birthdays hold a special meaning. Speaking of this, one of the youngest sensations of Bollywood, Sara Ali Khan is celebrating her 24th birthday today and is in Bangkok. Sara had jetted off to Bangkok to shoot for Coolie No 1 remake with Varun Dhawan. Now, as per report, her Aaj Kal co-actor, Kartik Aaryan might be planning a special surprise for the actress.

Yes, as per a report by SpotboyE, Kartik is off to Bangkok to surprise his co-actor from Aaj Kal on her birthday. Kartik was even clicked at the airport on Saturday afternoon heading off to an unknown destination. Now, the report from SpotboyE states that Kartik will be visiting his co-actor on the sets of her film, Coolie No 1 in Bangkok. Well, going by the surprise visits by Sara on Kartik’s movie set of Pati Patni Aur Woh in Lucknow, it seems the Aaj Kal actor wants to surprise the Simmba actress on her birthday as well.

(Also Read: After Lucknow, Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan romance at her ancestral home in Pataudi? Here’s what we know)

From the day the first look of Imtiaz Ali’s Aaj Kal has been out, fans have been extremely excited to see Sara and Kartik together on the screen. Often, videos and photos of Sara and Kartik have surfaced online when the Simmba actress has gone to Lucknow to meet Kartik. A video of Kartik and Sara went viral in which they were seen exiting an eatery in Lucknow and were almost mobbed by fans. Their fanbase is ever-increasing and their photos often go viral on the internet. Now, it surely remains to be seen if the report about Kartik’s surprise for Sara is true.

Meanwhile, Imtiaz Ali’s film starring Sara and Kartik will be out on Valentine's Day 2020. Sara will be continuing to shoot for Coolie No 1 on her birthday as well. The film’s first posters are out and it surely has added to the excitement among the fans of the two. Coolie No 1 remake stars Varun, Sara and Paresh Rawal. It is slated to release on May 1, 2020.
