Tabu, Ishaan Khatter & Tanya Maniktala join Mira Nair's 'A Suitable Boy'

Mumbai, Aug 12 : Actors Tabu, Ishaan Khatter and newcomer Tanya Maniktala will be seen in filmmaker Mira Nairs screen adaptation of Vikram Seth classic "A Suitable Boy".

"I'm very happy to be working on 'A Suitable Boy', and especially with Mira. Having worked with her on the 'Namesake', I look forward to one more creatively charged experience," Tabu said.

Adapted by Andrew Davies and directed by Mira and produced by Lookout Point, "A Suitable Boy" will shortly begin filming in India. The cast of the six-part BBC One drama is led by Ishaan, Tabu alongside Tanya in the central role of Lata.

"A Suitable Boy" tells the story of spirited university student Lata in 1951 at the same time as the country is carving out its own identity as an independent nation and is about to go to the polls for its first democratic general election.

Image Source: IANS Director Mira Nair

It is a tale charting the fortunes of four large families and exploring India and its rich and varied culture at a crucial point in its history.

"Vikram tells the story of a free India and our people with wit, clarity and love -- I am deeply honoured to be the one bringing this intimate, epic tale of an unseen India to the world," Mira said.

"Today, 'A Suitable Boy' is timelier than ever. With a mix of legendary and cutting-edge actors from the subcontinent, shooting entirely on location in palaces, villages and streets across northern India, we will keep the history and dream of an alternate India alive." Ishaan will be seen as Maan who is determined to enjoy life to the full whatever the consequences, much to the concern of his politician father. He is infatuated with courtesan Saaeda Bai (Tabu).

Ishaan feels honoured "to be working on this illustrious material alongside such distinguished artists and technicians led by the indomitable Mira Nair".

"I hope I can satisfy her vision and give the global audience the character they deserve in Maan Kapoor," Ishaan added.

The six part series, which will be distributed by BBC Studios, is filming at a number of locations across India including Lucknow and Maheshwar.

Tanya is also looking forward to shoot the project. "I have been in a daze this whole time, and all of this still feels surreal. It is truly exhilarating to be getting to work with Mira Nair and understanding and bringing her vision of 'A Suitable Boy' to life for all of us.

"I am still understanding Lata and the complexities of her reality, and I hope I can deliver, but for now I am focusing on enjoying the process and just taking it one day at a time," Tanya said.

-- With inputs from IANS
