Chennai man kills woman and tries to set it up as a suicide, gets arrested

Chennai man kills woman and tries to set it up as a suicide, gets arrested

The woman, who was a 41-year-old railway employee, had separated from her husband and was living alone in Thiruvottriyur.

news Crime

The Chennai police arrested a 32-year-old man for murdering his girlfriend and trying to stage it as a suicide.

According to reports, the woman who was a 41-year-old railway employee, had separated from her husband and was living alone in Thiruvottriyur. Her husband was living in another locality with their kids. She had separated from her husband a few years ago allegedly due to her developing a relationship with the 32-year-old Veerasamy, who worked in a railway canteen.

On Saturday afternoon, Veerasamy and Maya* checked into a hotel in Periyamet. Hours later, since the room was locked for a long time and there was no response to the knocks by the hotel staff, they used a spare key to open the door to check what was going on. The staff members were shocked to find Maya dead inside the room. She was found hanging from the ceiling.

The lodge staff immediately alerted the police, who rushed to the spot and secured the body for autopsy. On examination of the body, the cuts and bruises on it made them suspect that it could be murder. The lodge staff had also informed the police about Veerasamy, who had accompanied Maya while checking into the room but was missing since. This information was also confirmed by the police using the CCTV footage. They launched a search operation and Veerasamy was picked up from Tiruvottriyur on Saturday night.

Upon questioning Veerasamy, he reportedly confessed that he suspected Maya of infidelity and had fought with her in the room of the lodge on Saturday. Since he was inebriated, the fight turned physical and he punched her face repeatedly until she fell unconscious and died. He also reportedly told the police that he staged the crime inside the room in such a way to make it look like a suicide.

He has been arrested and remanded to judicial custody.

(*Name changed to protect identity)
