Eid celebrated in Kashmir amid massive security

Eid-ul-Azha prayers were offered in mosques today across the Kashmir valley amidst no reports of any violence, police said.

The authorities in Kashmir had on Sunday said people will be allowed to visit neighbourhood mosques to offer prayers. But large gatherings were not allowed in any part of the valley today, reports our New Delhi correspondent quoting an official.

"#Eid #prayers concluded #peacefully in various parts of the #valley. No untoward incident reported so far," the Jammu and Kashmir Police said in a tweet.

Reports suggested authorities distributed sweets at various mosques.

On the eve of Eid-ul-Azha, restrictions were eased in the valley to allow people to shop for the festival.

However, the usual hustle and bustle of the Eid-ul-Azha festival was conspicuous by absence in the region where normal life has been paralysed amidst heavy security cover, curbs on movement and curtailment of communication links after the abrogation of special status to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 on August 5.

The authorities are constantly reviewing the situation in Jammu and Kashmir and doing their best to minimise the inconvenience caused to people during the restrictions imposed on movement, the official said.

The government has also made arrangements for availability of adequate food and other essential items across Kashmir valley and steps are being taken to deliver certain goods at the people's doorsteps, another official said.

President Ram Nath Kovind on Wednesday declared the abrogation of special status given to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370 following a Parliamentary approval in the Modi government's proposal.

On Saturday, he gave assent to a bill passed by the Parliament for bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories -- Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh -- which will come into existence on October 31 with almost total control of the Indian government.

CPI (M) General Secretary Sitaram Yechury has alleged the people of Kashmir have been kept "imprisoned" in their own homes and warned the government that the impact of changing Jammu and Kashmir's status would be felt in other states with special status.

Yechury, who along with CPI general secretary D Raja, was not allowed to enter Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir on Friday, said he still didn't know the condition of his party colleagues in Kashmir.

"Eid is an occasion of joy and celebration, and our thoughts are with the people of Kashmir who have been kept imprisoned in their own homes. We still don't know how or where our Comrades in Kashmir are," he tweeted.

"We are a country of diverse languages, religions, cultures and ideas; this is our strength. The impact of un-democratically and forcibly altering Jammu and Kashmir's status will be felt in other states with special status. Let's not forget that most are on India's borders," Yechury said.
