TikTok is fuelling India's deadly hate speech epidemic

During June and July, WIRED identified more than 500 examples of caste-based hate, threats, violence and ridicule attacking different communities within the Tamil language on TikiTok. Users extol the virtues of specific castes and verbally attack local caste-leaders, which can trigger hate crimes.

India’s caste structure is a feudal system of social division stratifying people into hierarchical groups based on their background and work. These include: priests, warriors, farmers/traders, labourers and outcasts. Dalits, formerly the ‘untouchables,’ fall outside the system and are widely persecuted.

Videos found on TikTok include casteist-hate speech posted by users identifying themselves from high castes while celebrating and singing the praises of their communities. These quickly spill into threats of physical violence with members of some communities claiming dominance over other castes.

“We must sever, not the fingers, but the heads of those who dare to lay their hands on us (our community),” one user says in a video, identifying himself as part of the Nadar community. Nadars have traditionally occupied a low status in the caste ladder but have risen through entrepreneurship. This video has been liked by thousands of users, and more than 89 videos have sprung up lip syncing to the speech.

Another user shared a 15-second video responding to posts against his caste. “You Paraiyar dogs stab people in the back. Our courageous lot meet people face to face. I’ll chase each one of you Paraiyar down and slay you,” he says, identifying himself as a member of the Vanniyar community. Paraiyar is often used as a derogatory term to refer to Dalits. The user has several posts threatening Dalits and calls for people from his community to come together on TikTok.

As WIRED sampled caste-based videos TikTok’s algorithm quickly caught on serving an endless trove of accounts advocating caste supremacy and casteist speech. Many of the videos were discoverable under caste hashtags like #nadar #vanniyar #thevar and #paraiyar – some had been viewed millions of times.

Alongside the hate-fuelled videos, under the caste-linked hashtags, are videos of users lip syncing to popular movies and songs about their pride for their caste. The hashtags are also used by people on TikTok who criticise caste-based conversation. Videos promoting a ‘casteless’ society sit alongside those propagating hate and caste-pride.
