With Troops Descending On J&K, People Who Call Kashmir 'Home' Share The Other Side Of The Story

Amid the growing turmoil in Kashmir over the last few days, just hours ago, Home Minister Amit Shah moved a resolution in the Rajya Sabha that decrees that Article 370, which grants the state of Kashmir special status, will be repealed.

As per latest reports, Amit Shah Said that owing to "prevailing security situation", due to cross-border terrorism in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, the state will be bifurcated into two Union Territories. That is, Ladakh will be a Union Territory without an assembly, while Jammu and Kashmir will be a Union Territory with an assembly.

© RSTV

While the news had caused a nationwide uproar, we wondered about the people who are eventually at the receiving end. Regardless of how some Kashmiris feel about Azadi, there is no denying the fact that thousands of innocent lives are feeling threatened at the moment.

With the implementation of Section 144 across various districts in Kashmir, mobile connectivity and internet services have also been shut down. Kashmiris outside the state are worried about family and friends back home, awaiting a fate that nobody is prepared for at the moment.

© Twitter

People feared that this might be their last taste of freedom, so they exchanged photographs and sent out messages to family outside the state, which is only a tiny glimpse of the larger reality of families being left bereft during this time of unrest.

We hope this move by the government to curb cross-border terrorism does just that and leaves the innocent people in peace. But here is what the natives have to say about the current scenario in Kashmir:

The greater need of the hour.

#JammuAndKashmir For Kashmir: I don't know if/how much this might help but if it could, please spread the word. Safety planning is key in this time. While physical safety is integral, so is emotional safety. — Ruchita (@roocheetah) August 5, 2019

Ground reality.

Kashmiris have not only been disconnected from outer world they are not even able to communicate locally. Every open space is filled with armed forces. Residents are not allowed to venture out. — Khursheed Wani (@ksheed1) August 5, 2019

Other ramifications.

A friend, about to get married soon, can't reach his parents at his home. Phone lines suspended. Several journalists have no access of communication. There are patients, expecting mothers among those affected by the communication lockdown in #Kashmir. What a pity. Democracy? — Saira Aslam (@itssaira) August 5, 2019

People are worried about the well being of friends and family.

Total communication breakdown living outside kashmir cant even talk wid parents to know abut thr well being only anxiety Building up — umer (@babaumer) August 5, 2019

The fears…
