PM Modi in Man vs Wild: PM Modi Man vs Wild episode with Bear Grylls to air today at 9 pm

PM Modi in Man vs Wild: PM Modi with Bear Grylls will be seen venturing into the wilderness of Jim Corbett National Park in Man vs Wild show at 9 pm today. The PM Modi Man vs Wild episode will be broadcasted across the world in a special telecast on Discovery network.

Man vs Wild is a survival television series hosted by ace adventurer Bear Grylls. Bear Grylls revealed in a recent interview that since PM Modi is a vegetarian, he will not be seen eating insects or animals. Bear Grylls stated that eating insects is not necessary to survive in the wild as there are a wide variety of herbs, berries and fruits that can be eaten. Bear Grylls further added that the PM spent his younger years in the wild so he was very comfortable with that.

Speaking on the Man vs Wild Bear Grylls episode, PM Modi can be seen saying that when he was asked about the special Man vs Wild episode amid nature, focusing on his life beyond politics, he was both inclined and intrigued to be a part of it.

When will PM Modi Man vs Wild episode with Bear Grylls air?

The PM Modi Bear Grylls episode in the Man vs Wild show will premiere today, on August 12, 2019 in more than 180 nations across the world.

Where to watch PM Modi Man vs Wild episode with Bear Grylls?

The Man vs Wild show featuring PM Modi Bear Grylls episode will be telecasted in India on Discovery India. For the viewers outside India, the PM Modi Man vs Wild episode will be aired on Discovery.

What time will PM Modi Man vs Wild episode be aired?

The PM Modi Man vs Wild episode will premiere at 9 pm on August 12.

Where has the PM Modi Man vs Wild episode been shot?

The special PM Modi Man vs Wild episode has been shot entirely in the wilderness of the Jim Corbett National Park in Uttarakhand. PM Modi will be seen venturing into the wild in the show with host Bear Grylls.

Which channels will broadcast PM Modi Man vs Wild episode?

The PM Modi Man vs Wild episode will be telecasted globally by 12 Discovery network channels including Discovery, Discovery India, Discovery HD World, Discovery Science, Discovery Turbo, Discovery Kids, Discovery Tamil, JEET Prime, JEET Prime HD, Animal Planet, Animal Planet HD World, TLC, TLC HD World.

How to watch PM Modi Man vs Wild episode online?

The PM Modi Man vs Wild episode can be watched online by downloading the TataSky or Airtel TV app. The Man vs Wild episode may be made available on other online streaming platforms as well. Stay tuned for more updates.

How to watch PM Modi Man vs Wild episode in Hindi?

The PM Modi Man vs Wild full episode will be available in eight languages including English, Hindi, Marathi, Malayalam, Telugu, Tamil, Kannada and Bengali.

Where can I watch the teaser of the PM Modi Man vs Wild episode?

The teaser of the PM Modi Man vs Wild episode is available on the official twitter account of Bear Grylls and on Discovery.

What is Man vs Wild show?

The Man vs Wild show is a survival television series featuring host Bear Grylls. Bear Grylls is generally left stranded in a remote region in each episode and the show then captures his efforts to survive in the wild by eating snakes, insects and doing extraordinary stunts such as free climbing waterfalls, ice climbing, running through a forest fire, parachuting from helicopters and wrestling alligators.

World leaders including PM Narendra Modi with Bear Grylls in Man vs Wild

PM Modi to feature in Man vs Wild with Bear Grylls
