Indian man pushes parents' birthday present BMW into a river because he was angry it wasn't a Jaguar

A man in India has pushed a brand new car into a river because he was upset his parents gifted him a BMW instead of a Jaguar for his birthday.

The young man, only known as Akash, from Haryana in northern India, was given a BMW M3 car by his mother and father.

In an act of protest over not getting the vehicle he wanted, the man ditched the car, but later jumped into the river and joined drivers to try and save it.

BMWs cost around 3.5 million rupees (£41,400; $49,000) locally, while Jaguars are more expensive, costing about five million rupees (£58,000, $70,000).

Shocking footage shows the car floating away on the river in the northern Indian state before it gets stuck on a bank of tall grass.

Akash, believed to be the son of a local landlord swims in and tries to rescue it, with the help of others.

Police are investigating the incident, local media report.

A man in India has pushed a brand new car into a river as he was upset he gifted a BMW instead of a Jaguar for his birthday

The young man, only known as Akash, from Haryana in northern India, was given the car by his parents

In an act of protest over not getting the vehicle he wanted, the man ditched the car, but later jumped into the river and joined drivers to try and save it

BMWs cost around 3.5 million rupees (£41,400; $49,000) locally, while Jaguars are more expensive, costing about five million rupees (£58,000, $70,000)

Shocking footage shows the car floating away on the river in the northern Indian state before it gets stuck on a bank of tall grass. Akash, believed to be the son of a local landlord swims in and tries to rescue it, with the help of others

Since the video has gone viral, people have hit out at the driver online, accusing him of being ungrateful

One person said: 'Don't know whoever this disappointed idiot is! He should have sold it and taken care of thousands of poor kids education! They would have forever gratefully for his philanthropy! He missed it!'

A police official told IANS the young man filmed the video himself.

Since the video has gone viral, people have hit out at the driver online, accusing him of being ungrateful.

One person said: 'Your parents did not teacher you the concepts of gifts'.

Another wrote: 'Don't know whoever this disappointed idiot is! He should have sold it and taken care of thousands of poor kids education! They would have forever gratefully for his philanthropy! He missed it!'
