Ecology vs development: second successive year of flooding in Kerala may help settle the debate

Jiby writes on politics, developmental issues & legal affairs and enjoys hunting for data to make his arguments. He works on the Edit Page at The Times of India

The second successive year of extreme rainfall, landslides in hill districts and flooding in low lying areas has led to forceful questions on the wisdom of Kerala’s comprehensive rejection of the Gadgil Committee report. The report which sought declaration of the entire Western Ghats as an ecologically sensitive area and wanted curbs on illegal mining had irked powerful establishments like the Catholic Church forcing government to constitute the Kasturirangan Committee which presented a watered down report that categorised only one-third of the Ghats as ESA. It is another matter that even this report was rejected in Kerala’s hill districts.

A recent Kerala government study has revealed that a large proportion of the state’s hilly areas and lowlands are respectively prone to landslides and floods. This is a worrying scenario. It puts ordinary people who invest their life’s savings in houses, vehicles, etc, in harm’s way not to speak of their own lives. To make matters more difficult Kerala has one of the highest population densities in India making land a precious commodity.

For over a century, enterprising settlers have headed towards the Western Ghats to clear forests, plant crops and build human settlements battling the forces of nature. In the lowlands it was the floodplains that paid a heavy price over decades, but especially after urbanisation gained pace to cater to housing needs. My own great grandfather made this arduous journey from Palai town in Kottayam to Arakulam in Idukki district 40 kilometres away, in 1902 as a young man.

Where the first settlers cornered the more easily inhabitable lands subsequent wayfarers even branched out to the Malabar districts like Wayanad, Kannur and Malappuram when land availability became scant in central Kerala and forest department started to crack down on encroachments. Even here, the later ones had to scout deeper into forests or up steeper hills to thrash out their farm, raising the risks but with no other option but to succeed in life and earn their spurs as farmers.

These settlers, illustrious but poor, were also helped along by votebank politics. The rejection of the Gadgil and Kasturirangan reports also boils down to politics and development taking precedence over environment. But Kerala has come to the point where it must ponder the cost of illegal quarrying and the construction activity on flood pains. The dams are proving inadequate to store the copious amounts of water that come pouring in from the hills, which in turn have been denuded and loosened by quarrying and road building and construction activity and are unable to soak in the rain water.

A few more days of copious rainfall and the state could have been in far more dire straits. This precisely is the situation we need to prepare for. Extreme weather is hear to stay and no one can take their safety for granted.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
