Standing together for integration

“Why to delay Jammu & Kashmir being integrated with the rest of the Indian Union and why not bring it under the purview of the Constitution of India, in conformity with all the other States of the Indian Union?” This was asked by late CM Dr. J. Jayalalithaa, in her maiden speech in Rajya Sabha in 1984.

This very critical and pertinent question was finally addressed by a Government in the Center, led by Prime Minister Narendra Modi in 2019. No one would have ever thought that within few months of winning a second term, he would strategize to make article 370 and article 35A history and facilitate full reintegration of the state of Jammu and Kashmir with the rest of India. Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, as it has been called, has swept the Rajya Sabha and Lok Sabha test after intense debates witnessed between both ruling and opposition parties.

For years together these very same outcomes had been discussed, dissected and debated but it was always the case of a little more conversation and a little less action. The unasked question was always about who would bell the cat. Who would be willing and fearless enough to embrace change and selfless enough to take up the Kashmir issue in favour of Kashmir? The sad fact is that most looked the other way and resigned themselves to sitting on the fence, allowing things to not just continue as they were in what they believed was a lost paradise, but also to worsen. So who would restore Jammu and Kashmir to its lost pristine glory and facilitate cohesive inclusion and integration?

As witnessed, no political party that came to power in the Centre had the political guts or backing to take necessary steps and turn the table to fully reintegrate the state of J&K. Someone who came to power with full majority had to bite the bullet. Enter Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The state of affairs in J&K has always had an impact in the rest of the country. In May 2018, when teenager Tirumani from Chennai was stone pelted to death, I went to see his family. His father recounted how much youngsters like Tirumani wished to go Jammu and Kashmir to enjoy their holidays. But the separatist forces pelted his son to death. Being aware that the root cause of these problems remained in parts of the valley, I wondered how separate status had engrained the very separatist mind-set in the valley. While citizens, even youngsters, from all parts of the country felt love and identification with J&K, why was their love being met with such negative force? There is clearly something wrong with the inputs our Kashmiri youth are being fed. Except a hug and some words of solace I could not offer much to his father and the distraught family.

I left their home knowing that Tirumani did not deserve this. No one does. And neither do our Kashmiri youth deserve to live with such aggression. I only hoped to myself that there must be a permanent solution to these nefarious complexities in the valley. Now, the removal of the article 370 will only lead to the elimination of these very separatist forces and contribute to a peaceful valley life. There is still much to be done, but at least now the in-roads are there so that all can be part of a solution.

The keenness to understand the significance of Jammu and Kashmir in the southern state of Tamil Nadu has always been there. Sometime in October 2017, as part of an initiative to keep the citizens of Madurai, in specific the youth, connected with the significance of Jammu and Kashmir, a seminar was organised with an objective to contextualize the spiritual, emotional, linguistic, cultural and historical bonds that bind Jammu and Kashmir with the rest of India. While the state of Jammu and Kashmir has been in conflict for the last three decades, the seminar highlighted that this is but a blip when viewed in the larger historical context. The importance of the state as part of the Indian Union is not just a matter of geography, but encompasses the very idea and soul of India. At this seminar it was heartening to see that the youth participated in significant numbers just to understand how vital the state of Jammu and Kashmir is to India.

Tamil Nadu has been unstinting in its support towards the full integration of Jammu and Kashmir with India. In the past leading public intellectuals such as senior journalist Cho Ramaswamy reiterated this to the then Central Government under P.V. Narasimha Rao. Cut to present times, and it is also heartening to see decorated police officers like K. Vijay Kumar play such an important role in advising the current dispensation with respect to the policy in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh.

In fact, in 1970s many Tamil movies have been shot in scenic locations in the valley. Who can forget late Chief Minister M.G. Ramachandran’s famous song on Kashmir that continues to permeate the minds of Tamils through viral Whatsapp videos even today. There is no doubt that cinema forms an important umbilical chord connecting people and minds culturally and emotionally. Now is the time for the Tamil film industry to visit and make use of the opportunities that are available in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh, thereby contributing to the local economy and footfall too.

The reorganisation of Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh has changed the status quo and will in all certainty facilitate many more youth from not just Tamil Nadu but also from other states, to visit the beautiful region and to tap into and add to its limitless potential.

In addition to cinema, there are a plethora of avenues that will hugely benefit all. Tourism, which can really enhance an economy, will receive a much need boost. There is already an excitement to visit the valley and enjoy what it has to offer. For tour operators, hoteliers, bloggers, conservationists, archaeologists, this will be a great shot in the arm. The Prime Minister in his address to the nation has laid out the red carpet for the Tourism industry to visit Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh and enable the options of experiential tourism, adventure tourism and spiritual tourism. To add to this, Buddhism has existed in various forms in Tamil Nadu, and the reorganisation means that there is a window of opportunity to engage and collaborate with the monasteries in Ladakh.

However, most poignant of all is what this integration has meant for those who have been exiled from their heavenly paradise of a state, for so many decades. Finally, the mist has shifted and they can look at their own home with optimism and without the pain of their scars. Not to mention what it means to the family members of all those who have lost loved ones in the Valley, be they military or civilians. There is a ray of sunshine upon Jammu and Kashmir today that has not existed in all these years.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
