Rain-battered Kozhikode inches back to normality

Rain subsides making water levels in rivers recede; rehabilitation of flood-hit people a challenge for authorities

Life is limping back to normality in Kozhikode after five days of torrential rain, floods, and landslips in the hilly region.

Rainfall began subsiding on Monday, allowing water levels in rivers and their tributaries to recede. The district administration, however, appears to be struggling to rehabilitate the flood-affected people. A total of 44,864 people from 14,323 families are still staying 180 camps in Kozhikode, Koyilandy, Thamarassery and Vadakara taluks.

Officials said over 100 camps had been wound up by Monday evening. Over 60,350 people from 18,825 families were in the camps till noon. A majority of camps were in Kozhikode city and its suburbs.

Unlike during last year’s floods, more people were sheltered in makeshift camps this time. A total of 41,565 people belonging to 13,011 families were displaced and had to be sheltered at 297 relief camps in August last time.

This year, however, several low-lying areas in the city and its suburbs were submerged in the downpour. The victims are from Mavoor, Peruvayal, Nallalam, Cheruvannur, Areekkad, Kundayithode, Vengeri, Kannadikkal, and Olavanna. A reason for flooding was the overflowing of Poonoorpuzha, Iruvanchipuzha, and the Chaliyar. A large number of families were forced to take refuge in government- sponsored relief camps, especially at schools and colleges, as the flooded houses had to be thoroughly cleaned. Cleaning houses filled with slush left behind by floodwaters is expected to be a massive task. Ministers T.P. Ramakrishnan and A.K. Saseendran visited Vilnagad village where a landslip had claimed four lives. They inspected the rehabilitation centres there. Safety of the people and rebuilding the lives of the flood- affected were of utmost priority, they said.

IMD predicts rainfall

Meanwhile, in its forecast for the next five days, the India Meteorological Department has predicted a rainfall of 39 mm on Tuesday in Kozhikode block. The forecast for Wednesday is 51mm. It has forecast 64 mm rain for Thursday, and 3mm for Friday and Saturday.

The prediction for Kozhikode district is 22mm on Tuesday, 37mm on Wednesday, 47mm on Thursday, 10 mm on Friday, and 4mm on Saturday.

Train services restored

Train services between Kozhikode and Shoranur were restored after 1.30 p.m. after a team led by the Chief Engineer from Chennai examined the track on Feroke bridge. The Mangaluru-Nagarcoil Eranad Express ran as a special passenger train from Kozhikode to Nagarcoil.

Overnight trains to Bengaluru, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Thiruvananthapuram were regularised. Except for a few long-haul trains, normal services will be restored from Tuesday, officials said.
