Vadodara: Man held for killing wife, police turn guardian of their son

Cops to pool in money to pay for his education

VADODARA: When his mother Kanku was murdered in their house in January last year, little Bhavesh had no clue that his father had strangulated her. On Monday, he lost this only support when police came knocking and arrested his father, Bharat Devipujak.But, despite losing his parents, the eight-year-old won’t live a destitute life. He has got a new guardians in the form of policemen. In a humanitarian gesture, they have decided to become his caretaker till he grows up.S G Patil, assistant commissioner of police (E division), said, “With the father behind bars, Bhavesh has no one to look after him. His aunt refused to take him in. We felt very sorry about his condition and decided to become his guardians.”Bhavesh’s new home is a room in zone 3 office building at Panigate. In the morning, a woman cop wakes him up and gets him breakfast. A separate room with a bed has been made for him.Cops keep bringing fruits and chocolates and some even play games to keep him cheerful. When TOI visited the office, Bhavesh was relaxing on a couch on the first floor. “I want to go to school from tomorrow,” he said.Beginning Tuesday, a police vehicle will drop him to his government school in Gajrawadi. “We hope that once he starts attending school and meeting his friends, his life will be normal again. He is chirpy and good in studies too,” said a Panigate police station official.S G Patil and some other policemen have decided to fund his education. “If he doesn’t find it comfortable here, we will shift Bhavesh to children’s hostel but we will always be his guardians,” said Patil.Bhavesh was staying in a single-room home with his father who worked as a casual labourer at a shop in the old city. Police said that Kanku was angry with Bharat for selling their house allotted under government’s low-cost housing scheme. “After a bitter altercation, Bharat strangulated her and slept in the same room all night. The next morning he filed a police complaint stating that he found his wife dead in the bed.
