Breaking News August 13: Why CBI does a good job when there is no political overtone to a case: CJI

New Delhi:

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra will visit Umbha village today to meet the family members of ten Gond tribals who were gunned down last month over a land dispute. Meanwhile, the crucial day-to-day hearing in the politically sensitive Ram Janmabhoomi-Babri Masjid case in the Supreme Court will entre the 5th day on Tuesday with the counsel for the deity, 'Ram Lalla Virajman', re-commencing arguments for claim over the entire 2.77-acre disputed land in Ayodhya.

Check all Live Updates here:

8.15 pm: Maharashtra: Life in flood-affected Kolhapur's Hasur village limping back to normalcy.

8.00 pm: Rahul Gandhi has written to PM suggesting installation of early warning systems, specially designed landslide/flood shelters & developing long term strategy and action plan to protect life & livelihoods of people & environment of Wayanad (Kerala) to be taken up on priority.

7.45 pm: University of Jammu, Spokesperson: Classwork in the University shall resume from 14th August. Examination schedules of various examinations shall be notified separately.

7.30 pm: Government Sources: Union Home Minister Amit Shah has no plans to visit Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir on 15th August.

7.15 pm: Delhi High Court allows release of the movie 'Batla House' subject to deletion of certain scenes and putting a revised disclaimer in the beginning of the movie & also adding a disclaimer during a particular scene.

7.00 pm: J&K Governor's office: Rahul Gandhi was responding to fake news possibly spread from across the border about situation in Kashmir, which is peaceful with negligible incidents. He can check for himself from various Indian channels which have reported correct position in the valley.

6.45 pm: Dr. Vinay Thusoo, University of Jammu: Classes in the University of Jammu shall resume from tomorrow. Admissions as per revised admission schedule are commencing from 16 August & the merit lists shall be displayed in nodal departments on 14 Aug.

6.30 pm: PM Narendra Modi at the condolence meet for late former Union Minister & BJP leader Sushma Swaraj in Delhi: She was very strong in her opinions & also she tried to stay committed to them. Her speeches were not only effective, but also very inspiring.

6.15 pm: India Meteorological Department, Dehradun: Heavy to very heavy rainfall likely to occur at isolated places especially in Chamoli, Rudraprayag, Bageshwar, Pithoragarh, Dehradun during next 48 hours.

6.00 pm:

#WATCH Two policemen fight with each other allegedly over a bribe, in Prayagraj. Ashutosh Mishra, SP Crime, says “The incident took place day before yesterday. Both the policemen have been suspended. Investigation underway." pic.twitter.com/d83DItRTPf — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 13, 2019

5.45 pm: Kerala High Court rejects the appeal by state govt against the bail plea of IAS officer Shriram Venkitaraman, an accused in death case of KM Basheer(Trivandrum bureau chief of Siraaj daily). Basheer had died after the car Shriram Venkitaraman was traveling in rammed into his bike

5.30 pm: Union MoS V Muraleedharan on Kerala Floods: Government of India (GoI) has sanctioned â‚¹52 crore as an initial assistance to the Kerala government. They already have last year's sanctioned amount of â‚¹3000crore, of which â‚¹1500 crore is still unspent.

5.15 pm: Principal Secretary (Commerce & Industry), Jammu and Kashmir, NK Chaudhary: J&K has decided to host Investors Summit from 12-14 October,this will be first ever global summit being hosted by the state till date.The inaugural session of the summit will be held in Srinagar on Oct 12.

5.00 pm: Indian Meteorological Department (IMD): An Earthquake of magnitude 4.2 on Richter scale struck Jammu & Kashmir at 4:20 pm, today.

4.45 pm:

Haryana: Waterlogging in parts of Gurugram following rainfall in the area. pic.twitter.com/utwdYLmBC4 — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

4.30 pm:

Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi at condolence meet for late former Union Minister & BJP leader Sushma Swaraj being held at Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. pic.twitter.com/k3lgftqRRV — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

4.15 pm: Digvijaya Singh, Congress: Jammu & Kashmir Governor himself had said that there was an intelligence failure (Pulwama attack), had it been any other country Home Minister would have been forced to resign, if not the PM. But here, whoever raised questions was declared a traitor.

4.00 pm:

Delhi: Condolence meet for late former Union Minister & BJP leader Sushma Swaraj being held at Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium. Home Minister Amit Shah present at the meet. pic.twitter.com/zhU6mHlEVx — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

3.45 pm: National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) has established a medical camp on Haripur road in Sangli. Two doctors of NDRF along with paramedics and support staff with essential medicines are present there to ensure medical help to people.

3:22 pm: The elections for State Presidents & National Council Members will be held from 1 December to 15 December 2019: Radha Mohan Singh, BJP's National Election Officer.

3:22 pm: CM Devendra Fadnavis and State Cabinet Ministers to donate their one month’s salary towards CM Relief Fund for Maharashtra Floods: Maharashtra Chief Minister's Office (CMO).

2:55 pm: Aurangabad District Cooperative Milk Producer Union contributed Rs 25,00,000/- (Rs25 lakh) to the Chief Minister Relief Fund.

2:50 pm: Jammu and Kashmir | Cultural programme rehearsals underway at Srinagar's Sher-i-Kashmir stadium ahead of Independence Day.

2:40 pm: Nearly 30 children of a government middle school in Rajasthan's Bhilwara district complained of vomiting and diarrhoea after having the mid-day meal on Tuesday and were admitted to a hospital, officials said.

2:20 pm: Dress rehearsals underway at Srinagar's Sher-i-Kashmir stadium ahead of.

Jammu and Kashmir: Dress rehearsals underway at Srinagar's Sher-i-Kashmir stadium ahead of #IndependenceDay pic.twitter.com/O5phWqNASU — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

2:08 pm: International Cricket Council (ICC) | Women’s T20 Cricket has been confirmed for inclusion at the Birmingham 2022 Commonwealth Games.

2:00 pm: Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra visits Ubha village of Sonbhadra. Ten people from the village had died in firing last month over a land dispute.

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra visits Ubha village of Sonbhadra. Ten people from the village had died in firing last month over a land dispute. pic.twitter.com/e9SLmbVQji — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 13, 2019

1:58 pm: Due cognisance has been taken of all the fake Twitter handles and of any items which create disaffection. It is being tackled at the appropriate level legally, procedurally and through appropriate measures: Jammu and Kashmir Principal Secretary (Planning Commission) Rohit Kansal.

1:45 pm: We saw disturbances in the state in 2008&2016 too.There were 37 deaths in 1st week of 2016, but in last 1 week there hasn't been a single casualty. By imposing reasonable restrictions at least we've been able to save human lives: J&K Principal Secy (Planning Commission) R Kansal.

1:35 pm: Noushad,a cloth vendor in Kochi, donated new clothes kept for Eid sale to flood-affected people of the region,says,'My intention was to help people, by God's grace video went viral. Some ppl from Dubai called me saying they change their Eid plans&gave money to relief fund'.

12:45 pm: Kolkata Magistrate Metropolitan Court issues arrest warrant against Congress leader Shashi Tharoor in connection with a case filed by an advocate Sumeet Chowdhury over Tharoor's 'Hindu-Pakistan' comment.

12:42 pm: Following peaceful Eid al-Adha celebrations across various parts of Jammu, Kashmir & Ladakh, prohibitory conditions were further relaxed in various parts. Jammu region is almost entirely free of restrictions, they however continue in parts of Kashmir: J&K Principal Secretary R Kansal.

12:34 pm: 10 MLAs of Sikkim Democratic Front join BJP in presence of BJP Working President JP Nadda and General Secretary Ram Madhav.

12:24 am: Election Commission begins meeting to discuss different aspects of delimitation of Jammu and Kashmir Assembly.

11:52 am: Disqualified Karnataka MLAs mention for urgent hearing before the Supreme Court their petition challenging Speaker’s decision to disqualify them for the term of the present Assembly.

1:45 am: If the adversary wants to activate the LoC, that's his choice. Everybody does precautionary deployment, we should not get too concerned about it. As far as the Army and other services are concerned, we have to be always prepared: Army chief General Bipin Rawat.

11:30 am: Tamil Nadu Chief Minister K Palaniswami on Tuesday launched a blistering attack on P Chidambaram, saying the veteran Congress leader was “only a burden” on the earth.

11:28 am: A tiger has fallen in a well in Pipariyakala village of Barhi. Forest Department's team present at the spot. Rescue operation underway.

Katni, Madhya Pradesh: A tiger has fallen in a well in Pipariyakala village of Barhi. Forest Department's team present at the spot. Rescue operation underway pic.twitter.com/KqANX8djUV — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

11:14 am: 14 children injured after a bus they were travelling in skidded off the road in Vada of Palghar district, early morning today. All the injured have been admitted to hospital.

10:40 am: Ayodhya land case |Hearing in the case has started in Supreme Court. It is the 5th day of the day-to-day hearing in the case.

10:35 am: 1 dead, 4 critically injured after a boiler at a factory in Panki exploded. Injured admitted to hospital. More details awaited.

Kanpur: 1 dead, 4 critically injured after a boiler at a factory in Panki exploded. Injured admitted to hospital. The factory deals with construction of parts of train pic.twitter.com/ofavmnByCo — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 13, 2019

10:30 am: Robbers broke into the strong room of Punjab and Sind Bank in Panipat on August 11. Police says, "the bank and a school runs in the premises of a Gurudwara. Robbers entered the strong room by cutting the roof slab. 6 lockers have been damaged. Case registered."

Haryana: Robbers broke into the strong room of Punjab and Sind Bank in Panipat on August 11. Police says, "the bank and a school runs in the premises of a Gurudwara. Robbers entered the strong room by cutting the roof slab. 6 lockers have been damaged. Case registered." pic.twitter.com/uizMVLueyP — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

10:25 am: Congressman Tom Suozzi publicly apologises following outcry over Kashmir remarks.

10:15 am: 21 fire tenders carrying out fire-fighting operations in Gandhi Nagar Market. No injuries reported.

Delhi: 21 fire tenders carrying out fire-fighting operations in Gandhi Nagar Market. No injuries reported. pic.twitter.com/WwdmjxIvQN — ANI (@ANI) August 13, 2019

10:05 am: Congress General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh East, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, arrives in Varanasi. She is going to Umbha village in Sonbhadra to meet the families of the victims who were killed in firing over a land dispute on July 17.

Congress General Secretary for Uttar Pradesh East, Priyanka Gandhi Vadra, arrives in Varanasi. She is going to Umbha village in Sonbhadra to meet the families of the victims who were killed in firing over a land dispute on July 17. pic.twitter.com/WzEsr6cmep — ANI UP (@ANINewsUP) August 13, 2019

10:05 am: 88 people have died in 14 districts of Kerala since 8th August due to floods; 40 reported missing.

9:50 am: Situation is very bad. Home Minister Amit Shah & Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman also conducted inspection. Loss of over 50,000 cr in the state. On 16th Aug, I'm going to Delhi to meet PM regarding this: Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa on flood-situation in the state.

9:45 am: IndiGo flight 6E 636 from Nagpur to Delhi returned to taxiway from runway, after the aircraft detected serious error & pilot decided to abort the take-off. Passengers were de-boarded. Union Transport Minister Nitin Gadkari was also on-board the flight.

9:35 am: Fire breaks out at Gandhi Nagar Market; more than 10 fire tenders are at the spot.

9:30 am: Deinduction of some of the teams have started. Most are now involved in distributing relief material&medicines. 2.5 tons of ration delivered to villages of Rajapur & Rajapur Wadi. Medical camp doctors along with medical supplies sent to villages: Defence PRO on Maharashtra Floods

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
