Floods ravage at least 8 states as overall toll rises to 200 in Gujarat, Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka; rescue ops escalated-India News , Firstpost

Over 120 people were airlifted from an inundated road in Kutch as rescue operations were stepped up on Monday in flood-hit Gujarat, Kerala, Karnataka and Maharashtra, the four states where over 200 people have died so far

Thiruvananthapuram/Dehradun/Ahmedabad: Over 120 people were airlifted from an inundated road in Kutch as rescue operations were stepped up on Monday in flood-hit Gujarat, Kerala, Karnataka and Maharashtra, the four states where over 200 people have died so far, while nine people were killed in landslides in Uttarakhand and Jammu following heavy rains.

Also, five people were killed in West Bengal and Odisha in rain-related incidents on Monday.

Rains subsided in many parts of the flood-hit states where over 12 lakh people have been affected and the water level has started receding in the deluge-ravaged areas, officials said. The toll in Kerala rose to 83 on Monday, while in Karnataka, Gujarat and Maharashtra, 122 people lost their lives so far due to monsoon fury, as per official data.

Nearly 125 people stranded on a road washed away by floods in Gujarat's Kutch district were rescued by the Indian Air Force (IAF), while in Karnataka and Maharashtra, efforts have started to repair roads damaged by landslides and heavy rains.

In Uttarakhand, which is also being affected by heavy rainfall, six people, including a woman and her nine-month-old daughter, were buried alive in landslides in three different villages in the Chamoli district.

Erosion caused by the flooded Chuflagad river in the state also washed away two buildings on its banks. The state emergency operation centre in Dehradun said the debris of landslides fell on three houses in Banjabgad, Aligaon and Lankhi villages in the district's Ghat area, trapping the residents.

The six people suffocated to death, the centre said. In Jammu and Kashmir, three members of a family died after they came under a boulder during a landslide in Resai district.

Two others were also injured in the incident that took place on Sunday evening in Laar village in the district's Mahore belt. In states hit by floods, several roads were cleared on Monday, allowing partial movement of traffic, with priority being given to trucks carrying essential goods.

The Mumbai-Bengaluru National Highway-4, which was closed near Kolhapur in Maharashtra for the last six days, was partially opened for traffic on Monday after the flood waters receded and thousands of stranded trucks carrying essential commodities were allowed to move.

Traffic movement was also allowed between Kolhapur and Belgaum in Karnataka. Precaution is being maintained in the deluge-hit states as most rivers are in a spate and reservoirs are at the danger mark.

In Kerala, the toll increased to 83 and 2.55 lakh people have sought refuge in relief camps, officials said, fearing the toll may go up, as 50 people are still missing in Malappuram. There is no 'red alert' of torrential rains for any of the 14 districts on Tuesday, but an ‘orange alert’ has been issued for six districts.

Congress leader Rahul Gandhi on Monday visited flood affected areas in his Wayanad Lok Sabha constituency in Kerala, including the worst-hit Puthumala area, and assured all help to those hit by the calamity to rebuild their lives. In Karnataka, 86 taluks in 17 districts have been affected due to floods and rains, and the state government has put the toll at 48 and those missing at 12.

The state on Monday announced an assistance of Rs 5 lakh each to those who have lost their houses completely in the floods and landslides, to take up construction work; Rs 1 lakh to those whose houses were damaged and Rs 5,000 monthly to those staying in rental accommodations till their houses are ready.

Due to the deluge, a total of 6,73,559 people have been evacuated till Saturday evening and 1,224 relief camps opened where 3,93,956 people are taking shelter.

In Maharashtra, the toll increased to 43 on Monday and as on Sunday nearly 4.48 lakh people were evacuated from flood-hit areas, including 4.04 lakh from Kolhapur and Sangli, officials said, adding that 761 villages in 69 taluks have been affected by floods.

They were shifted to 372 temporary camps and shelters. In Gujarat where nearly 31 people have died in rain-related incidents in the last five days, efforts are on to trace and rescue fishermen of two missing boats.

Teams of the National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), the IAF, state disaster response forces and local administration are providing relief and conducting rescue operations in states hit by monsoon fury.

In Odisha, an elderly woman was killed and her daughter-in-law seriously injured when a wall of their house collapsed in Kalahandi district, as fresh rains lashed several parts of the state on Monday, with a threat of flood looming large, officials said.

The state had seen heavy rainfall last week, too, claiming four lives and affecting at least nine districts in south and west Odisha. In West Bengal, four people, including a minor girl, were killed in a lightning strike in South 24 Parganas district on Monday, police said.

Rainfall was recorded in parts Bihar and Jharkhand in the east and also in areas of northeast India, according to the India Meteorological Department (IMD). Light rainfall was also reported from parts of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Punjab.

In the national capital, it was a sultry day on Monday, with light rains in the afternoon. The humidity levels oscillated between 89 and 47 percent. While the Safdarjung observatory recorded 3.2 milimetres rainfall, the Palam and the Ridge area observatories received 5.1 milimetres and 1.2 milimetres downpour respectively.
