Are These 'Flood-Resistant' Houses The Future? Kerala's Experience From 2018 Deluge Suggests So

Kerala is currently battling an unprecedented second massive flooding in two years.

The deluge which inundated almost the entire state has left over 2.8 lakh people displaced in a matter of days. Most of these people have been shifted to temporary relief camps set up by the government across the state.

But with rains subsiding and water receding, many are in a rush to go back to their homes. While this may be the case of the majority, some are not so lucky. The heavy rains that began nearly a week ago have left a trail of destruction behind - mostly in the form of infrastructure.

BCCL

Nearly 300 houses across the state have been completely damaged in the floods while hundreds of others have been left partially damaged and require urgent repair before it is inhabitable. Others had to take refuge in relief camps because their houses got flooded though there was not much damage.

The second major flooding in two years and changes in the rain pattern have caused fears in the state that this is the new normal.

BCCL

This has people looking for solutions, and Kerala might already have found one.

In 2018 following the 'flood of the century' as part of the rebuilding process, Kerala came up with the idea of elevated houses - houses built on erected pillars which can withstand normal floodings.

This is particularly useful for low-lying areas like Kuttanad in Alappuzha where flooding is a regular occurance.

KSDMA/ FACEBOOK

Kerala State Disaster Management Authority (KSDMA) recently shared the images of one of those houses built in Kuttanad after the flood of 2018.

It belonged to Gopalakrishnan, a native of Cheruthana in Alappuzha district, who lost his house in the 2018 floods.

KSDMA/ FACEBOOK

But unlike the last year, despite the area being flooded again, Gopalakrishnan and his family were safe and the waters did not enter their house even after the entire area was inundated.

According to KSDMA, the house was conceptualized to withstand another flood and this year it has proven to be a success.

Kerala Finance Minister Dr. TM Thomas Isaac also shared images of similar construction across the district and said that more and more people are adopting the model.

Dr TM Thomas Isaac/ Facebook

While this is not a new concept and has been widely used in countries like Australia and Vietnam in areas prone to flooding, this has not been widely used in India and could be a solution for frequent flooding areas.
