Ready to fight a war for Kashmiris' rights: Bilawal

He stated that the people of Kashmir were looking towards the government [of Pakistan for help].

ISLAMABAD (Dunya News) – Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) Chairman Bilawal Bhutto Zardari said on Tuesday that the entire nation would fight for the rights of Kashmiris till the maximum possible limit.

The PPP’s Member of the National Assembly (MNA) held a press conference today in Islamabad to address the plight of Kashmiris in the Indian-occupied Kashmir (IoK).

“We are ready to battle for the rights of Kashmiri […] the government has been using tweets consistently [to address the issue],” Bilawal said, adding that every incompetence could be tolerated; but compromise on Kashmir would not be accepted.

He stated that the people of Kashmir were looking towards the government [of Pakistan for help] and we need to take practical measures for their support.

“We want the people of Kashmir to decide about their future independently; however for it we need to share their emotions and sorrows…and firmly fight for their rights at the diplomatic stage,” he added.

Bilawal Bhutto said that the political brass of the country should send a unanimous message to the world that Pakistan was firmly standing behind the people of illegally occupied Kashmir whom the Indian government has annexed.

He continued that India’s moves in the occupied land would be detrimental to regional peace and security, but his political party and the people of Pakistan would continue to struggle and strive for the people of Indian Occupied Kashmir and their due rights.

Bilawal also said that if the government of Pakistan handles the Kashmir issue according to the wishes of the nation with ‘seriousness’ then the entire nation and politicians would stand behind the government and its policy.

Slamming Indian government over abrogation of Article-370, Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) Chairman Bilawal Bhutto Zardari on August 6 said that New Delhi had revoked Kashmir’s special status illegally and unilaterally.

Bilawal called Indian prime minister Narendra Modi “an extremist” on whose hands were the blood of thousands of innocent Kashmiris.

The PPP leader said that India violated international laws and used cluster ammunition to target civilian population in Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) across the line of control.
