Kashmir news: Amit Shah to hoist tricolour at Lal Chowk on Independence Day?

Home Minister Amit Shah is expected to visit Jammu and Kashmir on August 15 to hoist the national flag at Lal Chowk, Srinagar. National Security Advisor Ajit Doval is also likely to join him there.

Home Minister Amit Shah is expected to visit the curfew-imposed state of Jammu and Kashmir to hoist the tricolour this Independence Day i.e. August 15. The move is certainly unprecedented given nobody from the ruling Centre government has ever unfurled the national flag in the state.

Reportedly Shah will be visiting the state on Thursday with a security convoy. Though the state police have not confirmed on his visit, which will be first after Centre revoked state’s special status. National Security Advisor Ajit Doval who is already in the state monitoring the situation and sending security-related updates to the Centre. Curfew was reimposed in the state following turbulence on Friday when restrictions were eased. There were massive demonstrations after the Friday prayers which reportedly was retaliated with tear gas and pellets.

On one hand, the state has eased restrictions however, the prohibitory orders such as suspension of cellular network, internet services continue to be in place. The stakeholders in the state are either under house arrest or have been jailed. Some have been moved to Agra and Delhi jails as well. A total of 400 people including businessmen, politicians have been jailed and transferred to other jails.

Meanwhile, Army chief General Bipin Rawat today said that everything was fine between the security forces and Kashmiris and that the two had good terms with each other. He added that the forces hoped to interact with locals without guns soon. Yesterday a Pakistan journalist had claimed that both Jammu and Kashmir police and CRPF were at loggerheads which resulted in the former killing five VRPF officials after they refused entry to a pregnant woman because she did not have the curfew pass. Denying the claim, CRPK and state police said the journalist was making a false claim.

For all the latest National News, download NewsX App
