Protest over Guru Ravidas Delhi mandir demolition: All you need to know about the Dalit Ravidassia community

The Ravidassia community are followers of medieval Saint and Bhakti poet Ravidas.

Key Highlights Ravidas, a medieval poet and saint, was born in Varanasi to the ‘untouchable’ leather tanners caste. Among Ravidas’s moral and intellectual achievements was the conception of “Begampura”, a city that knows no sorrow. Ravidassias are a Dalit (Scheduled Caste) community who believe in the teachings and sayings of Guru Ravidas.

Dalit activist Chandrashekhar Azad and about 90 other people were arrested on Wednesday evening (August 21) after a protest in Delhi against the demolition of the Ravidas temple, which was built in honour of the 16th-century poet and saint.

Protesters damaged vehicles, and several people including policemen were injured. According to some reports, the police resorted to a lathi-charge.

The demolition of the temple on August 10 in south Delhi's Tughlakabad was carried out following Supreme Court orders.

But it triggered protests in various parts of Punjab, which has a substantial population of Dalits who are followers of Ravidas. Subsequently, the protests have spread to the national capital.

Many Dalits from the region believe that Guru Ravidas had visited the site on which the temple was located in the first decade of the 16th century when pre-Mughal Delhi was the seat of power of the Lodi dynasty.

The demolition, which was carried out by the Delhi Development Authority, has been criticised by several political parties including the Congress and the Shiromani Akali Dal. In fact, Punjab Chief Minister Amarinder Singh even set up a committee that includes ministers in his cabinet to deal with the evolving situation.

Who are the Ravidassias?

Ravidassias are a Dalit (Scheduled Caste) community who believe in the teachings and sayings of Guru Ravidas (1450-1520). Ravidas, a poet and saint, was born in Varanasi to the ‘untouchable’ leather tanners caste. But his brilliance and revolutionary philosophy made him transcend the boundaries of caste and class. One of his famous disciples was the saint, Mirabai.

Among Ravidas’s moral and intellectual achievements were the conception of “Begampura”, a city that knows no sorrow; and a society where caste and class have ceased to matter.

Clearly ahead of his times it is ironic that even within Dalits he is largely associated with the tanners (chamar) sub-caste. In his own lifetime, however, his unusually egalitarian and proto-Marxist views (centuries before Marx was born!) found resonance with people across castes. Mirabai, notably, was from a royal Rajput clan.

Besides Punjab, followers of Ravidas are today found predominantly in Haryana and Uttar Pradesh (especially the Varanasi belt).

Dalit paradox and the Dera phenomenon

Despite their significant numbers in Punjab, the Dalits of the state are not politically united, which has prevented the emergence of a powerful pan-Dalit party like the Bahujan Samaj Party in Uttar Pradesh. The reasons for this may be varied, including the absence of charismatic leadership amongst the Dalits similar to Kanshi Ram or Mayawati.

Punjab’s Dalit movement followed its own trajectory with the emergence of dozens of Deras, which have both courted controversy and become sites for expression of Dalit pride. As is inevitable in India, some of these Deras, which can be thought of as socio-religious institutions, have become politicised over the decades, and politicians of all stripes woo the heads of the prominent Deras to get a readymade vote bank. In such a situation, a pan-Punjab political consciousness has been muted among Dalits, at least when it comes to electoral politics.

Contested histories

Many Dalits who identify themselves as followers of Ravidas became part of the larger Sikh identity over the centuries. The community also has several gurdwaras in India and abroad. However, they have also maintained their distinctive religious beliefs. This has, at times, led to friction.

Ten years ago, violence broke out in Punjab and Haryana after a leader of the Ravidassias was killed in Austria during clashes with a mainstream Sikh group.

In more recent years, the Dera Sachkhand Ballan based in Punjab’s Jalandhar is seen as spearheading the movement for an independent religious identity for Ravidassia followers. Having gained economic clout, the community has also built Sant Ravidas temples in many parts of north India.

The BJP-led NDA may want to move quickly to assuage sentiments of the community after the demolition of their temple in Delhi. Meanwhile, the incident could prove to be a trigger for Dalit political consolidation in the region that has so far been hard to come by.
