Former Pakistan minister claims of ‘Indian forces’ attack in Kashmir’; J&K Police calls out fakery

Security forces in Kashmir Valley | Photo Credit: AP

Srinagar: Irked over India's move to scrap Kashmir's special status, Pakistan continued to peddle lies on Tuesday and claimed that the Indian Army had used gunship helicopters in the state. Former Pakistan interior minister Rehman Malik claimed on Twitter that the Indian Army had attacked villages in Jammu and Kashmir using gunship helicopters.

He suggested on the social network that brave Kashmiris had sent the videos of the attacks, further claiming that dozens had been killed.

The Pakistani Senator called on US President Donald Trump, the United Nations and other human rights bodies to take notice of the alleged attacks.

Reacting to the tweets, the Jammu and Kashmir Police on Twitter rebutted the allegations and described the content as “malicious”. “This malicious content is strongly rebutted. We have taken up the matter with @TwitterSupport,” the J&K Police wrote on its official handle.

Just yesterday, the Indian security forces had called out Pakistan's propaganda on Kashmir and exposed its fakery.

A verified Twitter user had yesterday claimed of a rift among the Indian forces in Kashmir. WSK @WajSKhan had tweeted to claim that a Muslim Kashmiri cop had killed five CRPF personnel after they did not allow a pregnant woman to cross a checkpoint.

This malicious content is strongly rebutted.We have taken up matter with @TwitterSupport . https://t.co/oq6alFS3nT — J&K Police (@JmuKmrPolice) August 13, 2019

“Rifts emerging among Indian security forces deployed in #Kashmir. A Muslim Kashmiri policeman shot & killed five Indian CRPF personnel in a ‘blue on blue’ attack after they refused to let a pregnant woman by because she didn’t have a curfew pass. Things on edge since that attack,” the post on the verified Twitter handle read.

The security forces were quick to rebut the claim and asserted that all was well.

The CRPF tweeted: “The malicious content of this tweet is absolutely baseless and untrue. As always, all the security forces of India are working with coordination and bonhomie. Patriotism and our tricolour lie at the core of our hearts and existence, even when the colour of our uniforms may differ.”

The Kashmir Zone Police also slammed the malicious content and called it fake.

“This malicious content is strongly rebutted. The matter has been taken up with @TwitterSupport for action,” it tweeted.

The Pakistani propaganda on Kashmir has intensified in the wake of the Indian government's move to scrap Article 370 and bifurcate Jammu and Kashmir into two Union Territories.
