Cast announced for A Suitable Boy adaptation

The first screen adaptation of Vikram Seth’s classic novel, A Suitable Boy, for BBC One is to shortly begin filming in India.





A Suitable Boy tells the story of university student Lata; coming of age in North India in 1951 at the same time as the country is carving out its own identity as an independent nation and is about to go to the polls for its first democratic general election. It charts the fortunes of four large families and explores India and its culture at a crucial point in its history. Lata’s mother is determined to find her a husband — a suitable boy — but Lata, torn between family duty and the attraction of romance, embarks on her own, epic journey of love and self-discovery.Adapted by Andrew Davies (Pride and Prejudice, War & Peace, Les Misérables), directed by Mira Nair (Monsoon Wedding, The Namesake, Queen of Katwe), and produced by Lookout Point, the new six-part drama will feature Bollywood actor Ishaan Khatter (Beyond the Clouds, Dhadak) and Tabu (The Namesake, Life of Pi, Andhadhun) alongside Tanya Maniktala (pictured) in the central role of Lata.A Suitable Boy was commissioned by Charlotte Moore, director of content, and Piers Wenger, controller of BBC Drama “It was with some anxiety that I agreed to my book being put on the screen, but I’m glad I did,” Seth noted. “With Andrew adapting and Mira directing, I feel that my story is in safe, yet inspiring hands. We all passionately believed that the series should be filmed in India with an Indian cast, and we have got great locations and wonderful actors. I am confident they will bring my characters brilliantly to life - and I hope they have a really good time doing so.”Adding his comment on the new drama, Davies remarked: “I am truly thrilled to be chosen by Vikram Seth to adapt his masterpiece for the screen... It has been a total joy to work on, and I hope that audiences will love it as much as I do.”Mira Nair added: “Vikram tells the story of a free India and our people with wit, clarity and love - I am deeply honoured to be the one bringing this intimate, epic tale of an unseen India to the world. Today, A Suitable Boy is timelier than ever. With a mix of legendary and cutting-edge actors from the subcontinent, shooting entirely on location in palaces, villages and streets across northern India, we will keep the history and dream of an alternate India alive.”
