The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Day 12: Crossing the Indo-Myanmar Friendship Bridge - The Moodie Davitt Report

The Moodie Davitt Roarport The Moodie Davitt Report is providing exclusive daily coverage of Wild Tiger’s Roar Trip, one of travel retail’s boldest CSR initiatives. Via phone and social media, we’ll be with Gautom Menon and Paul George V on every stretch of their epic 65-day road trip from Kerala to Cannes and be there to greet them on the French Riviera when they arrive on the eve of the TFWA World Exhibition. We are unlikely to be alone. Duty free retailers: If you’d like to meet Gautom and Paul along the way (see their destination course below) let us know at Martin@MoodieDavittReport.com. The team are particularly keen to meet duty free retailers in Myanman and Thailand, their next two country stops.

DAY 12

MYANMAR

The Roar Crew has arrived in Myanmar, having crossed into India’s eastern neighbour over the famous Indo-Myanmar Friendship Bridge (see video below).

This long-awaited land border crossing was opened amid great fanfare last August. The Indo-Myanmar Friendship Bridge is located at Manipur’s border town of Moreh, 110 km south of Imphal.

Website A Better India describes Moreh thus: “Located on the border of India and Myanmar, the sleepy town of Moreh in Manipur is unlike any other border town across the country.

“Besides being India’s gateway to Southeast Asia, Moreh stands as a testimony to a rich, cross-cultural heritage that isn’t just limited to language or attire but something that has deeply woven its influence into the way of life for people on both fronts.”

Wild Tiger co-pilots Gautom Menon and Paul George Vedanayagam made a quick stop-off at the Indian embassy; sampled some of Myanmar’s legendary cuisine; and got to see some of the country’s rich and diverse culture. We’ll bring you more on their experiences soon as the pair head towards Thailand and a meeting between Tiger power and King Power in Bangkok. The Roartrip continues.

##RoarTrip, #Roarforourtigers, #KeralatoCannes, #WildTigerFoundation #TigerConservation

HOW TO SUPPORT THE WILD TIGER ROARTRIP

Via the official website – www.roartrip.in

The donation page link is on the website, but anyone can donate directly at www.roartrip.in/donation or https://letzchange.org/projects/roar-trip-2019-an-awareness-drive-for-tiger-conservation

Please encourage your colleagues, friends and family to consider doing so.

En route to Cannes, the daring duo will be meeting up with other travel retailers. Those wishing to ‘meet and greet’ them are encouraged to make contact. Yes, Gautom will be checking his email: gautom@wildtiger.in

EARLIER ON THE WILD TIGER ROARTRIP…

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Days 9-11: “For their tomorrow, we gave our today”

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Days 7 & 8: The Tigers Who Came to Tea

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Days 5 & 6: Wild Tigers become Bengal Tigers

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Days 4 & 5: The team earn their stripes but not a tiger in sight

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Day 3: High times in Hyderabad

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Day 2: Wild Tiger roars into Dufry Bengaluru

The Moodie Davitt ‘Roarport’ Day 1: 65-day tiger conservation brand odyssey waved off in ‘spec-cat-ular’ style

#RoarTrip, #Roarforourtigers, #KeralatoCannes, #WildTigerFoundation #TigerConservation

ABOUT WILD TIGER RUM: Kerala-based Wild Tiger is India’s first rum to be produced from a blend of molasses and cane spirit. The rum’s velvet tiger print stripe packaging reflects the fact that no two tigers share the same stripe pattern – so the stripe design of the sleeve has been designed and cut to ensure that no two bottles are alike.Wild Tiger made its Indian travel retail debut in February 2016 and is now available in 53 countries.

ABOUT WILD TIGER FOUNDATION (WTF): Wild Tiger Foundation is a CSR initiative by Wild Tiger Rum, which contributes 10% of its profits to the cause. It is a registered non-profit organisation headquartered in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India that focuses on the conservation of the tiger and its habitat by raising funds and creating awareness. It was founded in 2015 by drinks entrepreneur Gautom Menon and Coimbatore-based businessman Suprej Venkat.

The primary focus is the conservation of tigers and their habitats within the state of Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu, specifically Parambikulam Tiger Reserve in Kerala and Sathyamangalam Tiger Reserve in Tamil Nadu. Wild Tiger Foundation acts as an influencer and an enabler.India had around 100,000 tigers in the mid-19th century. Today it has around 2,200, underlining the urgency of the conservation cause.
