Women have a lot to offer in leadership roles

Women have a lot to offer in leadership roles

This is in response to the opinion article Women leaders can make a difference in a man's world (KT, August 13). Despite the generalised notion that politics is not a cup of tea for women and that they can't match the calibre of men, many women politicians have shown and proven that they can be as good as their male counterparts, and even better.

Whether it was former chief minister of Delhi, late Sheila Dikshit, India's former External Affairs minister, late Sushma Swaraj, or New Zealand's Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, they have done stellar work in their respective roles, and shown how responsibilities even in the highest political offices can be undertaken by showing empathy and kindness. These women have defended human values and showed how importance can and should be given to people and their needs.

The barbarity of Christchurch shooting shocked the world. An attack of such nature could have flared violence among communities, but prime minister Ardern handled the situation very well.

The world empathised with the country and its loss as pictures of Ardern clad in black clothes with head covered in solidarity with the community flashed in newspapers and news channels across the world. We got to see the prime minister's magnanimous side, and her strong resolve to use the political office to send the right message to people. She took hard political decisions and has earned respect of all.

Indian politicians Sheila Dikshit and Sushma Swaraj, too, will be fondly remembered for their role in politics. Dikshit gave a total facelift to Delhi during her reign and Sushma Swaraj donned many hats and served people with integrity and earnestness. These women are inspiration to many and proof of how women can make a difference to their roles with their innate feminine qualities.

The stereotypical statement that women cannot match the political abilities of men is not correct.

They are effective, hard-working, and walk that extra mile to be people's persons. -Jayashree Kulkarni, Australia


