Legal action likely against hotel owners near Hampi for ignoring flood warning

Flood water recedes in Hampi

BENGALURU/HUBBALLI: After a coordinated operation rescued over 500 tourists stranded at Virupapura Gadde (island) near the Hampi heritage site, Karnataka government has decided to initiate legal action against owners of the hotels and resorts operating in the island for ignoring their flood alert warning."We will initiate action against owners of hotels and guest houses in the island for ignoring our warning to vacate their guests and putting their lives at a risk,” said Koppal deputy commissioner C Sunilkumar.The DC said he is also contemplating to recover the fees paid to the NDRF teams from the erring hoteliers. According to official sources, a platoon of NDRF team is paid Rs 40,000 per day.The hoteliers also reportedly misled the authorities on the number of tourists stuck in the island. “They told us there are about 200 tourists including four to five foreigners. But there were over 450 tourists,” Sunil Kumar said. The administration has vacated the entire island including the hotliers and their staff.There are 16 authorised hotels in the island including some illegal ones. Fearing losses, the hoteliers had ignored the flood warning issued by the district administration and did not ask the guests to leave.About 544 tourists including 27 foreign nationals were stranded after flash floods triggered from Tunghabhdra entered the island located in Koppal district, about 350 km from Bengaluru.The district administration had issued an alert on Saturday anticipating heavy discharge into the river from TB Dam in Hospet following heavy rains in Shivamogga district. But the hotliers neglected the alert and reportedly persuaded tourists to stay put in the island assuring them that they would be safely taken to safer places in case there were floods."Since it was a weekend, they didn’t want to lose business. They were aware that floods will come even then they admitted tourists into the island which is a grave mistake,” the DC said.The NDRF and other rescue teams had to brave inclement weather and swelling Tungabhadra river for two days to rescue the tourists. Five rescuers even had a miraculous escape when their boat capsized and were swept away in the river.The life in historical Hampi town returned to normalcy on Tuesday with flood water receding to a great extent. The water level in Tungabhadra which was in spate on Monday, also receded. Located on the south bank of the Tungabhadra, the Unesco recognised heritage site, dotted with ruins and monuments from the 14th century Vijayanagara empire, including the 7th century Virupaksha temple, was inundated after the authorities released excess water from the nearby dam. But, police did not allow the tourists to enter on Tuesday as a precautionary measure.
