Priyanka Gandhi says cases against Sonbhadra tribals should be withdrawn

Congress leader Priyanka Gandhi Vadra Tuesday met the Sonbhadra massacre victims' families and vowed to stand with them till they get back the land over which the clash took place. (Photo: Twitter/IYC_UPEast)

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra met the families of those who were killed in the Sonbhadra massacre at the Umbha village on Tuesday.

She demanded that the Yogi Adityanath government should withdraw cases against the victims, who, according to her, were unnecessarily framed.

Speaking to media after meeting the victims' families, Priyanka Gandhi said "It is very clear that the villagers in Umbha were exploited. Cases were registered against them. Some of them were booked under the Gunda Act. The government must withdraw these cases because they were falsely booked."

A Sonbhadra woman, Santia Devi, who was named in a case spoke to India Today TV and said, "A case was registered against me for working on the land, which according to the administration was disputed. We have not indulged in any illegal activity. Our ancestors were also working on this land. The government should withdraw cases registered against us and should give possession of the land promised to us."

Another woman, Anita said "I was also booked for working on the land in our village. A case was filed against many villagers before the violence took place. Our land is the only source of income which we cannot give to anyone."

Another villager Bansilal Gond asked the UP government to ensure justice. "The village pradhan Yagya Dutt who is the main accused misused his power to frame us in April this year. We have lost our relatives in the violence that took place in the village last month. The government promised 10 bigha land to every deceased family and 5 bigha land to those who have sustained injuries. We want immediate possession of land so that there is no hurdle in future. UP CM also promised an inter-college which should be carefully constructed soon" he said.

Uttar Pradesh CM Yogi Adityanath, on July 21, met the families of 10 Gond tribals killed in Sonbhadra massacre and promised a slew of steps to help the community, alleging that "sin" committed during the Congress rule was responsible for the present situation.

More than 30 people including the main accused and village pradhan Yagya Dutt have been arrested in the case by the police so far.

Priyanka Gandhi drove down to the village in Sonbhadra district after landing at Varanasi airport, about 100 km away. During the 90-minute visit, she sat down on the ground, talking with the bereaved families and other local people.

She asked them about the steps taken by the BJP government in the state, particularly after the July 17 killings.

On July 19, she was detained overnight at Chunar by Mirzapur administration when she insisted on travelling ahead to Sonbhadra. The administration had then said her visit will create a law and order problems.
