John Abraham's Batla House cleared for August 15 release

Delhi High Court

Nikkhil Advani

battle

Mirror Exclusive Photos: From Ranbir Kapoor, Kajol, Rani to Swara Bhasker, Nawazuddin Siddiqui, Bollywood celebs spotted in the city 1 45 Give it a Spin Shraddha Kapoor seen at a studio in Goregaon after a dance show. The actress who had a shaky start to 2019 in spite of a big-budget film like Saaho, recovered somewhat later in the year with Nitesh Tiwari's ensemble cast project, Chhichhore. 2020 begins with Remo D'Souza's Street Dancer where she is paired with Varun Dhawan. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/ BCCL Tara Sutaria enjoys her free time Bollywood actress Tara Sutaria was spotted enjoying some free time at a high-end hotel in Juhu. After back-to-back interaction with media for her upcoming film Marjaavaan, the one film old actress was seen chatting with someone on her phone. Tara will be seen sharing screen space with Sidharth Malhotra and Rietish Deshmukh in the film. Photo by Satyajit Desai/BCCL Kajol caught in a happy mood at work Bollywood actress Kajol was her bubbly self during a shoot at a film studio in Mumbai. The actress is seen giggling while her teammates also had a smile on their face.Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Rakul Preet strikes a pose! Rakul Preet strikes a pose during a photoshoot at Filmistaan studio in Goregaon. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Emraan Hashmi spotted shooting at Kamalistan studio Bollywood actor Emraan Hashmi was spotted shooting at Kamalistan studio for an upcoming film. It seems like that the actor will be playing a cop as he was seen donning a police uniform. The makers finished his look with a moustache and formal watch. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Katrina Kaif adds some colour on her lips before product launch Katrina Kaif happily posed for our camera person as she applied a last-minute touch-up before launching her beauty product. Katrina looked beautiful in a bright yellow off-shoulder dress. Photo by Satyajit Desai/BCCL Sharad Kelkar spotted shooting Laxmmi Bomb in Goregaon TV actor Sharad Kelkar was spotted at Filmistan studio in Goregaon during the shoot of Akshay Kumar-starrer Laxmmi Bomb. Sharad was seen wearing a red saree. His hair was neatly tied into a bun and the makers completed his look with some matching jewellery and a big red bindi. It seems like Sharad took a small smoke break on the sets. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Bhumi, Taapsee caught in a candid moment Taapsee Pannu and Bhumi Pednekar are presently on a promotional spree for their upcoming film Saand Ki Aankh. While the actresses were having a fun time, our camera person clicked a candid shot. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Make way for Varun Dhawan Bollywood actor Varun Dhawan was spotted shooting on a busy road in Andheri. He was seen riding a scooter while being guarded by the crew members of the film. The actor will be seen next in David Dhawan's Coolie No 1 remake, which also features Sara Ali Khan. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Make way for Varun Dhawan Bollywood actor Varun Dhawan was spotted shooting on a busy road in Andheri. He was seen riding a scooter while being guarded by the crew members of the film. The actor will be seen next in David Dhawan's Coolie No 1 remake, which also features Sara Ali Khan. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL

Taapsee Pannu and Bhumi Pednekar share a candid moment Taapsee Pannu and Bhumi Pednekar have made their position strong in Bollywood with their choices of films. Now, the two powerhouse actresses will be sharing screen space for the first time with Tushar Hiranandani's Saand Ki Aankh. The actresses are busy promoting their film these days with the biopic on sharpshooter Chandro Tomar and Prakashi Tomar slated to release this Diwali. Our camera person found Taapsee and Bhumi in a fit of giggles at Filmistan studio in Goregaon. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL B-Town ladies having some fun Bollywood actresses Taapsee Pannu and Bhumi Pednekar are on a promotional spree for their upcoming film Saand Ki Aankh. The actresses, who will play Prakashi Tomar and Chandro Tomar respectively, was spotted with choreographer-filmmaker Farah Khan at Filmistan studio in Goregaon. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Aishwarya gives 'jadu ki jhappi' to a fan Aishwarya Rai Bachchan spreads love everywhere she goes. The former Miss World recently was spotted at an event for the film Maleficent: Mistress of Evil. She will be the voice of Angela Jolie's character - Maleficent in the Hindi version of the film. Our camera person spotted her hugging a fan at the event and we are drooling over it. Photo by Satyajit Desai/BCCL Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor spotted in Andheri Tiger Shroff and Shraddha Kapoor were spotted shooting for their next film - Baaghi 3 in Andheri. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Yes, it's RK Who would have thought we will get to see Ranbir Kapoor strike a rustic, desi look. But here he is, ready to take charge. Mirror photographer Raju Shelar caught RK's new look as he was shooting for an upcoming project in the city. Honorary Doctorate for Asha tai Asha Bhosle was yesterday conferred with an Honorary Doctorate by Manchester’s University of Salford for being an inspiration across generations. In 2011, she made a mark for herself in the Guinness Book of World Records as the most recorded artist in music history. At home, Asha Bhosle has been honoured with the Dadasaheb Phalke Award in 2000 and the Padma Vibhushan, the second highest civilian honour, in 2008. Photo by Sachin Haralkar/ BCCL 1000 watt smiles Cousins Rani Mukherji and Kajol were all decked up on Ashtami to celebrate Durga Puja at their family pandal in Mumbai. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ BCCL Alia Bhatt, Aditya Roy Kapur spotted in Bandra Alia Bhatt and Aditya Roy Kapur were spotted in Bandra, shooting for their upcoming film. Photo: Gurujeet Singh Devgun/BCCL Mind It! Rajinikanth plays it cool before resuming the shoot for his film. Rajini's next film, Darbar, also stars Nayanthara. The film shooting was moved from Jaipur to Mumbai. Darbar will be Thalaivar's 167th film and is expected to release next Pongal. It is the first collaboration between director AR Murugadoss and Rajinikanth. What's more, Rajini will be seen in police uniform after a gap of 25 years. The last time he played the role of a cop was in Pandian, that released in 1992. Photo by Raju Shelar/ BCCL Sushmita Sen goes on a date with boyfriend Rohman Shawl Bollywood actress and mother of two girls, Sushmita Sen, was spotted outside a restaurant in Bandra with her boyfriend Rohman Shawl. The couple were casually dressed and seemed to be engrossed in a conversation. Photo by Satyajit Desai/BCCL Guess who Bhumi Pednekar steps into a new avatar for her upcoming film. Photo: Raju Shelar/BCCL Kajol, Mickey Contractor spotted in Goregaon Bong beauty Kajol was papped with makeup artist and friend Mickey Contractor in Goregaon on Monday. Our photojournalist caught them enjoying at a Filmistan studio in Goregaon. Kajol was present for an ad shoot. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Dan Bilzerian is in town! International celebrity Dan Bilzerian has arrived in India for the first time. He was spotted at Taj Lands End, Mumbai on Thursday. Photo: Satish Malavade/BCCL Clean sweep Virat Kohli enjoyed every bit of limelight at an ad shoot in Filmcity yesterday. Photo: Raju Shelar Cool and Casual Tiger Shroff was spotted at a suburban studio on Monday. Sporting a white tee and red tracks, he looked as casual and comfortable as can be. The actor, who was last seen in Student of the Year 2, opposite new-comers Ananya Panday and Tara Sutaria has another big action film scheduled for release this year and another for 2020. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/ BCCL Sudeep flaunts his chiselled body South sensation Sudeep was recently spotted in Mumbai. Sudeep was snapped flaunting his perfectly chiselled body and a bruised face. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL No rainy day for Prabhudheva Filmmaker Prabhudheva was recently spotted in the city and was snapped by our camera person at a studio in Goregaon. It looks like there's no rainy day for the Dabangg 3-helmer as he made his way to work amidst rains. His spot boy carefully held an umbrella so he doesn't get drenched in the rains.

Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Striking a pose The pinned tweet on Swara Bhasker's Twitter reads "Basically, if I’m not involved in a #twittercontroversy once a week, assume I’m dead!!!" #realisation. She's peppered it with plenty of emojis too. Swara Bhasker is among the few in Bollywood who is not afraid to take a stand and stand her ground and for it, she has also been at the receiving end of vicious abuse on social media. Mirror photographer Nilesh Wairkar caught her striking a pose for a shoot in Mumbai. A walk in the park Actor Varun Dhawan snapped during a shoot in Goregaon on Tuesday. On the big screen, Varun Dhawan's next film scheduled for release is Street Dancer that is slotted for November 8, 2019. Next year, he will be seen in papa David Dhawan's Coolie No.1 remake opposite Sara Ali Khan. The film, slated to release on May 1, 2020, will be David Dhawan's 45th film. Photo by Raju Shelar/ BCCL Tongue-in-cheek Kangana Ranaut had an unusual pose for the photographers at a fashion event in the city on Sunday. Photo: Satyajit Desai/BCCL Always in India blue MS Dhoni takes a break during an ad shoot at Filmistan Studio yesterday. Dhoni, who holds the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in the Indian Army, returned from Srinagar on August 15, where he was serving his Parachute regiment. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/ BCCL Ain't I happy Ayushmann Khurrana during a photo shoot for his upcoming film at Filmistan Studio. Photo: Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Being a diva 'Mission Mangal' star Vidya Balan was seen receiving some help ahead of an event at JW Marriot on Wednesday.

The actress currently is on a promotional spree for the movie along with the remaining star cast Sonakshi Sinha, Akshay Kumar, Kriti Kulhari and others.

Balan will soon be seen in Shakuntala Devi biopic. Photo by Satyajit Desai/BCCL Sharing stories Bollywood superstar Amitabh Bachchan at the launch and press conference was also seen interacting with fans. Sharing how he got to be the host of Kaun Banega Crorepati, Bachchan said, "It was just a coincidence. The channel came about with this idea. Circumstances were such that everyone felt I should not go there especially people from my home but I just felt that this was something new."

It's his 10th season and he loves to return to the show due to the contestants, their stories and aspirations, Bachchan said. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL

Entry of the megastar Amitabh Bachchan, who has become synonymous with the game show Kaun Banega Crorepati, is all set to return to the small screen this August 19. At the press conference, the popular host revealed that Aishwarya Rai Bachchan and Shweta Nanda like playing Kaun Banega Crorepati at home. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL

Mahesh Babu in Town South actor Mahesh Babu, who celebrated his 44th birthday two days, was spotted at Goregaon Filmistan studio for an ad shoot yesterday with his wife Namrata Shirodkar. The actor was also seen taking photos with fans. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL

On field The heartthrob of the young generation was seen full pumped up during the charity match between All stars Football Club vs Dream X1. The game ended with ASFC winning 4-1. Ahan Shetty, Ranbir Kapoor and Antoni Pecora scoring a brace to seal the game. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Leading the tribe Ranbir Kapoor was seen motivating his teammates during warm-up before the Celebrity Football Match at Juhu. Along with Ranbir, Ahan Shetty was also spotted as was Aparshakti Khurana. Photo by Raju Shelar/BCCL Smiling on Kiara Advani appears oblivious to a fan’s attempts at catching her attention. The actress has a slew of projects coming up. While Good News is expected to release at the end of the year, she has Shershah, based on Capt Vikram Batra's valour in India's win in the Kargil War and Laxmmi Bomb and Indu ki Jawaani releasing in 2020. Photo by Nilesh Wairkar/BCCL Sanjay Dutt turns 60! Sanjay Dutt turned 60 on July 29. He celebrated his birthday in the company of his family and close friends. Dutt is all set to play the antagonist Adheera in KGF: Chapter 2. Photo by Satyajit Desai/ BCCL Elegant drapes Actor Kajal Aggarwal looks elegant draped in a beautiful silk saree. She was snapped at a Goregaon studio in Mumbai. We are not sure if she's heard of the #TwitterSaree trend, but she fits right in. Photo by Raju Shelar/ BCCL Pankaj Uddhas takes his canine friends for a morning walk Ghazal maestro Pankaj Uddhas takes his dogs for a stroll outside his Altamount Road residence in South Mumbai. Photo by Satish Malavade/ BCCL Arjun Rampal, Gabriella leave hospital with newborn Arjun Rampal and Gabriella Demetriades are all smiles as they leave a Mumbai hospital with their son. Arjun Rampal's daughters Mahikaa and Myra were by their father's side when the little one was born on Thursday, as were Gabriella's parents. Photo by Gurujeet Singh Devgun Heading home with baby Arjun Rampal's partner Gabriella Demetriades was discharged from hospital on Sunday, July 21. She gave birth to a son on July 18 and naturally, daddy dearest is over the moon. Arjun and Gabriella took to Instagram to post a picture of a pregnant Gabrielle in April this year with Arjun writing, "Blessed to have you and start all over again. Thank you baby for this baby." But it looks like his fans will have to wait a little longer to get a glimpse of the newborn. Photo by Gurujeet Singh Devgun Nawazuddin Siddiqui's Kurta Tales Our photographer Raju Shelar snapped this photo of actor Nawazuddin Siddiqui on Sunday where he was shooting at Film City.

After 48 hours I have started to breathe again,” says, minutes after exiting the Delhi High Court courtroom. His upcoming film, which is based on the Batla House encounter, was cleared after a hearing which lasted almost all of Tuesday. “For a while it was touch and go but our counsel, senior advocate Neeraj Kishan Kaul, put up credible arguments and after reading the original judgement in its entirety, the judge agreed that the film is completely based on this judgement which is in the public domain,” added the producer-director.The Batla House encounter took place on September 19, 2008, when a team of the Delhi Police Special Cell raided a flat in Batla House in Delhi’s Jamia Nagar following a tip-off that terrorists allegedly involved in the September 13 serial blasts in the national capital were holed up there. During the raid, a decorated police officer, Inspector MC Sharma, was killed.An accused in the case, Aziz Khan aka Junaid, moved the High Court last Friday asking for a stay on the release, arguing that the film’s posters and trailers depict the petitioners as terrorists and guilty of the crimes they are accused of, and so would adversely affect his trial which is on in a lower court. Apart from Khan, Shahzad Ahmed, who has been sentenced to life imprisonment in the case and who has challenged the verdict in the High Court, was also a petitioner in the matter. He contended that the film shows a link between the serial bomb blasts and the encounter and would therefore, prejudicially affect the trial in both the cases.The petition came up for hearing before Justice Vibhu Bakhru, who ordered a special screening of the film in the High Court on Monday. On Tuesday, he asked for a couple of scenes to be reworked. In one, John’s (Abraham, who plays DCP Sanjeev Kumar Yadav) character interrogates one of the students who insists that in the Holy Quran it is said that they should raise their voice against atrocities, after which they go on to discuss their differing ideologies. In the other scene, the boys were shown to be making explosives. “Even before he asked, I had voluntarily made some changes and toned down these scenes and when we volunteered this information, the judge was pleased, realising that we were not out to simply provoke but had taken pains to tell the story from three points of view: That of the Delhi cops, the students and the court’s judgement,” says Nikkhil.Now, they must carry a three-minute disclaimer, in Hindi and English, stating that the film is a work of fiction. “However, the judge has ordered the Censor Board of Film Certification (CBFC) to not waste time on another screening after the changes are incorporated and treat this judgement to clear the film for screening. So, after a last-minute legal, Batla House will keep its Independence Day date with the theatres.
