Pakistan asks UN Security Council to meet over Kashmir

Pakistan on Tuesday called for the United Nations Security Council to meet over India's decision to remove the special autonomous status of the disputed Kashmir region.

Last week, India's Hindu-nationalist-led government abolished the autonomous status of the Indian-controlled section of Kashmir, a Himalayan region that has been claimed in its entirety by both India and Pakistan since partition in 1947. Since the decision, telephone lines, internet and television networks have been blocked and there are restrictions on movement and assembly.

Read more: Kashmir lockdown — an uneasy calm prevails

In a letter to the UN, Pakistani Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Quereshi denounced "recent aggressive actions" by India, saying they "willfully undermine the internationally recognized disputed status of Jammu and Kashmir." He also accused India of "racist ideology" aimed at turning its part of Kashmir from a Muslim-majority into a Hindu-majority territory.

"The Indian actions on August 5, 2019 have opened the way for realization of this fascist policy objective," Quereshi wrote.

"Pakistan will not provoke a conflict. But India should not mistake our restraint for weakness," he continued. "If India chooses to resort again to the use of force, Pakistan will be obliged to respond, in self defense, with all its capabilities."

He said the Security Council had an obligation "to prevent the recurrence of another Srebrenica and Rwanda," referencing the genocides in Srebrenica, Bosnia, in 1995 and Rwanda in 1994.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price An unprecedented danger? On February 27, Pakistan's military said that it had shot down two Indian fighter jets over disputed Kashmir. A Pakistani military spokesman said the jets were shot down after they'd entered Pakistani airspace. It is the first time in history that two nuclear-armed powers have conducted air strikes against each other.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price India drops bombs inside Pakistan The Pakistani military has released this image to show that Indian warplanes struck inside Pakistani territory for the first time since the countries went to war in 1971. India said the air strike was in response to a recent suicide attack on Indian troops based in Jammu and Kashmir. Pakistan said there were no casualties and that its airforce repelled India's aircraft.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price No military solution Some Indian civil society members believe New Delhi cannot exonerate itself from responsibility by accusing Islamabad of creating unrest in the Kashmir valley. A number of rights organizations demand that Prime Minister Narendra Modi's government reduce the number of troops in Kashmir and let the people decide their fate.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price No end to the violence On February 14, at least 41 Indian paramilitary police were killed in a suicide bombing near the capital of India-administered Kashmir. The Pakistan-based Jihadi group, Jaish-e-Mohammad, claimed responsibility. The attack, the worst on Indian troops since the insurgency in Kashmir began in 1989, spiked tensions and triggered fears of an armed confrontation between the two nuclear-armed powers.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price A bitter conflict Since 1989, Muslim insurgents have been fighting Indian forces in the Indian-administered part of Kashmir - a region of 12 million people, about 70 percent of whom are Muslim. India and Pakistan have fought two of their three wars since independence in 1947 over Kashmir, which they both claim in full but rule in part.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price India strikes down a militant rebellion In October 2016, the Indian military has launched an offensive against armed rebels in Kashmir, surrounding at least 20 villages in Shopian district. New Delhi accused Islamabad of backing the militants, who cross over the Pakistani-Indian "Line of Control" and launch attacks on India's paramilitary forces.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price Death of a Kashmiri separatist The security situation in the Indian part of Kashmir deteriorated after the killing of Burhan Wani, a young separatist leader, in July 2016. Protests against Indian rule and clashes between separatists and soldiers have claimed hundreds of lives since then.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price The Uri attack In September 2016, Islamist militants killed at least 17 Indian soldiers and wounded 30 in India-administered Kashmir. The Indian army said the rebels had infiltrated the Indian part of Kashmir from Pakistan, with initial investigations suggesting that the militants belonged to the Pakistan-based Jaish-e-Mohammad group, which has been active in Kashmir for over a decade.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price Rights violations Indian authorities banned a number of social media websites in Kashmir after video clips showing troops committing grave human rights violations went viral on the Internet. One such video that showed a Kashmiri protester tied to an Indian army jeep — apparently as a human shield — generated outrage on social media.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price Demilitarization of Kashmir Those in favor of an independent Kashmir want Pakistan and India to step aside and let the Kashmiri people decide their future. "It is time India and Pakistan announce the timetable for withdrawal of their forces from the portions they control and hold an internationally supervised referendum," Toqeer Gilani, the president of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front in Pakistani Kashmir, told DW.

India-Pakistan rivalry: Kashmiris pay a high price No chance for secession But most Kashmir observers don't see it happening in the near future. They say that while the Indian strategy to deal strictly with militants and separatists in Kashmir has partly worked out, sooner or later New Delhi will have to find a political solution to the crisis. Secession, they say, does not stand a chance. Author: Shamil Shams



China in support

Poland currently holds the rotating presidency of the Security Council for the month of August. Polish Foreign Minister Jacek Czaputowicz confirmed to reporters at the UN on Tuesday that the council had received the letter, saying it "will discuss that issue and take a proper decision."

"Poland believes that this can only be resolved by peaceful means and ... we are in favor of dialogue between Pakistan and India to sort out the differences," he said. "Strained relations between India and Pakistan negatively affect the whole South Asia region and may lead to serious political, security and economic difference."

It was not clear whether the Security Council would respond to the request or whether a member of the 15-member body would also need to make a request. Pakistan said on Saturday that it had China's support for the move.

Read more: How far will China go to support Pakistan's position on Kashmir?

After British colonial rule ended in 1947, India and Pakistan fought their first war over control of Kashmir, whose population is mainly Muslim. The UN brokered a cease-fire in 1948 that left Kashmir divided, a resolution that came with the promise of a UN-sponsored plebiscite on its "final disposition" that has yet to be held.

The UN Security Council adopted several other resolutions over Kashmir in the 1950s, including one that calls upon both sides to "refrain from making any statements and from doing or causing to be done or permitting any acts which might aggravate the situation."

Watch video 03:07 Delhi: Hundreds rally against India's Kashmir policy

dv/se (AP, Reuters)

DW sends out a daily selection of hard news and quality feature journalism. Sign up here.
