Air tickets, exam slips of locals to be treated as curfew passes

NEW DELHI | SRINAGAR: The J&K administration has decided to treat air tickets of locals to and from Srinagar as curfew passes, a senior Union home ministry official has said. Similarly, students who plan to appear for a competitive exam can use the roll number slip as a curfew pass. Students and others willing to visit their families in the Valley will be allowed to do so. Tickets of locals who leave the state would also be considered as curfew passes.The state administration said it would phase out restrictions on the movement of people in the Valley, while claiming that normalcy has been restored in the Jammu division. Government spokesperson Rohit Kansal said in Srinagar that the decision to ease restrictions was taken after an assessment by local authorities of the situation prevailing in various parts of the Valley. Kansal also announced there was no shortage of medicines, including life-saving drugs, in any part of the Valley. Medical services are being provided without hindrance. He said 13,500 patients were treated in out-patient departments of government hospitals. The traffic flow on the national highway is smooth and air operations are normal, officials said.The administration also announced the first global investors’ summit in Jammu, Kashmir and Ladakh in October, even as restrictions and communication blockade continued on the second day of Eid . “We are focused on investment, employment and prosperity. This will the first global investors’ summit to be held in this region,” Kansal said.The MHA official said life in J&K is not as bad as it was during the shutdowns imposed by the Hurriyat. “Compare the loss of lives and violence (when protests erupted after Burhan Wani’s killing in 2016). The preventive action taken by the state is to minimise violence,” the official said. The 2016 agitation led to killing of over 119 and pellet injuries to nearly 16,000 locals. Security forces also gunned down over 600 militants, locals and foreigners, from 2016 to 2019.When asked how long the communication blockade and restrictions would continue, the MHA official said: “The situation is improving every day but the decisions are taken locally, depending on the prevailing situation. The restrictions are a trade-off between inconvenience and loss of lives. Some people are trying to instigate and provoke. We have to choose between allowing free run to such elements or leave it to the judgment of the local administration. We do not want anyone harmed due to any violent incident.”Kansal said the administration was conscious of the hardships people were facing because of the restrictions on movement and communication blockade. Minor protests were reported from some parts of Srinagar.Kansal did not give figures of number of arrests in the last nine days after Article 370 was made ineffective.On the release of former CMs Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti, the official said: “The release or detention of a political person is decided by the state administration.”
