PM Inaugurates Dynamic Facade Lighting in Parliament House complex



AMN / New Delhi



The Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Tuesday inaugurated the Dynamic Facade Lighting of the Parliament House Estate.

As India gets ready to mark Independence Day, PM Narendra Modi inaugurated the dynamic lighting facility at Parliament House Complex on the evening of Tuesday, 13th August, 2019. The Prime Minister also spent time witnessing some parts of the light show.

Such lighting has been done in important Government buildings such as North Block, South Block and Rashtrapati Bhavan. This lighting facility has become increasingly popular among citizens, encouraging more people to visit these landmarks in the heart of Delhi.



Lok Sabha Speaker Om Birla presided over the event. Among other dignitaries were Union Ministers, Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha Harivansh; Members of Parliament and former Members of Parliament.



There are 875 energy-efficient LED light fixtures (water and dust resistant), which have been installed in the Complex, allowing a significant reduction of power consumption. The long-lasting, excellent intensity LED bulbs are capable of creating 16 million colour combinations and the LED lighting is programmable and electronically controlled through computers.

The whole facade of Parliament House building has been covered for dynamic facade lighting and porches of Building Gates have also been highlighted.



The power consumption in the Parliament House, Parliament Library Building and Parliament House Annexe buildings will be about 26 KW, 15 KW and 12 KW respectively. The cost of permanent dynamic LED facade lighting is recoverable in 8.2 years, considering the expenditure involved in traditional temporary illumination. In case of permanent installations, lighting effects are available for all 365 days as compared to 10-15 days in case of temporary illumination.



The work of dynamic facade lighting of Parliament House, Parliament Library Building and Parliament House Annexe buildings was initiated on 20 July, 2019 by the Central Public Works Department (CPWD) and was completed in just 22 days. The innovative and inspirational lighting has been executed on the lines of surrounding areas of Parliament House Estate.



The dynamic lighting system, through intermittent multi-colour lights, creates an aura and enhances the grandeur of Parliament House.
