Death sentence commuted to 25 years imprisonment

high court

rape and murder convict

rigorous imprisonment

Bengaluru

Aggravating circumstances

Mitigating circumstances



Trial court had convicted accused for rape and murder of an eight-year-oldThehas commutted the death sentence imposed on ato 25 years in prison. The murder took place in 2012 and a trial court in Ramanagara had imposed the sentence in January 2018. On August 2, 2019, the High Court upheld the conviction but modified the sentence.The division bench comprising Justice Ravi Malimath and Justice HP Sandesh in their judgement said, “The sentence for a fixed period can be awarded in a case where the Court finds that life imprisonment would be a lower sentence and a death sentence is not warranted. Based on the facts and circumstances involved, we are of the considered view that the imposition of life sentence would not be adequate in as much as imposition of death sentence would be too excessive. Hence, we find it appropriate to sentence the accused to undergo rigorous life imprisonment with a minimum period of 25 years without remission.” The accused was also ordered to pay a fine of Rs 1 lakh.The accused will also sentenced to 10 yearsand a fine of Rs 10,000 for the offence of rape. Both sentences would run concurrently. Out of the fine amount, Rs 1 lakh would be paid to the mother of the deceased girl.The convicted person is Saleem, from. He was visiting his sister in Tavarekere police station on August 15, 2012. He asked a neighbourhood girl to bring him beedies. When she brought them, he raped her. To stop her from screaming, he smothered her to death.The Sessions Judge in Ramangara imposed the death sentence on Saleem considering it a “rarest of rare case.” The case came to the High Court for confirmation. The State Publlic Prosecutor HS Chandramouli argued that “It is a fit case to award death sentence. While imposing the death sentence, the (trial) Court has taken note of the mitigating circumstances and aggravating circumstnaces and in the present case, the accused has committed rape on eight-year-old girl in a cruel manner and injuries found on the deceased go to show that how he was cruel while commiting the rape on her and also murdered the said minor girl after committing rape on her.”The HC in its judgement considered the various Aggravating circumstances as well as the various Mitigating circumstances in the case. It noted that, “the death sentence must be imposed only when life imprisonment appears to be an altogether inappropriate punishment.” The HC was of the opinion that “the case on hand cannot be considered to be one of the rarest of the rare cases. Therefore, imposition of a sentence of death would not be appropriate. On the other hand, awarding a sentence of life imprisonment would not be adequate.”1 Committed rape on the girl aged about 8 years2 Committed murder by smothering3 Caused injuries, while committing rape, in a cruel manner in spite of the fact that the victim is minor4 Committed rape taking advantage that the victim was alone1 Case rests upon the circumstantial evidence2 There is no material available on record regarding previous criminal antecedents3 There is no material to show that he is threat to society4 There is no material to the effect that there is no chance of reformation
