Police reconstruct crime, hunt for murder weapon

Art director’s murder



art director

Virar police

crime

murder weapon

To plug loopholes and gaps in Shaikh’s statements, we are recreating the crime. This will help us understand what transpired that day, how the accused committed the crime —SPI Anil Dabde

To build a watertight case against Mohammad Furkan Shaikh, the main accused in the Goregaon-basedKrishnendu Chowdhury’s murder, theon Tuesday reconstructed the sequence of events that led to the killing. A team also searched for the knife that was reportedly used to stab the 37-year-old artist.Chowdhury went missing on August 7 after meeting Shaikh at his workshop in Bhati village, Madh. His body was found two days later in a nullah in Virar bearing multiple stab sounds in the neck and abdomen.The two often collaborated on weddings and other events. “Shaikh claimed that he had repaid Chowdhury Rs 5 lakh in instalments and an amount of Rs 85,000 was remaining,” said a police officer.According to sources, Shaikh, during his confession to the murder, told the police that the two had a heated argument after Chowdhury made several offensive comments against Shaikh’s wife including one where he said, “Pimp her out if you have to”. This angered Shaikh so much that in a fit of blinding rage, he picked up a sharp knife and stabbed Chowdhury several times. Two of Shaikh’s staffers Nazim Bada and Nazim Chota, both welders, were present in the workshop at the time of the killing, have been absconding since. The police believe they will be nabbed in a day or two.After the murder, Shaikh first dumped Chowdhury’s car in Charkop, Kandivali, and then used his own car to dispose of the body in Virar.“In order to plug loopholes and gaps in the version provided by Shaikh, we are recreating the sequence of events. This will help us understand what actually transpired that day. The exercise will help us understand how the accused committed the, their roles, positions, and their conduct after the crime,” said senior police inspector Anil Dabde of Virar police station.The need to recreate the crime arose after cops found several discrepancies in Shaikh’s statements.In his complaint, Shaikh said Chowdhury left his workshop at around 8:30 pm minutes after arguing with a woman over the phone regarding changes in the designs of a set. Call data records, however, showed that Chowdhury had not received any calls except from one of his employees in the time leading to his death.Additionally, without Shaikh giving up the location where he dumped the, the case hinges on circumstantial evidence.“We are yet to arrest the other two accused who are from his village. Shaikh was produced in court on Monday and has been remanded in police custody till August 22,” said a police officer from Virar police station.Chowdhury, who hailed from Kolkata, was unmarried and lived with three roommates in Malad’s Bangur Nagar area.
