AP Girl Pushed Into Flesh Trade In Delhi Escapes, Read Horror Story

Hyderabad: A couple was arrested on Thursday for allegedly selling a woman from Andhra Pradesh into flesh trade three-four months ago.

The woman had been working at the couple's Begumpur residence for the last couple of years, police said.

They brought the girl to New Delhi promising her a decent job. She was later sold at a brothel in GB road. Meanwhile, the woman also called her back in Begumpur for some days.

The woman left the house for some reason, during the period, the husband raped the young girl. The rape survivor narrated the ordeal to the accused woman once she was back, but she ignored the incident and imprisoned her at the house.

On Wednesday, the woman escaped from the house through the window by hanging a sari from it. She narrated the whole incident to a man named Virendra who took her to Kamla Market Police Station.

She filed a complaint and a case has been registered following which the couple was arrested.

Police also raided the brothel in GB Road. Meanwhile, the brothel owner is absconding.

In another case, a woman from Kolkata was rescued from a brothel in GB Road red light area in New Delhi. The 27-year-old woman worked with a leading company in Kolkata and came here after a man assured her of a better job opportunity. She was rescued on Thursday night after the Delhi Commission for Women received a complaint from her brother.

The woman was brought to the Kamla Market police station where an FIR was registered.

In another similar incident, Five people were arrested for allegedly abducting and raping a 20-year-old woman last month Rajasthan's Banswara district. They also said that the accused thrashed the victim's boyfriend before committing the crime.

The alleged incident took place in a village in the district on the night of July 13. The victim's boyfriend had also committed suicide following the incident.

Also Read: Sensational Rajasthan Banswara Abduction, Gangrape Case: 5 Arrested

Also Read: Home Guard Arrested For Cheating Asifabad Tribal Girl

Also Read: Woman Commits Suicide In Bellampalli
