Abhinandan Varthaman Vir Chakra: Know all about gallantry awards from Vir Chakra to Param Vir Chakra and more

Centre to honour IAF Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman with Vir Chakra on Independence Day | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights The Param Vir Chakra is India's highest military decoration, awarded for displaying distinguished acts of valour during wartime Maha Vir Chakra is the second-highest military decoration in India and is awarded for acts of conspicuous gallantry in the presence of the enemy, whether on land, at sea or in the air Vir Chakra is third in precedence in the wartime gallantry awards and is given for acts of bravery on the battlefield

Vir Chakra, the country's third-highest wartime military award, will be conferred on Indian Air Force's (IAF) Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman on Independence Day (August 15). Varthaman, in the wake of the terrorist attack on CRPF convoy on February 14, had shot down an F-16 fighter jet of Pakistan Air Force on February 27. However, his Mig-21 Bison got also hit in the dogfight and he landed in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK). He was held captive by Pakistan for three days before Islamabad released him on March 1 as a “peace gesture” after pressure from New Delhi and the international community.

Gallantry awards are given for exceptional courage, valour and dignity. After India got freedom from British colonial rule in 1947, first three gallantry awards namely the Param Vir Chakra, the Maha Vir Chakra and the Vir Chakra were instituted by the Government of India on 26th January 1950 which were deemed to have come into effect from the 15th August 1947.

Two years later, on January 4, 1952, the government instituted three more gallantry awards - the Ashoka Chakra Class-I, the Ashoka Chakra Class-II and the Ashoka Chakra Class-III – which were in January 1967, renamed as the Ashoka Chakra, the Kirti Chakra and the Shaurya Chakra respectively.

Param Vir Chakra

The Param Vir Chakra is India's highest military decoration, awarded for displaying distinguished acts of valour during wartime. It is conferred for "most conspicuous bravery in the presence of the enemy". The award has been given to only 21 soldiers till date.

Maha Vir Chakra

Maha Vir Chakra is the second-highest military decoration and is awarded for acts of conspicuous gallantry in the presence of the enemy, whether on land, at sea or in the air. This awarded has been given to more than 218 soldiers since its inception.

Vir Chakra

Vir Chakra is third in precedence in the wartime gallantry awards and is given for acts of bravery on the battlefield. As of now, 1322 personal has been given this award.

Ashok Chakra

Ashok Chakra is India's highest peacetime military decoration awarded for valour, courageous action or self-sacrifice away from the battlefield. The award may be given either to military or civilian personnel.

Kirti Chakra

Kirti Chakra is awarded for valour, courageous action or self-sacrifice away from the field of battle. It may be conferred on civilians as well as military personnel, including posthumous awards.

Shaurya Chakra

Shaurya Chakra is awarded for valour, courageous action or self-sacrifice while not engaged in direct action with the enemy. It may also be given either to military or civilian personnel, sometimes even posthumously.
