Five IAF pilots, who flew Mirage 2000 fighter jets and dropped bombs in Balakot, to get Vayu Sena Medals

Mirage 2000 fighter jets | File image | Courtesy: IAF

New Delhi: Five fighter jet pilots of the Indian Air Force, who flew Mirage 2000 planes during the Balakot air strikes and dropped bombs in February this year, have been awarded Vayu Sena Medals. The IAF officers are being conferred with the gallantry awards for bombing the Jaish-e-Mohammed terror camp in Pakistan’s Balakot on February 26. The medals will be given on Thursday, on the occasion of 73rd Independence Day.

Reports said Vayu Sena Medals will be awarded to Indian Air Force’s Wing Commander Amit Ranjan and Squadron Leaders Rahul Basoya, Pankaj Bhujade, BKN Reddy and Shashank Singh.

It may be recalled that the Indian Air Force had carried out pre-emptive, non-military air strikes on JeM terror camp in Balakot in the wee hours of February 26.

The air strikes followed the February 14 terror attack in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama on a convoy of the Central Reserve Police Force. Forty troopers of the CRPF were killed in the suicide terror attack claimed by the JeM terror group.

Thirteen days later, the IAF took a pre-emptive action claiming the terror group was planning to carry out more strikes in India. More than 250 terrorists and their handlers are believed to have died in the air strikes, though Pakistan never acknowledged the terror facility existed in the first place.

The air strikes were code-named 'Operation Bandar (monkey)' and involved 12 Mirage 2000 fighter jets which bombed the JeM facility in Balakot in the wee hours of February 26. The jets dropped Spice 2000 precision bombs on the terror camp located at Balakot in Pakistan's Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

A total of five Spice 2000 bombs were dropped out of which four penetrated the building in which the terrorists were asleep.

The 12 Mirage jets were assisted by other Mirage and Sukhoi Su-30MKI fighter jets which were airborne to keep the Pakistan Air Force jets at bay and launch any counter-offensive if needed.

However, nothing of that sort happened and the jets returned to the Indian side of the LoC safely.
