NSSO jobs report row turns PM Narendra Modi, Rahul Gandhi into Hitler, Mussolini

Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini -- among history's most infamous dictators -- have entered India's political discourse. And all it took was a mysterious report that the Narendra Modi government apparently wants to hide from the public and which was leaked to the press this morning.

A business daily reported this morning that a survey carried out by the National Sample Survey Office, a central agency tasked with carrying out large-scale surveys, had found unemployment in the country at a 45-year high of 6.1 per cent.

The report on the NSSO jobs survey, which has not officially been made public, prompted Congress chief Rahul Gandhi to indirectly invoke Adolf Hitler in criticising Prime Minister Narendra Modi. "The Fuhrer promised us 2 Cr [crore] jobs a year. 5 years later, his leaked job creation report card reveals a National Disaster," Rahul Gandhi said in a tweet.

NoMo Jobs!



The Fuhrer promised us 2 Cr jobs a year. 5 years later, his leaked job creation report card reveals a National Disaster.



Unemployment is at its highest in 45 yrs.



6.5 Cr youth are jobless in 2017-18 alone.



Time for NoMo2Go. #HowsTheJobs pic.twitter.com/nbX4iYmsiZ Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) January 31, 2019

PM Modi's Bharatiya Janata Party returned fire, invoking the name of Hitler's one-time ally from Italy, Benito Mussolini. "It's clear that he [Rahul Gandhi] has inherited Mussolini's shortsightedness and has myopic understanding of issues," the BJP said in a tweet.

"EPFO's real data shows sharp increase in jobs, created in just the last 15 months," the BJP also said, referring to data from the Employees' Provident Fund Organisation, which can give a general idea of the number of jobs in India.

It's clear that he has inherited Mussolini's shortsightedness and has myopic understanding of issues.



EPFO's real data shows sharp increase in jobs, created in just the last 15 months.



Only a man who hasn't ever held a proper job & is totally jobless can peddle such #FakeNews! https://t.co/T0DHUs7IdZ BJP (@BJP4India) January 31, 2019

The row over the NSSO jobs report comes just months before Lok Sabha elections are to be held. The Rahul Gandhi-led Congress has accused PM Narnedra Modi of not doing enough to generate jobs in the country.

The Narendra Modi government however has rejected the accusations, claiming that its various schemes have generated millions of jobs.

However, until now these claims -- either the Congress's or the Modi government's -- were not backed by hard numbers or data.

The NSSO report on jobs is the first survey to examine the employment situation in the country since the November 2016 shock demonetisation announcement.
