Pakistan PM Imran Khan threatens war, says ready to fight for freedom

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday threatened to go to war following the Indian government's decision to scrap Article 370, which granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir. In his latest address in PoK, Khan said people of his country are ready to fight for the "freedom" of Kashmir.

He criticised the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), which is the parent organisation of the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP).

Khan also highlighted incidents of lynching of Muslims in the country, saying the community is living in fear. The pakistan prime minister added that the current developments in Kashmir are alarming for the Muslim population living in the Valley, citing media reports.

"We are all concerned at moment about the truth of the humanitarian crisis and the atrocities created by this lockdown that has been imposed," he said.

Accusing the Indian government of making a "strategic blunder", the Pakistan prime minister said, "He (Narendra Modi) is playing his final card but it is going to be very expensive for India."

"Kashmir was not on the radar of the international community, but we as Pakistan have to ensure that this new momentum continues where Kashmir is in the global narrative. I pledge to be the ambassador of Kashmir," Imran Khan said.

"Now, I will become the brand ambassador and take Kashmir issue to all possible platforms," Khan said.

"The first important development is that Kashmir is now a global narrative; we have spoken to Donald Trump about it; we brought it up at the OIC," he added.

He went out to criticise the Indian Constitution and even went on to say that the "façade of tolerant India has been removed".

Citing danger to almost 18 crore Muslims living in India, he made another accusation. He said: "Pro Indian Kashmiri politicians today are endorsing two-nation theory."

"Our army is battle-hardened fighting a nearly 20 year war against terrorism. Our people are ready to defend our freedoms. We are observing where the events go from here. Pakistan is fully ready; our army, our people are on one page. We have decided we will not tolerate any violation and are fully ready to counter it," he added.

This is not the first time Imran Khan has tried to create a hype over the developments in Kashmir. The Pakistan prime minister has been constantly raising an alarm over the Modi government's decision to scrap Article 370.

India, however, has made it clear to Pakistan more than once to stay out of its internal matters, adding that the decision with regards to scrapping Article 370 was taken within the boundaries of the Indian Constitution.
