Sacred Games 2: Amruta Subhash on making Ganesh Gaitonde dance to her tunes

Amruta Subhash who has once shared screen space with Nawazuddin Siddiqui in Raman Raghav 2.0 will be seen once again with him in Sacred Games 2, this time as his aggressor. Amruta in Sacred Games 2 plays KDY (Kusum Devi Yadav), who's a RAW agent in Kenya. She knows Ganesh Gaitonde's weaknesses and for the love of her nation makes him dance to her tunes.

Ganesh Gaitonde has to leave Mumbai and is forced to set up a new home in Mombasa. He meets a RAW agent Kusum Devi Yadav who approaches Gaitonde for a special purpose. Gaitonde has no option but to do as she says.

Interestingly, Yadav's character was a male in Vikram Chandra's book on which the series is based. The actress told India Today TV that as a RAW agent, she researches on Gaitonde and uses his weaknesses against him.

"I am playing KDY (Kusum Devi Yadav), who's a RAW agent in Kenya. As a RAW agent, she has been trained to use the other person's weakness to her advantage. She researches Gaitonde and knows all his pluses and minuses. She can make him a puppet because she knows everything about him. He is, of course, annoyed with her because she knows everything. She is very calm and is doing everything silently and Gaitonde's repeated attempts to make her angry doesn't work as she's very stubborn and India's protection is of utmost importance to her and for that she's using him. She's making him dance to her turnes. I tell Gaitonde: Main kehti hoon main desh ke liye kar rahi hi, tu apni jaan bachane ke liye kar," Amruta tells India Today's Sushant Mehta about her character.

Interestingly, Amruta has taken inspiration for KDY's role from a Sri Lankan chameleon. The actress met her inspiration during a boat ride. "I had gone to Sri lanka for some other shoot and during a boat ride, I saw this chameleon. It was very calm but quite powerful. I couldn't help notice its strength and I realised it was KDY. I took a closer look at it to observe its eyes. I won't tell you which one, but there is a shot where I tried to copy the chameleon's body language," she said in another interview.

Sacred Games 2 will premiere on August 15 at 12 AM.
