Indian Army foils infiltration bid in Jammu and Kashmir’s Uri sector ahead of 73rd Independence Day

India celebrates its 73rd Independence Day on August 15. | File image

Key Highlights The security forces along LoC have credible intelligence inputs of Pakistan-backed terror launch pads along the international border in order to affect peace in the Valley ahead of August 15 The abrogation of Article 370 last week by the Indian Parliament, stripping J&K of its special status, has left Pakistan red-faced and Indian security forces have been on high alert ever since

Srinagar: The Indian Army on Tuesday foiled a massive infiltration bid by terrorists aided by the Pakistani Army in Jammu and Kashmir’s Uri sector, barely two days ahead of India’s 73rd Independence Day.

The infiltration bid was backed by heavy firing from military posts of the Pakistan Army along the Line of Control, sources said.

“The Pakistan Army attempted to push a group of terrorists into Indian territory to unleash violence in Jammu and Kashmir. The Indian Army posts are on high alert to tackle any such threat from Pakistan,” news agency ANI quoted army sources as saying.

Last week, the Army had successfully thwarted an infiltration bid by Pakistan’s Border Action Team (BAT) in the Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir, and following that, the Intelligence Bureau (IB) received inputs that large groups of terrorists belonging to Pakistan-based terrorist organisations such as the Jaish-e- Mohammad (JeM) and the Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) are continuously attempting to infiltrate India to carry out terror attacks in the Valley.

The security forces along LoC have credible intelligence inputs of Pakistan-backed terror launch pads along the international border in order to affect peace in the Valley ahead of August 15.

The abrogation of Article 370 last week by the Indian Parliament, stripping J&K of its special status, has left Pakistan red-faced and Indian security forces have been on high alert ever since.

Meanwhile, Army Chief General Bipin Rawat yesterday said if Pakistan “wants to activate the LoC, that’s their choice”. “Everyone does a precautionary deployment, we should not get too concerned about it. As far as the Army and other services are concerned, we have to be prepared always.”
