HC seeks further report in Karur murder case

Petition demands court monitoring of the case

MADURAI

The Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court on Wednesday allowed an impleading petition filed by the family of the father and son duo from Muthalaipatti in Karur district, who were murdered for exposing encroachment on a waterbody in their village.

A Division Bench of Justices M. Sathyanarayanan and B. Pugalendhi, who had earlier initiated suo motu proceedings taking cognisance of news reports on the murder, allowed the petition filed by V. Annalakshmi, daughter of Veeramalai and sister of Nallathambi.

In her petition, Ms. Annalakshmi claimed that she was a witness to the murder and said that following the incident land documents, case details and other documents obtained through Right to Information Act with regard to encroachment on the waterbody were missing. She believed that this could be the work of the perpetrators.

She further said that her brother’s son, a 11-year-old, who was waiting for the school bus with his grandfather, was also targeted by the perpetrators, but he managed to flee from the gang. She sought a direction for the case to be closely monitored by the court and investigation supervised on a daily basis by the DIG of Police, Tiruchi Range.

Earlier, the court had sought a report on the progress made in the investigation. After it was submitted that the accused were secured and the investigation was progressing, the court directed the State to submit a further status report. It also directed the State to submit a report on the steps taken to remove the encroachment on the waterbody.

The father-son duo of Veeramalai and Nallathambi were hacked to death by a group of six members on July 29. Nallathambi was murdered by the gang while he was returning to his village from Tiruchi. The same gang later hacked to death Veeramalai near his house when he was waiting with his grandson for the school bus.

A six-member gang, comprising Perumal, Prabhakaran, Kaviarasan, Sasikumar, Shanmugam and Stalin, surrendered before the Madurai District Court on July 31, following which they were remanded in judicial custody.
