Imran Khan terms revocation of Kashmir’s Special Status as strategic blunder by Modi

-

MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan: Prime Minister Imran Khan on Wednesday termed the revocation of Special Status of the Occupied Kashmir as a strategic blunder of the Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and said the latter would have to pay a heavy price for it.

While addressing the Session of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) Legislative Assembly in Muzaffarabad, Imran Khan said by repealing Jammu & Kashmir’s Special Status amid a curfew and media blackout, India unknowingly internationalized the issue and the whole world was watching the situation with concern.

“Kashmir was not on the radar of the international community but we as Pakistan have to ensure that this new momentum continues where Kashmir is in the global narrative. I pledge to be the ambassador of Kashmir,” Imran Khan said.

The prime minister said they would use all international forums to help sensitize the world on gravity and enormity of the situation in Indian Occupied Kashmir. He said he would forcefully present the Kashmir case in the UN General Assembly session in New York.

Imran Khan said he had assumed responsibility of raising the voice of Kashmir in the world by exposing the true face of RSS ideology dominant in India. He said he tried to fully expose the true face of Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its leader Narendra Modi before the world in his statements and tweets.

“India is heading towards disaster with extremist ideology. A country made up of 18 crore Muslims who live under threat. This will eventually face backlash. Anywhere in world there is marginalization, there will be radicalization,” he said.

Furthermore, he said Pakistan would respond with full force if India launched any aggression against Pakistan. He said not only our valiant armed forces but the whole nation was ready to defend the motherland.

“Our army is battle hardened fighting a nearly 20 year war against terrorism. Our people are ready to defend our freedoms,” he said.

Imran Khan said Pakistan would go to any extent to give response to the Indian aggression. He said the whole nation and army was on the same page regarding any external aggression.

“We are observing where the events go from here. Pakistan is fully ready; our army, our people are on one page. We have decided we will not tolerate any violation and are fully ready to counter it,” the prime minister said.

The prime minister if war broke out between Pakistan and India, it would be the responsibility of the World Community as it had done nothing despite knowing the critical situation in the Indian Occupied Kashmir.

“If this region goes to war, the world will be responsible. Those institutions responsible for keeping world peace, this is a trial of the United Nations. Will you stand by the 11 resolutions of the Security Council,” he said.

“Does the United Nations only work when the powerful make a decision? Does it not stand up when the weak are oppressed? I say to the United Nations that over a billion Muslims have their eyes on you right now.”

Imran Khan said there were reports that India was now planning to stage an action in AJK in order to divert the world attention from their brutalities in Occupied Kashmir. But, he added, it should haven’t remained under any illusion about their defensive capabilities.
