Pehlu Khan lynching case: Alwar court acquits all 6 accused – Here’s the FULL TEXT of the verdict

Pehllu Khan was lynched by a mob in April 2017 in Alwar

Key Highlights Pehlu Khan was lynched by a mob in Alwar in 2017 when he was transporting cows from Jaipur An Alwar court on Wednesday acquitted all 6 accused in the case Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot said that his govt would appeal against the verdict

Alwar: All six accused in the Pehlu Khan lynching case were acquitted by a local court in Rajasthan's Alwar on Wednesday.

Following the verdict, state Chief Minister Ashok Gehlot said that the Rajasthan government would appeal against the judgment delivered by the court of an additional district judge.

"The court gave benefit of the doubt to all six accused and acquitted them of lynching charges. We have not received the court order copy and will wait for it to study it and appeal in the higher court," Additional Public Prosecutor Khatana told reporters today.

Besides the six accused in the 2017 Alwar lynching case, three others - who are all minors - still face a separate inquiry by a juvenile justice board.

To read the full text of the court order, click here: https://cloudfront.timesnownews.com/media/display_pdf.pdf

RELATED NEWS No one killed Pehlu Khan! Rajasthan court acquits all 6 accused in 2017 mob lynching case

55-year-old Pehlu Khan and his two sons were allegedly assaulted by a mob near Behror in Alwar district on April 1, 2017, when the group was transporting cows from Jaipur. The incident was caught on camera which purportedly showed a group of men beating Khan and his son.

Khan later succumbed to his injuries at a hospital on April 3, sparking massive outcry against his murder and the menace of violent cow vigilantism.

The accused who were acquitted in the case are Vipin Yadav, Ravindra Kumar, Kaluram, Dayanand, Yogesh Kumar and Bheem Rathi. The counsel representing the accused said that the witnesses failed to identify them as the perpetrators in court.

He also alleged that video which reportedly showed the lynching had also not been sent to a forensic lab by the prosecution.

Meanwhile, Pehlu Khan's son Irshad Khan said that the family would be appealing against the verdict in the higher court. Prosecution lawyer Qasim Khan also said that they would be challenging the verdict in a higher court. He said, "We are hopeful of getting justice," he added.

Hours after the verdict, Rajasthan CM Ashok Gehlot said in a tweet, "Our State Government has enacted law against mob lynching in first week of August 2019. We are committed to ensuring justice for family of late Sh Pehlu Khan. State Government will file appeal against order of ADJ."

On the other hand, Defence lawyer Hukum Chand Sharma termed the Alwar court's decision as "historic" and a "slap on the face" of the people who he claimed had attempted to politicise the issue.
