Evaru Review: Five reasons to watch Adivi Sesh and Regina Cassandra starrer

Debutant Venkat Ramji’s ‘Evaru’ starring Adivi Sesh and Regina Cassandra in lead roles, apart from Naveen Chandra , Murli Krishna and Nihail is making waves on social media. After delivering hits with thrillers like ‘Kshanam’ and ‘Goodachari’, Adivi Sesh’s ‘Evaru’ is one the most-awaited films. While fans of the stellar cast will have enough reasons to watch the film, here are our five reasons why:Talking to Hyderabad Times, debutant director Venkat Ramji had revealed that the story of ‘Evaru’ was based on an idea producer PVP had. “Evaru is an unpredictable thriller; it’s like a dice you roll never knowing what number you’re gonna get. The film wastes no time delving into the story and every few minutes there’s going to be a new revelation. You’ll never predict where it goes,” he said.Adivi Sesh was last seen in ‘Goodachari’ and Regina Cassandra in ‘Awe’. Both the actors delivered such stupendous performances; it’s hard not to look forward to their next. Judging by the trailer, which sees Adivi Sesh play the role of a corrupt cop from Tamil Nadu called Vikram Vasudev and Regina Cassandra play a rape victim called Sameera who murders her rapist, the two have delivered amazing performances in this one too.Apart from the lead pair, the film also sees former child artist Nihal, looking for his missing father played by Murli Sharma and a cop from Andhra Pradesh called Ashok played by Naveen Chandra. With such good actors, it’s only expected that the film will do well. Especially so when talking to Hyderabad Times, Regina Cassandra promised that Naveen Chandra and his character will be ‘total fire on-screen’. “His character is the complete opposite of who he is in real life and it was a difficult character to pull off,” she said.Sricharan Pakala is one of the most-underrated music composers TFI has, having composed music for not just Adivi Sesh’s previous thrillers, but also films like ‘Idam Jagath’ and more. This film sees music and BGM by Sricharan Pakala. Regina Cassandra told Hyderabad Times, “Evaru has been elevated much due to his music and Vamsi’s cinematography.” Talking about the debutant DOP, director Ramji had also said, “He did such a wonderful job, he got a lot of calls after the trailer released. He’s also doing Keerthy Suresh ’s next film.”While Adivi Sesh had announced that he was shooting for ‘Goodachari 2’ and ‘Major’ details of ‘Evaru’s shoot were kept under wraps by the filmmakers. Buzz is that even in the film industry circles it was not known that the film was being shot. In a recent interview, Adivi Sesh even stated that this was so the film’s key twists and conflict points would be kept under wraps at any cost. Now, if that doesn’t create enough intrigue is anyone to watch the film, we don’t know what will!Watch this space for critic review of movie 'Evaru'.
