Hyd–based party files complaint against Hindu Mahasabha for shooting at Gandhi effigy

Hyd–based party files complaint against Hindu Mahasabha for shooting at Gandhi effigy

Hindu Mahasabha leader Pooja Shakun Pandey was caught on camera recreating the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi on his death anniversary.

news Controversy

The Hyderabad police received a complaint against Hindu Mahasabha leader Pooja Shakun Pandey for the shocking reenactment of the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi on his death anniversary. The complaint was filed by Majlis Bachao Tahreek party spokesperson Amjed Ullah Khan.

After videos of Pooja using a fake gun and firing it on the effigy of Gandhi in Uttar Pradesh went viral, Khan approached the Dabeerpura police and asked them to stringent action against the group for hurting the sentiments of Indians.

Khan in his complaint wrote, “The act of Pandey and her followers has hurt the sentiments of lakhs of Indians. An insult to the father of the nation is an insult to every citizen of this country.”

Dabeerpura Inspector N Satyanarayana told TNM that they have not registered the FIR yet and that the complaint was sent for legal consultation.

On Wednesday, which was the 71st death anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi, Pooja Shakun Pandey who is the National Secretary of the Hindu Mahasabha recreated the assassination of Gandhi in Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, besides garlanding his assassin Nathuram Godse and distributing sweets.

This Hindutva group which celebrates Godse, observes the death anniversary of Gandhi as Shaurya Divas (bravery day) of Godse. Using a toy gun, Pooja aimed at the effigy of Gandhi, following which blood oozes out of it. The videos of the same have gone viral and received wide condemnation.

Godse had killed Gandhi using a rifle in Delhi on January 30, 1948, when he was about to leave for his evening prayers. The Hindutva organization held Gandhi responsible for the partition and for being ‘too lenient’ with the Muslims.

Reportedly, Pooja told media that she would continue this tradition every year, “similar to the burning of Raavana during Dussehra.”

Meanwhile, Aligarh police have filed cases against 13 persons including Pooja, and two of them have been detained.
