Nigerian Shia Preacher, Leader of Banned Group, Being Treated in Delhi Hospital

New Delhi: A prominent Nigerian Shia preacher, who heads a banned group, arrived in Delhi on Tuesday after being allowed to leave the African country for medical treatment.

Ibrahim Zakzaky’s Islamic Movement in Nigeria (IMN) advocates an Iran-style theocratic state in the country and has been influenced by the Ayatollah Khomeini-led Iranian revolution. In Nigeria, the population is evenly divided between Muslims and Christians. Shi’ites are very small minority within the Muslim community.

Zakzaky has been behind bars since 2015 when government forces stormed into his compound and killed over 340 people. He was charged with culpable homicide, attempt to murder and other offences.

Since the arrest and killing of supporters, IMN has been holding large protests over the years.

The Nigerian government finally banned the group in July 2019. This was after weeks of protests during which there were violent clashes between security forces and the government. A senior police officer was also killed during one of those clashes in the Nigerian capital.

On August 5, a Nigerian court in Kaduna granted medical leave to Zakzaky and his wife to travel to India for treatment.

Nigeria has been facing threat from militant Sunni Islamic group Boko Haram for a decade. The founder of Boko Haram, Mohammed Yousef, was killed in custody, which is seen as the ‘turning point’ in the group’s fight with the Nigerian government.

Also read: Does India’s Heart Transplant Setup Really Favour Foreigners?

It is learnt that the Nigerian government had approached Indian authorities after the court’s decision. New Delhi was told that Zakzaky had chosen India for medical treatment.

Nigerian officials informed India that while they had no objection, it would be the latter’s call to decide on his visa.

India then granted a visa to 66-year-old Zakzaky and his wife.

For India, the decision was based on the Nigerian government’s green light and the “genuine” medical reason for the treatment, The Wire has learnt. With the judiciary and Nigerian government giving permission, no fingers could be pointed that India was interfering in internal relations, it was felt.

After arrival at Delhi airport on Tuesday, Zakzaky was taken straight to Medanta hospital, according to an IMN statement.

However, things may not be going all that smoothly.

Speaking to The Wire from Nigeria, the spokesperson for IMN, Ibrahim Musa said that they had “encountered some problem” on Wednesday.

He accused “Nigerian security operatives” of not allowing Zakzaky to consult with his preferred doctors. “They refused to allow him to see the doctors whom he had contacted before arriving in India,” said Musa, the president of IMN’s media forum.
