Three arrested by Gzb cops after two shootouts

Three alleged gangsters were arrested by the Ghaziabad police after two shootouts in the last twenty four hours.

In the first incident, the police on Wednesday arrested two alleged gangsters after a gunfight in the Loni area of the district in which the duo suffered bullet injuries in their legs, said an official.

The arrested gangsters later turned out to be the alleged killers of one Vikram Kasana, who was shot dead on July 14, while sitting on the veranda of his house in his village Mahmood Pur in the district, said Senior superintendent of Police Sudhir Kumar Singh.

The duo, who are also involved in several other cases of robbery and extortion, have been admitted to a hospital for treatment, he added.

Singh said the gunfight took place on Wednesday evening around 7 pm, when a police team at Sikrani village signalled two bike-borne youths to stop for a check up.

Instead of acceding to the police instructions, the youths opened fired at the police team, forcing the policemen to return the fire, in which the duo were injured, said the SSP, adding they were rushed to a hospital after the gunfight.

Later during the interrogation, the duo, identified as Bunty alias Vineet of Baghpat district in Uttar Pradesh and Rajiv of Faridabad in Haryana, disclosed about their involvement in Kasana's murder on July 14, said the SSP.

They said they shot dead Kasana, one of their accomplices with whom they had fallen out over differences in distribution of the loot booty, said the SSP, adding Kasana's mother is the head of a village civic body.

Police also seized the duo's Apache bike which was used in Kasana's killing, said the SSP, adding two country-made pistols and four live and as many used cartridges were recovered from their possession.

In another incident, the police arrested an absconder on Tuesday evening near Maharajpur police post after an exchange of fire.

The man arrested by the district's Link Road police from near Maharajpur police post on the Delhi-Uttar Pradesh border was identified Anuj alias Gappi, for whose arrest the police had earlier announced a reward of Rs 15,000.

Taking advantage of the darkness, Gappi's accomplice, fled the scene, said Singh, adding one country-made pistol and one used and two live cartridges were recovered from his possession.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
