We shot them down once, will shoot them down again, says Squadron Leader Minty Aggarwal

NEW DELHI: IAF fighter-controller Squadron Leader Minty Aggarwal was on duty when over 20 Pakistan Air Force (PAF) fighters attacked Indian Army establishments on February 27, the day after Balakot strikes. She saw the dogfight as also Wing Commander Abhinandan Vartaman firing at Pak F-16 before vanishing from her radar screen.“I don’t have words to explain the feeling,” says Sqn Ldr Aggarwal, 31, who will be awarded Yudh Seva Medal for her contribution in repulsing the PAF raid.In the hot seat when the PAF raid began, she saw her entire screen light up; there were red dots — enemy aircraft — everywhere. “As a fighter-controller, it is my duty and responsibility to not just guide an aircraft...but to provide a weapon solution and to achieve a lock-on so that the missile can be launched. At the same time, we have to keep in mind that my aircraft are safe.”“I was controlling Wing Commander Abhinandan since the time he was airborne. I provided him the air situation picture. During the aerial engagement, he was informed about the aircraft posture and he (attacked) the most appropriate target. I was monitoring the whole situation. And then, I saw the F-16 vanishing from my screen,” she said.Asked if the red light (the F-16) vanished from the screen, she said “Exactly”. But there was no time to celebrate. She wasn’t controlling just one IAF fighter.“It is a dynamic situation. I had to concentrate. We are all air warriors. We have to move on. I was controlling other missions also. So, I kept vectoring the other aircraft towards the enemy aircraft.”A MiG-21 Bison shooting down an F-16 is “a very big thing”, she said. It speaks of “the training plan of our academies” and how competent IAF pilots, controllers and air crew are.It was a very determined Pakistani attack on Army establishments, Sqn Ldr Aggarwal said. “They could not damage our military installations.” While insisting that defeating the PAF was a team effort, she said: “I feel (I was) chosen by God. I was lucky to be a part of that team. If given a chance, I will again perform... I request God to give me the energy to perform in the same dedicated and professional manner.”Sqn Ldr Aggarwal remembers “losing the blip of Wing Commander Abhinandan” when his MiG-21 went down. But there were no other losses, and certainly not a Su-30 that Pakistan has talked about. “I was monitoring the airspace and all our Su-30s are available to us,” she said, adding that India just lost one MiG-21.Like everyone else, she was overjoyed when Wing Commander Abhinandan returned. “I cannot explain that moment in words. Definitely, it was a moment of great happiness not only for me but the entire nation.”And February 27 isn’t just the final blow, she said. “That was a moment we were waiting for and I pray to God that...I am given the chance... we have shot them once and we will shoot them again.”
