Kartik Aaryan reminisces fond memories of celebrating Raksha Bandhan in Gwalior

Kartik Aaryan is currently in Bangkok for a brand shoot and will be missing Raksha Bandhan festivities with his sister, Kritika, whom he fondly calls Kittu — while she calls him Koki! This, however, is not the first time that the Luka Chuppi actor will be away from home during the festival. Ever since the Gwalior lad shifted to Mumbai to become an actor, his sister has been sending rakhi to him by post. This year will be no different. Here, Kartik goes down memory lane and tells us how he used to celebrate the festival, and his bond with his sister...

Has the way you celebrate Rakhsha Bandhan changed in any way?

Yes. Earlier we used to live in Gwalior, so, it was celebrated together. It was more fun then because we used to start preparing for it from weeks before the day. My sister would make sure that she bought me the most attractive rakhi, and I used to save coins in my piggy bank for her gifts. Now, we live in different cities. She’s studying in Bhopal, and I’m usually out for shoots. So, she sends me rakhi and a letter every year and, trust me, this is the most special thing I wait for the entire year.

Do you miss celebrating the festival with your sister back home?

Yes, I do miss it because bachpan ki yaadein best hoti hain. Back then, it was filled with more fun and shaitaani. I wish we could go back in time.



Raksha Bandhan celebration last year

What kind of gifts would you give her?

Though I used to save money for her gifts, I still tried escaping from buying something she wanted. Instead, I tried to make her like the things I wanted and bought them for myself, making her feel they were actually for her. But now, I’m compensating for all of it.

What are you planning to gift her this time?

Whatever is mine, is all hers!

Any particular year that was memorable for you?

Last year was really special because, during the festival, I was luckily shooting in Gwalior for Luka Chuppi. I took a break for Raksha Bandhan and we celebrated it together. My cousins had also come home. Mom had made our favourite food. It was just like old times.



Kartik Aaryan with sister Kritika

How has the bond between you and your sister changed over the years?

Now, we are more like best friends. Whenever I have doubts or I’m in trouble, I only talk to her. And though she is younger to me, I wonder how she knows so much more about life and relationships. She is like my friend, philosopher and guide. And I’m thankful to her that at any hour she is just a call away for me.

How would you describe your sister?

She is fun, super cute, intelligent and an overthinker just like me.
