Horrors of India-Pakistan partition: Tales of violence and pain

Hordes of Muslim refugees were seen leaving India for Pakistan after India's partition in September 1947 (File image) | Photo Credit: AP, File Image

Key Highlights When India gained Independence on August 15, 1947, it was also divided into two dominions The two dominions - India and Pakistan - were formed on the basis of Hindu and Muslim population in the respective districts. The India-Pakistan partition is regarded as one of the "largest" and "most violent" political migration in human history.

The horrors of Partition in 1947 will always be a terrifying, blood-stained blot in the legacy of the freedom of India. At the stroke of midnight of August 15, 1947, freedom was attained at the price of the country being divided into two independent domains – India and Pakistan.

The Partition resulted mainly in the division of two provinces in the country – Punjab and Bengal, based on the Hindu and Muslim population in the districts.

Muslim-majority Pakistan had West Pakistan (present-day Islamic Republic of Pakistan) and East Pakistan (present-day People’s Republic of Bangladesh).

Historians have described the 1947 Partition as the "largest political migration in human history" with around 15 million people getting displaced from their homes.

It also has the damning distinction of being one of the most violent human migration in history, with at least a million people murdered in communal riots that followed the Partition, and many others raped or maimed.

Along with the pain of embarking on a journey to a new land, leaving behind their homes, a wave of brutal violence and savagery from both sides of the border wreaked havoc on the migrants as they tried to seek refuge on the other side of the border.

Here are a few stories from the dreadful time of Indian history, which perhaps serve as a reminder of the very high cost of our freedom.

Tales of violence from Partition

‘Everybody became a devil’

Sardar Joginder Singh Kholi, now an octogenarian Sikh, was a teenager living in a village in Pakistan's Punjab province. He recalled how almost all men in his village were slaughtered by attackers at the time of Partition.

18 out of the 25 men in the village were killed in an attack, Kholi had recounted in 2017 to a news portal.

He also recalled a Sikh woman who committed suicide inside a gurudwara in order to "protect her honour".

Kholi said, "The woman's name was Veerawali. She was a very beautiful woman. But during the unrest … Muslims were chasing after her. There was a gurudwara in our village, so she ran inside the temple to take refuge. She paid her respects to the holy book … poured kerosene on her body and set herself on fire.”

“Now when I think of it, I feel that something happened to all of us. It's as if humanity had died. Everybody became a devil,” he said.

'Our neighbours promised to protect us. They didn't'

Nasim Fatima had a "very happy childhood" in Karol Bagh in Delhi. But during the Partition, she lost seven members of her family, including her parents and siblings.

“My father, mother, grandmother and four brothers and sisters were all killed. I was the only one of my family to survive,” Fatima, now in her 80s, told an international daily.

Recounting the day when she lost her family, she said, “My last memory before seven members of my immediate family were killed is looking through a keyhole in our house and seeing my father praying, with my two-year-old brother crying in the background. I was hit over the head and I still have a scar from the attack.”

She also recalled how their Sikh neighbours, who had assured the family to protect the members during the riots that followed the Partition, were the ones to attack.

'The whole train was butchered'

Mohindra Dhall, who now lives in Scotland, was a young boy when his family had to flee his hometown in Layallpur, present-day Faisalabad, which was located on the Pakistan side of the border.

Speaking to an international news channel, Dhall, now in his 70s, recounted how his family decided to leave their home after they heard reports of lootings and killings in the nearby villages. He says they had only a few hours to pack up their belongings and leave the town.

Dhall recalled how his family had failed to board a train to India as it was too crowded. People were sitting on the roof of the train and were jostling for the tiniest space available.

"My father decided to come out of the train and we stayed back, only to hear the next day that whole train was completely butchered. Half of our friends from the village, who were on the train, got butchered,” he said.
