We had to do 2-3 takes in different languages: Prabhas on shooting for 'Saaho'

Fans are already gearing up to meet Prabhas who is getting ready for 5-city tour for this upcoming trailer launch of Saaho.

Mumbai: Saaho, the magnum opus, as widely known now, has been shot in four languages. Prabhas who enjoys a pan India appeal, for the first time ever shot for a Hindi film and it was an experience he cherished. His fandom has crossed national boundaries also and the superstar enjoys massive popularity globally. Prabhas who is originally from Telugu film industry and has worked in other south Indian films had to speak in Hindi for the first time ever shooting for a film. Having spent such a long time shooting for Saaho, he shared what all difficulties he encountered.

On being asked about how it was shooting for a film which is being released in four languages, he shared, “We worked really hard because every shot we had to do 2-3 takes in different languages. It's really strenuous for the actors, technicians and everybody else. We used to be like 'Got the moment' Yes! Shot okay. Then you are like okay now no other language. So, it's really tiring but for me, it is my second time because for Baahubali I did Tamil and Telugu. This is my first Hindi film and all the dialogues I have done myself.”

Ever since the trailer launch, the team of Saaho has been receiving tremendous applause from various corners of the country. It’s apt to say that Saaho trailer lived up to the hype built up since the first poster released, and now the audience is eagerly waiting for the film to be released. This action-packed film which took 2 whole years to complete, is a complete package and promises to deliver an action- thriller which hasn’t been seen before!

As the audience entered the Saaho world after the trailer launch and got a glimpse of the thrilling roller coaster ride that Saaho is all geared up to give, It already had the viewers hooked on to the screens and at the edge of their seats, in this battle between epic pack of villains and the shades of grey that the protagonist displays. It has created worldwide ripples where the fans are showering love over heartthrob Prabhas, Shraddha who looks stunning in a cop avatar and the very brilliant multi starrer cast!

Since 30th august is being touted as the World Saaho Day and it cannot come soon enough, fans have been going crazy on social media expressing their love for Prabhas and Shraddha Kapoor and the anticipation for what is called the biggest action movie in the history of India.

Fans are already gearing up to meet their heartthrob Prabhas who is getting ready for a 5-city tour for this upcoming trailer launch of Saaho. He will travel to Mumbai, Chennai, Kochi, Bangalore and Hyderabad where he will interact with his fans and launch the trailer of Saaho.

The actor will be next seen in the big-budget film 'Saaho' alongside Shraddha Kapoor which is all is set to hit the theatres on August 30, 2019, and his next movie under the direction of ‘Jil’ fame Radha Krishna Kumar. The working title of the movie is ‘Amour’ along with Pooja Hegde.
