Consumer Electronics: There’s no slump in demand for phones and white goods, Retail News, ET Retail

KOLKATA: Consumers may be cutting down on consumption of daily necessities and deferring purchase of apparel and cars, but smartphones and white goods seems to have bucked the trend.Latest data by market researcher GfK show unit sales of products like smartphones, smart speakers, washing machines, refrigerators and air-conditioners have grown at a faster pace in the six months from January to June compared to same period last year.These categories have also grown faster by value sales in the same period from last year as per the researcher indicating consumers are buying more expensive products since the pace of growth has been higher than the price rise undertaken this year.Smartphones unit sales have grown 9% in offline stores in the first six months from 4% last year. While in online, smartphone volume sales have almost doubled to 62% between Jan-June against 33% in the same period last year, as per GfK, which is the only company which tracks actual sales unlike other researchers tracking shipments.In appliances, the volume sales growth has been 15% in the first half of the year against a contraction of 4% in unit sales in the same period of 2018. Even for consumer electronics , which includes television and audio products, the growth has been 2% in volume sales despite an almost flat market for televisions in this period since connected smart speakers grew by 39%, GfK noted. Industry executives said Indian consumers now consider smartphones and appliances as necessities and hence buying them, while they are also willing to buy novelty products like smart and connected speakers. Availability of cheap 4G data too has driven smartphone sales.CEO Avijit Mitra of Croma electronics retail chain owned by the Tata-owned Infiniti Retail Ltd, said consumers are buying, but it is as per their requirement unlike earlier, when they would probably buy multiple products at the same time“There is need and demand for electronics and gadgets. Consumer aspiration and cash too has not reduced. But due to the sentiments, they are prioritising their purchases which has also slowed down the premiumisation drive,” said Mitra.GfK India managing director Nikhil Mathur said AC and refrigerator drove sales of appliances due to extreme temperature during summer, while washing machine sales has been buoyant due to its utility.“Growth this year has been led by first time buyers, upgraders and evolving consumer needs. Besides the mega cities, consumption in cities with less than five lakh population is picking up,” he said. Panasonic India CEO Manish Sharma said last year growth had slowed down compared to 2017. “So, there was a lot of pent-up demand which has driven growth of electronics this year,” he said.In contrast, growth in FMCG sector slumped in the past four consecutive quarters since July-September 2018, both by value and volume. The auto industry is battling a slowdown with July sales the steepest fall in two decades. Sales of white goods were down last year due to the transition to Goods and Services Tax regime which increased prices.Even on a quarter-on-quarter basis, growth in appliances and television has been much more in April-June 2019. However, smartphone sales growth had slowed down in offline retail from 11% in April to June 2018 to 8% in last quarter, but online sales growth doubled to 68%, which GfK attributed to launch of big ticket online exclusive models.
