On Independence Day, Let's RememberThe Women Who Fought For Our Freedom

In the week before Independence Day, schools and pre-schools around the country celebrated India’s 73 years of freedom from colonial rule. Children were asked to honour the heroes who fought for the country by wearing costumes in their memory. A colleague, who has a 2-year-old son, was sent a list of icons that she could dress her child as. In the list of 10 names, there was just a single woman--Rani Lakshmibai. The young girls in that pre-school only had one name to look up to as a patriot worth honouring.

This is because history did not do justice to the women who fought for India’s independence. Other than a handful of names, their contributions have been forgotten. Those who have made it to the history text books are often painted simply as wives of the freedom fighters, be it Kasturba Gandhi or Kamala Nehru. But women started participating in the struggle against the colonisers, in the very early years of the 20th century. Infact, women were the backbone of one of the key movements of our struggle against the British--the Swadeshi movement. They picketed stores selling imported goods, pledged to prohibit the entry of foreign goods into their homes, and skilled themselves as small-scale producers of home goods.

But there isn’t even a single chapter in our history books dedicated to these brave pioneering women, who broke with convention, to fight for Swaraj. We have the names of some prominent freedom fighters who seem to have been forgotten by us. Here is a refresher:

Umabai Kundapur

She was the founder of the “Bhagini Mandal”, a group of women freedom fighters in Karnataka. She was also the leader of the women's wing of Hindustani Seva Dal. She was arrested for sheltering freedom fighters from the British.

Savitri Bai Phule

If you are a woman reading this, you probably owe your education to Savitri Bai, who worked tirelessly to further the cause of women’s education in the country. She was India’s first female teacher and established the first school for women in Maharashtra.

Laxmi Sehgal

A close side of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, the social activist was awarded a Padma Vibhushan in 1998. She led the Rani Jhansi Regiment, one of the first women contingents of the world. After India gained independence, Laxmi became a prominent social activist in Kanpur.

Rani Gaidinliu

Known for the armed resistance against the British Raj, Rani Gaidinliu is the Naga heroine not many of us know about. She led an armed revolt against the British in 1932, when she was 17, which resulted in a 14-year long imprisonment.

Accamma Cherian

In February 1938, the Travancore State Congress was formed and Accamma gave up her teaching career to join the struggle for liberty. She formed the Desha Sevika Sangh and toured Kerala, inspiring women to join the fight for freedom.

Tara Rani Shrivastava

Tara Rani Shrivastava was marching with her husband at a rally in Siwan (Bihar) in 1942, when the British forces shot her husband dead. Legend has it, she tore up her saree, bandaged her husband, and continued her march.




