Royal Navy takes charge of counter terror task force with France

Something went wrong, please try again later.

Get the stories that matter to our community straight to your inbox with our Daily Newsletter

The Royal Navy has taken joint charge of a counter terrorism task force that spans more than three million square miles of ocean.

Combined Task Force (CTF) 150, which consists of six international warships, will concentrate on cutting terrorists' funding steams by combating the smuggling of drugs, people and weapons in an area covering the Gulf of Aden, Gulf of Oman, the Arabian Sea, Red Sea, and the Northern Indian Ocean.

This area is a vital artery of world trade that includes the main shipping routes from the Far East to Europe and the US, with over 33,000 shipping movements per year. Over one third of the world’s oil passes through the region annually.

The Force was created to counter terrorism, prevent trafficking, and uphold law and order through Maritime Security Operations. Anti-piracy is not part of the Force’s role; this aspect of maritime security is the responsibility of CTF-151.

A Royal Navy spokesperson said: "An Anglo-French team now leads the fight against terrorists trying to use the waters east of Suez to conduct their illegal activities .

"Headed by British Commodore Edward Ahlgren, the two dozen Royal Navy and Marine Nationale personnel will choreograph the actions of up to six international warships, policing a vast area of ocean looking for suspicious vessels – usually smuggling drugs to fund terrorism – but also weapons, explosives and people.

"The Britons and Frenchmen take the reins of Combined Task Force 150 from Pakistan, whose four-month tenure under Commodore Alveer Ahmed Noor saw more than 25 tonnes of illegal narcotics seized – and terrorist overlords deprived of $19.5m (£16m) during 15 successful boarding operations, often carried out in tricky conditions during the monsoon season.

"150 is one of three long-running international task forces run from Bahrain, dedicated to a specific security/safe seafaring mission, and comprising upwards of half a dozen ships drawn from more than 30 nations. Task Force 151 focuses on keeping piracy off the Horn of Africa in check; 152 concentrates on security within the Gulf."

Learn more about the Navy If you want to know more about life in the Navy then these purchases are for you Royal Navy officer package This is the ultimate career kit combination for becoming a Royal Navy Officer, featuring all the different elements of the Royal Navy Officer selection process, including all of the tests and interviews. From £54 - buy it here The Royal Navy, Day by Day book This features great battles and minor actions by small ships, and the service of men and women, sailors, Royal Marines, the WRNS, aircrew, submariners, and RFA and Merchant Navy personnel, down the generations. From £60 - buy it here Ark Royal model This diecast and plastic model is called Forces Of Valor, a 1: 700 scale model of the Ark Royal-class carrier Royal Navy, HMS Ark Royal, Norway. From £58.49 - buy it here BBC Sailor: The complete TV series This follows the crew of the aircraft carrier Ark Royal back in 1976 to record what was intended to be her last voyage. It is one the best series ever made about the Royal Navy and also includes the BBC follow-up programme Sailor: 8 Years On - revealing the sad fate of the now decrepit Ark Royal in dock and going in search of its crew members to discover how their lives have changed. From £33.73 - buy it here Prices correct at time of publication. This article contains affiliate links, we may receive a commission on any sales we generate from it

This is the tenth time the RN has taken charge of the task group and despite the wealth of experience and knowledge British and French sailors have of the region (the French have commanded CTF 150 eight times), Commodore Ahlgren is under no illusions about the challenges facing his team and the warships under its direction as they patrol an area more than 30 times the size of the UK.

Commodore Edward Ahlgren said: "Our area of operation includes some of the world’s busiest shipping lanes and spans over 3.2 million square miles."

LATEST ROYAL NAVY AND ROYAL MARINE NEWS HERE

LATEST ARMY and ARMED FORCES NEWS HERE

“This area is a vital artery of world trade from the Far East to Europe and the United States and covers three of the world’s strategic ‘choke points’.

"Within the seas of the region all manner of activity is undertaken: be it piracy, drug smuggling, arms running, people trafficking, migration or legitimate activity like trade, fishing or leisure.

“In all of that, it is about finding the bad guy amongst a sea of people.”
