India independence celebrations turn violent: Armed police hit by bottles and eggs

India Independence Day: Police confiscate protestor’s dagger

top stories direct to your inbox SUBSCRIBE Invalid email Sign up to receive our rundown of the day'sdirect to your inbox We use your sign-up to provide content in ways you've consented to and to improve our understanding of you. This may include adverts from us and 3rd parties based on our understanding. You can unsubscribe at any time. More info

Protestors many waving Pakistani and Kashmiri flag descended outside the Indian High Commission in the Capital as tensions between India and Pakistan continue to soar. It is estimated around 5,000 people have took to the streets for the protests, with witnesses claiming Police have been hit with bottles and eggs. One witness wrote on Twitter: “Large India Independence Day celebration outside Indian High Commission disrupted by anti India protestors.

“Situation getting out of hand as protestors have been allowed to barge aggressively towards Indian groups. “Reports of stone pelting too.” Demonstrators carried banners saying "Kashmir is Burning", "Free Kashmir" and "Modi: Make Tea Not War”.

Protestors have clashed outside the Indian High Commission in the Capital

It is estimated around 5,000 people have took to the streets

Police were keeping a small counter-demonstration apart from the main protest. Relations between the two nations have worsened following India's decision to revoke special status for its portion of Kashmir. There has also been a blackout and curbs on movement, caused fury in Pakistan, which cut trade and transport links.

Protestors have condemend Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi

READ MORE: Fears of TOTAL WAR as Indian warships prepare for terror attack Pakistan also expelled India's envoy in retaliation. Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has used an independence day speech to defend his Government's controversial decision to strip the disputed Kashmir region of its statehood and special constitutional provisions. In a speech given on India’s Independence Day, Mr Modi said: "In the past 70 years, the existed system in Jammu and Kashmir encouraged terrorism, nepotism, corruption.

Demonstrators carried banners saying 'Kashmir is Burning'

Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during his independence day speech
