'No casualty on our side': Indian Army guns down 3 Pak soldiers during ceasefire violation along LoC in Poonch

The three Pakistani Army soldiers who were killed during the ceasefire violation in Poonch on Thursday | @OfficialDGISPR | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The Indian Army retaliated befittingly and thwarted Pakistan soldiers' attempts to destabilise security along the Line of Control Shockingly, Pakistan Army spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor blatantly blamed India of violating ceasefire along the International Border

Poonch: On a day India celebrates the 73rd Independence Day, Pakistan’s nefarious tactics to destabilise peace in Jammu and Kashmir continued as they violated ceasefire in the KG Sector of Nangi Tekri area in Poonch on Thursday, August 15.

The Indian Army retaliated befittingly and thwarted their attempts to destabilise security along the Line of Control.

Shockingly, Pakistan Army spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor blatantly blamed India of violating ceasefire along the International Border, while also claiming that three of his soldiers were killed in the exchange of fire.

“In efforts to divert attention from precarious situation in IOJ&K, Indian Army increases firing along LOC. 3 Pakistani soldiers embraced shahadat. Pakistan Army responded effectively. 5 Indian soldiers killed, many injured, bunkers damaged. Intermittent exchange of fire continues,” Pakistan Army’s DG-ISPR said in a post on social media platform Twitter.

In efforts to divert attention from precarious situation in IOJ&K,Indian Army increases firing along LOC.

3 Pakistani soldiers embraced shahadat. Pakistan Army responded effectively. 5 Indian soldiers killed, many injured, bunkers damaged. Intermittent exchange of fire continues. pic.twitter.com/wx1RoYdiKE — DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) August 15, 2019

The Indian Army, however, refuted Pakistan’s claims of soldiers getting killed on this side of the border. “The Indian Army denies Pakistan Army’s claims of five Indian soldiers dead in ceasefire violations along the Line of Control in Jammu and Kashmir,” Army sources said.

Locals in J&K corroborated Indian Army’s statement that Pakistan had violated ceasefire along the LoC. “I was at the flag hoisting ceremony and heard firing from the Pakistani side while I was returning,” news agency ANI quoted a local, Mohammad Muzir Mugal, as saying. “I want to tell Prime Minister Narendra Modi that if such violations happen on Independence Day, Pakistan must be given a befitting response,” he added.
