J&K: Army kills 3 Pak soldiers in retaliatory fire, denies claims on Indian casualties

The Indian Army befittingly retaliated to the ceasefire violation by the Pakistani troops. (Image used for representation)

At least three Pakistan Army soldiers were killed in the Indian security forces' response to the unprovocative firing from across the border. Pakistan violated ceasefire in Uri and Rajouri sectors of Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday.

Calling as "fictitious", the Indian Army also denied the Pakistan military's claim of killing five Indian soldiers during a cross-border firing along the Line of Control (LoC) in J&K.

The unprovocative firing from the Pakistani side began on the day India is celebrating its 73rd Independence Day. The Indian Army befittingly retaliated to the ceasefire violation by the Pakistani troops.

The three Pakistani soldiers who were killed in the ceasefire violations have been identified as Naik Tanveer, Sepoy Ramazan and Lance Naik Taimoor.

Sources: 3 Pakistan Army soldiers killed in punitive proactive response after ceasefire violations by Pakistan Army. Ceasefire violations taking place in Uri and Rajouri sectors. #JammuAndKashmir https://t.co/gjRpQ1wwmx ANI (@ANI) August 15, 2019





The Indian Army has also denied the Pakistan Army's claims that five Indian soldiers died in the ceasefire violations along the Line of Control (LoC).

India's response came after Pakistan Army spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor accused the Indian Army of "increaseing firing" along the Line of Control to, he said, "divert attention from precarious situation in Jammu and Kashmir".

Asif Ghafoor claimed that five Indian soldiers were killed and bunkers were damaged in the firing.

He tweeted, "In efforts to divert attention from precarious situation in IOJ&K, Indian Army increases firing along LOC. 3 Pakistani soldiers embraced shahadat. Pakistan Army responded effectively. 5 Indian soldiers killed, many injured, bunkers damaged. Intermittent exchange of fire continues."

In efforts to divert attention from precarious situation in IOJ&K,Indian Army increases firing along LOC.

3 Pakistani soldiers embraced shahadat. Pakistan Army responded effectively. 5 Indian soldiers killed, many injured, bunkers damaged. Intermittent exchange of fire continues. pic.twitter.com/wx1RoYdiKE DG ISPR (@OfficialDGISPR) August 15, 2019





When asked about Pakistan's claim, a senior Indian Army official said, "The claim made by Pakistan's military is fictitious."

Earlier in the day, the Pakistani troops violated the ceasefire in KG Sector of Nangi Tekri area. Mohammad Muzir Mugal, a local, said: "I was at the flag hoisting ceremony. I heard firing from Pakistan's side when I was returning from the ceremony."

There have been reports of the Pakistan army increasing its deployment along the LoC after India's decision to withdraw special status to Jammu and Kashmir, and bifurcate the state into two Union Territories -- Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

The Indian Army has also strengthened its vigil along the LoC and kept its personnel on high alert to effectively deal with any "misadventure" by Pakistan, a senior military official said.
