J&K people’s identity neither at stake, nor tampered with: Malik

J&K people’s identity neither at stake, nor tampered with: Malik

JAMMU, Aug 14: Governor Satya Pal Malik Wednesday sought to assuage the sentiments of people of J&K following Centre’s move to scrap Article 370 and bifurcation of state, saying that their identity “is not at stake nor has been tampered with” and the “Constitution of India allows many regional identities to thrive and prosper.”

In his Independence Day message on the eve of national festival, Malik, without directly mentioning about abrogation of Article 370 and bifurcation of J&K into two Union Territories by the Centre, said, “The changes brought out by the Union government are not just historic but have opened a new vista of development for the people of Jammu & Kashmir and the people of Ladakh.”

“At this point, I would like to assure the people of Jammu and Kashmir that their identity is not at stake nor has been tampered with. The Constitution of India allows many regional identities to thrive and prosper. If you travel from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, one will see wide range of languages, cultures, religions and societies. Therefore, no one should get worried that their identity will be lost with the measures taken by the Union Government. In fact this opportunity can be used to promote the traditional cultures, values and languages in the state. Kashmiri, Dogri, Gojri, Pahari, Balti, Sheena and other languages will have opportunity to thrive in the new set up. Various tribes and castes in the state who have not had political representation will find proper representation.”

While extending greetings and good wishes to the people of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh on the 73rd Independence Day, he said for the past 70 years, the common people of the state were distracted on the core issues of economic development, peace and prosperity. “Rather than focus on these, people have been misled about issues which are not material to their lives. It is amazing that whether it is an election or otherwise, the public discourse never focussed on issues of Roti, Kapada Aur Makan. With these changes, the veil has been removed. This will speed up economic growth and prosperity, promote good governance, usher in self sufficiency, provide enhanced job opportunities and more importantly bring a feeling of belonging and oneness amongst the residents of Jammu and Kashmir, with the rest of the country.”

Describing the young people as the driving force of change, Malik said, “They have a responsibility to build a bright future for the state and the nation. On this occasion, I strongly urge the highly talented youth of Jammu and Kashmir to come forward and take the lead in taking Jammu and Kashmir on a new path of progress and development.” He reiterated that his administration had zero tolerance policy towards militants and security forces were taking proactive action against militants.

“Militants who are carrying out isolated attacks on the security forces at the behest of their handlers across the border have lost the battle. Due to concerted and synergised efforts of Forces, there has been a discernible change in the approach of militants and their supporters. The recruitment of new militants has witnessed a downward trend, while stone-pelting incidents after the Friday prayers have all but ended. The misguided youth are returning back to the mainstream. We have adopted a multi pronged approach to contain cross-border infiltration that is giving positive results,” he said.

Malik stated that a long pending demand of the people of Ladakh was also fulfilled with the formation of a Union Territory of Ladakh. This would enable the people of Ladakh to realise their aspirations inspite of the problems they face on account of the large and difficult terrain. “My administration had earlier this year created a separate Revenue and Administrative Division for ‘Ladakh’ comprising the districts of Leh and Kargil with a Divisional Commissioner and an Inspector General of Police. Subsequently, 495 posts were also sanctioned for staffing the various Departments of this Division. A separate University has been established for Ladakh Region for which a Vice Chancellor has been appointed,” he said while referring to decisions taken by his administration regarding Ladakh.

While detailing about “Back to Village” programme, he said such was the level of success of this programme that the Prime Minister of India appreciated the effort by making a special mention of the initiative during his ‘Man Ki Baat’ aired on July 28, 2019.

Enlisting achievements of his administration, he talked about peaceful conduct of Urban Local Bodies in October and the second ever Panchayat elections in November-December aimed at empowerment of people through grassroots democracy.

“This was in a State which could not hold bye-elections to a Parliamentary seat two years earlier. All this was without any loss of life. Today, the state has a vibrant Panchayati Raj and municipal system which is fully empowered with complete delegation of funds, functions and functionaries. The process for establishment of the second tier of the Panchayats has been initiated for which the elections to the Block Development Councils shall be held very soon. I urge all elected Panches and Sarpanches to come forth and participate whole heartedly in these elections. The Block Development Council and thereafter the District Development Boards play an important role in ensuring peoples’ participation in planning and execution of development of their respective areas. I am confident that this budding Panchayati Raj system will be the harbinger of change in J&K in future,” he said.

While mentioning about the reservation provided to those residing in areas adjoining the International Border in direct recruitment, promotion and admission in different professional courses, at par with those living along the Line of Control (LoC) besides reservation provisions made for Pahari Speaking People and also Economically Weaker Sections (EWSs), he reiterated committed for “safe return and rehabilitation of the Kashmir Pandits in the Valley.”

Malik also talked about his administration’s fight against corruption, successful conduct of Amarnath Yatra and the Hajj and other administrative decisions including the steps taken for security personnel especially the J&K Police, employees and youth.

“I convey my greetings and good wishes to the people of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. I also pay homage to our great leaders who made enormous sacrifices to win freedom for our country. Today, we must also strongly affirm our dedication to safeguarding the unity and integrity of our nation. On this day, I take this opportunity to pay respectful homage and salute the brave hearts of the State Police, Central Armed Police Forces and the Army who made the supreme sacrifice to preserve the territorial integrity of our country,” he said.

While winding up his address, Malik said that he envisioned a bright future for the people of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh, ensuring no discrimination and full rights for women, Srinagar and Jammu becoming global metropolises with International Airports, boost to tourism with better infrastructure, creating jobs for youth, large scale industrial development, generating employment and growth, J&K becoming a hub for medical tourism and democratic representation for refugees and Safai Karamchari with flow of benefits of central laws and schemes to everyone and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs) and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) becoming instruments for local self governance.
