AIMIM stone pelters attacked police, passengers, trains shouting Allah-ho-Akbar in WB.

AIMIM stone pelters attacked police, passengers, trains shouting Allah-ho-Akbar in WB.

Not in Kashmir, now AIMIM stone pelters attacked trains, blocked railways in South 24 Parganas to register their protest against Removal of Art. 370, Criminalizing Triple Talaq and alleged attacks on Muslims over Jai Shri Ram slogan.

Upendra Bharti | HENB | Sangrampur (South 24 Pgs, WB) | Aug 14, 2019:: On the very Pak Independence Day on 14th Aug, the AIMIM (All India Majlis-e-Ittehad-ul-Muslimeen, the notorious party of Owaisi brothers) protestors showed their solidarity with Kashmir separatists, as an agenda of Pakistan.

The AIMIM stone pelters heavily attacked trains, blocked railways at Sangrampur Railway Station (Eastern Railway) areas in South 24 Parganas in West Bengal to register their protest against Removal of Art. 370, Criminalizing Triple Talaq and alleged attacks on Muslims over Jai Shri Ram slogan.

Violent AIMIM supporters went rampage and pelted stone take from railway tracks, few minutes after they started their agitation at Sangrampur Rly station around 8.30 am. The normal train services was suspended for hours till evening and the authority compelled to cut short the train services on emergent situation.

Extra contingent of GRP and RAF was deployed to control over the violent situation fueled by the fanatic Jihadi people shouting Allah-ho-Akbar.

The daily passengers, students and traders faced a lot of troubles due to violent protest of AIMIM and many of their supporters got into the trains to frighten the Hindu passengers by wielding arms and filthy languages. Police personnel on duty and passengers were also attacked by the Muslim agitators fanned by AIMIM. Many of police and passengers were injured, as reports came in.

From some video clippings it is ascertained that an AIMIM office situated at Kalikapota in Sangrampur area operated the whole agitation and their supporters went in copy book stone pelting like the separatist elements of Kashmir valley.

The AIMIM is spreading fast in West Bengal in the Muslim dominated areas as the ruling TMC has no control over the Jihadi situation in the state.

Read this news in Bengali:

Recently, AIMIM organized a big rally at Esplanade area in Kolkata where provocations were made openly against BJP and Hindu organisations in open day light. The police of CM Mamata Banerjee did not take any action for that subversive propaganda. Rather, Muslim appeasement in WB is the prime cause of Jihadi abundance in the state.

The Hindu interlocutor and Hindu Existence Web Editor, Upananda Brahmachari expressed his concern to this Jihadi increase in West Bengal in a political indulgence of the ruling party of the state.

Brahmachari told HENB, “Throwing stones to the Kaffirs, Mushriks and Munafiks for killing them or to attack, is an old and barbaric practice of fanatic Islam. The psychology of the Muslim stone-pelters are same whether it is in Kashmir or West Bengal… Syria or Pakistan. They want to deny the law of the land for establishment of Sharia or to annihilate non-Muslims by hook or by crook. Still the Islamic orthodoxy lies in primitive barbarism. They are not social enough. Non-Muslims must raise their voice against such Jihadi cult in Islam”.

….

__with inputs from Breaking Bengal, Dainik Jugasankha and Dr S Pramanik.

If you think it’s necessary to build up Hindu awareness thru us, plz donate here http://paypal.me/hinduexistence as you like.
