Man stabs roommate for not inviting him to dinner

The duo resided at Haji Tabela chawl in Bandra (east) with four others, police said adding that both worked together at a garment unit.

The incident was reported by two of their friends who witnessed the murder, police said.

Mumbai: A 19-year-old Bandra resident stabbed his 21-year-old roommate to death after the latter invited his friends for dinner but not the accused.

The duo resided at Haji Tabela chawl in Bandra (east) with four others, police said adding that both worked together at a garment unit.

The deceased was identified as Ayub Hussain (21), who was stabbed to death by his friend and colleague Sarhad Khan (19) on Wednesday afternoon. The incident was reported by two of their friends who witnessed the murder, police said.

“The room was occupied by four people who worked at the same place. We have seized the knife used in the murder. We are also investigating if there was any other reason behind the animosity,” said an officer of the Nirmal Nagar police station.

Preliminary probe revealed that the accused and the victim had a fight over petty issues on Tuesday night, following which both went out for sightseeing with other roommates.

Subsequently, they all went for dinner at a dhaba in Kalyan where Khan was asked not to join them. The official said that dinner was a treat from Hussain to his friends.

A day later, furious Khan lost his cool and in a fit of rage stabbed Hussain with a knife.

The two witnesses rushed the victim to Bhabha Hospital where he was declared dead.

The duo, subsequently, informed the police and when Khan came to check on Hussain, the police arrested him.

The police booked Khan under section 302 (murder) of the Indian Penal Code and he has been remanded to police custody for further investigation in the case.

In June, a vegetable vendor was arrested for allegedly stabbing his customer to death over a dispute on payment of `10 in Dadar area. The deceased, Mohammed Hanif, had gone to purchase vegetable in a market in Dadar area of the city around 11 pm on Monday when the incident took place. A dispute broke out between the man and a vegetable vendor which escalated to such a level that the latter stabbed him with his vegetable knife.
