Faridabad Police detain SHO named in DCP's suicide note on charges of blackmailing, abetment to suicide

DCP Kapoor's residence where he committed suicide earlier this week

Key Highlights DCP Kapoor shot himself at his residence in the early hours of August 14 Police recovered a suicide note where Kapoor had named Abdul Shaheed and one Satish Malik As per the FIR, both the accused have been booked for abetment to suicide and blackmail

Faridabad: Two days after Vikram Kapoor, an Indian Police Services (IPS) officer committed suicide at his residence in Faridabad's Sector 30, Haryana Police have arrested a local police officer in connection with his death. Posted as the Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) of the city's New Industrial Area (NIA), Kapoor reportedly shot himself with the service revolver of his gunman. His body was found by family members at around 6 am on Wednesday, August 14.

A preliminary search of the deceased's home in the Police Lines led investigators to a suicide note where Kapoor had mentioned Abdul Shaheed, the station-house officer of Bhupani area along with the SHO's associate Satish Malik. Faridabad Police detained Shaheed on the basis of the top cop's suicide note and a written complaint from his wife. Kapoor's son claimed that the two accused had been blackmailing his father for the past couple of weeks which is what drove him to take the drastic step.

According to the FIR, Shaheed and Malik were blackmailing the DCP by threatening to implicate him in a false case. A probe is underway to ascertain the exact reason for the blackmail. While Shaheed has been detained, police are yet to apprehend Malik. In his suicide note, Kapoor had mentioned both of the accused and held them responsible for his death. Along with scanning CCTV footage from the DCP's residence, investigators are also combing through the call records of all the concerned parties.

Sube Singh, PRO of Faridabad Police said that an FIR has been registered against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) for blackmailing and abetment of suicide. Kapoor's family members heard a gunshot and rushed to the living room where they saw him seated on the sofa amidst a pool of blood with the service revolver in his right hand. He had reportedly put the barrel in his mouth and pulled the trigger. Following the incident, ballistic and FSL experts were called in to collect fingerprints and gun powder on the deceased's hand. The same will be matched with an empty cartridge and other bullets found in the chamber of the gun recovered from the spot.

Kapoor, who had joined Haryana Police as an Assistant Sub-Inspector (ASI) in 1983, was cremated later in the day on August 14. He was promoted to the IPS in 2017 and posted as the DCP of (NIT) Faridabad after serving as a DCP at the Police Headquarters in Faridabad and Gurugram.
