Terror groups in PoK launch anti-India protests, threaten to launch jihad in J&K over dilution of Article 370

This is not the first time that terrorists in Pakistan have openly carried out protests despite the country being in Grey List of Financial Action Task Force | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The Pakistani authorities are actively encouraging terror groups like Hizbul Mujahideen and United Jihad Council to launch jihad against India Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan has vowed to fight against any Indian violations in Kashmir Saifulla also praised former dictator General Zia Ul-Haq for threatening to wage war against India when Rajiv Gandhi was at the helm

Muzaffarabad: After the abrogation of Article 370 which ended the special status of Jammu & Kashmir, terror outfits in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK), regrouped with an aim to launch 'jihad' against India.

The Pakistani authorities are actively encouraging terror groups like Hizbul Mujahideen and United Jihad Council (UJC), headed by Syed Salahudeen to target India after the revocation of Article 370 and Article 35A.

On Thursday, Khalid Saifulla, and Naib Ameer of Hizbul Mujahideen along with former terrorists participated in an anti-India protest outside the Press Club in Muzaffarabad giving a call to wage jihad against India.

In a video which surfaced on the social media, Saifulla said, “Action works more than words. My friends, we are all ready for jihad. Syed Salahudeen, move forward, we are with you.”

Saifulla also praised former dictator General Zia Ul-Haq for threatening to wage war against India when Rajiv Gandhi was at the helm.

It all started with Operation Brasstacks, a major military exercise carried out by the Indian Army in Rajasthan to replicate the operational capabilities of the Indian armed forces. It was the largest troop mobilizations of Indian forces in the Indian subcontinent which rattled the Pakistani military establishment.

Reading an excerpt of the brief conversation between Zia and Rajiv Gandhi, when the former visited India to watch a test match between India and Pakistan, Saifulla told the gathering "Mr Rajiv you want to invade Pakistan? Ok fine, go ahead! But please remember one thing that after that people will forget Changez Khan and Hulagu Khan and will remember Zia and Rajiv Gandhi only. Because it will not be a Conventional War."

He added, "Pakistan may possibly suffer annihilation but Muslims will still survive because there are several Muslim countries in the world. But remember there is only one India and I shall wipe out Hinduism and Hindu religion from the face of the earth! And if you don't order complete de-escalation and demobilisation before my return to Pakistan, the first word of mouth I will utter will be "Fire"!"

This is not the first time that terrorists in Pakistan have openly carried out protests despite the country being in Grey List of Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the international watchdog which keeps an eye on laundering and financing of terrorism.

Earlier, Pakistan’s Prime Minister, Imran Khan, threatening to “teach Delhi a lesson” pledged to fight till the end against any Indian violations in Kashmir.
