[VIDEO] Karnataka: Troubled over financial matters, family of five shoot each other in mass suicide-pact

Police officials are examining the area where the bodies were found (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The bodies were recovered from a lodge on Friday morning Police officials are ascertaining the exact cause of death Initial inputs suggest that the suicides were a result of financial troubles

Bengaluru: In a disquieting development which is emerging from the state of Karnataka, five members of a family allegedly committed suicide at a lodge near Gundlupete in Chamrajanagar district of the state. The bodies of a couple, two senior citizens and one child who was reportedly four-years-old were found in the early hours of Friday in an agricultural field.

Police officials have arrived at the scene and an investigation has been launched into the deaths. A preliminary probe suggests that the family took the drastic step owing to financial troubles, however, the exact reason for their decision is yet to be ascertained. Initial inputs also suggest that members of the family shot each other in what seems to be a case of mass suicide.

The deceased had been residing at the lodge for the past couple of days. While the local police department has managed to identify the victims, their identities are yet to be revealed to the media. The husband allegedly shot his pregnant wife, son and parents, before turning the gun to himself. More details are awaited as this is a developing story and investigators are in the process of investigating the circumstances surrounding the victims' demise.

This horrific incident brings back memories of the Burari mass suicide where eleven members of a family killed themselves at their home in Delhi. An investigation later revealed that the victims were attempting a ritual to connect with their deceased patriarch when the ritual went awry and led to the deaths of eleven people, including two school-going children. Psychologists familiar with the case had suggested that the family members were suffering from a case of 'shared psychosis'.

A somewhat similar incident had come to light from Punjab earlier this month where a 27-year-old man allegedly killed five members of his family before committing suicide. The chilling tragedy took place at Nathuwal village which falls under the Baghanpurana police station. Police officials had identified the victims as the man's grandmother, father, mother, sister and her three-year-old daughter.

In July of this year, a doctor and his three family members were found dead at their home in Gurugram's Sector 49. Police suspected that the PhD holder killed three of his family members before turning the gun to himself. The bodies of all four members were found hanging from a ceiling. While injury marks were found on the bodies, investigators have denied any foul play.

A family in Telangana had also suffered the same fate in June of this year when the father who worked as a supervisor at a granite company fed his family members biryani laced with poison.
