Rajasthan: Blind Dalit man kills self after getting threat calls from son's killers

Nearly a month after 28-year-old Harish Jatav was beaten to death after his motorcycle hit a woman in Bhiwandi, Rajasthan, his blind father has committed suicide, allegedly by consuming poison.

The deceased, Rattiran Jatav, a Dalit, reportedly killed himself on Thursday night after police failed to act against the people who killed his son last month. It is also alleged that he killed himself because he was receiving threat calls from the accused.

Superintendent of Police (SP) Alwar said the man was brought dead to the hospital. "The case is being investigated."

Meanwhile, Rattiram's second son, Dinesh Jatav told news agency ANI, "My father kept pleading with the police for justice but they did not pay heed to his request. If the police had taken action against the accused in my brother's murder case then my father would have been with us today. He had consumed poison as he was not served justice."

Ratiram's body has been kept by the police in the mortuary of the Rajiv Gandhi Hospital. A post-mortem will be conducted as his family has requested for it.

On July 16, Harish Jatav was riding his motorcycle in Falsa village when he hit a woman who fell unconscious and was taken to a hospital. Angered over this, her neighbours caught hold of Harish and beat him up. Harish sustained critical injuries on his head and was taken to Safdarjung Hospital in New Delhi. He succumbed to his injuries on July 18.

Rajasthan: Father of the man(who was beaten to death in Bhiwadi allegedly by a group of people last month after his motorbike hit a woman) has committed suicide allegedly after receiving threat calls. SP Alwar says, "the man was brought dead to the hospital, probe underway" pic.twitter.com/sBiRPqFlKF ANI (@ANI) August 16, 2019

Police had then booked Umer Singh and few others in this case, based on a complaint filed by Harish's father. The case was registered under sections 323 (punishment for voluntarily causing hurt), 341 (punishment for wrongful restraint) and 34 (acts are done by several persons in furtherance of common intention) of the Indian Penal Code and under sections of the SC/ST Act.

Police had said it wasn't a case of mob lynching "but a simple case of a road accident".

Meanwhile, husband of the woman who was hit by Harish's motorcycle too had filed a case against Harish on July 17. He had alleged that Harish was in an inebriated condition and was riding his motorcycle speedily in a rash and negligent manner. He said Harish was injured in the accident.

A case under sections 279 (rash driving or riding on a public way) and 337 (causing hurt by act endangering life or personal safety of others) of the Indian Penal Code were registered against Harish Jatav.

ALSO READ | Rajasthan: Man thrashed to death after his motorcycle hits a woman

ALSO READ | Delhi: Bike-borne men kill man outside his house in Sangam Vihar

ALSO WATCH | CCTV captures rider-less bike on Delhi road after biker dies in freak accident
