The Purple Turtle: The Purple Turtle to invest Rs 12 crore for expansion in FY20, Real Estate News, ET RealEstate

NEW DELHI: The Purple Turtle , a lighting and home decor brand, will be investing Rs 12 crore in the financial year 2019-20 to expand its reach, said Radeesh Shetty , founder of the company. In an interview with, Shetty talks about his business plans for coming months.The company witnessed a growth of about 35% since last year. "It was a very hard year for us as a lot of hospitality projects which we were working-on in Bengaluru , Mumbai and Hyderabad were put on hold while a lot of other projects were called-off," said Shetty.He adds that while they do buffer for projects getting delayed but when its a larger volume that kind of impacts them because there's a lot of effort that goes into planning of a project and they also plan their finances accordingly sometimes even hiring additional people.Shetty however feels that this financial will be better. The last six months have been fairly good according to him. "We are looking to double our revenue this financial year because we have invested in opening a lot of new stores and there's been a fair amount of investment and talent as well," added Shetty.Co-working spaces is one of the segments Shetty thinks can help him expand. "I think there is a lot of growth happening in this segment and we are witnessing lot of enquiries."In this financial year the company plans to expand to Mumbai. Also, they are expanding their retail footprint in Bengaluru by opening three more stores in the city. "In future we want to move to Delhi, Cochin and Coimbatore," said Shetty.The Purple Turtle currently has presence in Bengaluru, Chennai , Hyderabad, Calicut and Ahmedabad. "In some of these cities, we have partnered with stores who have other products as well. But now we want to have our own exclusive stores in these cities."As of now, about 60 per cent of the overall projects the company works on are commercial, 20% are hospitality which includes restaurants and hotels and the rest 20% is residential. "As of now, our focus is not on residential projects but having said that we still do large installations for homes."It manufactures about 50 per cent of its products from Sarjapur (Bengaluru) based factory while 45 per cent comes merchandising team which source products from across the country. Rest 5 per cent of the products are imported from China. The company is also looking to expand its material manufacturing product within the existing factory.
