Escalation in ceasefire violations by Pakistan a ploy to show Kashmir as potential flashpoint: Army sources

General Bipin Rawat

Key Highlights By escalating ceasefire violations, Pakistan wants to show Kashmir as a potential flashpoint to the world community Sources in the Indian Army also rejected claims made by Pakistan that five Indian soldiers were killed in the ceasefire violations Tension between both the countries escalated after Article 370 was abrogated ending the special status of Jammu & Kashmir

New Delhi: The Indian Army has said that Pakistan has upscaled ceasefire violation both "in terms of weapon and area" in last few days with an aim to show Kashmir as a potential flashpoint to seek world attention.

Earlier, the Indian Army said that three Pakistani soldiers were killed in punitive proactive response after ceasefire violations by Pakistan Army. As per the Army sources, ceasefire violations are still taking place in Uri and Rajouri sectors.

This comes ahead of the United Nations sessions with Pakistan ready to play the victim card with the hope that 'escalating ceasefire violations may invite due attention' from the world community.

Sources in the Indian Army also rejected claims made by the Pakistani Army that five Indian soldiers were killed in the ceasefire violations along the Line of Control.

Earlier in the day, Pakistani Army in a tweet had admitted that three of its soldiers were killed in the ceasefire violations.

Pakistani military spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor in a tweet said, “In efforts to divert attention from the precarious situation in IOJ&K, Indian Army increases firing along LOC. 3 Pakistani soldiers embraced shahadat. Pakistan Army responded effectively. 5 Indian soldiers killed, many injured, bunkers damaged. Intermittent exchange of fire continues.”

Ever since the Narendra Modi-led NDA government abrogated Article 370 ending the special status of Jammu and Kashmir Pakistan has downgraded diplomatic ties with India apart from suspending bilateral trade.

Lodging a strong protest with India, Pakistan summoned Indian Deputy High Commissioner Gaurav Ahluwalia condemning the alleged ceasefire violations by Indian troops along the Line of Control (LoC).

Foreign Office spokesperson Mohammad Faisal urged the Indian side to order its forces to respect the ceasefire.

While India maintains that the UN Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) has outlived its utility and is irrelevant after the Simla Agreement and the consequent establishment of the LoC, Pakistan has said that the Indian side should allow UNMOGIP to play its mandated role as per the UN Security Council resolutions.

The tension between both the countries escalated after Article 370 was abrogated ending the special status of Jammu & Kashmir. President Ram Nath Kovind declared abrogation of the provisions of Article 370 of the Constitution after both the houses passed a resolution in this regard.

"In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of Article 370 read with clause (1) of Article 370 of the Constitution of India, the President, on the recommendation of Parliament, is pleased to declare that, as from the 6th August 2019, all clauses of the said Article 370 shall cease to be operative...," an official notification said.

The decision to bifurcate Ladakh from Jammu and Kashmir and turn the two regions into separate Union territories received support from regional parties with few leaders from the Congress also supporting the move.
