Bihar Police raid Mokama MLA Anant Kumar Singh's residence; AK-47 rifle, live bullets recovered

Mokama MLA Anant Kumar Singh | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The raid was conducted at Anant Singh's ancestral home in Nadwa village Anant Singh alias Chote Sarkar is an Independent MLA who represents the Mokama Assembly segment Anant Singh has accused Janata Dal (United) leader Lallan Singh of forcing police to raid his house

Patna: The Bihar Police on Friday recovered an AK-47 rifle and several live bullets from the residence of gangster-turned-politician Anant Kumar Singh during a raid.

The raid was conducted at Anant Singh's ancestral home in Nadwa village, which falls under Badh Police Station limits.

Reports suggest that a bomb has also been found at his residence. The Patna Police have called in a bomb disposal squad and sniffer dogs. A team of Anti-Terrorism Squad and Special Task Force have also reached the spot.

"The house was unlocked in the presence of a magistrate with proper videography. An AK-47 rifle and other suspicious things have been recovered for which we have called Bomb Squad team from Patna. We are taking further action on it. This has been recovered from the house of MLA Anant Singh," a senior police officer said.

"As I told you earlier that this has been done in the presence of a magistrate, the entire incident has been videographed. You can see that no damage has been done," the police officer added.

Anant Singh alias 'Chhote Sarkar' is an Independent MLA who represents the Mokama Assembly segment.

The police action, conducted under the direction of SP (rural) Kantesh Kumar Mishra, followed specific inputs regarding the presence of a large cache of arms and ammunition in the residence of Anant Singh.

The Mokama MLA and his family members were not present when police raided the house.

Meanwhile, Anant Singh has accused Janata Dal (United) leader Rajiv Ranjan Singh alias Lalan Singh of making the Bihar Police raid his house. He alleged that Lallan Singh does not want him to contest the 2020 Bihar Assembly Elections.

"I contested election against Lalan Singh that is why I am being hounded. Lipi Singh (Barh SP) has been brought to Barh to trouble me," Singh told the media.

"My home is not being raided...it is being demolished by 100 policemen. Na Kurki hai, na jabti hai..mera ghar tod rahe hain 4 baje bhore se (My house is being demolished since 4 am)" he added.

Police have rejected Singh's allegations about his house being demolished.

Rajiv Ranjan Singh, the JD(U) MP from Munger parliamentary constituency, had trounced the Mokama MLA's wife and Congress candidate Neelam Devi in 2019 Lok Sabha Elections.

Once believed to be close to Nitish Kumar, Singh hoped that the Bihar Chief Minister would help him get justice in the matter.

In 2005 Bihar Assembly Elections, Anant Singh had won Mokama by defeating another gangster-turned-politician Suraj Bhan

Singh.

In 2004, the Bihar MLA was named in a case for brandishing an AK-47 at a party.
