Madhya Pradesh: Minor, her mother murdered by 25-year-old neighbour; later takes his own life

The father of the minor had gone out of the house to attend a religious ceremony and was being accompanied by his son (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The incident took place in Chhindwara, Madhya Pradesh on Thursday The accused committed suicide by jumping into a pond on Friday For the last six months, the accused had been harassing the minor

Bhopal: A woman and her daughter were murdered by their neighbour in Chhindwara town of Madhya Pradesh late night on Thursday. The 25-year-old accused ended his own life after murdering the mother-daughter duo by jumping into a pond. The incident came to light after the body of the accused was found in a pond on Friday.

The accused has been identified as Subham. Subham allegedly killed the minor and her mother at the latter's residence in Old Power House locality. The father of the minor had gone out of the house to attend a religious ceremony and was accompanied by his son.

The police said that the accused had attacked the minor and her mother with a sharp-edged weapon. The minor's father, Rajesh Soni claimed that the accused had been harassing his daughter since the past six months. He also alleged that he had approached the police in relation to the same and had lodged a complaint against the 25-year-old youth.

Soni said, "I had been to the police station two-three times and have given a complaint in written too. "He said that the accused was detained by the police after he approached them but was released later. Soni added that a few days earlier, Subham's friend had approached him and had asked him to work out a compromise with him. He further added that the accused's friend had assured him that he will not harass the minor again.

What the police have to say

Manoj Rai, Superintendent of Police Chhindwara said that the accused was identified after scanning the footage of the CCTV camera installed at the residence of his neighbours. Rai said that the accused and the deceased's families had lodged complaints against each other in the past but they had withdrawn them after reaching a compromise. He also said that the two families had given their written consent stating that they did not want the police to take any action against either of them.

Chief Superintendent of Police Chhindwara has been asked to find out the nature of the complaints filed by the two families. Rai said, "I had ordered a probe and instructed the CSP Chhindwara to find out what type of complaints were made and what action was taken against the complaint made by the girl's family." He said that if the police officials are found to be guilty of negligence or inaction, the authorities will take strict action against them.
