Salman Khan's Bigg Boss 13 To Have War Theme In New Season?

All you #BiggBoss fans, here's a tricky question for you! If #ShilpaShinde and @ms_dipika were in the same season of #BiggBoss, who do you think would have won? #BB13 #BB13War and let us know! :) — COLORS (@ColorsTV) August 14, 2019

After a lackluster season twelve, the makers of ‘Bigg Boss’ are all set to launch a new season on Colors channel. Salman Khan’s ‘Bigg Boss 13’ will feature only celebrities as contestants. The channel had earlier shared a picture on social media from the promo shoot of ‘Bigg Boss 13’ . Speculations were rife that ‘Bigg Boss 13’ will have horror as its theme for the new season. The channel is promoting the show on Twitter and engaging the fans by asking them to tweet using #BB13War. One of the tweets of Colors TV’s verified Twitter handle read, "All you #BiggBoss fans, here's a tricky question for you! If #ShilpaShinde and @ms_dipika were in the same season of #BiggBoss, who do you think would have won? #BB13 Tweet using #BB13War and let us know! :)" Check out the tweet!The tweet was enough to provoke Shilpa Shinde and Dipika Kakar’s fans and they were embroiled in a war of words over who would have won the show if they were in the same season.The tweet with the hashtag #BB13War has sparked rumours that ‘Bigg Boss 13’ will have a war theme inside the house. Interestingly, 'Bigg Boss 12' had the theme of 'Vichitra Jodi' last year. If the rumours turn to be true, we believe the viewers will definitely get to see new drama everyday in the show.Salman Khan has already shot for the promo of ‘Bigg Boss 13’. Gossip mills are buzzing with the rumours that ‘Naagin 3’ actress Surbhi Jyoti and Karan Wahi have also shot for the same. The makers are yet to confirm the development. The makers of the show have reportedly increased the total prize money from Rs 40-50 lakh to Rs 1 crore in 'Bigg Boss 13'. Interestingly, the popular reality show will be shot in Mumbai in the new season, instead of the original location Lonavala.Seven popular celebs have been rumoured to be part of ‘BB 13’ . The names of Sidharth Shukla, Chunky Panday, Devoleena Bhattacharjee, Mugdha Godse, Mahika Sharma, Rajpal Yadav and Aditya Narayan have been doing the rounds as confirmed contestants of 'Bigg Boss 13’.Stay tuned for more telly updates!
