BOMBSHELL!!! FG Tried To Kill El-zakzaky In India – IMN – Igbere TV

The Islamic Movement in Nigeria (IMN) has said that the Federal Government attempted to kill its leader, Ibrahim El-Zakzaky, while in India through its stringent security arrangement.

The group said this in a statement on Friday on the return of El-Zakzaky to Nigeria after his botched trip to India for medical treatment, Igbere TV reports.

“The interference of the government raised suspicion that it was planning to kill the Sheikh in India using its international connections,” the statement said.

“He insisted that if he would not be allowed to see the doctors that brought him to India he would rather come back to Nigeria and seek another destination for his treatment.

“This became clear because of the government’s stance insisting on other doctors than the ones that he was in India to meet. They finally decided to bring him back for refusing to succumb to be treated by their chosen doctors.”

The statement continued: “It is worth noting that the Kaduna high court allowed the Sheikh to go to India with the government only supervising, instead the federal government presented him to the Indian government as a dangerous suspect with an unknown ailment coming to India and demanded stringent security placed on him. There was even a report that the security agents in India subjected him to physical assault.

“It is glaringly clear that the Nigerian government had an ULTERIOR MOTIVE it was nursing using its connections in India when it violated court order and interfered with the procedures of the Sheikh’s treatment.

This can also be deduced from the way the security agents whisked him away to unknown destination after arrival at Abuja International airport, without allowing him to have audience with the journalists that were waiting for his arrival.”

El-Zakzaky and his wife, Zeenah, returned to the country around noon on Friday and landed at the Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport, Abuja.

They were immediately taken into custody by the Department of State Services (DSS).

The IMN condemned the act, calling on the DSS to publicly declare where El-Zakzaky is being held.

The group added that it would “continue its struggle to ensure that our leader gets the appropriate medical treatment he deserves as ordered by the Kaduna High court.”
