J-K: Indian Army foils multiple infiltration attempts by terrorists backed by Pak Army in Keran sector

New Delhi:

Indian Army foiled multiple infiltration attempts by terrorists backed by the Pakistan Army in the Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir on Thursday night. The Pakistan Army is increasing its attempts to push terrorists in the Indian territory, sources told news agency ANI.

The sources said to push terrorists from multiple points inside Indian territory, Pakistan has activated a major communication hub in Kali Ghati area near Neelam Valley in Pakistan occupied Kashmir to facilitate terrorists trying to infiltrate.

“The communication hub with a range of 50-60 km, allows terrorists to communicate with their guides even across the LoC. Indian Army positions alerted on the LoC to prevent any misadventure by Pakistan Army,” the sources added.

All bases of the Indian Army, Indian Air Force and other security forces in Jammu and Kashmir have been asked to be on high alert against possible attempt by Pakistan-backed terrorist groups to carry out terror attacks in view of Pakistani efforts to create disturbances in the Kashmir Valley, ANI added.

On Tuesday night, the Indian Army foiled a major infiltration attempt of terrorists backed by the Pakistan Army in the Uri sector of Jammu and Kashmir. The infiltration push was backed by heavy firing from Pakistan Army posts. The attempt of the Pakistan Army was to push a group of terrorists into India to unleash violence in Jammu and Kashmir. The Indian Army positions are on high alert to tackle any such threat from Pakistan, the sources.

In August 4, the Indian Army used Bofors howitzers to foil an attack by Pakistan Army's BAT on forward post in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir. "A BAT attempt was made on one of the forward posts in Keran sector (in Kupwara district) and foiled by alert troops resulting in neutralising of five to seven Pak regulars/terrorists," defence spokesman Col Rajesh Kalia had said.

"Bofors guns have been used to hit at military targets inside the Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) where terror camps are being aided and abetted by the Pakistan Army," India Today quoted sources in the Army as saying. "However, the Indian Army ensures that targets are only military and terrorists who are supported by the Pakistan Army," the source added.

The defence spokesperson said Pakistan has made a number of attempts in the last 36 hours to disturb peace in the Valley and to target Amarnath Yatra.

He said four hardcore Jaish-e-Mohammad terrorists were neutralised in two operations in which a cache of sniper rifle, IED and mine with Pakistan markings were recovered.

"This clearly indicates complicity of Pakistan in terror activities. Security forces will continue to respond to all nefarious activities along the LoC and hinterland," he said.

Sources said the BAT attempt was made on the intervening night of July 31 and August 1.

At least four bodies, possibly of Pakistan Army's Special Service Group (SSG) commandos or terrorists, were seen in close proximity of an Indian post in the sector, they said, adding search operations and attempts to take the bodies were being continuously interfered with by Pakistani troops deployed in the area.

Following India’s move to strip Kashmir of its special status given under Article 370 of the Constitution, terror launch pads in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (PoK) have been re-activated and terrorists make infiltration attempts very night, according to reports, citing a top Army official.

"Terror launch pads in Pakistan occupied Kashmir is full of terrorists. They are attempting to infiltrate every night but we are able to detect and stop them," India Today quoted Lt General KJS Dhillon as saying recently.

Pakistan has been opposing India's move to remove provisions of Article 370 of the Indian Constitution that gave Jammu and Kashmir a significant autonomy for decades and divide the state into two Union Territories.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had warned New Delhi of more Pulwama like incidents after its move on Kashmir. After Imran Khan’s threat, there were reports that terrorists from PoK had started assembling near the LoC in a bid to infiltrate into the Indian side.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
