After Dabangg 3, Salman Khan will dive into Alia Bhatt starrer Inshallah and the reality show Bigg Boss

If there is one superstar who is extremely occupied with a series of projects, it is Salman Khan. The actor is currently in Jaipur, Rajasthan to shoot for his upcoming film with Sonakshi Sinha, Dabangg 3. The film had kicked off a few months back and is in the process of filming. Salman along with Sonakshi and Saiee Manjrekar will be shooting in the Pink city for the next few days for the cop drama and then will wrap up the film.

As per a report in Mumbai Mirror, Salman had kicked off the Jaipur schedule of Dabangg 3 on Independence Day and it will go on for next 8 days. Post this, reportedly Salman will be taking a small break and will be heading to the US. Post that, the Dabangg 3 actor will return to Mumbai and kick start Sanjay Leela Bhansali’s film Inshallah alongside Alia Bhatt. Also, Salman will be shooting for Bigg Boss 13 in Mumbai itself as he has to simultaneously shoot for Inshallah in Mumbai.

(Also Read: EXCLUSIVE: Sonakshi Sinha off to Jaipur to shoot Dabangg 3 with Salman Khan, will miss Rakshabandhan this year)

A source quoted to the daily, “The crew (Dabangg 3) is filming at a remote village, Basco, on the Agra road, which is 50 km away from Jaipur city. The shoot started on Independence Day. A huge crowd had gathered around the spot to get a glimpse of Salman. It’s an outdoor schedule, and the idea is to capture the monuments of Jaipur.” About Inshallah, the report stated, “The film was supposed to kick o by mid-August, however, owing to the tight schedules of both the leads, the shoot will now only commence in the first week of September in Mumbai. Like all Salman films, Inshallah will take around 100 days to be completed.”

About Bigg Boss, the source mentioned to the daily that it remains a weekly affair for Salman and he will be shooting for the same in Mumbai instead of Lonavala this year. Also, the theme for this year’s season will be more youth-centric. Meanwhile, Salman shared a video yesterday on Instagram while shooting for Dabangg 3 in Jaipur. The actor wished his fans on Rakhi and Independence Day. Dabangg 3 is helmed by Prabhudheva and also stars Arbaaz Khan and South star Sudeep. Dabangg 3 is slated to release on December 20, 2019.
