A friend of the world

Diplomats at a discussion in UN Headquarters recalled the contribution of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman in realising rights of the deprived, terming Bangabandhu a “Friend of the World”.

They said the struggle and sacrifice of Bangabandhu in realising the rights of deprived people is a glowing example for the international community.

Permanent Mission of Bangladesh to the United Nations arranged the discussion at the UN Headquarters on Thursday, marking the 44th martyrdom anniversary of Bangabandhu and his family members, according to an official message received yesterday.

Former UN Under Secretary General and former Bangladesh Permanent Representative to the UN Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, Indian Permanent Representative to the UN Syed Akbaruddin, Serbian Permanent Representative Milan Milanovic, Cuban Ambassador Ana Silvia Rodriguez Abascal, Palestine Permanent Representative Riyad H Mansour, Bangladesh Permanent Representative to the UN Ambassador Masud Bin Momen and president of the USA unit of Awami League Dr Siddiqur Rahman, among others, spoke at the discussion.

Anwarul Karim said Bangabandhu, as a global leader, had played an outstanding role in achieving UN membership of Bangladesh. He highlighted a newly-born nation to the world, Karim added.

Recalling India’s long-standing relations with Bangladesh, Syed Akbaruddin said August 15 is India’s Independence Day, but when people of India heard that Bangabandhu and most of his family members were killed on August 15 in 1975, their mirth turned to mourning instantly.

He said the principle and ideology of Bangabandhu are being reflected in different activities of the United Nations.

Reading out a message of the Serbian foreign minister, issued on the occasion of National Mourning Day, Milan Milanovic highlighted the friendship between Bangabandhu and former President of Yugoslavia Marshal Josip Broz Tito.

Riyad H Mansour said 44 years after the assassination of Bangabandhu, his martyrdom anniversary was observed in the UN Headquarters, which is an outstanding initiative to pay homage to the legendary leader.

In his welcome address, Ambassador Momen highlighted the role and ideology of Bangabandhu in empowering people, protecting human rights, ensuring socioeconomic freedom and establishing democracy and peace.

Bangladesh Permanent Mission to the UN observed the National Mourning Day in the UN Headquarters for the first time with due solemnity.

Permanent representatives of different countries to the UN, diplomats, UN officials, rights activists and writers, among others, joined the programmes.

Earlier in the day, the national flag was hoisted at half-mast atop Bangladesh Permanent Mission. Milad and doa mahfils were also held, seeking eternal peace of the departed souls of Bangabandhu and his family members.
