Bangabandhu's birth centenary to be celebrated in UNHQs

Bangladesh Permanent Representative to the UN Ambassador Masud Bin Momen has said they are planning to celebrate the birth centenary of Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman at the UN.

"The year 2020 marks the birth centenary of Bangabandhu. We are planning to celebrate the birth centenary at the UN," he said while addressing a discussion at the UN headquarters in New York on Thursday.

Bangladesh Permanent Mission to the UN observed the National Mourning Day in the UN headquarters for the first time with due solemnity.

Former UN Under Secretary General and former Bangladesh Permanent Representative to the UN Anwarul Karim Chowdhury, Indian Permanent Representative to the UN Syed Akbaruddin, Serbian Permanent Representative Milan Milanovic, Cuba Ambassador Ana Silvia Rodriguez Abascal, Palestine Permanent Representative Riyad H Mansur, president of the USA unit of Awami League Dr Siddiqur Rahman, among others, spoke at the discussion.

They described Bangabandhu a ‘Friend of the World’ and recalled his contributions in realizing the rights of deprived people around the world, according to a media release issued on Friday.

The diplomats said death cannot defeat Bangabandhu rather he lives in the memory of his people and the world.

Anwarul Karim Chowdhury said Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, as a global leader, had played an outstanding role in achieving UN membership of Bangladesh, highlighting a newly born nation to the world and advancing pluralism.

Reading out the message of Serbian Foreign Minister, issued on the occasion of the National Mourning Day of Bangladesh, Milan Milanovic highlighted the deep friendship between Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and former President of Yugoslavia Marshal Josip Broz Tito.

Mentioning the friendship of Bangabandhu and Palestine leader Yasser Arafat, Riyad H Mansur said 44-year after the assassination of Bangabandhu, his martyrdom anniversary was observed in the UN Headquarters, which was an outstanding initiative to pay homage to the legendary leader.

Ambassador Momen highlighted the role and ideology of Bangabandhu in empowering people, protecting human rights, ensuring socio-economic freedom and establishing democracy and peace.

He said Bangladesh is now a role model of socio-economic development due to Prime Minister's visionary leadership.

Earlier in the day, the national flag was hoisted at half-mast atop Bangladesh Permanent Mission to the UN marking the national Mourning Day.

Later, the officials of the mission stood silence for one minute.

A milad and doa mahfil were held there seeking eternal peace of the departed souls of Bangabandhu and his deceased family members.

A video exhibition on the life and works of Bangabandhu was also screened.
