Pakistan army helps terrorists cross LoC, say officials

New Delhi: Terrorists operating from launchpads near the Line of Control have made 12 attempts in the last three days to enter India, with the Pakistan Army shooting at the Indian side to help them cross the border, defence officials said.These infiltration attempts have largely been in the Uri and Naugam sector. The Pakistan Army has also violated ceasefire along the rest of the LoC, the officials said.Security forces have received intelligence inputs suggesting possibility of a terror attack in the hinterland of Jammu and Kashmir. The army deployed along the LoC and security forces deep inside the territory have been placed on high alert, they said.“The Indian Army is alert and has been able to foil all attempts of infiltration. Pakistan has also been attempting to push terrorists into the hinterland. Our counter-terrorism grid and multi-tiered counter-infiltration grid are effective. The ceasefire violations are also being responded to effectively,” Northern Army Commander Lieutenant General Ranbir Singh told reporters on Friday.“The Indian Army is fully prepared, equipped and ready to undertake any task along or across the LoC. Should there be any misadventure by the Pakistan Army, a befitting punitive response will be given, which will be remembered for times to come,” he said.Officials added that Pakistan’s ‘propaganda’ on J&K has also been increasing. A spokesperson for the Pakistan armed forces twitted on Thursday that three Pakistani soldiers were killed in ceasefire violations along the LoC and five Indian soldiers were killed in retaliation. The Indian Army denied any loss of life and maintained that Pakistani soldiers were killed in an area opposite Naugam across the LoC.Pakistan is heating up the LoC to internationalise the Kashmir issue, the officials said. Tension between the two countries intensified after the Centre revoked Article 370 and split the state into two Union Territories. The United Nations Security Council, too, had a close-door meeting on the Kashmir issue.There are about 16 launchpads with presence of 200 to 250 terrorists near the LoC in Pakistan-occupied Kashmir. There has been a build-up of armed terrorists in these camps since end-July, defence sources said.
