NIT Rourkela professor, wife found dead at official quarters; investigation underway

The security chief informed the police, who broke open the door and recovered the two bodies (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A professor and his wife were found dead within the premises of National Institute of Technology (NIT), Rourkela The door of the professor's house had been locked from inside for the last two days A preliminary investigation has been launched into the case

Rourkela: The mysterious deaths of a professor and his wife have shocked the students and faculty of a leading engineering institute in Odisha. A professor employed at the National Institute of Technology (NIT) Rourkela and his wife were found dead on Saturday. The bodies were found at their official quarter which is located within the premises of the institute. The deceased have been identified as R Jaybala and Malvi Kesavan.

Allegedly, the door of the professor's house had been locked for the past two days. The incident came to light after the neighbours noticed that the door had been locked and called the security chief.

The security chief informed the police, who broke open the door and recovered the two bodies. Additional Superintendent of Police (ASP) and Deputy Superintendent of Police (City) reached the spot immediately and launched a preliminary investigation into the case.

A senior police official said, "The security in-charge here informed us as the doors were closed from inside for the last two days. We have launched a probe. As the investigation is in the preliminary stage, it will be premature to come to any perspective right now. We will look into all minute details.

According to a report, the couple had been married for nine years and had a happy marriage. The parents of the deceased have also been informed about the incident. The police are yet to confirm if this was a case of suicide. Some reports have also suggested that the police recovered a four-page suicide letter from the house of the deceased but the police have not confirmed the same yet. Further details are awaited.

National Institute of Technology (NIT) is a well-known educational institute that offers courses in engineering, technology and science. The government-run institution is situated in Rourkela, Kurukshetra, Allahabad, Bhopal, among several other cities.

College professor out on morning walk shot dead by bike-borne miscreants in Bihar

In October last year, two bike-borne men shot dead a college professor in Bihar's Nalanda district while the latter was on his morning walk. Identified as Arvind Kumar, the professor was shot dead near the Elite Hotel by two men.

The two accused managed to escape from the spot after the incident. The professor was being taken to the Bihar Sharif Sadar Hospital when he passed away. The Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Rajesh Kumar said that the professor had allegedly been targeted over a land dispute.
