Jilted lover kills 2 sisters in Sec 22, held

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, August 16

A 30-year-old jilted lover, son of a retired UT police inspector, has been arrested by the local police for the gruesome murder of two sisters at their one-room rented accommodation in Sector 22 on August 15. The victims were strangled, stabbed with a sharp weapon and their heads smashed against an almirah.

The victims, Manpreet Kaur (28) and her sister Rajwant Kaur (27), natives of Baluana village near Abohar in Fazilka district, were found murdered yesterday afternoon.

UT SSP Nilambari Jagdale said the suspect, Kuldeep Singh, a call centre employee, was arrested from the New Delhi railway station.

The police said the suspect and Manpreet had met each other in 2010 while working at a call centre. The duo became good friends and entered into a relationship.

The SSP said Manpreet and Kuldeep had plans to get married; however, their relationship turned sour following which Manpreet started avoiding him. “They had a break-up and for the past around six months, the victim was not taking his calls. He also suspected that Manpreet was in a relationship with someone else,” the SSP said.

The police said Kuldeep’s interrogation revealed that on the intervening night of August 14 and 15, he reached the victims’ house in Sector 22 with a motive to check Manpreet’s mobile phone so that he could confront her regarding her relationship with someone else.

“He first climbed the roof from where he jumped towards the rear balcony of the victims’ house on the second floor. Both victims were fast asleep at that time,” the police said. He then managed to open the rear door and entered their room. He tried to open Manpreet’s mobile phone, which was locked; however, he failed to do so. In the meantime, Rajwant woke up and went to the washroom.

Manpreet also woke up and saw the suspect, leading to an altercation. Kuldeep strangled her and smashed her head on the floor. Rajwant also came out and she was also strangled by Kuldeep. Both victims were then stabbed with a sharp weapon, probably a scissor. “The victims struggled to save themselves. However, he overpowered and killed them,” the police said.

After the incident, the suspect locked the room from outside and left for his house in Zirakpur on his motorcycle. The police collected the footage of CCTV cameras installed outside houses, in which the suspect is seen leaving with a bag on his back.

A few hours later, he took a bus for Ambala and then boarded a train for Delhi.

Strangled them with hands, stole

Kuldeep first strangled both victims with his hands and then used a stole for the purpose. They were stabbed and their heads smashed against an almirah.

Suspect took victims’ phones along

After the murder, suspect Kuldeep took the mobile phones of both victims along and returned home. Later, his sister tied him a rakhi after which he escaped.

Tried to open Manpreet’s mobile

Suspect Kuldeep tried to open Manpreet’s mobile phone using her thumb impression. However, since she had applied mehndi on her hands, the phone could not be opened.
