Bihar’s tryst with gangsters, politicians and world’s most dreaded firearm AK-47

Criminals in Bihar don’t use ‘desi katta’ anymore

Key Highlights An AK-47 rifle and huge cache of ammunitions and explosives from the ancestral house of controversial Bihar MLA Anant Singh The first use of AK-47 in Bihar was recorded in 1991 when dreaded gangster Samrat Ashok killed a contractor near Barauni Singh, a multiple term MLA from Mokama, holds considerable clout in his constituency

Mokama: There's nothing shocking about the recovery of an AK-47 rifle and huge cache of ammunition and explosives from the ancestral house of controversial Bihar MLA Anant Singh on Friday during a raid on Friday.

Singh, a multiple-term MLA from Mokama, holds considerable clout in his constituency than the actual government. His political patron is none other than Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar.

Singh's political profile gained prominence with the support of his older brother Dilip Singh who had emerged as a powerful Bhumihar gang leader in the region in the mid-80s.

In India, converting muscle power into political power is relatively easy and this is what Dilip did when he contested from the Mokama seat in 1990 and won with a comfortable margin. Anant, who used to be an enforcer for his elder brother, took the political reins from him and since then his power has only increased.

The first AK-47 ever recovered in Bihar was from the house of Suraj Singh from a village near Mokama. Suraj was a close aide of Dilip Singh.

Mafia, AK-47 and Bihar

Criminals in Bihar don’t use desi katta (country-made pistol) anymore and prefer AK-47 assault rifles instead.

The first use of AK-47 in Bihar was recorded in 1991 when dreaded gangster Samrat Ashok killed a contractor near Barauni zero mile and used it to wield influence in the state. This happened at a time when even Bihar Police had no access to the sophisticated assault weapons like the AK-47.

Another high-profile casualty of the Kalashnikov rifle was Dhanbad Superintendent of Police Randhir Verma who was shot dead by bank robbers in 1991 while trying to thwart a robbery.

The use of one of the most widely used assault rifles in the world continued in Bihar in the coming years and it became increasingly popular with the gangsters who could afford it.

On December 1994, Muzaffarpur-based mafia don Chhotan Shukla’s ambassador car was sprayed with bullets. As expected, the weapon of choice in this murder was AK-47.

The Unholy Trinity: Caste-Mafia-Politics

Caste and politics in Bihar are inseparable. Be it, former chief minister Lalu Prasad Yadav or Nitish Kumar, political patronage was provided to gangsters for various reasons. During the 90s, Bihar witnessed a turf war between gangsters from the backward castes, the Bhumihars and Rajputs with full political support. Later, Anand Mohan Singh, who was a symbol of sorts of the waning Rajput power in Bihar forged an alliance between the Bhumihars and Rajput gangsters to tackle the growing menace of gangsters from the backward castes.

If gangster-turned-politician Shahabuddin's power increased dramatically in Lalu’s reign, Anant Singh received patronage from Nitish Kumar. Kumar, who had promised clean and good governance, gave Singh a party ticket and also campaigned for him. One reason behind his support to the dreaded gangster was his caste while some say that the mafia don was too powerful for Kumar to ignore.

Singh was convicted in the lynching of G Krishnaiah, district magistrate of Gopalganj in 1994 and earned the dubious distinction of being the first politician in independent India to be given the death penalty.

Meanwhile, a case has been registered against Independent MLA from Mokama, Anant Kumar Singh under the Arms Act, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA), and Explosive Act.
