After Facing Humiliation At UN Pakistan Violates Ceasefire At LOC, One Indian Jawan Killed

An India soldier was killed in Nowshera in Rajouri district of Jammu and Kashmir on Saturday after the Pakistan army targeted Indian posts from across the Line of Control.

The martyred soldier has been identified as Lance Naik Sandeep Thapa, a resident of Dehradun.

Thapa who had served in the Army for 15 years had sustained fatal injuries during the ceasefire violation.

AFP/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

A defence ministry spokesperson said Pakistan initiated the ceasefire violation around 6.30 am. The Indian army was “retaliating befittingly“.

The LoC has been tens for the past few days with Pakistan resorting to unprovoked firings targeting both civilian and military installations.

Even though ceasefire violations are a regular occurrence ahead of the winters as Pakistan tries to push in the maximum number of infiltrators to the Indian side before the harsh Himalayan wineries make cross-border infiltrations impossible.

Pakistan uses the ceasefire violation as a distraction to aid the infiltrations.

AFP/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

Last week a major infiltration bid by a group of about half-a-dozen heavily-armed terrorists was foiled along the LoC in Kupwara district of north Kashmir.

A soldier was injured in the initial exchange of firing with the terrorists who were trying to sneak into the valley from Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK) through Machhal sector. The group had sneaked about 500 metres inside the Indian territory when it was confronted by the alert troops, leading to a gunfight.

This year the situation along the LoC has been particularly tens after the abrogation of Article 370 by India earlier this month.

On Thursday three Pakistani soldiers were killed in retaliatory fire by Indian forces to the unprovoked aggression from across the LoC in Uri and Rajouri.

AFP

Pakistan which acknowledged that it lost three of its personnel also claimed that five Indian army men were killed by them. India, however, rejected the Pakistani claims, calling it "fictitious".
