AIIMS fire: Inferno put out after 6 hour operation involving NDRF, 34 fire tenders

A massive fire has broken out at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi. The fire broke out on the first to fifth floors of a building in the PC block of AIIMS Delhi. Initially, the fire was limited to the first two floors.

A press statement issued by AIIMS stated that the Delhi fire services along with AIIMS fire division have controlled the fire and are still on the job. There has been no loss or damage to life.

A total of 34 fire tenders reached the spot and were involved in dousing the flames. National Disaster Relief Force (NDRF) teams were also rushed to the spot and aided the firefighting operations. Two teams of NDRF comprising 80 men were deployed to AIIMS to help douse the fire.

Delhi Fire Service Director, Vipin Kental said, "The fire is completely under control. Cooling operation is underway, they'll continue for some more time, the staff will be here to monitor that. No casualty has been reported."

The fire spread to the fifth floor with general ward patients being shifted to another ward. Sources say the fire on the fifth floor is as a result of an AC compressor that blew up. The fire on the first and second was due to a short circuit.

AIIMS officials said that there was no loss of life, injuries in the incident. The officials added that Union Health Minister Harsh Vardhan personally oversaw the firefighting operations on-site and ensured patients are well taken care of. "The minister also discussed the need to conduct a special fire audit. AIIMS Delhi regularly does this exercise, however, a more comprehensive special audit will be conducted," the officials said.

As the flames were controlled, patients evacuated from the AB ward were expected to be shifted back on Sunday.

The patients have been shifted to the Rajendra Prasad Centre (RPC). The operation theatre in RPC has been converted into gynaecology OT and doctors are conducting deliveries there. The RPC casualty room has is functioning as a temporary labour room.

GENERAL WARD EVACUATED

Owing to the fire, authorities at AIIMS have closed the emergency department as a precautionary measure. The building that caught fire is located in the teaching block of AIIMS, New Delhi, which is near the emergency department.

Fire at AIIMS: A total of 34 fire tenders have reached the spot and are trying to douse the flames. AIIMS has closed the emergency department which is close to the spot. pic.twitter.com/KTnCpMLQKL Rebellious Psychiatrist (@DrRebellious) August 17, 2019

Patients who were admitted to the emergency ward have been shifted elsewhere. Patients were shifted from AB ward (Orthopaedic Unit) after the fire broke out in PC block near the emergency ward

Delhi: Patients are being shifted from AB ward (Orthopaedic Unit), after a fire broke out in PC block near the emergency ward on the 2nd floor at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS). No casualty reported till now. pic.twitter.com/MDvvQH2NpK ANI (@ANI) August 17, 2019

DELHI CM ASSURES QUICK RESPONSE

Delhi Chief Arvind Kejriwal in a tweet said, "The fire in AIIMS building will be brought under control at the earliest.

Fire service trying it's best to extinguish the fire. I appeal to everyone to maintain calm and allow the fire services personnel to do their work (sic)."

VIROLOGY UNIT GUTTED

The Microbiology department's virology unit on the second floor of the teaching block has been completely gutted, sources said.

Sources said the fire spread to the Emergency Lab in the department of Lab Medicine, which is adjacent to the Microbiology department's virology unit, where electricity work was going on for some time and cable and wire being used were kept, they said.

Patients' samples come to the virology unit and Lab Medicine department for testing.

Sources said it is suspected that a large number of samples and patient records have been destroyed as the virology unit has been completely gutted.

The hospital area that was gutted in the fire at AIIMS Delhi today. (Photo: Satyendra Kumar Kanojia/India Today)

AIIMS FIRE CAUSES PANIC

The major fire at AIIMS, which caters to hundreds of people every day, left patients and their relatives in panic and disrupted emergency services of the hospital Saturday evening.

Mohammad Sohail rushed to the hospital after hearing of the fire as his uncle was admitted in the surgery department.

"I was at home when I heard news about the fire at AIIMS. I was concerned about my uncle's safety. When I reached here, I learnt that the fire broke out in a non-patient block" he said.

Rajesh Mahato (31), who works as a guard at the teaching block, said he was among the first to notice the blaze and immediately informed the control room and subsequently the fire department was called.

"It was Saturday and the department usually closes by 1 pm. When the fire broke out, there were not many students inside the building, due to which everyone was evacuated swiftly and no casualty or injury took place," he said.

A Delhi Fire Services official told news agency PTI that they received a call of a fire in the PC and Teaching Block of the hospital at around 5 PM and fire tenders were immediately dispatched to contain it.

Scenes at AIIMS after the first and second block of a building caught fire today. (Photo: Milan Sharma/IndiaToday)

Former finance minister Arun Jaitley is admitted at the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of the cardio-neuro centre. This unit is however housed in a different building in the complex.

(With inputs from agencies.)

ALSO READ | Delhi fire: 5 dead, 11 hurt as massive blaze engulfs Zakir Nagar building

WATCH | Massive fire breaks out at Delhi's AIIMS
