Patent images of electrically supercharged bike based on BMW S1000RR

BMW Motorrad has become the latest entrant to join the league of manufacturers who have patented a supercharged machine. New patent images that have surfaced online show a BMW S1000RR based motorcycle with an electric supercharger.

While Kawasaki has the H2, Honda too is rumoured to be working on a naked supercharged motorcycle. Suzuki, on the other hand, showcased the Recursion concept back in 2013. However, this one gets a turbocharger mated to an intercooler. Employing a supercharger is very costly and hence the usage in production models is limited.

So, what’s this BMW S1000RR based motorcycle about? To understand that, let’s first look at forced induction engines. A supercharger is essentially an air compressor that increases the pressure or density of air supplied to an internal combustion engine. This allows more oxygen to enter the engine, allowing more fuel to be burnt. Thus, producing increased output. A turbocharger, on the other hand, increases efficiency and power output by forcing compressed air into the combustion chamber. This allows the compressor to force more air, which directly leads to more fuel into the combustion chamber than atmospheric pressure.

Now a traditional, mechanically powered supercharger is powered by the power from the engine. A turbocharger, on the other hand, creates a blockage in the exhaust system. Besides that, there is the problem of turbo lag. An electrically powered supercharger, on the other hand, uses a small battery or a capacitor to power the supercharger. That’s what does duty in the patented motorcycle based on the BMW S1000RR.

Besides that, the patent image suggests that the future BMW S1000RR will be assisted by a compressor. This will be powered by an electric motor pushing air into the combustion chamber via an intercooler. Also, an engine like this will remove the need for high revving engines, thus negating the extra exhaust gases. Besides that, it will also lead to less consumption of fuel.

Also Read: BMW G 310 R & G 310 GS available at 0% interest and 100% funding

A supercharged BMW S1000RR is the future. Ever strictening emission norms have manufacturers on their toes, with their R&D teams busy developing more efficient and less polluting engines. In fact, we would not be surprised to see all manufacturers heading to forced induction engine. First for the expensive flagships and then to the more affordable models. However, do not expect a supercharged BMW S1000RR to be launched anytime soon.

BMW Motorrad launched the new BMW S1000RR in India at INR 18.50 lakhs (ex-showroom, Delhi) in June. Besides that, the company is working with its Indian partner TVS, to develop another new model.

[Source: Bennetts UK]
