Army destroys Pakistani post opposite Rajouri sector in J&K after Pak forces target civilians

Pakistani post was destroyed by Indian Army on Saturday on the other side of the border in J&K's Rajouri sector | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights Indian troops destroyed Pakistani post on the other side of the border in Rajouri in J&K Pakistan violated ceasefire along LoC in J&K at 6:30 am today The puniticve action was taken by Indian Army after Pakistan targeted civilians in ceasefire violation

New Delhi: Amid heightened tensions between India and Pakistan over Centre’s decision to revoke the special status to Jammu and Kashmir, security forces on Saturday demolished a Pakistani post on the other side of the border in Rajouri district in J&K.

The Indian troops took the punitive action to destroy Pakistan post after Pakistani forces targeted civilians in the regions.

Earlier today, Pakistani troops resorted to unprovoked heavy shelling and ceasefire violation in J&K's Rajouri sector. In response, the Indian Army destroyed a Pakistani post in an area opposite the Naushera sector in Rajouri.

As per a news agency, a heavy exchange of fire between the two sides was still underway after the ceasefire violation by Pakistan.

However, an army soldier was killed after Pakistan violated ceasefire along the Line of Control (LoC) in Nowshera sector of J&K.

Defence spokesman Lt Col Devender Anand said that the soldier had been identified as 35-year-old Lance Naik Sandeep Thappa of Dehradun, who had served in the Army for 15 years.

Army Sources: A Pakistani post opposite the RAJOURI sector (J&K) has been hit in action by Indian Army today. The exchange of fire between the two sides is still on after Pakistan violated ceasefire. One Indian Army soldier lost his life this morning in Pakistani firing pic.twitter.com/ws4rnRQndr — ANI (@ANI) August 17, 2019

The spokesperson added, "He was a brave soldier and the nation will remain indebted to him for his dedication to duty and supreme sacrifice."

The ceasefire violation by the Pakistani troops was initiated at around 6:30 am on Saturday. The Pakistani Army fired small arms and resorted to shelling with mortars in the Nowshera sector in the morning, following which the Indian Army retaliated befittingly, the spokesperson said.

Interestingly, two days ago India had rejected Pakistan's allegations that five Indian soldiers had been killed in cross-border firing along the LoC in Jammu and Kashmir.

The Indian Army had called the neighbouring country's claims as "fictitious" after Pakistan military’s spokesperson Major General Asif Ghafoor had alleged that three of its soldiers and five Indian soldiers had been killed in the exchange of fire.

Ghafoor also claimed in his tweet that the Indian Army had increased firing along the LoC in a bid to distract global attention from the current situation in Jammu and Kashmir.

Rejecting his claim, a senior Indian Army official said, "The claim made by Pakistan’s military is fictitious.”

Reports have suggested that the Pakistan army has increased its deployment along the LoC after the Narendra Modi government's move to revoke the special status of Jammu and Kashmir and divide the state into two Union Territories - Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

A senior military official told a news agency that the Indian Army has also fortified its vigil along the LoC and has asked the troops to remain on high alert to deal with any “misadventure” by Pakistan.


