Dreaded Gurugram gangster arrested from Abu Dhabi

Gurugram, Aug 17 : Haryana Police on Saturday said they have arrested a fugitive gangster from Abu Dhabi named Kaushal who was involved in several extortion killings.

This was confirmed by Sube Singh, PRO of Faridabad Police. Though he did not share details of the operation but sources said that the raid was carried out with the help of Interpol and police in Abu Dhabi.

A Special Investigation Team (SIT) of Haryana Police headed by Palwal SP Narender Bijarniya, Sanjay Singh, DCP, crime branch, Faridabad, Narender Chauhan, crime branch inspector, and Anand Yadav played a crucial role in tracing Kaushal's location in Abu Dhabu and arrested him.

Kaushal is a dangerous gangster of Gurugram involved in over 100 criminal cases including murder, attempt to murder, kidnapping, extortion and running betting rackets in Gurugram.

A native of Naharpur Rupa village in Gurugram, Kaushal was also involved in the murders of bookie Vijay Batra alias Tantrik, property dealer Jaydeep alias JD who was a former gangster, and Haryana Congress spokesperson Vikas Chaudhary in Faridabad.

Kaushal had personally demanded extortion money from them. They were killed by his men after they refused to pay up.

Earlier, Gurugram Police has initiated an operation against Kaushal and his gang and managed to arrest over 20 people, including his girlfriend and wife who were also involved in criminal activities.

Crime Branch officials also recovered two diaries from them containing names and phone numbers of 300 people who were their targets and who regularly paid extortion money to the gang.

Kaushal's wife Roshni was arrested by Special Investigation Team (SIT) headed by SP Bijarniya on June 29 in connection with murder of Vikas Chaudhary. With her, the SIT also arrested the gangster's close aide Naresh alias Chand.

Kaushal's girlfriend Manisha was arrested from a house in Burari on June 4. Her arrest was possible after Gurugram Crime Branch managed to nab Rahul Dagar, Kaushal's cousin, at IGI airport on June 3. He had arrived from Dubai after meeting Kaushal.

Kaushal reportedly demanded an extortion sum of Rs 1 crore from Chaudhary which the latter had refused. Kaushal wanted to send a strong warning as a threat to others and hence killed Chaudhary. Vijay Batra and Jaydeep were also killed in a similar fashion.

Kaushal used to send voice messages to his targets were paying him regular extortion money. He also threatened them with dire consequences citing the murders of Chaudhary and the others.

He had also tried to extort Rs four crore from a Gurugram liquor trader and another Rs four crore from a liquor contractor of Ballabhgarh in Faridabad.
