Ghaziabad: Police officer shouts on phone, then commits suicide with service pistol

Victim is survived by his wife and two children. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Police officer shoots self dead with service revolver Senior Sub-Inspector Madhup Singh shouted on phone before taking the extreme step Victim is survived by his wife and two children

Ghaziabad: In a tragic incident, a police officer committed suicide at his residence in Kavi Nagar area of Ghaziabad district in Uttar Pradesh on Friday. The police officer has been identified as Madhup Singh, who was posted at Baleni police station in Baghpat district.

Madhup Singh shot himself in the head with his service revolver. Before shooting himself, Singh, a Senior Sub-Inspector (SSI), shouted on the phone while he talked to someone on the other end.

According to a report, Madhup Singh's wife said she was preparing breakfast when he got the call and started shouting on the phone. When Singh's wife asked him about the issue, he declined to reveal the details.

The police officer, who was originally from Allahabad, is survived by his second wife and two children aged 7 and 12. Singh lost his first wife to cancer around nine years ago and later married his wife's cousin.

While on his way to drop his son to school, the deceased officer visited a family friend Santosh Dikshit at 6:30 am on that fateful day.

Dikshit said that before shooting himself dead, the officer was very angry while he was talking to someone on the phone.

As police officer's wife constantly asked him about the reason for his anger, he locked himself up in the room and moments later shot himself in the head. His neighbours broke open the door and found him lying in a pool of blood.

"The alleged suicide took place around 8 in the morning when Madhup Singh was about to leave for work. We haven't found any suicide note from the spot. The reason for suicide seems to be personal. However, a probe is underway to ascertain the reason for suicide. We have sent the body for post-mortem and the report is awaited," the report quoted Superintendent of Police (SP) Shlok Kumar as saying.

The police are trying to find out who the officer was talking to just before the shooting incident.

Madhup Singh joined Uttar Pradesh police in 2004 as a constable after the death of his father, who was a sub-inspector. The officer had served at various police posts in Ghaziabad district.

In 2015, an inquiry for alleged misconduct was launched against Singh when his service revolver was stolen while he was posted in Government Railway Police (GRP) in Chandausi.

The family of the officer claim he was denied a promotion after the inquiry was launched against him.

In a similar incident in 2018, a sub-inspector also committed suicide by shooting himself with his service weapon in his quarters in Ghaziabad. He was posted at posted at Kavi Nagar police station.
