Can a single tribunal resolve water disputes between states?

Water, or the politics of it, can send temperatures soaring. Ask Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The two southern states were at each other’s throat for decades over who should use how much water from the Cauvery, a river essential to both. The conflict would often flare up, with buses being burnt, shops being pelted with stones and Tamils being thrashed in Karnataka and vice-versa.The Centre set up a tribunal in 1990, under the Inter-State River Water Disputes Act (IRWDA), 1956, to find a solution to this vexing issue. The tribunal in 2007 decided the quantum of water Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and also Puducherry and Kerala, through which the river passes, were entitled to. But that was hardly the end of the issue as all states but Puducherry went to the Supreme Court against the tribunal’s award and the apex court finally gave its verdict in February 2018, nearly three decades after the tribunal was established. The court set Tamil Nadu’s share of the waters at 404.25 thousand million cubic feet (TMC), lower than the 419 TMC awarded by the tribunal.Cauvery may be an extreme example, but no tribunal under IRWDA — there have been nine so far, of which five are active — has taken less than seven years to submit its final reort. This is what the government hopes to fix with a proposed amendment to IRWDA, which was passed in the Lok Sabha on July 31 but is yet to be introduced in the Rajya Sabha Once the bill becomes a law, a permanent tribunal will be set up, with temporary benches — instead of one tribunal for every dispute — and all the five existing tribunals will be dissolved into the new one. More importantly, the bill gives the tribunal less time than now to adjudicate a conflict, but the entire process — from the time states approach the Centre for resolution — could still take long and may not be immune to delays.Members of a bench will vacate their offices once the bench is left with no dispute to look into, unless they are also part of another bench. Andhra Pradesh has raised objections to this, saying that even after a bench is dissolved, its members should be retained on the tribunal for their expertise till they reach retirement age.Shifting monsoon patterns and drying catchment areas in India’s river basins, of which there are 20, combined with a growing population mean India’s water resources are on the decline.India’s average annual per capita water availability has been falling — from 2,210 cubic metres in 1991 to 1,820 cubic metres in 2001 to 1,651 cubic metres in 2011, according to the Central Water Commission. Government estimates it will further fall to 1,486 cubic metres in 2021. Availability below 1,700 cubic metres is a water-stressed condition and below 1,000 cubic metres is a water-scarce condition.Source: Ministry of Water ResourcesThis raises the dangerous prospect of more states upstream damming rivers to keep as much water as possible for themselves, much to the chagrin of neighbours downstream. This invariably leads to conflicts in which the Centre has to intervene. And the government thinks the changes to IRWDA will help it resolve disputes faster.Under the current IRWDA, once two or more warring states go to the Centre, it tries to mediate between them. If that does not work, it has to set up a tribunal within a year of the states approaching the government.The proposed amendment lays more stress on mediation, with a total of a year-and-a-half given to the dispute resolution committee (DRC), before the matter is sent to the tribunal.The proposed amendment also gives the tribunal a maximum of three and a half years, including an extension, compared with six years earlier. All told, the whole process, as per the proposed amendment, should now take five years, compared with seven years till now. But there is no telling if the tribunal will stick to the timeline, given the delays of its predecessors. Moreover, despite the decision of a bench of the tribunal having the “same force as an order or decree of the Supreme Court”, it could still be appealed in the apex court, as has happened before, despite decisions of earlier tribunals also having the same status.“You can put time restrictions on the tribunal, but what happens if the parties go to the Supreme Court? You don’t need to have a substantive reason to go to the Supreme Court. It’s all about optics and grandstanding and getting electoral dividends,” says Srinivas Chokkakula, a fellow with the Centre for Policy Research, a New Delhi-based think tank. Given that water-sharing is becoming more politically contentious, states cannot seem to settle for less water from a river than it claims as its rightful share. That leaves a state government with no option but to approach the Supreme Court if the tribunal does not accept its demands.“If the Supreme Court accepts petitions against the orders of the tribunal, then what is the sanctity of the tribunal? When a state does not comply with the decision of the tribunal, it should be construed as a breakdown of law and order,” says Bhartruhari Mahtab, a member of Parliament of the Biju Janata Dal (BJD) from Odisha. But he is in favour of the time restrictions in the amendment.(Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Union water resources minister, was not available for comment.)There are now two tribunals involving Odisha, one regarding the river Mahanadi, which it shares with Chhattisgarh, and another over the Vansadhara, which it shares with Andhra. Odisha is also opposed to the Polavaram irrigation project on Godavari in Andhra, which it claims will submerge lands in Odisha’s Malkangiri’s district. Odisha and Telangana, another state that stands to be affected, have both gone to the Supreme Court against the project.Andhra and Telangana are also awaiting the decision of the second tribunal set up on the allocation of the Krishna water. The first tribunal was set up in 1969 and gave its verdict in 1976, and the second one in 2004 and submitted its report in 2010, deciding the allocation to Maharashtra, Karnataka and erstwhile Andhra Pradesh. Then Andhra was bifurcated to create Telangana in 2014 and the latter demanded that its share be determined afresh, which the tribunal is working on now.It is quite possible that either Telangana or Andhra or both would end up unhappy with the tribunal’s decision and further delay the process with appeals, even after the single-tribunal system is in place.“Once an award is given, what is the guarantee that states will implement it? There should be a penalty if they do not,” says Bharat Sharma, scientist emeritus, International Water Management Institute Equally important for the new amendment to work is the credibility of dispute resolution before a bench is set up, according to Chokkakula: “States should believe in DRC’s neutrality. That’s most crucial. The Centre is seen as politically subjective.”A case in point is the dispute between Punjab and Haryana over the 201 km Sutlej Yamuna Link (SYL) canal, which is supposed to bring Haryana’s share of the surplus waters of the Ravi and the Beas. Once completed, it will irrigate nearly half a million hectares in Haryana. In 1985, a Shiromani Akali Dal leader was killed for signing the Punjab Accord with the Centre, which included the construction of SYL. Three years later, 30 labourers working on the project were murdered, and, in 1990, two engineers were killed, and Punjab put the project on hold.In 2004, the Congress government in Punjab terminated the 1981 agreement between Punjab, Haryana and Rajasthan, which also included the canal. Sentiments have run high in both Punjab and Haryana, with farmers taking to the streets. The Supreme Court last month told the two states to resolve the issue with the Centre’s help. Punjab is Congress-ruled and both the Centre and Haryana are governed by the Bharatiya Janata Party. For this to work, Punjab has to believe the Centre will be impartial. What makes matters more complicated is that the man who revoked the agreement in 2004 as Punjab chief minister, Amarinder Singh, is CM now, too.Fifty years after the first tribunals were established, resolution of river-sharing conflicts has not become any easier. Besides the disputes being looked into by tribunals, there are conflicts like the one between Tamil Nadu and Kerala over the Mullaperiyar dam and the Polavaram issue.The Centre will have to win the trust of states as a nonpartisan mediator to avoid future disputes reaching the tribunal or, worse, clogging an already overworked judicial system. But despite its best efforts, it may not have much success.
