What did you achieve by killing Araku MLA, CM asks Maoists

Strongly condemning the assassination of Araku MLA Kidari Sarveswara Rao and his close aide and former MLA Siveri Soma, Chief Minister Chandrababu Naidu on Thursday said such incidents were against the spirit of democracy and their actions were by no means justifiable.

The Maoists could differ on issues but they absolutely had no right to eliminate people’s representatives.

Asking what the Maoists achieved by killing the MLA and his follower, Mr. Naidu appealed to them not to endanger democracy by resorting to violence.

Moving a condolence motion in the Assembly on the two deaths, Mr. Naidu said it was unfortunate that the Maoists had suspected the MLA of encouraging bauxite mining in Visakhapatnam district even after the TDP government had not only cancelled the mining leases given to the NMDC Limited but also imposed a blanket ban on the extraction of the ore. He alleged that it was the Y.S. Rajasekhara Reddy government which created the mess by allowing the mining against the wishes of the tribal folks.

‘Blow to development’

Minister Kidari Shravan Kumar, elder son of the slain MLA, asked whether it was fair on the part of the Maoists to kill his father who dedicated his life to the welfare of the tribal people.

He recalled that Sarveswara Rao had vowed at a public meeting in his constituency in 2015 to quit politics if the mining resumed. He observed that by killing leaders like his father, the Maoists had dealt a severe blow to the development of tribal areas. Speaker Kodela Siva Prasada Rao said the killings had exposed the hollowness of the Maoists’ claims to fight for the rights of the tribal people. Paderu MLA Giddi Eswari said the people’s representatives in the agency areas had been living under constant fear and insisted that the government should do something to improve the situation. TDP chief whip Palle Raghunatha Reddy appealed to the Naxalites to join the mainstream by realising the futility of their armed revolt.

BJP Floor leader P. Vishnu Kumar Raju said Maoists should use vote as a bullet and contest in the elections to implement their agenda through democratic means.
