Weekend off averts tragedy as fire guts AIIMS teachers' block

Weekend luck: Fewer visitors averted tragedy

Massive fire at AIIMS Delhi; virology unit gutted, samples destroyed

NEW DELHI: A major fire gutted two floors and partially damaged two others in the teachers' block of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences on Saturday. It took 42 fire tenders to fight the blaze, though even late on Saturday, the flames on the top floor were yet to be brought under control. Fortunately, there was no casualty because of the presence of fewer people than usual in the building, the offices there being closed for the weekend.Several teachers and assistants present in the building were safely evacuated. The offices in the block are inter-connected with the main hospital building, and it was only the timely containment of the fire to the affected building that averted a bigger disaster. Around 200 patients in the emergency ward adjoining the block were shifted to the orthopaedic ward in another building.Prima facie, police said, the cause of the fire was a short circuit on the second floor. However, forensic teams were called in to investigate the blaze in the block that houses the office of the hospital director and a bio-medical laboratory and other offices on the upper floors. With the integrity of the structure compromised, the National Disaster Relief Force was summoned late on Saturday to manage any potential debacles.However, crime and forensic teams were called in to investigate the blaze in the block that houses the office of the hospital director on the ground floor and a bio-medical laboratory and other offices on the upper floors. With the integrity of the structure compromised, the National Disaster Relief Force was summoned late on Saturday to manage any potential debacle.Chief fire officer Atul Kumar Garg said the Delhi Fire Service got a call from the security guards of the hospital at 4.50pm on Saturday. They reported seeing thick smoke engulfing the first and second floors. A team from the Hauz Khas fire station reached the scene, only to find that the flames had spread to the other floors fuelled by the wooden partitions, files and furniture in the office rooms.The blaze was finally declared to be “within control” around 7pm. However, even after that, embers could be seen bursting into flames from time to time. Fresh blazes was reported around 7.20pm and again at 9pm, but were quickly doused. However, till late at night, the fifth floor was still aflame, the fire fed by the chemicals stored on that floor.Fire officers said that within a short time, the fire spread from the second floor to the third, fourth and fifth floor with the wooden partitions in the rooms constructed almost three decades ago acting as fuel. Smoke also started reaching the adjoining buildings through the ducts, including to the OPD unit, where, again fortunately, there were only a handful of people at the time. They were quickly evacuated by the security guards.The air-conditioning units of all the other blocks and the gas connections were cut off to prevent another flare-up. The main power connection was switched off and most of the emergency units were made to run on battery backup. Chief fire officer Garg said, “Our prime objective was to contain the flames and the bulk of the firefighting teams were deployed for this.”Police had a tough time controlling the crowd that had collected to watch the flames because they were also dealing with VIP movement, with many prominent political leaders driving in to meet former finance minister Arun Jaitley, who is undergoing treatment in the intensive care unit housed in another building on the premises. Arvind Kejriwal had to appeal to the public to keep calm and allow the firemen to do their work.Fire officers were hugely relieved to limit the fire to the PC block because the building is connected to the main building through balconies. “If the fire had spread to the main building, it would have been an unimaginable disaster,” said a fireman.Vijay Kumar, DCP (south), while saying that prima facie it appeared to be a case of a short circuit, assured of “conducting a thorough inquiry into the incident”. “Police will prepare the final report once we get inputs from the forensic department,” said Kumar.Amid all this, AIIMS director Randeep Guleria and Union health secretary Preeti Sudan took hourly reports of the situation. They later held a meeting with senior health officials and doctors of the institution to assess the damage.
