Punjab retired govt employee murder: Wife planned murder with paramour, say cops

Reportedly, the police had been always suspicious of Daljit, as on the day of the incident she did not raise an alarm about her husband's murder. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Chandigarh: A week after the retired Punjab government employee who was found murdered at his residence in Ludhiana, the police claimed to have solved the murder case. On Saturday, the police arrested the deceased's wife in connection with the case.

The accused was identified as 40-year-old Daljit Kaur, who has been booked under Section 302 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code. According to a report, the police claimed that her 58-year-old husband, Jasvir Singh's body had multiple stab wounds which were found by his eight-year-old son on August 4. He was reportedly murdered by two on-contract killers hired by his wife and her paramour-Harkrishan Singh.

Singh lives in Amritsar and Daljit was having an affair with him from the past four years and they both wanted to marry each other. Station House Officer, Nidhan Singh, Jagraon city police station said that the three other accused in the case are currently at large. On the intervening night of August 3 and August 4, the killers visited Jasvir's house and the police have CCTV footage in which Daljit can be seen waiting for the killers. After which two men can be seen entering their residence.

Reportedly, police further mentioned that initially Daljit slept next to her husband along with her son but later she moved to another room, leaving Jasvir alone. In 1998, Jasvir underwent a sex-change surgery, later he married to Daljit and their child is a test-tube baby. In January last year, he was booked in a corruption case while working at the Industrial Training Institute in Moga district of Punjab. However, he was then booked under the corruption case and was suspended from the government service and was given a retirement in January this year.

Reportedly, the police had been always suspicious of Daljit, as on the day of the incident she did not raise an alarm about her husband's murder. It was their minor son who informed the neighbours. Later, she had claimed that robbers broke into their home and attacked all three of them.

The police are now trying to nab the rest of three accused who are still at large.




