Jhajjar rape-and-murder case transferred to Delhi Police

Kin expressed displeasure over probe by Haryana cops

The rape-and-murder case of a 27-year-old woman has been transferred from Haryana to Delhi Police after her family expressed displeasure over the former’s probe, officers said on Thursday.

The family’s request was approved immediately, they said, adding that officers from Haryana handed over the investigation documents to Delhi Police on Tuesday.

“We arrested all three accused, including the main accused Vidhan, who had kidnapped the woman on the pretext of giving her a lift on his bike, on Monday. Earlier, his accomplices Naveen and Neeraj Nara, residents of Najafgarh, were held under the Arms Act on January 25. During interrogation, they confessed to the murder,” said DCP (Dwarka) Anto Alphonse.

Offered lift

On January 17, the victim, who was employed as an engineer with a firm in Gurugram, was waiting for an e-rickshaw to go home in Dichaon Kalan village here when the incident happened. Seeing the victim, Vidhan offered her a lift at 6 p.m., the police said.

The victim agreed as she knew Vidhan, who belongs to her village. “The way from Najafgarh to Dichaon Kalan village [6 km] was dark and Vidhan took advantage of the situation. He took the motorcycle to an isolated spot. Following this, he and two others attempted to rape her,” said an officer. The victim begged them to let her go. When they refused, she threatened to tell everyone in the village about the incident.

“Scared of getting caught, they strangulated her. To conceal her identity, they disrobed her and carried her body in a van. Then they dumped the body in a well in Jhajjar,” the officer added.

After the victim did not reach home, her family lodged a missing complaint at Kapashera police station in the south-west district.

In the last call to her family, the victim told them that she was in Kapashera.

After the body was recovered, the Haryana police registered a case of murder and started an investigation. They informed their counterparts in Delhi about the body of the woman, where her identification was done.

“We will add more Indian Penal Code sections in the case as per the investigation, which was affected owing to the issue of jurisdiction. Baba Haridas Nagar of Delhi and Jhajjar in Haryana are neighbouring areas. We will seek police custody of the accused for identification of the murder spot,” said a police officer.
