Bihar MLA Anant Singh flees house amid raids, cops question wife

Delhi:

Days after AK-47 and other explosives were recovered from the house of Bihar’s Independent MLA Anant Singh, the Patna Police raided the residence of the lawmaker. However, Singh dodged the arrest and fled the spot moments before police party raided his house. “We did talk to his wife but she did not divulge details, we will take further action accordingly,” the police officer was quoted as saying by news agency ANI. The controversial MLA was booked under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA) on Saturday. Confirming this, Patna (Rural) Superintendent of Police Kantesh Kumar Mishra said that it could not be ruled out that the sophisticated weapon may have been used in "some big incidents".

AK 47, live bullets and bombs - these are few things that our security forces recover from terrorists or Maoists. However, in Bihar's Mokma, the arms and ammunition were recovered from a public servant’s house. The Bihar police have recovered these deadly weapons from Independent MLA Anant Kumar Singh during a raid. According to reports, the police had to call bomb squad to defuse the bombs.

The raids were carried out on the legislator’s residence at his ancestral village Nadva after receiving specific inputs that illegal arms were being restored there, Superintendents Police Kantesh Mishra said.

According to sources, police had received intelligence inputs about movement of illegals arms and ammunition from the MLA’s residence and other locations. A similar movement had taken place a few days ago as well.

The police said that the AK 47 rifles were covered in carbon to avoid detection by the metal detectors. The carbon covering is used by arms smugglers to hide weapons. After carbon covering, even x-ray machines can’t detect weapons.

Singh, nicknamed 'Chhote Sarkaar', has a long criminal record and was recently summoned to the police headquarters in Patna for giving his voice sample in connection with a bid on the life of a Mokama-based contractor. The MLA had reacted angrily to the raid at his ancestral house and alleged that a conspiracy has been hatched against him at the behest of JD(U) MP Lalan Singh. "Weapons not belonging to me are being shown as having been recovered from my house. The house has also been badly vandalised during the raid," he said.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
