19 drug mules held this month in NCB crackdown on cartels

NEW DELHI: In the past fortnight, Narcotics Control Bureau ( NCB ) arrested 19 drug mules , including eight foreigners, and seized 2.9kg cocaine, 10kg hashish, 18kg ganja, 13kg heroin and 13kg opium from them. The bureau will be intensifying its crackdown on drug traffickers in the coming weeks.A senior NCB official said that the operations are being conducted in coordination with other drug law enforcement agencies across the country and abroad. The seizures in the last two weeks were made during raids conducted in Ludhiana, Amritsar, Ferozepur, Mandi, Mumbai and Lucknow. A probe is on to tighten the noose on drug cartels sending consignments from Adis Ababa.A team in Mumbai seized 2kg cocaine at the airport and arrested a person from Suriname. The drug had been sent from Suriname via Addis Ababa. The trafficker arrived in Mumbai by Ethiopian Airlines. Police will be contacting their counterparts in the originating country and conducting joint operations to nab the international mules, sources said.After taking over on July 31, NCB DG Rakesh Asthana told the bureau to focus on cross-border cartels and mules bringing in drugs from Afghanistan. NCB also plans a crackdown on the Delhi-Punjab drug network being operated by Af-Pak-based cartels. In Delhi, mules based in Uttam Nagar, Lajpat Nagar and Paharganj and their handlers are being identified, said a source.Officials said that Delhi has become a transit point for international drug cartel, which is evident from the scale of seizures made recently. “Not only are Afghani carriers being sent to India in large numbers, but the consignments originating in western countries are mostly being routed through Delhi and Mumbai. We are in touch with immigration officials for better screening procedures to identify the suspects,” a senior official said.NCB had recently busted a heroin-supplying module being run by an Afghani with links to the Taliban from Hauz Rani of south Delhi.
