ISIS claim responsibility for Kabul wedding suicide bombing which killed 63

ISIS claim responsibility for Kabul wedding suicide bombing which killed 63. [Photo: Courtesy]

ISIS has claimed responsibility for a suicide attack at a wedding party in Kabul.

The bomb blast killed at least 63 people and injured another 182 in the Afghan capital on Saturday night.

The venue was packed with partygoers and children when the terrifying attack was unleashed.

ISIS, in a statement on the messaging website Telegram, claimed responsibility saying its bomber had been able to infiltrate the reception and detonate his explosives in the crowd of "infidels".

Pictures posted on social media showed bodies strewn amid overturned table and chairs at the wedding hall, with dark blood stains on the carpet.

The bomber struck the men's reception area, officials said.

"Everybody was running," a waiter at the hall, Sayed Agha Shah, said after the blast.

"Several of our waiters were killed and wounded."

Both the bride and groom survived.

"I won't ever be able to forget this however much I try," the groom, identified as Mirwais, told the TOLOnews channel.

He said his cousin and some friends had been killed.

"I can't go to the funerals, I feel very weak ... I know that this won't be the last suffering for Afghans, the suffering will continue."

The bride's father told TOLOnews 14 members of his family were killed.

Other pictures show the destroyed wedding hall with the ceiling collapsed.

The attack came as the Taliban and the United States are trying to negotiate an agreement on the withdrawal of U.S. forces in exchange for a Taliban commitment on security and peace talks with Afghanistan's U.S.-backed government.

It follows a bomb attack on a mosque in Pakistan on Friday that killed a brother of Taliban leader Haibatullah Akhundzada.

The Taliban denied responsibility and condemned the blast in the minority Shi'ite neighbourhood.

Wedding halls have become a big business in Kabul as the Afghan economy slowly picks up and families spend more on celebrations.

Big, brightly lit halls now line some suburban streets of the city, and bombers have targeted them before.

At least 40 people were killed in a wedding-hall blast in Kabul in November.

Islamic State militants also operate in Afghanistan and have carried out bloody attacks in towns and cities, some aimed at members of the Shi'ite minority.

Share this story
