Chinese troops entered Ladakh because Congress neglected region: BJP MP Jamyang Tsering Namgyal

BJP MP Jamyang Tsering Namgyal (First from left) | Photo Credit: PTI

New Delhi: The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) Member of Parliament (MP) from Ladakh, Jamyang Tsering Namgyal, who hit the limelight with his passionate speech on Article 370 in Parliament, said the region was neglected in defence policies formulated under Congress rule. This is the reason, he opined, that China “captured its area up to Demchok sector”.

Namgyal also accused successive Congress governments of “ruining” Kashmir by practising politics of “appeasement” in hostile situations of which Ladakh was “collateral damage”.

"(Former prime minister) Jawaharlal Nehru formulated the 'forward policy', which said we should move towards China inch by inch. During its implementation, it became a 'backward policy'. The (Chinese troops) continued to intrude into our territory and we continued to retreat," Namgyal said in an interview given to the news agency PTI.

"It's the reason Aksai Chin is completely under China. The People's Liberation Army personnel have come up to Demchok's 'nallah' because Ladakh didn't get due importance in defence policies in the 55 years of Congress rule," the 34-year-old first-time Parliamentarian said.

In July 2018, troops of India and China were involved in a tense stand-off as People’s Liberation Army (PLA) troops protested against India’s attempt to construct a canal or nallah in its own side in the Demchok sector.

Yet another incident in 2019 rang alarm bells on the Indian side when PLA troops crossed the Line of Actual Control (LAC) and entered Demchok. The incident took place after Tibetans hoisted the flag of Tibet on Dalai Lama’s birthday.

The incident was brushed off by Army chief General Bipin Rawat who said it is not an intrusion but a patrol by Chinese troops of their “perceived” LAC.

The Ladakh MP said the region will get its due attention in Centre’s defence planning after being accorded the status of a Union Territory once the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, comes into effect.

Speaking on how defence preparedness will strengthen in Ladakh after t becomes a UT, the BJP MP said the rehabilitation project announced by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh will put an end to migration in border villages.

“The borders will become secure when city-like facilities, including roads, communication, schools and hospitals, will be provided to these areas under the Narendra Modi government," he said.

The BJP MP earned accolades from both PM Modi and Amit Shah for his August 6 speech during the discussion in Parliament on resolutions on Kashmir.

In a rousing speech in the Lok Sabha during the debate on Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Bill, 2019, the BJP MP said that Ladakh has been fighting for Union Territory status for over seven decades.

“A lot of people spoke about Ladakh, Leh, and Kargil. Ladakh has been mistreated and alienated for the last 71 years and was called a place with barren lands. Do people who have such a narrative understand Ladakh? Do they know about its culture, language, food, geographical condition, climatic condition? Ladakh has been fighting for the UT status for the last 71 years. We wish to become an integral and unbreakable part of India,” he said.

He also tore into the critics of the Centre’s decision to revoke provisions of Article 370 and said that only two families will lose with the abrogation of provisions, apparently referring to Abdullahs and Muftis, though he mentioned no names.


