Bihar MLA Anant Singh goes missing after FIR registered in AK-47 case

Independent MLA Anant Singh went missing from his Patna residence as police reached there to arrest him following the recovery of an AK-47 rifle, 22 live cartridges, and two bombs from his ancestral house in Mokama on Friday.

An AK-47 rifle was recovered from the ancestral house of controversial Bihar MLA Anant Singh on Friday during a raid which also yielded a large number of ammunition and explosives.

An FIR was registered against him under the newly formed Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (UAPA). The police, however, arrested Chuttan alias Sunil Singh who is a close aide of the legislator and an accused in an attempt to murder case and was present at the residence.

Patna (Rural) SP Kantesh Kumar Mishra and Additional SP Lipi Singh on Friday conducted a day-long raid at Anant Singh's home in Ladma village and recovered an assembled AK-47, 22 live cartridges and two bombs.

Trouble began mounting for the dreaded gangster-turned-politician a few days ago after an audio clip went viral where he was heard hatching a conspiracy to eliminate one of his rivals.

The police headquarter took cognizance of the audio recording and carried out a voice sample test of the legislator, last week.

After the raids were conducted at his ancestral home in Ladma, Anant Singh hit out at the state government for trying to implicate him.

The two-time JD(U) MLA alleged that he was being falsely framed in the case at the behest of JD(U) MP from Munger, Lallan Singh, against whom his wife Neelam Devi contested in the recently concluded Lok Sabha polls.

It may be mentioned that at one point in time, Anant Singh was very close to Chief Minister Nitish Kumar and had won elections on a JD(U) ticket from Mokama for the first time in 2005 and then in 2010.

Just ahead of the 2015 assembly elections, Anant Singh fell out with Nitish after he was charged in a murder case. Anant Singh who is also known as "Chhote Sarkar" in his area won elections from jail as an Independent candidate.
