Mumbai: 6 Thai women rescued after police bust sex racket at spa centre in Vile Parle

A sex racket was being run in the garb of spa centre. | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights Mumbai Crime Branch bust sex racket at spa centre Police rescue six Thai nationals from spa sex racket Thai women were in possession of business and tourist visas

Mumbai: In a major crackdown, the Crime Branch of Mumbai Police busted a sex racket that was being operated in the garb of a spa centre. The police have also rescued six Thai women nationals.

The sex racket was busted after the police raided a spa centre located at suburban Vile Parle and arrested its manager and the owner. The raid was conducted on Saturday evening by the sleuths of Unit 9 of the crime branch of the city police.

According to a report, the police have also recovered a laptop, Rs 1.23 lakh cash, a swipe machine, some documents, three voucher books.

According to an official, the spa centre where the raid was conducted has been identified as 'The Thai Villa' located at Rishi Building on Dixit Road.

The Thai women rescued from the spa centre were found to be in possession of business and tourist visas.

The police have filed a case under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Prevention of Immoral Trafficking Act.

Noida spa centres indulging in 'sex trade'

In a similar event reported from Uttar Pradesh, Noida Police carried out simultaneous raids at dozens of spa centres in the city allegedly indulging illegal sex trade. 35 people, including foreigners, were arrested by the police on July 1.

Among those arrested were 25 women and 10 men. Many foreign nationals, including some from Thailand, were also among those detained by the police. However, the police did not give an exact count of the arrested foreign nationals. The raids were conducted late in the evening at 14 spa centres in the commercial hub of Sector 18. The raids continued till almost midnight.

Delhi Police bust sex racket a spa centre

Earlier on May 22, the Delhi Police also busted a sex racket operating from the spa centre of a mall in the city and found 11 girls 'indulging in immoral activities'. The spa centre owner fled the spot during the raid. A team of the Delhi Commission for Women (DCW), along with local police, raided the spa centre in Rohini area of North Delhi on May 22 found the girls in an "objectionable position".

DCW chief Swati Maliwal earlier said they had issued notices to Delhi Police for not making arrests in the case. The notice was also issued to the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD) to ascertain whether they had received any complaints about the spa.
