M.N. Reddi loses legal battle over post of Karnataka police chief

M.N. Reddi, Director-General of Police and head of Home Guards, Civil Defence, and Fire and Emergency Services, has lost his legal battle over the post of State police chief, with the Supreme Court dismissing his plea against the verdict of the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT).

A Bench of the apex court comprising Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul and Justice K.M. Joseph has, in its July 30 order, declined to interfere with the tribunal’s July 17 verdict, which found nothing wrong in the State government’s October 2017 order appointing IPS officer Neelamani N. Raju as State police chief. “Heard learned counsel for the petitioner [Mr. Reddi] and perused the relevant material. We are not inclined to interfere with the impugned judgment [of the tribunal]. The special leave petition is accordingly dismissed,” the Bench said in its brief order.

Mr. Reddi had, in June this year, moved the Bengaluru Bench of CAT questioning the process followed by the State government in selecting Ms. Raju. He had contended that the State, instead of following the mandatory guidelines issued by the Supreme Court in 2006 and clarified in 2018 for sending the names of eligible IPS officers to the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) for selection a candidate to the post, had illegally evolved its own procedure. He sought a fresh selection process and consideration for the post.

The State government, subsequently, defended the procedures followed in selection to the post of Director-General and Inspector-General of Police (State police chief) and the appointment of Ms. Raju. It described Mr. Reddi’s plea as lacking in merit and timed-barred.

The CAT, after summoning the original records of the selection process, found that the selection committee had done “an excellent job” in conducting a comparative study of all six candidates considered for the post by examining all records, including commendations and encomiums. While all the IPS officers considered the top post had received two distinctions each, Ms. Raju had received 20 ‘outstanding’, nine ‘very good’, and one ‘good’ ratings in her annual performance appraisal report. Mr. Reddi had received 19 ‘outstanding’, seven ‘very good’, and three ‘good’ ratings.

Observing that Ms. Raju’s appraisal record were slightly better than that of Mr. Reddi, and that she was his senior, the CAT found that the selection committee had made an unequivocal proposition and placed the matter before the then Chief Minister, who then selected her for the post of police chief.
