[PHOTO INSIDE] Taimur Ali Khan laughs uncontrollably as he enjoys playtime with dad Saif Ali Khan in London

Taimur Ali Khan, Saif Ali Khan's latest photo from London is too cute for words | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Taimur Ali Khan is currently in London But each time his new photograph surfaces on the internet, fans can't get enough of him This time, the little one is enjoying his playtime with dad Saif Ali Khan

From London, with love! That's what you would want to say after looking at baby Taimur Ali Khan's latest photograph from the city. The little one, who is currently in London with his parents Kareena Kapoor Khan and Saif Ali Khan, is living it up. From enjoying his time on playdates to getting to spend quality time with his family, the little munchkin is doing it all. Ever since Taimur has stepped out of the city, his fans and even the paparazzi have started to miss the daily updates, but courtesy their fan following across the world, one or another moment from their trip keeps finding its way to the internet.

In the latest photograph that has now surfaced on the internet, we see little Taimur laughing uncontrollably as his dad Saif swings him in his arms. While Saif is dressed in a black tee and blue denim, Taimur is shelling out micro-fashion goals in a blue shirt and ripped denim. One can't see Saif's face in the photo, but going by the vibe it oozes, it's clear that the father-son duo is the happiest when together!

Here, take a look at the latest photograph of Taimur and Saif from London:

Photos of Saif Ali Khan with Taimur https://t.co/BCOlk4bMpc pic.twitter.com/VlbV5zK8Uh — Saif Ali Khan Online (@SaifOnline) August 18, 2019

The Khans are currently in London for their respective work commitments - while Saif is shooting for Jawaani Jaaneman alongside Tabu, Kareena Kapoor Khan is busy with the shoot of Angrezi Medium. Meanwhile, several photographs of Taimur, Kareena and Saif keep surfacing on the internet. From Kareena and Saif cuddling with their baby boy to the little one strolling around the streets of London with his parents, the photos say it all.

Apart from Angrezi Medium, Kareena has also been juggling the shoot of Dance India Dance, wherein she features as a judge. The actress, in fact, has taken even one-day trips to keep up with the shoot schedules back home.
