I AM the latest Jeffrey Archer, the author told an Indian street vendor

I AM the latest Jeffrey Archer, the author told an Indian street vendor The bestselling writer spoke to us about the routine that allows him to finish a draft in 50 days, among other things

| Published 31.01.19, 06:23 PM

You have to speak up, I cannot take that soft Indian voice. Shout at me!” bellows the 78-year-old Jeffrey Archer, as we sit down for an interview in one corner of a room on the media terrace, on a bitterly cold afternoon. We are at the Zee Jaipur Literature Festival 2019 at the Diggi Palace and Archer has just finished his long session with Barkha Dutt, addressing a packed house on the Front Lawn. The bestselling author of books like The Fourth Estate, Kane and Abel and A Prisoner of Birth spoke about his strict routine of writing for two hours with two-hour breaks, that allows him to finish a draft in 50 days, among many other things. Just before we enter the room, Jeffrey writes ‘HELL’ in capital letters on a board propped on the terrace, answering the question, “What is the place of literature in the age of micro-blogging?” That’s Jeffrey Archer for you! His spirit is that of a teenager, age notwithstanding, smiling and cracking jokes despite a packed schedule and several requests for autographs and photographs.

Advertisement

Excerpts from an interview...

You have to speak up, I cannot take that soft Indian voice. Shout at me!” bellows the 78-year-old Jeffrey Archer, as we sit down for an interview in one corner of a room on the media terrace, on a bitterly cold afternoon. We are at the Zee Jaipur Literature Festival 2019 at the Diggi Palace and Archer has just finished his long session with Barkha Dutt, addressing a packed house on the Front Lawn. The bestselling author of books like The Fourth Estate, Kane and Abel and A Prisoner of Birth spoke about his strict routine of writing for two hours with two-hour breaks, that allows him to finish a draft in 50 days, among many other things. Just before we enter the room, Jeffrey writes ‘HELL’ in capital letters on a board propped on the terrace, answering the question, “What is the place of literature in the age of micro-blogging?” That’s Jeffrey Archer for you! His spirit is that of a teenager, age notwithstanding, smiling and cracking jokes despite a packed schedule and several requests for autographs and photographs. Excerpts from an interview...
