United Nations should resolve Kashmir issue as per its resolutions: Maleeha Lodhi

"You will find a lot of Srinagar functioning tomorrow [Saturday] morning", Jammu and Kashmir Chief Secretary B.V.R. Subrahmanyam told reporters.

Beijing has argued that the decision violates its sovereignty. This meeting nullifies India's claim that Jammu and Kashmir is an internal matter. "The Chinese concerns in this regard were therefore misplaced".

Israeli agencies including secret service Shin Bet, who are responsible for human rights abuses and killings of Palestinians, also provide training for Indian military units suppressing the people of Kashmir. But Lodhi maintained that "The fact that this meeting took place is testimony to the fact that this is an internationally recognized dispute".

Hundreds of people have held a street protest in Indian-controlled Kashmir as India's government assured the Supreme Court that the situation in the disputed region is being reviewed daily and unprecedented security restrictions will be removed over the next few days.

That came just before a presidential order was announced to subsume the region into India's federal government by revoking Article 370 of the constitution and downgrading the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two federal territories.

It is very rare for the UNSC to discuss Kashmir - the last such meeting on the region being held 54 years ago.

India's decision to revoke special status for the portion of Kashmir it occupies, along with a communications blackout and curbs on movement, caused fury in Pakistan, which cut trade and transport links and expelled India's envoy in retaliation.

But India accused Pakistan of exaggerating ceasefire violations along the LoC to draw more worldwide attention to the disputed region, according to local media.

The United Nations Security Council is expected to hold a closed-door meeting after China backed Pakistan's call for the global body to discuss India's decision on the disputed Muslim-majority state.

Kaepernick posts tribute video on 3-year anniversary of protest

Hov stated, "That's his version of an action item, this is our version of an action item", adding, "We all do different things". According to USA Today , Kaepernick has been out of work for 889 days as of August 7, since he left the 49ers in March 2017.

Pakistan had written a letter to the UNSC seeking a meeting and according to reports, it was backed by ally China.

Since then India and Pakistan have fought over the territory.

But perhaps the biggest problem could be India's neighbour Pakistan. But the US and many other nations have offered only tepid responses, calling on the South Asian neighbors to exercise restraint and maintain peace in the region.

Lodhi underscored the fact that Pakistan "stands ready for a peaceful settlement of the dispute of Jammu and Kashmir".

New Delhi has been harping on its terror mantra despite Islamabad's repeated attempts at resolving all outstanding issues between the two countries, including that of Kashmir, through dialogue.

After holding a meeting in Saudi Arabia on August 6 at the behest of Pakistan, the OIC only reiterated its previous position.

Gulf Arab countries may also be wary of supporting Kashmiri rights because it centers on "people's right to their own freedoms", said Hafsa Kanjwal, a Kashmiri American assistant professor of South Asian history at Lafayette College.

While the United Nations and Pakistan have accused India of human rights violations in Kashmir, the US and India have repeatedly said Islamabad backs terrorists in and around the region. "The time has arrived to teach you (India) a lesson".

Pakistan's security forces, meanwhile, said "unprovoked firing" by India along the militarized Line of Control in the region killed three Pakistani soldiers and two civilians in separate incidents. The United States is a traditional backer of India and China of Pakistan, while many council members have close relations with both countries.
