N.J. boy lost his parents, sister in an instant. $80K already raised for his future.

A Sikh community near Carteret is rallying to support a boy who survived a head-on crash in Virginia that killed his parents and sister.

Nearly $80,000 was raised by Sunday evening for Yashveer Singh, 11, of Carteret, who suffered serious injuries in the accident on Thursday, family friends said.

His father, Gurmeet Singh, 44; mother, Jasleen Kaur, 38; and 6-year-old sister all died after a pickup truck driver lost control of the vehicle and crashed into their minivan in Virginia. Yashveer Singh was taken to a nearby hospital, where he is recovering, according to police.

The Singh family were regulars at Gurdwara Dashmesh Darbar, a Sikh temple in Port Reading, where friends gathered to mourn on Sunday. Temple leaders added an hour onto their typical day service for a “condolence meeting,” where attendees said special prayers and sang hymns around 3 p.m.

“With whom shall I become friends if all the world passes away,” lyrics to one mournful song said.

Gurmeet Singh was a “jolly man,” the type who could get anyone to laugh, former neighbors said. He had a constant smile on his face and was always cracking jokes at neighborhood and temple gatherings, Jagpreet Kakkar said.

He came to America from New Delhi as an adult and worked as an independent wholesaler, where he sold goods like candies and batteries to convenience stores in several states, Kakkar said.

The family lived in Carteret for about 10 years, and the children attended local schools, according to former neighbor Pinal Singh (who is unrelated to Gurmeet).

Jasleen Kaur, Gurmeet Singh’s wife, was a reserved woman and doting mother. She always looked out for her children and her community, Kakkar said. Kakkar chuckled as she recalled Kaur’s young boy riding down the sidewalk on a tricycle; Kaur scurried after him with a spoonful of food, trying to get him to eat.

The two families’ children played together at the Singh’s household, where they jumped on trampolines and swung on tree swings. And when they were all at the temple, they dodged between the adult’s legs and played in the foyer.

“They used to play right over there,” Pinal Singh said, gesturing to an open area in the Temple. “I’m still thinking (they) will just show up.”

A Teeyain Da Mela celebration was scheduled for Sunday at a nearby banquet hall, but organizers postponed the event after hearing the news of the crash. Many community members felt too somber, event organizer Veenu Gill said.

Friends of the family organized an online fundraiser to pay for funeral expenses and to support the boy. Additionally, around 300 people attended the condolence meeting Sunday.

“Not everyone knew them, but everyone came to support (the boy),” Gill said.

Community members said they expect the boy to recover, and it is unclear who will take custody of him. Some said his grandparents were planning to fly in from India.

Funerals for the three people who died have not been scheduled yet — and it may be a long time before the Sikh community feels whole again after the loss of three of their members.

“I couldn’t sleep (after hearing the news),” Kakkar said.

Pinal Sigh, with tears in her eyes, added: “It’s funny how much you take for granted.”
