Mumbai: Sex racket busted at Vile Parle, Borivali

Unit 9 of Mumbai Crime Branch have busted a prostitution racket operating under the garb of a massage parlour in Vile Parle. The cops have arrested a man and rescued six women, all Thailand nationals for allegedly running a prostitution racket at the same spot. In another raid at Borivali (W), police rescued six women and arrested the manager.

According to sources, on Saturday evening, the crime branch officers received a tip-off that a sex racket was being operated from 'The Thai Villa', located at Rishi Building near Dixit Road in Vile Parle. Acting on the information, police raided the premises and rescued six Thai women. Subsequently, police also arrested the owner and the manager of the spa.

During the raid, police seized Rs 1.23 lakh in cash, a laptop, swipe machine, three voucher books and some documents.

Moreover, the rescued women were found to be in possession of tourist and business visas. Accordingly, a case was registered under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) and Prevention of Immoral Trafficking Act (PITA) at Vile Parle police station.

In another raid, Unit 11 of crime branch police raided 'Regal Spa' in Borivli (W) and rescued six women from prostitution racket. Police said, one of the rescued women was found performing indecent acts with a dummy. The spa center is a duplex shop having six rooms three on basement and three at upper floor while cash counter and waiting room is at the ground floor. Police arrested lady owner Divya Sarveshlingam Sakhinetipalli, 39, and recovered Rs 23,800 in cash from her while the six women, who claimed to be victims, were rescued.

Rs 1.23 lakh – confiscated in the raid. Six girls from Thai Villa at Rishi Building in Vile Parle were from Thailand found possessing tourist and business visas. Subsequently, police also arrested one.



confiscated in the raid. Six girls from Thai Villa at Rishi Building in Vile Parle were from Thailand found possessing tourist and business visas. Subsequently, police also arrested one. Rs 23,800 – were recovered from the spa center which is a duplex shop having six rooms three on basement and three at upper floor while cash counter and waiting room is at the ground floor. Police arrested the lady owner Divya Sarveshlingam Sakhinetipalli, 39 while the six women, who claimed to be victims, were rescued.

PAST RAIDS IN MUMBAI SPAS

August 1, 2019 – Police have rescued eight girls and arrested three persons after raiding a spa in suburban Goregaon on suspicion of a flesh trade racket was operating from there.

July 15, 2019 – The Mumbai Police Crime Branch has busted a well-organised flesh trade racket being run under the guise of a spa in Saki Naka, complete with a ‘call centre’ in Lower Parel. Three girls have been rescued and one person arrested in the case.

Compiled by DNA – Research N Archives
