Amid fire chaos at AIIMS, doctors help woman deliver baby

At a time when firefighters were trying hard to contain a major fire which broke out in one of the buildings of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in Delhi on Saturday, the doctors of the apex medical institute helped a young woman deliver a baby girl during the chaotic situation there.

It has come to light on Sunday that a young mother, who was admitted to the Gynaecology Ward of the AIIMS on Saturday morning, went into labour while the hospital staff was busy evacuating patients in the emergency ward in the aftermath of the massive blaze.

Amid widespread chaos, the young mother was shifted to the operation theatre at Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences of the institute. Around 9.30 PM, when the firefighting operations were underway in full swing, the 30-year-old woman delivered a healthy baby girl with the help of doctors there.

"Attending to the patient is our duty and we cannot ignore it under any situation. The life of this patient and her child was more important than anything. We immediately took her to the RP centre OT for delivery," a senior doctor, who helped the woman deliver the baby, said.

Both the mother and child are doing well, the doctors said.

AIIMS - the country's apex medical institute - witnessed one of the worst fire incidents on Saturday. The fire broke out late afternoon in the hospital and caused extensive damages to the first, second and third floor of the PC Block. A total of 34 fire tenders were pressed into service.

However, no casualty was reported due to the incident. After nearly six hours, the massive fire at the AIIMS was brought under control, the Delhi Fire Services and AIIMS Fire Division said.

Harsh Vardhan meets director

Union Minister for Health and Family Welfare, Harsh Vardhan, on Sunday reviewed the situation at AIIMS after a major fire broke out at the facility on Saturday. He held a meeting with AIIMS Director and other senior faculty members. The fire which is suspected to have started from the microbiology laboratory area has damaged some laboratories and office areas. However, the hospital area has not been affected by the fire and there has been no casualty. As a precautionary measure, AIIMS administration had shifted patients from AB wing of the hospital to other areas in the building.
