[PHOTOS] Salman Khan poses with his little fans as he shoots for Dabangg 3 with Sonakshi Sinha in Jaipur

Salman Khan strikes a pose with his fans in Jaipur | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Salman Khan is currently busy shooting for the third instalment of Dabangg 3 The superstar was seen striking a pose with his little fans Dabangg 3 is slated to release on December 20

Salman Khan is currently busy with the shooting of his next film Dabangg 3. The actor, who is shooting for the third instalment of his Dabangg franchise, is currently in Jaipur along with his co-star Sonakshi Sinha. Together, the two actors are making heads turn in the pink city and making their fans happy by striking a pose with them.

It was on Thursday when Salman Khan updated his fans about his whereabouts. Taking to his Instagram handle, he shared a video from the sets of Dabangg 3. In the video, the actor is seen sporting a black shirt and his iconic moustache from the film. He says, "Happy Independence Day. Happy Rakhi and happy rain in beautiful Jaipur, Rajasthan."

Now a couple of more photos of the Dabangg actor and his better half Rajjo have cropped up on the web which is making fans gush. In the picture, Salman can be seen posing for a photo with two of his little fans who seem joyful on meeting him. While saree-clad Sonakshi looks beautiful as she heads inside the city palace. Check out the photos here:

Directed by Prabhudheva, and bankrolled by Salman Khan and his brother Arbaaz Khan, Dabangg 3 will also launch a new face, Saiee Manjrekar. The debutante is the daughter of actor-filmmaker Mahesh Manjrekar. If the reports are to be believed, Saiee will essay the role of the love interest of superstar Salman Khan's character, Chulbul Pandey from his younger days.

During his professional commitments, Salman made sure to take some time out for his personal relations. The actor celebrated Raksha Bandhan with actress-turned-politician Bina Kak in Jaipur. In an image, Bina is seen posing with Salman and her two children and captioned it, "Rakhi celebration at home Jaipur. Blissful having my brother like son at home... Shooting 'Dabangg'."

Stay tuned for more updates.
