Rains to abate in North after 24 hours, says IMD

editorial@tribune.com

Vibha Sharma

Tribune News Service

New Delhi, August 18

As the hills and plains of northwest India battle the monsoon fury, fresh updates from the India Meteorological Department (IMD) say that relief is in sight. The low pressure area over north Haryana and adjoining Punjab is likely to weaken during the next 18 hours. The current interaction between the monsoon low and the western disturbance is also likely to weaken. Under its influence, the widespread rainfall over Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Punjab and Haryana, Chandigarh and Delhi is likely to continue for the next 24 hours and reduce thereafter, says the Met office.

Further, between August 23 and 25, widespread rainfall with isolated downpour is expected over Madhya Pradesh, eastern and adjoining northeastern parts and scattered to fairly widespread rainfall over the rest of the country, “except over northwest and interior parts of peninsular India”.

National capital Delhi is on high alert following the rise in the water level in the Yamuna because of incessant rain in the catchment area and subsequent release of water at the Hathnikund barrage. Yamuna waters could swell further due to additions from rivulets flowing in from Haryana and adjoining Uttar Pradesh.

Subsequently between August 23 and 29, the country is expected to see further reduction in rainfall in major part of the country. However, above normal rainfall is likely over Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, North Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, Kerala and Lakshadweep and near- normal over Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, the Gangetic West Bengal and Odisha, says the IMD.

The rest of the country is likely to receive below normal rainfall and the “probability for genesis of monsoon depression during the next two weeks is low”.

While large parts of the country battle excess rains and floods due to increase in extreme rain events, an equally large number is battling drought-like situation owing to unequal distribution of rainfall. The phenomenon propelled by global warming is increasing by the year. According to reports, so far 10 such events have already taken place in comparison to seven last year.

In fact, the IMD’s weekly statistics say it all—how poorly distributed seasonal rains have been in 2019. Though the overall rainfall in India is “normal” because of very heavy rains in several parts, many districts, including in Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Bihar, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and some areas of Tamil Nadu, are reeling under dry weather conditions. It is expected that extreme rain events that flooded states like Kerala and Uttarakhand for two subsequent years may become more frequent as climate further becomes warm.

RAINFALL POORLY DISTRIBUTED
