Mainland's Principal Salerno has a long record of dedication, commitment | LETTERS

Staff Writer

The Daytona Beach News-Journal

Don't dismiss the good work

Some of us who have known and/or worked with Dr. Cheryl Salerno for almost 30 years, and who, therefore , are familiar with her dedication and commitment, as a teacher, assistant principal and principal to the improvement of the lives of Volusia County students, can only try to understand the mistakes and alleged violations that have been made and wonder what else, unreported, there is to the story.

[READ MORE Investigation: Mainland Principal Salerno faked class for athletes ]

There seems to be, in today’s media-rich environment, an eagerness to ignore a lifetime of good work when a public servant makes a mistake and instead flay the poor soul as though he or she is nothing short of a conniving degenerate.

We know Dr. Salerno to be an advocate for all students, but particularly for those who, were it not for the opportunities presented by public education, would face a lifetime of struggle and broken dreams.

This piece is not written for the purpose of exonerating or making excuses for Dr.

Salerno. It is written in the hopes that a lifetime of good work not be dismissed as irrelevant and unworthy of testimony.

Timothy C. Henderson, Port Orange

Follow the money

Most polls show that the vast majority of Americans, including most gun owners, support universal background checks and closing the gun show and private sale loopholes. This majority of Americans even includes a large majority of NRA members who feel America needs better screening of potential gun purchasers. If the majority of NRA members support universal background checks, it would seem only the leadership of the NRA is adamant about blocking this legislation.

It stands to reason those NRA members who support universal background checks would not be alienated by a legislator’s vote in favor of these measures. The only thing a legislator stands to lose is NRA campaign contributions. It seems to me that those candidates beholden to the NRA are less interested in the NRA membership than they are in the money doled out by NRA leadership, directly and indirectly. Perhaps it’s time to forego the easy money and support the will of the citizenry.

Joe Masella, Ormond Beach

Keep open mind

I’m old enough to have been an adult during“Earth Day, 1970. It is foggy to me, but I do remember the name Paul Ehrlich. So, I Googled his name.

Everyone should do the same.

Most of the scientific experts at the time forecast global starvation because of population explosion. One brilliant mind, however, predicted “global cooling” at the rate of 11 degrees by the year 2000.

Well, thanks to American ingenuity (we should strive to get China and India on board), none of this happened.

For one, instead of 1 bushel of corn per acre, we figured out a way to get 10 bushels of corn per acre.

As for pollution, we have figured out ways to cut chemical emissions to give us cleaner air and water.

Fascinating stuff. I wish the media would go back in time and expose these fakers, most of whom were Leftists, anti-capitalists. Perhaps, then, we wouldn’t take so seriously “global warming.”

Larry Harton, Ormond Beach

Common sense limit

OK, suppose we remove the nonsense from this gun control debate and try a little common sense. I support the Second Amendment, but I think it’s reasonable to say that we have to draw the line somewhere. Do we allow people to mount .50 caliber machine guns in the back of pickup trucks? How about being able to pick up a grenade launcher at Walmart? Obviously, we need some kind of limits.

According to a 2019 study from New York University’s School of Medicine, between 1994 and 2004, when an assault style weapons and high capacity magazine ban was in effect, there were 53 mass shootings in the U.S. After the ban expired, between 2005 and 2017, the number was 309.

I think common sense makes it pretty clear where the line needs to be drawn. We are not talking about pistols, rifles, shotguns, etc. we are talking about military style, high capacity weapons.

This is not an assault on our rights, it is literally protecting our lives.

Tim Remmert, South Daytona
