Sick man bludgeons sr citizen to death

Bengaluru

senior citizen

Techie kidnaps, thrashes stalker A 24-year old techie in Hyderabad kidnapped and thrashed a 22-year-old stalker. While the stalker is undergoing treatment for internal injuries, the techie and her five friends who helped her in handling him have been arrested by the police.

By Amit Kumar & Iffath FathimaHe escaped from his hometown in Maharashtra, attacked man with a wooden plank in JalahalliA mentally challenged man who escaped from a hospital in Gondia, Maharashtra, where he was undergoing treatment somehow reachedand ended up murdering ain Jalahalli. And when passers-by overpowered him and handed him over to the police, he told officials that he killed the senior citizen as he wanted to take along someone with him as he would die soon.The incident took place on January 25 at around 9 am. Sixty-year-old Hanumanthappa, a resident of Jalahalli, was walking past a modular kitchen showroom when he saw a man standing on the main road with a wooden plank in his hand. That man was later identified as 30-year-old Uttam Kunjam.As Hanumanthappa approached the spot where Uttam was standing, the latter started attacking him with the plank. Hanumanthappa cried out for help even as the merciless and relentless attack left him with serious head injuries.Locals who rushed to Hanumanthappa’s rescue called up the Jalahalli police and took him to private hospital after securing Uttam; some even assaulted him.At the police station, Uttam told officials that he had killed him as he wanted someone to go with him to heaven.“The accused is mentally challenged and hails from Gondia, Maharashtra. We found an Aadhar card in his pocket and informed his parents. They said that their son ran away from the hospital. They do not have any clue on how he reached Bengaluru,” said a police official from Jalahalli station.Hanumanthappa breathed his last at 3.30 am on January 26. Earlier, police had booked a case under section 307 (attempt to murder) of the Indian Penal Code; after his death, the case was modified to section 302 (murder).“He has been sent for medical treatment,” the official said.
