28 people killed after heavy rain in India

Onlookers and commuters stand next to a flooded water channel flowing over a bridge after heavy rains at New Chandigarh in Mohali district in the northern Indian state of Punjab, on August 18, 2019 AFP

As many as 887 roads, including 13 national highways, are fully or partially blocked because of landslides

Rains continued to lash several places in Punjab and other states on Monday after at least 28 people were killed and dozens reported missing or feared dead over the weekend across north India.

A flood alert was issued in parts of Delhi, Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh as the Yamuna and other rivers flowed close to the danger mark.

The casualties in the north Indian states came even as states in the south such as Kerala and Karnataka reeled in the aftermath of heavy rains. According to latest reports, the toll in Kerala has climbed to 116 while 76 people were reportedly killed in the Karnataka floods.

In Himachal Pradesh’s Shimla, Solan, Bilaspur and Kullu districts, schools and colleges were ordered to remain shut on Monday.

More than 500 people were stranded in several parts of the state cut off by landslides, PTI reported. Efforts are on to clear the roads and restore traffic to move them to safer places.

At least 28 people killed after heavy rain in Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Punjab https://t.co/yuvI4ZjYGD — scroll.in (@scroll_in) August 19, 2019

As many as 887 roads, including 13 national highways, are fully or partially blocked because of landslides.

The director of Shimla Met centre, Manmohan Singh, said light to moderate rainfall would occur at many places in the state till Tuesday while heavy rain was expected at isolated places.

On Sunday, 25 tourists, including a foreigner, were rescued after being left stranded for more than two days in Kullu without food or shelter.

Uttarakhand

At least seven people were killed and 20 were rescued across Uttarakhand as heavy rainfall continued. Uttarkashi, the worst-hit district, has received about 200 mm of rain since Saturday. Heavy rainfall has been predicted in Chamoli, Pithoragarh, Dehradun, Pauri and Nainital districts till Wednesday.

At least three people were killed and two were injured in three different accidents in Dehradun, Pauri Garhwal and Nainital districts.

Punjab and Haryana

The situation looked grim in Punjab and Haryana as well even though the India Meteorological Department said no heavy rainfall was reported in most parts of the two states on Monday morning, PTI reported.

On Sunday, at least 12 trains were cancelled after rainwater flooded railway tracks in Ropar town. The Sutlej inundated the homes of several slum dwellers on the outskirts of the town. Almost one dozen villages were evacuated near Budhki and Sarsa rivers.

In Patiala, 32 schools have been already closed following heavy rainfall. At least three members of a family were killed in Aol village near Khanna town when the roof of their home collapsed.

In Uttar Pradesh, rivers such as the Ganga, the Yamuna and the Ghaghra are in spate. The Ganga is flowing above the danger mark in Badaun, Garhmukteshwar, Naraura and Farrukhabad, reported Hindustan Times.
