How did DK Ravi die? Film reopens old row

IAS officer DK Ravi

Jacob Varghese

Bangalore

DK Ravi participates in a procession in Kolar in 2014

The unnatural death ofin 2015 had kindled many a conspiracy theories. A Kannada film whose storyline was a closely guarded secret till now is set to revive them.Chambal, directed by National Award winneris a film on the 2009 batch IAS officer. A few stills from the film which are to be revealed on Friday (one of them accessed byMirror on Thursday) shows the lead actor recreating a popular scene from the life of the Ravi.Ninasam Sathish, who plays an IAS officer in the film, said, “This is a film about an upright IAS officer. I am not able to tell you anything more at this point of time.” A teaser of the film last month did not give a hint about the protagonist. A trailer of the film was released on Thursday evening which had hints about the film possibly narrating Ravi’s story.Director Varghese, however, played it safe. “I cannot say that this is somebody’s story. A child which draws a tree or a bus is inspired by watching a tree or a bus. You cannot say it is the same bus and the same tree that the child drew,” he said, rather cryptically.A few months ago, a video streaming site offered Rs 10 crore for Chambal on the condition that it would be exclusively streamed online without a theatrical release.Varghese and Sathish refused the offer.This is not the first time Varghese has made a film with an IAS officer as the protagonist. In 2010, he made the film Prithvi which was about a deputy commissioner fighting against the illegal iron ore mafia in Ballari. The film starring Puneeth Rajkumar was praised for its realistic portrayal of the mining scandals.Ravi was found hanging in his apartment on March 16, 2015. He was the Additional Commissioner of Commercial Taxes (Enforcement) at that time. Conspiracy theories about involvement of politicians and companies evading tax in his ‘murder’ were bandied about. Others hinted at a failed love affair. However, in December 2016, a CBI enquiry found that Ravi had committed suicide.
