From Bulandshahr to Lote, a familiar theme of rumours, violence

cow slaughter

Ratnagiri district

Mumbai-Goa highway

Hindutva agenda

Sambhaji Bhide and Milind Ekbote

Last week’s attack on cops in Konkan, a region known for its multicultural fabric, was again triggered by unconfirmed reports ofLote, a small industrial town in, 280 km from Mumbai, grabbed the headlines in 1980s when the residents united to protest against the arrival of polluting factories in Konkan. Last Saturday, demonstrators from Lote gathered again, but this time for an issue which resonated with only a section of the population: rumours of cow slaughter near the town drove the crowd of about 800 to block a stretch of thefor four hours.The police’s diplomatic efforts to send people home failed, and lathi charge and clashes followed. The demonstrators attacked 15 cops, seriously injuring deputy superintendent of police Vishweshwar Nandedkar, in a near-repeat of the Bulandshahr violence in UP where inspector Subodh Kumar Singh was killed by protesters acting on rumours of cow slaughter.Nearly four years after the BJP government led by Devendra Fadnavis amended the Maharashtra Animal Preservation Act, banning slaughter of cow progeny, the social and political repercussions are evident in the Lote incident. Locals say the protest was a spontaneous reaction to a sensitive religious matter, but there are more facets to it.Historically, Konkan has been a peaceful multicultural region compared to some other parts of Maharashtra. Communities of Brahmins, Vaishya, Kunbi, Maratha and Muslims have lived and thrived here. Brahmins have considerable land holdings, including mango orchids. Many Muslims took up work in the Middle East, raising their families’ economic status in Konkan, before returning and starting businesses here. Industrialisation did not alter the region’s multicultural fabric.Shimga (Holi) is a big festival here, celebrated by Hindus and Muslims. The latter pay respect to the gram devata, or village deity, adorning it with ornaments and playing dhol. Hindus reciprocate by worshiping peers and making offerings at dargahs. The Shiv Sena has traditionally enjoyed the voters’ support here. It has not tried to enforce itsbecause Muslims also back the party.But in the past few years, conservative and controversial voices have found prominence among Hindus and Muslims, disturbing the relative calm Konkan has enjoyed. Some other parts of Maharashtra have also witnessed this change. Western Maharashtra, known for its co-operative movement, reformists and progressive culture, has been in the news lately because of controversial right-wing figuresand Dhanajay Desai, who is an accused in the killing of engineer Mohasin Sheikh. Bhide and Ekbote have been linked to the Bhima Koregaon violence against Dalits.In Konkan, Bhide, Narendra Maharaj, Sanatan Sanstha and Hindu Janjagruti have pursued hard-line Hindutva, building a considerable following. The views of Tablighi Jamaat and Ahle Hadees have gained acceptance in the Muslim community of the region. Konkani Muslim women were not known to view the burkha or head scarf as a key part of their religious identity. This has changed in the past few years.The emergence of what many see as conservative and divisive forces among Hindus and Muslims is a big blow for Konkan, which produced modern India’s first Muslim reformer, Hamid Dalwai. Historian Ramchandra Guha highlighted Dalwai’s work in the book ‘Makers of Modern India’.Last week’s violence near Lote followed a week of unconfirmed reports of cow slaughter. Some locals reported finding carcasses of cattle between Dhamandevi and Ghanekhunta villages, and a local news channel ran a story that cows had been killed for beef. Another story claimed that cows were seized from villages, taken to the spot and killed. A report on January 25 said a rescued cow and bull were brought to the same area for slaughter. There was no official confirmation for these claims, yet many assumed that some Muslim suspects were behind the incidents. The police stepped up patrolling in the area to prevent any untoward incident, but violence broke out near Lote on January 26.Interviews with villagers revealed that the protesters had acted without evidence, ignoring a key fact — there is a gau shala just a few kilometres from the reported spot. People from nearby villages often send aged or ailing cattle to the shelter.Another important fact: the police had not received any complaints of missing cattle recently. Often, cash-strapped farmers abandon cattle, which then wander near the highway. Some residents say a recent rally by Hindu Janjagruti Samiti, which seeks greater protection for cows and creation of a Hindu Rashtra, raised tensions in the area, which ultimately led to the January 26 protest.The rural economy has changed drastically over the years. Many farmers don’t require or cannot afford cattle. It costs around Rs 1,000 to Rs 1,500 a month to care for a cow. Erratic weather and falling crop prices have made this an expensive activity for many farmers. Claims about using cow urine and dung in cosmetic products have no scientific backing. Though some products are available in the market, it is not a business model a farmer or a gau shala can follow with any success. The state government has sanctioned Rs 1 crore for a gau shala in every district, but there is no mechanism to check if the funds are being utilised properly.There is big difference between cow protection suggested by Mahatma Gandhi and that followed by the BJP and ultraright-wing groups. The latter views another community as the only threat to cows, ignoring real problems that are forcing farmers to give up cattle. The attempts to whip up passions over the issue have resulted in lynchings across the country.
