Important to reduce tensions with Pakistan, maintain regional peace: US President Trump to PM Modi

In a 33-minute phone call, PM Modi, US President Trump discuss 'regional situation' | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights The White House said during a call with PM Modi, President Trump conveyed the importance of reducing tensions between India and Pakistan PM Modi, US President Donald Trump spoke on several matters including regional peace Pakistan PM Imran Khan has been issuing scathing statements against India in a bid to ratchet up Kashmir issue

New Delhi Prime Minister Narendra Modi had a 33-minute-long telephone conversation with US President Donald Trump on Monday. During the conversation, two leaders spoke at length on “bilateral and regional matters”.

During the conversation PM Modi highlighted the rhetoric of “certain leaders in the region” was detrimental to region peace – in an apparent reference to Pakistan PM Imran Khans’s rant against India on Kashmir issue.

“In the context of the regional situation, the Prime Minister stated that extreme rhetoric and incitement to anti-India violence by certain leaders in the region was not conducive to peace. He highlighted the importance of creating an environment free from terror and violence and eschewing cross-border terrorism without exception,” the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) said in a statement.

The White House in a statement said the two leaders spoke on regional developments and US-India strategic partnership. "The President conveyed the importance of reducing tensions between India and Pakistan and maintaining peace in the region" the statement added.

Modi and Trump also discussed bilateral trade and recalled their conversation on the margins during the G-20 summit in Osaka in June. The two leaders also discussed Afghanistan which completed its 100 years of independence on Monday (August 19).

“Recalling that today marked the one hundred years of the Independence of Afghanistan, the Prime Minister reiterated India’s longstanding and unwavering commitment to work for united, secure, democratic and truly independent Afghanistan,” a statement from PMO said.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan, who has been venting out his ire against the Narendra Modi-led government since the abrogation of Article 370, on Sunday launched a fresh attack at the Central government in a series of tweets. Slamming his Indian counterpart Modi over the Kashmir issue, the Pakistan PM said that India has been captured by a “fascist, racist, Hindu supremacist ideology and leadership”.

“India has been captured, as Germany had been captured by Nazis, by a fascist, racist Hindu Supremacist ideology & leadership,” he wrote on Twitter.

Asserting that RSS ideology is inspired by that of Nazi's, the Pakistan PM tweeted, “One can simply Google to understand the link between the Nazi ideology & ethnic cleansing & genocide ideology of the RSS-BJP Founding Fathers,” the Pakistani Prime Minister tweeted .

Pakistan has tried to raise the Kashmir issue on international forums including the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) seeking support and intervention in Kashmir issue. Besides China, no country extended support or agreed to mediate between India and Pakistan on the "bilateral" issue.

India, earlier this month, scrapped the special status accorded to Jammu & Kashmir under Article 370 of the Constitution and bifurcated the state into two Union Territories (UTs): Jammu with a Legislative Assembly on lines of Delhi and Puducherry and Ladakh sans one.


