Inter-state robber arrested in Delhi

New Delhi, Aug 19 : A 29-year-old inter-state robber involved in over 45 cases of robbery and snatching has been arrested along with his associate from Yamuna Vihar area, police said on Monday.

Police have recovered two single shot pistols, four live cartridges and a motorcycle from their possession.

The accused has been identified as Riyazuddin, a resident of Mustafabad (Delhi) while his associate is Mohd Fahim (22), a resident of Ghaziabad, who were arrested on August 17 from C Block, Yamuna Vihar, northeast Delhi.

"In the second week of August, we had received information that Riyazuddin was committing robbery/snatchings in Shahdara and northeast districts. On Saturday, we received a tip off that he would come to Yamuna Vihar on a white motorcycle to rob persons on morning walks," said Pramod Singh Kushwah, Deputy Commissioner of Police (Special Cell).

A trap was laid and when the police spotted the motorcycle they forced it to stop with the help of barricades and overpowered the accused.

During investigation, it was found that Riyazudin was involved in over 24 cases of dacoity, robbery, snatching, and attempt to murder in Delhi, Uttar Pradesh (UP) and Haryana.

"He is also a proclaimed offender in eight cases in Delhi, UP and Haryana. Twenty-one cases of robbery/snatching registered in Delhi and Ghaziabad have been solved as a result of their arrest. The group led by Riyazuddin has over 10 criminals who mainly targeted their victims during morning walks on roads or in parks in Loni, Sahibabad and other places in Ghaziabad and occasionally drifted to Shahdara and northeast districts of Delhi," said Kushwah.

Police said in the year 2017 he along with six other associates committed a dacoity of Rs 25 lakh in Saharanpur and then attempted a cash robbery in a petrol pump at Nehtor, Bijnor.

"In this petrol pump robbery, he along with an associate was apprehended at the spot and remained in jail till January 2019. In January, he was released on bail from Bijnor, UP and arrived in Delhi.

"He reorganized his group in Delhi and NCR for robbery and snatchings and included Mohd Fahim, Imran and others in his group. During investigation, 13 incidents of robbery/snatching in Delhi and eight incidents of Ghaziabad registered between February 19 to August 2019 have been solved," said Kushwah.
