New Yamaha NMAX 155 to debut in November or December

Yamaha is testing the facelifted NMax 155 in Indonesia, a spy shot revealed earlier this month. According to a new report from TMCBlog, the company will launch the new model in the country in November or early December. Patent images have already leaked the new model's design.

Also Read: Retro-style Yamaha XSR155 officially unveiled

The new Yamaha NMax 155 will feature revised styling. The front fascia, for example, will include a new, LED headlamp. The position of the headlamp and fly screen will be the same as on the old model.

The cockpit will pack a digital instrument console, which should benefit from Bluetooth connectivity – a feature that is steadily catching up. The region behind the instrument console (under the handlebar) will house a bottle holder and a glove box (with lid). The footboard will have a slanting design for improved ergonomics with better comfort. The step-up saddle adds a sporty look to the scooter. At the rear, the new scooter will feature a new LED taillight design.

Engine specifications of the new NMax 155 will include a 155 cc single-cylinder, SOHC, liquid-cooled, fuel-injected motor that will pump out 15.09 PS of power and 14.4 Nm of torque. Braking department will comprise disc brakes on both wheels, and there should be a dual-channel disc brake option. If launched in India, the scooter will have to feature ABS tech to comply with the latest safety norms. The shock absorption department will comprise telescopic front forks and twin gas-charged springs at the rear. With a full tank of 6.6 litres, the Yamaha NMax 155 will tip the weighing scale at 127 kg.

The current Yamaha NMax 155 is available at IDR 27.54 million (INR 1.38 lakh as per the conversion rate on 19 August).

Also Read: Yamaha to start launching BS-VI models in November

Yamaha is reportedly working on a YZF-R15 V3.0 based dual-purpose motorcycle as well. This product, according to leaked documents, will be available in two variants, namely WR155 and WR155R.

[Source: TMCBlog.com]
