Unable to adjust to family's lifestyle, couple commits suicide in UP

Allegedly, Bhagirath and his wife took a motorcycle to the nearest railway track and jumped in front of a speeding train (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights A couple jumped in front of a train in Mathura and committed suicide on Monday The two deceased have been identified as Bhagirath and Priya The couple was allegedly having trouble in adjusting to the lifestyle of their family

Agra: In an attempt to end their lives, a couple in Mathura, Uttar Pradesh jumped in front of a train on Monday. At around 10 am, Bhagirath and Priya jumped in front of a train and committed suicide. It is being alleged that the couple was having a tough time adjusting to the lifestyle of Bhagirath's family.

The two deceased were residents of Hatana village which falls under the limits of the Kosi Kalan police station. The bodies of the deceased were found near a level crossing. The area falls under the jurisdiction of the Chhata police.

Allegedly, Bhagirath and his wife rode on a motorcycle to the nearest railway track and jumped in front of an approaching train. Ramesh Prasad Bharadwaj, Station House Officer (SHO), Chhata said, "Before committing suicide, Bhagirath had made a phone call to his father Rajendra, asking him to take back the motorbike. The couple lived in an extended family and were unable to adjust according to family living style." The police have sent the bodies for post-mortem.

Couple commits suicide by drinking pesticide in Maharashtra

In June this year, a couple committed suicide in Maharashtra by drinking pesticide after battling against financial issues. The two deceased were identified as Vinod Ramakant Joshi and Meena Joshi. The two deceased allegedly made their teenaged son drink pesticide as well.

Vinod was a labour-contractor in Pune who had been facing losses for the last one year. Vinod and his wife had told their relatives that they were going to Kolhapur to visit the Ambabai temple. When they reached Kolhapur, the couple checked into a lodge and told the staff that they would be staying there for four days. The couple told the staff not to disturb them during their stay.

The following day, Vinod and his son had gone out of the lodge and while returning, Vinod had taken two bottles of water to his room from the reception counter. When the family did not come out of their room for around two days, the staff knocked on their door.

When all of their knocks went answered, the staff of the lodge called the police. The police broke open the door and found the dead bodies of the couple inside the room, their 17-year-old son was also found in an unconscious state. The police said that they had found a note in Vinod's pockets. In the note, Vinod had written that the family was committing suicide by drinking pesticide.
