J&K schools reopen but fear and posters hold sway

(With inputs from Sanjay Khajuria in Jammu)

SRINAGAR: Around 190 primary schools in the Valley reopened on Monday after a forced two-week break, but attendance was uniformly thin amid growing uncertainty fuelled by multiple incidents of stone-pelting and the appearance of posters in several localities calling for an indefinite shutdown.Sources said youths suspected to be members of separatist groups were behind the posters that were pasted overnight on walls across neighbourhoods in Srinagar , challenging the administration's attempt to restore normalcy. The posters talk of mass resistance to the nullification of Article 370 that took away J&K's special status and advise people to step out only once in the morning or evening to stock up on essential commodities.Government spokesperson Syed Sehrish Asgar said the day passed off without any incident, contradicting reports of stone-pelting at security forces and civilians at Rawalpora, Hyderpora, Peerbagh and Batamallo. Private vehicles were attacked in some of these places.At Srinagar’s Tyndale-Biscoe School and Burn Hall School, the few students who turned up were those escorted by their parents using private cars. Most schools chose not to send out buses to pick up students for fear of being caught in stone-pelting by protesters. Teachers outnumbered students in several public and government primary schools.Mohammad Hanief Ahanger, a resident of Alocha Bagh, said he wouldn't risk sending his kids to school anytime soon despite the administration assuring people of security. “Almost 80 per cent of Srinagar city and other districts of the Valley are still under strict restrictions. The large number of security personnel deployed to maintain law and order is proof of the tense situation. How can a parent dare to send his kids to school under such circumstances?” he told TOI.Government spokesperson Syed Sehrish Asgar, deputy inspector general of police VK Birdi and director of school education Muhammad Younis Malik jointly addressed a press conference later in the day to announce that middle schools across the Valley would reopen on Wednesday.Staff attendance across primary schools on Monday was an "encouraging sign", they said.Asgar, who is the director of information and public relations, claimed that the civil secretariat in Srinagar recorded 98 per cent attendance. “There was no law and order breach in the Jammu region as well. We urge people not to pay heed to rumours,” she said.In Jammu, the police appealed for information from the public to combat fear mongering. “An appeal to the citizens was made to use Jammu telephone Nos 0191-2542001, 2542000, 2560401, 2544581 and helpline Nos. 2560244 & 100 to share information regarding any rumour-monger or person spreading malicious content," a spokesperson said.One person has been arrested and a case registered at Rajouri police station against two others for "spreading malicious information over Facebook”.
