Manual to detect cybercrime and economic offences to assist cops

DCP Sambhaji Kadam develops standard operating procedure for investigating new-age crimes while police get advanced training



With time, the nature of crime has always changed but the two decades of the 21st century witnessed a spurt in cybercrime, especially its types have changed immensely with the scope of investigation has only widened. Keeping all such issues in mind, Pune police, one of the finest forces in the country, are coming up with a standard operating procedure (SOP) of investigations to enable its personnel crack cyber crimes as well as economic offences with ease.



As part of the SOP, deputy commissioner of police (DCP) of economic offences wing and cybercrime cell, Sambhaji Kadam, has developed two separate manuals, which will help officers to investigate any case in detail once it gets registered. These manuals will be circulated among all police stations and related departments.



Elaborating the new changes, DCP Kadam told Mirror, “The most challenging part of cybercrime offences are criminals, modus operandi and ever-changing nature of crime. The criminals are smart, educated, techsavvy and experts in using technology to cheat common people. In such situations, traditional methods of investigation are not useful. Against this backdrop, it is necessary to follow some standard methods and use modern technologies. We will make the staff more tech-savvy and update them with the modern methods of investigating technical crimes.”



The crime rate in Pune has increased in the past few years, in which the ratio of cybercrime and economic offences is quite high. In 2018, 13,500 cases were registered in Pune and Pimpri-Chinchwad, of which 5,500 cases were related to cyber frauds and 8,000 cases were regular crimes like robbery, attempt to murder, murder, rape, extortion, among others.



After formation of separate police commissionerate for Pimpri-Chinchwad, 4,500 cases were registered in the Pune cybercrime cell. Earlier, the cybercrime cell used to register a case and after verifying all details, it would transfer to the police station concerned. Since regular staff of a police station are busy in detection work of other crimes, they would rarely get time to focus on the technical investigation or follow-up cybercrime cases.



The scenario has now changed in the past few months since the dedicated cybercrime police station came into function. The teams of officers have started following the SOP laid by DCP Kadam. The SOP has been helping the cops in fast detection, to maintain a proper and right track of investigation while building strong evidences against the criminals. Recently, the cops have detected 50 cases of cybercrime frauds that were registered in last two months.



DCP Kadam added, “The manual explains the basic concept of all types of economic and cyber frauds, FIR registration, seizure of electronic material, packing and sealing of digital evidences, investigation of the case, production of evidences and co-ordination with the public prosecutor and court. While upgrading the investigation methods, we have set up five special teams to deal with different kinds of offences — online cheating frauds, online business frauds, data theft and hacking, social networking complaints and mobile offences, and other complaints. We have also installed a new modern software to train our officers and other staff. We are conducting workshops for police officers, providing them training from basic to advance levels. We will also train policemen in the art of cyber sleuthing.”



Police inspector Jayram Paigude, who works with cybercrime police station, said, “The manual is really helpful for our staff. Many a time, we faced problems in investigation, but this manual now helps us in every aspect of the probe. It is also helping officers of our police station. We have focused on technical training programmes so that the cops can use it easily while investigating various frauds.” Another assistant police inspector told on condition of anonymity, “I was investigating a case of online bank fraud in which a man was cheated Rs 2 lakh. I followed the manual and was able to find the accused and detect the case quite fast.”


