15-yr-old daughter, boyfriend killed B’luru businessman and not accidental fire: Cops

15-yr-old daughter, boyfriend killed B’luru businessman and not accidental fire: Cops

The body of the businessman who hails from Rajasthan, was found on Sunday and it was made to like death due to accidental fire.

news Crime

Police in Bengaluru said that the 41-year-old businessman, whose body was found burnt at his residence near Bashyam Circle in Rajajinagar on Sunday, was killed by his 15-year-old daughter and her 18-year-old boyfriend. They had initially tried to trick the police by passing it off as an accidental death due to fire caused by a short circuit.

The businessman Jai Kumar Jain, hails from Rajasthan and managed an apparel shop near his residence. His wife and son were attending a function in Tamil Nadu when the incident occurred.

Assistant Commissioner of Police V Dhananjay Kumar told PTI that the duo was arrested on Sunday itself.

According to the investigators, the 15-year-old daughter and her 18-year-old boyfriend were upset about Jai Kumar’s opposition to their relationship which led to the murder.

The PTI report said that the businessman had caught his daughter with the boy at a mall recently and expressed his strong reservations about the relationship. He had also warned her not to spend time with him, which resulted in the duo hatching the conspiracy to eliminate him.

In their confession, the minor-accused admitted that she laced the milk her father drank with sleeping pills. Later, she and her boyfriend stabbed him to death. Following that, the duo dragged him to the bathroom and tried to set ablaze the body.

But alert neighbours called the police and fire brigade after noticing smoke. When police reached the spot, they found the partially charred body with stab wounds and blood on the bed sheet. When questioned, the duo gave conflicting replies

According to Deccan Chronicle, the minor had first said that after she returned from her relative’s house after having breakfast on Sunday at around 10.30 am, she saw smoke coming from the bathroom of her father's bedroom. This is when she alerted her neighbour. But a few minutes later, she said that she had gone out for a morning walk and not to a neighbour’s house
