[Photo] Salman Khan poses as a station master for Bigg Boss 13's promo and we can't keep calm

Photo of Salman Khan from Bigg Boss 13 promo | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Another still of Salman Khan from one of the Bigg Boss 13 promos goes viral on the internet The actor and reality show host is seen posing as a station master in this one Check out the viral photo right here

Another still of Salman Khan from Bigg Boss 13's promo breaks the internet, this time in a different avatar. In this new still, the actor is seen posing as a station master and making an announcement. Fans have been sharing the photo on social media excitedly tagging the actor. Salman has been hosting the show for several years now and people love him on the show so much that they watch it specially over the weekend for him. Ratings in the past have been proof of this that most viewers only tune in on weekends to catch up with the show only because of Salman. Fans are excited to see what's different in the show this time.

According a daily, this particular promo will have the actor seated in a cabin and shaking from tremors of the trains passing by where Salman will announce that this season will move at a faster pace. The daily quoted a source saying, "Seated in a cabin, shaking from the tremors of the trains passing by, Salman is dressed as a station master, as he explains the concept of the new season, stressing on the fact that it will move at a faster pace, and adding his own quirky take to the proceedings." The actor will reportedly fly to Jaipur to shoot for Dabangg 3 after his shoot for the promos here.

Check out this viral photo from Bigg Boss 13's promo shoot here.

The upcoming season of the show has no theme as such for now but the house has moved from Lonavla to Filmcity, Mumbai. Commenting on the change in location, the source added, "There are several reasons for the change in the setting, the prime one being to lock celebrities in their own city but without any connections with the outside world." The source also added that this time the house will only have celebrities and well-known personalities as contestants instead of roping in commoners. Stay tuned with us for more updates from TV town and tweet to us @zoomtv.
