Shot in arm for BJP ahead of LS poll

editorial@tribune.com

Sushil Manav

Tribune News Service

Chandigarh, January 31

Bharatiya Janata Party candidate Krishan Middha’s victory in Jind has come as a big boost to the ruling party in Haryana ahead of the parliamentary elections, as the bypoll was being touted as a referendum on the Manohar Lal Khattar government in the state.

Middha defeated Jannayak Janta Party-supported candidate Digvijay Chautala by a margin of 12,935 votes. But the defeat notwithstanding, the result can be seen as a huge morale booster for the less-than-two-month-old JJP, launched by Hisar MP Dushyant Chautala on December 9.

The result has also come as a dampener for the Congress and the INLD. The Congress’ high-profile candidate Randeep Surjewala barely managed to save his security deposit while INLD candidate Umed Redhu had to be content with only 3,454 votes and finished a poor fifth after MP Raj Kumar Saini’s candidate Vinod Ashri.

The victory in Jind has come close on the heels of BJP’s triumphs in five municipal corporations — Yamunanagar, Karnal, Panipat, Rohtak and Hisar — where the ruling party’s mayoral candidates defeated those backed by the Congress and the INLD-BSP combine by handsome margins.

The win is important because Haryana will have parliamentary as well as Assembly elections this year and the Jind success will rejuvenate the ruling party’s workers for the bigger battles ahead.

If the bypoll was really a referendum on the BJP government in the state, Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar can justifiably claim that people of Haryana have reposed faith in his performance. “Middha’s victory is a clear signal that the people of Haryana have rejected the politics of nepotism, regionalism and politics of a few families,” said Captain Abhimanyu, who is minister in-charge for Jind district in the government.

The bypoll witnessed a family feud in the Chautala clan that touched a new low. Former Chief Minister Om Prakash Chautala termed his grandsons Dushyant and Digvijay as “traitors” and accused them of getting his furlough from Tihar Jail cancelled in connivance with Delhi’s AAP government to stop him from campaigning in favour of the INLD candidate.

The bypoll also witnessed Chautala’s wife Sneh Lata crying on a hospital bed and telling their grandsons not to touch her body after her death and Digvijay’s mother breaking down during the campaigning over Chautala’s and Sneh Lata’s outbursts.

However, despite his defeat, Digvijay has emerged a victor to the extent that he and his brother Dushyant can claim to be real successors of the legacy of their great grandfather Chaudhary Devi Lal, despite the rebuff by the jailed INLD patriarch.

Dushyant and Digvijay were able to strike a chord with young voters, particularly Jats, in rural areas, and they can pose a challenge in future not only to the INLD, but also to Jat leaders in the Congress.

The fact that Surjewala could get only less than half the votes polled by Middha despite the campaigning by Congress stalwarts like former CM Bhupinder Singh Hooda, state party president Ashok Tanwar, Rajya Sabha member Kumari Selja and CLP Leader Kiran Choudhry is being seen as a bad sign for a party hoping for a comeback in the Assembly poll.

Jind result victory of graft-free governance: CM

Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar said the comprehensive victory of the BJP in the byelection to the Jind Assembly constituency was indicative of the increasing faith of people in the state government’s transparent and graft-free governance and uniform development policy. “Jind has taken forward the trend started by the massive victory of the BJP in the elections to five municipal corporations held recently. The party will win all 10 seats in the forthcoming Lok Sabha elections in the state,” Khattar said in Chandigarh on Thursday. TNS
