six murders: UP: Six murders in 12 hours in Allahabad; SSP shunted

ALLAHABAD: Six murders in 12 hours, including a sensational triple murder, rocked Allahabad, again exposing shocking laxity in police. Jolted by the climbing crime graph , the state government suspended Allahabad SSP Atul Sharma and replaced him with Satyarth Anirudh Pankaj. And Opposition leaders found ammo to attack the BJP government on the deteriorating law and order.While a young couple was found brutally murdered in Hasanpur Korari village in trans-Ganga area early Monday, three persons were shot by unidentified assailants near Chaufatka area in Dhoomanganj late Sunday. A 27-year-old man was also shot by a history-sheeter near Allahapur area in Georgetown late Sunday night. Initial reports from Dhoomanganj and Georgetown suggest police laxity. Role of cops in both cases is under scanner and senior officials have been asked to initiate investigation and submit reports. Two policemen, senior sub-inspector Dhoomanganj and Rajruppur police outpost in-charge, were suspended after the murders.Talking about the triple murder, suspended SSP Atul Sharma admitted the Dhoomanganj police did not initiate preventive action as both parties had earlier approached them. Similarly, the role of Georgetown police is under scanner as they did not act against the accused, a local history-sheeter, who went trigger-happy a few days ago. Lambasting the state government over the law and order situation, Opposition parties claimed there was ‘jungle raj’ in UP Samajwadi Party president Akhilesh Yadav tweeted — Bigadti kanoon vyawastha se Uttar Pradesh ab ‘Hatya Pradesh’ banta ja raha hai. Kya BJP UP ki yehi pehchan banana chahti hai? Jab janta ko jaan ka bharosa na ho toh kaisa vikas aur kis par vishwas? (Due to deteriorating law and order, UP is becoming ‘Hatya Pradesh’. Does BJP want to make this identity of UP? If people fear for their lives, what good will development do and how will the people trust anyone).”Bahujan Samaj Party president Mayawati tweeted — There’s no rule of law in Uttar Pradesh under the BJP government. The mafia is ruling. That’s why large number of murder cases are being reported.”UP Congress general secretary Mukud Tiwari said, “Goons don’t fear the police. Dhoomanganj and Georgetown incidents proved law and order has collapsed in Allahabad.”Meanwhile, a delegation of Samajwadi Party, led by state spokesman Richa Singh, staged a demonstration at district collectorate on Monday and threatened to launch an agitation against the BJP government for its failure to control crime.
