Soldier martyred on Loc in Poonch, 4 others injured

NL Correspondent

Jammu Tawi, Aug 20

An Army jawan was martyred and four others were injured as Pakistani troops targeted forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Jammu and Kashmir’s Poonch district on Tuesday.

Pakistani troops started unprovoked shelling along the Line of Control in Mendhar and Krishna Ghati sector of Poonch at around 11 am by using small arms and mortars in which a soldier martyred however army retaliated strongly,” defence spokesperson said.

“Naik Ravi Ranjan Kumar Singh (36) of village Gope Bigha, Tehsil Dehrionson (Bihar) attained martyrdom in Mendhar sector in exchange of fire who is survived by his wife, Rita Devi.” defence spokesperson said.

Army said that he was a brave, highly motivated and sincere soldier. The Nation will always remain indebted to him for the supreme sacrifice and devotion to duty.

On Saturday, an Army soldier was killed after Pakistan violated ceasefire by resorting to mortar shelling and small arms firing on forward posts and villages along the Line of Control (LoC) in Rajouri.

Due to tension between India and Pakistan following the Centre’s move to scrap Article 370 in Jammu and Kashmir, Pakistan suspended the weekly Poonch-Rawalakot bus service yesterday.

Pakistan had also suspended Thar link Express and Lahore-Wagah Samjhauta Express post abrogation of Article 370 from Jammu and Kashmir.

First encounter post-abrogation in Baramullah

Srinagar, Aug 20

In the first encounter in nearly two weeks, a fierce gun-battle broke out this evening between terrorists and security forces in Baramulla area of Kashmir. This is also the first encounter after abrogation of Article 370 in J&K.

In the first encounter in nearly two weeks, a fierce gun-battle broke out this evening between terrorists and security forces in Baramulla area of north Kashmir. This is also the first encounter after abrogation of Article 370 in J&K.

Sources say two to three terrorists are trapped inside as a joint operation by CRPF, Army and the Special Operation Group of the Jammu and Kashmir Police is launched. Baramullah is around 54 km from capital Srinagar.

Meanwhile, Kashmir Zone Police took to twitter to say, “Exchange of fire between security forces and terrorists in Baramulla. (The) area under cordon. Details will follow.”

Ever since Article 370 was abrogated on August 5, the Valley has been by and large peaceful apart from certain stray incidents of stone-pelting.
