Political will lacking to nab masterminds of Dabholkar’s murder, say activists

MANS activists, citizens gather to mark rationalist’s sixth death anniversary

Despite some progress in the Dr. Narendra Dabholkar murder case last year, investigative agencies have failed to nab the masterminds behind the crime while successive State governments have lacked the political will to bring a closure to the case, said the Maharashtra Andhashraddha Nirmoolan Samiti on Tuesday on the sixth death anniversary of the eminent rationalist.

As is the custom on each anniversary, activists from the MANS and ordinary citizens gathered at the city’s Omkareshwar Bridge, where Dr. Dabholkar was gunned down while out for a morning stroll on August 20, 2013.

Chants of ‘Phule! Shahu! Ambedkar! Amhi Saare Dabholkar, Pansare, Kalburgi, Gauri Lankesh!’ rent the air and as scores of demonstrators taking part in the ‘Jawab Do’ campaign questioned the government’s tardiness in bringing the masterminds of the murders of Dr. Dabholkar, veteran Communist leader Govind Pansare, scholar M.M. Kalburgi and senior journalist Gauri Lankesh to book.

“While there have been eight arrests in the case last year, the main orchestrators of the conspiracy have yet to be arrested,” said Dr. Hamid Dabholkar, son of the late rationalist.

He said be it the erstwhile Congress-Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) government or the present Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-Shiv Sena, none of the administrations had ever taken the lead in bringing the case to a satisfying conclusion.

“We find that it is only after the Bombay High Court keeps rapping the probe agencies on their knuckles from time to time that there is some progress in the form of a few arrests, as in the case of Sachin Andure and Sharad Kalaskar [named by the CBI as the assailants of Dr. Dabholkar],” said Dr. Hamid Dabholkar.

Activist Mukta Dabholkar, the late rationalist’s daughter, pointed out that the scope of violence on part of these right-wing, hardline outfits was no longer limited to progressive thinkers or activists, but extended to common citizens as well.

“It is not only the question of Dabholkar, Kalburgi and Pansare, but now concerns ordinary people as well, as was proved by the Nallasopara arms haul. Think of the enormous loss of life that would have entailed had these bombs gone off,” said Ms. Dabholkar.

She further said that the charge sheets filed in the murders of all four activists clearly pointed to a radical syndicate that was influencing youths to carry out such crimes.

“Investigative agencies have detailed the ways in which these young assailants were influenced to carry out their deeds, and how they were motivated after reading a particular kind of literature. The question arises as to who is sheltering them and funding them,” said Ms. Dabholkar.

“It is extremely painful if the death of someone close [Dr. Dabholkar] has to be revived again and again [in the form of anniversary protests]. But we think more of Dr. Dabholkar than merely being our father…he was a symbol of progressive thought and remains an inspiration to youths. His killing is emblematic of intolerance and the crushing of progressive thought,” she said.
