Mumbai Police arrest unemployed man for beating live-in partner to death in Kalina

A case has been registered with Vakola police station (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Thinkstock

Key Highlights Vakola police are investigating the matter and more details are awaited The victim and the accused hailed from Mizoram and had been living together for two years Police officials said that the accused tried to pass off the victim's death as an accident

Mumbai: A 20-year-old man has been arrested by Mumbai Police for the alleged murder of his live-in partner. Identified as Ramsen Curio, the accused was taken into custody after a preliminary medical examination revealed that the woman's death could not have been caused by an accident as claimed by her partner.

On August 19, the accused rushed his 30-year-old live-in partner Marina Lalmanswami to a local hospital. He told doctors that she fell from the stairs and incurred severe injuries. On her way to the hospital, the woman succumbed to the injuries and a case of accidental death report (ADR) was registered in this regard at the Vakola police station.

However, a preliminary medical examination of the victim's body revealed that she died as a result of repeated blows to her body and head. After ruling out death by accident, Mumbai Police lodged an FIR against the accused of the alleged murder of his live-in partner. Neighbours of the couple further told investigators that the couple fought regularly and often engaged in violent fights.

Originally from Mizoram, the couple had been living together in an apartment in Kalina area of Santa Cruz for the past two years. While the woman worked as a hair-dresser, the accused had been unemployed for the past several months. Going by reports, investigators have reason to believe that the accused suspected his partner of infidelity. This is what may have caused the fight between them which led to the woman's demise.

Police have booked the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC) on charges of murder. An officer familiar with the case said that the accused thrashed the victim mercilessly on Monday. She had been taking medication for the pain, however, he decided to rush her to a hospital when her condition deteriorated. She was declared dead upon arrival. Meanwhile, more details are awaited as this is a developing story.

A similar case had come to light from Delhi in April of this year when a 42-year-old man was arrested for the murder of his live-in partner. In his confession to the police, the accused claimed that he killed his partner after the two got into an argument. Investigators revealed that the accused suspected her of cheating on him. An officer probing the case claimed that the accused pulled down the victim's body to the bathroom and locked the door. He even managed to flee the scene of the crime but was arrested from Connaught Place by Delhi Police.
