Indian man seeking asylum in US force fed at ICE detention facility in Texas

Follow @ambazaarmag

His attorney says the man’s father was killed in India due to political activism and his sister was attacked with acid.

A 35-year-old Indian national seeking asylum in the United States who is currently in a US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention facility has been force-fed, according to a report. The person, who was on a hunger strike inside the detention center, was forced to receive fluids through an IV drip two weeks ago inside the facility.

As reported by the Associated Press last Thursday, the asylum seeker was brought to his attorney on a wheel chair with tubes threaded through his nose. The asylum seeker informed the attorney, Linda Corchado, that he had been force-fed.

“He says, it was terribly painful and it was an awful experience,” Corchado, an immigration attorney based in El Paso, Texas, was quoted as saying by Associated Press. “Even as I was talking to him, he kept grimacing.”

Corchado’s client told AP that he would rather starve to death in custody than be deported back to India, where he says he fears for his life because of his political activism. According to his attorney, the Indian man’s father was killed in India due to his political activism and his sister was attacked with acid.

While more details into the case are not immediately available, it brings to spotlight once more the fact that Indians make up for a considerable number of asylum seekers in America. It is a fact often overlooked among the more upwardly professional and economically secure employment-based immigrant community.

Earlier this year, in June, a seven-year-old Indian girl died due to heatstroke as she tried to cross the US border from Mexico. The girl was accompanied by her mother and her dad lived in New York with an asylum petition pending before the New York immigration court.

The parents maintained after the tragedy that they were trying to give their child a better life in the US than she would have back home in India. According to their attorney, the family was persecuted back in India and hence they undertook the risky route.

In the recent past, there has been an increase in the number of undocumented Indian migrants trying to sneak into the US. In some cases, it has also been found that long waiting periods have also forced asylum seekers to look for alternate means to sneak into the US.
