INX Media Case highlights: Chidambaram taken to hospital for mandatory check-up after CBI arrests him

Chidambaram’s medical tests conducted inside CBI headquarters

Former finance minister P Chidambaram’s mandatory health check-up has been conducted inside the CBI headquarters, reported news agency ANI. Chidambaram was arrested on Wednesday night after a day-long chase.

Amid high drama, CBI takes away Chidambaram from Delhi house for questioning

Ending the day-long chase, P Chidambaram was taken away in a car by CBI officials.

Delhi: P Chidambaram taken away in a car by probe agency officials. pic.twitter.com/g6LgcfDyMj — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

Karti says ‘no case’ as CBI, ED knock at P Chidambaram’s Jor Bagh house

Tweeting about the high-voltage drama, Karti Chidambaram has said, “This is a political witch-hunt. Outrageous media leaks are the preferred tactics of the ED. I have nothing to do with INX or the FIPB. All my assets and liabilities are duly declared in statutory and regulatory filings.” He said, “I have repeated this ad nauseam. I have been raided 4 times. Appeared for over 20 summons. Each session for a minimum of 10 to 12 hours. Been a “guest” of the CBI:) for 12 days. There is still no chargesheet for alleged events which apparently took place in 2008 and a FIR in 2017. There is no case.”

I am thankful to the @INCIndia Shri @RahulGandhi @priyankagandhi for their support. And ever grateful to @KapilSibal @DrAMSinghvi @salman7khurshid for being there with us throughout. — Karti P Chidambaram (@KartiPC) August 21, 2019

ED team enters the residence of P Chidambaram.

ED team enters the residence of P Chidambaram.

Delhi: ED team enters the residence of P Chidambaram. pic.twitter.com/P1ZXC5MpIY — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

Police and ED team outside the residence of Congress leader P Chidambaram

Police and ED team outside the residence of Congress leader P Chidambaram at Jor Bagh in Delhi.

Delhi: Police and ED team outside the residence of Congress leader P Chidambaram at Jor Bagh in Delhi. pic.twitter.com/lCWIQcAw0Y — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

CBI official jumps the gate of P Chidambaram’s residence

A Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) official jumps the gate of P Chidambaram’s residence to get inside. CBI has issued a Look-Out Notice against him.

#WATCH Delhi: A Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) official jumps the gate of P Chidambaram's residence to get inside. CBI has issued a Look-Out Notice against him. pic.twitter.com/WonEnoAgR4 — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

CBI team arrives at P Chidamabaram’s residence

A Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) team arrives at P Chidamabaram’s residence. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Enforcement Directorate (ED) have issued a Look-Out Notice against him, reports news agency ANI.

CBI team leaves from AICC headquarters

A Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) team leaves from AICC headquarters.

Delhi: A Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) team leaves from AICC headquarters. #PChidamabaram pic.twitter.com/80Fi4LkqC9 — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

P Chidamabaram arrives at his residence from the AICC headquarters

P Chidamabaram arrives at his residence from the AICC headquarters. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Enforcement Directorate (ED) have issued a Look-Out Notice against him, reports ANI.

Delhi: #PChidamabaram arrives at his residence from the AICC headquarters. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and Enforcement Directorate (ED) have issued a Look-Out Notice against him. pic.twitter.com/fT7pyLcfYv — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

P Chidambaram: I was aghast that I was accused of hiding from the law

P Chidambaram: I was aghast that I was accused of hiding from the law, on the contrary, I was seeking protection of law. My lawyers tell that cases will be listed on Friday. I bow down to orders of SC. I respect law even if it is applied with an unequal hand by probe agencies.

P Chidambaram: I was aghast that I was accused of hiding from the law, on the contrary, I was seeking protection of law. My lawyers tell that cases will be listed on Friday. I bow down to orders of SC. I respect law even if it is applied with an unequal hand by probe agencies. pic.twitter.com/4ErWZXuI0l — ANI (@ANI) August 21, 2019

P Chidambaram: Not been accused of any offence

P Chidambaram: In last 24hrs much has happened,that has caused concern to some&confusion to many. In INX Media case, I’ve not been accused of any offence nor any one else incl any member of my family. There is no charge sheet filed by either ED or CBI before a competent court, reports news agency ANI.

Not hiding from the law, says Chidambaram facing arrest

In a dramatic turn of events, Congress leader P Chidambaram who faces arrest by the Central Bureau of Investigation and the Enforcement Directorate, made a surprise appearance at the Congress headquarters on Wednesday evening to assert that he was not running from the law but was seeking its help.

Chidambaram’s plea in SC runs into a technical glitch, told to approach CJI

Former Union minister P Chidambaram’s bail petition has not been listed yet by the CJI due to technical issues. Congress leader Kapil Sibal has mentioned the matter again before Justice NV Ramana who asked Sibal to go back to the CJI.

Chidambaram was me till 6.30 pm yesterday: Abhishek Singhvi

“The hunger for sensationalisation in this case is deadly and could lead to character assassination of a towering political figure.

How can somebody be an absconder who was with me till in legal conference with me till 6.30PM yesterday?” Congress leader Abhishek Singhvi tweeted on Wednesday.

Rahul Gandhi hits out at govt

Modi's Govt is using the ED, CBI & sections of a spineless media to character assassinate Mr Chidambaram.



I strongly condemn this disgraceful misuse of power. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) August 21, 2019

Both CBI, ED probing case

Both the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) and the Enforcement Directorate (ED) are probing the INX media case . The CBI registered a first information report in the case on May 15, 2017 alleging irregularities in the Foreign Investment Promotion Board clearance; the ED lodged a money laundering case a year later.

CBI files a caveat

Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) has filed a caveat (court can’t pass any order without hearing the party filing it) in the Supreme Court, in the petition filed by P Chidambaram seeking protection from arrest in connection with the INX media case, reported news agency ANI.

Worked very closely with Chidambaram: Jairam Ramesh

“I have worked very closely with @PChidambaram_IN since 1986 and couldn’t agree with @priyankagandhi more,” said Congress leader and Rajya Sabha MP Jairam Ramesh in a tweet.

I have worked very closely with @PChidambaram_IN since 1986 and couldn't agree with @priyankagandhi more https://t.co/uZWC1f0dVw — Jairam Ramesh (@Jairam_Ramesh) August 21, 2019

We stand by Chidambaram’s quest for truth: Congress

The Congress extended support to senior leader P Chidambaram in a tweet saying, “a govt that persecutes its citizens for speaking truth to power is only reiterating its own cowardly nature.”

“@PChidambaram_IN is an extremely qualified & respected leader, he has served this nation with dedication & humility. We stand by his quest for truth no matter what,” the party tweeted tweeted.

A govt that persecutes its citizens for speaking truth to power is only reiterating its own cowardly nature. @PChidambaram_IN is an extremely qualified & respected leader, he has served this nation with dedication & humility. We stand by his quest for truth no matter what. — Congress (@INCIndia) August 21, 2019

Sounds a bit too much: Sanjay Nirupam on lookout notice against Chidambaram

Look out notice for P. Chidambaram ?

It sounds a bit too much.

Country’s scholarly politician, former Home minister and Finance minister being treated like a thief.

This is not good at all. — Sanjay Nirupam (@sanjaynirupam) August 21, 2019

ED issues lookout notice against Chidambaram: Report

The Enforcement Directorate has issued a lookout notice against Congress leader and former Finance Minister P Chidambaram.

CJI bench assembles to hear Chidambaram’s bail petition

CJI bench assembles to hear P Chidambaram’s bail petition in the INX media case.

Chidambaram’s team told to approach CJI

A special leave petition was filed in Supreme Court by lawyers of former finance minister P Chidambaram seeking interim relief in the INX media case. They were told to approach the Chief Justice if India.

Case of monumental magnitude: Centre to SC

Solicitor General Tushar Mehta opposed former finance minister P Chidambaram’s bail plea and said it is a case of “monumental magnitude”.

‘Won’t flee justice’: P Chidambaram files plea in SC

A special leave petition was filed in Supreme Court by lawyers of former finance ministerPChidambaram seeking interim relief after the Delhi high court denied his anticipatory bail plea in the INX Media case on Tuesday.

“None of the three grounds to deny bail were made out (by the HC): there is no allegation that the petitioner is likely to flee justice; or that the petitioner is likely to influence the witnesses; or that the petitioner is likely to tamper with the evidence,” said the petition filed by Chidambaram.

Special Leave Petition filed in Supreme Court

A Special Leave Petition has been filed in the Supreme Court by lawyers of former Union minister P Chidambaram seeking interim relief against Tuesday’s order of the Delhi High Court cancelling the senior Congress leader’s anticipatory bail plea.

Co-accused Indrani is a key witness

According to a first information report (FIR) filed on May 15, 2017, the main witness against former finance minister P Chidambaram in the INX Media case is co-accused and now approver, Indrani Mukerjea.

Mukerjea, who is in jail in Mumbai accused of murdering her daughter Sheena Bora, was a director of INX Media Pvt Ltd. Chidambaram is accused of bypassing rules by clearing a foreign investment in the broadcasting company when he was finance minister in 2007.

Chidambaram being shamefully huntdown: Priyanka Gandhi

Congress general secretary Priyanka Gandhi Vadra on Wednesday tweeted in support of former Union finance minister P Chidambaram, who faces arrest in the INX Media case, saying he was being “shamefully hunted down”.

“An extremely qualified and respected member of the Rajya Sabha, @PChidambaram_IN ji has served our nation with loyalty for decades including as Finance Minister & Home Minister,” Priyanka Gandhi said in a tweet.

Delhi HC rejected Chidambaram’s bail plea on Tuesday

The Delhi high court on Tuesday rejected former Union minister P Chidamabram’s bail plea in the INX media case.

Top Congress lawyers gear up to defend Chidambaram

To prevent former Union minister P Chidambaram’s arrest in connection with the INX media case, top Congress lawyers — Abhishek Singhvi, Kapil Sibal and Salman Khurshid — have geared up for a legal battle in the Supreme Court on Wednesday.

Chidambaram bail plea in Supreme Court

Former Union minister and finance minister P Chidambaram’s bail plea will be taken up in the Supreme Court today after the Delhi high court rejected his petition on Tuesday.
