Horlicks tackles exam related stress with emotional nutrition

With the exam season around the corner, children need more than just nutrition to tackle stress and better prepare. An additional need for emotional support is high as students constantly battle immense pressure, more so when living away from their homes. Answering this silent call, Horlicks unveiled the campaign – “Fearless Kota” last year. The campaign successfully spread the message on the missing emotional nutrition in a student’s life and reunited mothers with their children, encouraging students to take on their exams fearlessly.

Adding even more depth to the “emotional nutrition” narrative, Horlicks is back again with a brand-new campaign “Bottle of Love” which now reconnects mothers to their children across the country. With the new campaign, Horlicks empowers mothers to break down locational barriers and share a bottle filled with love, helping kids to better prepare for their exams. After last year’s success in Kota, Horlicks continues to deliver emotional nutrition to kids by taking the initiative nationwide, giving kids the support they need to greet each challenge with a confident smile.

The new campaign enables parents to share a bottle of love by registering on www.bottleoflove.in. When on the website fill in the details for your request, after which an empty bottle will be sent to you, to fill with things you want to send. We will then deliver this very special bottle to your children and let love work its magic!

The new film plays out the real-life bytes of children talking about their journeys away from home and the emotional stress they undergo. It also shows mothers trying to relive the moments spent with their children and filling the Bottle of Love with goodies from home which are then sent to their children.

Vikram Bahl, Executive Vice President Marketing, GSK Consumer Healthcare India said, “We recognize the emotional stress in children during exam time and the need to provide them with emotional nutrition. Horlicks, as a brand, has always aimed at providing students the support they need to excel in all their endeavors. This time we went a step further with this campaign and launched it across India, in a bid to connect and reconnect children with their mothers.”

Swati Bhattacharya, CCO, FCB Ulka said, “Almost every household in Bihar, Bengal and down South is home to a Horlicks bottle. There is hardly a house that doesn’t have one. And by using the bottle, using its body to be the medium of sending ‘emotional nutrition’ from mothers to the children battling exam stress, is the insight that forms the foundation of this film.”

Campaign Elements : Digital

Client : Horlicks India (GSK Consumer Healthcare)

Creative Agency : FCB India

CCO: Swati Bhattacharya

Creative Team : Abhijeet Ray

Accourt Management : Debarpita Banerjee, Shreekant Srinivasan, Vishakha Khatri

Planning : John Thangaraj, Gurleen Pal

Director (of the TVC) : Veneet Raj Bagga

Exécutive Producer : Aanchal Bhargava, Anshul Jain

Production House : Onions Creative Media

TVC Details : Digital

Working title of film : Fearless Kota 2.0

Duration : 3 mins

Campaign breaks as of : 20. 01 .2018
