Police Officer Martyred, One Terrorist Killed In Baramulla In First Encounter After Abrogation Of Article 370

An SPO of Jammu and Kashmir police was martyred and an unidentified terrorist was killed in an encounter in Baramulla district of Jammu and Kashmir.

The martyred SPO has been identified by the police as Billal while another cop, sub-inspector, Amardeep Parihar, who was also injured in the fire exchange has been admitted in a hospital.

BCCL/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

The gun battle between security forces and armed militants, which had begun on Tuesday evening, had continued into the night and on Wednesday morning the Jammu and Kashmir police tweeted that the encounter was over.

"Encounter is over. One terrorist killed. Identity being ascertained. Arms and ammunition recovered. Our colleague SPO Billal attained martyrdom. SI Amardeep Parihar injured in the incident is being treated at Army Hospital," stated the police in the tweet.

Baramulla update: Encounter is over. One terrorist killed. Identity being ascertained. Arms and ammunition recovered. Our colleague SPO Billal attained martyrdom. SI Amardeep Parihar injured in the incident is being treated at Army Hospital.@JmuKmrPolice — Kashmir Zone Police (@KashmirPolice) August 21, 2019

The encounter broke out around 5.30 pm on Tuesday after the security forces engaged with the terrorists.

This was the first encounter between security forces and terrorists ever since the Union government abrogated special category status to Jammu and Kashmir on August 5 by reading down Article 370 of the Indian Constitution.

BCCL/ REPRESENTATIONAL IMAGE

Kashmir valley has been by and large peaceful apart from stray incidents of stone-pelting and protests since August 5. The number of ceasefire violations by Pakistan across the LoC have increased, however, over the past week after a lull in the first fortnight of August.

Security agencies believe that the ceasefire violations by Pakistan are an attempt to help terrorists from across the border to infiltrate into the Indian side. This has been a long-used tactic by Pakistan, especially ahead of the Himalayan winters to push the maximum number of infiltrators into India.
