Posing with female gardner to dancing with special kids, Salman Khan's humble nature will win you over

Salman Khan makes the best of Dabangg 3 Jaipur schedule | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Salman Khan is shooting for Dabangg 3 in Jaipur The superstar decided to bring a smile on the faces of his fans by spending some time and posing with them Salman's rakhi sister Bina Kak took to her social media handle and shared photos

Salman Khan is not just a superstar but also one of the most humble actors in the Indian film industry. The actor makes sure to oblige his fans with photos and selfies wherever he goes, and once again he is making his fans happy with his humble gestures. The actor who is currently in Jaipur shooting for his upcoming film Dabangg 3 made sure to spread smiles in the pink city.

The photos were shared on the social media handle of Salman Khan's rakhi sister Bina Kak who lives in Jaipur and is accompanying her brother on the film sets.

Sharing a very sweet picture of the actor with her lady gardner, she wrote, "SK @beingsalmankhan ,With my lady Gardner ...Bhai ke jaaba su pehli photoo khachani chhe ,she used to say ,. N there he obliged before leaving for mumbaiiiiii....See the cheer on both the faces .." In the photo, Salman looks handsome with a sweet smile on his face. Take a look at the picture here:

In another photograph, the Dabangg actor can be seen shaking a leg with special kids. "Dancing on the sets ..Salman khan spending quality time with children of #umangjaipur on the sets of #dabangg3 ..Special tent was put up for children n they were treated with patties ,wafers n pastries by the crew ..They all had a ball with their favorite Bhaijaan", she wrote.

Sonakshi Sinha, who is playing the lead role opposite Salman, too posed for a sweet picture.

Dabangg 3 is all set to hit the silver screens on December 20. Salman recently took to social media and revealed that Dabangg 3 will be released in Kannada, Tamil and Telugu apart from Hindi. He wrote, "Chulbul Pandey coming to you on 20th Dec in hindi, kannada, tamil and telugu! #Dabangg3"

Stay tuned to zoomtv.com for more updates on lifestyle, fashion, entertainment and more.
