Chhota Rajan Awarded 8 Years' Prison For Attempt on Hotelier's Life

Mumbai: A Mumbai court on Tuesday awarded eight years’ rigorous imprisonment to gangster Chhota Rajan and five others for attempting to kill a city-based hotelier in 2012.

Special court Judge A.T. Wankhede convicted the six under various sections of the stringent Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) and sections 307 (attempt to murder) and 120(b) (criminal conspiracy) of the Indian Penal Code. The court also imposed a fine of Rs 5 lakh on each of them. In May last year, the same court had awarded life imprisonment to Rajan for the murder of Mumbai-based journalist J. Dey.

Rajan is lodged in Tihar jail in Delhi after his deportation to India from Indonesia in October 2015. Besides Rajan, the five others that have been awarded the punishment are Nityanand Nayak, Selvin Daniel, Rohit Thangappan Joseph alias Satish Kalia, Dilip Upadhyay and Talvinder Singh.

Also read: Chhota Rajan’s Victims May Have Cause to File Suit Against the Government

Hotelier B.R. Shetty was shot at in suburban Andheri by two motorcycle-borne shooters linked to Rajan in October 2012, when he was going to meet a friend.

Mumbai Police’s anti-extortion cell which probed the case, alleged that Rajan had ordered his sharp-shooter Kalia to eliminate Shetty.

Kalia, who was in judicial custody for his involvement in J. Dey’s killing, asked his aide Gurudeep Singh, who is wanted in the case, to approach Upadhyay and Talvinder Singh to carry out the killing. Nayak and Daniel then conducted a recce and helped the shooters identify Shetty, according to the police. On October 3, 2012, Upadhyay and Talvinder Singh followed Shetty on a motorcycle from the time he left his office. When the businessman reached near a jewellery showroom in Andheri, Upadhyay shot him. Shetty received injuries on his right arm, but survived.

During the trial, the prosecution examined 49 witnesses.

While convicting the six men, the court relied on the confessional statements of four of the accused as well as the deposition of Shetty.
