Alcoholic murders wife, throws her body off the roof after she refuses to give money saved for kids' fee

Goregaon Police are probing the matter (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The accused was an alcoholic and often fought with his wife, said police Mumbai Police is yet to arrest the 36-year-old accused, a resident of Goregaon He tried to pass off his wife's death as a case of suicide, claim investigators

Mumbai: Police in the capital city of Maharashtra is on the lookout for a 36-year-old man who allegedly murdered his wife following a petty argument with her over household expenses. Officials familiar with the case cited circumstantial evidence pointing to the fact that the suspect was heavily inebriated at the time of committing the crime.

Going by the timeline of events, the accused got into an argument with his wife over domestic expenses at their residence in Mumbai's Goregaon area. He then strangulated her to death in a fit of rage. Realising what he had done, the accused decided to cover his tracks. In order to make his wife's death look like a suicide, he dragged her body all the way up to the roof of their home and pushed it off.

An FIR has been lodged in this regard against the accused under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code on charges corresponding to murder. However, the most recent reports suggest that he is yet to be arrested. An investigator told media outlets that the accused is an alcoholic and regularly fought with his wife over expenses.

On the day of the crime, the couple was reportedly fighting over money. The victim refused to give him the money she had hidden away to pay for their children's school fee. This angered the accused who strangulated her to death. While preliminary reports hinted that the woman's death was a case of suicide, a postmortem revealed strangulation marks. More details are awaited as this is a developing story.

A similar incident has come to light from Mumbai's Kalina area where police have arrested a 20-year-old unemployed man for beating his 30-year-old live-in partner to death following a scuffle. The accused, in this case, tried to pass off the death of his partner as an accident. He took her to the hospital and claimed that she had incurred severe injuries after falling off the stairs. However, a preliminary investigation revealed that she died as a result of repeated blows to her head.

In Delhi's Shakurpur area, a 40-year-old man was arrested by police earlier this month on charges of murdering his own wife. The accused later confessed to stabbing his wife to death while under the influence of alcohol. Delhi POlice later arrested the accused on the basis of treatment from his 21-year-old daughter who witnessed the crime and narrated how her father murdered her mother.
