America would fall apart if it were not for immigrants: Suketu Mehta

Getty Images (An inflatable boat with 47 migrants on board is pictured while being rescued by the Dutch-flagged Sea Watch 3 off Libya's coasts on January 19, 2019.)

Getty Images (A family speaks through the US-Mexico border fence in Tijuana, Mexico)

Getty Images (Bodies of Salvadoran migrant Oscar Martinez Ramirez and his daughter, who drowned while trying to cross the Rio Grande on their way to the US in Matamoros on June 24, 2019.)

NEW DELHI: Anger is palpable in writer’s new book, This Land is Our Land (Jonathan Cape), which the Indian-American writer refers to as an immigrant’s manifesto.Armed with stories, data and research, Mehta tries to demolish every argument being made against letting people from poor nations, hit by conflicts or climate change, seek a place of safety in rich nations, which once prospered by exploiting the same countries.In a phone interview tofrom New York, the 56-year-old journalism professor at New York University and the author of Maximum City: Bombay Lost & Found (2004), says he wrote the manifesto “in reaction to this truly frightening wave of anti-immigrant hatred”. Edited excerpts:If there is one slogan that describes my manifesto, it is: ‘We are here because you were there’. People are moving to the rich countries from the poor countries not because they hate their families. My family did not move from rural Gujarat for Kenya or England because they hated Gujarat. They left because colonialism left them no choice. When rich countries have stolen the future of the poor countries through colonialism, war and inequality and climate change, they are moving because they have no choice. That’s the point of the book.The saddest thing I am seeing on the borders in America or Europe is families being torn apart. In America, ICE [the US Customs and Immigration Enforcement] is raiding homes of immigrants and imprisoning and breaking up families, deporting people who have been living here peacefully and working. Last year, they were actually ripping babies out of their mother's arms from people coming here and looking for asylum and caging these children, as young as 18 months old, and removing them from their parents’ for months at a time. This was an obscene violation of America’s fundamental values. I never thought this country would come to this pass. We are seeing a savage reaction to immigrants and it is only going to go increase because human movement, as climate change kicks in, is only going to accelerate.There are two kinds of backlash. One is the official backlash, the backlash of the leaders -- whether it is [US President Donald] Trump against the Mexicans or [Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor] Orban against Middle Eastern refugees. There are states that are erecting barriers and walls and in some cases, they are ordering their troops to shoot at migrants coming across. The Israelis were shooting at African migrants coming across.There is also a backlash at an individual level. So in New Zealand, there was the Christchurch shooting. The killer also published what he called a manifesto and then last week in El Paso, there was a white American man who shot dead people in the largely Latino city. He also published what he called a manifesto. So it’s a war of the manifestos. Theirs are an incitement to genocide. So I felt this need right now to write down my manifesto in reaction to this truly frightening wave of anti-immigrant hatred.Right now, Indians in America do not seem threatened. The president is not openly advocating the expulsion of Indians from America. But that could come next. Once you are done demonising the Mexicans, he could go after the Indians because ultimately, their aim is to keep America white, make America white again.I will give you an example. There is a doctor in Houston -- the father of one of my friends. He has been an immigrant from Kerala and he came to America in the 1960s. So he has always felt apologetic about his place in America. ‘Oh I should be grateful towards America; this country took me. Then he read the book and realised he had to leave [India] because there was no future in small town Kerala at that time because 200 years of British colonialism had robbed us of our future. So he came to a richer country to seek opportunities and now he is giving copies of my book to his Indian friends in Houston because he is saying: We do not need to apologise. We are an asset to this country. This country would fall apart if it were not for immigrants. We should celebrate America but we should not feel guilty about immigrating.I will tell you: Right now, this summer was the hottest summer in Indian history. Why is that happening? Because the United States is putting one-third of the excess carbon into the atmosphere. And a study that just came out of Stanford University says that since 1960s, global warming has reduced Indian GDP by 31% and it has actually increased the GDP of cold countries like Norway and Sweden by 10%. So every year, it gets worse for Indians -- the heat wave, the pollution. And that’s caused by the rich countries.What I suggest is that countries should be responsible towards other countries that they have despoiled. So if there is any natural justice, Britain will be taking in a lot of Indians, America be will be taking in Latinos. Of course this is not a rule. All these countries would benefit by taking in people from all over the world.In India, we have quotas since the upper castes, for centuries, benefitted from the labour of the lower castes. Now Indians have realised we need quota to help people who have been historically dispossessed, like the Dalits. The same thing I argue for on a global scale. Since the colonial powers got rich off slavery and colonialism, they should now pay, not by sending sacks of gold and diamonds back to these countries but by letting in workers from these countries. And when these workers come, everyone benefits. The rich countries benefit because they are not making enough babies and they need young people to pay into the pension system for their old people. People who move benefit because they increase their standard of living and the countries they move from benefit because the remittances send by the maids, the drivers, the doctors are the best way to help the poor people. Last year, $700 billion were sent back as remittances from rich countries.I believe that a story in long form journalism needs three things: stories, statistics and a statement. When you are talking about immigration, it is a very emotional issue. So you need numbers. People need information about how many people are moving, why they are moving, etc. But that isn’t enough for the average reader. Because then it would be an academic study. The numbers have to go along with strong human stories. Like the stories in the book of families trying to get to safety. The numbers have to be backed by stories of emotional weight. And the two have to come together in a statement about what is the author saying, what is the argument.The story which was most emotionally moving, I mean I cried, is from a place called Friendship Park on the [US-Mexico] border between San Diego and Tijuana. There is a fence and all these families who are not allowed to hug, they go on the opposite sides of the fence and I saw a Mexican man who had not seen his mother for 17 years. He could not cross the borders. He does not have the papers. But the border patrol allows people to come for 10 minutes at a time, even if you do not have papers, and talk to your family across this fence and there was this thick iron fence and the man put his face on the fence and the mother put her face on the other side and her mother told him how much she missed him and he told her how much he loves her. He sends the money every week. That’s why he is here [in America]. But he can't see his mother. And the hole in the fence is big enough to put the pinkie finger through …so he puts his pinkie finger; his mom puts her pinkie finger and they do what is called the pinkie kiss. That’s all he is allowed to touch of his mother. It was heartbreaking and it shows the stupidity of these rules to keep a man like this away from his mother. It makes no sense.Their names were Oscar and Valeria Martinez. He was working in a fast food place in El Salvador. And why were they moving? Well, they were moving because America has consistently messed with El Salvador. The civil war of the 1980s, which was funded by the Americans. El Salvador has been ruined by American guns. Most of the guns in El Salvador come from America. And Americans buy the drugs that come out of El Salvador, which results in all those drug wars over there. So for a father, if I was a father in El Salvador, I would make the same choice: I will take my child and run for safety to give my child a better life. That's why I call people like these ordinary heroes.Americans have identified immigration as the single biggest topic of concern for them. Whether they are pro or against, immigration is going to decide the 2020 elections. And this is why I wrote this book now because with this book, I have a voice in this conversation. For me, it’s very personal. I am an immigrant and I am an American citizen. I think the whole world should have a say in the American elections because often what happens is that the decisions made in Washington have a bigger impact in India and Pakistan than sometimes the decisions made in Islamabad or Delhi. This country decides whether earth has a future or not, with global warming. This country decides everything from nuclear weapons to trade policy. So the whole world is anxiously watching what is going to happen in America in 2020 because the whole world will be affected.Right now, the economy is doing well because Trump had these huge tax cuts, which someone will have to pay for. There is no such thing as a free lunch, right? But the bill may come after he gets reelected. So right now the economy is doing well; the stock market is fine. There are no major wars. That's why trump is not invading Iran for the moment. If that goes on and because of the way the American constitution is rigged in favour of the smaller states, the rural states, if the elections were held today, Trump would definitely get reelected.If you have read the book, you will remember the part about Warren, the small town in Pennsylvania. I feel the concerns of the whites. I know the pain they are feeling. I am not dismissing their pain. I am saying that their pain has not been caused by migrants. The reason those people in Warren, Pennsylvania don’t have jobs is not because of Mexicans or Muslims. It’s because people in Wall Street, the rich, stole their money after the 2008 financial crisis. The banks sold them the houses they could not afford. Their jobs have been lost not due to China but due to automation. So I tried to connect the economic dots and I am very cognizant of the pain the white working class has in this country. I just feel that they have been hoodwinked. They should be angry at the bankers, not the immigrants.Well, it would be different. Dawood Ibrahim and Chhota Shakeel don’t control the city like they used to. Bal Thackeray is gone. It is a different city. But many of things I wrote about -- the movement of people, the intersection of politics and criminality -- those remain very relevant. So if I were to write a book, it would be about a different set of characters but the plot would more or less remain the same.Yes, it is along the lines of Maximum City. It’s about a set of characters in the city and my interactions with them and my life in New York. I am going back to that book, but I felt I had to write this book, This Land is My Land, and do my dharma as a writer.
