WPP brings all Mumbai agency employees under one roof

WPP has invested in two co-location campuses in India. More than 3,800 employees across WPP agencies will move into a new Mumbai Campus, near the Sahar International Airport next week, while a Gurugram Campus will be set up next year.

WPP’s Mumbai Campus will be named BAY99, which alludes to the city’s historical roots and is also the Campus’ postal code reference. Situated next to the international airport in the Sahar area, the location offers various amenities, including social options. The Orb complex, which the campus is a partof, will also offer more than 40 dining and entertainment options within a short distance.

Mark Read, CEO of WPP, said: “India represents a region with immense opportunities for WPP. We are committed to building further momentum for our businesses there, through our Campus investments. Having modern, dynamic workplaces creates real impact for our people, and enables collaboration and ideas to thrive. We work with some of the most progressive clients and teams in India and we want to support their efforts in creating outstanding work.”

In a first for WPP’s India offices, the co-location will bring together more than 16 companies under one roof, with a space of 3,80,000 square feet over a 10-year lease. On-site, staff will enjoy a host of modern facilities, ranging from a rooftop terrace, recreation lounge, library, cafeteria and more.

WPP Country Manager for India, CVL Srinivas said, “India is one of the most exciting markets for WPP with great growth potential. By investing in co-location campuses in key cities, we are bringing to life our vision to lead the market as a creative transformation company and to build a strong, cohesive WPP community. We support some of the biggest brand names in India and more than ever, clients want to be connected to easy processes and solutions, as well as a complete suite of services. The new Campus means our teams will have increased access to each other’s expertise and this will go far in enabling our talent to do their very best work for clients.”
