Salman Khan and Sonakshi Sinha spend time with special children on the sets of Dabangg 3; See Pics

Over the past few days, Salman Khan and Sonakshi Sinha had been shooting in Jaipur, Rajasthan for their upcoming film, Dabangg 3. While photos and videos of Salman along with Prabhudheva and Sonakshi have been shared online by the stars but now, some adorable photos of the Bhaijaan are doing rounds on social media after they were shared by senior actress Bina Kak. Bina Kak had even shared photos of Salman celebrating Raksha Bandhan on the sets of the film and those photos went viral.

Now, today Bina took to Instagram to share photos of Salman and Sonakshi with special children of a school in Jaipur. In one of the photos, Salman aka Chulbul Pandey can be seen dancing with the special needs children and enjoying with them. Bina mentioned in her caption that a party was organised on the sets with snacks where the children spent their time with the favourite stars. Salman can be seen smiling and having a gala time with the kids.

(Also Read: Bigg Boss 13: Salman Khan shoots for four promos amidst shooting of Dabangg 3; DEETS INSIDE)

In the other photo, Sonakshi aka Rajjo can be seen clad in a saree and standing among the children for a photo. Sonakshi can be seen giving the widest smile as she spent the day with the special children. Bina’s caption read, “Dancing on the sets ..Salman khan spending quality time with children of #umangjaipur on the sets of #dabangg3 ..Special tent was put up for children n they were treated with patties ,wafers n pastries by the crew ..They all had a ball with their favorite Bhaijaan.”

Check out the photos:

Meanwhile, Salman wrapped up the Jaipur schedule yesterday and returned to Mumbai last evening. Dabangg 3 stars Arbaaz Khan, Sudeep and others apart from Salman and Sonakshi. The film will also introduce Saiee Manjrekar, daughter of Mahesh Manjrekar, in Bollywood. To launch Saiee, Salman has banned phones onset and has asked the young girl to stay away from the limelight. Dabangg 3 is helmed by Prabhudheva and is slated to release on December 20, 2019.
