J&K: 1 terrorist killed in first encounter since abrogation of Article 370

Security force team which undertook first counter-terror op in the Valley since abrogation of Article 370 (India Today)

In the first counter-terror operation since the abrogation of Article 370, one Lashker-e-Taiba (LeT) operative was gunned down in North Kashmir’s Baramulla district in a joint operation launched by Indian Army, Jammu Kashmir Police and Crpf. One policeman was martyred while another was seriously injured. The operation which began on Tuesday evening, ended on Wednesday morning.

The J&K police said in a tweet that the militant had been identified as "Momin Gojri" a resident of Baramulla. He was affiliated to Pakistan-based terror outfit Lashkar-e-Taiba.

Chinar Corps also put out a tweet: TerrorismFreeKashmir. ONE terrorist eliminated in Op KakkarHammam (Baramulla). Weapons & warlike stores recovered. Operation over #JihadNahiJahalat #CommonCausePeace #Kashmir #IndianArmy.

#ChinarCorpsCdr & all ranks of #ChinarCorps salute the supreme sacrifice by SPO Bilal Ahmad and offer deepest condolences to the bereaved family. https://t.co/qkw9rLaIGc — Chinar Corps - Indian Army (@ChinarcorpsIA) August 21, 2019

Heavy stone-pelting was reported while the encounter was on.

One SPO identified as Billal Ahmad succumbed to injuries, while another J&K police personnel Sub-inspector Amardeep Parihar was rushed to an army hospital for further treatment, a top official confirmed to India Today TV.

This is the first counter-terror operation since August 5, when two bills were tabled in the Rajya Sabha by Home Minister Amit Shah to annul the application of Article 370 revoking the special status, dissolving the state into two Union territories.

After a lull of two weeks, security forces are prepared to resume operations against terror operatives.

The counter-terror operations were put on hold since most of the security grid was deployed to maintain law and order in anticipation of unrest in the strife-torn Kashmir Valley.

Before the Tuesday encounter, security grid claimed that not a single bullet had been fired. Sources said, with this, operations will resume in the region, including in terror hotbed South Kashmir.

A source said, "There has been relative calm since Kashmir Valley due to the lockdown. With the communication system blocked, terror operatives have not been able to get instructions from the ISI. This has, however, also affected tech-based interception."

"But with relative peace, more security operations are likely to be launched to neuteralise terrorist," the source said adding that there were over 230 terrorists operating in the Kashmir Valley.

Sources also said there is an apprehension in security grid as some youth would pick up arms as a direct fall out of scrapping Article 370.
