Judge to hear advocates' plea for retracting 'controversial' observations

Madras High Court judge Justice S Vaidyanathan, who withdrew his "controversial" observation that co-education in Christian institutes was "highly unsafe" for the future of girl children, has said he would take up the plea of some advocates seeking withdrawal of some more observations in his order on Thursday.

The judge had made the observations recently when refusing to quash a show-cause notice issued to a Madras Christian College professor facing sexual harassment charge from at least 34 girl students pursuing third-year Zoology course at the college.

Senior advocate Vaigai on Wednesday made a mention before the judge in the court to hear the case again for removal of some controversial paras in the order.

The judge assured Vaigai that he will list it on Thursday.

A delegation of 64 lawyers led by Vaigai had made a representation on Wednesday before the Madras High Court Chief Justice not to post any cases on Christian missionaries as well as women before Justice Vaidyanathan.

The delegation also requested the Chief Justice to counsel the judge to recall the order and delete some more paras in it.

The representation said, "It is well established judicial norm that judges do not venture into issues that is not the subject matter of adjudication and judicial restraint is exercised to ensure that all the statements made by a judge are backed by evidence and are germane to the issue being considered."



"The court room cannot be used as a platform to voice personal views and opinions as every word uttered by a judge carries weight and meaning and has the full force of a judicial pronouncement."



In his order dismissing the plea of Assistant Professor Samuel Tennyson on Friday, Justice Vaidyanathan had said, "There is a general feeling among parents of students, especially female students, that co-educational study in Christian institutions is highly unsafe for the future of their children."The judge had also said Christian missionaries always came under attack for one issue or the other.

"In the present era, there are several accusations against them for indulging in compulsory conversion of people of other religions into Christianity... Though they impart good education, their preaching of morality will be a million dollar question," Justice Vaidyanathan had added.

Christian organisations, including the Tamil Nadu Bishops Council, and various sections of society had expressed concern over the observation of the judge in the order.

When the case came up on Tuesday, a mention was made by John Jackria, counsel for the Madras Christian College, seeking withdrawal of the controversial observation.

The judge acceded to the mention and withdrew part of his observations.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
