It’s lights, camera & action for Nushrat Bharucha, Sunny Kaushal and Vijay Varma in Prayagraj!

Sunny Kaushal relaxing between shots (BCCL/ Amar Deep)

Bhagwan Tiwari strikes a pose in between shots (BCCL/ Amar Deep)

Actor Vijay Varma shooting for the film at the college in Prayagraj (BCCL/ Amar Deep)

Director Nikhil Nagesh Bhatt (BCCL/ Amar Deep)

It’s lights, camera & action for Nushrat Bharucha, Sunny Kaushal and Vijay Varma in Prayagraj!

Prayagraj is making news for all good reasons these days! And that’s because producer Shaailesh R Singh, known for films like Tanu Weds Manu , Shahid, Madaari and Aligarh, is shooting for his next film Hurdang in the city.A love story, which is inspired by true incidents and set in the 1990s of the then Allahabad, the film features Sunny Kaushal Nushrat Bharucha and Vijay Varma in the lead roles.Sunny Kaushal relaxing between shots (BCCL/ Amar Deep)Director Nikhil Nagesh Bhatt, who is an Allahabadi himself, has decided to shoot this movie in his hometown. Earlier, in an interview with us, director Nikhil, giving an insight about the film, was quoted as saying, “This is a story inspired by true incidents. In the year 1990, as a kid, I saw thousands of youngsters getting involved in a fight for their rights. The students’ agitation was not politically motivated; they were fighting for their rights. Lots of lives were lost and lots of lives were rendered directionless. They say, love stories coming out of duress stand tall. The movie is a love story set in those times.”Bhagwan Tiwari strikes a pose in between shots (BCCL/ Amar Deep)In the film, Sunny and Nushrat play students and childhood lovers who have grown up together and their love story from the 90s. The shooting of the movie, which took place for around a month in Prayagraj, will continue for a few more days. The film was canned at different parts of the city including the Ewing Christian College and Sangam. In fact, the cast and crew has been visiting different parts of the city and eating everything Allahabadi. “They loved the lassi and phaluda-kulfi of Allahabad,” informed a source from the film.— Akash.Wadhwa@timesgroup.comActor Vijay Varma shooting for the film at the college in Prayagraj (BCCL/ Amar Deep)Director Nikhil Nagesh Bhatt (BCCL/ Amar Deep)
