FPIs up contrarian bets in Q1, buy into auto, telecom stocks

Stock Analysis – Know before investing Stock score of Muthoot Finance Ltd moved up by 1 in a month on a 10-point scale. Subscribe Now Exclusively for

Stock Analysis Stock score of Muthoot Finance Ltd is 6 on a scale of 10. View Stock Analysis »

Bloomberg

Fortune favours the brave. That appears to be the latest investment motto at overseas funds, which last quarter bought telecom, NBFC and auto stocks, proving that contrarian bets are here to stay. FPIs raised stakes in Bharti Airtel and Vodafone Idea by 4.4 per cent and 2.5 per cent, respectively, in the June quarter compared with the last quarter of FY19. Based on the average quarterly prices, FPIs invested about Rs 19,000 crore in the two telecom companies, making up two-thirds of their total India investments in the June quarter. FPIs invested about Rs 32,000 crore in Indian equities in the June quarter, according to NSDL data.With Reliance Jio altering and dictating the industry dynamics, others in the telecom business are battling high cash burn and spiraling debt. To be sure, last two quarterly results of the Bharti Airtel suggest that the decline in the smartphone segment is getting less pronounced, and capital intensity could peak in FY20. Bharti Airtel’s average revenue per user has been improving in the past four quarters.Among NBFCs, FPIs raised holdings in Shriram Transport, Gruh Finance, Equitas Holdings, and— in the range of 1.5-8 per cent — in the June quarter. FPIs’ stake in Shriram Transport increased 5.7 per cent as it is trading at a trough valuation, which adequately reflects the current demand environment. Shriram Transport has a strong franchise in the used commercial vehicle finance business.Even in the auto sector, which is reeling under acute demand contraction, FPIs shopped in the June quarter. They bought into Maruti Suzuki and India’s largest tractor maker Mahindra & Mahindra. FPIs raised stakes in Maruti Suzuki and Mahindra & Mahindra by 0.9 per cent and 3 per cent, respectively, in the June quarter.
