Tragedy averted as fire breaks out in civil hospital

Ludhiana: A major tragedy was averted at Lord Mahavira Civil Hospital when fire broke out in the OPD block on Wednesday morning.

The fire at the civil hospital created panic among the visitors, but timely action by two doctors at the hospital saved the situation.

The doctors acted swiftly and controlled the fire with fire extinguishers. The new block in the civil hospital has fire extinguishers while sprinkler system is still under installation.

The fire department has already denied NOC to the civil hospital twice because the system was not found up to the mark.

It was around 8.35am when short circuit in the wires led to fire.

The doctors controlled the situation within a few minutes. The fire erupted due to a short circuit in the electricity duct at the OPD block of the hospital.

As safety measure, visitors at the OPD block were evacuated due to thick smoke.

Dr Milan Verma, surgeon, civil hospital, said: “I along with Dr Varun Saggar were on round in the female ward on the first floor and noticed smoke. We then saw people gathered on the ground floor and making videos of the fire.”

He said they came down and brought manual fire extinguishers to control it.

He said they were given training to douse flames and operating fire extinguishers which worked on Wednesday.

He said people were watching the fire and instead of doing something.

“If we had not acted on time, it could have resulted in a major incident. Nobody has been hurt,” he said.

Notably, it is not the first time that fire incident has been reported at the civil hospital. On August 16, 2018, a small fire incident was reported at the eye OPD of the hospital, but nobody was hurt and fire was controlled.

Station fire officer S N Sharma said: “In 2017 and 2018, the civil hospital was denied fire NOC because arrangements were not up to the mark, but after the authorities of the civil hospital did not apply for NOC from the fire department.”

He said fire system was installed in the new block which was functioning properly, but there was no satisfactory arrangement in the old block of the hospital.

Meanwhile, senior medical officer at the civil hospital, Dr Avinash Jindal, said: “Fire was controlled in time. We have recently installed fire extinguishers in the OPD block and these systems work properly.”

He said no fire safety system had been installed in the old block, but they had installed fire extinguishers and they were yet to get NOC for sprinklers from the fire department.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
