HC sets Shakil gang man free in murder case, calls evidence “laughable”

Chhota Shakil gang member

Bombay High Court

life imprisonment

Pune Sessions Court

double murder

Court said pistol and cartridges seized cannot be connected.Nearly 20 years after an allegedwas held guilty of murdering two people near Godrej Bungalow in Juhu, thelast week acquitted the man owing to flimsy evidence. A division bench of Chief Justice Pradeep Nandrajog and Justice Bharti Dangre said they “feel like laughing” as the “ballistic report links the said pistol recovered on July 27, 1998 to the four cartridges seized in Juhu on July 31, 1998”. It also found the testimony of a purported eyewitness “unreliable”.Mohammed Hussein Abdul Aziz Shaikh’s case had garnered a lot of attention when he was sentenced to merely five years in prison despite being held guilty of the murder in 2000. The judgment had forced the state to appeal against the punishment in High Court. As per the Indian Penal Code, the minimum punishment for murder isAccording the case of the prosecution, on July 31, 1998, two people – one Chandu Takle and politician Raju Kanadi – were shot dead in Juhu. Four cartridges were recovered from the spot. The prosecution alleged that politician Amin Shaikh had planned the murder due to political and gang rivalry.Mohammed Shaikh, also an alleged Chhota Shakil gang member, was arrested a month later in August 1998 with a pistol and seven live cartridges from the. The cops had received information that a Chhota Rajan gang member was to be produced in the court and members of Shakil’s gang would be out to kill him. The cops said the accused had used the same pistol for the July murder. In the chargesheet, the prosecution cited an eyewitness who said he saw Shaikh running with the pistol in Juhu. Though Amin Shaikh walked free in 2000, Mohammed Shaikh was convicted for the. He was, however, sentenced only to five years in prison.When the state’s appeal in the High Court finally came up for hearing in 2010, Mohammed Shaikh had already served his time. Advocate Amin Solkar was then appointed as his counsel. Citing section 377 of the Cr.PC, Solkar argued that even though the accused had not filed a formal appeal against his conviction he can argue for acquittal as the state had asked for enhanced punishment. He pointed out that there was no proof of proper seizure of the weapon, or the cartridges.
