From wife Sharmila to daughter-in-law Mitali Bourde, know all about Raj Thackeray’s family tree

File image of Raj Thackeray with family | Photo Credit: PTI

Mumbai: Raj Thackeray, chief of the Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS), was interrogated by the Enforcement Directorate (ED) on Thursday in a money laundering case. Thackeray arrived at the ED office in South Mumbai just before noon. The MNS supremo was accompanied by his family members.

Thackeray reached the ED office at around 11.30 am and went straight into the building. His family members, meanwhile, camped at a nearby hotel.

Thackeray is being probed by the ED in connection with alleged irregularities in a case relating to a loan given by Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services (IL&FS) to Kohinoor CTNL.

Ahead of the questioning, Section 144 of the CrPC was imposed in the area by the Mumbai Police to maintain law and order. Unlawful assembly of people was also banned in parts of central Mumbai and Dadar, where Thackeray resides.

All about Raj Thackeray’s family

As Thackeray appeared before the ED for questioning in the case, his family accompanied the MNS chief in a show of solidarity and support. Among others, wife Sharmila, son Amit and daughter-in-law Mitali Bourde came to south Mumbai and stayed put at a nearby hotel while Thackeray answered questions by ED sleuths.

Talking about Raj Thackeray and his family, the MNS chief is known to the current generation as the nephew of late Shiv Sena founder Bal Thackeray. Bal Thackeray’s son Uddhav Thackeray, current chief of the Shiv Sena, is his cousin.

But very few of the millennials know that Raj's Uddhav's grandfather - Keshav Sitaram Thackeray (17 September 1885 – 20 November 1973) - better known by his pen name Prabodhankar Thackeray, was a very renowned social reformer who fought against social evils like untouchability, child-marriages and dowry. He was also a key leader of the Samyukta Maharashtra movement that fought for a linguistically carved out Maharashtra with Mumbai as its part.

Amit Thackeray with wife Mitali Borude - PTI

Raj Thackeray’s parents were Shrikant and Kunda Thackeray. While Shrikant was Bal Thackeray’s younger brother, Raj's mother Kunda was the younger sister of Bal Thackeray's wife Meena Thackeray.

Raj Thackeray, who was born on June 14, 1968, goes by the full name of Swararaj Shrikant Thackeray.

Raj Thackeray’s wife Sharmila, whose maiden name was Sharmila Wagh, was born to Marathi cinema photographer, producer-director Mohan Wagh.

The couple has two children - son Amit Thackeray and daughter Urvashi Thackeray.

Ami was soft-launched into politics by his father during the 2014 Assembly Elections in Maharashtra. In the run-up to polls that year, Amit had held roadshows, as well. Since then, he has been regularly seen standing by his father's side during political rallies.

Amit had recently married his girlfriend Mitali Borude, who is a fashion designer.

Raj Thackeray also has a sister by the name Jaywanti Thackeray.
