From #SacredGames to #SacredBiscuit, Netflix show inspires viral hashtags, memes

The second season of Sacred Games was released just a week ago. Starring Bollywood actors Saif Ali Khan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui in the lead, the show has Twitter users sharing memes, jokes and fan-theories all the time.

If you are an avid follower of the show, you must have come across the memes inspired by the Parle-G dialogue that features in the latest season of the show.

The scene showing Nawazuddin Siddiqui’s character Ganesh Gaitonde giving a surprise call to Bunty after missing for months, has gone viral on Twitter. He calls him from Kenya to ask how he is, to which Jatin replies, “Yahan Parle-G khana pad raha hai kaali chai me dubokar (We have been reduced to surviving on Parle-G dipped in black tea)."

What is Parle-G?

Now, if you don’t already know what Parle-G is, it is a brand of biscuits that almost everyone in India grew up eating. Parle-G dipped in tea has a fan-base of its own. Finishing a biscuit without half of it melting in the tea was indeed a struggle.

Manufactured by Parle Products in India, a Nielsen survey of 2011 said it is the best-selling brand of biscuits in the world.

Sadly, the brand might be facing job -cuts soon due to the economic downturn in India (explained further down).

Parle-G and Netflix share Sacred Game memes

Parle-G’s official Twitter channel lost no time and shared a meme themselves with the caption: “Parle-G is proud to be part of every artist’s initial struggle. #SacredBiscuit for every genius. #SacredGames.”

Netlfix jumped the bandwagon soon and replied: “Season 1: 0 mentions of Parle-G. 0 hit songs written by Bunty. Season 2: 1 mention of Parle-G. Bunty becomes a world-famous producer, casino owner and lyricist. Coincidence? We think not.”

Within no time, tea and biscuits memes flooded Twitter with funny responses.

Parle May Fire Up To 10,000 Amid Slowdown

Unfortunately, India’s largest biscuit-maker might have to lay off up to 10,000 workers as slowing economic growth and falling demand in the rural heartland could cause production cuts.

According to a report by Indian media channel ndtv.com: “A sharp drop in Parle’s biscuit sales means the company may have to slash production, which may result in layoffs of 8,000-10,000 people, Mayank Shah, category head at Parle, said in a telephone interview from Mumbai.

“A downturn in Asia’s third-largest economy is denting sales of everything from cars to clothing, forcing companies to curtail production and raising hopes that the government will unveil an economic stimulus to revive growth.”

Many took to Twitter to discuss economic slowdown in the country.
