Modi’s nightmare: a Muslim-majority India

In Assam, a state with thirty-four percent of its people being Muslim, a movement is underway to deport up to four million of them to the neighbouring Bangladesh and Myanmar

The high growth rate among Muslims is giving Modi sleepless nights, as this is the first time he has mentioned the issue of unchecked population growth in India

About two years ago, I did some research on Indian population growth, including Indian minorities. I concluded that there are at least 90 million missing Indian Muslims, according to the 2011 census. Either they have not been registered or the census enumerators have registered them as Hindus. My conclusion was that successive Indian governments were scared that the evil Nazi Hindutva activists would pour out into the streets, killing every Muslim in sight, after being told that Muslims are nowalready about twenty-five to thirty percent of India’s population.

With Modi behaving like an Indian Hitler, I’m convinced that he is having nightmares of waking up one fine morning and discovering that India has turned into a Muslim majority country. This is the only explanation I have for his recent actions of enslaving the people of the Indian-occupied Kashmir. His virulent hatred for Muslims should be obvious to neutral observers. Note that he has never expressed regret whenever his Hindutva friends have raped Muslim women or lynched Muslim men on trumped up beef-eating charges.

The recent case of the killers of Pehlu Khan being acquitted despite considerable video evidence identifying his Hindutva killers proves that the Indian judiciary is no longer independent as far as minorities are concerned. If it had been the other way around, if six Muslims had killed a Hindu, the judges would have sentenced all six to death immediately.

Back to the missing Indian Muslims: how can anyone be sure that Indian census data are reliable? Despite India’s superiority in information technology, why does it take them almost forty-five days to conduct elections? In most countries, including the US, election results are known within twenty-four hours. Taking that as a bench mark, conducting India’s elections and counting of votes should not take more than four or five days. The only conclusion is that India’s demographic data is not documented properly. Pakistan, on the other hand, is much better in this respect. Yes, the Indian census data over all these years has been fudged to show that Muslims are an insignificant minority in the country.

Modi himself is proving that his agenda is to either convert all Indian Muslims to Hinduism, or kill or deport them if they refuse. In Assam, a state with thirty-four percent of its people being Muslim, a movement is underway to deport up to four million of them to the neighbouring Bangladesh and Myanmar. Amit Shah, Modi’s right hand man, has repeatedly called Assam’s Muslims “termites”. Muslims are being asked to prove that they were born in India and they did not migrate from Bangladesh. Even though most of them voted in previous elections, and some of them have even served in the Indian army, yet they face the risk of deportation if they don’t have the required documents.

The high growth rate among Muslims is giving Modi sleepless nights, as this is the first time he has mentioned the issue of unchecked population growth in India

Mind you, Hindus in Assam are not being questioned or asked to prove whether they are Indian. In fact, the Modi government’s stated policy is to welcome with open arms all Hindus from Pakistan and Bangladesh who wish to settle in India. This policy of asking Muslims to prove they are genuine Indians and not illegal migrants will soon be extended to other Indian states like Kerala with high Muslim populations. Poor Indian Muslims will have sleepless nights for many years fearing the midnight knocks on their doors and being expelled from the country.

If more proof is needed, Modi’s speech recently on the need to curb India’s population growth should be sufficient. When he said that Indians should have small families, he didn’t mean Indian Hindus. Since the Hindu population of India has already reached the replacement growth rate of 2.1 percent, he really meant that Muslims should limit the number of their children. Obviously, the high growth rate among Muslims is giving Modi sleepless nights, as this is the first time he has mentioned the issue of unchecked population growth in India.

In ancient days, whenever a nation was conquered, the first thing the victorious army did was to try and kill the men and rape the women of the defeated territory. Which is why the Haryana Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar crowed after the abolition of Article 370: “Now we can get girls from Kashmir.” He was of course saying what primitive soldiers used to wish for before starting a war. Modi and his henchmen know that this is how they can exterminate the Muslims of India: kill the men and take away their women. And the only way to prevent them from doing so is for Indian Muslims and other minorities to get united, and vote the BJP out in all future elections.

The writer is an engineer, a former visiting lecturer at NED Engineering College, an industrialist, and has been associated with the petroleum, chemical industries for many years
