Here’s what Kangana Ranaut has to say about Priyanka Chopra's ‘Jai Hind’ tweet controversy

Recently, Priyanka Chopra Jonas has been in the news after at an event a Pakistani woman lashed out on her for supporting war between India and Pakistan. At the event, the Pakistani woman claimed that by putting out a tweet like ‘Jai Hind’ after airstrikes by India over Pakistan post the Pulwama attack, Priyanka is sending out a wrong message of war despite being UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. Now, Kangana Ranaut, who has worked with Priyanka in Fashion, has come out in support of the global icon.

Kangana said in a statement to Hindustan Times that it surely wouldn’t have been easy for Priyanka, being the UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador, to limit herself to one country. However, the Manikarnika actress stated that there are very few people who choose their heart over their brains. Kangana said, “It’s not an easy choice to make... when you are stuck between your duty and your emotions, being a UNICEF goodwill ambassador sure you can’t limit your identity to one nation, but how many of us choose heart over mind every day.”

(Also Read: Priyanka Chopra yelled, called 'hypocrite' by Pak woman at Beautycon in LA; THIS is how she replied)

Recently, reports are in that after the ‘Jai Hind’ tweet controversy being brought forth during an event in LA, a Pakistani Minister Shireen Mirza has written to the UN and has sought the removal of Priyanka as a goodwill ambassador for UNICEF. The letter also cited the Kashmir Issue as one of the reasons behind the removal of Priyanka from UNICEF. At the event where Priyanka was accused by the Pakistani woman, the actress kept her composure and calm and handled the blames politely.

The video of the exchange between Priyanka and the woman went viral on social media. Post that social media users were split in their opinions on Priyanka’s way of handling the situation. Some praised her for handling it well while there were others who were angry at her for not answering the woman’s question.
