Grade-A student, 18, collapsed on O2 Academy dancefloor and died after ‘taking four MDMA bombs’

A HIGH-achieving teen died on the dance floor at the O2 academy after taking four MDMA 'bombs' that she had smuggled in her bra, an inquest heard.

India Thaker, 18, swallowed the powder wrapped in cigarette paper fell backwards into the crowd at the Bournemouth venue.

3 India took a fatal amount of the drug after smuggling it into the venue in her bra Credit: Bournemouth News

3 She was rushed to hospital but died shortly after she arrived. Her parents are now trying to warn other users to aware of the deadly consequences of taking drugs Credit: Google Maps

The moment she collapsed was caught on CCTV, as well as other clubbers dragging her to the side.

Medics at the O2 Academy in Boscombe, Bournemouth, Dorset, treated her at the club before she was rushed to hospital where she later died.

An inquest heard the teenager had just received an offer from Falmouth University to study photography and was posthumously awarded an A in the subject at A-Level.

Her parents Sumuil Thaker, the CEO of a medical science company, and Moira Thaker joined the Dorset coroner to warn revellers of the deadly

consequences of taking drugs.

Coroner Rachael Griffin said: "India was an adventurous, bright and sociable person. If any good can come from her death it must serve as a warning of the dangers if taking these drugs.

"People take it for enjoyment but in doing so can have the most tragic consequences."

Mrs Thaker added: "People take these drugs to enjoy themselves, but they need to realise the danger of what they doing."

The Bournemouth inquest heard Miss Thaker had driven with two friends from her home in Thatcham, Berks, to the nightclub on March 30 this year to see dance act My Nu Leng.

People take these drugs to enjoy themselves, but they need to realise the danger of what they doing. Moira Thaker

Her friends left her on the dance floor at about 3.20am to go to the toilet but when they returned they could not find her.

Friend Alana Chart said: "She was my best friend, we were inseparable.

"I know she had done MDMA a couple of times before but not for a long time.

"She seemed happy all night. We went to the toilet but she said she wanted to keep dancing.

"When we came back to the dance floor we couldn't find her. We were calling and calling her but there was no answer.

"When everyone left the club there was still no sign of her. We asked the bouncers to look for her but they weren't very helpful.

"It was a police officer who told us at 5.30am that she had been taken to hospital."

A post mortem examination found Miss Thaker had a high enough concentration of the MDMA in her system for it to be fatal.

Police investigations concluded there was no third party involvement in her death.

The coroner recorded a verdict that Miss Thaker died of an MDMA overdose.

Her family said she was a keen scuba diver and was passionate about the marine environment.

They have set up a Justgiving page in her name with donations going towards the not-for-profit conservation organisation Project AWARE.

Mr Thaker said: "She had a thirst for life and everything she did was full on. She was adventurous, outgoing - a lovely child who lived a teenager's life. "

He added: "She was going out to enjoy herself with friends. She embraced a course of action that night that is not representative of the girl she was. It is a tragic end."

3 Her parents have begun a fundraising page to raise money for a charity that India was passionate about Credit: Bournemouth News

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368 . You can WhatsApp us on 07810 791 502. We pay for videos too. Click here to upload yours.
