Police rescue Bangladeshi girl from trafficker

Hyderabad: The sleuths of Special Operations Team (SOT), Malkajgiri, busted an international sex racket on Thursday.

The sleuths also rescued a minor girl hailing from Bangladesh and arrested three traffickers including two from Bangladesh and one from Hyderabad and seized three mobile phones.

The accused persons identified as Mohammed Sohail (29), Visti Hossan (25), K Hari Chowdary (28) were arrested and remanded in judicial custody.

According to officials, Mohammed Sohail Hussain had illegally migrated to India from Bangladesh about ten years back and about four years ago he married Visti Hossan, who had also illegally migrated from the same place in Bangladesh.

The couple had been staying in New Hafeezpet in the city since last four years and was working in its individual professions. Meanwhile, they came across one Sigdhar, who lured a victim girl (17) from Bangladesh to Bangalore and took the help of one Sujan.

The accused forced the girl into prostitution in Bangalore and used her as a dancing girl. Later she was handed over to one Vijaya from Vijayawada, where she was sexually assaulted by one Sai, son of Vijaya.

Later, she was again purchased back by the accused Sohail who started the prostitution business and gained the amounts. He used to run the prostitution business in the rented lodges clandestinely through an illegal website classifieds.

Accordingly, Sohail and Visti came to a place near ECIL on the intervening night of Thursday and called up the punter K Hari Chowdary to the said place.

Police raided the place and caught the culprits red handed and saved the victim girl from their clutches.

Police registered a case under sections 342, 366 (b), 370, 370 (A), 474, 376 R/w 114 IPC and Sec 3, 4, 5, 7 of PITA Act and Sec 4 of POCSO Act-12 and Sec 14 of Foreigners Act-1946.

The other accused Sai, Vijaya and other traffickers of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka State and Bangladesh are absconding. Efforts are in progress to arrest them.
