Cruise trips: Fun time on swollen Ganga

boom time: At present, 12 big and small cruises are operating on Ganga

Varanasi: At a time when the Ganga has marooned hundreds of villages and city areas, it is fun time for tourists, mostly foreigners, who are enjoying cruise trip from Kolkata to Varanasi in the swollen river.

At the same time, it is also a boom time for the operators of these cruise. At present, around 12 big and small cruise operators are operating on the river. The cruise trips would continue till the end of September as the increased level of water in the Ganga makes navigation of cruises easy.

“In these two months (August and September) we get the required water level for a big cruise like our’s without even dredging of the river bed as there is a constant level of around six feet of water, right from our starting point at Kolkata to Chunar,” said Romeet Kashyap, tour manager of a private cruise operator, licensed from the tourism department. In one such cruise trip, there are 17 tourists, four each from Australia and Hong Kong, two from US and the rest from Britain.

During the trips operated from Kolkata to Chunar, the cruise stops at trourists sites in Farraka, Buxar known for the significant battle between British East India Company and combined forces of Nawabs and Mughal emperors, tomb of Lord Cornawallis in Ghazipur, Varanasi and concludes at Chunar famous for its fort.

Apart from large cruises, there are small local operators too which also make the best use of the rise in the level of the river.

“Floods are trouble times for people affected by it and the administration but for the cruise these times are easy for handling tourists and cargo, said Vivek Malviya, owner of another private company working with tourism department.

Powered by three engines, each of 400hp (horse power), the entire trip takes around three weeks, including the time of visit at the tourist sites. These cruises have different capacity of around 40 passengers per cruise.


