Bengaluru: Two students, tech firm staffer nabbed for drug peddling

BENGALURU: Two students of a college on Hosur Road and a tech company employee have landed in police custody for allegedly peddling drugs. Police on Thursday seized one kilogram of ganja, 24 strips of LSD and MDMA pills from them.Siddarth S, 19, and Arvind Bhaskar,19, are B.Com students and natives of Kerala. The other accused, Vamsikrishna Y from Kerala is a resident of Electronics City. Vamsi has been operating in the city for the last three years. They are in judicial custody now.Suddaguntepalya (SG Palya) police said Vamsi used to procure drugs from handlers in Goa and sell them in Bengaluru through students. Their customers included IT professionals and students staying in hostels and paying guest accommodations around SG Palya, Tavarakere and Koramangala.“Initially, Sidharth and Arvind were Vamsi’s customers. They started selling it to make a quick buck to meet their drug requirements. We’re verifying their contacts,” police said. The students were staying in a house at SG Palya by paying a monthly rent of Rs 22,000.Bengal couple in soup for growing ganjaA couple from West Bengal reportedly grew ganja along with vegetables on a piece of agricultural land they had taken on rent near Nelamangala on the outskirts of Bengaluru.Acting on a tipoff, Thyamagondlu police along with officials from the revenue department raided the farm at Hanumanthapura and arrested Kalugupta B, 38, and his wife Deepali, 30. The land belongs to Naga Basavaraju.“Five ganja plants were grown in the middle of ivy gourd crop. Kalugupta claimed he was growing it for his own use. We’ve seized the plants from the farm and one kept inside his house,” an officer said.Nigerian selling cocaine heldTwo persons, including a Nigerian, have been arrested in separate cases of drug trafficking. The Central Crime Branch (CCB) sleuths have seized cocaine and MDMA worth Rs 2.5 lakh from them.Chibuko Johnbosco, 39, from Lagos in Nigeria, was taken into custody from his rental house at Banjara Layout near Ramamurthy Nagar on Wednesday. Officials have seized 20 grams of cocaine, a mobile phone and Rs 5,000—all worth Rs 1.75 lakh—from him.MDMA seizedSyed Irfan, 24, of New Gurappanapalya, was nabbed while trying to sell MDMA outside a hotel at Kacharakanahalli near Banasawadi. He was in possession of 14 grams of drug worth Rs 75,000.
