ED raids houses, offices of Jet Airways founder Naresh Goyal

Jet Airways founder Naresh Goyal | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Earlier, a Look Out Circular was issued against Naresh Goyal after an investigation by the Corporate Affairs Ministry reportedly found large-scale wrongdoings at the embattled airline Jet Airways suspended its operations on April 17 this year due to severe fund crunch Jet Airways failed to clear dues worth over Rs 8,000 crore and reportedly owes money to lessors, suppliers, pilots and oil companies

New Delhi: The Enforcement Directorate on Friday (August 23) raided multiple premises linked to grounded airline Jet Airways' founder Naresh Goyal in connection with a case of an alleged contravention of the foreign exchange law. The investigative agency is also searching offices of the debt-laden carrier in Delhi and Mumbai.

The searches were done under the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), and aimed at gathering more evidence. The probe agency is also examining the now-defunct carrier's stake in Jet Privilege Pvt Ltd (JPPL), set up in 2012, as part of the latest searches.

It is worth noting that a Look Out Circular (LOC) was issued against the Jet founder after a probe by the Corporate Affairs Ministry reportedly found large-scale wrongdoings at the beleaguered airline. On May 25, Goyal and his wife Anita were offloaded from a Dubai bound Emirates flight along with their checked-in luggage. The Delhi High Court had asked Naresh Goyal to first deposit Rs 18,000 crore the crisis-hit carrier owes lenders if he wishes to travel abroad.

Reports suggest the probe agency is also inspecting charges of tax evasion of more than Rs 650 crore brought to the notice by the income tax department against the airline and its entities to verify if these breached provisions of the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA).

Struggling for survival because of a severe fund crunch, Jet Airways suspended its operations on April 17 this year. Naresh Goyal and Anita Goyal had resigned from the board of Jet Airways, which the former founded 26 years ago, in March after a debt restructuring plan. At present, Jet is undergoing insolvency proceedings. A consortium of lenders led by State Bank of India (SBI) had failed to revive the airline and sent Jet to the bankruptcy court in June to recover their dues.

In July, the government had ordered an SFIO (Serious Fraud Investigation Office) probe into the affairs of the financially-troubled airline after finding instances of fund diversions. Jet failed to repay debts worth over Rs 8,000 crore and reportedly owes money to lessors, suppliers, pilots and oil companies.
