Chandrababu As CM, A Saga Of Misrule

Kommineni Srinivasa Rao

Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister and TDP Supremo Chandrababu Naidu starts his day in the name of Mission 2019 and gets into Election campaign mode. Invariably, he makes Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Ap Leader of Opposition YS Jagan Mohan Reddy and Telangana Chief Minister K Chandrashekar Rao targets of his criticism. In one such propaganda speech of his, he is supposed to have said that disaster would befall Andhra Pradesh if the TDP is not returned to power. He sought the help of all sections of society to help the TDP win. Then he trained his guns at PM Modi and the CBI. Chandrababu has also been criticising KCR saying that the Telangana chief minister has been impeding AP's development. Chandrababu seems to forget that his rule over the past four and a half years has been nothing but an unmitigated disaster. What about the atrocities committed by the TDP in the time it was in power? What about the subversion of all institutions including the police force which has now turned into his private machinery.

The fact that Andhra Pradesh is a failed state with everybody toeing Chandrababu Naidu's line is reflected in the dastardly murder attempt on YSR Congress party president YS Jagan Mohan Reddy. The fact that the Leader of Opposition in AP was attacked in the VIP lounge of the Visakhapatnam airport casts a dark shadow on Chandrababu's rule. Added to that, his constant attempts to stall investigation into the conspiracy dimension of the murderous attack mirror his diabolical side of his rule. What does he have to say about the refusal of the state police force under his orders to hand over case records relating to the murder attempt on YS Jagan to the National Investigation Agency (NIA)? This is far from how any civilised democratic society functions. Within hours of the murderous attack, the DGP of the state told media men that the attacker was a YSR Congress fan. How did he come to this conclusion? Why did Chandrababu attempt to water down the case and undermine his significance by terming it as a drama, a statement unbecoming of any responsible chief minister? The NIA has now clearly stated that the attack on the Leader of Opposition in Andhra Pradesh was a premeditated murder attempt. Shouldn't Chandrababu apologise for his irresponsible behaviour and statement? By being in denial, is he not lending credence to the belief that the TDP leadership is directly involved in the conspiracy behind the murderous attack?

When 20 workers from Tamil Nadu were killed in an encounter near Tirupati, the TDP chief did not so much as order a probe. The Tamil Nadu government had then stated that it was a fake encounter. In fact, the then chief minister of Tamil Nadu J Jayalalithaa had even given family members of the deceased jobs as compensation. Doesn't it clearly point to a major crime in the deaths of these workers in AP? Similarly, when 29 pilgrims died in a stampede at Pushkarams, Chandrababu Naidu did not so much as allow a case to be registered and the commission appointed by him was an act of tokenism as events proved. Was this in itself not a crime? Was it not criminal on part of the government to remain a mute spectator when a train was burnt in Tuni railway station. Even worse he blamed the opposition parties for this crime. There are many such instances of TDP leaders misbehaving with officials while Chandrababu Naidu and other party bigwigs look the other way. The atrocities committed by Janmabhoomi Committees are far too numerous to be listed here. And one could go on citing similar examples.

Also Read: All Party Meet: Orwellian World Of Chandrababu Naidu
