YS Jagan Pays Tributes To Prakasam Pantulu

Amaravati: Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister YS Jagan Mohan Reddy paid rich tributes to the first chief minister of erstwhile united Andhra Pradesh, Tanguturi Prakasam Pantulu on his 147th birth anniversary.

Taking to micro blogging site Twitter, YS Jagan said that Tanguturi Prakasam Pantulu was an exceptional leader of noble stature who ignited Telugu pride and also contributed immensely to the state as Chief Minister. His fortitude will remain an inspiration across generations.



Tributes to #TanguturiPrakasam Pantulu garu on his Birth Anniversary. An exceptional leader of noble stature who ignited Telugu pride and also contributed immensely to the state as Chief Minister. His fortitude will remain an inspiration across generations. — YS Jagan Mohan Reddy (@ysjagan) August 23, 2019

Andhra Kesari

Prakasam Pantulu is also known as Andhra Kesari a title bestowed upon him for daring the British during the freedom movement.

As the story goes when India was rocked by protests against the Simon Commission, slogans of “Simon Go Back” rent the air, and black flags were shown wherever the commission members entered. The British Government banned any strikes, demonstrations all over the country. However a large crowd, gathered at Parry’s Corner, opposite the Madras High Court, and began to chant slogans of “Simon Go Back”. The police fired on the crowd, to disperse them. A youngster named Parthasarathi, fell a victim to the firing, and his lifeless body was lying on the square. The police warned that if anyone tried to carry the corpse, would also be similarly shot dead.

But one man stepped in to take the body. As the police turned their guns towards him, he tore open his shirt in fury, bared his chest to them. And in a loud voice, roared , “Shoot you cowards, if you have any guts”, his chest bared to the police guns. The police taken aback by the defiance, and understanding the situation, gave way to him. That act of courage and defiance earned that man, the title of “Andhra Kesari”( The Lion of Andhra).

Also Read: AP CM YS Jagan’s Janmashtami Greetings To Telugus
