Five IAF Officials Found Guilty In 'Friendly Fire' That Killed Six Personnel In Budgam On 27 February

An internal probe by the Indian Air Force has confirmed the speculation about India shooting down its own chopper in Budgam, on February 27 during the air raid by Pakistan Air Force.

An IAF inquiry into the incident has found that the MI-17 helicopter was shot down by an Indian missile and has held five officers "blameworthy".

AFP/ FILE

"Five officers including one Group Captain, two Wing commanders and two Flight Lieutenants have been held blameworthy by the court of inquiry by the Air Force headed by a senior officer," ANI quoting a source reported.

The officers have been found guilty of charges including negligence and not following correct procedures while shooting down the Mi-17 V5 chopper.

The inquiry was ordered by the Air Force Headquarters under an Air Commodore-rank officer as the crash resulted in the death of six of its personnel.

The top brass of the Air Force and the government are of the view that strictest punishment should be meted out to personnel who are found guilty.

AFP/ FILE

Sources said that during the probe, it had emerged that the officers handling air defence responsibilities at the Srinagar airbase mistook the chopper returning midway from a mission as an incoming missile towards the base.

The incident happened on February 27, a day after the IAF crossed the border and struck terror camps inside Balakot, Pakistan.

The Mi-17 had crashed within 10 minutes of taking off, killing six IAF personnel onboard squadron leader Siddharth Vashisht with other members squadron leader Ninad Mandavgane, Kumar Pandey, sergeant Vikrant Sehrawat, corporals Deepak Pandey and Pankaj Kumar and a civilian on the ground.

BCCL/ FILE

This was happening as Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was engaged in a dogfight with the intruding Pakistani jets.

Ever since the crash, there had been rumors and unofficial admissions that it was, in fact, a 'friendly fire' that brought down the Mi-17.

According to reports, the Mi-17s ‘Identification of Friend or Foe’ system was switched off at the time, which resulted in it being mistaken for an incoming unmanned Pakistani aircraft.

AFP/ FILE

The confusion happened at a time when the IAF was on a heightened alert following the Balakot Air Strike and India was expecting retaliatory actions from Pakistan.

The Balakot Air Strike was carried out by India after the JeM claimed responsibility of the Pulwama terror attack which killed over 40 CRPF men on February 14.
