PM Modi inaugurates first memorial for Homi Bhabha

Paris: Prime Minister Narendra Modi on Friday inaugurated the first ever memorial for Homi J Bhabha, the father of India’s nuclear program, 53 years after he died in an air crash in France.In January 1966, the ‘ Kanchenjunga ’, a Air India Boeing 707 aircraft crashed into the Bossons Glacier on the icy south-west face of Mont Blanc. It had 11 crew members and 106 passengers. None survived. Bhabha was one of the ill-fated passengers.Earlier, the ‘ Malabar Princess ’ — a Lockheed L-749A aircraft of Air India — crashed into Rocher de la Tournette on Mont Blanc on November 3, 1950, while flying on the Bombay-Istanbul-Geneva-London route. It had 40 passengers and eight crew members on board. All of them perished.The crash sites are near Nid d'Aigle (or Eagle's Nest), well known as the last station on the tramway that takes tourists to the foothills of the Mont Blanc mountain in France. It is the point where the mountaineers start their ascent to scale the icy heights of the Alps.The picturesque village of Nid d'Aigle, at an altitude of 2,362 metres, will house the monument dedicated to Bhabha and several other Indians who died in the twin crashes.The memorial has been designed by Bossonet Marbrerie, a well-known architectural firm of France.It looks like a cairn with each of the balanced stones representing “perfectly aligned thought and intention of the people” of India and France to remember the victims of the two air crashes, said a source aware of the design of the monument.The architects chose to make it look like a cairn, which speaks for the natural desire of people to stand up and support one another in the mountain, irrespective of their nationalities, particularly in times of need and emergencies, the source added.The mortal remains of the crew and passengers the two Air India aircraft could never be recovered from the snow-covered heights. The wreckages remain at the crash sites.Daniel Roche, who spent years looking for the wreckages in Mont Blanc, had in July 2017 found human body parts – a hand and the upper part of a leg – in Bossons Glacier, near the site of the 1966 crash. He also found parts of one of the four engines of the aircraft. A box containing rubies, emeralds and sapphires were found near the crash site in September 2013, while a camera was retrieved in June 2014.When a jute sack – with “Indian Government Services – Diplomatic Mail – Ministry of External Affairs” – printed on it was recovered in Bossons Glacier in August 2012, the government became anxious as it could have contained sensitive communications.If leaked, it might have had repercussions on New Delhi's foreign engagements.They were, however, relieved after it was found that the diplomatic bag was marked ‘C’ – not ‘A’ or ‘B’ which denote “classified” and “official communications” categories, respectively.The sack was later brought to New Delhi and it was found to contain newspapers of the third week of January 1966, some magazines, and an Indian Airlines calendar. Those days, the external affairs ministry used to courier newspapers and magazines to missions abroad in diplomatic bags.
