Abhinandan Varthaman medically fit, begins flying MiG 21 again

File picture: Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman | Photo Credit: IANS

Key Highlights Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman underwent a full medical examination around three weeks ago The Wing Commander had sustained injuries while ejecting from MiG 21 across the Pakistani side of the border on February 27 Abhinandan’s fitness was certified by the Institute of Aerospace Medicine

New Delhi: Months after his MiG 21 was hit by a Pakistani missile, Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman has been declared medically fit and has started flying the fighter jet again. The Wing Commander had sustained injuries while ejecting from his MiG 21, across the Pakistani side of the border on February 27.

As per a senior Indian Air Force officer, Abhinandan’s fitness was certified by the Institute of Aerospace Medicine. "The clearance was given to Abhinandan for flying again after he was declared medically fit,” added the officer.

Sources said Abhinandan underwent a full medical examination around three weeks ago.

Abhinandan had to keep himself away from flying for six months following the grounding of his fighter jet during an aerial engagement with Pakistan Air Force (PAF) jets on February 27 in the aftermath of the Balakot airstrike.

Forty Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) personnel were killed in the terror strike in Jammu and Kashmir's Pulwama on February 14.

On February 26, the Indian Air Force carried out a pre-dawn attack on Jaish-e-Mohammed's biggest terror camp in Pakistan's Balakot.

On February 27, the Pakistani security agencies had captured Abhinandan and also released the videos of his interrogation. The brave IAF officer was released to India approximately 60 hours later.

On March 1, senior IAF and security officers had received the Wing Commander, who entered India through the Zero Line at the Wagah-Attari joint check-post.

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan had called Varthaman's return to India a "peace gesture".

Later, Prime Minister Narendra Modi suggested on Saturday that had it not been for "politics", the Indian airstrike in Balakot would have been ranked "among one of the major military operations of the world".

While replying to what had led to the early release of Wing Commander Abhinandan, the PM had said: "That was a (terrible) night. There are many mysteries buried in (the darkness of) that night. Let those mysteries stay where they are."

He further took a jibe at Pakistan, saying: "If it (Pakistan) admitted that the airstrike caused damage, the world would know that there was a terrorist camp there. It was a lone residential building housing 600 people on a hill surrounded by trees. So, to hide this, they had to do something."

Earlier this week, a report had suggested that a Pakistani commando, who was behind the Commander Abhinandan Varthaman's capture in Pakistan, has been killed in firing by Indian security forces along the Line of Control.

Wing Commander Abhinandan Varthaman was awarded Vir Chakra, the third highest wartime military award in India, on India's Independence Day.
