Modi honours victims of two plane crashes in France: When tragedy struck and claimed the life of Homi Bhabha

Homi Jehangir Bhabha, the father of India's nuclear programme.

Key Highlights The Malabar Princess -- Air India flight 245 -- was a Lockheed Constellation. The plane was being piloted by Captain Alan R Saint. Assisting him was co-pilot Vijay Yeshwant Korgaokar. Kanchenjunga crashed on 24 January 1966 at almost the same location as the Malabar Princess. Homi Bhabha's death triggered several conspiracy theories on the cause of the crash.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi who was on a bilateral visit to France honoured on Friday morning the victims of two Air India crashes in the Alps that together killed 165 people.

Modi, who also addressed the Indian diaspora in Paris, inaugurated a memorial in Nid D'Aigle dedicated to the victims of the two flights.

While the first plane – named the ‘Malabar Princess’ – crashed in 1950, the second aircraft called ‘Kanchenjunga’ crashed 16 years later, killing among scores of people the legendary nuclear scientist Homi Jehangir Bhabha. Modi also honoured Bhabha on Friday.

In a twist of fate, both crashes occurred in the same area of Mont Blanc mountain not far from France’s border with Italy.

The two tragedies in the first two decades after Independence plunged the young nation into grief – and claimed the life of the father of India’s nuclear programme.

Malabar Princess

The Malabar Princess -- Air India flight 245 -- was a Lockheed Constellation. The Bombay-London flight had stopovers in Cairo and Geneva. The Princess had flown Air India’s first flight in June 1948, taking the same route.

On 3 November 1950 the plane was being piloted by Captain Alan R Saint. Assisting him were co-pilot Vijay Yeshwant Korgaokar and other technicians and experts.

The aircraft crashed into the Mont Blanc a little after 9.40 am at an elevation of about 4,670 metres. All 48 people on board were killed.

The tragedy has inspired books and films including Henri Troyat’s novel La neige en deuil and the 2004 film Malabar Princess.

Kanchenjunga

The plane named Kanchenjunga that crashed on 24 January 1966 at almost the same location as the Malabar Princess, killing all 117 people on board, was a Boeing 707-437.

Air India Flight 101 was flying from Bombay to London, and stopped at Delhi and Beirut on the way. It was due to fly to Geneva en route to London when it crashed into the French Alps.

A mere accident?

On board the Kanchenjunga was the brilliant Indian scientist Homi Bhabha, and his death triggered several conspiracy theories on the cause of the crash. Before his death Bhabha, who was the chairman of the Indian Atomic Energy Commission, had reportedly expressed confidence that India was not many years away from testing a nuclear weapon. Eventually, India carried out its first atomic bomb test in the 1970s when Indira Gandhi was prime minister.

One persistent conspiracy theory suggests that Flight 101 was brought down by a projectile to kill Bhabha and thereby sabotage India’s fledgeling nuclear programme.

Discoveries from the site

Climbers and adventurers have over the decades trekked to the sites of the two crashes and discovered items including jewels from the wreckage. However, there is some confusion over which of the two crashes the recovered riches belong to.

In September 2013, the French media was abuzz with excitement after a climber discovered a box at the site, which was later found to contain jewels valued at up to $330,000. A year before a ‘diplomatic bag’ was recovered. Smaller discoveries are often made from the area where the two doomed flights met their end.

The views expressed by the author are personal and do not in any way represent those of Times Network.
