Yashwant Sinha: A maverick in politics

Yashwant Sinha: A maverick in politics Yashwant Sinha's autobiography, Relentless, casts light on several matters such as how Narasimha Rao invited him to defect to the Congress party or how V P Singh offered him the governorship of Punjab

| Published 23.08.19, 08:51 AM

Indeed, Sinha confirms what had been widely rumoured in New Delhi when he was finance minister --- he wasn't particularly close to prime minister A B Vajpayee. In fact, Tarun Das, director general of the Confederation of Indian Industry, the influential business lobby organisation, advised Sinha to see Vajpayee more often. Sinha and the prime minister grew closer later, after Sinha became external affairs minister. Sinha casts light on several matters.

Advertisement

#V P Singh offered him the governorship of Punjab. Sinha consulted Chandra Shekhar and turned down the offer. #The Congress party – which was supporting the Chandra Shekhar government from outside --- wanted former finance secretary S. Venkitaramanan to replace R N Malhotra as Reserve Bank of India governor. So Sinha had to ask Malhotra to resign. Venkitaramanan would grapple with a foreign exchange crisis: he told me he'd proposed handing over Indian embassy property in Tokyo and Beijing to real estate developers to net $1 billion. #P V Narasimha Rao invited him to defect to the Congress party, which had 232 MPs. Sinha was then a member of Chandra Shekhar's Samajwadi Janata Party which had five MPs. Perhaps Rao hoped that other SJP MPs would follow Sinha into the Congress. But Sinha didn't bite. Instead, he joined the BJP. #Did Manmohan Singh have a memory lapse when he appeared before the joint parliamentary committee (JPC) formed after the Harshad Mehta scam broke? Or did he lie to it? Sinha was a member of the JPC. He felt that Manohar J Pherwani, who had been appointed chairman of the Unit Trust of India (UTI) by the Rajiv Gandhi government and sacked by the V P Singh government, had indulged in malpractices. The Narasimha Rao government had reappointed Pherwani to UTI. Asked about this, Manmohan Singh said he hadn't appointed him, his predecessor (Sinha) had. Sinha demanded that the committee call for the file. Singh had signed it. Incidentally, Pherwani denied any wrongdoing in an interview to me days before he died.



Indeed, Sinha confirms what had been widely rumoured in New Delhi when he was finance minister --- he wasn't particularly close to prime minister A B Vajpayee. In fact, Tarun Das, director general of the Confederation of Indian Industry, the influential business lobby organisation, advised Sinha to see Vajpayee more often. Sinha and the prime minister grew closer later, after Sinha became external affairs minister. Sinha casts light on several matters. #V P Singh offered him the governorship of Punjab. Sinha consulted Chandra Shekhar and turned down the offer. #The Congress party – which was supporting the Chandra Shekhar government from outside --- wanted former finance secretary S. Venkitaramanan to replace R N Malhotra as Reserve Bank of India governor. So Sinha had to ask Malhotra to resign. Venkitaramanan would grapple with a foreign exchange crisis: he told me he'd proposed handing over Indian embassy property in Tokyo and Beijing to real estate developers to net $1 billion. #P V Narasimha Rao invited him to defect to the Congress party, which had 232 MPs. Sinha was then a member of Chandra Shekhar's Samajwadi Janata Party which had five MPs. Perhaps Rao hoped that other SJP MPs would follow Sinha into the Congress. But Sinha didn't bite. Instead, he joined the BJP. #Did Manmohan Singh have a memory lapse when he appeared before the joint parliamentary committee (JPC) formed after the Harshad Mehta scam broke? Or did he lie to it? Sinha was a member of the JPC. He felt that Manohar J Pherwani, who had been appointed chairman of the Unit Trust of India (UTI) by the Rajiv Gandhi government and sacked by the V P Singh government, had indulged in malpractices. The Narasimha Rao government had reappointed Pherwani to UTI. Asked about this, Manmohan Singh said he hadn't appointed him, his predecessor (Sinha) had. Sinha demanded that the committee call for the file. Singh had signed it. Incidentally, Pherwani denied any wrongdoing in an interview to me days before he died.



#Sinha and foreign secretary Kanwal Sibal shot down a proposal to return Jinnah House in Mumbai to industrialist Nusli Wadia's mother, Dina Wadia, Muhammad Ali Jinnah's daughter. Vajpayee had cleared the proposal, made by Jaswant Singh, Sinha's predecessor, but Sinha persuaded the prime minister to reverse his decision. Predictably, that put paid to Sinha's friendship with Nusli Wadia.

Though he had Swadeshi sympathies, Sinha was never a member of the RSS. The two didn't agree. He says in the book, “Most of these people were prisoners of an ideology that had long become irrelevant....Unfortunately, it carries great conviction with the gullible, as does the complete nonsense that is dished out by the bhakts on social media these days.” Sinha rebelled and quit the BJP. Today he stands marginalised. Ministers don't reply to his letters. This is a good, engrossing book, rich with detail --- sometimes too much detail. Why, for instance, write about so many countries he dealt with as foreign minister? Still, it's a well-edited book. I could spot only one major error --- Dina Wadia wasn't Jinnah's sister; she was his daughter.

The reviewer worked at India Today, was executive editor of a business magazine, resident editor at two financial dailies and a deputy editor at The Telegraph


