IAF Officials Found Guilty In Budgam Chopper Crash, Pakistan Blacklisted By FATF And Other News

An internal probe by the Indian Air Force has confirmed the speculation about India shooting down its own chopper in Budgam, on February 27 during the air raid by Pakistan Air Force.

An IAF inquiry into the incident has found that the MI-17 helicopter was shot down by an Indian missile and has held five officers "blameworthy". Read more

Finance Body Blacklists Pakistan For Failing To Stop Terrorism, Imran Khan Left Red-Faced

In a major embarrassment for Pakistan, the Asia-Pacific Group of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) has placed the country under the Enhanced Expedited Follow Up List (Blacklist) for after the country failed to meet its standards.

The FATF found that Pakistan was non-compliant on 32 of 40 compliance parameters on money laundering and terror financing. The FATF APG made the decision in a meeting that was held in Canberra, Australia after discussions that lasted over seven hours over two days. Read more

Using E-Cigarettes Could Soon Land You In Jail For Three Years, Fine Of Rs 5 Lakhs

It was earlier reported that the Modi Government is planning to introduce an ordinance soon to ban the manufacture, sale, and import of ENDS devices, including e-cigarettes.

Now, more details of the Union Health Ministry's proposal has emerged. Reuters which accessed an internal note reported that Health officials are proposing jail terms of up to three years, with a penalty of up to 500,000 rupees for repeat offenders against the new rules. Read more

Myanmar Army Raped Rohingya Women With 'Genocidal Intent', Govt Did Nothing To Stop Them: UN

Currently, one of the worst humanitarian crises is going on in Myanmar, where the Rohingya Muslim community is being targeted and reports suggest that thousands of Rohingyas have been killed so far. Hundreds of thousands have fled to neighbouring countries for safety.

Sexual violence has been a known tool used against the Rohingyas by the troops in Myanmar. Even the UN expressed its worries about it in 2017. Read more

India Is Facing Worst Economic Crisis Since Independence, Niti Aayog Chief Rings Warning Bell

Now, even government appointed officials of Niti Ayog (earlier planning commission) are worried about the bad liquidity situation in the financial sector and weak private investment in the economy.

Vice Chairman of Niti Aayog, Rajiv Kumar, said that there is a need for extraordinary steps as the government is faced with an “unprecedented issue”. Read more
