Separatists groups are misleading on Article 370 and 35A

As an Indian, I believe all Kashmiris are our brothers and sisters. I am writing this article based on my real-life events. Before I start, I would like to mention, one of my very close Kashmiri friend, SAM. She is intelligent and caring. Whatever I know about Kashmir, I know because of her. She told me everything. About her life and Kashmir. She told me how Kashmir was 25 years ago. Fighting between militants and the Indian government. The struggle of common Kashmiris. How she and her family suffered during the 2014 flood. How the Indian army helped Kashmiris and local people.

I still remember the day, when I first met with her. She was wonderful. We became friends. When she told me, that she is from Kashmir, I couldn’t believe that. She was different, doesn’t look like an Indian, she looks like a foreigner.

At first, I imagined Kashmir, exactly as she said. I used to believe that all Kashmiris are simple, hard-working, innocent, and religious people. Just like her and her parents. No different than me and other Indians.

The word “all” I used for the Kashmiris, is subjected to the interpretation I made. Prevailed by the situation at that time, within the scope of my viewpoint. Things changed when I started giving attention to politics and other matters of Kashmir because of her.

Local politicians playing dirty games on the ground for power. Shaking hands with other nations (Including Pakistan) to concern the lands and rights of common Indians. It’s hard to identify one rotten apple in a bunch. Just like that, you can’t say, what is lurking behind these good people. Bad guys always use good people as a shield. They protect their legacy built on lies and the blood of innocent people.

That’s what happened in Kashmir. Few powerful politician families ruled and consumed Kashmir, made it hollow and empty. They do not follow the constitution of India. And they have their separate flag.

Everyone in India calls these people separatists of Kashmir. I understand why now. They are the corrupted politicians motivated by the Pakistani agenda. Militants, Hurriyat leaders, and Jihadis. Commonly known as “Tukde Tukde Gang” also known as separatists groups. They are nothing but a threat to the local Kashmiris. They are stabbing behind the back of their people. They are encouraging innocent and poor children to stone-pelting and paying them to do so.

These rich separatists, protected by article 370 enjoy their life in Kashmir, while common people suffer. They send their children abroad or to the other states of India.

Today most of the Kashmiris youth are migrating to Delhi, Hyderabad, Bangalore, etc. for better education and life. Most of them never argue or complain about anything. Because they are not misled by the separatists. No one is provocating them anymore. You can also say, a calm and peaceful environment of India starts curing them.

I must say, some Kashmiris youth do protest. They have inherited the Jihadi thoughts and Ideology of these separatists. They march against India. They are the ones, who insult India and still stays in India. They must understand, we haven’t done anything wrong. Their actions can’t threaten us. They are only spoiling their future.

I don’t know why some Kashmiris follow these separatists. Let me tell you the one fact I know. Separatists were the few people, who wanted to be a part of Pakistan but were thrown out of Pakistan. They deserve nothing. They follow orders of Pakistani militants and terrorists, just like a dog, and want to separate Kashmir from India so that Pakistan can capture the rest.

Good Kashmiris help everyone. They can gladly give their lives for others. SAM is no different. She loves India and Indian culture. She respects Islam, she visits the mosque every day, she keeps Roja every year. She is the one who enlightened me with the true beauty of Kashmir. She told me about Tulip, Dal Lake, Shikaras, Pashmina Shawls and so much that I just can’t write. She elaborated Kashmir to me just like a heaven on earth.

On 8 July 2016 just after the Eid, when that militant died, you know whom I am talking about. A huge protest was raised by the separatists and a curfew was imposed by the Indian government to calm down the situation.

Unfortunately, SAM was stuck with her family in Kashmir and I was in Delhi. I was so tensed about her. I prayed for her safety. What else could I do? When I called her on 23rd July 2016, she was fine and happy while I was about to lose my patience. This curfew was nothing for her, but for me, it was just like a long nightmare. It was all new to me. I tried every possible method to contact her, but the world seems to get isolated from Kashmir during this kind of curfews.

On that day, I understood the real pain of her family and local Kashmiris. But she is lucky to have such a good and cooperative family. Her family members are smart and have enough experience to survive these kinds of blackouts. They help their neighbors during these kinds of curfews. They collect a full stock of ration and take all precautionary measures.

The course of these events in Kashmir made me dig deep inside the cause of the Kashmir issue. I found separatist brain-washing Kashmiris to fight for freedom in the name of religion. They want to make Kashmir a part of Pakistan. They are misleading the world.

Kashmiris are our brothers and sisters. We never wanted to house arrest anyone or do anything bad to them. But they picked stones against the Indians. Who protected them from exploitation by the Pakistani armies. And the worst thing is that they are killing Indians for protecting them. Every single person who has a little sense of humanity will strongly condemn these kinds of insanity and inhumane acts. But we never shouted. We are struggling in Kashmir to maintain law and order. And we will continue to do so.

You might think why I am mentioning dying poor country like Pakistan in this article again and again. It’s only because Pakistan is funding these separatists in Kashmir. Pakistan is the root cause of this cancer. And you won’t believe, most of the Kashmiri watch Pakistani television channels. And Sam used to watch some too.

Over time, I lost SAM. I could carry the relationship further. But I haven’t tried enough. I never proposed to her just because of restrictions imposed by article 35A. I knew from the start that the probability of us, being together forever and ever is very very thin. But, I still miss her. And now, when the article 35A and 370 is gone for good. I am so confused, what to do next. I even don’t know that she liked the decision of the Indian government or not.

I stopped talking to her after a small fight over WhatsApp. It’s like, after a year and half of our friendship, we were looking for a way to end this all. I told her I will not talk to you anymore. And well I have to keep my words. So, I never tried to push it from my side again. It hurts a bit, but I think we should let it go. So in the end, we are not together. I think she is not using the same phone number anymore. To escape from all these, after the breakup I stopped using Facebook. Stopping going to the places where I have memories related to her. I have deleted everything, her private data, and pictures from my phone and computer. And I am trying to move on.

I will request all the Kashmiris to join with India and be a part of the growing super nation, leave your rage and hatred aside and move on. Just like me. Join hands together and work as one family under one nation, one constitution, and one flag. Don’t rage war, make love and peace.

But it is impossible for every Kashmiris especially separatists. As they have created deep roots of hate inside the lives of local Kashmiri people. Which can’t be cured easily.

All the separatists are exasperated and became insane when article 35A and 370 are scraped. Kashmir and India are now one. Their supporters including Pakistanis are doing everything they can to force the Indian government to reconsider this matter. That is why they are misleading on article 370 and 35A. To fulfill their dreams of making Kashmir an independent nation, where Separatists, Pakistanis, and Jihadi minded people can leave together. They are just like cancer. Consuming all the benefits provided by the Indian government. And in return, they will only throw stones back to us.

Separatists never liked our nation, but they still live with us. They plan attacks by associating with terrorists and militants, protect militants from Indian security forces, and do everything to separate Kashmir from India. So, Pakistan can occupy Kashmir. Their march for freedom is nothing more than a deception. I request every Kashmiri Indian to report about any such events happening in the locality to your local police station.

At last, I want to say this to all Kashmiris. Pakistan can not help you. They can’t even help their people. So, be a part of new India or leave India. Move on, just like I did with Sam. I know it is not easy. Article 370 and 35A is already gone. Think about it. Don’t do anything stupid unless you want to go to jail like other separatists.

Thank you for reading. Please don’t mind my poor English. Have a great day. Jai Hind.
