UN rebuffs Pak over complaint against Priyanka Chopra, says she is free to speak in personal capacity

WASHINGTON: Pakistan faced yet another rebuff from the United Nations on Thursday with the organization upholding the right of Indian actress Priyanka Chopra to speak in her personal capacity on issues that concern her, while rejecting Islamabad plea that she be removed as UNESCO’s goodwill ambassador because “she encouraged nuclear war,” a phony charge generated by a Pakistani troll.United Nations spokesperson Stephane Dujarric clarified the UN position after Pakistani minister Shireen Mazari wrote to the organization falsely alleging that the actress had supported India’s “nuclear threat to Pakistan” even though there was no such threat, not did Chopra’s tweet remotely suggest that. Daughter of an Indian military officer, Chopra had tweeted “Jai Hind” and her salute to the Indian armed forces in the aftermath of the Balakot military strike by the Indian Air Force, which came in response to the terrorist attack in Pulwama.“Any goodwill ambassador whether it’s Miss Chopra or anyone else, we expect them to adhere to impartial positions when they speak on behalf of Unicef or any other organization …(but) when these ambassadors speak in their personal capacity they retain the right to speak about issues of interest or concern to them,” Dujarric said at a briefing, when asked about the Pakistani demand. "Their personal views however do not reflect the views of the agency with which they may be affiliated with," he added.The row began when two weeks ago, Chopra was heckled by a Pakistani-American woman at a public event in the U.S about her tweets supporting the Indian armed forces. Describing herself as a Pakistani, the woman, identified as Ayesha Malik, accused the actress of being a “hypocrite,” said she was “encouraging nuclear war against Pakistan” and argued that it did not behoove of her position as a UNICEF goodwill ambassador.Chopra responded: “I have many, many friends from Pakistan and I am from India. War is not something I’m really fond of but I am patriotic, so I’m sorry if I hurt sentiments of people who do love me and have loved me. But I think that all of us have a, sort of, middle ground that we all have to walk. Just like you probably do as well. ” She then proceeded to deliver a haughty public smackdown of the Pakistani woman’s grandstanding and false equivalence. “The way that you came at me right now ... girl, don’t yell. We’re all here for love. Don't embarrass yourself,” Chopra told her.The matter would have ended there but for a concerned effort by some Pakistani entertainers and politicians to present Chopra’s tweets as war-mongering, that too of the nuclear kind, and seeking to have her removed as a UNICEF goodwill ambassador. In an OpEd she wrote for CNN, Mehwish Hayat, a Pakistani actress, pontificated that “Celebrities who act as charity spokespeople should always focus on humanitarianism” and advised Chopra that she “should not be using her voice to legitimize a regime opposed to the values she claims to represent.”“Perhaps alarmed by Hollywood's open opposition to his ally Donald Trump , Indian PM Modi has arguably co-opted and weaponized the country's film industry. It is difficult, often impossible, for Pakistani actors to find work in India. Pakistan is a Muslim majority nation, and Islamophobia is a top-down industry in India: at the top, hyper-nationalist films, songs and slogans teach the masses to hate,” Hayat wrote, notwithstanding the fact that Bollywood’s top stars are Muslims, the industry is largely secular, it produces many hits feel good movies that promote goodwill between communities, and many Pakistanis have found work in the industry.The UN rebuff came on the heels of a series of setbacks for Pakistan in its effort to somehow project India as a warmongering nation – because of the constitutional changes relating in Jammu and Kashmir -- while claiming the high moral ground. Although Pakistan has frequently made nuclear threats in the past and has been host to many terrorists and terrorist attacks directed at India, the Pakistani establishment is now revise the region's chronicles through a social media campaign portraying India as as the aggressor.But from the UNSC members rejecting its efforts to internationalize a bilateral issue to its downgrading by the Financial Action Task Force over terrorism financing, the Pakistani campaign has come acropper.On Thursday, the Pakistani high commissioner to Sri Lanka Shahid Ahmad Hashmi was caught falsifying the outcome of his meeting with the Sri Lankan President Maithripala Sirisena , claiming that Colombo has acknowledged Jammu and Kashmir was disputed territory, it had offered to mediate etc. The Sri Lankan President’s office subsequently issued a statement saying he had made no such remarks, aside from stating it is in Sri Lanka’s interest to see growth of regional cooperation and friendship.
