More trouble for Jet king, ED suspects Naresh Goyal of diverting loan money from airways

The Enforcement Directorate (ED), probing diversion of funds from loans borrowed by Jet Airways in the period of over a decade, carried out raids and searches at 12 locations across Mumbai and Delhi.

Primarily, the probe is being carried out in connection with the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA) violations by Naresh Goyal and others who had allegedly misused loans borrowed from various banks and diverted it to foreign countries through ghost companies.

Naresh Goyal’s statement was recorded by the agency at his residence in Delhi while another raid was conducted at premises owned by Hasmukh Gardi a close aide of Goyal.

Gardi, a Dubai-based NRI, was the promoter of the company named Tail Winds Corporation, which was floated by Naresh Goyal in the Isle of Man islands located in Europe.

Gardi later also became Director in Jet Airways and held the position for a long time.

Jet Airways underworld connection

The agency suspects that some elements from the underworld were also part of the initial funding for the airline. Gardi’s name appeared the Panama papers leak, which is also under investigation by the Enforcement Directorate.

Gardi reportedly owned 30 shell companies and his Carmichael road premises were raided by the agency sleuths on Friday.

In 2007, a PIL was filed in the Bombay High Court by a social activist M Furquan alleging that Naresh Goyal had links with underworld don Dawood Ibrahim and Chhota Shakeel and this nexus could hamper national security.

A plea was also filed the same year in Supreme Court alleging Naresh Goyal's links to the underworld don Dawood Ibrahim and his aides.

Earlies in 2000, a discreet investigation was carried out by the Intelligence Bureau and some IB officers also sent letters suspecting Naresh Goyal’s links to underworld. This was followed by some MPs raising questions in Rajya Sabha but nothing concrete came out then.

Jet Airways funds diverted to ghost companies

The ED has now started focussing on funds being diverted by Naresh Goyal and others from the airline which will also help them dig more on the funding pattern and stakeholders of the airline.

Sources said the airliner leased airplanes from a ghost company based in Ireland and inflated the lease the amount around 20 to 30 per cent in the invoices from the actual amount.

This way the money was diverted to the Ireland-based company and few others, from where it is suspected to have been then diverted to some shell companies which then rerouted funds to Naresh Goyal and his aides. Eventually causing huge losses to the airline and losing on foreign exchange.

The initial probe is under FEMA but agency sources believe that money has been laundered and eventually, PMLA sections could be added in the case.

Also, another important revelation that has come to light was that the commissions in large amounts from the loan amount were paid to nonexistent or shell companies for leasing of airplanes eventually driving the airline to huge losses and loan amount being misappropriated.

Other than the ED probe, Naresh Goyal remains under investigation by the Income Tax department and Serious Fraud Investigation office.
