Rahul to go to Srinagar with delegation of oppn leaders today

At a time when the government is trying to protect the people of Jammu & Kashmir from the threat of cross border te… https://t.co/nN9QKUao3S — DIPR-J&K (@diprjk) 1566573364000

attempts should not be made by senior political leaders to disturb the gradual restoration of normal life. Politica… https://t.co/BhOT5eIG6g — DIPR-J&K (@diprjk) 1566573391000

They would also be violating restrictions that are still there in many areas. Senior leaders should understand that… https://t.co/jByj33v3fP — DIPR-J&K (@diprjk) 1566573403000

NEW DELHI: Congress leader Rahul Gandhi will go to Srinagar on Saturday along with a delegation of leaders from the Left, Trinamool, DMK, RJD and NCP in response to Jammu & Kashmir governor Satya Pal Malik ’s “invitation” to the leader to visit the state. The leaders are expected to reach Srinagar a little after 1pm.The visit is seen as a political point as the delegation may be turned back from the airport. Rahul had earlier responded to Malik’s remarks that he should come and see things for himself. Later Malik “withdrew” the invitation, saying the Congress leader was imposing conditions that were unacceptable.While Congress leaders Ghulam Nabi Azad and Anand Sharma will accompany Rahul, DMK will be represented by Tiruchi Siva, the Left by Sitaram Yechury and D Raja, Dinesh Trivedi from TMC and Manoj Jha from RJD.The J&K government put out a tersely worded tweet, advising the political leaders to stay away. “At a time when the government is trying to protect the people of Jammu & Kashmir from the threat of cross-border terrorism and attacks by militants and separatists, and gradually trying to restore public order by controlling miscreants and mischief-mongers, attempts should not be made by senior political leaders to disturb the gradual restoration of normal life,” DIPR said on Twitter.The move comes a day after an opposition protest at Jantar Mantar, where leaders of 10 parties demanded the immediate release from “illegal detention” of all Kashmiri politicians under house arrest since August 5. The opposition leaders also said communication systems and normalcy should be restored in the region.Malik and Rahul had clashed, with the governor saying the Congress leader was being influenced by fake news. He was reacting to Rahul’s statement that “people were dying in the state and the situation was not normal as claimed by the government”.When Malik offered an airplane, Rahul had instead sought permission to travel with a clutch of political leaders. The governor promptly said the offer was being politicised.Opposition leaders, including those from Congress, have since maintained that if the situation in J&K is normal — as is being claimed by the government — the detained political leaders should be released, and those attempting to visit should be allowed entry.J&K has been under a security lockdown with no mobile connectivity since August 5, when the government passed a resolution in Parliament to defang Article 370 and revoke the special status of J&K. Since then landlines have been restored in parts of the state, including the Valley.So far, attempts by Congress leader Ghulam Nabi Azad and Left leaders Sitaram Yechury & D Raja to enter J&K have been thwarted by the local administration on the grounds that their arrival will lead to law-and-order concerns.The public relations department also asked political leaders to “cooperate and not visit Srinagar as they would be putting other people to inconvenience”. “They would also be violating restrictions that are still there in many areas. Senior leaders should understand that top priority would be given to maintaining peace, order and preventing loss of human lives,” the J&K government tweeted.
