January witnesses 20 killings

January witnesses 20 killings

SRINAGAR, Jan 31: January 2019 witnessed at least 20 killings in encounters and other militancy related incidents.

Among the killed are 17 militants including a top commander, two forces personnel and a civilian. Besides nearly two dozen civilians and atleast 11 security forces personnel including three army men suffered injuries during clashes or grenade attacks.

The year began with the killing of a special police officer (SPO) Sameer Ahmad Mir of Hajan Pulwama after the militants barged into his home and fired at him on January 1.

Two days later on January 3 three militants identified as Towseef Ahmad Thokar, Zubair Ahmad Bhat, both residents of Charsoo Awantipora and Shakoor Ahmad Parry of Aripal Tral were killed in a gunfight after they were trapped in an underground hideout in Gulshanpora village of Tral. Two of them belonged to Hizb and one was associated with LeT. In the gunfight three army men also sustained injuries.

The killing of three militants was followed by the killing of a civilian belonging to minority Sikh community by the unknown gunmen near his home in Tral village. The slain identified as Simranjeet Singh was the brother of a political activist Rajinder Singh.

Only next day on January 5, another gunfight raged in Aripal village of Tral in which a CRPF man identified as Mahesh Kumar Meena was critically wounded and after nearly two weeks succumbed to injuries at AIIMS Delhi. After the gunfight, forces, however, failed to retrieve any dead body despite burning down a residential house as the militants, one of whom believed to be top Hizb commander, Hammad Khan had managed to flee.

A couple of days later, a Pakistani militant was killed in a brief shootout in Litter area of Pulwama while his other associates managed to escape.

On January 12, forces achieved a major success by killing a top militant commander of Al Badr outfit, Zeenat-ul-Islam along with his another associate Shakeel Ahmad Dar in a brief gunfight at Katpora Kulgam. During the funeral prayers of Islam, over a dozen protesters suffered injuries after the forces fired live ammunition and pellets on them during the clashes. Four of the protesters had been hit by bullets.

Three more militants associated with Al Badr were killed in a gunfight in Hapatnad area of central Kashmir’s Budgam district on January 21. In the gunfight the militants killed in an underground hideout were identified as Syed Raban of Nazneenpora Shooin, Sabzar Ahmad Mir of Lassipora and Towseef Ahmad Itoo of Nowpora , both natives of Pulwama.

As the bodies of the trio were yet to be handed over to their families, another gunfight broke out between forces and militants in Shirmal area of Shopian that left three militants bonging to Hizb dead.

The slain who also got trapped in an underground hideout were identified as Shams-ul-Haq of Dragad, Shoaib Ahmad Shah of Shirmal and Amir Ahmad Bhat of Chiddipora. Haq, a BUMS student was the brother of an IPS officer Inam-ul-Haq.

All the six slain militants were later buried in a single day.

A day later on January 23 three militants belonging to LeT and identified as Suhaib Ahmad Akhoon, Mohsin Mushtaq and Nisar Ahmad Darzi, all residents of Baramulla were killed in an encounter after they were trapped in an underground hideout in orchards of Binner village of the district. The last gunfight of the month raged in Khanmoo area of Srinagar on January 26 during which two militants, one local and a Pakistani national were killed. The local militant was identified as Saqib Shafi Dar of Arihal Pulwama. During the gunfight, reports had suggested injuries to two CRPF men.

The month also saw increasing grenade attacks by militants on security deployments. In last two weeks militants carried out at least eight grenade attacks in different parts of the valley. Several persons including cops were injured in the incidents.
