Restrictions reimposed as Valley fears protests

editorial@tribune.com

Tribune News Service

Srinagar, August 23

Restrictions were reimposed today in many parts of the Valley amid fears of protests after Friday prayers.

There has been no respite from the communications blockade imposed after the revocation of Article 370 on August 5.

Within hours of the restoration of some landlines in Srinagar, these stopped working, causing immense problems to the people.

The snapping of cell phones and landlines after the revocation of Article 370 has cut the valley off from the outside world and created a communication vacuum.

Fearing protests, the administration today reimposed strict restrictions on the free movement after some posters appeared in Srinagar, asking people to march to the UN Military Observation Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP) at Sonwar.

It was not clear who gave the call for the march to UNMOGIP. In the past, the separatists have issued calls, urging people to stage protest at the UNMOGIP office.

The separatists have not issued any calls for protests after the revocation of the Article 370.

Except Syed Ali Shah Geelani and Mirwaiz Umar Farooq, most of the separatists and their workers have been arrested . Some have been arrested by the NIA on charges of terror funding.

The police and central armed police forces were deployed around the UN office and the road leading to Sonwar in Srinagar to avert any protest march. Routes leading to the UN office were sealed off at Dal Gate and at the Sonwar crossing.

Due to the tightening of the restrictions today, no Friday prayers could be held at major mosques in Srinagar, including the historic Jamia Masjid.

This is the third consecutive Friday that no prayers could be held at the Jamia mosque.

Officials said the restrictions were reimposed due to Friday as there were possibilities of protests.

The restrictions on the movement of people badly hampered the normal life in Srinagar. The shops and business establishments continued to remain shut for the 19th consecutive day even as no group has called for any shutdown. Public transport continues to remain off the roads.

However, some private vehicles were seen plying in some parts of the valley. Protests were held in the Soura locality which was attended by a large number of people.
