Rahul Gandhi Kashmir visit: Opposition delegation asked to go back hour after landing in Srinagar | Updates

Follow us on Rahul Gandhi had recently asked Governor Satya Pal Malik when he could come to the state and meet people without any conditions.

The Rahul Gandhi-led Opposition delegation that landed in Srinagar around an hour ago has been sent back. The delegation comprises Ghulam Nabi Azad, D Raja, Sharad Yadav, Manoj Jha, Majeed Memon, and others. The Jammu and Kashmir administration had earlier asked the leaders not to visit as they would disrupt the restoration of normalcy.

The leaders were supposed to meet people and assess situation in the Kashmir Valley where restrictions are in place after the Centre withdrew special status to Jammu and Kashmir and split the state into two Union Territories earlier this month.

Rahul Gandhi had recently asked Governor Satya Pal Malik when he could visit the state and meet people without any conditions.

Parties that will be part of the opposition all-party delegation are Congress, CPI-M, CPI, RJD, NCP, TMC and DMK. The sources said top Congress leaders who will visit Srinagar are Ghulam Nabi Azad and Anand Sharma. Rahul Gandhi is likely to accompany them. CPI-M's Sitaram Yechury, CPI's D Raja, DMK's Tiruchi Siva, RJD's Manoj Jha and Dinesh Trivedi from TMC will also be part of the delegation that will leave for Srinagar around noon from Delhi airport.

So far, the government has not allowed any political leader to enter the state ever since provisions of Article 370 were abrogated by the Centre.

Stay tuned to this space as we bring to you live and latest updates on the developments in and across Jammu and Kashmir

15:02 | Delegation of opposition leaders comprising Rahul Gandhi, Ghulam Nabi Azad, D Raja, Sharad Yadav, Manoj Jha, Majeed Memon, and others that had reached Srinagar has been sent back.

12:15 | The flight carrying Rahul Gandhi, Opposition leaders has taken off

11:45 | If the situation is so normal, why aren't they letting us go?: Sharad Yadav tells India TV

11:30 | Rahul Gandhi and the Opposition leaders have boarded the flight

10:50 | Leaders have arrived at Delhi airport; Rahul Gandhi will arrive shortly 10:45 | Rahul Gandhi leaves for airport 10:30 | If the situation is normal, then why are the leaders under house arrest: Ghulam Nabi Azad 10:20 | We are going in govt's support: NCP leader Majeed Memon 10:15 | US working on two-prong strategy to ease Indo-Pak tensions over Kashmir issue The US is working on a two-pronged strategy to defuse fresh tensions between India and Pakistan after New Delhi revoked the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, senior officials from the Trump administration said.

The first strategy is to exert pressure on Pakistan to refrain it from indulging in any cross-border infiltration or providing material or financial support to terrorist activities in India, particularly in Kashmir, they said. The second strategy is to encourage India to bring normalcy in Jammu and Kashmir and ensure that human rights of the people there are protected, political prisoners are released and channels of communications are reopened.

08:30 | From what we hear, Opposition leaders will most likely take off from Delhi airport at 11:50 am

08:00 | J&K admin asks Rahul, leaders not to visit Srinagar

The Jammu and Kashmir administration has said attempts should not be made to disturb the gradual restoration of normal life. In a series of tweets, the Information and Public Relations Department of the Jammu & Kashmir government said: "At a time when the government is trying to protect the people of Jammu & Kashmir from the threat of cross border terrorism and attacks by militants and separatists and gradually trying to restore public order by controlling miscreants and mischief mongers, attempts should not be made by senior political leaders to disturb the gradual restoration of normal life. "Political leaders are requested to cooperate and not visit Srinagar as they would be putting other people to inconvenience. "They would also be violating restrictions that are still there in many areas. Senior leaders should understand that top priority would be given to maintaining peace, order and preventing loss of human lives."

Latest India News
