Middle India

Babulal Gaur: Jan Sangh to unsung?

Former Madhya Pradesh CM Babulal Gaur, 89, passed away in Bhopal on August 21 after spending a few weeks in hospital. Gaur, was one of the last of the old order of the BJP, who came to the party from the Jan Sangh. He ran the show in the BJP in Bhopal for many years, controlling MLAs and corporators. With him being dropped from the Cabinet in June 2016, and not contesting the Vidhan Sabha elections in 2018, he had been out of the political scene. What is the political legacy he leaves behind in Bhopal?

Gaur’s daughter-inlaw, former Bhopal Mayor Krishna Gaur, who replaced him as the BJP candidate in Govindpura in 2018, is now the MLA from the seat and won by a handsome margin.

There is however no guarantee that she will be re-nominated from Govindpura, one of the safest seats for the BJP, which has many takers.

Bhopal Mayor Alok Sharma will complete his term in office later this year and would be looking for a safe seat. Another BJP leader, Tapan Bhaumik, has been working in the area too and with Babulal Gaur not around, Krishna will not find it easy to secure a re-nomination unless she can quell the intra-party competition. With most BJP MLAs in the city from the same age group, there is bound to be fierce competition. Is she upto the task? We will know after a few months.

Babulal Gaur’s other legacy is that of pursuing urban development in Bhopal with missionary zeal. Former MLA Surendra Nath Singh, has been campaigning to protect encroachers.

Gaur’s stand onthe issue was very clear they could not be allowed to take root. Another BJP MLA, Vishvas Sarang, has a car show room operating out of his house, in violation of land-use norms. The Congress government is not looking into it for its own reasons, but local BJP leaders should think about the legacy Gaur left behind.

Police promotion row

The Madhya Pradesh government has decided to reintroduce the practice of out-of-turn promotions to policemen who engage successfully in anti-naxal or anti-terror operations. The previous government stopped the practice in 2012 after many complaints of fake encounters being staged to secure promotions.

In fact, some promotions were even revoked. Gallantry awards have also been set aside consequently. The state police decided to review the policy on out-of-turn promotions. The first beneficiaries of the amended policy would be 18 personnel of the state police who were part of an operation in which one naxal was killed in Balaghat district in July.

All 18 will get out-of-turn promotion.

Will Scindia switch parties?

The political grapevine in MP has been agog with the story that star Congress leader Jyotiraditya Scindia is joining the BJP. The rumour has, however, refused to go away.

That Scindia was a contender for the top-job in MP before the Assembly polls is well known. That he and the duo of CM Kamal Nath and former CM Digvijaya Singh are not really on the same page on certain issues is also known and has been the case for many years now.

How did this rumour begin and intensify? The speculation began after Scindia praised the scrapping of article 370. Also, the BJP is on a roll, getting people to join it across the country, in Karnataka, in Sikkim and Maharashtra. Scindia, is on the other side’ in the Congress in MP and is perceived as someone who could go’ to the BJP for being upset. The MP government is placed precariously and, in many quarters, the Scindia-could-go-tothe-BJP theory is part of the narrative to speculate on the stability of the government.

A planned tour of the Gwalior region was cancelled adding to the speculation and was cited as a sign. Scindia commands the loyalty of about 25 MLAs and has about eight of his nominees as minister in the MP Cabinet. There are also many reasons for Scindia to not join the BJP. Getting the top-job in MP would be easier for him being in the Congress than in the BJP.

Meanwhile, amidst the rumours, the AICC appointed Scindia as the chairman of the screening committee for the Maharashtra Assembly elections.

A rare encounter

The Madhya Pradesh police on August 19 shot dead two alleged criminals in Narsinghpur district. The duo, Vijay Yadav and Sameer Khan had close to 20 cases including that of murder and arms act registered against them in Jabalpur.

The encounter is the first such prominent action by police after October 2016 when eight alleged members of Students Islamic Movement of India were shot dead after a jail break.

In the Narsinghpur case, the family members of those killed have alleged foul play accusing Narsinghpur Additional SP Rajesh Tiwari of having staged the encounter. The MP Human Rights Commission has asked for a report from the IG and SP. The police claim two weapons have been recovered from the alleged criminals and have been sent for forensic tests and that all processes have been followed in the case.

Run Rameshwar, run!

A video on social media that showed a youth from Shivpuri clocking 11 seconds in a 100 m sprint went viral last week. A day later, the MP Sports Minister Jitu Patwari was told about Rameshwar Gurjar’s feat as was Union sports minister Kiren Rijiju. On August 19, Gurjar was in Bhopal and the minister went personally to see his performance which by all accounts turned out to be damp squib. Gurjar could barely time 14 seconds and said that it happened because he was made to wear shoes and run.
