Bengaluru: Unemployed man strangles wife to death, dumps body in travel bag

Mohaty used to fight her frequently over money for alcohol. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused Mohanty strangled wife to death Rosaliya Mohaty used to fight her frequently over money for alcohol Accused is on the run after killing her

Bengaluru: In yet another crime emanating from domestic violence, a woman was strangled to death by her unemployed husband in Bengaluru, Karnataka. He stuffed her body in a travel bag and dumped her in a hall in her rented accommodation.

The accused has been identified as Sunil Kumar Mohanty, who is being searched by police. Mohanty is on the run since he killed his wife 30-year-old Rosaliya Sarojini Barla. She was working at a garment factory near Electronics City.

According to a report, the matter came to light after some neighbours complained of foul smell coming out of the house. The police later opened the door with a duplicate key and found the body stuffed in a travel bag. There were also bloodstains all over the floor.

When the police opened the bag they found a decomposed body that was found to be that of Rosaliya. Police probe found that Mohanty frequently used to fight with Rosaliya when she refused to money for alcohol.

Man beheads wife in Telangana

A man beheaded his wife and then carried her severed head through the streets of Vijayawada on August 11. The shocking incident took place in Srinagar colony under the limits of Satyanarayanapuram police station.

Police said Pradeep Kumar slit his wife 23-year-old wife's throat with a knife near their house. He then beheaded her and was seen walking calmly on the street with her head in one hand and a knife in the other. The CCTVs installed in the colony recorded people running in panic after seeing him with the severed head.

Pradeep then threw the head in a nearby canal and then surrendered at the police station. According to Deputy Commissioner of Police Vijay Rao, the headless body was shifted to a government-run hospital for autopsy.

According to preliminary investigations, Pradeep had a love marriage with Manikranti five years ago. However, there were frequent quarrels between the couple.

Kumar's wife had filed a case of domestic violence against him sometime back after which he was arrested. Police said that the accused, who was recently released on bail, resorted to the brutal killing to seek revenge.
