Hinduism is the Foundation of Civilization in the World- Review Nepal News

Among all religions of the world, Hindu religion is considered as an ancient religion that is recognized as the foundation of civilization and as the most liberal democratic way of life. Hinduism & Buddhism are the identities & cultural assets of Nepal. The Lord Pashupathinath, Shoyambhunath, Lumbini, Barahachetra, Gosaikunda, Muktinath, Ridi, Janakidham, Devghat of Nepal, Kailash Mansharobar of Tibet (well accessed for Nepalese and Hindus), and Tirupati, Rameshroram, Jagannath, Badrinath, Amarnath of India are the symbolic shrines of Hinduism & Buddhism. The people of Nepal and India always have cordial relations due to the cultural and religious resemblance. They should know that if instability persists in Nepal, it could be a bastion of terrorism posing a threat to the whole world. When present India (Hindustan) was not in existence, there were more than 60 nations, 250 years ago, the great King Prithvi Narayan Shah expressed –"Nepal is true Hindustan"





We have two pious Hindu countries in the world- Himabatkhanda and Bharatkhanda, Kailash-Mansarowar to Hinda-Mahasagar is the original place of Hindus and Hinduism. The Bramhaputra in east, Hindukush in west, north Kailash-Mansarowar and the south Ganga River is the boundary of Himabatkhanda(Nepal) and Ganga to Hinda-Mahasagar is Bharatkhanda (India). Kailash-Mansarowar is the pious land of the lord Shiva. Hindu Kush (Hindu's land) shows that two major kingdoms of Gandhaar & Vaahic Pradesh (Balkh of Bactria) had their borders extending far beyond the Hindu Kush. Legend has it that the kingdom of Gandhaar was established by Taksha, grandson of Bharat of Ayodhya. Gandhaar's borders extended from Takshashila to Tashkent in the present day Uzbekistan. In the later period, Mahabharat relates Gaandhaari as a princess of Gandhaar and her brother, Shakuni as a prince and later as Gandhaar's ruler.





A Scholor V.S. Sardesai writes- ''Hindu'' does not come from Sindhu'. The country lying between the Himalayan mountain and Bindu Sarovara (Cape Comorin sea) is known as Hindusthan by combination of the first letter 'hi' of 'Himalaya' and the last compound letter 'ndu' of the word 'Bindu.' The historian Yogi Naraharinath also has written- 'Himalaya, Him' indicates 'Hindu.'





Hindu religion is the world's most liberal and tolerant religion. Despite being a Hindu country, Nepal is the most liberal and tolerant non-secular country in the world. The philosophy of Hinduism is guided as- "to refrain from all evils, to do what is good and to purify the mind". High thinking & Simple living is the way of Hindus. In Sanskrit, Hindu means 'Hi'= Sun, 'Indu'= moon. Nepalese national flag is also decorated by Sun and Moon. The triangular flag with the Sun and Moon is based on the principles of Hinduism. The national flag of Nepal has its own identity and recognition in the world. The Nepalese flag is very inclusive and represents to all the castes and tribes insisting the nature. The flag of Nepal is the symbol of unity in diversity. The Maoist wants to change the national flag. That is why; the intention of Maoist is to abolish the identity of Nepalese nationality. To change the national flag is irrational. The Nepalese people believe, Nepal will remain eternal till there is the Sun and Moon. The western renowned philosopher Voltaire, George Bernard Shaw, German scholar Nitse, Megasthaniz and Fai-Han has written many books supporting the Hindu philosophy expressing the evolutionary process of the world's civilization. Hindu philosophy is incomparably greater intellectual work than the Bible?





There is a misconception in some minds that Hindu scriptures sanction the caste system. But being based on Vedas, Hinduism does not permit any caste system, whatsoever.

Vedas, the proud possession of mankind, are the foundation of Hinduism. Vedas are all-embracing, and treat the entire humanity with the same respect and dignity. Vedas speak of nobility of entire humanity (Krinvanto Vishvam Maryam), and do not sanction any caste system or birth based caste system. Mantra number 10-13-1 of Rig Veda addresses entire humanity as divine children (Shrunvantu vishve Amrutsya Putraha). Innumerable Mantras of Vedas emphasize one-ness, universal brotherhood, harmony, happiness, affection, unity and commonality of entire humanity. Rig Veda, the Divine Poet declares, "All men are brothers; no one is big, no one is small.





'Hindu tradition is focused on similarities and shared traits rather than differences and exclusions. This makes its identity indefinable yet definite in its features. This means that despite its universalism there are a plethora of beliefs and practices that can be uniquely identified with Hinduism. Without doctrinal rigidity, the Hindu mind has engaged itself with questions that beleaguer the entire humankind rather than issues limited to Hindus. A Hindu identity cannot be sought through conversion or differentiation between believers and non-believers. It has to be acquired through acculturation and assimilation through the recognition of such principles and disciplines that would lead any human being to become a better person and live in harmony with Dharma — the natural path of righteous conduct. Thus Hinduism bows to the potential of every individual to attain enlightenment, to become a messiah unto herself or himself. (An Indian Scholar Mr. Ram Madhav)

Nepalese all around the world and Nepal's well-wishers are anxious about the conspiracy designed by some deviant party leaders against the Monarchy and Hinduism. Nepal will not become a heaven on earth just because monarchy is actually abolished and republican system ushered in. Nepal has already received so much respect and identity for being a Hindu kingdom. The essences of Nepalese nationalism are- Hinduism, constitutional monarchy and Nepali language. If these basic foundations are violated, national unity and sustainable peace cannot be achieved. The conflict between the political parties and the king came up because of the mistakes and blunders of the Nepali Congress and the CPN-UML and the authoritarian thinking of the Maoist. But, where would they stand abolishing Nepal and its identity. The nation and its people will win only if all the political leadership realizes this fact. Hindus by nature are peaceful, law abiding and secular people. However, it is a matter of great regret that Hindus are not being treated with the respect and dignity they deserve.





However at the political level, Indian government has been trying to create nuisance in Nepal's effort to strengthen its nationalism and democracy. Indian leaders must understand that if Nepal due to any reason, is destroyed, India won't get any peace. Forgetting Nepal's background of Hinduism and Buddhism, a democratic country like India, should not work to create anarchy and establish terrorism in Nepal. But why are the United Nations, America and other foreign powers, despite knowing the identity and value of Nepal, are supporting the continuous ruin of this country? Hinduism is the mother of all religions. But we in Nepal are trying to dig up a well though there already is water in our rivers.





As it is known and acknowledged, the Hindu civilization has made an immense contribution towards the advancement of humanity and human civilization across the world. From ancient times Hindus have made the most significant contributions in the fields of astronomy, astrology, mathematics, chemistry, medicine, art, music and last but most important, in the field of spirituality and divine cognition. The nectar of Hindu spiritual doctrines and practices was practically rediscovered by the west in the 20th century and many a harried westerner, worn down by the hectic pace of a technology and money driven life has found solace in the transcendental path of yogic practices and the ancient Vedic spirituality.-(A Saint-Tapan Ghash).





A scholar Babu Suseelan says- Hinduism is supported by science, but rooted in a perception of reality that reaches beyond the reductionism frame work to the intuitive awareness of the oneness of all life. The religion promotes the interdependence of the world and its multiple manifestations, and the cycles of change and transformation. We need to promote the universal, systemic and all inclusive Vedic thought system.' An international scholar Aldous Huxley said-"The oldest aspects of Hindu mythology give place to the most profound and subtle utterances about the nature of ultimate reality, it is in itself a liberal education in humility, tolerance and suspense of judgment."





Similarly, an Indian scholar Prem Sabhlok expresses-The metaphysics of Socrates and Plato influenced so much the Western social and spiritual thought and brought enlightenment to the West that today WEST describes “Plato as philosophy and philosophy as Plato.” We the followers of Vedic Sanatan Dharma in India seem to have forgotten that that source of his writings and philosophy was Vedic metaphysics. Before Plato, Pythagoras went from Samos (Greece) to land of Ganga to learn Geometry. He would not have gone such a long and strange journey had the reputation of Brahmin’s (Vedic) science not been long established in Europe. (Francois. M. Voltaire). Plato left Athens for about one decade and visited Prasava (Persia), Ariana (Iran) and North West part of the then India-land of Aryans. He seems to have discussed a number of metaphysical concepts with the then Vedic Rsis and Munnies. On his return to Athens, he propagated those thoughts without making any reference to Vedic rsis and munnies. However, the influence of Vedic metaphysics is clearly visible in Plato’s writings/books. '





But, it was a matter of regret to write- the history of the 'destruction of Hindu Identities' says- 'Many prominent Hindu temples were desecrated and destroyed. Somnath temple on the coast of Gujarat was plundered and destroyed. The Vishnu temple was replaced with the Alamgir mosque at Benares, and The Treta-Ka-Thakur (Lord Rama) temple in Ayodhya was demolished and Babri Masjid was erected on its debris. This is just to mention the few as about over 63000 temples all over India were destroyed or converted in to mosques. Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb (1658-1707) topped the list. The number of temples destroyed under his orders is counted in four figures. He ordered all temples destroyed such as the Kashi Vishvanath that was one of the most sacred temples and a center of Hindu learning. He had mosques built on a number of cleared temples sites. All other Hindu sacred places within his reach also suffered destruction and mosques were built upon them. Krishna's birth temple in Mathura was desecrated by cow slaughter and a mosque was built over it. Aurangzeb did not stop at destroying temples.'- Chand K Sharma. So, in such situation we all Hindus in the world need to take up this idea of freedom to their heart, make it their own agenda to save the identities of Hindu's Dham, Temples and cultural values, bringing changes in the style of our behavior. A Scholar J. G. Arora writes (Organizer Weekly)





All Hindus must resolve themselves to build Lord Rama Temple in Ayodhya to symbolize religious way of life, peaceful coexistence, higher ethical standards, total freedom, independence and liberty for all irrespective of religion, creed and caste. Hindus have always opened their hearts to all faiths across the globe, protected them, sheltered them, nourished them, never abused them, never terrorized them, and only allowed them total freedom to practice their faith without demeaning them, terrorizing them, destroying their places of worship and forcing them to convert. Literary sources, foreign travelers, Baber himself, grand daughter of Aurangzeb, British Judge and numerous other people have documented the erection of Babri Masjid on the site of Rama Temple in Ayodhya by destroying the Temple and also using the Temple ruins for the construction of mosque.





Hindus should take a proactive stand in demanding the investigation of hundreds of questionable sites where Hindu Temples were razed and converted them to mosques; and reconvert them to the original structure in places such as Mathura, Somanth, Dwaraka, Kasi, Taj Mahal, etc. In 1520 the Muslim ruler by the name Baber came, plundered, ruined, and demolished Rama Temple and built Babri Masjid using the demolished debris. Now both Hindus and Muslim claim that site to be theirs.





The events of December 6, 1992 do not stand-alone; they are part of the history of the struggle being waged between tolerant and intolerant faiths; between peaceful and aggressive faiths; between inclusive and exclusive faiths going back to thousands of years. When they attacked the Babri Masjid, they were only taking over their sacred place and thousands of history. No nation can afford to ignore the history. History of mankind has not started on 1528.





Among the excavation yields ASI mentioned were stone and decorated bricks, mutilated sculpture of divine couple, carved architectural members including foliage patterns, amalaka, kapotapali, doorjamb with semi-circular shrine pilaster, broken octagonal shaft of black schist pillar, lotus motif, circular shrine having pranjala (watershute) in the north and 50 pillar bases in association with a huge structure.





Similarly, the Taj Mahal was a pre-existing structure before but it was said to be built by Shah Jahan. We have all heard how the Taj Mahal, which is considered one of the great wonders of the world, was built as the preeminent expression of a man's love for a wife. That it was built by Emperor Shah Jahan in commemoration of his wife Mumtaz. But the truth is that the Taj Mahal was never built by Shah Jahan. Some say the Taj Mahal pre-dates Shah Jahan by several centuries and was originally built as a Hindu or Vedic temple/palace complex-known as-'Tejomahalaya' (powerfull Siva), the Hindu King Jai Singh. This is not unlike the many other buildings that were acquired by the Muslim invaders to be used for their own purposes. The point to consider is how much more of India's history has been distorted if the background of such a grand building is so inaccurate. The evidence that shows the Taj Mahal and many other buildings may not have been of Muslim origin.





As 1910 the Encyclopaedia Britannica included the statement by Fergusson that the building was previously a palace before becoming a tomb for Shah Jahan; and more. It is because of the manipulation of history by invaders that the true greatness of India and Vedic culture has been stifled or hidden. The architecture is definitely of Indian Hindu orientation and could very well have been designed as a Shiva temple; the issue of the arch and the dome; how the invader Timurlung (1398) took back thousands of prisoner craftsmen to build his capital at Samarkhand and where the dome could have been incorporated into Islamic architecture; how it was not Shah Jahan's religious tolerance that could have been a reason for Hindu elements in the design of the Taj.'- Stephen Knapp, www.stephen-knapp.com I think- the automatic falling the droops of water were for the Lord Shiva who converted after for the queen Shah Jahan's body.





If we want to know the greatness of Hinduism, we can see The Great Wall of China, "the seventh wonders of the world" has a fourteen feet long Sanskrit incantation engraved on the western gate. Mongolian emperor Kublai Khan had written 'OM Namo! Bhagawati' including others in the 14th century. The Chinese Great Wall has many syllables from 'Mahabharata' written on the doors in Sanskrit language. It is not a common thing that the language was written in Kalipinya letters. NEWSWEEK COLUMNIST Ms Lisa Miller says-'we are all Hindus. The Rig Veda, the most ancient Hindu scripture, says: "Truth is one, but the sages speak of it by many names." A Hindu believes there are many paths to God. The most traditional, conservative Christians have not been taught to think like this. They learn in Sunday school that their religion is true, and others are false. Let us all say "OM." when you chant "OM," it will resonate not only in the room but down through the ages.' May 13, 2010 at > http://www.newsweek.com/id/237910





Nepal and India is a land of devotees of different religious faith and traditions and all cooperating and co-existing together towards attainment of humanity and protection of civilized society. We in Nepal are suffering from the madness notorious activities of Christians and its brokers to destroy the Hindu identity in this pious land. Actually, the real introduction of Christianity we should have to remember the expression by American former President Jefferson has said- 'The Christian religion subjected many to inhumane torture in course of proselytizing them– many were imprisoned; many thrown into fire, and given mental torture. The Christian religion deceived and tricked half the population of the world to keep them in illusion. Other half were made naïve.'





In this context, an analyst Stephen Knapp says- India is slowly losing the Vedic culture (Hinduism) through the process of secular or Christian education. In public schools all Vedic books have been removed from the curriculum. There are no possibilities to study the ancient Hindu literature or art in such institutions. The Hindu population is slowly forgetting the unique history and lofty culture of their homeland. (5th Feb. 2008- Peoples Review) In fact the Christian saints order to destroy the huts where they keep the idols of Hindu's God & Goddess and to break the statues of Hindu idols into tiny pieces. That was their goal to destroy Hindu & Buddha culture and make the country a Christian nation. So, it is a high time Nepal also should be careful to save her indigenous culture.





Similarly, the scholar S. Knapp Says- 'A scholar V. S. Sardesai has written- 'British invasion of India and to the address of Lord McCauley to the British Parliament on February1835. He said- (Lord Mecaule addressed to the British Parliament 2 Feb 1835- 'I have traveled across the length and breadth of India, …I don't think we would ever conquer this country, unless we break the very backbone of this nation, which is her spiritual and cultural heritage, and therefore, I propose that we replace her old and ancient education system, her culture, for if the Indian think that all that is foreign and English is good and greater than their own, they will lose their self-esteem, their native culture and they will become what they want them, a truly dominated nation'. And in order to break what McCauley called the backbone of India, the British replaced the old and ancient educational system of India as proposed by McCauley by what is now known as Mc Cauley's system of education and which is still being followed in India even after independence and which makes Indians think that all that is foreign and English is good and greater than their own and which also makes Indian loose their self esteem and their culture.





Stephen Knnap writes- India is a predominantly Hindu nation. 83% of the Indian population is Hindu. But it is a matter of great regret that India is the only country in the world where the Hindu majority population is being ruled by the other 17% minority communities. Sonia Gandhi, the President of the ruling Congress Party is a practicing Catholic Christian. Her son Rahul Gandhi who is being groomed as the next Prime Minister of India is also a Christian. Sonia's daughter Priyanka Vadera and her husband are also Christians. India's Defense Minister is A. K. Anthony, a Christian. Sonia's closest advisors are: Margaret Alva, Oscar Fernandez, Ambika Soni, all Christians (yes, despite Ambika' s Hindu sounding name, she is a Christian).





The conspiracy against oriental Baidik Hindu and Buddha's culture was started almost 200 years ago from India by East India Company where Lord Macaulay was one of them who succeed to destroy oriental Hindu identities and culture. In addition, they engaged one Mr. Max Muller, a German Sanskrit scholar and a devout Christian, to help missionaries in converting Hindus to Christianity by misinterpreting and distorting Vedas and other scriptures of Sanatana Dharma Traditions so that Hindus would loose respect for the Vedas and Vedic Traditions and move away from Sanatan Hindu Dharma and thus could easily be converted to Christianity' The Christians are very active to abolish the Hindu identity.





As we all know, from the time of greater Nepal Unification, the king of Gorkha- Prithvi Narayan Shah and after his younger son Bahadur Shah unified more than Hindu states in Himawatkhanda and then established Hindu Kingdom in the world. When the Indian Congress (I) Sonia Gandhi in power, Hindu kingdom and Nepal’s monarchy was abolished and the country was declared secular by the hint of Sonia Gandhi. We all know that religion was never an issue for Nepal. However, a Ghost suddenly edited the Interim constitution and declared the country secular. There are reports that Anti Hindu groups are advocating for cow slaughter in Nepal. It is evident that Indian Congress (I) Govt was historically been against Hindus.





Secularism is being held up on the same pedestal as Democracy by those who have political motives to do so. These self-serving secularists refuse to see that Theocracy is alive and well internationally. Just look at all the Islamic states, Israel, as well as many European states that proclaim them secular but practice hard-core evangelical proselytizing Christianity. So what was wrong with Nepal being the sole Hindu state in the world? No other religion was persecuted here by the Hindu majority. The secularism was the Maoist agenda. This agenda was covertly supported by the Christian missions. The attempt of different Christian missions was to demoralize the Hindus. if the demand for a Hindu kingdom is not responded , the Hindus are ready to start a war for the cause of Hindu kingdom. In fact, the Hindu Philosophy preaches that all the people of the world are our friends. Fraternity & honesty always has been propounded by Hindus. However, the Racism and social discriminations are the great hindrances of Hindus. Of course it needs to be corrected. If we respect each other, our problems will be mitigated gradually.





Similarly, A renowned actress of film and movies Manisha Koirala, the grand daughter of BP Koirala says, comparatively- 'The talk of secularism and removal of the Hindu kingdom, this should have occurred when the people became dissatisfied with Hinduism and when there was a conflict between Hindus, Muslims or Christians. Ours is a peaceful Hindu nation. There had been any conflict regarding religious issues. In such, a contest, secularism was introduced. This was added from above and outside; so that is wrong. The situation has now deteriorated. They don't have a vision on the implication of their decisions in the long term. The King and the palace is an integral part of Nepalese culture and traditions. During the King's visit to different religious festivals, the people received him with love. In my opinion the King and the Palace are the cultural and traditional pillars of Nepal. There is rampant theft, robbery and no law and order in the nation. The nation is heading towards anarchy.'-(Mar.25-2010 People's Review)





We summarily reject the forceful declaration of Nepal as republic and secular country. We need the support of World Hindu Organizations/Buddhist organizations to make Nepal a peaceful place to live. Conversion is expeditiously going on; Hindus are forcefully converted every second whereas politicians have kept the public busy with political agenda. Nepal's declaration as a secular country is a matter of Shame for the Global Hindus. It is a symbolic attack on Hinduism. As one of the members suggested, toppling the Congress government could work in the biggest advantage for India and for the people who support justice, peace, democracy, human rights, freedom and Dharma. We know, Communists do not believe in religion. JNU is popular for producing Extreme Leftists. It was Indian Congress government and policy makers like SD Muni who not only assisted but funded Nepal Maoists to wage a war against Hinduism. They were successful in declaring Nepal a secular country and abolishing Monarchy. Of course, Indian diplomats and congress (I) are responsible for the bloodshed in Nepal and facilitating eradicates Hinduism.





31th Aug 2009 Newsweek magazine, USA >www.newsweek.com< Lisa Miller writes- According to a 2008 survey, 76 percent of us continue to identify as Christian (still, that's the lowest percentage in American history). Of course, we are not a Hindu—or Muslim, or Jewish, or Wiccan—nation, either. A million-plus Hindus live in the United States, a fraction of the billion who live on Earth. But recent poll data show that conceptually, at least, we are slowly becoming more like Hindus and less like traditional Christians in the ways we think about God, our selves, each other, and eternity. The Rig Veda, the most ancient Hindu scripture, says: "Truth is one, but the sages speak of it by many names." A Hindu believes there are many paths to God. Jesus is one way, the Qur'an is another, Yoga practice is a third. None is better than any other; all are equal. Thirty percent of Americans call themselves "spiritual, not religious," according to a 2009 NEWSWEEK Poll, up from 24 percent in 2005. Stephen Prothero, religion professor at Boston University, has long framed the American propensity for "the divine-deli-cafeteria religion" as "very much in the spirit of Hinduism. And if going to Catholic mass plus the Yoga plus the Buddhist retreat works, that's great, too."





Hinduism is the foundation of civilization. We are 85% Hindus and including Buddhists and Omkar family we are 96% in Nepal. In India, an estimated 930 million of its population are followers of Hinduism. Now, India is in favour of Nepal because from 1014, India has witnessed the historical victory of nationalist patriotic power as a democratic practice of world’s largest democracy. And in 2019 also, BJP and the Hindu nationalist Narendra Modi won the aspirations of Indian people and ruling in India recognizing as a world leader. We the Nepalese people heartily congratulate Prime Minister NarendraModi, a visionary leader. We believe Indo-Nepal relations will find new dimensions with new government of India. All Nepali people want India be supportive in reinstating our lost pride-the only one Hindu kingdom-in the world and constitutional Hindu monarch.The Nepalese monarch always has goodwill with India. The fact is that the Nepalese monarchs held special right for carrying out ritualistic worship in many Hindu shrines and temples in India. Then, India's Hindutwa also can be dignified. So, in Nepal there must be in existence the Hindu monarchy-the safe guard of Hinduism, equality and humanity and is is necessary to restore the only one Hindu kingdom in all over the world to keep intact the basis of world civilization.
