5G slicing ensuring service guarantee for verticals - Tele-Talk by Vinay Devadatta

It was my first job and I had to report at the company’s corporate office in Mumbai. I arrived in Mumbai - couple of days earlier than the reporting date and stayed at my friend’s house in Vile Parle, a suburb of Mumbai. We were both joining the same company. On the appointed day, we went to the nearest suburban railway station to take the local train to Churchgate. My life lesson began as soon as we entered that station. Boarding the train was another lesson,I soon realized how crowded a place could get. Couple of days earlier, I had travelled from Bangalore to Mumbai by Udyan Express in the First Class compartment, and it was a luxurious experience. So, in the evening, on our way back from office, I insisted that we travel by First Class, to avoid the crowd, even though it was expensive. My Mumbai friend agreed with a smile and we bought the expensive First Class ticket and got ready to embark on the return journey. However, to my utter disbelief, my return commute was worse as the compartment was even more crowded than the one in the morning.This anecdote exemplifies one of the critical but not well-known features of 5G which could radically change the market for Communication Service Providers (CSPs) i.e .Service Guarantee. There are three key technical capabilities that are required to ensure Service Guarantee. One is the ability to isolate the resources that are required to render a service with a particular set of quality related characteristics.Each industry and within an industry, different functionalities would require different characteristics, hence CSPs should be able to dynamically and in parallel, deploy multiple logical networks matching customer needs. This requirement is fulfilled in 5G through the Network Slicing concept where the physical and virtual resources are grouped and strung together dynamically to create isolated logical networks. This is like having separating different classes in a train.The second is the ability to control access to the Network Slice (NS), so that once a customer service request is granted, the capacity is not an issue. Latest Virtualization techniques (Network Function Virtualization) NFV/ (Software Define Network) SDN) allow for scaling of the resources allocated to a Network Slice to an extent. 5G networks have the ability to control access to the NS at the time of granting a service request as well as trigger capacity augmentation to meet increase in demand. The first part is akin to a Travelling Ticket Examiner (TTE) restricting entry of travelers.If communication services are to be bundled by industry verticals as part of their core operations and services, it is important that thes availability of the same is known ahead of time. In a world of constrained resources, reservation mechanism provides a way of conveying information bi-directionally about demand and availability. This mechanism enables CSPs get to know ahead of time about demand and can plan and redeploy or indicate non availability (and may be also propose some alternatives). From a consumer’s point of view, knowing the availability ahead of time or knowing alternatives can ensure that there is no need to prepare for last minute hitches.We can augment 5G system with a service reservation system for business and mission critical services. This is similar to the Railway reservation system which can issue confirmed tickets ahead of the actual journey, and railways leverage the capability of changing the train compartment configurations.Up to 4G technology, communication services were provided as a best-effort service. The Network Slicing concept of 5G enables CSPs to provide differentiated services to consumers based on their needs. The technology allows isolation of parts of the network resources, so that different policies may be set. To an extent, this was also possible in 4G as CSPs could statically configure the network to differentiate customers. However, this by itself (like having a separate first class compartment in the local train) does not guarantee a superior service as the slice itself might get overloaded and the promised service may not be rendered.However, the traditional sources of telecom revenues are steadily decreasing and CSPs are hard pressed to find a new customer base. As per the GSMA report “The 5G ERA: The age of boundless connectivity and intelligent automation”, one of the five goals of 5G is to reach out and be part of various vertical industries. While most industries do leverage telecom services to facilitate their day to day operations from an enterprise perspective, they are yet to incorporate telecom services as a core part of their business. Incidentally, many industries are actively exploring ways of reinventing themselves in the rapidly transforming digital world, and there is opportunity for CSPs to play a pivotal role in this transformation.In the 5G world, verticals will be able to onboard communication services and bundle them as a core part of their operations and offerings if they can be sure of the quality as well as service availability at critical times. This will result in a wider and richer scope of services and products from verticals. CSPs can leverage 5G technology to ensure guaranteed services and be the backbone of Industrial transformation.

DISCLAIMER: The views expressed are solely of the author and ETTelecom.com does not necessarily subscribe to it. ETTelecom.com shall not be responsible for any damage caused to any person/organisation directly or indirectly.
