Jaitley a compassionate leader, NDA pillar: Maha politicos

Condolences poured in for Arun Jaitley from across party lines in Maharashtra with NCP patriarch Sharad Pawar hailing the former Union finance minister as a "compassionate leader" while Shiv Sena chief Uddhav Thackeray saying the "pillar" that kept the NDA united has collapsed.

Jaitley, 66, breathed his last at 12:07 pm at the AIIMS in Delhi after battling multiple health issues for the last several months. He was on life support.

Chief Minister Devendra Fadnavis termed Jaitley's death as "shocking" and a "personal loss".

"Shocked and deeply pained to know about our great leader Arun Jaitley ji. It is more painful as we lost another great leader after Sushma Swaraj ji in just a few days. My deepest condolences to his family, friends and crore of @BJP4India Karyakartas. This is my personal loss too!" Fadnavis tweeted.

Fadnavis said Jaitley would be remembered for his contribution as the minister of finance, defence, information and broadcasting and also as the leader of the opposition in Rajya Sabha.

The chief minister recalled that Jaitley used to actively participate in the party meetings despite his health issues.

"His contribution for rolling out of GST was immense and this herculean couldn't be done without a leader like Jaitley ji. My Heartfelt tributes.. You will keep inspiring us forever !" Fadnavis added.

In his tribute, NCP chief Sharad Pawar hailed Jaitley as an "astute Parliamentarian and a compassionate leader".

"Deeply saddened by the demise of veteran BJP leader Shri Arun Jaitley. We have lost an astute parliamentarian, avid reader and a compassionate leader. I extend my heartfelt condolence to his family members. May his soul rest in peace," the former Union agriculture minister tweeted.

Describing Jaitley as an excellent legal luminary and intelligent economist, Pawar said the BJP leader had ably presented the government's side on the challenging subjects like noteban and complex ones like GST. "His absence will be felt in the Parliament," Pawar added.

Shiv Sena president Uddhav Thackeray said Jaitley's death is a "shock" to the country.

Thackeray said with Jaitley's death, the pillar that kept the ruling National Democratic Alliance (NDA) united has collapsed.

"His was an extra ordinary personality. He had maintained his unique identity despite being in the public life for such a long period. He was an excellent lawyer. He played a key role as the troubleshooter in the (first) Modi government.

"He was one of the leaders who wanted the relationship between Shiv Sena-BJP should remain intact," Thackeray said in a statement.

Joining other leaders, MNS president Raj Thackeray tweeted, "Shri Arun Jaitley, our former Finance Minister, a senior BJP member and a brilliant orator, who with his spirited debating capabilities, energised the Parliament. The Maharashtra Navnirman Sena humbly pays its tribute to Shri. Jaitley. #ArunJaitley".

Maharashtra Congress chief Balasaheb Thorat also paid homage to Jaitley.

"Saddened to hear about the untimely demise of senior BJP leader & former Union Minister Shri. Arun Jaitley ji. My Heartfelt condolences to his family. May his soul rest in peace! #ArunJaitley," he tweeted.

Summing up the sombre mood in the BJP, state party unit president and Revenue Minister Chandrakant Patil said, "The country and the BJP has suffered due to successive deaths of tall leaders like former prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, Anant Kumar, Sushma Swaraj, Manohar Parrikar, Daveji and now Arun Jaitlyji".

He said Jaitley's death would create a huge vacuum in the country and the BJP.

"Arunji was a very versatile, humble, firm and flexible personality. He played a very major role in maintaining relations with leaders of various parties," added Patil.

(This story has not been edited by Business Standard staff and is auto-generated from a syndicated feed.)
