'Arun Jaitley's Passing Leaves A Huge Void': President Ram Nath Kovind

President Ram Nath Kovind on Saturday, August 24, 2019 paid tribute to Arun Jaitley following his demise. He expressed his sadness at the demise of the senior BJP leader. He also hailed the proficiency he displayed in the various capacities he had held - a lawyer, a Parliamentarian and as a Union Minister. He also conveyed his condolences to the family of the veteran politician.

"Extremely saddened by the passing of Shri Arun Jaitley after battling a long illness with fortitude and dignity. A brilliant lawyer, a seasoned parliamentarian, and a distinguished Minister, he contributed immensely to nation building. Shri Arun Jaitley possessed a unique ability of discharging the most onerous responsibility with poise, passion and studied understanding. His passing leaves a huge void in our public life and our intellectual ecosystem. Condolences to his family and associates," said the President in his tweets

READ | Former Union Minister Arun Jaitley Passes Away At AIIMS In New Delhi

Read President Ram Nath Kovind's tweets below:

Extremely saddened by the passing of Shri Arun Jaitley after battling a long illness with fortitude and dignity. A brilliant lawyer, a seasoned parliamentarian, and a distinguished Minister, he contributed immensely to nation building. — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) August 24, 2019

Shri Arun Jaitley possessed a unique ability of discharging the most onerous responsibility with poise, passion and studied understanding.



His passing leaves a huge void in our public life and our intellectual ecosystem. Condolences to his family and associates #PresidentKovind — President of India (@rashtrapatibhvn) August 24, 2019

Arun Jaitley was battling illness

Jaitley, 66, had been battling illness and was admitted to AIIMS on August 9th this year. The BJP leader was visited by several top politicians of the country since his admission. President Ram Nath Kovind had visited AIIMS on the day of his admission to the hospital, PM Modi visited him immediately after his return to the country from Bhutan. Union Minister Home Minister Amit Shah was also present in the hospital on August 11. Dr Harsh Vardhan, Delhi Chief Ministers Arvind Kejriwal, Bihar Chief Minister Nitish Kumar, as well as senior Congress leader Abhishek Manu Singhvi had also visited AIIMS to inquire on the former union minister. On the day the veteran BJP leader had been admitted, a number of senior government leaders including PM Modi and Home Minister Amit Shah had visited him at AIIMS. Vice President Venkaiah Naidu had also gone to AIIMS, on the day after Jaitley's admission.

READ | President Ram Nath Kovind Meets Lata Mangeshkar At Her Mumbai Residence, Calls Her 'the Pride Of India'
