Did You Know The Man Who Featured In The Exorcist's Most Disturbing Scene Is A Serial Killer In Real Life?

Long before the Conjuring universe came into picture, The Exorcism was one movie that left millions of people terrified. Remember that one spine-chilling scene from the movie that still makes our hearts skip a beat in 2019? This little detail that we have got to know about that scene is even more horrifying. You’ll never be able to watch the movie in the same way again.

For the unversed, we are talking about the scene in which 12-year-old girl possessed by an occult is being taken to hospital for tests. There, a catheter is inserted into her neck through an artery.

Twitter

Following this, Regan, the girl, grimaces while the blood spurts from her neck. It’s just a medical producer and has nothing to do with the occult. Yet, it remains to be one of the scariest scenes in the history of horror movies.

If you don’t remember the scene, here it is.

In real life, the scene hides another scary secret – of that relating to a serial killer. Paul Bateson, who appears in that scene as the man in background is actually a serial killer in real life. He is so horrifying that he has appeared as one of terrifying the serial killers in Mindhunter.

Wondering how he became a part of the movie? Paul Bateson was a radiographer who had visited a hospital to carry out research where William Friedkin, The Exorcist’s director spotted him.

As the director watched him perform cerebral angiography in which a catheter is inserted into an artery in order to take images of the brain, William Friedkin decided to put the scene in his movie.

He called Paul Bateson to work as a technician and an extra in the movie. In that scene in the movie, he appears in the background. He is calm and composed and has most of the dialogues in that sequence.

Six years after that scene, Paul Bateson became a serial killer after he murdered for the first time. He killed a journalist named Addison Verrill in 1979 and was sentenced to 20 years in jail. Even before that he had reportedly murdered several gay men in Manhattan.
