Armeena Khan to meet UNICEF officials to discuss Kashmir crisis

LAHORE- Pakistani actress Armeena Khan, who has been actively speaking against the atrocities in IOK, has shared on Twitter that she will be meeting representatives from UNICEF to discuss the ongoing crisis in Kashmir soon.

“Off to London. May the prayer of the innocent Kashmiris be answered, aameen,” Armeena tweeted recently. “This is a small step but the right one. May all that is good in this world prevail over wanton evil.”

https://twitter.com/ArmeenaRK/status/1164548491852562432

Khan also revealed that she will be giving a full update about the meeting with no details spared. The Janaan actor is currently in London preparing for her meeting with the humanitarian group.

Recently, Armeena criticized former Miss World winner for warmongering during a height of nuclear tensions between Pakistan and India, earlier this year. Chopra came under fire when a Pakistani-American woman, Ayesha Malik called her a hypocrite for being a UN Peace Ambassador and yet praising an act of war at Beauty Con, LA.

“Whenever you’re don’t venting”. Sorry, didn’t realize that speaking on a humanitarian crisis was “venting” pic.twitter.com/OqCLgjDNa1 — Ayesha Malik (@Spishaa) August 11, 2019

At an incident in Los Angeles earlier this month, Priyanka responded to Aisha’s query saying, “I have many, many friends from Pakistan and I am from India. War is not something I’m really fond of but I am patriotic, so I’m sorry if I hurt sentiments of people who do love me and have loved me. I think that all of us have a sort of, a middle ground that we all have to walk. Just like you probably do as well. The way that you came to me right now… girl, don’t yell. We’re all here for love."

As soon as the video of this incident went viral, many celebrities, including Armeena started questioning Priyanka’s role as a UNICEF ambassador.

Consequently, Khan penned an open letter to the UN, urging the organization to take action against Chopra and revoke her status as a UNICEF ambassador.

https://twitter.com/ArmeenaRK/status/1160994762582908929

UN finally responds to Priyanka Chopra's ... 11:17 AM | 23 Aug, 2019 Unicef Goodwill Ambassador Priyanka Chopra, who has received immense criticism for a tweet supporting war, retains the ...

Have more to add to the story? Comment below and stay tuned for more updates!
