Woman killed by husband for accusing him of infidelity in Kolkata's Chinatown

At around 9 pm, the police were informed about the incident while the two victims were taken to a hospital (Representative Image). | Photo Credit: Getty Images

Key Highlights The Kolkata Police arrested Li Wan Tho from Chinatown for murdering his wife and father The accused's wife had allegedly accused him of infidelity when he attacked her with a bucket He attacked his father when the latter tried to intervene and save Tho's wife

Kolkata: A man of Chinese origin was arrested by the Kolkata Police on Saturday after he murdered his father and wife. Identified as Li Wan Tho, the 62-year-old man lost his temper when his wife accused him of infidelity. The incident took place at their residence in Chinatown. The police solved the murder case within 24 hours.

On Friday, the accused's wife was suspicious of his character and had allegedly accused him of going to dinner with one of his girlfriends. Listening to this, Tho flew into a rage and allegedly attacked his wife with a bucket. When Tho's father tried to rescue his wife, he started attacking him as well.

At around 9 pm, the police were informed about the incident while the two victims were taken to a hospital. Tho's wife was declared brought dead. The accused's 90-year-old father passed away at the hospital while treatment was being administered to him. A local said that Tho's wife's face "had been reduced to paste".

Initially, Tho told the police that he was not at home and did not have any knowledge about the incident. He said that when he returned, the gate was locked from the inside and all his knocks went answered. He said that his wife was not picking up his calls either. Tho then added that he asked the neighbours for a ladder and requested one of the locals to climb up the wall of his house. When one of them climbed up, they saw the bodies of Tho's wife and his father lying in the courtyard of the house.

On being interrogated further, the accused crumbled under police pressure and started changing his statements. The police then started investigating the spot and checked the footage of the CCTV cameras installed at the house. According to the footage, Tho had left the house at 7.11 pm. The police noticed that Tho's shirt had dark patches.

Further investigation revealed that after asking one of the locals to climb up the ladder, Tho had taken out a key of his house from his pocket and had unlocked the gate. The police then asked him why he had initially pretended like he was stranded outside the house.

When he realised that his lie had been caught by the police, Tho confessed to the crime. He also told the police that the 'patches on his shirt were those of blood. He had allegedly stained his shirt when he was trying to move his wife's body.
