From Arun Jaitley to Atal Bihari Vajpayee: BJP loses its stalwarts in one year

Former Union Minister and Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) leader Arun Jaitley died at 12:07 pm on Saturday at All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS). He was 66 years old. Arun Jaitley was admitted to AIIMS on August 9 after he complained of restlessness. He was placed under observation at the hospital's Cardio-Neuro-Centre.

Several leaders including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Union Home Minister Amit Shah and other top BJP and Congress leaders condoled Arun Jaitley's demise.

The BJP lost several of its leaders including former External Affairs Minister (EAM) Sushma Swaraj, former Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee, former Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar, Union Minister Ananth Kumar in past one year. Sushma Swaraj and Arun Jaitley died in a span of 18 days.

Here's a look at all the BJP leaders we lost in the past year:

Sushma Swaraj

Former Union Minister Sushma Swaraj who died of a cardiac arrest at the age of 67 on August 6. Swaraj was admitted to AIIMS following a deterioration in her health. She was declared dead within hours. Diplomats of about 50 countries across the world at the United Nations wrote separate condolence messages for Sushma Swaraj.

Atal Bihari Vajpayee

Former Prime Minister and BJP stalwart Atal Bihari Vajpayee died last year on August 16 following a prolonged illness. He was 93 years old. Atal Bihari Vajpayee was admitted to AIIMS on June 11, 2018, with complications arising out of Urinary Tract Infection, low urine output and chest congestion. He was on life support after his condition deteriorated. He breathed his last at 05:05 pm on August 16.

Manohar Parrikar

Former Goa Chief Minister Manohar Parrikar died on March 17 at the age of 63 after a prolonged battle against cancer. Manohar Parrikar, a former Defence Minister in the BJP government, had been in and out of hospitals in Goa, Mumbai, Delhi and New York since February 2018. However, it was in October 2018 that the Goa government made a formal announcement about Parrikar suffering from a pancreatic ailment. His last rites were held at Miramar, Goa.

Ananth Kumar

Former Union Minister for Parliamentary Affairs Ananth Kumar passed away on November 12, 2018, at a private hospital in Bengaluru. He was 59. The then Congress-led Karnataka government declared three-day mourning across the state as a mark of respect. A six-time parliamentarian from the Bengaluru South Lok Sabha constituency since 1996, Ananth Kumar had been undergoing treatment for cancer in the UK and US since August 2018.

Madan Lal Khurana

Former Delhi Chief Minister and senior BJP leader Madan Lal Khurana passed away on October 28 in New Delhi. The 83-year-old breathed his last at around 11 pm at his Kirti Nagar residence. He was suffering from a chest infection and fever from the last few days. Khurana had served as Delhi chief minister from 1993 to 1996. He also served as Parliamentary Affairs and Tourism Minister in Atal Bihari Vajpayee government.

Babulal Gaur

Former Madhya Pradesh Chief Minister Babulal Gaur passed away on August 21 at a private hospital in Bhopal after a prolonged illness. The 89-year-old BJP leader passed away due to cardiac arrest. He was also suffering from various old-age related ailments and was hospitalised for quite some time.

Mange Ram Garg

Former BJP Delhi President and MLA Mange Ram Garg passed away at 7.30 am on July 21, 2019. He took his last breath at Sri Balaji Action Hospital, North Delhi. Mange Ram Garg had not been keeping well due to age-related issues and was reportedly undergoing certain treatments. A halwai by profession, he was elected to the assembly in 2003.

(With agency inputs)
