Kolkata: Chinese-origin man arrested over murdering wife and father in Chinatown

Kolkata police today arrested a Chinese-origin man, Li Wan Tho, in connection to double murders on Friday in the Tangra region in East Kolkata, better known as Chinatown for a large number of Chinese origin people residing in the region.

Police said that the man cracked down under interrogation and confessed to beating his wife and father to death after a particularly unpleasant argument on Friday. According to reports, Li Wan confessed that on the day of the incident he was about to leave the house to meet with his friends when his wife alleged him of infidelity and seeing other women behind her back. This lead to an argument which turned particularly worse and resulted in a displeased Li Wan losing temper and smashing his wife's face into a pulp with a bucket that was lying nearby. When Li Wan's 90-year-old father rushed in to stop him from doing so, he was met with the same treatment, said reports.

Kolkata Police Joint Commissioner (Crime) said that the police had received a call from the Chinatown region at 9 PM on Friday, reporting the incident. When the victims with fatal injuries on their face were rushed to a nearby hospital, the woman was declared as "brought dead" while her father-in-law collapsed during critical treatment, an NDTV report confirmed.

According to the report, Li Wan Tho had in an earlier statement to the police said that he found his wife and father lying in a pool of blood on returning after a meeting with his friends. The narrative construed by him held that on finding the door locked, Li Wan had urged a local to climb the 10-feet-high boundary wall of the house with the help of a ladder, pulled down the grill, and found the two victims lying in a pool of blood.

The report added that the police began to suspect the man when they found faults in his story. During interrogation, investigators asked Li Wan why he had to make a ruckus over having the gates locked if he had the key himself, as evident by him unlocking the grill.

Adding to that, CCTV footage from the site reportedly show Li Wan exiting the premises of his house at 7:11 PM while sweating profusely with apparent dark patches of blood on his shirt and returning at 8:20 PM.

Li Wan Tho is reportedly a priest and a record keeper for the Chinese community at Chinatown in Kolkata. His father was also an almanac reader for the community earlier.

His three children, who stay in Canada, have been informed of the murders, the report added.
