HaitiLibre.com : Haiti news 7/7





Haiti - News : Zapping...





Another police offier shot down

Thursday evening in Côte-Plage 18, in the commune of Carrefour (South of the capital), a police officer, Goof Williamson, was shot down by unidentified individuals in unsolved circumstances.



Lynchage : popular justice in Ouanaminthe

This week in Ouanaminthe (North-East Department), specifically in the Plaine Rose neighborhood, residents lynched an alleged 30-year-old thief, known as "Aries" who robbed small farmers. According to exasperated residents they had already captured several times and handed the thief to justice who was released each time for supposedly insufficient evidence...



Hinche : Government Commissioner on layoff

Thursday, the Commissioner of the Government of Hinche, Serge Desrameaux, installed last March, was laid off following accusations of corruption. The Bar of Hinche lawyers are satisfied with the decision of the Ministry of Justice and took the opportunity to ask the Minister Jean Roudy Aly to quickly put an acting Commissioner so that activities can resume the prosecution.



Indians give their blood to Haiti

As part of the 73rd anniversary of India's Independence Day, at the request of the Honorary Consul General of India in Haiti, Eddy Handal, the Ministry of Public Health organized a day of blood collection for the first time to the Best western hotel, where the Handal Consul had invited Indian nationals to donate blood. 38 bags of blood were collected by staff of the National Blood Transfusion Center.



Words of sympathy from the Mayor of Port-au-Prince

Ralph Youri Chevry, the Port-au-Prince area learned with great difficulty the news of the death of the Mayor of Quartier-Morin, Thursday August 22 https://www.haitilibre.com/en/news-28565-haiti-politic-death-of-the-mayor-of-quartier-morin-north.html "City Administration of Port-au-Prince sends its deepest and sincere condolences to the municipal body of Quartier-Morin, to the family, to the relatives of Mr. Jean Eric Belliard, as well as the residents of the district of Quartier-Morin [...]"



The Presidency welcomes the vote of the deputies

Jude Charles Faustin, the Councilor of President Jovenel Moïse, praised the attitude of the deputies who by their vote, definitively rejected in the night from Wednesday 21 to Thursday 22 August, the request of the opposition minority, to indict the Head of State See also : https://www.haitilibre.com/en/news-28555-haiti-flash-motion-to-impeach-president-moses-is-rejected.html



HL/ HaitiLibre


















