Conman Sam Peter planned to target GSB pontiff in Mangaluru

MANGALURU: The city police team that is investigating the case of conman T Sam Peter , who was arrested along with seven others, has revealed that they had come to the city to target a Gowd Saraswat Brahmin (GSB) seer, and also for settlement of a gold seizure case that took place in Bengaluru.Police have also revealed that Peter, who was wanted by the CBI , and has been issued a red corner notice by the Interpol, has committed 14 major offences, which are registered in more than six states, including Karnataka. In Maharashtra, he was a proclaimed offender of the state.Sam Peter was contacted by Ramachandra Nayak, a resident of Udupi, who runs a lodge, when he came to Mangaluru. Ramachandra had given him money to target a GSB seer or his close associates. He wanted Peter to either blackmail, threaten or kidnap the seer or his associates. To carry out the task, he contacted two notorious locals—Abdul Lathif and G Mohiuddin. When police raided Mohiudddin’s house, they seized a weapon and registered a case under the Arms Act against him.Another task Sam Peter had to carry out was to recover money given to solve a gold smuggling case. City police commissioner P S Harsha explained that smuggled gold valued at Rs 10 crore was seized by customs in Bengaluru. In order to release that without any case being lodged, Dubai Sharif, a notorious smuggler, to whom the gold belonged, had contacted advocate Muzafar Ahmed, a resident of Bengaluru.The advocate introduced Girish Rai and Imtiyaz to Dubai Sharif to settle the issue. They demanded Rs 1.7 crore, but failed to strike a deal, and return the money taken from Dubai Sharif. In order to recover the same from Girish and Imtiyaz, advocate Muzafar introduced T Sam Peter to Dubai Sharif, who used to pose as a director of NCIB. Sam Peter was asked to go to Mangaluru and abduct Girish and Imtiyaz, and recover the money. Locals Lathif and Mohiuddin were also involved in the case. Police will question advocate Muzafar in this regard.Peter also had taken along with him a fake news TV reporter, who would come with a camera and TV logo, soon after he commits any fraud. He also had two passports issued in his name. Police also found out that T Sam Peter, has been found to be using 12 fake names in the past, and has 14 major cases lodged against him across the country. He was born in Kerala, and was named Anthony.He later shifted to Kushalangara in Kodagu district. His criminal activities started from Kushalanagara, where he cheated a bank, and committed other frauds. CBI has registered cases against him in Ghaziabad, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka.
