Fruit growers fear losses amid turmoil

editorial@tribune.com

Samaan Lateef

Tribune News Service

Srinagar August 24

The continuing clampdown in Kashmir has created fear among growers about the impending losses to the region’s biggest economy – Rs 8,000 crore apple industry — as the growers fear that the crop ready for transportation to outside markets could rot amid the prevailing situation.

The peach and pear produce that was harvested during August may rot in the orchards and inside the houses of farmers, if security was not provided to trucks to move into the markets.

“We had plucked the peach and pear in August but because of the curfew we could not ferry the produce to the local market,” said Muzaffar Ahmad of Sopore.

“The peach fruit ripened inside the shed and finally perished. We had no option but to throw it away. Hope pears won’t meet the same fate.” Kashmir produces nearly 19 lakh metric tonnes of apple every year from 14,6016 hectares of land and 95 per cent of which is sent to different parts of India and some varieties are exported to Bangladesh.

Apple growers said the clampdown had added to their worries, as several pears-laden trucks were not allowed to reach the fruit markets in Kashmir and outside. “The repeated hailstorm during summer months ravaged the fruit production. And now the restrictions on public movement have affected the sale of their produce,” said a Baramulla resident, Umar Farooq.

Farooq said pears were rendered to rot on trees and peaches in sheds at several places in north Kashmir after the government imposed restrictions on public movement across the valley.

Ahead of the suspension of Article 370, the Government authorities asked tourists and Amarnath yatris to leave Kashmir immediately. The government advisory was followed by nearly 2 lakh labourers of north India leaving Kashmir in a panic.

The mass migration of labourers has added to the woes of fruit growers. “Cultivation of fruit is getting delayed as outside labourers have left Kashmir and locals are mostly unwilling to do the work in the present situation,” said Fayaz Ahmad, an apple trader.
