Ghaziabad: Man shoots uncle to death after he stopped him from beating wife

The victim had slapped his nephew for beating his wife and son. | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Victim slapped his nephew for assaulting his wife and son The accused Dinesh took out a pistol and shot his uncle dead The accused has been arrested and sent to jail

Ghaziabad: In yet another crime arising out of domestic violence, a man in Ghaziabad allegedly shot dead his uncle after he intervened to stop his nephew from thrashing his wife. The accused has been identified as 32-year-old Dinesh Diwakar.

Police said the accused is an alcoholic and frequently thrashed his wife in a drunken state. The 63-year-old victim Satish Chandra had retired from Indian Railways and used to reside near the house of the accused.

According to a report, the incident happened when the victim went for a usual walk after dinner on Friday. The victim's son Ashwani Diwakar said that when his father reached home after a walk, some neighbours told him that his nephew Dinesh was beating his wife and 8-year-old son.

Hearing this, Chandra rushed to Dinesh's home where he saw the accused beating his wife and son. The accused had reportedly asked his wife to give him money for alcohol, but she refused.

"My father intervened in the matter and slapped Dinesh when he could not stop him from beating his wife. Moments later, Dinesh went inside the room and took out a pistol and shot my father," the report quoted Ashwani Diwakar as saying.

The victim was rushed to a nearby hospital where he died during the treatment.

Station House Officer (SHO) of Sihani Gate police station said a case of murder under Section 302 of Indian Penal Code (IPC) has been registered against Dinesh. SHO Umesh Bahadur Singh also said that the accused has been arrested.

Police have recovered the pistol from the crime scene. Dinesh was produced before a court and sent to jail.

Son kills 75-year-old father in UP

In a similar case reported on August 21, a man allegedly killed his 75-year-old father in Jalaun district of Uttar Pradesh after he refused to give him money. According to PTI report, the incident took place in Taharpura village in Konch tehsil where the victim Sarju Prasad was brutally beaten by his son Hanumant Singh.

According, Superintendent of Police Satish Kumar, Hanumant Singh beat up his father after he refused to give him money. The victim Sarju Prasad died on the spot. The accused was arrested and the body sent for post-mortem.

In another case on August 19, an 80-year-old man was found chopped and stuffed into seven buckets in Hyderabad. The senior citizen was found in pieces in his residence after the neighbours complained of foul smell from his house. The victim's son allegedly killed him over money.
