No lessons from AIIMS: 1,478 Delhi hospitals are playing with fire | Deep Dive

No lesson from AIIMS! Most of Capital’s 1,478 healthcare facilities, including prominent govt hospitals, aren’t equipped to battle blaze.

A major fire engulfed five floors of an AIIMS building about a week ago, destroying samples, reports and equipment, besides triggering widespread panic and chaos as Emergency patients were evacuated through dark plumes of smoke.

It took several hours for about three dozen fire engines to bring the situation under control. Fire department officials later pointed to multiple safety-norm violations. The Delhi Police’s Crime Branch lodged a case and started its investigation into lapses.

While India’s premier health facility is still smarting from the August 17 blaze, a Mail Today reality check has shown that many other top Delhi hospitals might well be awaiting similar disasters. These hospitals are operating without the fire department’s no-objection certificates (NOCs). Obtaining and renewal of NOCs ensure periodic checks, rectification of flaws in fire-safety systems and availability of adequate equipment.

Sometimes, the fire department doesn’t issue NOCs because inspections reveal that buildings aren’t meeting its safety standards -- both structural and equipment-related. Either way, operations without NOCs may spell catastrophic consequences. A scrutiny by the fire department, done after the AIIMS incident, has revealed that many Delhi hospitals don’t have wide enough passages for fire engines to move due to encroachment. Hydrants were found in most premises, but they could be inaccessible in case of an emergency.

LOK NAYAK JAI PRAKASH NARAYAN (LNJP) HOSPITAL

The casualty building of the prominent hospital near Delhi Gate is functioning without an NOC, a fire department report reveals. Though bustling with patients, the hospital has a narrow emergency exit, the reality check shows. Other loopholes include faulty arrangements regarding water hosepipes and fire hydrants. There is no designated refuge area.

LNJP Medical Supreinrendant Dr Kishore Singh said, We have held a meeting on fire-safety issues. A drill has been conducted to train the staff for emergencies. We have asked fire department officials to do an audit and PWD officials to check equipment and correct our systems wherever required.

DR. RAM MANOHAR LOHIA (RML) HOSPITAL

Situated near Connaught Place, RML Hospital has 1,400 beds and caters to a huge number of patients. Its trauma centre has safety shortcomings, says the fire department. The staircase meant to be used to access fire exits is crammed with unused beds, the reality check reveals.

RML spokesperson Smriti Tiwari, however, said the hospital is following all fire-safety norms. After the AIIMS incident, we have done a check that found no loopholes. However, some renovation work is going on and we are working on issues as they come to notice, she said.

LADY HARDINGE HOSPITAL & MEDICAL COLLEGE

The hospital near Connaught Place has over 1,000 beds in its two units. A separate outpatient block also caters to patients. According to the fire department, its Payment Ward and UG Hostel don’t not have NOCs.

The reality check reveals that many wards don’t not have fire extinguishers, the main building doesn’t have proper exits and many doors meant to open into open spaces in case of emergencies are locked.

The administrative department admitted that NOCs for Payment Ward and UG Hostel are awaited, but they are functioning. It also admitted that a budget approval is awaited to replace faulty smoke detectors and a 15-year-old fire pump house. "We are following all rules and regulations set by the fire department and the government," said a hospital official.

GOVIND BALLABH PANT HOSPITAL

This is another top hospital that does not have an NOC, according to the fire department. The area of refuge outside the main building has been turned into a parking lot for private cars, the reality check reveals. A sign board says no parking but crucial space for fire tenders has been compromised. Water leakages are seen in the fire control room on the ground floor. Fire and smoke detection systems are found broken and the exit is narrow with extra iron bars obstructing the way to escape. Repeated calls to hospital director Sanjay Tyagi for a comment remained unanswered.

OVERALL SCENE

Of the 1,478 registered hospitals, nursing and maternity homes and health centres in Delhi, 122 do not have NOCs, according to the fire department. The department has sent a letter to the Director General of Health Services (DGHS), responsible for renewing licences of hospitals and nursing homes. Safety norms were changed after a hotel blaze in Karol Bagh killed 17 people in February this year. It is now mandatory for all buildings above the height of 9 metres (two storeys) to get a fire clearance. The earlier limit was 15 metres (three storeys).

"When fire-clearance applications come, an inspection team is sent to see whether all norms are being followed or not. If they don’t meet the requirements, we don't give the fire clearance, said Delhi fire services chief Atul Garg. In June, Delhi’s health department issued show-cause notices to several registered nursing homes and medical care facilities for not submitting fire-safety certificates.

EXPERTS’ TAKES

NoCs aren’t renewed frequently, leaving enough time for many property owners to make illegal structural changes. The changes usually go unnoticed, until things go horribly wrong, said Neeraj Sehgal, chairman, Fire and Security Association of India.

Audits do not happen in many important buildings. This should be on time and mandatorily. Residents should also rope in private auditors, said fire-safety expert Santosh Kumar Bagla.

CENTRE’S PLANS FOR BETTER SAFETY IN DELHI

The Union Health Ministry is likely to make it mandatory for Delhi hospitals with more than 200 beds to have their own firesafety staff.

When the fire broke out at AIIMS, it took us eight minutes to reach after the first call. Every minute counts. If hospitals have their own safety staff, they can start dealing with emergency situations before fire tenders reach, said a fire department official.

Also read: A drought of doctors: City hospitals in ICU

ALSO WATCH| Delhi hospitals provide essential services despite IMA's nationwide strike
