Man murderd over tying cattle in village street

Ludhiana: Samrala police on Saturday afternoon arrested a person for the murder of his co-villager after he asked him to remove his cattle from the middle of a street at Bagli Kalan village in Samrala. The accused has been identified as 35-year-old Amandeep Singh.

Police officials said that Amandeep, who was unemployed, used to tie his cattle in the street to which many villages had already objected to. They added that on Friday evening, the accused had again did the same thing. Thirtyone-year-old Tanvir Singh, a factory worker, who was returning home from work on his motorcycle objected to it.

The cops said that this led to a heated argument after which the deceased asked him to remove the cattle from the road. They added that later the accused attacked Tanvir with an ice pick many times. Police officials said that the accused attacked the deceased thrice in the chest and back, but the one he received in the chest proved fatal for Tanvir, as it pierced through his heart. They added that the deceased suffered severe bleeding in the heart area, due to which he died on the spot.

The police said that after the incident, villagers informed the police and a police team from Samrala police station reached the spot and started the investigations. They added that the police shifted the body of the deceased to the civil hospital for a post-mortem examination.

SHO Samrala police station inspector Sukhvir Singh said that the accused was booked for murder of the deceased on the statement of Parminder Singh Rinku, a cousin of the deceased, who is also the eyewitness in the case. He added that the accused was arrested from Samrala area on Saturday afternoon.

Police officials further said that the accused had burnt the motorcycle of a villager about two years ago and had allegedly beaten him up. They added that the accused had been in jail in the same case for some time and had come out on bail when he committed this crime. Cops said that the accused might have been mentally upset because of being unemployed.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
