Bengaluru police raid two pubs for playing loud music, DJ arrested

Bengaluru police raid two pubs for playing loud music, DJ arrested

The raids come two months after the Karnataka High Court pulled up the police for its casual approach to complaints of high noise levels from pubs in residential areas.

news Law and Order

The Central Crime Branch (CCB) police raided a hotel in Bengaluru where a party was organised and loud music was played till 4 am on Sunday. Police arrested the DJ Tambe Danial Atem, a Cameroon national, even as several others left the scene.

Police stated that the raid was conducted by officials of the women and narcotics squad of the CCB on RG Royal Hotel near the Iskcon temple in Mahalakshmi Layout after receiving information that a rave party was organised and illegal drugs was supplied.

“When we raided the place, loud music beyond permissible limits was being played at the venue located on the sixth floor. It was gross violation of the excise permit to keep the hotel open till such late hours and playing loud music without permission. There were more than 150 customers, including about 50 foreigners. The party went on till 4 am and we immediately arrested the DJ identified as Tambe Danial Atem,” a senior police officer said speaking to The New Indian Express.

But while the police seized the sound system, DJ console and cash, they were unable to recover evidence of the supply of drugs at the party. Owner of the hotel Ravish Gowda, general manager Venkatesh, manager Sebastian and event manager Saleem are currently absconding and police officials are attempting to trace them.

In a parallel raid, a team of police officials raided By Chance Bar and Restaurant on Brigade Road on Saturday late night for playing loud music. The police arrested KR Rajanna (58) and James John (44) and also seized music equipment for violating rules, reported Deccan Herald.

The raids come two months after the Karnataka High Court pulled up the police for its casual approach to taking action on complaints of high noise levels from pubs in residential areas. The police was criticised for conducting an inspection of noise levels in the evening and for failing to use suitable devices to measure the sound.

Following a directive from the High Court, police officials conducted a fresh inspection in June. The details of the inspection are yet to be made public. The High Court is currently hearing a petition filed by Defence Colony Residents’ Association asking police to limit music played in pubs in Bengaluru that are located in residential areas.
