Kashmir's Call to Foreign and Domestic Investment in Food Retail - Re-Tales by Dr. Deepak Halan

Jammu and Kashmir 's economy is predominantly dependent on agriculture and the valley is also known for its cold-water fisheries. Kashmiri saffron, as we all know, is famous world over and brings the state considerable foreign exchange. J&K is bestowed with the presence of three favorable agri-climatic zones and an enormous base of natural resources appropriate for cultivating fruits, vegetable and dairy products. The major production clusters in the state is: Paddy, wheat, maize, cabbage, potato, peas, apple, pear, walnut, meat milk and eggs. Horticulture with an annual turnover of over Rs 5000 crores, as per Department of Horticulture, J&K, is the biggest source of income in the state's economy. Removal of Articles 370 and 35A of the Constitution has ended J&K’s special status paving its way into the country’s collective growth process. Article 370 provided the J&K legislature authority to makeseparate laws for the state and laws approved by the Parliament were not applicable in J&K, unless separately cleared by the state assembly. This posed problems for businesses - they had to follow different laws in the state from those in the rest of the country. Another major hurdle was the provision that debarred non-residents from settling and buying property in the state, thus preventing the firms from attracting the required talent.The Food & Grocery market in India is the sixth largest in the world and constitutes almost 65% of the total retail market in India. However, according to the government data, only about 7% of the agricultural produce is processed in India-the proportion is considerably higher in the case of countries such as Malaysia and China. Moreover, India’s share in global exports of processed food stands at only about 2%. As per the government, FDI in the food processing sector fell by 31 percent in 2018-19. To further add to India’s woes, unfortunately, we have a high share of the harvest and post-harvest losses from major agricultural produce on account of poor storage, transportation and logistics. Common are tales of farmers abandoning their crop at the mandi as the money earned from the sale would not be enough for even the transport cost. India annually produces many times the quantity of fruits, vegetables, and perishables, then its existing storage capacity.A key aspect to be leveraged upon is the fact that India allows 100% FDI, under the automatic route, in food processing industries. Further, 100% FDI under government route for retail trading, including through e-commerce, is permitted in respect of food products manufactured and/or produced in India. Global retail companies are setting up global and/or regional trade “hubs”; in emerging economies which was earlier more for non-foods and processed foods. For e.g. E-Mart in Korea is known to have sourced vegetables from China to supply its stores in China and Korea while Carrefour sourced frozen strawberries from China for stores in China, Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia, Brazil, Spain, and the U.K. The global retail companies are increasingly investing in contract farming with farmerslocated near production centres, leading to creation of more jobs in villages. Multi-national firms have invested in contract farming in India, in the past. For example, the McCain Foods India -Mc Donald’s potato supplier, is known to have invested in contract farming in Gujarat and one of the maiden ventures by PepsiCo resulted in tomato contract farming in the early 1990s.Removal of Articles 370 and 35A of the Constitution, Jammu and Kashmir's favourable food eco-system and India’s economic policies offer huge opportunities for growth in food processing and the food retail sector. Leveraging upon this opportunity by both domestic and global industry would be a much-needed shot-in-the-arm for both J&K, as well as India’s economy. Farm to fork investments are likely to result in better back-end infrastructure, less wastage, fewer middlemen and a higher quality of life of citizens who will benefit from better prices and a higher level of employment.

DISCLAIMER: The views expressed are solely of the author and ETRetail.com does not necessarily subscribe to it. ETRetail.com shall not be responsible for any damage caused to any person/organisation directly or indirectly.
