Raj Kummar, Janhvi's RoohiAfza to Ranbir's Shamshera: Filmmakers are ditching the Swiss Alps for the Himalayas

Filmmakers are ditching Swizz Alps for Himalayas | Photo Credit: Instagram

Key Highlights Filmmakers are ditching the scenic Swiss Alps for Himalayas Indian filmmakers have found their new hotspot destination to shoot on picturesque locales From Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan's untitled next with director Imtiaz Ali to Ranbir Kapoor's Shamshera, checkout the films that are recently shot in the Himalayan region

Shooting at exotic locations have always been an essential part of Hindi cinema. A Bollywood film, as they say, is never complete without a dance sequence in heavy snow or a romantic conversation on a stunning beach. There have been films in the past, like everyone's favourite Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge, which have not only remained favourite of all the movie buffs till date but has also showcased the affinity that Indian filmmakers have for scenic Switzerland.

Bachna ae Haseeno, starring Ranbir Kapoor, was another such film that took the audience to the beautiful locales of the stunning country. Switzerland has always been a hot favourite with Indian filmmakers. However, things are taking a turn for good now. While earlier the makers used to look out for the exotic destinations outside India, now it looks like they have found the option in their country.

Recently, there has been a shift in the Hindi Film industry and big-budget films are now being shot in the beautiful locales of Himalayas. While in the past, movies like Jab We Met, Highway, 3 Idiots have taken a U-Turn from international destinations, the films like Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan's Aajkal, Ranbir Kapoor and Vaani Kapoor's Shamshera, Janhvi Kapoor and Raj Kummar Rao's Rooh-i-Afza and Alia Bhatt, Aditya Roy Kapur Varun Dhawan, Sonakshi Sinha starrer Kalank too have been shot in the high northern regions.

Photos of Janhvi Kapoor made rounds on the social media when the diva was on a workcation to Himachal. Taking it to her Instagram, she shared a couple of photos basking in the Himalayan sun.

When photos of Sara Ali Khan and Kartik Aaryan from Imtiaz Ali's next made rounds on the social media, fans were smitten by the couple. Their postcard photos made Himachal look even more beautiful.

Alia Bhatt and Varun Dhawan went all the way to Kargil for the shoot of Kalank. The actress took it to her Instagram handle and shared a photo with her costar.

A couple of weeks back, paparazzi spotted Ranbir Kapoor and Vaani Kapoor at the airport. The Shamshera actors were heading to the mountains for their film's schedule.

Well, looks like India's natural beauty has caught the eyes of the filmmakers and they are ready to explore it too. Let us know your thoughts on the subject and stay tuned to zoomtv.com for all the latest updates.
