New Book by David Yager: How Federal Election Climate Politics Could Seriously Damage Alberta's Economy

This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

New Book by David Yager: How Federal Election Climate Politics Could Seriously Damage Alberta's Economy Business Wire

Article content CALGARY, Alberta — Depending upon the outcome of the upcoming federal election, climate change may claim its first major casualty; the economy of Alberta. That’s because getting out of the oil business has become a major campaign issue. The stakes are huge, and not just environmental.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content By experienced and respected energy writer David Yager, From Miracle to Menace examines Alberta from the perspective of its dominant oil, gas and coal industries. A major focus is past destructive energy policies that have divided the country. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.

tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or New Book by David Yager: How Federal Election Climate Politics Could Seriously Damage Alberta's Economy Back to video Thanks to climate politics, it is happening again. Justin Trudeau’s Liberals introduced policies that seriously damaged Alberta’s carbon resource industries. The Green Party and NDP promise that if elected, they accelerate moving away from fossil fuels and betting big on “clean tech” to keep the country warm, moving and economically secure. But as the book explains, Canada’s political mission to save the world by itself will not arrest climate change. Global energy demand is forecast to grow by 30% in the next 20 years. With no substitutes for plastics, petrochemicals and heavy transportation, oil consumption will increase no matter what Canada does.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content Canada only produces 4% of the world’s oil, 1.6% of total emissions and houses merely 0.5% of its population. Canada could disappear entirely and there would be no material reduction in global emissions unless the rest of the world – specifically China, India and the US – does the same thing. Alberta’s massive carbon resource warehouse is ground zero for the political battle over the country’s future. Already devastated by the collapse in commodity prices and denied pipeline expansion capacity in all directions, Alberta’s future direction hinges upon which politicians comprise the next federal government. The opening line of the book reads, “The current debate about climate change and what mankind should do about it has deteriorated to the point of absurdity.” The federal election is a perfect example.

Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

Article content The book has three sections. Carbon Development: Alberta helps Canada become the world’s fifth largest oil and gas producer. Carbon Politics: past policy disasters and how carbon dioxide became the world’s greatest threat. Carbon Future: the complex issues surrounding climate change and ways Alberta can help solve the problem without legislated economic devastation. The book is available in multiple formats. More information and purchase details at www.miracletomenace.ca . View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20190826005127/en/ Contacts David Yager, Author

403 850 6088

yager@telus.net

Share this article in your social network

Latest National Stories Advertisement Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.

The Winnipeg Sun's Daily Headline News Sign up to receive daily headline news from the Winnipeg SUN, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. Sign Up By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of The Winnipeg Sun's Daily Headline News will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again
