Naveen demands infra boost in Maoist-affected districts in Odisha

BHUBANESWAR: Chief minister Naveen Patnaik on Monday proposed to the Centre to improve banking and telecommunication services in Naxal-affected districts and laid special emphasis on requirement of railway connectivity in Maoist strongholds of Malkangiri and Nabarangpur districts. Naveen placed the key demands at the review meeting by union minister Amit Shah at Delhi on issues, involving left wing extremism (LWE)."I made three major demands. Malkangiri and Nabarangpur districts should get railway connectivity. Banking facilities and telecommunication services should be improved in all Naxal-affected areas. I hope the Centre comply with them,” Naveen said. Sources said Odisha’s other demands included more Central funds for roads, schools and hospitals in Naxal-affected areas. State government also sought more funds to enhance security-related logistics and surveillance in the sensitive regions."We also demanded deployment of at least one battalion of Central force in Naxal-affected districts and a chopper for emergency situations. Forest dwellers in LWE-affected areas should be given land and other benefits for their survival. Communication and infrastructure development holds the key to tackle LWE menace,” said minister of state for home Dibya Shankar Mishra, who also attended the meeting.Official sources said at present 15 out of 30 districts in Odisha are affected by LWE. However, Maoist-related activities were not reported in Gajapati Jajpur and Dhenkanal—five of the affected districts in 2018. While Odisha has total 6789 gram panchayats, over 4,000 gram panchayats, mostly located in Maoist-affected districts do not have banking facilities. Of 8,000 villages that do not have telecommunication services across Odisha, at least 6,000 villages are located in LWE-affected districts. The state has around 50,000 villages. Official sources said services of 248 mobile towers set up by the BSNL in Naxal-affected districts are of poor quality.Data released by the state government in its White Paper-2018 said LWE activities are under control in Odisha, though situations in Koraput, Malkangiri, Rayagada, Kalahandi, Nuapada and Kandhamal districts continue to be challenging for the police. “We did not witness any Maoist-triggered violence in Mayurbhanj, Dhenkanal, Gajapati, Ganjam and Jajpur districts last year,” a senior police official said. According to the White Paper, total 54 LWE-related incidents were reported in the state in 2018 in which 19 Maoists were killed, 39 arrested and 27 surrendered. Police seized at least 40 firearms, huge cache of bullets and 24 improvised explosive devices (IEDs) during anti-Maoist operations in different districts last year.
