Mumbai: Ganpati festival goes green, artists create 22ft high idol with paper and mud

The annual Ganpati festival revelries bring concern for the environment as the thousands of idols immersed in the sea at the end of the festivities threaten the environment. But, the change is in offing.

The artists have now started making idols out of paper and mud, which are completely soluble in the water and do minimum damage to the ecology.

Eco-friendly Ganpati idols

Even as the major pandals in Mumbai always compete for the biggest and best Ganpatis, a famous pandal in Lalbuagh has decided to lead by example. Instead of getting a massive idol made out of plaster of Paris, this year Tejukaya Ganpati Mandal in Lalbaugh will be made out of biodegradable components.

The 22ft huge Ganpati idol will not use any thermocol or plastics; decoration will also be of paper, cotton etc.

In fact, the mandal has asked the devotees not to bring agarbatti and flowers for idol. Instead, they have been asked to donate pencils, pens, notebooks and similar things which can be donated to flood-affected areas of Kolhapur and Sangli. The mandal, which is now in its 53rd year, believes that saving environment in need of the hour.

India Today TV also visited a Ganpati workshop, which specialises in eco-friendly Ganpatis.

Idol maker in Matunga Sagar Chitale, who only makes eco-friendly Ganpatis, says that even though it is a long and costly process but it is worth it if it helps save the environment.

Photo: India Today/ Mangesh Ambre

It is a lengthy procedure. I started making the idols soon after Navratri. The price of the idols is more than that of the plaster of Paris, but yes, if one has to save the environment it is nothing. Good thing is that the people are getting aware and there is a huge demand for paper Ganpatis. Big Ganpatis too can be made of paper and they do not harm the environment at all. The jewellery part is too made paper and we don’t even use nails and instead use gum and small wood. The government too should help in the initiative and provide a place to make such idols, Sagar Chitale told India Today TV.

Ganpati immersion's effect on aquatic life

There will be at least 2,000 pandals in Mumbai during Ganpati festival and if you add the household Ganpatis, the number of idols to be immersed in the Arabian sea shoots manifold.

Even as the BMC builds small ponds across the city for idol immersion, very few people use it. Besides the huge Ganpatis usually kept by the pandals cannot be immersed in the ponds. Thus, most idols end up at the sea.

The chemicals from the colours and mix of the idols cause serious damage to aquatic animals. During the last year's festivities, the Mumbai coastline was lined with dead fish, water snakes and turtles. This also hampers the state economy as the sea is one of the major sources of food in Maharashtra.

Eco-friendly Ganpatis are a sure way of ensuring that they do not end into a pile of garbage at the sea or pollute it, causing irreversible harm to aquatic ecology.
