Bollywood to Make Movie on Pakistan Airstrikes

Producer claims the upcoming film will show the ‘true story’ behind sortie whose efficacy has been brought into question

Bollywood is to make a movie on the “true story” of Indian airstrikes on Pakistan this year, its producer said on Friday, the latest patriotic film to hit the silver screen in the country.

The Feb. 26 attack took place after a suicide bombing, perpetrated by a local separatist but claimed by a militant group based in Pakistan, killed 40 Indian troops on Feb. 14 in India-Occupied Kashmir.

Pakistan then carried out its own raid over the de-facto border in Kashmir before the two countries stepped back from the brink of another conflict.

India said that in the raid, its aircraft successfully attacked a training camp at Balakot and killed “a very large number” of “terrorists,” but doubts have been raised about its efficacy.

The new movie is set to be produced by Vivek Oberoi, who starred in a flattering biopic of Prime Minister Narendra Modi, the release of which was delayed so as not to interfere with this year’s election. It will also tell the story of handlebar-mustached Abhinandan Varthaman, an Indian pilot who was shot down in the raid and then handed over by Pakistan, becoming a national hero.

“As a proud Indian, a patriot, and a member of the film fraternity, it’s my duty to highlight what our armed forces are truly capable of,” Oberoi was quoted as saying by Indian media. “This film is a powerful tool to underline the achievements of brave officers like Wing Commander Abhinandan, who went behind the enemy lines and did what makes every Indian proud of them,” said Vivek.

Kashmir has been divided between India and Pakistan since the end of British colonial rule in 1947. Both claim the Himalayan territory in full and have fought two wars over it. Earlier this month India stripped its part of the region’s autonomy, sending tens of thousands of extra troops and imposing a lockdown and a communications blackout that on Friday entered its 19th day.
