Lucknow: Secret wedding & sex-deceit saga end in techie’s murder

LUCKNOW: It was a saga of love, sex and deceit that ended in the murder of thirty-year-old Sharad Nigam. Police said Nigam was shot by a garment shop owner in Balaganj over his relationship with a woman.The key accused, Surendra Jaiswal, 50, and his aide Suraj Kumar Chauhan, 19, were arrested on Monday. Jaiswal has two young sons, both in their early twenties.ASP (west) Vikas Chandra Tripathi , who led the investigation, said, “Jaiswal had an affair with a 26-year-old woman in neighbourhood. Her father died when she was a child and she lived with her ailing mother. Jaiswal had been sexually exploiting her since she was 12.”“The woman’s proximity with Nigam grew over one-and-a-half years and they even married secretly. Jaiswal wanted to continue the relationship, but when the woman refused, he decided to eliminate Nigam,” the ASP said. Nigam was the woman’s cousin.A year ago, Jaiswal bought a small garment shop and told the woman to manage the business. “In return, he asked her to break ties with Nigam but she refused and quit three months ago. Earlier too, she had tried to end her relation with Jaiswal but couldn’t as her financial condition was not good and she was dependent on him,” he added.SSP, Lucknow, Kalanidhi Naithani said, “On the fateful day, Nigam left from office at 6pm and went to the woman’s house. He stayed there till 9.30 pm. Jaiswal and Chauhan followed Nigam on a motorcycle and intercepted him near his house. Jaiswal shot Nigam on his shoulder from close range. Nigam died due to excessive bleeding.”ASP Tripathi said police got clue of Nigam’s relationship with the woman through his social media account. “We also recovered a pen drive from Nigam’s bag which had his photographs with the woman. It also had woman’s photos with Jaiswal.”The call record details of woman showed that she was in touch with Jaiswal.“During interrogation, the woman admitted that she had a relationship with Jaiswal earlier but later married Nigam. She said Jaiswal wanted her to leave Nigam,” he added.“When we visited her house for investigation, Jaiswal sensed trouble and fled to Nepal . He returned two days ago and was hiding in a hotel when we picked him. He confessed tp the crime and said he had planned to kill Nigam on July 22 but could not execute it as the woman was with him all the time,” he said.The woman wanted to marry a man from Gonda two years ago but Jaiswal did not let her do so even then. The man was also interrogated who told police that Jaiswal had forced the woman to lodge a complaint of harassment against him at Mahila Thana in Lucknow.
