Blackbuck deaths: Villages blame salt pans

RAJKOT: The heavy flooding around Velavadar National Park in Bhavnagar district earlier this month left 18 blackbucks dead. Majority of them died after being attacked by stray dogs as the antelopes escaped into nearby villages to save themselves from the floods.But what caused this unprecedented flooding and accumulation of water for days in the region where the rain water otherwise quickly flows away into the sea?Villagers living around Velavadar claim the salt pans that have come up on nearly 20,000 acres land that have blocked the natural flow of rivers into the sea, resulting in heavy flooding. In 2018, the state government had allocated this land for development of salt pans despite stiff opposition from the locals, some of whom even moved the high court with a public interest litigation.Around 4,000 blackbucks are found in 39 villages outside the national park. In fact, the forest department has also been opposed to development of salt pans in this region. blackbucks has the highest protection under schedule -I of the Wildlife Protection Act. According to the forest department, 16 blackbucks died due to dog bites, one drowned and another died in road accident between August 11 and 13.“The lease holders are required to break the protection wall of their pans during monsoon to allow the natural flow of water. But to save costs, they did not do it. As a result, flood water only kept accumulating there for days together,” a senior forest department officer in Bhavnagar told TOI on condition of anonymity.Two major rivers - Kalubhar and Ghelo - flow through this area and the water goes away into the sea through Gundala and Juna Bandar creeks.When contacted, chief conservator of forest (wildlife circle) D T Vasavda said, “Whenever we were asked to give opinion about the granting of lease for salt pans, our reports were always negative.”Shardul Chudasama, former sarpanch of Kalatalav village and one of the petitioners in the PIL, said, “This area is a grassland and best suited for the grazing of blackbuck deer and Nilgais. We protested the allotment of land for salt lease because it imbalances the ecosystem. blackbucks came towards the village areas to escape drowning but were attacked by dogs.”Ramesh Patel, sarpanch of Kotda village, said, “Crop in 22 villages was washed out because of flood water and nearly 3,000 farmers have suffered losses.”The land for salt pans is allotted near Savainagar, Nava and Juna Madhiya, Paliyad, Kardej, Sanes, Kala Talav, Narmad, Ganeshgadh, Kotda, Bhadbhid Gundala and Adhelai. Maximum causality of blackbucks was reported in thse villages.The villagers also filed an affidavit in the high court recently, alleging that several government resolutions and notifications were violated by allotment of land close to eco-sensitive zone.Rajesh Gidia, the advocate representing the villagers, said, “We have mentioned in our petition that the salt pans also pose danger for blackbucks. In the next hearing which is scheduled in September first week, we will also submit the report on death of these animals.”
