Another stalwart goes

ROBINSINGH@TRIBUNE.COM

First Sheila Dikshit, then Sushma Swaraj and now Arun Jaitley. Uncompromising in ideological and political stance, go-getters, yet amiable and filled with innate humanness — their passing away within a space of a month is a collective loss. Their nuanced and balanced brand of politics, one of dignified acknowledgement of the other while holding your own, is fast losing the tag of desirability. Few went unscathed by Arun Jaitley’s sharp, piercing delivery of speech, and his good measure of humour ensured the blow was soft and not personal. BJP’s ‘firefighter’, ‘go-to man’, ‘man for all seasons’, ‘consensus builder’ would have added to the repertoire, but Jairam Ramesh’s tribute of being ‘every non-BJP person’s favourite BJP-ite’ would have elicited a smile and a perfectly crafted Jaitley response. The lawyer knew how to argue his case well.

An unlikely victory in the Delhi University student polls had catapulted the young Jaitley into the centre of the political muddle in the 1970s, and he never looked back. The Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha and a key minister in the Vajpayee and Modi regimes, he had almost zero claims to being a grassroots politician, his one Lok Sabha poll outing in an all-conducive 2014 battle having come a cropper. That did little to alter his standing in the BJP, or as a master strategist. He knew his politics, and more important, that of the opponents.

As Finance Minister, demonetisation and introduction of GST tested Jaitley’s resolve. Many believed he had more friends outside his party, but the BJP always gained by this facet of affability. Such was his rapport that during a debate on demonetisation, an Opposition MP said he was sure the Prime Minister did not take Jaitley into confidence, because if ‘Arunji had known, he would have whispered about it in my ears’. The House had a hearty laugh, PM Modi included. That’s the late Arun Jaitley’s enduring legacy. Committed, unsparing, and helping BJP gain acceptability whenever it most needed it.
