Jealous of woman finding love, jilted lover murders her husband in Lucknow

City police with the culprits (Picture Courtesy: @lkopolice) | Photo Credit: Twitter

Key Highlights The prime accused had been sexually assaulting the woman since she was 12 Police said that the victim and the woman had secretly married each other and wanted to live together Jaiswal fled to Nepal to evade arrest but was nabbed upon his return two days later

Lucknow: Right out of a crime novel, the evidence in a murder case has led Lucknow Police down a rabbit hole of love, jealousy, hardship and murder. The case began with the death of 30-year-old software engineer Sharad Nigam, who was shot dead by two bike-borne men near his home on July 23 of this year. Nigam was rushed to a local hospital where he succumbed due to excessive bleeding from the gunshot wound on his shoulder.

Police registered a case in this regard and an investigation was launched into Nigam's death. A preliminary search of his social media account led officers of the Lucknow Police to a 26-year-old woman, a cousin of the victim. In her statement, she claimed that she was in a romantic relationship with Nigam and the two wanted to get married. However, their plans were foiled by a third man who coveted their love. This man was later identified as 50-year-old Surendra Jaiswal, a garment shop owner in Balaganj area of the city.

A father of two sons in their early twenties, Jaiswal became the prime suspect. He grew suspicious when investigators visited the woman and fled to Nepal only to return two days later. Jaiswal was arrested from a local motel where he was trying to hide from the police. Upon interrogation, the suspect confessed to hatching a plan to murder Nigam in order to have the affection of the woman all to himself.

A deeper plot unravelled when Lucknow Police decided to piece the puzzle together and found out that it was a love-triangle which led to Nigam's murder in full public view. Assistant superintendent of police (west) Vikas Chandra Tripathi said that Jaiswal was in a relationship with the girl and had been sexually exploiting her ever since her father's death when she was 12. The female was dependent on the 50-year-old for her making ends meet which is why he decided to open a garment shop and asked her to manage it for him.

However, the woman fell in love with Nigam who was her cousin about a year-and-a-half ago. She even quit her job at the garment shop to be with him. This angered Jaiswal who decided to remove Nigam from his way, permanently. Along with 19-year-old aide Suraj Kumar Chauhan, he managed to intercept the victim and wasted no time in planting a bullet on Nigam's shoulder from close range.

Another senior officer familiar with the investigation said that police recovered a pen drive from Nigam's personal belongings which contained pictures of the woman with him and also with Jaiswal. Nigam and the woman even got secretly married sometime this year. Her call records corroborated her story. Jaiswal and his aide were arrested on Monday and booked under relevant sections of the Indian Penal Code for murder.
