Fellow reporter cleared in J Dey murder case

MUMBAI: The Bombay high court on Tuesday upheld the acquittal of Jigna Vora , the lone woman accused in the 2011 murder of a fellow reporter, J Dey The HC bench of Justices B P Dharmadhikari and S K Shinde said the CBI has not shown any evidence of any direct conversation between Vora and gangster Chhota Rajan or transcripts of call data records (CDR) to show any such conversation of her having instigated him against Dey . The HC held there was “no foundation” to the charge against her of having instigated Rajan to kill Dey or of having provided him with any material. Without adequate evidence or proper foundation, how can anyone be roped in as an accused, the HC said. It also considered the fact that she was on leave for 10 days since a day prior to the murder.The conversation was only between Rajan and co-accused Manoj Shivdasani. Shivdasani had in his statement said Rajan had called him and mentioned about Jigna to him while discussing about another co-accused, Vinod Asrani.“Prosecution has failed to prove her involvement,” the special trial judge for offences under the stringent Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA), a law meant to curb crime syndicates, had held last May. The trial court had pronounced her “acquitted of all charges.”Her acquittal was seen as a setback by the city police, who had arrested her, and the CBI, which prosecuted her. The CBI appealed against the acquittal before the HC but without success as the HC did not allow the appeal.Mumbai police had arrested Jigna on November 25, 2011, five months after the hit. Police had invoked MCOCA against her for allegedly providing crucial information including Dey’s photograph, address, motorcycle licence number and timings to Rajan to facilitate the murder. In jail for more than six months, she was released on bail in July 2012.CBI special public prosecutor Pradip Gharat challenged the clean chit she had received from the trial court. Vora’s defence advocate, M K Kocharekar, had argued her arrest itself was wrong and evidence against her inadequate.As a journalist, calling Rajan doesn’t mean they are participating in a conspiracy, her trial lawyer Prakash Shetty had argued earlier during trial, adding she had no motive to kill Dey and charges against her were “malicious.”The CBI case during trial was that “she was jealous of Dey as he was getting more news about crime world from one Farid Tanasha, who was very closely associated with Rajan. She used to publish news contrary to the news published by Dey. She used to contact Rajan and instigate him to commit the murder.” In its appeal, the CBI maintained its stand.The trial court had observed there was nothing in the evidence of key prosecution witnesses, including two reporters, “to suggest she had instigated Rajan to murder Dey or that she had any other role.” The verdict had said, “In fact even in various extra-judicial confessions made by Rajan” he nowhere said she or anyone else had instigated him. “Even recovery of various mobile phones and SIM cards from Jigna and call data records fail to connect her to the murder, hence she has to be acquitted.” The trial court verdict had mentioned Vora was in her 40s and her occupation was “healing meditation.”
