J&K Police officer lashes out at BBC Urdu for justifying truck driver’s murder by stone-pelters

J&K Police officer lashes out at BBC Urdu for justifying truck driver’s murder by stone-pelters

He wrote in a series of tweets: “In this @BBCUrdu story the reporter presumes on behalf of rioters that truck would be carrying security forces,thus killed the truck driver. What a shameful justification of murder by learned journalist! Shame needs to die of shame. RIP Journalism.”

On Tuesday, Jammu and Kashmir Police Officer Imtiyaz Hussain lashed out at BBC Urdu for justifying the heinous murder of a truck driver in Jammu and Kashmir.

The BBC Urdu justified the murder claiming that the ‘truck would be carrying security forces and thus killed the driver.

He wrote in a series of tweets: “In this @BBCUrdu story the reporter presumes on behalf of rioters that truck would be carrying security forces,thus killed the truck driver. What a shameful justification of murder by learned journalist! Shame needs to die of shame. RIP Journalism.”

Also Read: 'They are agent of Pak'—Twitter hails J&K cop who exposed BBC Urdu for justifying truck driver's murder by stone pelters

He later said that the website had deleted the controversial line, but he still had a screenshot.

Also Read: Jammu and Kashmir top cop exposes anti-India narrative of the foreign media

He added: “It’s important to portray a truthful picture of Kashmir situation because a lot of Pakistani boys reading these BBC Urdu exaggerated stories widely shared on social media get motivated to join terrorist ranks & come to Kashmir creating trouble. Truth is the ultimate causality in journalism driven by agenda. Wish we had reporters on ground reporting truth. Absolving murderers is no journalism.”

It’s important to portray a truthful picture of Kashmir situation because a lot of Pakistani boys reading these BBC Urdu exaggerated stories widely shared on social media get motivated to join terrorist ranks & come to Kashmir creating trouble. https://t.co/kYFb8zOLEu — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) August 27, 2019

@BBCUrdu website has deleted the controversial line from the story now. I had taken the screenshot though. pic.twitter.com/sNrdTIaqUI — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) August 27, 2019

Truth is the ultimate causality in journalism driven by agenda.

Wish we had reporters on ground reporting truth. Absolving murderers is no journalism. https://t.co/zzCRLmay4M — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) August 27, 2019
