UP: Baghpat men kill niece's boyfriend, rotten body chewed by animals found

A case under the Arms Act was registered in Dwarka South police station and both the accused were arrested.

The Delhi Police's manhunt to nab criminals hiding in Dwarka led them to unearth a gruesome murder of a 25-year-old youth in neighbouring Uttar Pradesh.

The police on Monday arrested Pramod, 20, and Prakash, 22, for the murder committed in UP's Baghpat. Two country-made pistols with two live cartridges have been recovered from their possession.

On August 23, a partially burnt body was found at an isolated area in Niwara, Baghpat industrial area. It appeared that to conceal the identity of the deceased, the face was burnt. The police said the body looked to be at least three days old as there were bugs on it and one of the legs was probably eaten by animals. As the body could not be identified, it was preserved in the hospital. An FIR in the case was registered in Baghpat.

The Jail Bail Released Cell of Dwarka district on Monday received a tip-off that two armed criminals are hiding in the area and might commit some crime in Sector-1, Dwarka.

The team laid a trap near Sector-1 bus stand in Dwarka where the accused were supposed to come. Around 10.15am, the accused were seen coming from the JJ Colony side. The team overpowered both the accused.

A case under the Arms Act was registered in Dwarka South police station and both the accused were arrested.

Interrogation

During interrogation, the accused made a sensational disclosure to the police. Pramod and Prakash admitted that a week ago, they killed their distant relative Ankit, a resident of Jhajjar in Haryana.

Pramod further disclosed that his niece was in a relationship with Ankit. They had informed about the activities of Ankit to his parents but nobody paid any heed.

Angry over this, Pramod made a plan to eliminate Ankit. He hired his friend Prakash and also roped in one Atul in his plan to kill Ankit. Prakash provided three country-made pistols.

As per their plan, on August 20 evening, they called Ankit to join them for drinks. When Ankit got drunk, they took him to Baghpat Industrial Area in an inebriated condition. After reaching the isolated spot, they shot him in the forehead and burnt his face to conceal his identity.

Ankit's family was informed who later identified the body. The deceased's family was not aware of him missing as he was staying in Bahadurgarh, Haryana, in rented accommodation and used to visit their house in months.
