nushrat bharucha: I loved the bin mausam ki barsaat in Prayagraj: Nushrat Bharucha

Nushrat Bharucha shooting in Prayagraj for Hurdang (BCCL/ Amar Deep)

I loved the bin mausam ki barsaat in Prayagraj: Nushrat Bharucha

Shooting in UP for the first time, actress Nushrat Bharucha made the most of her visit to Prayagraj. The 'Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety' fame actress was in Prayagraj shooting for the film ' Hurdang '. "Shooting in UP, especially Prayagraj is a different experience altogether. I have been here for almost a month, or probably more than that. I have actually roamed around the streets of this city and have met several people. I have also met several students in the college where we are shooting. Prayagraj has a very different vibe. In my head, I wasn’t even able to imagine ki Prayagraj kaise hoga. So everything for me was a new discovery and a new experience. In the past, several of my industry friends have shot in UP and used to share so many stories about this place, while I have only been to Lucknow to promote my films. I know Prayagraj quite well now, that toh I can surely say after shooting here for such a long time," shared the actress.Nushrat Bharucha shooting in Prayagraj for Hurdang (BCCL/ Amar Deep)But one thing that Nushrat and the other cast and crew had to deal with were the rains. "The rains in Prayagraj are really unpredictable. It used be very nice and sunny and then suddenly it would start raining and I used to wonder ki where did this rain come from abhi toh dhoop thi. Since we were shooting outdoors, I used to be continuously updating my weather app. But at the end of the day, I love rain, and haan kabhi kabhi bin mausam ki barsaat bhi achhi lagti hai."A complete foodie at heart, the ' Pyaar Ka Punchnama ' actress has been roaming around the streets of Prayagraj to try different delicacies. "The moment I landed in Prayagraj, I asked people what is this city known for food wise. And I ate my favourite paani poori there from a popular chaat waala, who was just outside my hotel. So instead of ordering it in my room, I actually went there to eat it. Then I have also eaten the faluda kulfi at Sangam, which I was told is a must-try here. Since I was shooting there, so especially jaa ke khana nahi pada. And I also had the very famous lassi of Prayagraj. I don’t exactly remember the place as it was ordered for me in my hotel room. But it was really yummy and heavy too. I was also able to know this city more because my director Nikhil Nagesh Bhatt, who is from Prayagraj. So he knows all the famous food joints, so he kept ordering something or the other for us. But I also had to check the calorie count, so I kept on having a bite or two of everything her ordered.”Telling us about her character in the film, Nushrat shares, "My character in the film is called Jhullan, who is a really tez-tarrar in your face kind of girl, who is very honest but unappologetically herself sort of character. She has a very small world. Her life starts and ends with Daddu, Sunny Kaushal. It is a very sweet love sotry between these two characters and their life is of the 90s Prayagraj."To get into the character of a college student, Nushrat also visited a few colleges of Prayagraj to meet the students. "Preparing for the role was really a fun task for me. I went to Prayagraj a few days before the shooting started and interacted wit the students there to observe them. It was like going back to college," she shared.
