'Pak uses terrorism as diplomatic tool': Jaishankar in Russia, slams Islamabad for obstructing trade, connectivity

India's External Affairs Minister S Jaishankar has slammed Pakistan for using terror as a state policy and a country that has been obstructing trade and connectivity in the region.

Speaking at the powerful think tank Valdai club in Moscow EAM said, "Problem with Pakistan is very different. I would say if today you look at international relations, I cannot think of any other country in the world, which actually uses terrorism as a diplomatic tool against its neighbour. It a very unique phenomenon."

EAM highlighted how Islamabad refused to grant the most favoured nation or MFN status to India despite New Delhi granting it. India had withdrawn the status after the 14th February Pulwama terror attack perpetrated by Pakistan based Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM) terror group.

EAM said, "We have struggled to have normal trade. They would not give us MFN status, although we are members of the WTO and Gatt. They would not allow connectivity from India to Afghanistan."

Pakistan has also been hindering India-Afghanistan connectivity. To increase connectivity India and Afghanistan started the air corridor which has been expanded to many cities of both the countries.

EAM explained, "So if have a neighbour who will not trade with you normally, who would not allow connectivity, using terrorism as a means of pressurizing you is okay as a policy, it is not a normal neighbour. We have some unique problem out there. We will find ways to deal with. There are complicated political and historical reasons for it."

Asked if, in foreseeable future, there can convergences between the two neighbours, Jaishanker said, "It will certainly would be my hope that they would become a normal neighbour, one day. I mean, that has to be something I would like to see happen."

The comments by EAM Jaishankar come even as Pakistan on Tuesday said that it is considering a complete closure of Air Space to India and a complete ban on use of Pakistan Land routes for Indian trade to Afghanistan.

EAM is on a two-day Russia visit and will meet his counterpart the Russian FM Sergey Lavrov on Wednesday.
