Garissa CEC's attempted murder case to proceed

The case of attempted murder of a former Garissa county executive will proceed on September 23 without further delay.

Chief magistrate Francis Andayi fixed the hearing of the case in which Mohamud Hussein Aden and Juliet Charity Njoki have denied attempting to kill Idris Mukhtar, former Garissa finance executive, on May 19, 2018 at Kileleshwa in Nairobi.

The two also deny another charge of conspiring to kill lawyer Charles Kanjama between July 1 and September 27, 2018 in Nairobi. They are represented by a team of lawyers led by Kiraithe Wandungi.

The prosecution says the accused jointly with others not before court attempted to cause the death of Mukhtar by shooting and injuring him at White Star Restaurant along Kandara Road in Kileleshwa, Nairobi.

Mukhtar was immediately after the shooting admitted to the ICU at a Nairobi hospital before he was transferred to India.

A man alleged to be a prime suspect died in Parklands police station cells where he was being held for interrogation.

David Mwai, 27, allegedly committed suicide after recording a confession with detectives.

During investigations police arrested several people among them Garissa Governor Ali Korane and his brother after they were mentioned adversely by witnesses.

The governor, his brother and others were released. But Mukhtar's family insisted they were involved in the plot to kill their son since he had questioned the governor's education.

Korane has denied any connection to the attempted murder.

According to investigators Mwai, the assassin hired to kill the former Garissa finance boss, confessed to police the initial plan was to kidnap and poison Mukhtar but he took too long and instead was ordered to shoot to kill.

Mwai reportedly was unable to abduct and inject the county official with hydrogen peroxide for three weeks.

Mwai told the investigators how he was approached by a former schoolmate who told him a friend wanted a man killed. The pay was to be Sh500,000.
