Rahul's immaturity problem for Congress: BJP leaders mock Gandhi over Kashmir stand

Minutes after Rahul Gandhi issued a clarification on Congress's stand on Kashmir, BJP leader and Union minister Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi has attacked the Congress leader saying his immaturity has become a bane for the party.

Naqvi said, "Rahul gandhi ki nadaani Congress ki pareshani ban gayee hai (Rahul Gandhi's immaturity has become a problem for Congress.)"

The minister further added, "Congress leadership has realised that they have committed a mistake." He was referring to the times when Congress targeted the Modi government over the abrogation of Article 370 and the ongoing severe lockdown of the Valley.

Rahul Gandhi on Wednesday issued a statement and said that although Congress disagrees with the government on a number of issues, it is firm on one stand that Kashmir is an internal matter for India.

it’s like stealing a Band-Aid from the dispensary & sticking it on a gunshot wound.



https://t.co/VyEBopyPvr Shandilya Giriraj Singh (@girirajsinghbjp) August 28, 2019

He said, "I disagree with this Govt. on many issues. But, let me make this absolutely clear: Kashmir is India's internal issue & there is no room for Pakistan or any other foreign country to interfere in it."

Joining Naqvi in the attack on Rahul Gandhi, Union minister and BJP MP Giriraj Singh said Rahul Gandhi and Congress have done much damage to India.

In a tweet, Giriraj mocked Rahul Gandhi's statement on Wednesday morning and said, "It's like stealing a Band-Aid from the dispensary and sticking it on a gunshot wound."

Giriraj also slammed Congress spokesperson Randeep Singh Surjewala who has said that Pakistan is using Rahul Gandhi's name to file petitions in the United Nations against India's move on Kashmir.

Spot on, Chief! This is what @INCIndia has insisted all along: J&K is an integral part of India; we opposed the manner in which Art.370 was abrogated because the way it was done assaulted our Constitution& democratic values. No reason for Pak to draw any comfort from our stand https://t.co/iI8HZ6sopU Shashi Tharoor (@ShashiTharoor) August 28, 2019

Giriraj said, "After knocking on every door in the international community, Pakistan's last resort is now to rely on Rahul Gandhi and Congress."

Meanwhile, Congress MP Shashi Tharoor has come out to support Rahul Gandhi. Tharoor tweeted, "Spot on, Chief! This is what INCIndia has insisted all along: J&K is an integral part of India; we opposed the manner in which Art.370 was abrogated because the way it was done assaulted our Constitution& democratic values. No reason for Pak to draw any comfort from our stand (sic)".
