'Pak considering complete closure of airspace to India': How this could impact India's carriers

Air India | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights During the five month period when Pakistan had closed its air space after Balakot strike, Indian airlines suffered losses to the tune of Rs 700 crore The average flight time, during those five months, was increased by up to 90 minutes, depending on the type of aircraft and destination As per reports, Air India lost over Rs 400 crore during those five months

Pakistan is mulling a complete closure of its air space to India, Pakistan's Minister for Science and Technology Fawad Chaudhry indicated on Tuesday. His remarks came amid increasing rhetoric from Islamabad following New Delhi's decision to scrap the special status granted to Jammu and Kashmir under Article 370.

Taking to Twitter, Fawad wrote, “PM is considering a complete closure of Air Space to India, a complete ban on use of Pakistan Land routes for Indian trade to Afghanistan was also suggested in cabinet meeting, legal formalities for these decisions are under consideration... #Modi has started we will finish!”

PM is considering a complete closure of Air Space to India, a complete ban on use of Pakistan Land routes for Indian trade to Afghanistan was also suggested in cabinet meeting,legal formalities for these decisions are under consideration... #Modi has started we ll finish! — Ch Fawad Hussain (@fawadchaudhry) August 27, 2019

With Pakistan failing to get traction for its belligerent stand on Kashmir, Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan on August 26 said that he will raise the issue at every international forum, including at the UN General Assembly. His reaction came after Prime Minister Narendra Modi, during his meeting with US President Donald Trump on the margins of G7 Summit in France categorically rejected any scope for third-party mediation between India and Pakistan on Kashmir.

Pakistan had closed its air space on February 26, after the Indian Air Force carried out airstrikes on terror facilities in Pakistan's Balakot in the wake of a terror attack on a CRPF convoy in Pulwama on February 14. Pakistan opened its airspace for all civilian traffic on July 16, after more than four-and-a-half months.

How the closure of Pakistan air space could impact airlines

If Pakistan decides to close its air space, it will increase flying cost and flight time for Indian carriers. During the five-month period when Pakistan had closed its air space after the Balakot strikes, Indian airlines suffered losses to the tune of Rs 700 crore and the average flight time was increased by up to 90 minutes, depending on the type of aircraft and destination. Air India suffered the highest losses owing to Pakistan's decision.

According to a report published in The Indian Express, Air India lost over Rs 400 crore till July 2, while India’s largest domestic airline IndiGo incurred a loss of Rs 25.1 crore till May 31. Besides, SpiceJet and GoAir suffered a loss Rs 30.73 crore and Rs 2.1 crore respectively till June 20.

Air India had to re-route, merge or suspend many of its international flights that connect India with European and US cities. “The flying time for long-haul flights towards the USA increased by 90 minutes and additional fuel was needed. US-bound flights had to be stopped at Vienna,” Air India said, explaining the effect of the closure of air space by Pakistan.

Indigo could not start direct flights from Delhi to Istanbul due to the closure of air space. Indigo, which had started flying the Delhi-Istanbul route in March, had to take the longer route over the Arabian Sea and make a stop at Doha in Qatar for refuelling.

As a result of the closure of Pakistan air space, global carriers such as United Airlines and Air Canada had suspended direct flights to India.

Apart from this, Pakistan also suffered a whopping USD 50 million loss after it closed its air space to India. “It’s a huge loss for our overall (aviation) industry,” the Dawn quoted Pakistan's Minister for Aviation Ghulam Sarwar Khan as saying in July.

Closure of Pakistan's air space could once again hit India's aviation sector and airlines' revenues.
