Delhi-NCR’s most wanted plumber-turned-don arrested from IGI Airport

Before turning to crime, Kaushal worked as plumber | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Delhi-NCR's most wanted gangster Kaushal arrested Haryana STF arrested Kaushal from IGI airport on Monday Before turning to crime, Kaushal worked as plumber

Gurugram: The Special Task Force (STF) of the Haryana police has arrested one of the most wanted gangsters of the National Capital Region (NCR) from Indira Gandhi International (IGI) Airport on Monday. The accused named Kaushal was arrested when he flew in from Dubai.

Kaushal used to work as plumber till 15 years ago in Gurugram. The accused is wanted in at least 206 criminal cases including the murder of Haryana Congress leader Vikas Chaudhary. The Congress leader was shot dead in Faridabad in June this year.

According to a report, the accused Kaushal carried a bounty of Rs 5 lakh on his head. Chaudhary had criminal influence in Gurugram, Faridabad and Rewari region and was operating his racket from Thailand and Dubai.

The report further suggests that Chaudhary never made extortion or threat calls by himself, but used to make audio clips and sent it through Whatsapp messenger app to his targets.

According to STF officials, they received a tip-off that the accused was heading to Delhi to meet his family. However, other reports suggest that he was deported to Delhi after he was detained by United Arab Emirates (UAE) officials for using fake documents to stay in Dubai.

Earlier, Kaushal arrested in 2015, but jumped parole and fled.

"The gangster was staying in Dubai on a fake passport to avoid scrutiny from police and this helped us to bring him back to India within a week of his arrest," the report quoted an official as saying.

According to Deputy Inspector General (DIG) STF Satheesh Balan, police officials received information that a man against whom a Red Corner Notice was issued has been detained at IGI airport. Later, a team of senior police officials was rushed to the airport to arrest the wanted man.

Kaushal was produced before a local court in Gurugram in connection with the murder of a gangster Mahesh Attack and sent to seven days police custody.

An STF official said that Kaushal was travelling on a fake passport issued in the name of Narendra Kumar Rajasthan's Alwar. Later, that passport was cancelled on the request from the Haryana government.

Police officials say they have also recovered another passport from Kaushal issued in the name of Harish Yadav and nearly Rs 1.8 cr in Kuwaiti dinar fro his possession.

The officials said that Kaushal was running his extortion racket with the help of his trusted aides named Amit Dagar and Anil Lath, both of whom were residing in Dubai.
