After J&K continues to remain tense

After J&K continues to remain tense

Even after three weeks of the scrapping of the Article 370 from the Constitution, situation in the newly created Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir continues to be tenuously tense as was more than evident when Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and 11 leaders of other opposition parties who landed on Saturday at Srinagar Airport were sent back to Delhi exposing all official claims of return of normalcy in Kashmir in particular and in the union territories in general.

The delegation of the opposition parties and the accompanying media were detained at the Airport and forced to return to Delhi. For over 10 days government controlled and influenced media has been shouting loudly informing country at large that situation in the two union territories including in the Kashmir valley is normal and under control.

Leaders of the Opposition & the Press got a taste of draconian administration & brute force unleashed on the people of J&K when we tried to visit Srinagar yesterday", Gandhi tweeted adding that the people in Kashmir have been curtailed from their liberties.

From words of Governor Satyapal Malik and official spokespersons, who have been repeatedly been shifting gears with contrary claims of return of normalcy to "situation" moving towards normal in the erstwhile J&K state, it is clear that the governments in New Delhi as well as in Srinagar are trying to hide facts on the ground.

Background of the visit was that former Congress president had been invited by the Governor some days ago and he had accepted the invitation. It was obviously appropriate that Gandhi took opposition along so that their assessment based on a sense of what people are going through was credible. But they weren't allowed beyond the airport. Press people with the delegation were mishandled, beaten. It is clear that situation is J&K isnot normal.

While the opposition condemned the government's decision as "undemocratic and unconstitutional", step is unprecedented because nine political parties that have representation in the two houses of parliament are being treated with suspicion and are being projected as anti-people. Anger of the people is not being allowed a legitimate ventilation thus forcing people to weigh their options.

Restrictions were imposed in Jammu and Kashmir on 5 August after the Centre withdrew special status from the state and divided it into two union territories almost three weeks back.

It is over three weeks that there has been no ground report from Kashmir in particular which is resulting in spread of rumours. Visit of responsible representatives of political parties would have only helped the government.

Communist Party of India (Marxist) leader Sitaram Yechury, CPI's D Raja, DMK's Tiruchi Siva, RJD's Manoj Jha, NCP's Majeed Memon, TMC's Dinesh Trivedi and Congress' Ghulam Nabi Azad along with Anand Sharma were part of the delegation.They had planned to visit other parts of the state. So far, the government has not allowed any political leader to enter the state. They are all senior leaders and would have done nothing to worsen the prevailing situation.

Azad was earlier twice stopped at Jammu airport, most recently on Tuesday, and was "forcibly" sent back to Delhi both times. Even Yechury of the CPM and Raja of the CPI were earlier not allowed to enter the state.

Over1000 leaders both political as well as social and economic, including former Chief Ministers Omar Abdullah and Mehbooba Mufti, are under arrest. The restrictions are still in place at several areas in the state.

Activities of over a month since several steps including the sending of additional security forces for finally scrapping the Article 370 along with Article 35 A and to divide the erstwhile state of J&K into two union territories, it is clear that the Modi government is moving ahead unilaterally without taking any opposition party or even an NDA ally into confidence which has rarely happened in the past.

Earlier on several occasions, the governments in New Delhi took the help of the opposition to apply balm on the hurt feelings of the affected people. All party meetings were convened by the government and a delegation of major opposition parties were urged to go and visit affected areas but here in the case of J&K, the opposition has been totally sidelined.

Developments in J&K after 5th of August establishes beyond any doubt that Prime Minister Narendra Modi is not at all interested in taking the opposition along and wants to solve and resolve the issue in an autocratic manner. The Prime Minister's approach in Kashmir has once again proved that his recent emphasis and stress on the need of the opposition in democracy was not out of his conviction but was mere a hollow expression of paying lip service to country's parliamentary democracy.

Stopping opposition fromvisiting the Kashmir, keeping local leaders under arrest, cutting off the communication avenues like the internet and mobile telephony and restricting telephone services is being reported by the foreign media that in turn is negatively impacting the Modi government's image. It may backfire in the long run as it is going to be increasingly difficult to defend these measures.

Question is how long the government would be able to maintain information blackout and keep the situation under control by force and denying people basic liberties. Keeping security forces on high alert to maintain law and order for a longer duration is difficult. Holding on operations of shorter duration are relatively easier than sustaining them over a longer time is a maxim that wise governments follow.

Dr. Satish Misra is a Veteran Journalist & Research Associate with Observer Research Foundation.

—[IFS]
