'They are agent of Pak'—Twitter hails J&K cop who exposed BBC Urdu for justifying truck driver's murder by stone pelters

'They are agent of Pak'—Twitter hails J&K cop who exposed BBC Urdu for justifying truck driver's murder by stone pelters

"Truth is the ultimate causality in journalism driven by agenda. Wish we had reporters on ground reporting truth. Absolving murderers is no journalism," the J&K cop Imtiyaz Hussain wrote on Twitter.

Jammu and Kashmir (J&K) police officer Imtiyaz Hussain has lashed out at a section of foreign media and exposed how they are carrying anti-India narrative after the abrogation of Article 370.

SC allows Yechury to visit J&K, five-judge Constitution Bench to hear pleas regarding abrogation of Article 370

Taking it to Twitter, Imtiyaz Hussain slammed a @BBCUrdu story over its reporting on the killing of a truck driver in Kashmir. The cop said, "A @BBCUrdu story, where the reporter presumes on behalf of rioters that truck would be carrying security forces, thus killed the truck driver. What a shameful justification of murder by learned journalist!"

Violence in Kashmir because of Pakistan's instigation, says Rahul Gandhi after Islamabad uses his words in letter to UN

Also Read: J&K Police officer lashes out at BBC Urdu for justifying truck driver’s murder by stone-pelters

Slamming @BBCUrdu story for anti-India narrative, the J&K cop said, "the truck driver in Kashmir was killed by Pakistan instigated rioters. He also added: "there've been 02 killings since August 04 in Kashmir. One person killed by Pakistan backed terrorists and another a truck driver by Pakistan instigated rioters. None of these reported by @AJEnglish, @BBCUrdu or @nytimes because it doesn't fit in the scheme of their propaganda."

Also Read: Jammu and Kashmir top cop exposes anti-India narrative of the foreign media

Truth is the ultimate causality in journalism driven by agenda.

Wish we had reporters on ground reporting truth. Absolving murderers is no journalism. https://t.co/zzCRLmay4M — Imtiyaz Hussain (@hussain_imtiyaz) August 27, 2019

The J&K cop is being praised on social media after he exposed BBC Urdu following which the controversial line was deleted from the story. Take a look at these comments:

We believe you sir and we know because of ppl like u in valley, Kashmir is in safe hands... — gullyboy (@Adamhere12) August 27, 2019

They will report when stone pelters will hit by pallets during protecting these terrorists — Information world (@pkhandsome17) August 27, 2019

If a country puts certain restrictions to bring law and order, suddenly it becomes extra judicial and human rights issue. But lynching of Ayub Pandit, killing of Aurangzeb, stone pelters kicking and hurting the army is devoid of human rights? Or it is a certified Jihad by some? — Ravi Rai (@Raviravirai) August 27, 2019

Proud of you Imtiaz Hussain and your dedicated unnamed Team — NABAROON GOSWAMI (@nabaroon) August 27, 2019

You rock! More power to you. Keep exposing their ville agenda. — Chanakya74 (@Chanakya_74) August 27, 2019

Imtiyaz Sir, super human like you are hope of India and humanity. May Lord bless you with courage and good health to serve country in best possible way. Stay blessed — Kafir (@mintu_solanki) August 27, 2019
