Saved From Slaughter, Seized Camel Dies In Dhula Police Station

A Correspondent

TANGLA: Tragedy struck the camels seized by Darrang police which were brought for sale ahead of Bakr Eid at Dhula and Tangni cattle market in Darrang district.

One of the six seized camels died in Dhula Police Station on Monday night. While five of them are at Dhula Police Station, one is in custody of Mangaldoi Police Station, said Dhula Police.

“The animals are finding it difficult to cope with the climatic condition of Assam which might have resulted in the camel’s sudden death,” said a caretaker looking after the animals, while adding that the rest of camels are taking food and are being looked after by veterinarian.

The Darrang Police are also in dizzy as to the fate of the camels which is entangled in the court of law. “We do not know much about the camels’ whereabouts. We seized them on August 11 and they are in our custody since then,” said the Officer-in-charge of Dhula Police Station, Abhijit Kakoty. “We are also finding it difficult to take care of the camels. However, we are consulting with veterinarians to ensure that they are in good health,” he added.

The owner of the camels was also given interim custody by a lower court in Darrang. However, police have challenged the verdict before the sessions court with an appeal to give custody of the animals to the Animal Welfare Board of India. “We have denied custody of the camels to its owner Samatullah and appealed to the court to give the custody of the camels to Animal Welfare Board of India,” said Kakoty. “We are waiting for the court order so that we can hand over the camels,” he added.

“Rajasthan has banned slaughter and transportation of Camels under the Rajasthan Camel (Prohibition of Slaughter and Regulation of Temporary Migration or Export) Bill, 2015,” said Sujeet Choudhury, a member of the Animal Welfare Board of India. Choudhury came to Mangaldai based on information of the seizure of the animals.

“It is baffling as to how these animals were smuggled to Assam for sale,” said Choudhury. “Camel is the State animal of Rajasthan. It suits to the weather of Rajasthan only,” he further said. Choudhury informed that they were trying to take the animals back to Rajasthan.

Also Read: Stolen truck meets with accident at Dhula

Also Watch: 264th Bokakhesa-Bhouna organized in Jamugurihat | The Sentinel News | Assam News
