Life with bribes and kickbacks

India’s BJP and Congress party compete in mutual accusations of major corruption, which persists at both national and individual level.

Gimme the money: waiting to exchange old banknotes outside the Reserve Bank of India in Bangalore Manjunath Kiran · AFP · Getty

Indian prime minister Narendra Modi presented himself as the nation’s chowkidar (watchman) after the clashes between India and Pakistan that followed a car bomb attack in Jammu and Kashmir this February. Rahul Gandhi, president of the Congress party, replied that ‘the watchman is a thief’ (chowkidar chor hai) but the slogan didn’t catch on. Modi was re-elected in May with an even bigger majority than in 2014.

Corruption is a regular part of Indian politics, and Indian life in general. Beside the major corruption scandals exposed by the media, India leads the Asia-Pacific region in bribes and backhanders. The poorest are worst affected: 73% resort to bribery at least once a year compared with 55% of the better-off, according to Transparency International, which, though controversial, publishes unique research.

Bribery gives access services that ought to be public: the issue of official documents, help from the police, connection to the electricity grid, even hospital treatment. The business sector complains about corruption too, though it is the subject of many criminal investigations — compromised businessmen have had to flee the country — and links between politicians and obscure financiers constitute what journalist James Crabtree calls the ‘billionaire Raj’.

Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) dreams of a future ‘without Congress’ and criticises the dynastic character of its rival, which has dominated Indian politics since 1949. The BJP accuses the Congress party of courting Muslims and exploits scandals that have emerged under Congress governments. Modi has claimed that Rajiv Gandhi, Rahul’s father, ‘was termed “Mr Clean” by his courtiers, but his life ended [in a suicide bombing] as bhrashtachari [corrupt] number one’. This was a reference to the Bofors scandal, in which the Swedish firm secured a contract to supply field howitzers to India after secret payments to intermediary politicians and defence ministry (...)
