Natural for accused in cow slaughter cases to be punished by mob, feel 35% Indian cops: Report

The report is titled 'Status of Policing in India Report 2019' (Representative Image) | Photo Credit: BCCL

Key Highlights Titled 'Status of Policing in India Report 2019', the report focuses on police adequacy and working conditions. 50 per cent of police personnel feel Muslims are "naturally prone" to committing crimes 43 per cent of 12,000 cops whose responses were recorded said that rape accused should be punished by mob

New Delhi: Justice is hard to find in a country where multiple cognisable crimes are reported every hour. However, a new report has now revealed that India is in dire need of better educating the very people responsible for bringing justice to victims of a crime, the police. Released by former Supreme Court judge J Chelameswar, the report highlights startling responses by members of the police force from across 21 Indian states.

Titled 'Status of Policing in India Report 2019', the report focuses on police adequacy and working conditions. For this report, NGO Common Cause and Lokniti Programme of the Centre for the Study of Developing Societies interviewed as many as 12,000 police personnel stationed across 21 states and around 11,000 of their close family members.

In the report, researchers found that one in two police personnel interviewed as part of the project feel that members of the Muslim community are "naturally prone" to committing crimes. It also revealed that 35 per cent of those cops held a common belief that it is only natural for a mob to deliver the punishment to the "culprit" in cases of cow slaughter. Out of the interviewees, 43 per cent said that it is natural for a mob to punish an individual accused of rape.

As many as 37 per cent of the personnel interviewed during the compilation of this report told volunteers that those accused of minor offences should be let off after a small punishment by the police itself instead of being tried in a court of law. The report also addresses a major cause for concern which has been raised by activists and citizens alike, the pressure exerted on investigators while probing allegations against people wielding political clout. Researchers found that 72 per cent of the 12,000 policemen interviewed experienced "political pressure" while investigating such a case.

To put things in perspective, the Delhi High Court cited the 2018 edition of the Status Policing in India report to establish the existence of institutional bias of the police force while issuing its landmark judgement in the 1987 Hashimpura massacre. A trial court had earlier acquitted 16 policemen accused of killing 42 people, in this case.

During the release of the report, former Supreme Court judge J Chelameswar stressed on the need to issue better training to police officers. He also talked about how transfers should not be used as a form of punishment against policemen by political forces.
