The arms and allies we need to defend our seas

RICARDO SALUDO

THIS writer has long echoed the advocacy of the late National Security Adviser, Parañaque congressman, Philippine Navy stalwart and United States Naval Academy graduate Roilo Golez. Before his death in June last year, he had repeatedly argued that the Philippines should acquire anti-ship missiles to deter encroachment on our islands and reefs in the South China Sea.

The projectiles can also stop intruders in our exclusive economic zone (EEZ), extending 200 nautical miles (370 kilometers) from our territorial baselines; and our extended continental shelf (ECS), stretching 320 nm (592 km) out. Under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (Unclos), a nation has exclusive rights to conduct or authorize economic activities in the waters of its EEZ and the seabed of its ECS.

The Washington D.C. defense think-tank Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments (CSBA) also urged the US to help the Philippines acquire anti-ship missiles, plus maritime surveillance aircraft and air defense systems. CSBA pushed for these “anti-access, area-denial” or A2-AD assets in its report, “The Geostrategic Return of the Philippines,” after the government of Benigno Aquino 3rd lost control over Scarborough Shoal in April 2012.

Patrol planes would watch the sea, covering far greater expanses in much less time than frigates and boats. Missiles would deter interlopers, even major warships, and air defense systems would protect rockets and bases. Makes perfect sense.

But our top ally had other plans. Instead of helping us defend our islets, shoals and waters on our own, America got Aquino to allow more US forces into the country, with access to Philippine bases, under the 2014 Enhanced Defense Cooperation Agreement (EDCA), despite Washington’s refusal to help defend our territorial claims.

American military advisers did not favor missiles or the other A2-AD gear advocated by CSBA. It took Japan to give us several sea patrol planes, and only in recent years did the Philippine Air Force (PAF) order maritime surveillance aircraft.

As for sea weaponry, the Philippine Navy is spending tens of billions of pesos on frigates and boats. But they won’t last a week against the People’s Liberation Army Navy (PLAN). They can’t even get near enough to fire their limited-range missiles before longer-range Chinese rockets take them out.

End-result: Despite huge outlays on new armaments, the country still has to depend on America for maritime defense. Which seems exactly what the US wants, so its forces would be welcomed and allowed to use our archipelago as its main military platform in its escalating superpower rivalry with China.

The A2-AD alternative

But what if the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) took the advice from Golez and the CSBA, and acquired anti-ship missiles, patrol aircraft, and air defense systems?

Golez had advocated India’s BrahMos projectile, developed from Russian technology. Its range of 300-400 km would cover our entire EEZ and most of our ECS. Mounted three on a truck, the mobile rockets would be hard to find and take out. And their supersonic speed makes them near-impossible to dodge.

The late security chief wanted 200 BrahMos; the military could acquire 100 initially, plus Japan’s Mitsubishi Type 88 or Type 12 projectiles (range: 200 km) at a discount. For P35 billion, we could acquire 100 BrahMos and maybe 200 Mitsubishis, deployed together, so adversaries don’t know which ones are pointed at them.

What about planes? The PAF already has eight Beechcrafts given by Japan, plus C-295 planes ordered from Indonesia. For about P10 billion, the Air Force can add six high-performance maritime patrol aircraft for a future fleet of 16 MPAs.

The Armed Forces could spend another P15 billion for air defense, for a total bill of P60 billion. That’s the estimated cost of six missile-armed frigates the Navy wants to buy. But the missiles, planes, and anti-aircraft weaponry could watch more waters, scare even large warships, and fend off air attack than anything short of an aircraft carrier.

Do we have P60 billion to spare? Budget officials told Golez that Malampaya gas royalties — now at P150 billion — could be used for weaponry securing offshore oil and gas deposits. And when President Rodrigo Duterte visited India last year, he got a billion-dollar credit line to buy Indian products.

With patrol aircraft and supersonic missiles protected by air defenses, the Philippines would become a porcupine nation, which no country, not even China, could take lightly. Then, if anyone encroaches our islands and waters, we can do far more than protest and sue.

Why we can’t get missiles

So, what are the generals waiting for? Well, the US would be uncomfortable, if not downright livid, about the idea of missiles with Russian technology being its ally’s most sophisticated and lethal weaponry, as one ambassador and retired general confided.

Funnily enough, China would join the US in opposing anti-ship missiles in our arsenal. Beijing certainly doesn’t want its ships facing supersonic rockets. And Washington would have two worries: losing its leverage to get the EDCA implemented, and possibly being dragged into a war with China if the Philippines sinks a PLAN vessel.

So, the military has to make do with ships and planes that don’t scare our neighbors, and all we can do about intrusions is file futile protests, which are routinely ignored.

Meanwhile, Vietnam recently forced a Chinese survey ship out of its EEZ after several weeks’ standoff. It has nothing like the 1951 US-Philippines Mutual Defense Treaty or the 1998 Visiting Forces Agreement. It gets no American military aid and advice, and faces PLA troops, warships, planes, and rockets just across the border.

But Hanoi has an ally that knows how to get Beijing to behave: Moscow. Russian state petroleum enterprises are set to survey for oil in Vietnam’s EEZ. And the Vietnamese are buying BrahMos missiles, which India agreed to sell.

Maybe we can learn a thing or two from the only Asian nation that stood up to two global superpowers.
