Bhima Koregaon case: Bombay High Court questions accused on why he read War and Peace

The court told the accused, "Nature of the books, suggest that you are a part of a banned organisation."

During the hearing of the "Urban Naxal" case in the Bombay High Court on Wednesday, the court deemed the nature of literature read by the accused as evidence of their affiliation with banned organisations.

A single-judge bench of Justice Sarang Kotwal hearing the bail plea of Bhima Koregaon violence accused Vernon Gonsalves and others also said that books like Leo Tolstoy's "War and Peace" and CDs prima facie indicated they contained some material against the State.

Vernon Gonsalves's lawyer Mihir Desai said, "There is no evidence of anything being recovered from him and his house on the search conducted at his residence in Andheri."

The classic novel about Russia during Napoleonic wars became a point of contention during the day's hearing after the Pune Police probing the case claimed that the book was part of the "highly incriminating evidence" it had seized from Gonsalves' house in Mumbai during raids conducted a year ago.

Desai said Pune police have seized a CD of Jai Bhima Comrade documentary and some books from Gonzalves's house. The CDs that have been seized are "Marxist Archives", "Rajya Daman Virodhi" released by the Kabir Kala Manch, and book "War and Peace" by Leo Tolstoy. At this, the court said, "Nature of the books, suggest that you are a part of a banned organisation."

"The title of the CD 'Rajya Daman Virodhi' itself suggests it has something against the State while 'War and Peace' is about a war in another country. Why did you (Gonsalves) keep objectionable material such as books like 'War and Peace', books and CDs at home? You will have to explain this to the court," said Justice Kotwal.

Desai then argued, "mere possession does not make anyone a terrorist."

The court told Desai to explain why Gonsalves kept such material at his home and also asked the Pune police to convince the court on the electronic material they have against Gonsalves.

Gonsalves' counsel Mihir Desai told the high court that Pune Police had based the entire case against him on the basis of some emails and letters recovered from the computers of other people.

"None of these letters or emails were written by Gonsalves or were addressed to him. Therefore, in the absence of any cogent incriminating evidence against him, Gonsalves shouldn't be denied bail," Desai argued.

Opposing the bail application, advocate Aruna Pai, who is representing Pune Police, said while police did not find any electronic evidence against Gonsalves from the computer and hard disk recovered from his house, the raid had yielded "highly incriminating evidence" in the form of "books and CDs with objectionable titles mentioned above".

The judge also said Pune police too have to do "much explaining" to convince the court that the material found on such CDs and in the books is incriminatory against Gonsalves.

"So far, the police have failed to provide details of what was on the CDs or in the books and pamphlets recovered that linked Gonsalves to the case. Merely stating that they have objectionable titles is not enough. Have you tested these CDs? What if they turn out to be blank inside?" the judge asked.

The hearing will continue on August 29.

The case

Vernon Gonsalves was arrested by the Pune police under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act after raids at residences and offices of several activists in connection with the Elgar Parishad case.

The police had claimed provocative speeches made at the Parishad on December 31, 2017, were responsible for the caste violence around Bhima Koregaon village in Pune district the next day during an event to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the Battle of Bhima Koregaon. One person was killed and others were injured in the violence.

Police are probing alleged Naxal links in organising the Parishad, which was held at historic Shaniwarwada in Pune.

Other arrested accused in the case include activists and academics Shoma Sen, Rona Wilson, Sudha Bharadwaj, Arun Ferreira, and Gautam Navlakha.
