Priyanka Chopra Got Called Out For Her ‘Hypocritical’ Politics

Priyanka Chopra is often looked up to as a role model for people supporting a peaceful world. She has done a lot of good works for our earth, and deserves to be praised as a hero.

However, no one is perfect, and Chopra may have made a mistake on her Twitter account. One woman wasn’t afraid to confront Chopra about her hypocrisy during BeautyCon. Here’s what happened.

Priyanka Chopra is confronted at BeautyCon for encouraging nuclear war

Priyanka Chopra | John Sciulli/Getty Images for Beautycon

All the drama was started by a tweet made on February 26, stating, “Jai Hind @IndianArmedForces.” Jai Hind is an Indian phrase that means “Hail India.” The tweet by itself doesn’t seem like that big of a deal, but it was made right after an announcement that the Indian armed forces had launched airstrikes in Pakistani territory, escalating tensions between nuclear powers.

Chopra received quite a lot of feedback on Twitter after her statement. But having people argue with you online is very different than having someone call you out in person. While Chopra was on stage, taking questions, at BeautyCon in Los Angeles, a woman confronted her about the tweet.

Ayesha Malik, stood up to confront Chopra. She also recorded the interaction and posted it on her own Twitter account. She said, “It was kind of hard hearing you talk about humanity, because as your neighbor, a Pakistani, I know you’re a bit of a hypocrite.”

She then brought up Chopra’s tweet, reading the statement and the exact date the tweet was made, so viewers could look it up for themselves.

Malik continued, “You are a UNICEF ambassador for peace and you’re encouraging nuclear war against Pakistan. There’s no winner in this. As a Pakistani, millions of people like me have supported you in your business of Bollywood and you wanted nuclear war.”

Before Malik could finish her statement, officials approached her and took the microphone back. Which left Malik yelling to be heard for the last couple sentences.

Priyanka Chopra responds to her critic

Priyanka Chopra gets an audience question calling her hypocritical — here’s her response. #beautycon pic.twitter.com/pS82qX1SQG — Lindsay Weinberg (@WeinbergLindsay) August 10, 2019

In response to Malik, Chopra said, “So, I have many, many friends from Pakistan and I am from India, and war is not something that I am really fond of but I am patriotic. So, I’m sorry if I hurt sentiments to people who do love me and have loved me, but I think that all of us have a sort of middle ground that we all have to walk, just like you probably do as well.”

At that time, Malik started yelling something from the audience, but we can’t make it out. Chopra, however, responds. “The way you came at me right now?” Chopra said. “Girl, don’t yell. We’re all here for love. Don’t yell. Don’t embarrass yourself. But we all walk that middle ground, but thank you for your enthusiasm and your question and your voice.”

Chopra’s response wasn’t totally fair since Malik was yelling because the microphone had been taken from her. More than likely, she was only trying to be heard, not trying to accost Chopra.

Later, Malik continued the conversation on Twitter. She wrote another post explaining how scared she and her family were during that time. With blackouts and the risk of nuclear weapons, it would be a very frightening experience.

Is Priyanka Chopra a hypocrite?

Priyanka Chopra tweeted during a time when we were this close to sending nukes to one another. Instead of advocating for peace she tweeted in support of the Indian army pic.twitter.com/LhbMkOW59v — Ayesha Malik (@Spishaa) August 11, 2019

Malik’s main criticism of Chopra is that she’s a UN ambassador on one hand, and cheering the Indian army’s treatment of Pakistan on the other. While it’s great to have national pride, Malik does have a point that Chopra should be for peace. Also, the UN shouldn’t be for any country over any other, so for a UN ambassador to support the force of one country, it is kind of hypocritical.

In reality, there’s nothing wrong with Chopra’s statement as an individual. We all have the right to our opinions and the right to express them. The problem is that she is an ambassador.

In the future, Chopra will need to consider her words more carefully if she would like to keep her position as a UN ambassador.
