12th India Security Summit on “Towards New National Cyber Security Strategy” held

New Delhi: The 12th India Security Summit on the theme “Towards New National Cyber Security Strategy” was held here today. During the conference, many issues were discussed such as protection of critical national infrastructure, emerging cyber threats: incidents, challenges and response.

Addressing the gathering, Dr Jitendra Singh said that Indian society has gone through rapid evolution as far as technology, special communication technology is concerned. He said that ‘digital culture’ is being transferred from generation to generations. He said that every technology has a utility; similarly cyber technology is a big boom nowadays. But besides being a boon the same technology has become one of the greatest threat, he added. He also mentioned about the cyber threat in the wake of national security.

The Minister said that the concept of security has itself undergone change in the last few decades. It has assumed proportions; external as well as internal. The Minister said that it is important to understand that terrorism is terrorism and there cannot be a distinction based on caste, creed and religion. He added that we need to set the priorities. The Minister expressed hope that threat of cyber security will be overcome soon and we will find ways to deal with the cyber threat.

The Minister of State for Home Affairs Shri G. Kishan Reddy said that we live in a digital world. He said that security is one of the challenging areas that all of us have to think upon. As we are adopting different technologies, we are also facing different challenges particularly on cyber security. Cyber security is the need of the hour for cyber safe society, the Minister said. Shri Reddy said that new tools and technologies must be developed at faster rate for cyber security.

Shri G Kishan Reddy said that cyber space is becoming new battle field. He further said world over, successful attack has caused significant financial loss and other problems. He said that cyber security is crucial for digital Governance and its broad ecosystem. The MoS (Home) said that the Government has taken various measures to counter cyber threats. The Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has rolled out a scheme ‘Indian Cyber Crime Coordination Centre (I4C)’ to combat cyber crime in the country, in a coordinated and effective manner. He also mentioned about the “Cyber Swachhta Kendra” which is a part of the Government of India’s Digital India initiative under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY).

He called for generating more awareness through seminars and advisories. He said that cyber security is the collective responsibility of all of us and invited suggestions from the stakeholders to counter the cyber threat.

The DG, NIC, Ms Neeta Verma said that India is the third largest user of internet and the cyber crime has increased manifold in the recent years. She said that various steps are taken by the Government to provide cyber security. She emphasized on the efforts by all stakeholders to supplement the efforts of the Government. She said that this is not one time task but an ongoing and joint responsibility of all of us.
