Mobile Phone Services Resume In 5 Districts Of Jammu Region Including Poonch, Rajouri

highlights Five districts are - Doda, Kishthar, Ramban, Rajouri and Ponch.

Earlier, 2G mobile internet services were restored in five districts.

Meanwhile, Supreme Court has issued notice to the Modi government.

New Delhi:

Mobile phone services, which have been suspended in Jammu and Kashmir since August 5, have been resumed in five districts of the state. The five districts where services have been resumed are - Doda, Kishthar, Ramban, Rajouri and Ponch.

Earlier, 2G mobile internet services were restored in five districts (Samba, Kathua, Reasi, Jammu, and Udhampur) of Jammu region. Internet and calling facilities were suspended in Jammu and Kashmir following the scrapping of Article 370. While people in Jammu are now able to make phone calls, the telecom services are still suspended across Kashmir valley.

Kashmir was placed under a total clampdown on August 5, hours before Union Home Minister Amit Shah announced in the Rajya Sabha that the special status for the state had been revoked.

ALSO READ: 50,000 jobs will be available in next three months in Kashmir, says J-K Governor Satya Pal Malik

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court on Wednesday issued notice to the Narendra Modi government and others regarding the abrogation of Article 370, which gave special powers to Jammu and Kashmir. The top court said that a five-judge Constitution Bench will hear all the petitions related to scrapping of the Article 370 in the first week of October.

The Supreme Court will also take up the issues related to media restrictions and communication blockade after a week. The apex court refused a request from the Centre to appoint an interlocutor for Jammu and Kashmir.

ALSO READ: Amit Shah gives presentation on nullifying Article 370, Kashmir situation at cabinet meeting



Though Solicitor General Tushar Mehta had requested the Supreme Court not to issue formal notices, saying this will have cross-border repercussions and may be used by other countries, Chief Justice of India Ranjan Gogoi said that, “we know what to do. We have passed our orders.” Attorney General KK Venugopal also calls it a very sensitive issue, saying whatever happens here is raked up before the United Nations.

With Article 370 becoming history, Jammu and Kashmir will not have separate state flag. With President Ram Nath Kovind’s nod to scrapping of Article 35A, every Indian will now be able to buy property in Jammu and Kashmir. Instead of the Ranbir Penal Code, the entire region will now fall under the jurisdiction of the Indian Penal Code. With these announcements, the Modi government at the Centre will have right on land and police power in Jammu and Kashmir.

As against the trifurcation buzz, the Modi government announced the bifurcation of Jammu and Kashmir. Union Home Minister Amit Shah also moved a bill proposing bifurcation of the state of Jammu and Kashmir into two union territories - Jammu and Kashmir division and Ladakh. Shah, who introduced the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation bill, said the union territory in Ladakh will have no legislature like Chandigarh. The other union territory of Jammu and Kashmir will have a legislature like Delhi and Puducherry.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
