Nagarjuna rings in his 60th birthday with Samantha Akkineni, Naga Chaitanya in Spain

Nagarjuna to ring in his 60th birthday in Spain

Key Highlights Superstar Nagarjuna is turning an year older today The actor is celebtrating his 60th birthday today in Spain The destination birthday has been organised by Samantha Akkineni and Naga Chaitanya along with Akhil

South superstar Nagarjuna is celebrating his 60th birthday with his family in the scenic landscapes of Spain. The actor, who has turned a year older today, August 29th, has the big birthday plans in store. Telugu superstar Nagarjuna Akkineni is currently in Ibiza, an island in Spain, where he is enjoying with his close ones. This trip is going to be a short one for the Manmadhudu star as he has to return for the shoot of his ongoing show Bigg Boss Telugu.

As per a leading tabloid, a source close to the actor revealed, “Nagarjuna is hosting Bigg Boss 3, and has to shoot the weekend episodes with the contestants. Soon after his birthday, he is going to come back to Hyderabad straightaway to participate in the shoot.”

The destination birthday bash has been organised by Naga Chaitanya and Samantha Akkineni with Akhil Akkineni by their side. The family was snapped at the airport leaving Hyderabad earlier this week. The intimate party in Spain will only be attended by Nagarjuna’s family and his childhood friends and will not be a starry event.

While the photos of the family celebrating Nagarjuna's birthday have not yet cropped up on the social media, Samantha, who is in a full-on holiday mode is keeping her fans updated with her social media posts. Check out some of the vacay photos from Samantha's on-going Spain vacation right here:

Updating her followers about her vacay, the diva shared a pretty picture along with a caption, "Painted nails can only mean one thing time for the holidays.. coz lately every role I play comes with a strict ‘No nail polish ‘ rule ... there was actual excitement about getting them painted today .. little joys .. love being a woman and a girl sometimes."

We cannot wait for the photos from Nagarjuna's birthday bash, what about you?
