Plea to enforce ILP in a stricter manner in Mizoram

Newmai News Network

Aizawl | August 28

Mizoram Cultivator and Labour Union (MICLUN) on Wednesday appealed to Mizoram Home minister, Lalchamliana to enforce the Inner Line Permit (ILP) in a stricter manner.

MICLUN general secretary, Lalruatpuia said that the Union had submitted a representation to the State Home minister asking him to enforce ILP as per the guidelines of Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation (BEFR), 1873.

According to the BEFR, any violators are liable to be punished with either one year imprisonment or a fine of Rs 1000, he said.

More than 1,190 people were arrested and pushed back from Mizoram for not possessing valid ILP after state police launched massive raids recently.

Lalruatpuia alleged that the state government’s failure to enforce the regulation in a stricter manner has emboldened outsiders to live without valid ILP. He also said that section 12 of the guidelines for the enforcement of the Inner Line Regulation states that a surprise check on ILP should be conducted once in a month and ILP cell should be set up in every police station.

The Union also appealed to the State Home minister to launch raid on illegal traders and those "outsiders" who run shops in the name of the "native Mizos".

ILP is an official travel document issued to Indian citizens to allow inward travel into a protected area like Mizoram, Nagaland and Arunachal Pradesh for a limited period. It is implemented and issued by the state government as per the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulations, 1873.

As for Mizoram, the state government issued ILP through liaison officers from cities -Kolkata, Silchar, Shillong, Guwahati or New Delhi.

Typically, a "Temporary ILP" is issued to visitors, which is valid for 15 days, and can be extended for another 15 days with the possibility of extending it to one month in exceptional circumstances. However, with the sponsorship of a local resident or government department, a "Regular ILP" can be procured, which is valid for 6 months and can be renewed twice for another 6 months each. ILP can also be obtained on arrival at Lengpui Airport, Bairabi Railway station and Vairengte police check gate.

Government employees travelling for official purposes are exempted from obtaining ILP but are required to carry a photo identification card with them at all times.
