AMSU on 54th Foundation Day reaffirms to stand firm

Newmai News Network

Imphal | August 28

Reaffirming its firm stand to participate in the every issue concerning the state, All Manipur Students’ Union (AMSU), the oldest student body of Manipur, celebrated its 54th foundation day here on August 28.

AMSU was set up on this day in 1965 barely a day after four students were killed in security force firing during the uprising of the students after an "artificial food scarcity" hit the state in 1965.

Since its inception, the Union has been working hard to safeguard the “Manipuri nation” and its territorial integrity, said AMSU president, Laishram Peter while speaking at the foundation day celebration held its office inside the DM College campus.

He said that the student body would continue to take active role in safeguarding the territorial integrity of the state, in protecting the indigenous people of the state and drug menace as well.

The student leader said that there is a "hidden agenda" behind keeping secret the contents of the Framework Agreement which the government of India inked with NSCN(IM) on August 3, 2015. He then warned that AMSU will fight tooth and nail if Manipur is affected by the outcome of the agreement.

“We heard that the peace talks is about to come to conclude,” he said and added that AMSU will not accept any agreement that infringes the interest of Manipur.

"While entering the agreement, Manipur’s territorial integrity and all communities in the state must be respected," he asserted.

Peter then reminded that the people of Manipur are always ready to sacrifice their lives for the territorial integrity of Manipur.

Talking about drug menace, Laishram said that "Manipur seems to have drowned in drug menace". He then expressed serious concern over the increasing drug trafficking cases in the state in recent times.

Peter said that seizures of huge quantity of drugs in the recent times showed that the state has become an important transit route for illegal drugs. He then demanded stringent laws against drug peddlers.

Laishram Peter then demanded the state government to make a provision in the existing laws so as to award life imprisonment and capital punishment for drug peddlers.

He added that AMSU will launch a campaign against drug abuse and trafficking in the state.
