Anxiety, stress amid lockdown: Psychologists, psychiatrists fear rise in mental illness in Valley

Anxiety, stress amid lockdown: Psychologists, psychiatrists fear rise in mental illness in Valley

JAMMU, Aug 28: Amidst the problems faced by the people of Kashmir with respect to health-care access in the Valley where lives have been severely affected by a clampdown and a communication blackout, psychological stress and mental illnesses may remain even more ignored in this silence.

A media report in the FirstPost, citing psychologists, has pointed out that the present situation in fact is not only leading to neglect of patients already suffering from mental illnesses but is also likely to further trigger emotional stress and anxieties in people with no history of such diseases.

According to this report, Dr Aijaz, who is a consultant clinical psychologist at Institute Of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Kashmir (IMHANS) said that over 40 percent of his patients have shown signs of mental illnesses due to the recent turmoil. “There are people who are not being able to talk to their relatives. Some are anxious after not being able to talk to parents or children living outside the Valley,” he added

The psychologist quoted the case of Adil, a student of Class 10, who has been suffering from dissociative episodes, saying, “He has been suffering from depression since that time. He does not speak much either. He doesn’t interact with his parents, and gets extremely angry over small things.” Adil is among hundreds of patients who have been affected by the clampdown and communication blackout that has been in place in Kashmir.

The psychologist said that there are also some patients who were recovering, but suffered a relapse due to the curbs and communication blackout.

A pharmacist from Kashmir visiting Delhi, recently, told Kashmir Times, that he was receiving several old prescriptions of patients who had been cured of psychological disorders long back. In the first two weeks of the lockdown, he had received no less than 40 such prescriptions, indicating the rise in relapse of the disorder.

“The demand is so high and the supplies are depleting of all major drugs including those for psychiatric ailments that I had to dash to Delhi to get them,” he said.

A senior Delhi based psychiatrist, when contacted, also spoke about the direct fallout of the situation of massive restrictions, communication blockade, night raids and detentions on the emotional psyche of the people. “Emotional wounds and stress cannot be classified as a medical case of trauma but can gradually lead to that,” he explained.

The FirstPost report also quotes Dr Aijaz as saying, “Patients are coming with complaints of lack of appetite and sleeplessness. Although these cannot be categorised as chronic depression, they are features of depression.” Aijaz said that restrictions such as those presently in place in Kashmir affect people's routines, and lead to anxiety.

The report also mentions the case of 26-year-old Aqib Rashid Wani of Khankah-e-Moula area of Srinagar has been waking up in the middle of the night after having nightmares of him being arrested by government forces.

For Wani, the nightmares started after forces conducted raids in the neighbouring areas of Srinagar, the report and quoted him as saying, “I wake up panting in the middle of the night, as if I have been running for miles trying to evade arrest.”

In addition to nightmares, Wani has been experiencing bouts of anxiety and panic attacks. “After the nightmares persisted, I decided to visit the hospital,” Wani said, adding that he did so despite the taboo that the illness carries. Wani further said that he feels suffocated due to being "caged" in his house. “I want to go out, but then, there is nowhere to go. And that’s when panic attacks take over my brain.”

The report also mentioned that “till 2 pm on that day, about 400 patients had visited the OPD at the psychiatry section of Srinagar's Shri Maharaja Hari Singh (SMHS) hospital.” “Patients from all parts of Kashmir, in order to avoid restrictions, arrive as early as 6 in the morning,” said Nazir Ahmad, an employee who checks patient cards.

The report also quoted another doctor as saying, “Uncertainty anywhere is not good for a person's well-being. When one is in a state of perpetual uncertainty, it will affect the person's mental state." She further said, “If a patient is suffering from any prior illness, such a situation destabilises him or her. The condition of people suffering from anxiety disorders may worsen."

The doctor added that five out of 10 patients visiting her have mental health issues due to the prevailing situation in the Valley. She further said that some of her patients are worried about being arrested for no crime of theirs, while others are worried about night-time raids and the anticipation of a crackdown. “The precipitating factor for mental illnesses for a lot of people is the current situation. Even patients who come to the hospital with other complaints talk about it," she said.

The doctor said, “We have patients coming here with panic attacks that they suffered because of the news that they heard. The condition of some patients on medication destabilised after they heard about the prevailing situation."
