College student stabbed in broad daylight in Andhra over suspected ‘infidelity’

College student stabbed in broad daylight in Andhra over suspected ‘infidelity’

The police have arrested a 19-year-old boy for the attack.

news Crime

A teenager in Andhra Pradesh's Anakapalle town was brutally stabbed in broad daylight on Wednesday evening. The police said that 19-year-old Sai Sanga Rao allegedly attacked Yashoda Bhargavi, who is eighteen-years-old, outside Ramachandra theatre in Anakapalle, with a sharp object.

According to Anakapalle Town police, Sai and Bhargavi had known each other for nearly five years. They were said to have been in a relationship, which their parents were also aware of. Police said that when Bhargavi, who is a B Com first year student, began talking to other boys in her class and failed to take Sai’s calls a few times, he began to suspect that she was interested in someone else. This led him to allegedly attempt to kill her, after which he planned to take his own life, the police said.

Sai allegedly attacked Bhargavi with a sharp weapon, stabbing her in the neck and abdomen. He also allegedly stabbed her in the hand when she raised it in defense, police said. Bystanders who witnessed the attack immediately intervened, nabbed Sai, and called the police.

Bhargavi was taken to NTR Hospital in Anakapalle as she had suffered considerable blood loss. Police said that her condition is now stable, and she has been referred to the King George Hospital in Visakhapatnam.

The police have taken Sai into custody. An FIR has been registered under Section 307 (attempt to murder), Section 354 (assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her modesty) and Section 506 (criminal intimidation) of the IPC.

In another horrifying incident in Visakhapatnam district in April this year, a pregnant woman was allegedly cut with a blade by her husband and mother-in-law for dowry. They also attempted to force her to undergo an abortion. Last year in May, Visakhapatnam police arrested a man for murdering his live-in partner. Police said that the man, identified as R Satish, strangled his partner K Sujata and set her body on her fire, because she had objected to Satish's plans to marry someone else.
