End The Pettiness, Stop The Bullying

The harassment meted out to former CBI director Alok Verma reveals the petty mentality of those who run the omniscient, omnipotent, and omnipresent Government of India. I wonder what it is about government that makes the same opposition leaders who articulated the janata’s anger with rulers turn into replicas of the bullies they replaced. In the “modified” BJP’s case it’s turned out worse than the effete Congress it replaced.

Alok Verma would have retired a long time ago if not for the assured two year term he got in service courtesy his appointment as CBI director. Once sacked from that post, there was no locus for forcing him to serve till January 31. Unceremoniously hauling him back from leave on January 31 to serve out his last day as Director General of Services, Civil Defence and Home Guards was a cheap shot. No less. After all, he was a former Commissioner of Delhi Police and had supervised the very post he was told to hold for a day.

And Verma has come out with his dignity intact by not falling for the bullying. By not joining duty, Verma has apparently made out a case for his harassers to deny him pension benefits. Think about it. No boss will stand a deputy gunning for him and it was Verma’s bad luck that the deputy, and not the director, had government’s backing. He was sacked unceremoniously, reinstated, sacked unceremoniously again, and ironically “reinstated” again, on the putative day of his retirement merely to rub in his fall from grace.

We saw the Haryana Congress government of BS Hooda frivolously transfer Ashok Khemka from one post to another despite norms that officers be posted for two years at one post. We have seen such vengeful mentality against Gujarat officers who rubbed Narendra Modi the wrong way. Former IPS officer Sanjiv Bhatt has been in judicial custody for five months without bail in a 22-year-old case. In my home state of Kerala, a retired IPS officer TP Senkumar was sacked as state DGP by chief minister Pinarayi Vijayan two days after the LDF government assumed charge in 2016 but he went to the Supreme Court which reinstated him a year later, allowing him to serve nearly two months of what remained of his service before retirement.

This was a slap in the face for the Kerala government but the opportunity to hit back came when Senkumar in an interview post retirement made remarks on demographic changes in Kerala due to growing Muslim population. Such divisive opinions are held by a large section of the population and these need to be countered politically and factually. Instead, the Kerala government got its opportunity to avenge its insult and Senkumar was booked and arrested under Section 153A of IPC for promoting communal enmity. Whatever happened to the right to free speech, one would wonder! Senkumar was inciting no violence, but merely stating an opinion. Another case of forging documents to go on medical leave in the period when he was sacked as state DGP was also filed but the high court came to Senkumar’s rescue and squashed the case.

In a near repeat of such coercion, a young IPS officer Chaithra Theresa John was criticised by the chief minister Vijayan for daring to enter and search a CPM party office while hunting for suspects who stoned a police station. However, a departmental probe cleared her making us wonder why Vijayan chose to blow his top and undermine his own office. Politicians seeking the cover of democracy to censure even legitimate actions by a civil servant hardly bolsters their own credibility. Political parties do protect our democracies and are important cogs in the machinery to get our voices heard by civil servants but they cannot become a law unto themselves. A midnight raid need not always be equated to democracy being under peril.

However, IPS officers who struggle against political bullying would do well to think about how ordinary people get tangled in the criminal justice delivery system and struggle for bail or a culmination of the legal processes so that they can get on with their lives. Senkumar’s recent distasteful remark about ISRO scientist Nambi Narayanan’s credentials after the latter received a Padma Bhushan reveals how even his dire personal experience with the law has not stirred any empathy for a fellow sufferer.

What kind of a civil and police machinery does our autocratic democratic governments want? If IPS and IAS officers are going to be complicit in the machinations of ruling parties, it signals the breakdown of institutions that protect our rights and our democracy. By insulting and threatening them with disciplinary and criminal action, governments send out a strong message to everyone else: kneel when asked to bend.

Facebook Twitter Linkedin Email Disclaimer Views expressed above are the author's own.
