Indrani Mukerjea Says "Good News That P Chidambaram Has Been Arrested"

INX Media case: Indrani Mukerjea reportedly revealed details of her meeting with the Chidambarams.

Highlights Indrani Mukerjea had turned approver in case linked to P Chidambaram

Mr Chidambaram is accused of facilitating foreign funds into INX Media

Indrani and Peter Mukerjea jailed in Sheena Bora murder case

Indrani Mukerjea, the jailed INX Media co-founder who turned approver in a corruption case linked to P Chidambaram, today said it is "good news" that the former Finance Minister has been arrested. Mr Chidambaram is accused by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) of facilitating a huge infusion of foreign funds into INX Media - the media company founded by Indrani Mukerjea and her husband Peter - in 2007, when he was Finance Minister, at the instance of his son Karti, who allegedly received kickbacks for his role.

"It's good news that P Chidambaram has been arrested," Ms Mukerjea said outside a Mumbai court, reported news agency ANI.

Mr Chidambaram and his son were named by the Mukerjeas, who are in jail in Mumbai for the alleged murder of Indrani's daughter Sheena Bora. Indrani Mukerjea, who turned approver in the case in July, reportedly revealed details of her meeting with the Chidambarams.

The case against the veteran Congress leader and Karti Chidambaram has been built on the statement of Indrani Mukerjea, sources have told NDTV.

Indrani Mukerjea was arrested for the murder of Sheena Bora in August 2015 and Peter Mukerjea was arrested by the CBI later. Earlier this year, Indrani Mukerjea filed a divorce plea and later turned approver in INX Media case. She is currently lodged in Mumbai's Byculla jail. Peter Mukerjea too is jailed in the same case.

After the CBI filed a First Information Report in May 2017 over alleged irregularities in the Foreign Investment Promotion Board (FIPB) clearance granted to the INX Media group for receiving overseas funds of Rs. 305 crore in 2007, when Mr Chidambaram was Finance Minister, the Enforcement Directorate filed a case of alleged money-laundering.

Mr Chidambaram, one of the strongest defenders of the Congress, was arrested last Wednesday evening amid high drama after his lawyers failed to get the Supreme Court to urgently hear his petition challenging the rejection of his pre-arrest bail request by the Delhi High Court.

Mr Chidambaram is already in the custody of the CBI. The Enforcement Directorate too is seeking his custody.

(With inputs from ANI)
