Who is Gunjan Saxena? Janhvi Kapoor will portray her on screen in The Kargil Girl

Read the untold story of the first Indian woman to fly into a combat zone | Photo Credit: Instagram

Janhvi Kapoor has got her hands full as she has an array of film releases lined up for 2020. Fans will see Janhvi in an upcoming biopic of Gunjan Saxena, who was India's first female Air Force Officer to enter the combat space during the Kargil War. Gunjan Saxena: The Kargil Girl is produced by Karan Johar, along with Hiroo Johar and directed by Sharan Sharma. The pivotal cast of the film includes Janhvi Kapoor, Pankaj Tripathi, Angad Bedi, Neena Gupta and Vijay Verma.

But, who is this girl? What is her story? Is she only an IAF officer or is there something else to the story that attracted Karan Johar to make a film on her? Here's all you need to know.

Who is Gunjan Saxena?

During the Kargil War, Indian defense forces successfully uprooted Pakistani infiltrants on the battlefield and they were able to get India its legendary victory. The Indian Air Force (IAF) was monumental in getting India its victory in the Kargil war. The IAF employed huge airpower at 32,000 feet and the pilots worked well in eradicating Pakistani infiltrants from their terror camps.

Amidst this operation, Gunjan Saxena made history as she flew in her aircraft into the combat zone in Kargil. To honour her courage and bravery, she was awarded Shaurya Chakra by the Indian government.

Gunjan Saxena got the opportunity to join the first batch of female IAF trainee pilots while she was pursuing her graduation at Hansraj College, New Delhi. She was truly inspired by her father and brother who served in the Indian Army and she wanted to pursue the same and became a part of the IAF female pilots team. At the age of 5, she saw the cockpit for the very first time and since then, it was her dream to fly Indian Airforce fighter jets.

Till 1999, women were not allowed to fly fighter jets owing to the extreme mental and physical stress they have to endure in the combat areas. But, this feisty young woman was not going to restrict herself due to stereotypes. When the war struck, there was an urgent need for pilots and the IAF called for female pilots who were willing to rise to the occasion. Gunjan said yes.

While sharing the first look poster of The Kargil Girl, Karan Johar shared a small gist from the movie and what it will be about. The post captioned, "She was told ki ladkiyan pilot nahin banti...but she stood her ground and wanted to fly! Gunjan Saxena - #TheKargilGirl, releasing on 13th March 2020."

Karan recently uploaded 3 first look posters on his social media account. Check them out below.

In one look poster, his caption read, "With unabashed courage & bravery, she made her domain in a man's world. Gunjan Saxena - #TheKargilGirl, releasing on 13th March 2020."

In another poster, he wrote, "Her pillar of strength - her father. He gave her the wings to fly! Gunjan Saxena - #TheKargilGirl, releasing on 13th March 2020."

Now that you know the story of the brave and courageous Gunjan Saxena, you must be eagerly waiting for the film to release. Well, you have to wait until March 13, 2020, to watch it in the theatres.

For more news and updates, stay connected to ZoomTV.com and follow us on Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook at @Zoomtv.
