In Punjab, fight against drugs a tightrope act

JALANDHAR: The drug problem in Punjab may be the subject of informal discussions and find mention in political speeches by way of oblique references to political and police patronage enjoyed by the drug lords, but it has proved to be a hot potato. If Congress used it for political leverage in the 2017 state assembly polls, today it’s feinting pointed questions about it.To begin with, the matter was pushed to the political centre-stage not by a mainstream politician, but by a top cop. It was the then Punjab DGP (Prisons), Shashi Kant, who in 2011 and beginning of 2012 made startling disclosures of about political patronage of drug trade in jails. His revelations virtually set the cat among the pigeons, heaping embarrassment on the state police and the political establishment. The more the state government tried to duck allegations of politicians’ involvement or a soft approach towards drug trafficking, the more the issue gained upon.Even as SAD-BJP was grappling with Kant’s allegations, then Congress general secretary Rahul Gandhi’s remark that 70% of Punjab youths were hooked on to drugs catapulted the issue to national headlines and made the whole country sit up and take notice. Rahul’s remarks and SAD-BJP’s attempt to counter it ensured that the issue became a talking point. While the ruling SAD-BJP claimed that Gandhi’s claim was outlandish and questioned the source of his information, the ruling alliance could not take the issue off the political centre stage despite the Congress failing to justify the figure given by Gandhi.Busting of the international synthetic drug racket in 2013 following the arrest of Arjuna awardee Punjab Police ex-DSP Jagdish Bhola put the ruling alliance in the dock. A “TV byte” by Bhola on political involvement during one of his appearances in court ensured that the matter gained traction in Punjab’s political-scape. After names of a few senior Akali leaders came to fore vis-à-vis financial transaction in the synthetic drug racket, the allegations of political patronage of the lethal trade got solidified.However, the political match between SAD-BJP ruling alliance and Congress was fought against the backdrop of internal squabbling on both sides. If BJP was uncomfortable with these allegations, then PPCC president Partap Singh Bajwa’s focus on building pressure to get the case shifted to CBI lost steam when Captain Amarinder Singh opposed it.Drugs also remained a pivotal issue in the 2014 Parliament election, denting Akali Dal’s electoral fortunes and even reflecting on its ally. BJP’s top gun Arun Jaitley suffered a humiliating defeat in Amritsar amid the Modi-BJP wave in rest of north India. People’s discomfiture with SAD-BJP and Congress ensured that the newbie, Aam Aadmi Party, got its first four MPs in the election.In the aftermath of the poor poll show, then CM Parkash Singh Badal made his minister Sarwan Singh Phillaur resign from his post due to allegations against his son. This was followed by chief parliamentary secretary Avinash Chander being questioned by the Enforcement Directorate. The quizzing of SAD leader Bikram Singh Majithia’s by ED stirred a political storm, which later petered out when the ED failed to come out with anything against Majithia. It also spelled the end of a few political careers.By now, drugs were dominating the political narrative in the state. With AAP riding a wave of popularity in Punjab, its central leaders, including party supremo, sharpened their drug attack on Majithia. Even Punjab Congress chief Captain Amarinder Singh took oath on Gutka (Sikh prayer book) to wipe out drugs in Punjab in four weeks.However, AAP’s attempts to tailor its campaign and politics around the drug issue blew up in his face and Kejriwal had to apologize to Majithia. Today, Amarinder, too, is facing questions as the drug trade in Punjab is far from over. But a beginning has been made. The arrest of a high-profile police inspector with drugs by the Special Task Force is symbolic of the police-drug mafia nexus. The Congress government has not been able to derive any political dividend from this in the wake of allegations of stopping the probe from going “upwards” and shifting of STF chief ADGP Harpreet Sidhu. The opposition, especially AAP and its dissident leaders, have been alleging that the probe was scuttled to prevent it from reaching those who patronized inspector Inderjit Singh all these years.In 2018, a social media campaign — Black week against Chitta — launched after drug overdose deaths of several young men, left the Amarinder government red-faced. With several drug-related deaths being reported in recent weeks, SAD-BJP as well as AAP and its splinter groups have launched an offensive against Congress. Ending drugs was the second big promise made by Congress after punishing those guilty of the Bargari sacrilege case and Behbal Kalan firing incidents.
