Mehbooba Mufti presided over many bloodbaths in Kashmir in 2016: Congress leader Salman Nizami

PDP chief Mehbooba Mufti

Key Highlights Congress leader Salman Nizami took on Sana Mufti in a scathing tweet Nizami claimed that Mufti had presided over "bloodbath" in Kashmir in 2016

New Delhi: Mincing no words, Congress leader Salman Nizami on Thursday took on Sana Iltija Mufti, daughter of PDP chief and former J&K CM Mehbooba Mufti, and questioned the deaths of innocent civilians in Kashmir which took place when Mehbooba was the chief minister of the state in 2016.

In a scathing tweet, Nizami claimed that 250 innocent Kashmiris were killed and around 10,000 were injured and 5,000 were blinded when Mehbooba Mufti helmed the top post of the PDP-BJP government in Jammu and Kashmir in 2016.

The Congress leader said in his tweet, “It’s a little rich coming from you, Miss Sana Mufti. Your mom (Mehbooba Mufti) presided over many bloodbaths in Kashmir. In 2016 when she was in power & you were in abroad. 250 innocent Kashmiris were killed, 5000 were blinded, 10,000 were injured. Where was this anguish then?”

His tweet was in reference to Sana Iltija Mufti’s statement on Wednesday in which expressed her despair over her mother’s detention in J&K following the abrogation of Article 370 that granted special status to Jammu and Kashmir.

In an interview with a news channel, Sana said that her mother was not a terrorist and that the manner in which she was being treated was humiliating.

Speaking about her mother’s house arrest, Sana said in the interview, “My mother is not a terrorist. She is a former CM, a two time MP. So, frankly, I find it totally bizarre and its extremely disconcerting and humiliating the manner in which she is being treated.”

It’s a little rich coming from you, Miss Sana Mufti. Your mom (Mehbooba Mufti) presided over many bloodbaths in Kashmir. In 2016 when she was in power & you were in abroad. 250 innocent Kashmiris were killed, 5000 were blinded, 10,000 were injured. Where was this anguish then? — Salman Nizami (@SalmanNizami_) August 29, 2019

Unrest and violent clashes had struck Kashmir in the aftermath of the killing of Hizbul Mujahideen terrorist Burhan Wani, with at least 247 people losing their lives in the resultant violence. At the time of the unrest, the PDP-BJP alliance – helmed by Mehbooba Mufti – was in power in Jammu and Kashmir.

Meanwhile, Jammu and Kashmir have been in a lockdown since August 5 after the Centre abrogated Article 370 that granted special status to J&K and announced that the state would be bifurcated into two Union Territories – Jammu and Kashmir, and Ladakh.

Several opposition leaders including Mufti and NC leader Omar Abdullah have been placed under house arrest while a communication ban is in place at several areas across the region.

Meanwhile, last week Nizami had attacked Pakistan by saying that Islamabad should not interfere in the New Delhi's internal matter as Article 370 had been granted by the Indian government and not Pakistan. He had added that the people would fight for their rights in a "democratic and peaceful way."
