Watch Kartik Aaryan’s Expressions As A Female Fan Pulls His Cheeks & Tells Him “Aap Bahot Cute Ho”

Kartik Aaryan is enjoying good times in the industry and is making news every day for one reason or another. Just yesterday we reported to you how Kartik banned sweets on the sets of Aaj Kal so that Sara Ali Khan doesn’t feel cravings and now he is making us blush with his “Fan Love”

Advertisement

Kartik was recently papped at the airport and like most of the times, he was surrounded by fans. A video is going viral on social media which shows Kartik acknowledging the love of his fans by clicking selfies with them. This is not it, Kartik even talks with his fans, let one of his female fans click the selfie again (because she didn’t like the first one) and also let her pull his cheeks. Isn’t that sweet? Have a look at the video and don’t miss the reaction of Kartik when his fan says, “Bahot cute ho aap, bahot handsome ho and when she pulls his cheeks”-

Advertisement

On the work front, Kartik was last seen in Sonu Ke Titu Ki Sweety and Luka Chuppi, both of which proved to be big Hits. He will be next seen in films like Aaj Kal, Pati Patni Aur Woh, Dostana 2 and Bhool Bhulaiyaa 2.

Recently Kartik Aaryan was given a rare honour as he was feted with a customised postal stamp by the Lucknow post office.

The actor who was shooting in Lucknow for his upcoming film Pati Patni Aur Woh, and the honour was given by the Director of Postal Services, Lucknow headquarters Region, Krishna Kumar Yadav.

“We wanted to give Kartik something he will always remember. What could be more special than him being a part of the stamp collection? It’s a new initiative we have taken,” Yadav said.

“When we shared the stamps with Kartik, he was very excited. He wanted to know how one would be able to use them. We told him that they could be used to write letters not only to people in India, but also abroad. He was really happy,” Yadav added.

Android & IOS users, download our mobile app for faster than ever Bollywood & Box Office updates!
