Blatant VVIP racism: CM BS Yediyurappa’s kin threatens DCP; says ‘will get you transferred from this post’

Karnataka CM BS Yediyurappa | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights The man has been identified as Rajesh, CM Yediyurappa's sister's son The incident took place at Chamundi hills where the CM's kin had gone to visit the temple The CM's nephew was not allowed to enter the temple due to security concerns

Bengaluru: Karnataka Chief Minister BS Yediyurappa’s nephew threatened a Deputy Commissioner when he was not allowed to enter a temple due to security concerns. The incident took place at Chamundi hills where the CM's kin had gone to visit the temple and party workers also joined him in threatening the police. The man has been identified as Rajesh, CM Yediyurappa's sister's son.

Yediyurappa formed the government last month, after the exit of the 14-month-old Congress-JD(S) coalition government.

To keep the BJP out of power, the Congress and the JD(S) formed a post-poll alliance after the May 2018 state Assembly elections. Both the parties also formed a pre-poll tie-up and fielded joint candidates in the 2019 Lok Sabha elections but the move failed to pay dividends with both the parties blaming each other for their humiliating defeat.

The grand old party and the JD(S) won only one seat each while the BJP, riding on the Narendra Modi wave, got 25 of the 28 seats in the state.

In a big blow to the JD(S), party patriarch and former prime minister HD Deve Gowda was defeated in Tumkur while his grandson Nikhil, son of former chief minister HD Kumaraswamy, lost from the party’s traditional bastion Mandya.

Meanwhile, Congress’ Siddaramaiah launched a scathing attack on the CM asking how many days he required to start governance.

Taking to his Twitter handle the former Karnataka CM said, “You took 3 days to take the oath, 26 days to have the council of ministers, 6 days to distribute portfolios. How many more days you need to start the governance? Then, why did you hurry to destabilize the coalition govt?”

He further predicted that the fall of the Yediyurappa's government was imminent adding that it will lead to mid-term polls in the state. Describing the BJP government as an illegitimate child of Operation Lotus Siddaramaiah said that the newly elected CM cannot make a decision without consulting BJP president and Home Minister Amit Shah.

Siddaramaiah also attacked one-month-old BS Yediyurappa government for appointing Laxman Savadi, who was caught watching porn on his smartphone during Assembly proceedings in 2012, as Deputy Chief Minister.

Apart from Savadi, two more Deputy Chief Ministers have been appointed sparking a row in the ruling party and drawing sharp criticism from the opposition Congress and Janata Dal-Secular (JD-S).

Speaking on this issue, senior Congress leader VS Ugrappa told IANS that this is perhaps the first time that Karnataka has three Deputy CMs in the 34-member ministry in which 16 posts are still vacant.

He further said that it indicates the pulls and pressures in the ruling party and the grip the BJP’s central leadership has over the CM.
