US faces withdrawal dilemma in Afghanistan

WASHINGTON - America's longest war may officially end soon, or will it? An imminent peace deal between the United States and the Taleban may turn out to be the easy part but leave Afghanistan with an uncertain and highly volatile future.

More complicated will be intra-Afghanistan negotiations between the Taleban and the Afghan government on power sharing, which are likely to take place in Oslo within weeks of a deal with the Taleban. One potential complication is Afghanistan's Sep 28 presidential election.

US envoy Zalmay Khalilzad has been working on the deal with Taleban delegates in Doha, and is due this week to brief the Afghan government on the details, which it must agree to go into talks in Oslo.

Meanwhile, the United States is trying not to sound too eager to get out of the Afghanistan quagmire; Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Joseph Dunford on Wednesday (Aug 28) said it was premature to use the word "withdrawal", but a peace deal with the Taleban was worth trying.

"I believe that what is needed is some type of disruption to the status quo," he said.

President Donald Trump said on Thursday said that 8,600 US troops would remain in the country if a peace deal is reached with the Taliban and that the US would maintain a permanent presence.

The Taleban is in control of roughly 15 per cent of Afghanistan, with the government controlling about 60 per cent, and the rest contested. The Taleban has not let up in its military operations including attacks on civilians. They have rejected a ceasefire, believing that would lose them leverage; the language in the peace talks is of a "reduction of violence".

General Dunford in Wednesday's press conference - the first in a year at the Pentagon - alongside Defence Secretary Mark Esper, tried to nuance the perception that the United States' goal is withdrawal of its 14,000-odd troops.

Mr Khalilzad has also insisted in public statements that the US is aiming at a peace deal, not a withdrawal deal, with the Taleban, whom it drove out of office in 2001 when they continued to give safe harbour to Osama bin Laden, who masterminded the Sept 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in the US.
