Aravallis: The destruction continues | SPL REPORT

An India Today TV ground report has found illegal mining and construction in the protected forest area continue unabated despite Supreme Court rulings.(Photo: Reuters)

Haryana state has the lowest forest cover in the country today after slipping from the second lowest position in 2018. The forest cover in the state is mostly concentrated in the Aravalli hills which act as green lungs for the National Capital Region (NCR).

But a recent amendment to the Punjab Land Preservation Act (PLPA), a 100-year-old law, by the Manohar Lal Khattar government threatens to open up 33 per cent forest for commercial activity.

An India Today TV ground report from Faridabad, Haryana has found illegal mining and construction in the protected forest area continue unabated despite Supreme Court (SC) rulings.

Both the ruling Bhartiya Janata Party (BJP) and the opposition Congress blame each other for the mess.

How green was my valley

In Ankhir village, land mafias have encroached upon an entire hill to build an illegal road. On both sides of the road, farm houses have sprung up. This commercial activity is going on unchecked despite the area falling under Sections 4 and 5 of Punjab Land Preservation Act. Quarrying and real estate development is banned in 17 villages of Faridabad under this act but the administration has turned a blind eye.

Sunil, a local activist told India Today TV, "This is their modus operandi; first they will create a road in the forest or hill area and then start encroaching by clearing the trees and rocks. Unfortunately the villagers also assist them in this loot since they get paid well."

Sunil said that there has been a surge in deforestation and mining in the area in the past three years.

The extent of collusion between the land sharks and a section of the administration is glaring in Sector 44 of Faridabad. Construction at the Leisure Valley was stopped after the Supreme Court found violation of forest land use laws.

An India Today TV ground report from Faridabad has found illegal mining and construction in the protected forest area continue unabated in Aravallis

But just opposite Leisure Valley, as India Today TV found out, protected forest land was encroached on and illegal construction was in full swing in Mewla Maharajpur village.

Vishnu Goel, a local RTI activist has been battling it out with land mafia for over eight years now. He points out to the glaring contrast.

"You can see construction in the HUDA sector was stopped after Supreme Court intervened; but see how construction in the forest area is going on just opposite Leisure Valley."

Choked lifelines

India Today TV also visited the famous Surajkund Lake area. Locals say there used to be another lake right next to it by the name Peacock Lake. Both have dried up now as illegal construction choked flow of streams into the lakes.

This commercial activity is going on unchecked despite the area falling under Sections 4 and 5 of Punjab Land Preservation Act

Environmentalist Chetan Agarwal alleges that the Haryana government in an affidavit has said that there are no Aravallis in Faridabad at all. They brought the amendment to the PLPA to allow illegal construction in the Aravallis with retrospective effect."

With assembly polls in the state round the corner both the ruling BJP and the opposition Congress are engaged in a blame game.

Political blame game

BJP leaders in Faridabad maintain that it was Chief Minister Manohar Lal Khattar who saved the sacred Mangar Bani protected forest area from commercialisation. The Congress, on the other hand, has alleged that the BJP government is least interested in saving Aravallis.

Sunil, a local activist, said that there has been a surge in deforestation and mining in the area in the past three years

Congress leader Pradeep Zaildar alleged that the government is reluctant to designate the region as a national conservation zone (NCZ), which is why it is refusing to accept the areas ahead of Gurugram as Aravalli zone so that thousands of acres could be handed over to industrialists.

The Aravallis act as green lungs for the NCR, whose cities have the worst air quality in the world. Running north to south, Aravallis are our shield against desertification. Aravallis also help in recharging ground water, which is depleting at an alarming rate.

In Haryana, Aravallis extend from Mewat, Faridabad, Gurugram, Mahendragarh till Rewari.
