Tamil Nadu: Month-old leopard cub rescued from passenger's bag at Chennai airport

Meanwhile, the accused passenger has been detained and the Tamil Nadu Forest Department will take further action in the case. | Photo Credit: ANI

Chennai: The Air Intelligence Unit at the Chennai International airport has seized a one-month-old leopard cub from a passenger's baggage on Saturday.

The news agency ANI reported that the rescued cub will be rehabilitated in the Aringar Anna Zoological Park in Chennai. Meanwhile, the accused passenger has been detained and the Tamil Nadu Forest Department will take further action in the case.

#WATCH Air Intelligence Unit at Chennai International airport has seized a one-month-old leopard cub from the baggage of a passenger. The cub will be rehabilitated in the Aringar Anna Zoological Park in Chennai; Passenger handed over to Tamil Nadu Forest Dept for further action. pic.twitter.com/WgYIBabZ4D — ANI (@ANI) February 2, 2019

Air Intelligence Unit at Chennai International airport has seized a one-month-old leopard cub from the baggage of a passenger. The cub will be rehabilitated in the Aringar Anna Zoological Park in Chennai; Passenger handed over to Tamil Nadu Forest Dept for further action. pic.twitter.com/TIlNqRAYPl — ANI (@ANI) February 2, 2019

Leopards have been making headlines in past few days. In recent case reported from Rajasthan, panic gripped locals in several districts owing to the rising number of leopard sightings and attacks in recent days. These districts include Ajmer, Nagaur, Sikar and Udaipur. The forest officials of the area had to install a cage near Kadmal area after a leopard attacked four villagers from Butala and Kadmal villages within a span of two days.

Meanwhile, in the wake of these attacks, rangers have warned tribals in the district to look out for the big cat which has been terrorising the area.

In a similar case reported from Jalandhar, an adult leopard entered a densely populated village in Jalandhar on Thursday. The leopard entered the Lamma Pind and left the villagers in panic. The leopard attacked six people while the rescuers made constant efforts to catch him and avoid more damage.
