Foxconn Faces Challenges as It Plans to Ramp up iPhone Production in India

Trade war between the U.S and China has alarmed tech giants. Starting from December this year, iPhones will attract 15% tariff duty. Apple has said that it will absorb the duty by reducing the cost of parts. However, the move might not be sustainable and in the end customers may have to bear the brunt. Amid tensions, other Asian countries including India are prepping themselves as an alternate manufacturing destination for iPhone.

It is no secret that Apple is heavily dependent on China. Moving the iPhone production out of China might not be easy. Meanwhile, Foxconn has opened two assembly plants in India and is likely to open two more. The Indian bureaucracy is making it easier for companies to set up their manufacturing plant. The new facilities are not only expected to help Apple but also the Indian Government which is battling against high unemployment numbers.

Foxconn’s first India facility started in 2015 in Sri City, a special economic zone where goods can be imported and exported with limited red tape and foreign companies make everything from diapers to train carriages. Foxconn’s plant employs almost 15,000 workers—about 90% of them women—and assembles phones for various manufacturers, including local best-seller Xiaomi. In recent months, workers began testing and assembling Apple’s iPhone X, which will be sold in India first and eventually exported. The plan is to expand India’s $25 billion phone manufacturing to $400 billion by 2024,” says Pankaj Mahindroo, who heads the Indian Cellular & Electronics Assn. “A substantial portion of it will be for the export market.

Our Take

Not everything seems to be hunky-dory when it comes to manufacturing iPhones out of India. To begin with, there is a shortage of skilled workers and industrial designers. Furthermore, the manufacturing ecosystem in India is lacking supplier support for components like batteries, semiconductors, and others.

Adding to that, the Indian government is required to invest heavily in infrastructure and come up with business friendly economic policies. As Bloomberg points out, the trade wars are only going to help India to a certain extent. Beyond this, India will have to prove its mettle and offer better manufacturing conditions than China.

[via Bloomberg
