Mumbai: Cops say AIDS claimed 19-yr-old gang-raped on birthday

The 19-year-old gang-raped during her birthday celebrations breathed her last late on Wednesday night, after battling for life for 35 days in the hospital.



Police say the medical reports show that she was HIV+ and died of complications of the condition, compounded by the physical trauma of the violent sex attack. However, the Chunnabhatti police are yet to add murder charges to the complaint against the absconding accused.



The tragic turn is another complication in an already appalling case. The police have registered the case only on the basis of the father's statement and were not able to take down details from the teenager as she suffered a paralytic attack while she was admitted in the hospital and had to be moved to the ICCU (Intensive Coronary Care Unit).



As per police records, the deceased came to Mumbai from Aurangabad on 7th July to celebrate her birthday.



In the city, she went to meet a friend, who took her to a chawl in Chembur. He reportedly injected her with a sedative and raped her. Three of his friends joined in later and took turns to rape her several times.



They released her later, but not before threatening to kill her and her brother, who lives in Mumbai, if she told anyone.



On July 18, the teen complained of acute stomach pain and was admitted to a local hospital in Chembur. On July 22, she was shifted to a hospital in her native Aurangabad for further treatment, where she suffered a paralytic attack that robbed her of her speech and mobility.



"In the hospital, I was waiting for some miracle but my daughter drew her last breath on Wednesday," said her grieving father, "I tried to talk to her about her rapists but she was in no condition to say anything. The accused should get death penalty."



The police say she was in the last stage of an HIV infection, AIDS, which damages the immune system "So her chances of survival were less as she could not respond to treatment," said an officer.



"We have registered a case of gang rape," said Deputy Police Commissioner Shashi Meena, " but have not added any other charges. The medical report revealed an existing condition that complicated her treatment. We have not closed the case yet, and are in search of the accused."
