Rave party organised by Cameroon student: Police

Bengaluru: When the police raided an upscale in Mahalakshmi Layout police station limits recently, over claims of a rave party, they faced a lot of flak for inconveniencing more than 100 guests, including foreign nationals.

But now the preliminary investigation has revealed that the organiser of the party was an African student and drugs were used. Police sources said that the party organiser, A. Daniel, is a citizen of Cameroon and is in India on student visa.

The Central Crime Branch (CCB) sleuths got a tip off regarding drugs being supplied in a party at R.G. Hotel and conducted a late night raid and arrested Daniel.

“His involvement in the party itself raises many doubts. How can someone come here on student visa and involve in business activities. There is connection with drug mafia and we are investigating it,” a police source said.

The background of Daniel is being ascertained. It is suspected that he might be involved in nefarious activities at his college also, the police said.

One of the officers who conducted the raid at R.G. Hotel explained that the police had got tip off on circulation of drugs in the event. However, later it was known that the many of the guests were coming to the party after taking drugs. As the police team waited for the party to begin, the guests started coming only after 1 am. At 3 am raid was conducted.

As many as 150 members were there. About 50 Africans, mainly from Ghana and Uganda and others were present.

The police are searching for Salim, another accused who is also an event manager. The police have information that Salim was involved in organising rave parties around the city.

Of late BJP MLC Lehar Singh has been highlighting this problem and claims drug mafias have links with terror outfits. “Everyone knows the use of drugs is rampant. All high profile parties in Bengaluru central business district are primarily drug parties, but everyone has turned a blind eye,” he said.

“I have provided evidence in the House. Lots of funds have been invested in drug trade and they are also radicalizing the youth. First an individual is drugged and made weak, later they will be given lessons in extremism. It’s a question of national security,” he underlined.

When contacted Sandeep Patil, Joint Commissioner (Crime), said the city police will identify and deport the foreign nationals involved in drug racket in the city. Stern action will be taken against them, he added.
