Thief identifies priest in 1992 Sister Abhaya murder case

THIRUVANANTHAPURAM: The first ray of hope for the prosecution in the Sister Abhaya murder trial emerged on Thursday when key witness Adakka Raju testified before a special court here that he had seen two men, including Fr Thomas Kottoor, the first accused in the case, in the St Pius X convent compound in Kottayam in the wee hours of March 27, 1992, when the Sister was found murdered in the well of the convent.“I had been on the terrace for stealing copper components of the lightning conductor installed atop the convent building. I had committed theft on two days and was there on the third day looking for the remaining copper components. I saw two men walking up the stairs with a torch and they were seen surveying the surroundings. One of them was a tall man and the other one was Fr Thomas Kottoor, who is in this court. As they were there, I abandoned my plan and left the place,” Raju told the CBI special court.During the examination by CBI prosecutor, Raju identified Fr Kottoor, who was in the dock. He later told the court during the cross-examination by Kottoor’s lawyer B Raman Pillai that he had identified both Kottoor and Fr Jose Puthrukkayil (who was later discharged from the case) when CBI summoned him for an identification parade after the arrest of the accused in the case in 2008.Raju had earlier given a sworn statement to the judicial first-class magistrate in Ernakulam. He also levelled serious allegations against the crime branch team, which had initially probed the case. He said he had been picked up by the crime branch sleuths and kept in custody for 57 or 58 days.“Samuel sir (crime branch officer) asked me to own up the crime. He said I would get a new house, my kids would get good education and my wife would get a new job if I agreed to the proposal. I was brutally tortured in custody with my hands and knees tied up. I had thought of owning up the crime at one point. But, by that time, another person, who landed up in the custody, helped me by informing the court about my plight. Then, I was handed over to Kottayam West police where I was booked for a theft case,” said Raju.During the cross-examination that went on for over three hours, advocate B Raman Pillai listed out around 10 criminal cases in which Raju had been an accused. He said Raju had been a juvenile delinquent and admitted to juvenile home for two years.Raju didn’t deny Pillai’s comments regarding his criminal past, which also included cases of stabbing a man and abetting the suicide bid of his own wife. The effort of the defence lawyer was to prove that the witness had a blemished character and his statements couldn’t be taken on face value. The cross-examination of Raju will continue on Friday.
