Rahul Gandhi Kissed By A Man On His Way To Wayanad Constituency, Watch

Even as controversy surrounded Rahul Gandhi after Pakistan quoted him in their letter to UN, a light moment or a somewhat bizarre incident caught the attention while the leader was on the way to his constituency Wayanad to review the flood situtaion there. As the convoy of Rahul Gandhi went forward in Wayanad amid supporters surrounding his vehicle, and frequently hanging around his vehicle to shake hands with him, a man leaped forward and kissed him. Rahul Gandhi was seated at the front seat of his car and the window was open as he was shaking hands with supporters. A man first held his hand and then leaped forward to kiss him with the security personnel dragging him back as soon as he placed his kiss on Rahul's cheek. The entire incident was captured as media demanded answer from the leader on his earlier tweets.

WATCH THE VIDEO BELOW:

#WATCH A man kisses Congress MP Rahul Gandhi during his visit to Wayanad in Kerala. pic.twitter.com/9WQxWQrjV8 — ANI (@ANI) August 28, 2019

READ: Randeep Surjewala leaps to Rahul Gandhi's defence, attacks Pakistan

Rahul Gandhi evades question

As Congress leader Rahul Gandhi was confronted by media on his way to his Wayanad constituency on Wednesday, after Pakistan quoted the leader in their letter to United Nations Security Council, he chose to evade the question. This was hours after Rahul Gandhi posted a series of tweet in an attempt to damage control over his repeated remarks questioning the situation in Kashmir. After the abrogation of Artcile 370, Rahul Gandhi has also tried to visit Kashmir and indulged into a verbal clash with the Jammu and Kashmir's governor Satya Pal Malik. When he was confronted on Wednesday, Rahul Gandhi evaded the question and said: "I have already tweeted everything."

READ: Article 370: Russia snubs Pak, calls Kashmir India's internal matter

Rahul Gandhi's damage-control tweet:

On Wednesday, after Pak's letter to UN quoted Rahul Gandhi, he took to Twitter saying that he disagreed with the Centre on many issues, however he does not want any foreign country to interfere in Kashmir. 'I disagree with this Govt. on many issues. But, let me make this absolutely clear. Kashmir is India’s internal issue and there is no room for Pakistan or any other foreign country to interfere in it', he wrote. Below is his another tweet :

There is violence in Jammu & Kashmir. There is violence because it is instigated and supported by Pakistan which is known to be the prime supporter of terrorism across the world. — Rahul Gandhi (@RahulGandhi) August 28, 2019

READ | Debt-ridden Pakistan Considers Complete Closure Of Airspace For India

Pakistan quotes Rahul Gandhi

Pakistan's minister of human rights Shireen Mazari has sent a eight page letter to UN citing statements from leaders like Rahul Gandhi and Ghulam Nabi Azad calling the revocation of article 370 'arbitrary'. In the the letter dated 27 August 2019, the minister sought the attention of the United Nation special procedure mandate holders asking the members to investigate the 'violation of human rights' and deaths of people which has been 'acknowledged by mainstream politicians'. “Acts of violence have even been acknowledged by mainstream politicians, such as the Leader of the Congress Party, Mr. Rahul Gandhi who has noted “people dying” in Jammu and Kashmir, in light of events going very wrong there,” the letter stated.

READ | Rahul Gandhi Politicises Kerala Floods, Alleges Bias By BJP-led Centre
