Q1 GDP numbers to be out today: Five things to watch out for

Representative Image

Key Highlights According to economists, Indian economy grew at its slowest pace in five years in Q1 on the back of weak consumer demand and private investment Consumption slowdown is reflected in various leading indicators like auto sales The govt is taking various measures to revive growth in the economy

New Delhi: The Central Statics Office (CSO) is expected to release GDP growth numbers for the April-June quarter (Q1) today (Friday). According to economists, Indian economy grew at its slowest pace in five years in Q1 on the back of weak consumer demand and private investment. Economic growth will also be affected amid a trade war between China and the US as it has dampened business sentiments.

Here are five things to watch out for in today's GDP numbers

Headline numbers

According to a Reuters' poll of economists, the median estimate for annual growth in Q1 GDP is 5.7%, which is lower than the 5.8% growth reported for the previous three months. If the economy actually grew at 5.7% or less in Q1, then it will be the slowest pace of expansion in five years, since March 2014 and will be the fifth straight quarter of decline. The government can no more be in a denial mode that the economy has slowed down.

Consumption slowdown

Analysts say the slowdown in the Indian economy is driven by consumption slowdown, which is reflected in the slowing auto sale, and lower volume growth of FMCG companies. It may be noted that auto sales in the first seven months of 2019 have fallen by 13%. "India's economic slowdown could continue for next 2-3 years as the economy faces serious structural issues of a slowdown in consumer demand and decline in manufacturing growth," Sunil Sinha, principal economist at India Ratings said.

Recently the government has taken multiple steps to combat the slowdown. Last week FM Sitharaman announced measures to boost auto sales and revive loan growth in the banking sector.

Slowdown in private investment

Another reason behind the slowdown in the economy is lower private investment. Mounting bad loans in the banking sector and liquidity crisis at the shadow banking sector has affected loan growth and private investment in the country. Excess capacity in some sectors is also responsible for weak private investment, analysts say.

RBI in its annual report released on Thursday has also accepted the fact that consumption has slowed down in the economy and private investment needs to be pushed to revive growth.

On Wednesday, the government approved 100% foreign investment in coal mining and eased rules for sectors including contract manufacturing and single-brand retail. Finance Minister Nirmala Sithraman is likely to announce more measures soon to support sectors such as auto and real estate.

Public spending

During the April-June quarter, the government's capital spending fell 28% annually to Rs 63,000 crore, partly due to restrictions on announcing new projects during the Lok Sabha and state elections in that period. However, the government's capital spending is likely to revive soon. Analysts say the government is likely to use part of the excess receipts from RBI to boost investment. Government has said that it will spend Rs 100 lakh crore on improving the infrastructure of the country to achieve its $5 trillion GDP dream by 2024.

India could consider a "modest stimulus" for some sectors after the Reserve Bank of India's hefty dividend while following fiscal discipline, news agency Reuters quoted an unnamed senior government official as saying.

Revenue collection

Lower GDP growth in Q1 will also mean that the government is likely to fall short on its revenue collections target on both direct and indirect tax front. Worth mentioning here is that the government has set a GST collection target of Rs 6.63 lakh crore for FY20 in Budget 2019 as against last years' actual collections of Rs 6.43 lakh crore. Worth mentioning here is that in the first four months of FY20, CGST collection is below the target.

Repo rate cut

Lower GDP growth in Q1 will make case for another repo rate cut by RBI. The central bank has already cut benchmark lending rates by 110 basis points in four back-to-back revisions in 2019. However, analysts believe monetary stimulus will not be sufficient to revive growth as NPA-hit banks are reluctant to pass on benefits of lower rates, and largely using the space given by rate cuts to protect their margin.
