Bank employee duped of Rs 11 lakh on job portal

processing fees

job portal naukri.com

bank employee

private airline

ticket checker

security deposit

Lost money as ‘’ for a job in an airline.A 25-year-old Bhandup resident was allegedly duped of Rs 11lakh by two people who posed as recruiters of an airline on theThe duo lured the victim, Pramod Tawde, a, by promising to get him a job in a reputed, and took the money in installments as ‘processing fees’, the police said.An FIR has been registered for cheating at Sakinaka police station. The police believe it to be part of a job scam operating out of a call centre, which acquires job aspirants’ data from different websites.Last week, the Matunga police had busted a similar scam by raiding a call centre in Delhi which duped hundreds of people from across the country. The police are trying to ascertain if Tawde, too, was cheated by the same people.Tawde, who has been working in a bank for the past two years, said in the FIR that the duo claimed that they had shortlisted his résumé from the job portal. After getting access to his personal, educational and professional information, they called him on his mobile phone posing as employers from the airline.According to the FIR, Tawde had posted his résumé on the website, and in May he received a text message stating that it has been checked and verified by the ‘employers’, who would connect with him over the phone soon.The victim then got a call from a woman, Neha, who introduced herself as an employee with the airline. She said he had been selected for the job as ain the airline and that a human resources (HR) executive would get in touch with him for the interview. The police said an ‘HR executive’, Ajay Saini, then interviewed Tawde over the phone. He asked basic questions and told him that he had passed the round and would have to coordinate with Neha.Neha then called Tawde and told him that to take the process forward, he would have pay Rs 1,800 as a. He did so immediately.Over the next few days, he was asked to make more such deposits, and within a month, he had paid the scamsters Rs 11 lakh. On realising the fraud, he lodged a complaint on Wednesday.Aspokesperson for naukri.com said, “We take matters of customer security, data and cybercrime very seriously. As and when we are approached by law enforcement authorities, we provide all possible cooperation. We have stringent procedures to prevent any fraudulent activity, whether it targets jobseekers or recruiters.”The spokesperson added that naukri.com tells jobseekers regularly through emails and SMSes not to pay money to anyone who promises to find them a job.
