2 prisoners killed as lightning strikes temple in jail complex

Ludhiana: Two inmates of Borstal Jail died, while two others suffered injuries after lightning struck them near a temple inside the jail complex. The deceased were identified as Rishabh (who was in jail in a theft case at Saleem Tabri police station since July 30), and Lakhvir Singh (who was in jail since 2018 in a case of Sadar Ludhiana police station for allegedly kidnapping, abducting, and inducing a woman to compel her for marriage). The injured were identified as Rajwinder Singh (who was in jail in an ‘attempt to murder’ case of Sidhwan Bet police station) and Gurdeep Singh (who had two theft cases against him, including one at Meherban police station).

The jail’s deputy superintendent Rahul Raja said the four inmates, along with other inmates, had gone to a temple inside the jail to offer prayers, when around 4.30pm on Thursday, lightning suddenly struck them. He added that four inmates got injured in the incident, and after the jail staff saw them, they rushed to the spot and shifted them to the civil hospital for treatment. He said a judicial enquiry will be carried out into the incident.

A jail official — who took the four injured to the civil hospital in an ambulance — said two of the injured were declared dead by doctors at the hospital, while two others were undergoing treatment. He added that only four persons were injured in the incident, even as there were more persons at the spot where lightning struck.

Rajwinder said they had gone to offer prayers at the temple, while lightning struck them. He added there were around 20 persons near the temple when lightning struck, and they did not know how it happened. A doctor who was treating the injured said their condition was stable for now, and a specialist would check them. He added that Rajwinder and Gurdeep had suffered a shock, because of which they sustained injuries.

Dr Avinash Jindal, senior medical officer (SMO) at Ludhiana Civil Hospital, said the exact cause of death of the two inmates would be ascertained by the doctor, who will conduct a post-mortem on Friday. He added that so far as the other two other inmates were concerned, they had not suffered any injuries, but were in a state of shock. He said the duo had told them they were struck by lightning. The jail staff said Borstal Jail had inmates ranging from 18 to 21 years who had committed various crimes.

Police officials said four of the inmates were found unconscious when jail employees reached the spot after hearing the bang. They added that the temple structure and adjoining walls also suffered damages in the incident. Rahul Raja said it was not raining when lightning had struck the spot.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
