From a small town from Shivamogga, this 11th grade girl makes it to an International School in Bengaluru

International school

Hindi

In yet another feat of hard work and struggle to ace all odds, a Grade 11 student from Shivamogga battled in her academics, secured a scholarship at anin Bengaluru. Here’s how.With not having financial means to study in a good private school in the city Harshitha, a Grade 11 student secured a 100 per cent scholarship from Canadian International School (CIS) for the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP). CIS offers multiple scholarships every year to deserving candidates for Grade 9 as part of the International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) program and Grade 11 for the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme (IBDP).Harshitha, who secured the CIS scholarship to study in Grade 11 of the IBDP, said, “When I started looking into the IB diploma program last year, I felt this is what I wanted to study. A search on the internet landed me with plenty of schools, but CIS had great feedback online. When I checked out CIS' official website and found the scholarship program, I knew I had found my perfect fit. Coming here has been a terrific experience. I have access to the opportunities I was always looking for. The program has propelled my dreams, providing me with doorways to paths I have never thought would be opened to me.”The young and determined student finished her 10th grade in ICSE board at a local school in Shivamogga and moved to the state board for her 11th grade, but she wasn't happy doing it. She wanted a different curriculum and that's when she stumbled upon the IBDP at CIS on the internet. Harshitha loved the school, but didn't know how to get there because she couldn't afford it. She discovered the scholarship program on the internet and applied straight away. “I didn't know if I could make it, and if I did, I would have to repeat the 11th grade, but I knew I deserved it. I gave the test and I was informed that I was awarded the 100% scholarship and I was on cloud nine,” she said.Harshitha’s mother works as ateacher at a school in Shivamogga and her father works as a photographer. She does not regret the decision of shifting schools in the middle of her course. In the beginning, her parents were sceptical, she said.Talking about her future plans she said that she is is planning to do a double major in aerospace engineering and creative writing.Speaking about it Shweta Sastri, managing director, Canadian International School said, “Our dream is to provide an opportunity to the best minds in the country and assist them in getting access to quality education and international learning standards. The scholarship is a means to help deserving students like Harshitha realize their educational goals by overcoming financial hardships.”
