Delhi: Jilted lover fakes murder plot, implicates ex's new boyfriend

The Delhi Police has unearthed a case where a man staged a scene wherein he shot himself and after being injured, he told the cops that he was attacked by his ex-girlfriend's boyfriend.

The case has been reported from Madipur area of New Delhi.

In a report about the matter, the Times of India (TOI) said on Monday afternoon, police were informed that 26-year-old Ghulam Sabir had been shot at in Madipur. Hearing the news, the cops reached the spot but by then Sabir had been taken to a hospital.

"At the spot, policemen were told that a man, who had personal enmity with Sabir, had shot him at his house and fled. An FIR was lodged and investigation initiated," Times of India said in its report.

The report said when police started investigating the case, it led them to a man who was friends with Sabir's ex-girlfriend.

"Sabir also confirmed the theory alleging that that the man, identified as Puneet, had objected to his relationship with the girl and had shot him when he refused to part ways with her," the report said.

Meanwhile, the police also decided to scan the CCTV footage from the area where Sabir was allegedly shot at. They later detained Puneet.

But the matter did not end there.

Thankfully for Puneet, the police noticed several discrepancies and contradictions in Sabir's story. The CCTV footage too contradicted him and when the cops cross-examined Sabir, he reportedly "broke down" and told the cops that he had staged the shooting and weaved the story to implicate Puneet out of jealousy.

The reason: Puneet was dating a woman who had broken up with Sabit some months ago.

"On August 26, Sabir called Puneet to his house for a meeting and tried to convince him to stay away from her. However, Puneet refused and walked away," the Times of India report said. Following this, Sabir planned the staged shooting to implicate Puneet.

He asked two of his friends to shoot him in the waist. After shooting at him, his friends rushed him to the hospital. They were the ones who also called up the cops saying someone has attacked Sabir.

Sabir's friends too have been reportedly arrested.

ALSO READ | 25-year-old jilted lover kills minor girl, mother, commits suicide

ALSO READ | Jilted lover held for writing Islamic State message on mall posters in Mumbai

ALSO WATCH | Girl brutally attacked outside college by alleged jilted lover in Tamil Nadu
