Despite Heated Exchanges on Kashmir, India and Pak Continue Talks on Kartarpur, Jadhav

New Delhi: While India berated Pakistan for trying to project an “alarmist” picture of South Asia over its attempt to internationalise the revocation of special status to Kashmir, New Delhi has also proposed dates for the next senior-level meeting of the Kartarpur corridor at Attari.

According to official sources, India has proposed dates in the first week of September to finalise the agreement on the modalities of the Kartarpur corridor that would be a visa-free pilgrimage to link two holy shrines related to the founder of Sikhism, Guru Nanak.

The proposal was put forth on Wednesday – and so far, there has apparently been no response from Islamabad. So far, two senior official-level meetings have been held, with the last one in July.

On Friday, the two sides are meeting for a technical meeting at zero point, according to the Pakistan foreign office spokesperson Mohammed Faisal. “Pakistan remains committed to completing and inaugurating the Kartarpur Sahib corridor as announced by our Prime Minister,” he said. The corridor has to be opened to mark the 550th birth anniversary of Guru Nanak in November.

Indian government sources said that senior officials have to build upon the discussion in the technical meeting. The outstanding issues that require to be decided are the alignment of the temporary road for the corridor, modalities to exchange information about using the corridor, and modalities to deal with emergencies, including medical cases, during operation of the corridor, they added.

Besides, Indian officials added that work on this side of the border on physical infrastructure, including the passenger terminal building and the highway, is progressing on time.

“Secretary BM (Border Management), MHA is chairing regular meetings of the inter-ministerial Empowered Group to monitor progress and ensure timely implementation of the state of art facilities on the Indian side,” said official sources.

Consular access to Jadhav

Another topic on which India and Pakistan are talking to each other quietly is the issue of consular access of Kulbhushan Jadhav, the retired Indian naval officer in Pakistan’s custody. As a consequence of an order from International Court of Justice, Pakistan had agreed to provide consular access to Jadhav, who had been sentenced to death by a Pakistani military court. India has sought “unimpeded” and private access to Jadhav, while Pakistan wants the conversation to be monitored.

Both the Indian and Pakistani spokespersons confirmed on Thursday that talks are underway. “Two sides do remain in touch. Let’s see what kind of response we get from Pakistan,” said MEA spokesperson Raveesh Kumar at the weekly briefing. However, he again reiterated that bilateral negotiations on Jadhav’s access would not be done through the media.

India also confirmed that Pakistan had given prior notice to India over Thursday’s missile test, as required in bilateral agreements.

Besides these topics, both governments are largely hitting out to each other – with Pakistan insisting that the situation was explosive in Kashmir, while India dismissed this “alarmist” picture.

Also Read: Pakistan Tests Nuclear-Capable Missile ‘Ghaznavi’: Army

Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan tweeted on Thursday afternoon that all Pakistanis should observe Kashmir hour at noon to “show solidarity with the Kashmiri people” following the modification of Jammu and Kashmir’s status in the Indian Constitution and restrictions on movement and communications.

I want all Pakistanis to come out tomorrow 12 noon -12.30 pm to show solidarity with the Kashmiri people and send the Kashmiris in IOK a clear message that the entire Pakistani nation stands in solidarity with them & against Indian fascist oppression, the inhumane 24-day curfew, — Imran Khan (@ImranKhanPTI) August 29, 2019



The Pakistan government plans to sound sirens at 12 on Friday, and play the national anthem and Kashmiri anthem across the country.

Here in Delhi, Indian spokesperson Raveesh Kumar said, “We strongly condemn the recent statements by Pakistani leadership on matters internal to India. These are very irresponsible statements”.

He noted that these statements were intended to incite ‘jihad’ and provoke violence throughout India. “This is intended to project an alarming situation, which is different from ground realities,” said Kumar.

Kumar said that Pakistan will have to understand that the world has understood their plans and will not be convinced by their “lies and deceit”.

He asserted that the situation in Kashmir would normalise and strongly refuted media reports of drug shortage. Kumar also noted that the situation in Kashmir should not be compared to other parts of the country as it was never the same, even before the change in status and imposition of current restrictions.

On media reports of infiltration of terrorists to attack Indian ports, Kumar confirmed that the Indian government had received this information.

“We have been aware that Pakistan has been using terrorism as state policy. Pakistan has an obligation to take action against terror groups. It is also important for them to start behaving like normal neighbours do, who do not push terrorists into other’s territory,” he said.
