More than 700 letters sunken, forgotten and saved from a wartime shipwreck

Advertisement

More than 700 letters from soldiers writing home to loved ones were hauled from the depths of a shipwreck, revealing life during the Second World War.

The SS Gairsoppa was steaming home from India to Liverpool to deliver vital silver to fund the war efforts when she was torpedoed by a Nazi U-boat on February 14 1941.

She sank in icy seas more than three miles deep near the coast of Ireland. Only one of her 84 crew survived.

The ship, carrying bundles of letters home, never reached its destination. It ended up lying forgotten on the ocean floor, half a mile deeper than the wreck of Titanic, for more than seven decades.

In 2011, the American deep-sea exploration pioneers discovered the long-lost wreck of the Gairsoppa 4,700 metres (2.9 miles) under the Atlantic Ocean.

Remote control submarines searched in dark waters for four hours to reach the wreck where teacups, sheets of silk and even bottles of tomato ketchup and HP sauce were found.

Along with £150million worth of silver and enough tea to fuel two thirds of the British population, twelve bundles of mail were preserved in an air pocket in the ship's wreckage.

Shrouded in darkness and held together with immense pressure, the letters lay within the hold beneath tons of mail bags and sediments. Without light, currents, heat and oxygen, decay slowed down.

A total of 717 letters, the largest collection ever found at sea, were hauled from the depths of the murky ocean offering a unique insight into the extraordinary circumstances of British people stationed in India.

This letter is from S.N. Mitra (right), working at the Tata Iron and Steel company’s Jamshedpur plant, to Paul F. Kohlhaas, who had recently been relocated to the New York Office. Mitra is clearly devastated by this relocation: ‘I had always depended so much on your guidance and your inspiring advice in all my activities'

This card depicting a lioness was sent by A.E. Porter of the Indian Civil service to his son in Gloucestershire ‘with love from Daddy’

A clipping of an advert placed in a newspaper. It read: ‘WANTED husbands for five young and pretty sisters (aged 16 to 24). One is daring. One is alluring. One is coy. One is wild. One is wise. You can have your pick. ‘P.S. can’t afford any dowry. Their youth and beauty will compensate you for it.’

This vivid blue Season’s Greetings card was sent by Jack Alleman of the Catholic Mission in Patna to Mrs Lohrum in Los Angeles. The accompanying typed letter is no longer legible, but the printed message in the card reads: ‘All joy be yours this Christmas Day, And not today alone, But every day of the Coming Year, Be Happiness your own’. Another Christmas tied with string reads: 'Wishing you all the happiness and the best of everything'

The S.S Gairsoppa was heading for Liverpool but was forced to break convoy and and was torpedoed 300 miles off the coast of Ireland

And the delicate paper letters found at the bottom of the murky sea were painstakingly restored due to the shipwreck preserving most of its contents by creating a unique micro climate.

A story of survival SS Gairoppa was steaming home to Britain when she was hit by a torpedo when 84 crew members and two gunners were on board. Desperately trying to escape the steamship, 31 men crowded onto one of the lifeboats, led by Second Mate Richard Ayres. But after a few days out at sea only three of the men were still alive. Finally, land was sighted. However, Ayres risked sailing the boat into Caerthilian Cove in Cornwall in treacherous conditions. An enormous wave threw them overboard, trapping them under the lifeboat. Exhausted, Ayres recalled almost giving up hope until he heard the sound of children shouting encouragement from the shore. In one last effort he made it onto dry land. Ayres was the only survivor who made it to shore alive. He was awarded an MBE Most Excellent Order of the British Empire and Lloyd’s War Medal for Bravery at Sea. After recuperating in local hospital, Ayres eventually returned to the sea and even back to India. But he never spoke of his ordeal again. Advertisement

Most of the soldiers whose letters sank with the ship were stationed on the remote edge of British India’s North-West Frontier province in modern Pakistan, fighting a tribal war along a strategically sensitive boundary.

Some letters, which are being displayed in an exhibition called Voices from the Deep at the Postal Museum in London, detail the horrific tribal conflict during one of the campaigns in the Second World War, while others indicate little concept of the Blitz those living in India had.

Rupert Searle of the first Devonshire Regiment wrote to his sister Bet from the British Military Hospital at Rawalpindi. He almost died after suffering gangrene on his leg and had to undergo a gruelling operation.

He wrote: ‘They had to take one hundred and fifty little cuts off my good leg and put on the bad one. They said the longest I would live was two days. I had to fight for it the second night was touch and go…but I won in the end.’

Sergeant Bloomfield wrote about the hardship of digging trenches. He said: ‘It’s damned hard work walking so far and then having to dig for three days. Both my hands and feet were sore, not forgetting my back.’

Another was a clipping of an advert placed in a local newspaper. It read: ‘WANTED husbands for five young and pretty sisters (aged 16 to 24). One is daring. One is alluring. One is coy. One is wild. One is wise. You can have your pick.

‘P.S. can’t afford any dowry. Their youth and beauty will compensate you for it.’

Some letters describe the rich countryside of India, as well as the troubles of living there.

A soldier wrote home to his parents after suffering in hospital from jaundice which he described as ‘an Indian complaint which makes you turn yellow’.

After recovery, he wrote that he was back ‘fighting those rotten tribes again’, giving a detailed account of the wounds of some of his fellow soldiers.

Many of the letters were also written by individual missionaries or more formal newsletters sent from houses, hospitals and schools.

One missionary newsletter sent home details a man who had to go to hospital when he was ‘bitten on the toe by a snake’.

Gladys Clapp wrote passionately to her parents with her view of recent developments in the war, 28th November 1940. She praises 'Gallant little Greece' and feels that 'England has defiantly turned the corner now without a doubt.'

In one letter, a German author writes: ‘I am writing to you in English as then delay in the letters is less likely. Please write in English too.’ It shows a sign of the impact censorship during war had on daily life.

This card sent to San Francisco shows a common image of an Indian snake charmer produced by the famous London company Raphael Tuck & Sons. Snakes are considered sacred in the Hindu religion and snake charmers holy men inspired by the gods

Rupert Searle of the 1st Devonshire Regiment writes to his sister Bet from the British Military Hospital at Rawalpindi. Suffering from gangrene sustained in the tribal war, he had an operation where ‘They took one hundred and fifty little cuts off my good leg and put on the bad one’. (left) A newsletter from the A.P. Mission Hospital tells of a man brought to the hospital ‘pale and semi-conscious’ after being bitten on the toe by a snake (right)

This photo shows a village missionary school in East Bengal and was sent by C. Prior of the Oxford Mission in Calcutta to Margaret in Devon

This card was sent by Sally, Phil and Barbara to the Canadian Bank of Commerce in Los Angeles and shows an Indian water carrier. Without a centralised water system and pipes, water carriers collected water from sources such as rivers and carried them to people’s homes for payment

This unusual Christmas and New Year card sends ‘Greetings from India’ along with an embossed silver camel and an image of a temple behind

The journey of S.S Gairsoppa S.S Gairsoppa which was sunk in 1941 Christmas was just three weeks away when the SS Gairsoppa left Calcutta, India, on December 5 1940 to start its voyage to Liverpool to deliver vital silver to fund the war efforts. The S.S Gairsoppa was returning back to Britain with a cargo of silver ingots and joined a convoy in Sierra Leone. The silver, which was desperately needed to top up Britain’s collapsing silver stocks and pay for weapons and wages. But just as crucial as the silver was Britain’s favourite drink; tea. Tea was essential to top up the country’s wavering morale. The steamship went round the Cape of Good Hope due to the Suez Canal being so dangerous. Due to the heavy cargo, the steamship was forced to burn more fuel to maintain speed in the convoy during choppy seas. It was forced to break away from convoy in a notorious danger zone and two days later, 300 miles off the west coast of Ireland, it was torpedoed by a German U-boat 101. The torpedo hit the straggler with such force that the lower hull cracked open like an egg. It took just twenty minutes for the ship to sink to the seabed, where it lay for 70 years. Advertisement

But most of all, many people wrote home with love to their family and mention how long their letters take to arrive, sometimes taking weeks, sometimes even months to be delivered.

Barbara Borghese, a conservator at the Postal Museum, said: ‘We were never going to be able to conserve the whole collection. We had boxes and boxes of letters, envelopes and cards.'

'The letters had broken into tiny fragments resulting in a jigsaw puzzle attempt to piece them back together.

With the ink completely faded in some sections, the letters required a good eye for old handwriting to be salvaged.

Ms Borghese said: ‘A lot of the letters came to me in little bits and pieces. They were vacuum packed into mail bags in the bottom of the ocean where the pressure is very heavy. It became a really squashed and tight bundle of letters.

The letters were fragile with brown stains from the ships rusting metal.

Ms Borghese said: ‘The reason why you can still see writing is because the pressure at the bottom of the sea. They were so squeezed together that what was in middle got preserved remarkably well considering 70 years in salty water.

‘People think paper as something incredibly fragile but paper has a great strength, it’s a great material and it does like to be in water as that’s how a sheet of paper is first formed.'

'The letters were first sent to an archaeological studio in Scotland and that was the first place that was asked to do something about the bundles.

'There was a lot of time spent there was a chemical risk. Repairing and replacing them like a jigsaw puzzle, because of the repairs and drying and flattening and the mounting. Literally piecing together tiny fragments.

'I would infill parts that I’m missing with paper that compatible with the colour, the quality, weight thickness of original paper.'

Voices From the Deep is at the Postal Museum in Clerkenwell, London.

The delicate paper letters at the bottom of the sea could be painstakingly restored due to the shipwreck preserving most of its contents by creating a unique micro climate

Along with £150 million worth of silver, enough tea to fuel two thirds of the British population, tea, twelve bundles of mail were salvaged from an air pocket in the ship

Most of the soldiers whose letters sank with the ship were stationed on the remote edge of British India’s North-West Frontier province in modern Pakistan, fighting a tribal war along a strategically sensitive boundary

The American deep-sea exploration pioneers Odyssey Marine Exploration discovered the long-lost wreck of the Gairsoppa 4,700 metres (2.9 miles) under the Atlantic Ocean

SS Gairsoppa was steaming home from India in while in the service of the Ministry of War Transport when she was torpedoed by a Nazi U-boat on February 14 1941. It had £155m of silver still onboard

Amid the wreck, 109 tons of silver, 717 letters and dozens of items used by the crew were recovered by robots controlled from the Odyssey’s research ships
