Bhima-Koregaon case: SC orders interim protection to Anand Teltumbde till February 11

The Special Court in Pune today passed an order terming the arrest of Dalit human rights activist Anand Teltumbade by Pune Police as illegal. Anand Teltumbde was arrested from domestic airport in Mumbai this morning in connection with the Bhima-Koregaon case.

Judge KD Vadane gave the above order on the application by defence lawyer Nahar after he challenged that the arrest of his client was illegal.

Nahar said that the arrest of Anand Teltumbde is illegal and in contempt of the Supreme Court. "Pune Police has violated the SC order that specifically gave protection to Teltumbde for four weeks that lapse on February 11, 2019," he argued.

Public prosecutor Ujwala Pawar tried justifying Anand Teltumbade arrest as a rightful act.

Teltumbde can approach the competent authority for bail or pre-arrest bail.

The Supreme Court ordered interim protection to Anand Teltumbde till February 11.

Anand Teltumbde is accused of making inflammatory speeches at Elgar Parishad in Shaniwarwada, Pune on December 31, 2017 that led to the riots at Bhima-Koregaon the next day on January 1, 2018.

Police say that Maoists were behind Elgar Parishad. Anand Teltumbde faces charges in relation to these cases along with other prominent activists, all of whom have been dubbed "urban naxals".

Last August, Pune Police had raided Teltumbde's house in a multi-city operation. P Varavara Rao, Vernon Gonzalves and Arun Pereira, whose houses were also raided during the operation, are in custody already.

On January 30, the police had opposed Teltumbde's plea for an anticipatory bail saying that it was "necessary to allow sufficient opportunity to the investigating agency to collect the evidence". A custodial interrogation had been sought by the police.

Teltumbde's bail plea was subsequently rejected.

Earlier on January 14, the Supreme Court refused to quash Pune Police's FIR against Teltumbde for his alleged role in the Elgar Parishad-Bhima Koregaon violence. The apex court then refused to interfere in the case.

Anand Teltumbde is the brother of Milind Teltumbde who is one of the 22 accused named in the Elgar Parishad case. 10 out of the 22 have been arrested till date. Milind Teltumbde has many cases pending against him for his alleged connection with Naxal Movement.

Teltumbde's lawyer advocate Rohan Nahar alleged that the arrest is illegal. Nahar said that the police arrested Teltumbde before he could approach High Court for relief.

Also read | Bhima-Koregaon violence: Pune police wants custodial interrogation of Anand Teltumbde

Also read | Bhima Koregaon anniversary: Hundreds visit war memorial, security heightened

Also read | Maharashtra government opposes any court relief to professor Anand Teltumbde

Also watch | Activist Anand Teltumbde arrested in Mumbai in connection with Bhima-Koregaon case
