In this new poster in Patna, Rahul Gandhi is Ram and PM Modi is Raavan

The poster informs about Rahul Gandhi's Jan Akanksha rally scheduled for February 3 at Gandhi Maidan in Patna.

Helicopter-borne candidates and campaigners circling over villages and cities are a passe in Bihar as posters have taken over.

And no ordinary posters for that matter. These posters have Congress chief Rahul Gandhi dressed as Lord Ram, all set to shoot the 10-headed 'demon' king Raavan down with his arrow.

A second poster of Rahul Gandhi dressed as Lord Ram has come to light. And this poster has Raavan too -- Prime Minister Narendra Modi.

The poster exudes hope that Rahul Gandhi will usher in Ram Rajya in the country and will end the "BJP's misrule".

The first poster that emerged on January 29 did not have a Raavan -- the evil king who abducted Goddess Sita.

Taking an apparent dig at the opposition BJP, a slogan etched in the middle of the first poster read: "Woh Ram naam japte rahe, tum bannkar Ram jiyo re [Let them keep chanting the name of Lord Ram, you [Rahul Gandhi] be God himself]."

READ THE FULL STORY HERE | Kabhi Rahul, Kabhi Ram

The second poster that came into picture on Saturday shows PM Modi with the proverbial ten faces of Raavan. These faces depict the evils of any society -- from crime against women to farmer distress and so on.

These posters purportedly inform about Rahul Gandhi's Jan Akanksha rally scheduled for February 3 at Gandhi Maidan in Patna.

This is, however, not the first time Congress party workers are using the visual campaign to the hilt to trade barbs to woo voters.

"Bahut huya jumlon ka vaar, phir ek baar Nitish Kumar [too much of barb-trading, vote for Nitish Kumar once again]," screamed a hoarding at the busy Exhibition Road intersection in the city while banners carrying NDA's war cry of "Badaliye sarkar, badaliye Bihar [change government, change Bihar]" and the image of Modi-Shah duo, became ubiquitous in the state capital in October, 2015.

This happened ahead of the third phase of the high-octave Bihar assembly elections.

Also earlier, a similar poster portraying Rahul Gandhi as Lord Ram and PM Modi as Raavan had created an uproar in Uttar Pradesh.

ALSO WATCH | Poster depicts Rahul Gandhi as Ram, PM Modi as Raavan
