Filmmaker Robert Bilheimer wins international award and embarks on new trafficking film

In 2011, a local documentary company released Not My Life, a harrowing spotlight on the exploitation and trafficking of children around the world — for labor and for sex.

Not My Life highlighted the issue of human trafficking at a time when it was still largely ignored by or unknown to the mainstream media, elected officials, and the public.

"The scope and dimension and ubiquity of the issue were really not in play in terms of the public consciousness," said Robert Bilheimer, president and chief filmmaker with Worldwide Documentaries, which he and his wife, Heidi Ostertag, operate from their home in Bloomfield, Ontario County.

Shown on campuses, on PBS and CNN International, as well as major networks across the world, Not My Life became a must-see for organizations trying to combat human trafficking. In India, in particular, millions saw the film on a prominent news program, and it resonated in a country where trafficking was rampant.

Now Bilheimer has received the same honor given to the Dalai Lama and Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani advocate for education who also won a Nobel Peace Prize. Recently, Bilheimer was notified that he is the 2019 recipient of the Mother Teresa Award for Social Justice from the India-based Harmony Foundation, an organization battling oppression and discrimination.

Slavery was never abolished

"Many believe that slavery was abolished in the 19th century with such instruments as the Emancipation Proclamation, yet it continues to exist albeit in invisible ways," Harmony Foundation founder and chairman Dr. Abraham Mathai wrote in the letter alerting Bilheimer to the honor. "The unique method of appropriating cinema as a medium for spreading awareness and to use the documentary, Not My Life, which is the first film to depict the cruel and dehumanizing practices of human trafficking and modern day slavery on a global scale was amazing and remarkable."

The honor comes at the same time as Worldwide Documentaries is trying to amass financing to complete a follow-up project, called Heart of the Matter, which focuses on the worldwide refugee crisis and how it is exacerbating human trafficking.

"Where (traffickers) were once fishing in pools of vulnerability, which is what traffickers do, now it's oceans," Bilheimer said in a recent interview.

That very vulnerability was at the heart of Not My Life, which showed labor and sex trafficking from a rare international scope, even bringing its lens to the United States and the story of a teenager forced into prostitution at a truck stop.

The ugliness of trafficking, as the film revealed, was real and pervasive, whether the forced labor of the very young or the kidnapping and rape of youth. For Bilheimer, Not My Life needed to walk a tightrope, finding a way to display the abhorrent practices without pushing people to look away and forget.

Worldwide Documentaries navigated that tightrope.

"The impact of (Not My Life) was ... that they were touching people with storytelling and without lecturing," Susan Bissell, the chief of Unicef's child protection division, said in a telephone interview. "The impact was widespread at many levels. There's a number of people that were casually exposed for the first time to the issue."

Refugee crisis brings trafficking crisis

While Not My Life succeeded in bringing the issue of trafficking to millions — and helped spark a more intense societal and law enforcement crackdown against it in India — the refugee crisis has created a world where even more people are treated as chattel. Thus, Worldwide Documentaries turned its attention to Heart of the Matter.

As now planned, Heart of the Matter will consist of five shorter documentary segments, and, like Not My Life, will have an expansive reach. Already Bilheimer and his crew have filmed a Honduran family escaping the extortion, violence and murders committed by gangs. This segment, entitled "Where Am I," tracks some of the family from McAllen, Texas — a point of entry for thousands of migrants and refugees in the U.S. — to a reunion with other relatives. Threatened with death by gangs, the family hopes to find in United States a haven of humanity and safety.

"Where Am I" particularly humanizes refugees who are often little more than sheer numbers and pawns in the current political climate. The National Geographic Society provided a storytelling grant for "Where Am I."

Another segment is set in Cox's Bazar in Bangladesh, the sprawling refugee camp for the Rohingya, the largely Muslim population violently forced from Myanmar by its Buddhist government and military. The camp, with its 900,000 vulnerable refugees, is the world's "human trafficking capital," Bilheimer said.

"The traffickers are just preying on the kids, especially the girls, and feeding them into the maw of this industry," Bilheimer said.

The refugee crisis does not have an end in sight, Bilheimer noted. Around the world, millions are fleeing what were once their homes because of gangs, ethnic cleansing, and the loss of once-farmable land due to climate change and drought.

"You can't talk about refugees, you can't talk about asylum-seekers, you can't talk about forced migrants without talking about the human trafficking industry," Bilheimer said. " ... Where you have one, there you have the other."

Bilheimer, who recently turned 75, is insistent that Worldwide Documentaries will complete Heart of the Matter. His career has been spent with sensitive revelatory films about difficult topics — trafficking, the global AIDs crisis, South African apartheid. The Cry of Reason, his 1988 film about apartheid, was an Oscar finalist.

Unicef's Bissell is working with Worldwide Documentaries to bring Heart of the Matter to fruition, and to the world. The story is a necessary one, she said.

"There's really no country and therefore no person untouched by the migration crisis that the world is experiencing," she said. "The links between that crisis and the exploitation of humankind is second to none."

How to contribute
