Pak PM's article in US daily makes false assertions against India

Islamabad [Pakistan], Aug 30 (ANI): Pakistan Prime Minister Imran Khan penned an opinion article for The New York Times which was published on Friday, wherein he made false assertions against India while trying to rake up the nuclear bogey.

"After I was elected prime minister of Pakistan last August, one of my foremost priorities was to work for a lasting and just peace in South Asia. India and Pakistan, despite our difficult history, confront similar challenges of poverty, unemployment and climate change, especially the threat of melting glaciers and scarcity of water for hundreds of millions of our citizens," Khan wrote.

If this were so, Pakistan would not have been progressively reducing allocations for the water sector in its budgets, even under Imran Khan.

"I wanted to normalise relations with India through trade and by settling the Kashmir dispute, the foremost impediment to the normalization of relations between us," he added.

This holds no truth as Pakistan, even under Imran Khan, did not move to give India Most Favoured Nation (MFN) status mandated under the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and neither did it allow land transit to Afghanistan.

"On July 26, 2018, in my first televised address to Pakistan after winning the elections, I stated we wanted peace with India and if it took one step forward, we would take two steps. After that, a meeting between our two foreign ministers was arranged on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly session in September 2018, but India cancelled the meeting. That September I also wrote my first of three letters to Prime Minister Narendra Modi calling for dialogue and peace," Khan said in the article.

India has maintained a consistent position that terror and talks cannot go together. With Pakistan persisting with fomenting terrorism in India, a dialogue is just not possible, as Islamabad needs to root out terrorism from its soil first.

"Unfortunately, all my efforts to start a dialogue for peace were rebuffed by India. Initially, we assumed that Mr Modi's increasingly hard-line positions and his rhetoric against Pakistan were aimed to whip up a nationalist frenzy among the Indian voters with an eye on the Indian elections in May," he also stated, conveniently forgetting to mention India's stand on terrorism and dialogue.

"On February 14, a few months before those elections, a young Kashmiri man carried out a suicide attack against Indian troops in Indian occupied Kashmir. The Indian government promptly blamed Pakistan. We asked for evidence, but Mr Modi sent Indian Air Force fighter planes across the border to Pakistan. Our Air Force brought down an Indian plane and captured the pilot. We struck back to signal we could defend ourselves but chose not to strike a target that would cause loss of life. I made a conscious decision to show that Pakistan had no intention of aggravating the conflict between two nuclear-armed states. We returned the captured Indian pilot, with no preconditions," he said, referring to the dastardly Pulwama terror attack.

Again, quite conveniently, the Pakistani Prime Minister abstained from mentioning the fact that the suicide bomber belonged to Pakistan-based terror outfit Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM). The terror group, helmed by UN-proscribed terrorist Masood Azhar, immediately claimed responsibility for the attack which claimed the lives of 40 CRPF personnel.

Khan also wrote about the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in the opinion editorial and stated, "On May 23, after Mr Modi's re-election, I congratulated him and hoped we could work for "peace, progress and prosperity in South Asia." In June, I sent another letter to Mr Modi offering dialogue to work toward peace. Again, India chose not to respond. And we found out that while I was making peace overtures, India had been lobbying to get Pakistan placed on the "blacklist" at the intergovernmental Financial Action Task Force, which could lead to severe economic sanctions and push us toward bankruptcy."

India did not need to lobby to get Pakistan placed on the 'blacklist' of the FATF. It was placed on the 'grey-list' in 2018 due to serious deficiencies in its anti-Money laundering and terrorism financing regimes. The recent visit of the Asia Pacific Group (APG) has identified a series of continuing shortcomings in Pakistan. The Prime Minister's latest statements along with the APG's appraisal goes on to prove that Pakistan is not serious about complying with internationally accepted norms in the areas of money laundering and terror financing.

"Evidently Mr Modi had mistaken our desire for peace in a nuclear neighbourhood as appeasement. We were not simply up against a hostile government. We were up against a "New India," which is governed by leaders and a party that are the products of the Hindu supremacist mother ship, Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, or the R.S.S. The Indian prime minister and several ministers of his government continue to be members of the R.S.S., whose founding fathers expressed their admiration for Benito Mussolini and Adolf Hitler. Mr Modi has written with great love and reverence about M.S.Golwalkar, the second supreme leader of the R.S.S., and has referred to Mr Golwakar as "Pujiniya Shri Guruji (Guru Worthy of Worship)," Khan wrote.

"Mr Modi's guru wrote admiringly about the Final Solution in "We, Our Nationhood Defined," his 1939 book: "To keep up the purity of the race and its culture, Germany shocked the world by her purging the country of the Semitic Races -- the Jews. National pride at its highest has been manifested here. Germany has also shown how well-nigh impossible it is for races and cultures, having differences going to the root, to be assimilated into one united whole, a good lesson for us in Hindustan for us to learn and profit by," he added.

The incumbent Pakistani Prime Minister is known by the moniker of 'Taliban Khan' which makes the act of pointing fingers at others strange.

"I had hoped that being elected prime minister might lead Mr. Modi to cast aside his old ways as the chief minister of the Indian state of Gujarat, when he gained global notoriety for the 2002 pogrom against local Muslims on his watch and was denied a visa to travel to the United States under its International Religious Freedom Act -- a list of visa denials that included associates of Slobodan Milosevic," the PM stated.

There have been several court-supervised enquiries into the events and none of them have found PM Modi to be responsible. Such lies and insinuations do not behove the Prime Minister of a country.

"Mr Modi's first term as prime minister had been marked by the lynching of Muslims, Christians and Dalits by extremist Hindu mobs. Indian-occupied Kashmir, we have witnessed increased state violence against defiant Kashmiris. Pellet-firing shotguns were introduced and aimed at the eyes of young Kashmiri protesters, blinding hundreds," Khan also wrote.

The Pakistani PM would be better off looking at the egregious violations of the human rights of the Baloch, the Pashtuns and the minorities in his own country. There are thousands of missing Baloch and the almost daily forced conversions of minority Hindus, Christian and Sikhs girls.

"On Aug. 5, in its most brazen and egregious move, Mr Modi's government altered the status of Indian-occupied Kashmir through the revocation of Article 370 and 35A of the Indian Constitution. The move is illegal under the Constitution of India, but more important, itis a violation of the United Nations Security Council resolutions on Kashmir and the Shimla Agreement between India and Pakistan. And Mr Modi's "New India" chose to do this by imposing a military curfew in Kashmir, imprisoning its population in their homes and cutting off their phone, internet and television connections, rendering them without news of the world or their loved ones. The siege was followed by a purge: Thousands of Kashmiris have been arrested and thrown into prisons across India. A blood bath is feared in Kashmir when the curfew is lifted. Already, Kashmiris coming out in defiance of the curfew are being shot and killed," Khan claimed.

The steps taken by New Delhi on August 5 were as per the Indian Constitution. The decision was ratified by both Houses of the Indian parliament. We hardly need lessons from the 'selected' Prime Minister of Pakistan on democracy or constitutional practices

"If the world does nothing to stop the Indian assault on Kashmir and its people, there will be consequences for the whole world as two nuclear-armed states get ever closer to a direct military confrontation. India's defence minister has issued a not-so-veiled nuclear threat to Pakistan by saying that the future of India's "no first use" policy on nuclear weapons will "depend on circumstances." Similar statements have been made by Indian leaders periodically. Pakistan has long viewed India's "no first use" claims with scepticism," the Pakistani PM added.

The fact that Khan considers internal matters of India as a cause for direct military confrontation shows just who is war-mongering.

"With the nuclear shadow hovering over South Asia, we realize that Pakistan and India have to move out of a zero-sum mindset to begin a dialogue on Kashmir, various strategic matters and trade. On Kashmir, the dialogue must include all stakeholders, especially the Kashmiris. We have already prepared multiple options that can be worked on while honouring the right to self-determination the Kashmiris were promised by the Security Council resolutions and India's first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru," Khan said.

"Through dialogue and negotiations, the stakeholders can arrive at a viable solution to end the decades of suffering of the Kashmiri people and move towards a stable and just peace in the region. But dialogue can start only when India reverses its illegal annexation of Kashmir, ends the curfew and lockdown, and withdraws its troops to the barracks," he also stated.

What India has done is irreversible. The earlier Pakistan gets used to it, the better it would be for itself and for the region.

"It is imperative that the international community think beyond trade and business advantages. World War II happened because of appeasement at Munich. A similar threat looms over the world again, but this time under the nuclear shadow," Khan lastly wrote.

There is no threat of war from the Indian side. Perhaps the international community needs to advise Pakistan on the issue. (ANI)
