Saluting Martyrs

Martyrs’ Day or Shaheed Diwas is observed every year to honour the brave soldiers who laid down their lives to protect the nation’s sovereignty. The day also honours the contributions of the bravehearts who sparked the flame of nationalism and ushered in the dawn of freedom in India. Though 15 other countries also observe Martyrs’ Day on different dates, in India it is observed January 30, on the death anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. On this occasion, Orissa POST spoke to some youth and asked them about their definition of patriotism/nationalism.

“When we think of patriotism, people clad in army uniform come to our mind immediately. But to grow and flourish, the society also equally needs the services of doctors, engineers, sportsmen, traders, teachers and others who perform their duties sincerely. For me, they are also as patriotic as the soldiers who guard the borders,” said Dipanshu Bit, a video editor based in Bhubaneswar.

To him, patriotism means to work sincerely and give 100 per cent always. It is okay, he said, if someone is not saying ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’ as long he is doing his duty of nation building.

Many youths these days take pride in settling down in developed countries after getting their basic education in India. Is there a dearth of opportunities in India to utilise the expertise of these highly-skilled youth, Dipanshu asked. On this day, these youngsters should think how they can use their talent for the growth of the nation where they were born and brought up, he added.

Annada Mishra, a student of Taksila School, said she gets goosebumps when she listens to Lata Mangeshkar’s lines ‘Aye Mere Watan Ke logo,’ the immortal patriotic song composed by poet Pradeep.

“I am yet to find an answer to that feeling. I am sure many others also experience it. When I went to Delhi, my mom asked me to bow before the Amar Jawan Jyoti, a memorial set up to commemorate the martyrs and unknown soldiers of Indian Army who died during Indo-Pak War of 1971, and said they are the real heroes who laid down their lives for the sake of the country. The armed forces not only fight the enemy on the borders, they make us feel secure despite the presence of many internal enemies. They remain awake at the frontier in bone chilling cold which is why we can sleep peacefully in our homes,” Annada said, quoting her mother Subhasmita.

It is not only on occasions like Martyrs’ Day, Republic Day or Independence Day, all countrymen should keep the soldiers’ sacrifices always in mind, she added.

Young poet Antaryami Mishra thinks a bit differently from the others. Patriotism or nationalism is not an idea that can be identified in the name of religion, caste or community of the people, he believes.

“There is no denying one must love and pay respect to his/her motherland. But that doesn’t mean that we should become violent, taking the law into our hands. We must understand that people who criticise the government’s style of functioning are not necessarily anti-nationals,” observed Antaryami.

BIJAY MANDAL, OP
