News India: Mystery of Skeleton Lake deepens

Pilgrims pummelled to death by giant hailstones. Civilians slaughtered by Japanese forces in World War II. Or a royal entourage struck down by angry gods for bacchanalian behaviour.

What happened to the hundreds of people whose ancient bones scattered around a remote frozen site high in the Himalayas has baffled scientists for decades since their discovery in 1942.

Now, the mystery of Skeleton Lake has deepened even further, with a new study revealing mass deaths may have occurred at the site several times and stretch back to the 7 th Century.

A tiny body of water with deep secrets, Roopkunda Lake is high in the Himalayas on a Hindu pilgrammage path. (Schwiki/Wikimedia Creative Commons)

Even more puzzling, DNA tests indicate some of the remains at the site have Mediterranean origins - meaning people may have travelled thousands of kilometres to meet their deaths at the lake.

Roopkunda Lake is in India's part of the world's tallest mountain range, a small isolated pond just 40 metres wide. At more than 5,000 metres above sea level, it is usually frozen over.

The human remains – of up to 800 people - were first discovered there in 1942, and British officials initially thought the skeletons were the victims of invading Japanese forces, The Sun reported. This theory quickly fell from favour, but no one since has been able to say what happened to those who died, or why they were there.

No sign of epidemic was found, and one earlier study found some bones had compression fractures that could have been caused by huge hailstones, though this was never confirmed, The New York Times reported. Another theory is that they could have been unlucky explorers caught in the freezing temperatures.

Scientists have noted the lake may have been on a path trodden by Hindu pilgrims wanting to honour mountain goddess Nanda Devi. According to local legend, bodies at the lake include a king and queen killed by divine intervention as punishment for partying too hard.

Human bones lie exposed to the elements at the site and include those of men, women and children. (Ashokyadav739/Wikimedia Creative Commons)

The latest study by scientists from India, the US and Germany tested the DNA of 38 sets of remains from the lake and found they could be clustered into three distinct groups.

The research, published this month in Nature Communications , found the largest group had ancestry consistent with present-day South Asians, and one set of remains had Southeast Asian ancestry.

But it was a surprise to find 14 of the sets of remains "have ancestry typical of the eastern Mediterranean," the study found.

The researchers also found that the South Asian remains were from two groups that arrived at the lake at different times – between the 7 th and 10 th centuries, but with some bones generations older than others.

The other two genetic groups – the Southeast Asian and Mediterranean groups - arrived at the lake around 1,000 years later.

The researchers said their work adds "meaningful insights about an enigmatic ancient site" but concede it does not solve the mystery of the lake.

Theories for why there have been several mass deaths at the lake range from the divine to plain evil. (Ashokyadav739/Wikimedia Creative Commons)

"There have been multiple proposals to explain the origins of these skeletons," the authors wrote.

"Local folklore describes a pilgrimage to the nearby shrine of the mountain goddess, Nanda Devi, undertaken by a king and queen and their many attendants, who – due to their inappropriate, celebratory behaviour – were struck down by the wrath of Nanda Devi.

"It has also been suggested that these are the remains of an army or group of merchants who were caught in a storm. Finally, it has been suggested that they were the victims of an epidemic."
