National security main factor for J&K becoming UT

editorial@tribune.com

Arun Joshi

Tribune News Service

Jammu, August 30

The decision to accord the union territory (UT) status to Jammu and Kashmir was necessitated as the Centre wanted to root out terrorism from the Valley once and for all, as the continuation of the state would have kept the control of the police and public order with the state government, and not Delhi.

This was an important milestone in the mind of the Central government when it scrapped the special status and declared J&K to be UT, the other being that of the cold desert region of Ladakh on August 5.

The priority was to target terrorism ruthlessly with a strong political will. With the bitter experience of the past when successive state governments turned a blind eye to the growth of armed militancy and radicalisation to keep their Kashmir-centric politics aloft, the Centre knew that the repeat of the past of having a government that bows to wishes of separatists and militants would be an unmitigated disaster. It was compelled by circumstances to take control of the police and public order to strengthen the national security in the sensitive Himalayan territory.

The recurring terror acts and the inability of the state governments to punish terrorists were impacting the country’s image internationally, while the questions being asked within the country were more worrisome, “ why soldiers are dying, if terrorists are still running the show in Kashmir,” sources privy to the backroom developments told The Tribune.

With more than 50,000 dead in the state in the past 30 years, the Centre wanted to put an end to the daily death dance. The Pulwama-type terror attacks were becoming national tragedies.

The Centre was focused more on the long-term objectives of attaining peace in Kashmir than mere doing away with the special status of the state to underscore a political point. More important was the necessity to root out terrorism that pushed the government to take this measure, sources explained.

“There was a necessity to invest the Centre’s representative with all these powers without any hideous political interference in the law and order machinery, hence the UT where Lieutenant-Governor will have all such powers,” the source said.

Union Home Minister Amit Shah’s words that the statehood would be restored to J&K once the situation normalises, meant wiping out of the last vestige of terrorism from the soil of Jammu and Kashmir. That also meant that there would be no restoration of the statehood till things were back to the pre-1989 level of normalcy.

Equally important was the land issue. The Centre wants to initiate so many projects in the hospitality, tourism, horticulture and industrial sectors, for which the acquisition of land is high on the priority list.

It had also become a security issue. The previous PDP-BJP coalition government had been denied a piece of land, measuring less than 1200 sq feet in Gulmarg, where it wanted to set up a strategically important device system as part of its counter-insurgency operations. The plea was rejected on the specious ground that it would violate wildlife rules, whereas there neither was forest nor wildlife. So many other similar concerns made the Centre set up the UT instead of retaining the statehood for J&K.

Each and every case with authentic arguments was compiled to make a case for the transfer of land for the projects without any legal hurdles. The continuation of the state – the land is a state subject – would have complicated the matter. That complication, the sources said, had been done away with as in UT, the powers of the land utilisation would also be vested in Lt-Governor – meaning thereby Delhi.

Wiping out terrorism

The priority was to target terrorism ruthlessly with a strong political will. With the bitter experience of the past when successive state governments turned a blind eye to the growth of armed militancy and radicalisation to keep their Kashmir-centric politics aloft, the Centre knew that the repeat of the past of having a government that bows to wishes of separatists and militants would be an unmitigated disaster. It was compelled by circumstances to take control of the police and public order to strengthen the national security in the sensitive Himalayan territory.
