Shahbaz, Siraj castigate India

LAHORE: PML-N president Shahbaz Sharif said on Friday the Indian oppression and brutality could not suppress the voice of the Kashmiris and their right to self-determination.

In a statement issued here, the opposition leader in the National Assembly condemned New Delhi’s atrocities including curfew and communication blackout for the past 26 days.

“Tyrannical acts of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi have only brought the destiny of freedom of Kashmir closer and the writing is on the wall. Modi’s despotism has created a clear global distinction between the countries that stand for justice and those who don’t,” he said.

The occupied Kashmir, he said, would prove to be a graveyard of all those who are subjecting it to oppression. He said every step of Modi was writing another chapter of defeat in history and he would one day be tried for war crimes.

JI: The Jamaat-i-Islami on Friday announced full support to the government on every step it would take for the liberation of Kashmir.

The JI leaders while participating in the event called for taking concrete measures to help the besieged people of the occupied region.

“People of Kashmir are facing severe shortage of food and medicines. A drought-like situation is emerging in the IOK,” said JI chief Senator Sirajul Haq while talking to journalists at the JI headquarters.

He said the government should not limit itself to mere sloganeering as the food and medicine crisis could cost thousands of lives. He said India was trying to divert world attention from the impending humanitarian crisis. So, he added, it was duty of the Pakistan government to go to every extent to help the innocent Kashmiris.

Prime Minister Imran Khan, said Siraj, should not be worried at this crucial juncture as the nation would extend support to him.

The JI chief expressed concern over reports about the presence of “RSS terrorists” in the occupied Kashmir. He said Hindutva gangs were being sent to the held region with targets of mass killings.

He said Islamabad needed to act swiftly. He called for removal of fence along LoC and abolition of Shimla Agreement between Indian and Pakistan.

At a solidarity rally in Lahore, JI Naib Emir Liaquat Baloch said the nation was fully supporting their brothers and sisters in their struggle against the Indian occupation. He said the Kashmiris would not surrender before the Indian aggression.

He announced that the JI would hold a big march in Karachi on Sunday to express solidarity with the people of Kashmir.

Published in Dawn, August 31st, 2019
