In an echo chamber of child-lifter rumours, afraid and sleepless

Ghaziabad: Masuri is paranoid. Villagers here say they haven’t been sleeping at night to prevent children from being kidnapped. And while anxiety runs deep in the still nights, the days see violence stemming from this same fear.To put a stop to these “kidnappings”, the villagers have taken the law into their own hands, beating up people they ‘feel’ could be child-lifters. Three cases have been reported in the last seven days where local mobs have thrashed strangers on suspicion of being child-lifters, putting the village at the epicentre of this frightening trend in Ghaziabad.Ask anyone here, and the reply one will get is that the fears are not unfounded. Several children have gone missing from here, they say, though police records put the number of missing kids in all of Ghaziabad this year at 27. But disappointment with police has catalysed into anger and vigilantism because of a sudden surge of rumours about gangs of kidnappers lurking around.The villagers are reading about it on their phones, hearing others talk about it night and day. They are in an echo chamber , fed and enhanced continuously by rampant sharing of falsehoods on WhatsApp chat groups and algorithm-curated social media timelines that simply give them what they want to read. It has reinforced their fears, and convinced them what they have been reading is true.In one such clip received by a villager in Piplera (a village located just 500 metres from Masuri police station) on WhatsApp, a youth, about 20 years old, is seen tied to a pole. People have surrounded him from all sides and some of them are slapping him and asking him questions about how he lures children. The youth, who seems to be under a lot of strain, confesses to his crime, blurting out the names of villages from where he and his friends have stolen kids. Several members of his gang are on the prowl, he adds. The youth tells the crowd that organs from the kids are sold to private hospitals. The footage, believed to have been shot in Bhopal, ends with the person filming asking people to remain alert and spread the message.While no one knows who is making the videos, or where the text messages originate, they have created such terror in the minds of villagers that they are wary of every new person in the village. Even this correspondent faced stern questions and locals opened up only after they saw an identity card.“The situation is bad here. Locals have caught five to six people for trying to steal children. But we are not getting any support from police. They ask us to hand over the child-lifters to them, and later they are released without any action,” says Mohammad Raees, former pradhan of Piplera.“These days you can’t be sure about anyone. Who knows in which form they are roaming. We need to be sure who we are speaking to,” says Hazi Zameer Ahmed, a farmer, adding he has four kids and is worried about their safety.Rumour mongering is not new but the before the internet, their effects wouldn’t be this disastrous, says city-based psychiatrist Dr Rakesh Chandra. “In past, there were rumours about stories about monkey-man. Rumours spread like wildfire through mouth-to-mouth gossips too. If rumours remain in circulation for a longer time, it becomes more vicious,” she explains.Besides Masuri, cases of mob attacks have also been reported from Loni, Vijay Nagar and Tronica City.According to police, it all started when a person from Moradabad, who allegedly had a mental health issue, was found roaming aimlessly in Dasna railway station on August 22. Cynical, people on the platform turned violent and would have killed him had it not been for the quick police action.Later, two back-to-back incidents were reported. A 24-year-old farm helper was attacked in Nidori Village on August 24 after people spread the rumour that the youth was looking for a target. A day later, two youths from Delhi, who were seeking donation for an ashram, were beaten up in Akash Nagar in Masuri. This time, police arrested four for spreading rumours. The accused even tried to produce false evidence of child-lifting, says Naresh Kumar Singh, SHO, Masuri police station.In several cases, images and videos of atrocities on children in other countries are being shared on social media, mainly on WhatsApp groups, as those of child-lifting incidents in India. In fact, a photograph of Masuri police saving the man from attackers in Dasna on August 22 was circulated in Gwalior as the image of police arresting a child abductor, cops shared.“As the matter is related to children, people are quite emotional. Any suspicious-looking person becomes a threat if someone claims him/her to be a child-lifter,” says Neeraj Kumar Jadaun, SP (rural), adding that the rumours are akin to “seasonal ailment”.Police hope arrests in Ghaziabad, Meerut and other adjoining districts, 45 in all so far, will act as a deterrent. In the meantime, they continue to caution people against rumour-mongering.
