If we agree to defend Afghanistan from Taliban then US will side with India in taking back PoK: Swamy

Subramanian Swamy | Photo Credit: ANI

Key Highlights US President Donald Trump had earlier said that it was "not fair" that India, which is geographically "much closer" to Afghanistan compared to the US, is not fighting terrorist groups in the war-torn nation As part of the Afghan peace process with the Taliban, the US has promised to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan Swamy had earlier said that if India wants to take back PoK then it needs to withdraw the illegal petition filed by Nehru in the UNSC in 1947

New Delhi: BJP Rajya Sabha MP Subramanian Swamy has said that he now has a solid hint that if India agrees to defend Afghanistan against terrorists like Taliban and allow the US to withdraw its troops, then Washington will side with New Delhi in taking back Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK).

This comes after Taliban on Wednesday said they were close to reaching an agreement with the US on peace in Afghanistan.

Both the US as well as Taliban negotiators have said they have made progress on establishing safe zones once the American forces started withdrawing troops from Afghanistan.

Based on the safe zone strategy, a ceasefire will be announced in every province from where US forces would leave while nationwide ceasefire will only be implemented after the complete withdrawal.

US President Donald Trump had earlier said that it was "not fair" that India, which is geographically "much closer" to Afghanistan compared to the US, is not fighting terrorist groups in the war-torn nation.

Talking to reporters he further said that while India was not fighting the terrorists, Pakistan which is right next door is fighting it very little. “It's not fair. The United States is 7,000 miles away.” he had said.

As part of the Afghan peace process with the Taliban, the US has promised to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan, in exchange for the guarantee by Taliban that areas which would remain under their control would not become a platform for promoting transnational terrorism.

After India abrogated Article 370 ending the special status of Jammu and Kashmir, Shiv Sena leader Sanjay Raut said that the Centre will also reclaim Balochistan and Pakistan-occupied Kashmir (PoK).

After Raut’s statement, Swamy said that if India is serious about taking back Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK) then it needs to withdraw the illegal petition filed by Jawaharlal Nehru in the UNSC in 1947. He further said that the withdrawal of the petition will make the Line of Control (LoC) illegal after which Indian security forces can cross over to reclaim PoK.

Recently, Swamy had advised the Union government on Twitter asking it to block ships bound for Karachi port if Pakistan closes its air space for Indian aircraft.

Swamy issued this statement after reports started coming from Pakistan that it was considering closing its air space for traffic from India.

After India carried out pre-emptive airstrikes in Pakistan’s Balakot early this year, Islamabad closed its airspace for Indian traffic from February 26. It was fully reopened on July 16 and till that time nearly 84,000 flights had been affected.
