Firepower for IAF: Israeli SPICE bombs used in Balakot airstrikes arrive in India; more lethal Mark-84 on way

Mirage-2000 fighter aircraft | Photo Credit: PTI

Key Highlights Three batches of the SPICE-2000 bombs have arrived in India An advanced version of these SPICE bombs are also slated to be delivered in the next few weeks Further, new communication equipment, and also, radars, including the "Indra" and the "Rohini" are to be delivered shortly

New Delhi: In a major boost for the firepower of the Indian Air Force, three batches of the Israeli SPICE-2000 bombs arrived on Saturday in India. These are the same bombs that the IAF used during the Balakot airstrikes to target the Jaish facility in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province.

In June, the IAF had inked a deal worth around Rs 300 crore for buying more than 100 of these bombs. According to reports, the IAF used penetrator version of these bombs which enters the building from the top and then explode after hitting the bottom.

However, given the bomb's success in the Balakot airstrikes, the IAF had further placed an order for an advanced version of the Spice-2000 bomb, which can completely destroy buildings and bunkers. These are called "Mark 84" warhead or the fragmentation bomb or more famously- the "Bunker Busters".

According to reports, these Mark-84 warheads are likely to arrive in India in the next couple of weeks. As part of the effort to ensure preparedness, more Anti-Radiation Missiles which are useful against radars, are also coming.

Speaking on the condition of anonymity, a top government source in June had told news agency ANI that the contract for procuring over 100 SPICE bombs with Mark 84 warheads was signed with Israel under emergency provisions. He had further said that the deliveries were to be expected within three months.

Under the emergency provisions, the equipment has to be bought and made ready for deployment in three months. Using these, the IAF and the Army have made several deals in the past months. While the IAF has inked Rs 200 crore deal for 'Strum Ataka' anti-tank missile from Russia to enhance the capabilities of Mi-35 attack helicopters, the Army has inked a deal for acquiring Spike anti-tank guided missile with France.

Meanwhile, another boost for the squadron strength of the IAF is coming in the form of 33 new combat aircraft including 21 MiG-29s and 12 Sukhoi 30 MKIs.

The talks to acquire the additional Mig-29s are at an advanced stage and the Air Force hopes to close the deal soon. It was reported in February that IAF has sought emergency shipment of 21 Mig-29s to make up for dwindling squadron strength.
