Kiccha Sudeep-Salman Khan bhai-bhai

As for the Salman Khan starrer Dabangg 3, in which he plays the villain, Sudeep says he is lucky.

Actor Kiccha Sudeep, who owes his Bollywood success to Ram Gopal Varma, reveals that it wasn’t the warmest of welcomes in the industry.

“You can’t say I got an open reception; the scenario that time was very different. The Hindi and South industries weren’t too connected. But I found a footing since the time I worked with director Ram Gopal Varma. Ramu called me and gave me work. I had come to take the remake rights of the film Sarkar, and I met him at a function held in Hyderabad. I will never forget the recognition I gained working with him. Coming from a humble place like Bangalore and working with the icon Amitabh Bachchan was a huge opportunity for me,” he reveals.

As for the Salman Khan starrer Dabangg 3, in which he plays the villain, Sudeep says he is lucky. “Salman is like an elder brother to me. I am lucky to be in the good books of everyone involved in the film. It feels good that they have given me all the facilities I need in Dabangg 3.” The actor is all set to go to Pune soon to shoot parts of the film.

As for the film, the actor says audiences should expect something different. “It’s going to be something different and interesting for people to watch. Back then, there were a lot of cultural differences, but now everything has come on one platter. Consumers’ minds are opening up, and they want to watch films regardless of skin colour or accent. They come into the theatres just wanting to enjoy,” he explains.

Meanwhile, Sudeep and his wife Priya have been gearing up to attend the trailer launch of his next Telegu film Sye Raa as well as promote his next Kannada film Pailwan. Both films are releasing in Hindi and other South Indian languages as well. “My wife Priya, who is residing here in Mumbai with me, is accompanying me. Having both work and family together feels good. Actually, my stay for all these launches has coincided with the week-long Dabangg 3 shoot in Pune, and Priya wanted to accompany me for all of it. So now, here we are, living under one roof,” he smiles.
