ISI-Backed Terror Group Planning Attacks In NCR, Intelligence Bureau Warns Delhi Police

highlights Al-umar-Mujahideen (AuM) might carry out the attacks outside Kashmir valley.

AuM is being headed by Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar alias Mushtaq Latram.

The Pakistan-based terror outfit was behind the terror strike in Anantnag.

New Delhi:

The Intelligence Bureau (IB) has warned Delhi Police against possible terror attacks in the National Capital Region (NCR) which is being planned by terror outfits backed by Pakistan’s spy agency Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI).

According to reports, Al-umar-Mujahideen (AuM) might carry out the attacks outside Kashmir valley following the Modi-government’s decision of scrapping of Article 370 of Indian Constitution which gives special status to Jammu & Kashmir.

"With Jaish-e-Mohammedd and Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) exposed at international platforms, Al-umar-Mujahideen (AuM) is the new poster boy of ISI (Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence) and is capable of carrying major terror strikes outside the Valley,” IB reportedly said in its top-secret reports.

Pakistan-based terror outfit, AuM is being headed by Mushtaq Ahmed Zargar alias Mushtaq Latram. The Pakistan-based terror outfit was behind the terror strike in Anantnag, near Srinagar on June 12 last, killing five CRPF jawans. Outfit’s present headquarters is based in Muzaffarabad area of PoK where it runs a terror camp under the supervision of ISI officials.

"Zargar has recruited Kashmiri cadres from Jammu and Kashmir as well from Pakistan Occupied Kashmir (PoK). Post revocation of Article 370, the ISI's intention is to use Zargar's cadres to carry out terror strikes in and out of Jammu and Kashmir," the IB report was quoted as saying by IANS.

According to the report, the IB has briefed Delhi Police officers on it and suggested strict anti-terror measures in the NCR (with the help of respective state police) to counter the ISI plot.

Intensive vigil on cyber cafes, old car dealers, SIM card dealers, chemical shops, besides carrying out other secret drills are some of the measures being taken by the city police.

The report reveals that ISI can plot terror attacks through fidayeens, either as a human bomb or a driver of explosive laden vehicle (VB-IED). Similarly terrorists can lob grenades in crowded areas or plant IEDs. For a major strike, to capture world attention, the terrorists can plant IEDs as well as resort to indiscriminate firing in high-security zones, in key cities in India located outside the Valley.

After India's decision on Kashmir, Pakistan is leaving no stones unturned to internationlise the issue by raising it on global fronts multiple times. They even took the Kashmir issue to the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) with the help of China, but failed miserably after the council refused to issue any statement and suggested bilateral route to resolve the issue.

Sources in Delhi police said top cops are monitoring the security upgrade and extra vigil particularly in areas vulnerable to such strikes.

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
