LankaWeb – Governance and Psychology – 11.1 Concealed Risk of Social & Economic Disintegration of Tamils

Governance and Psychology – 11.1 Concealed Risk of Social & Economic Disintegration of Tamils

Kanthar Balanathan DipEE(UK), GradCert-Rel Eng(Monash), DipBus&Adm-Finance(Massey), CEng. MIEE

SriLanka History

It is not professed to go through history. Please read all my articles in www.nrnmind.blogspot.com. Whatever, in short, Tamils came 1700 years after the Sinhalese, with Magha who was not a Tamil. Ref;(i) https://www.britannica.com/biography/Vijaya-king-of-Sri-Lanka. (ii) https://www.britannica.com/place/Sri-Lanka/History#ref388477

It is requested that all Tamils read this article and digest to understand what is said here whether Tamils demand is justifiable from the perspective of social & economic justice and NOT get worked up reading the myths and truths of the SriLankan history. Federal System for a small island like SriLanka will drive the ethnic communities to a high risk of social and economic disintegration and generate a rebirth of terrorism on another 30-year horizon. An example is South Sudan and other mushroom banana republics that is driving locals to take boats to European countries.

Jaffna

The Kings of Jaffna were so hot-headed, impulsive in nature that they only believed in Brahminism, Vellalar and caste differentials. Some kings were known as Pandarams, who was not a high caste, but second in the hierarchy with the inborn skill to kill people. Ref; https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Jaffna_monarchs.

They did not show interest in development, integrated farming. They wanted isolated jobs and live in pockets. Unlike the North, the South was rich and knowledgeable. Agriculture was integrated with the kings showing interest in building tanks, channels etc. The Jaffna kings were fed from South India. Even now Tamils go to Tamil Nadu to get degrees / higher degrees in Tamil, religion etc. This route made the guys lazy and not show any interest in development. Most of the Nallur settlers are not Tamils but Aryans, Parthians etc. To generalize, Tamils were lazy but avidity for power and comfortable living.

Since the North is a composition of missed races from South India, the kings wanted to separate them via a method which gave them the path to form the caste structure. Even today the man with power has the say. The people with power were elevated to the higher caste and others were ordered to do menial work. The different racial status added to this concept. The root cause is the majority of the people in the north were non-Vellalar/ Pandarams. These Vellalar hence were a minority race.

The British, whatever they do, had a philosophy to engage effective and efficient people to work. To the Tamil elite, caste is more important than their skill. This made the Tamil elites to suck into the British and go for higher education to the UK.

SJVC was a foreigner. Naganathan was born and bred in Tamil Nadu. They rushed into SriLanka to embrace power before the independence.

North was like a Jungle until the Portuguese arrived in 1905 and the British. After the British arrived the lower caste people received some support for studies, jobs, and respectable living. However, in the bush areas, they were oppressed by the Pandarams. The social condition and the society were not of human, but woeful & pathetic like that of Jungle animals with five senses.

SriLanka government on independence gave all the help for all citizens with no differentiation of race, which gave most Tamils to go for higher studies. Even then getting into good schools by the lower cast youngsters was impossible.

The elites calculating shrewd strategy was to consolidate all by the conception of Federalism and Tamil Eelam. The poor illiterate Lower caste Tamils were fooled and confused by this outset, and they could not understand the danger and the plot behind this scheme. All the imbecilic fools from day 1 after independence since the day of propagation by SJV Chelvanayagam passionately and vigorously supported this model. People in Jaffna are finding it difficult to relieve themselves from this model of Federalism with lack of understanding behind the plot of caste-oriented discrimination and oppression. Until today the fanatics want to retain the name FEDERAL PARTY”.

In 2013, CV Wigneswaran, Mavai Senathirajah, and Sambanthar & Co discovered that all the elite’s future will be wrecked and fragmented if they let the non-elites get all the benefits from the SriLankan government. Supporting the Federal Party by all can only be done through intoxication and intimidation, which if they have the Police and Land power.

From 1948 the FP studied and concluded that unless power is transferred to them, the lower caste Tamils will be elevated and may displace the Tamil elites. It is SriLanka who looked after the lower caste Tamils and today most of them were able to study and get decent jobs, while some concentrated on farming, fishing, and cottage industry. JR Jayawardhane and Rajiv Gandhi failed in 1987 by amendment to Provincials Councils without comprehending the danger they are faced with respect to India and SriLanka. This is like people having a chicken brain. Chicken brain lacks most of the psychological characteristics we recognize in other intelligent animals and considered to possess a low level of intelligence compared with other animals. Where and why they failed is they did not have the vision to foresee the danger they are faced with on a 25-year horizon.

It is now considered that the LTTE local and oversea teams are a talented set of bunches to have formulated a strategy to propagate their vision through a pertinent mission. Maybe the planning strategy of Anton Balasingham. Tamil Diaspora has understood that it is them who can deliver either Federalism or Tamil Eelam. Tamils are all over the continents of Europe, America, and Russia. Every country they are influencing the local governments to help them by propagating lies of discrimination and oppression.

What will happen if Police and Land power is transferred to the Provinces?

Tamils; they consider that Vellalar means; landowners, all others and Shudras (workers). This is the reason they want Land power” so that they can manipulate settlements based on caste and continue to hold that profound prestige monarchy concept. This will result in Sinhalese people settlement or buying land in the North.

Police Power; Police means power. Power can make people listen and support the government. Political enemies can be castrated with the help of police by whirling false charges, which is what happens with the GOSL now.

THEREFORE, POLICE AND LAND POWER IS IMPORTANT TO THE TAMIL ELITES TO ACHIEVE TAMIL EELAM TARGET ON A 20 YEAR HORIZON. POLICE PERSONNEL MAY BE USED TO GIVE BIRTH TO ANOTHER TERRORIST FRONT IN THE NAME OF FREEDOM FIGHTERS. CASTE SEGREGATION CAN BE ACHIEVED VIA LAND POWER. TAMIL EELAM TARGET IS DEFINITELY ACHIEVABLE WITH POLICE AND LAND POWER WITHIN A SHORT TIME. TAMIL NADU WILL EXTEND THEIR MORAL AND PHYSICAL SUPPORT TO THE BANDITS.

Caste Differential

For example, since the NPC was created and assumed power; Who held the Chief Minister position? Are there any lower caste people in the NPC secretariat as government employees? Other than Sivajilingham, is there any other non-elites in the Council? Do we think that there are no non-elites who are not fit to be in politics? Even the local NGOs; which areas are they concentrating on helping the poor? It is all to do with the elite caste orphans who are handicapped, depressed, displaced. Even the NGOs holding the portfolio with elite caste members want to help their caste orphans. Whatever it is, it is the caste differential that crawls in to show sympathy and affection. An elite caste local NGO will turn a blind eye to the lower caste orphans.

Political parties were based on caste difference.

Terrorist fronts were based on caste front.

In the LTTE structure; Most of the elites were placed to do admin and boss work and the poor lower caste Karawa were placed in the battlefront. Most deaths occurred within the Karawa people. Catholic Karawa boys and girls were sent to the war front and made suicide squadrons.

TNA constitutes of mostly from elite caste.

Please visit the following web and study the number of terrorist fronts based on caste.

https://sangam.org/taraki/articles/2006/05-05_LTTE_30th.php?uid=1720

To be concluded in 11.2
