Interpol Secy Gen calls on Shah, assures support in fighting terror

New Delhi, Aug 31 (UNI) Calling on Union Home Minister Amit Shah here on Saturday, the Interpol Secretary General Jürgen Stock assured him best support of the agency in combating terror. He also appreciated India’s commitment and cooperation to stamp out terrorism.

Mr Stock also conveyed that the three focus areas of Interpol are counter terrorism, organised emerging crime and cyber crime.

During the meeting, the Home Minister proposed hosting of Interpol General Assembly in New Delhi in the year 2022, as part of celebrations of the 75th Anniversary of Indian Independence.

He also expressed India’s willingness to be an Interpol ‘Regional Hub’ Global Academy by extending assistance as well as infrastructural support.

Mr Shah emphasised the zero tolerance approach of Prime Minister Narendra Modi to Drug Trafficking, International Terrorism, Dirty Money and Money Laundering.

Underlining the urgent need for a long term strategic action plan in fighting these menaces not just in Asian region but across the world, he called upon Interpol to accord top most priority in fighting these menaces.

Mentioning about the recent amendments in Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA), the Home Minister told Mr Stock that over the years, Indian Intelligence and Investigation agencies have acquired rich and varied experience in their decades old fight against terrorism and Interpol should actively collaborate with Indian Law Enforcement Agencies to make best use of this expertise.

However, he expressed concern about the delay in publication of Red Notices and an urgent need for proactive pre-publication consultation for ensuring expeditious publication of Red Notices.'Such cooperation enables India to more intensely pursue high profile fugitive economic offenders and terrorists,' Mr Shah added.

The Interpol Chief appraised the Home Minister about the databases of his organisation that house 100 million records, secure global data communication channel (I-24/7) and other tools through which it is assisting Law Enforcement Agencies across the world.

UNI AKS RP2104
