Cop threatens to shoot self in audio clip, DIG marks probe

Ludhiana: An inquiry has been ordered into the purported conversation between SP (investigations) Khanna and two junior police personnel in which the former is allegedly asking them to let go his acquaintance carrying gold as they had “valid documents” for the same. In the audio clip circulated in the media, one of the subordinates is heard threatening to shoot himself after an argument with the SP. Taking a serious note of the clip, deputy inspector general (Ludhiana range) Ranbir Singh Khatra has ordered a probe into the matter.

Khatra said Khanna SSP Gursharandeep Singh has been asked to probe the matter. He said the inquiry would be time bound and necessary action would be taken if any wrongdoing is found on anyone’s part.

In over three-minute long clip, the official is heard first talking to one ASI and asking him to let go the person with gold as they are his acquaintance. The officer is also heard telling his subordinate that when the person had taken his name why they didn’t let them go to which the later replied that the persons in car didn’t give his reference.

The junior police personnel then hands over the phone to another personnel with whom there is some argument over setting up of a checkpost. The officer is then heard asking the personnel as to why he did not share the information about recovery of gold, to which the latter responds that the information was given through a proper channel. The argument ensues and the police personnel is heard issuing threat that he would shoot himself and leave a suicide note in his pocket, after which the call is disconnected.

Responding to the allegations, SP (investigation) Jasvir Singh said he did not say anything objectionable and was seeking information about the recovered gold. He, however, added that recording and making such conversation viral could be seen as an activity against the department.

Khanna SSP Gursharandeep Singh said the audio clip is an old one and the persons who were carrying gold in the vehicle were let off after they showed the documents.

Police sources said about two months ago, Khanna police had recovered gold worth around Rs 7.5 crore from a checkpost. They added that the 22.3kg gold was found in the white coloured vehicle.



Facebook Twitter Linkedin EMail
