Ganesh festival: Police want mandals to install 5,000 CCTV cameras

Ganpati festival

Ganesh Mandals

Gauri Ganpatis

Quick Reaction Team

Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad

State Reserve Police Force team

Mumbai police teams in plain clothes will keep an eye out for eve-teasers during the 10-day, beginning tomorrow. To avoid any untoward incident during the festival, the police said all thein the city have been asked to install CCTV cameras. These will be in addition to the 5,000 cameras installed by the city police.There are around 8,000 public mandals in the city, with over 1.25 lakh household Ganpatis and around 12,000. Promising safety across the city with 40,000 cops with battalions of State Reserve Police Force,, Civil Defence and NCC students, Mumbai Police spokesperson Pranaya Ashok said there will be special bandobast for Lalbaugcha Raja, who is visited by over 15 lakh devotees every day during the festival. Around ten deputy commissioners of police, four combat vans, one, four assistant commissioners of police and 20 inspectors, along with 400 male constables and 100 women constables will be posted around Lalbaugcha Raja, Ashok told Mirror.For its part, the traffic department has shut around 50 roads, converted another 56 to oneways, and prohibited parking on 99 others. Roads in South Mumbai, like Nathalal Parekh Marg (from Badhwar Park to Indu Clinic) will be closed for traffic. Ashok said police teams will be deputed across the city, especially on JSS Road, CP Tank Road, Vitthalbhai Patel Marg, Dr BA Road, Dr SS Rao Road, Dattaram Lad Marg, Sane Guruji Marg, Dr E Borges Road, Chinchpokli Bridge, Dr Annie Besant Marg, Ranade Marg, Hemu Kalani Marg in Chembur, Linking Road, SV Road, MG Road and Juhu Tara Road.Mumbai has around 130 immersion points for large Ganpatis. Ashok said the police will have help centers at every immersion point with facilities for public announcement. Loudspeakers will be allowed till midnight on September 3, 6, 7 and 12, the days of immersion. The police have also requested help from local fishermen and the Coast Guard to avoid drowning incidents.
