House of Cards - The IL&FS story

Infrastructure Leasing and Financial Services

Finance Minister Nirmala Sitharaman

Raj Thackeray

Dadar highrise

Kohinoor Square

Kohinoor CTNL

MNS chief Raj Thackeray appears before ED, cops detain party workers 1 6 Raj Thackeray appears before ED Maharashtra Navnirman Sena (MNS) chief Raj Thackeray arrived at the Enforcement Directorate's office in south Mumbai, on Thursday at around 11:30 am. The ED had summoned him in connection with a probe into the IL&FS case. Earlier, workers of his party had called for a bandh in Thane to protest against the summons but they called it off after Thackeray appealed to them to maintain peace and harmony in the city. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/BCCL Thackeray with his mother Before leaving for the ED office, Thackeray was spotted at his residence Krishna Kunj in Dadar’s Shivaji Park area. Photo by Satish Malavade/BCCL Thackeray’s family accompany him Raj Thackeray was accompanied by his wife Sharmila Thackeray, son Amit Thackeray and daughter-in-law Mitali on his trip to the ED’s office. However, Thackeray entered the office alone and his family members camped at a nearby hotel. Former Aam Aadmi Party member and social activist Anjali Damania hit out at Thackeray and alleged that he took his family members along with him in order to gain sympathy from the people. Photos by Satish Malavade/BCCL Bala Nandgaonkar by Raj’s side MNS leader Bala Nandgaonkar was also spotted alongside Thackeray at his residence. Photo by Satish Malavade/BCCL Security beefed up The Mumbai Police imposed Section 144 in areas under Dadar, Marine Drive, MRA Marg and Azad Maidan police stations as a precautionary measure. Cops were also deployed outside the ED’s office and roads leading to it were barricaded. Photo: PTI MNS leaders detained Hours before Thackeray reached the office, the police launched a crackdown on key party functionaries to prevent them from creating any ruckus. MNS Spokesperson Sandip Deshpande and MNS Thane chief Avinash Jadhav were detained. Strongly protesting his detention, Deshpande termed it as "high-handed action" by the police. Shivaji Park police also asked leader Yashwant Killedar to not come out of his house in Dadar and deployed men outside his residence. Photo by Deepak Turbhekar/BCCL

Unmesh Joshi was summoned by the ED in a matter relating to realty company Kohinoor CTNL, that was funded by an IL&FS subsidiary

Former IL&FS chairman Ravi Parthasarthy (centre) allegedly used his contacts in the political and bureaucratic circles to get contracts for the company

A year after it went bankrupt with a Rs 91,000-crore debt, Mirror takes a look at the spectacular collapse of IL&FS and what’s next for the company.There’s a reason the(IL&FS) crisis is likened to the downfall of Lehman Brothers. In September 2008, when the American financial services firm filed for bankruptcy, it had billions in debt. Last September, it was revealed that IL&FS, too, was struggling with a debt of Rs 91,000 crore. Both asset-rich companies, when they went down, sent shockwaves through their economies. And both looked to their government for a bailout: The US government instituted the Troubled Asset Relief Program in 2008, and last week,announced a Rs 70,000 cash infusion to soothe a compromised and smarting public sector banking industry, as part of an effort to revive the economy.With the Enforcement Directorate recently summoning MNS chiefand Unmesh Joshi, son of former chief minister and senior Shiv Sena leader Manohar Joshi, for questioning in a money-laundering case related to IL&FS, the scam has moved from the confines of India Inc, into the larger public sphere.Thackeray was grilled for almost eight hours over his alleged involvement with Kohinoor CTNL, a real estate company promoted by Joshi, which has constructed the. The ED is probing alleged irregularities in loans and equity investment, worth over Rs 860 crore, made by IL&FS’ financial subsidiary, IFIN, in— in which Thackeray’s firm, Matoshree Realtors, had a stake in the company but sold it in 2008. Now everyone’s wondering: who else is on ED’s hit-list?“The story of IL&FS is one of massive corruption, bad corporate practises, crony capitalism and collusion between various agencies and stakeholders,” says Shriram Subramanian, MD of the corporate governance advisory, InGovern. “It took short-term loans to finance infra projects, which typically have a long gestation period, so it would never have been able to pay lenders back. This created what is called an ‘assetliability’ mismatch. But since IL&FS was not a listed company — and therefore not accountable to anyone — it was never called out on this.”In August and September 2018, a series of defaults by IL&FS and its subsidiaries, revealed that the company had the huge debt hanging over its head, but only Rs 1,800 crore in its bank. Credit agencies immediately downgraded their ratings; IL&FS had always been a ‘Triple-A’, which inspired investor confidence. But after the downgrade, it was basically worthless. The crisis hit — and instantly paralysed — the debt and equity markets in the country in a domino effect, with widespread selling off of NBFC and related-sector stocks. That a behemoth like IL&FS had gone belly-up, shocked and panicked the markets. The government was forced to step in and, via the National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT), sacked the IL&Fs board and reconstituted a new one under banker Uday Kotak.Probes by the Serious Fraud Investigation Office showed the rot ran deep. Even in 2017, while many of IL&FS’ subsidiaries had gone into the red, the parent company, at least on paper, appeared to be in reasonable health. Clearly, there had been considerable manipulation, which made auditors, ratings agencies and even certain stakeholders, look the other way, while things went downhill. Today, one year later, the debt is still pending. And on Friday, IL&FS said that it has received 19 bids for some of its road assets that it will sell to pay off the debt.The company, which was set up by the government in 1987 to finance infrastructure projects across the country, had turned into an infrastructure company itself, helming a wide range of projects — from roads, highways and tunnels, to water and solar power undertakings. “Many of these projects were ‘gold-plated’, which means IL&FS inflated costs and often borrowed in excess of what was required,” says Subramanian. When word of this practise got out following the bankruptcy, the government apparently cancelled the Zoji La tunnel that had been contracted to IL&FS in Leh, and has now sought fresh bids. Bangalore Metro, portions of which were commissioned to IL&FS, is said to have done the same.“IL&FS may have been a professionally-run company, but it acted like a promoter-driven one. The top management imagined themselves to be business maharajas,” says an analyst. Former chairman Ravi Parthasarathy, who headed IL&FS for almost three decades before quitting in July (just before the scam broke), was a suave, pipe-smoking uber-networker. He knew everyone who was anyone in the business, bureaucratic and political circles, and over the years, successfully leveraged them for contracts. The Citibank alum, who has headed IL&FS from the start, was a man who was seen everywhere, but rarely heard from. Analysts say Parthasarthy facilitated the personal aggrandisement of many top managers at IL&FS. “There was a time when there was a fully-equipped bar in the lobby of the IL&FS headquarters at BKC, with the choicest of single malts, vodkas and wines from France, Italy and California, on offer. IL&FS was perhaps the only corporate house in India to sport such a facility right at its entrance,” says the analyst.The CEO also richly rewarded himself and his deputies. “Parthasarathy and his cronies used to travel to London and New York by First Class, and often chartered private planes for onward journeys that were paid for either by the parent company, or by one of the many companies IL&FS had dealings with.” In October 2018, when the Serious Fraud Investigation Office began its probe, its chargesheet stated that the Chennaibased Siva Group had arranged the ‘hospitality’ for Parthasarathy, vicechairman Hari Sankaran, joint director AK Saha and other senior leaders on innumerable occasions. “This included foreign junkets with helicopter rides, stays at fancy hotels and high-end furnishings for apartments they owned in places like Brussels and London,” the analyst adds. In fact, in 2017-18, Parthasarthy gave himself a 144 per cent hike in salary, and also facilitated hikes of 61 per cent and 20 per cent respectively (from FY 2015 to 2018), for Sankaran and Saha, says Dr Arunima Haldar, professor (Finance) at the SP Jain Institute of Management and Research. (Sankaran, Saha and IL&FS financial services CEO Ramesh Bawa were later arrested by investigating agencies).“All this at a time when the company was already dangerously in the red,” says Dr Haldar. “More importantly, it was a case of expropriation of public money, because IL&FS’ biggest institutional investors were LIC, SBI and public sector banks.” Indeed, of the Rs 91,000 crore, about Rs 57,000 crore was taxpayers’ money, which had been borrowed public sector entities.What does it take for such a spectacular bankruptcy to go unnoticed? The Board had not flagged it off, nor had the various auditors, which routinely go through the company’s balance sheet. IL&FS’ institutional investors — LIC and SBI (holding 25.34 per cent and 6.42 per cent stake respectively); ORIX of Japan (the largest shareholder, with 23.54 per cent); Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, HDFC and Central Bank of India, hadn’t questioned it either. “When public money is involved, how can you not demand accountability?” asks Dr Haldar.The structure of the company may have made it hard to spot. IL&FS has over 300 subsidiaries, associates and ‘special purpose vehicles’ (SPVs) — entities created to manage specific projects — which last for years as the project drags on. In June, Saha and IL&FS Transporation Network head K Ramachand were arrested by the ED for allegedly moving funds around between two SPVs. Experts feel that this complicated pattern of holdings — and the sheer number of subsidiaries — made it hard to keep track of all the bottomlines. “As per norms for NBFCs, lending to group subsidiary calls for appropriate amount to be deducted from its netowned funds that constitutes equity and reserves to give a true and fair view, which were not made in IL&FS case. Moreover, the onus to detect such anomalies lies with the auditor and rating agencies, and such compliances were not adhered to,” says Makarand Joshi, partner with MMJC & Associates LLP, a compliance firm.According to columnist and writer Tamal Bandyopadhyay, “the whole issue is one of governance, and the top management ran the company like they were its promoters. But when the ship started sinking, they left it like professionals.” It’s also possible that Parthasarathy and his C-suite used their clout to evade scrutiny. Last year, nine key managers were questioned by investigating agencies for “for misstating profits to hide the group’s poor financial health to obtain higher credit ratings, raise debts and reap personal benefits by way of high managerial remuneration”, a statement said. “Parthasarthy and his loyalists had racked up a personal net worth of well over Rs 1,000 crore each,” adds Subramanian.With ED questioning Thackeray and Joshi, the probe has taken a slightly different turn. IL&FS’ financial arm IFIN allegedly gave two loans to Kohinoor CTNL in 2009 — Rs 100 crore in May and Rs 135 crore in September, at rates of 2.5 per cent and 1.77 per cent respectively, above its borrowing rate, unlike the standard three per cent that is charged. “IFIN, as per the findings of a special audit done on IL&FS’s high-value transactions done during 2013-2018, had, at times, even lent at a rate that was up to nine per cent higher than the borrowing rate. We are probing why this exception was made for Kohinoor,” says an ED source. The two loans under the ED scanner were allegedly extended only a few months after IL&FS had surrendered its stake in kohinoor ctnl, worth Rs 225 crore, for Rs 90 crore, thereby suffering a loss of rs 135 crore.The ED is also probing 18 other instances of loan grants by IFIN, which were worth a total of Rs 1,922 crore, to firms that had been categorised as financially ‘stressed’ by risk-assessment teams between 2013 and 2018. The loans were given, despite being redflagged by risk assessment, and the fact that IFIN itself was experiencing liquidity problems, sources said. “Each of the loan transactions will be scrutinised to understand the circumstances and establish whether these were genuine goof-ups or part of any criminal conspiracy or negligence. Or if there was some quid pro quo involved,” another ED source said.“ED is probing, in particular, default on loan payments by IL&FS’ borrowers and the diversion of the loans in such cases. There appears to have been a lack of accountability, apathy and collusion in certain aspects of its lending function.” According to Makarand Joshi, with the SFIO chargesheet indicating favouritism towards the Siva group, there has been a cascading effect on other defaulting debt exposures, especially with real estate entities like Kohinoor, Parsvnath, Unitech and others.” This, he says, has opened up a whole new can of worms.
