India’s newest acquisition AH-64E (I): The Apache which took over the mighty Soviet tank fleet during Cold War

IAF's Apache Guardian AH-64E (I) | Source: IAF

Key Highlights The Apache first saw action during the Gulf War and almost half of them were deployed in Saudi Arabia by the US following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990 The first four of the 22 helicopters were handed over to the air force by US aerospace major Boeing on July 27 The Apache can carry out precision attacks at standoff ranges apart from operating in hostile airspace

New Delhi: India is all set to induct the first batch of US-made Apache Guardian AH-64E (I) attack helicopters and they will be inducted into the Indian Air Force (IAF) at Pathankot in Punjab on September 3 by Defence Minister Rajnath Singh.

For anyone from the 90s, who loved playing video games, highly-popular shoot 'em up Desert Strike: Return to the Gulf reminds one of Boeing’s AH-64 Apache helicopters. TheUS-made Apache Guardian AH-64E (I) attack helicopter, which has now attained legendary status, has also been featured in several Hollywood movies.

The Apache first saw action during the Gulf War and almost half of them were deployed in Saudi Arabia by the United States following Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. Their performance in the war was remarkable with the loss of only one chopper.

The IAF had signed a multi-billion dollar contract with the US government and Boeing Ltd in September 2015. The order was for a total of 22 Apache helicopters, the first four of which were handed over to the air force by the US aerospace major Boeing on July 27.

Apache’s incredible service record

One of the most advanced multi-role combat helicopters in the world, Boeing has delivered more than 2,200 Apaches worldwide, which is a testimony in itself to the success of this chopper.

The induction of AH-64E (I) is a significant step towards the modernisation of Indian Air Force’s helicopter fleet and the overall chopper has been customised to suit IAF’s future requirements. It will also be having the capability of flying over mountainous terrain.

The Apache can carry out precision attacks at standoff ranges apart from operating in hostile airspace with threats from the ground, the IAF has said.

What makes this chopper a lethal acquisition for the IAF is its ability to transmit and receive pictures from the battlefield which can then be used to launch coordinated attacks from the weapon systems through data networking.

Produced by Boeing Defence, the Apache is preferred for use in close air support operations.

After the first delivery in 1984 to the US, the Apache has seen extensive service in almost all the major conflicts the US faced since the 1990 Gulf War.

Apache AH-64: Specifications

The AH-64 Apache attack helicopter can accommodate two crewmembers — the pilot and gunner. While the pilot sits at the front the gunner sits behind him. While controlling the weapons systems, the gunner can coordinate with other support units on the ground and in the air while the pilot can track, engage and shoot targets via a helmet-mounted tracking system.

In terms of armaments, it features an M230 Chain Gun located just below the nose and can also fire air-to-surface missiles and rockets.

Powered by two General Electric T700-GE-701 turboshafts similar to the ones used in the UH-60 Black Hawk, the Apache has a top speed of 293 km/h with a maximum cruise speed of 265 km/h.

With the delivery of Apache Guardian, India, now, is the 15th country in the world to fly the attack helicopter with remaining 14 Apache Guardians expected to be delivered by 2020. India has also ordered hundreds of Stinger air-to-air missiles as well as Hellfire missiles for the helicopters.
