No country for minorities: In Imran Khan's 'Naya Pakistan', another Sikh girl abducted and converted

Pakistan PM Imran Khan | Photo Credit: AP

Key Highlights Sikhs and other minorities in Pakistan are finding it extremely difficult to practice their faith Sikh community in Nankana Sahib has announced a ban on the entry of Muslims in gurdwaras including Gurdwara Janamasthan The incident has increased tensions between the Sikh and Muslim communities in Pakistan

Islamabad: In yet another case of forced conversion in Pakistan, a 19-year-old Sikh girl has been abducted and converted to Islam in Pakistan. An FIR has been registered against six people.

While on one hand, Pakistan talks about safeguarding the rights of the minorities, on the other hand, innocent underage girls are abducted and forced to marry a Muslim.

Pakistan PM Imran Khan lectures India on Kashmir and human rights but is silent on this issue of minorities facing forced conversions in Pakistan. US-based fringe group Sikhs for Justice (SFJ) talks about Khalistan and Sikh rights but has not issued a single statement on the forceful conversion of Sikh girls in Pakistan.

This is the second case of forced conversion after another Sikh girl, who is the daughter of a 'granthi' (priest) of Gurudwara Tambu Sahib, and was forced to accept Islam at gunpoint. The family has not been allowed to meet the girl and Pakistani authorities are forcing the family to withdraw their FIR.

The incident has increased tensions between the Sikh and Muslim communities while the family of the abducted girl has said that they will self-immolate in-front of Punjab Governor's house if the girl is not released.

To assuage the angry Sikhs, the government in Pakistan's Punjab province has constituted a high-level committee to negotiate with the minority community over the abduction and forced conversion of a teenage girl from the community and has sent Punjab Law Minister Raja Basharat which has been sent to Nanakana Sahib to calm the situation.

Jagjit Kaur's family has alleged that she was converted to Islam at gunpoint and forced to marry a Muslim boy who has ties with 2008 Mumbai attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed's proscribed terror outfit Jama'at-ud-Da'wah (JuD).

An FIR has been registered against six people in the case.

Cops have also arrested one of the suspects named Arsalan, a friend of the prime accused Mohammad Hassan who married the Sikh girl and on court’s order, the girl has been sent to a shelter home in Lahore.

As per local media reports, the Sikh community in Nankana Sahib has announced a ban on the entry of Muslims in gurdwaras including Gurdwara Janamasthan, the birthplace of Guru Nanak Dev, until the girl is reunited with her family and action is taken against the culprits.

While Pakistan is making grand preparations for Kartarpur Corridor, Sikhs and other minorities in Pakistan are finding it extremely difficult to practice their faith.
