India excludes 1.9 million people including Muslims from Assam citizen list

SHAFAQNA- Nearly 2 million people— many of them Muslims- have been excluded from a list of citizens in India’s northeast Assam.

The list, known as the National Register of Citizens (NRC), was published on Saturday .

A total of 31.1 million people were included in the final list, leaving out 1.9 million people, according to a statement from the Assam government.

Critics fear it will lead to the deportation of Assam’s hundreds of thousands of Bengali-speaking Muslims, who make up a third of the state’s population, with claims to legal residency.

There are also concerns that the register will be used to justify religious discrimination against Muslims in the state.

Human rights activists fear those excluded from the list may face possible jail time or deportation, and they may be deprived of their right to vote, among other civil rights, Aljazeera told.

Since 2015, all residents of Assam have had to prove with documentary evidence that they or their relatives were living in the state before March 24, 1971 — the day preceding the Bangladesh Liberation War — to be considered eligible for Indian citizenship.

Assam is the only state in India to have a citizenship register. It was created in 1951 to distinguish Indian citizens from undocumented migrants from what used to be East Pakistan, a territory that became Bangladesh in 1971. An updated NRC was ordered by the Supreme Court in 2013 and the process began in 2015.

Many of Assam’s minority Bengali community have lived in India for decades, after crossing the border into the state during the bloody Bangladesh independence struggle in 1971. Many others can trace their history back even further, arriving before the independence of India in 1947.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi said in January: “I am here to assure everyone that no Indian citizen will be left out of the NRC. This is my assurance.”

A draft list released last year left the names of an estimated 4 million people off the register.

“Nobody really knows what’s going to happen after the list is published,” said Shreya Munoth, a New Delhi-based lawyer who works on human and women’s rights issues. Munoth said applicants can go to the Supreme Court with their appeals, but if that fails “the consequences of that have not been discussed at all.”

“Does that mean deportation? Indefinite incarceration? What does it entail? That has never been discussed because it would attract too much international scrutiny which the state does not want,” she said. , CNN reported.

Those excluded have 120 days to prove their citizenship at hundreds of regional quasi-judicial bodies known as foreigner’s tribunals. Up to 200 more tribunals are expected to be set up on top of the existing 100.

The tribunals must decide on the cases within six months.

Observers are worried that the final list, will result in families being split up, incarcerated, and even being chased out to Bangladesh — a country many have never set foot in. And rights groups are worried that the list could set off a chain of events similar to the Rohingya crisis in Myanmar in 2017, when roughly 750,000 members of the Muslim Rohingya minority were persecuted, stripped of their Burmese citizenship and forced to flee to Bangladesh, according to Time.
