139 Terrorists Neutralised By Indian Army In J-K This Year

highlights 222 ceasefire violations have been recorded along the LoC after August 5.

As many as 27 terrorists were killed in the month of May, 2019.

The highest number of ceasefire violations was recorded in the month of July.

New Delhi:

As many as 139 terrorists have been killed by the Indian Army in Jammu and Kashmir in the first eight months of this year, defence sources said on Saturday. However, during these operations, the 26 security forces personnel, belonging to various ranks, have also been martyred.

According to IANS report, these terrorists were killed in skirmishes along the Line of Control (LoC) as well as in various encounters with the Army in different parts of the state. The figures provided by the Army were recorded from the period January 1 till August 29.

"Five militants have been neutralized by the Army in the month of August while one was captured during an operation. The month of May was the most eventful as far as military engagements against terrorists is concerned," a senior Army official was quoted as saying in by the report.

The report states that maximum number of terrorist-initiated incidents (22) in Jammu and Kashmir were reported in the month of May and security forces managed to neutralise as many as 27 terrorists in this period- the highest number for any calendar month in the year 2019.

The total number of terrorist-initiated incidents across Jammu and Kashmir from January to August have been recorded at 87. In the last week of July, Indian Army used Bofors howitzers to foil an attack by Pakistan Army's BAT on forward post in Keran sector of Jammu and Kashmir. More than four BAT commandoes had been gunned down by while they were attempting to infiltrate the LoC.

"Pakistan has upped its ante to infiltrate militants into India this year. There have been renewed attempts at infiltration by Pakistan particularly after abrogation of Article 370. This is evident from the number of ceasefire violations by Pakistan this year," said the official.

Also, as many as 222 ceasefire violations have been recorded along the LoC after August 5 when the Parliament withdrew special category status to Jammu and Kashmir by reading down Article 370 of the Constitution and further divided the state into two union territories.

The highest number of ceasefire violations (296) was recorded in the month of July this calendar year. It was also the month during which, incidentally, Pakistani prime minister Imran Khan and US President Donald Trump had met in Washington DC.

The total number of ceasefire violations by Pakistan in the first eight months of this year alone have touched 1,889. In the entire calendar year in 2018, there had been 1,629 ceasefire violations by Pakistan along the LoC.

With Agency Inputs

For all the Latest India News, Download News Nation Android and iOS Mobile Apps.
