‘Abrogation of Article 370 has opened the road for development in J&K,’ says Amit Shah

New Delhi | Jagran News Desk: Union Home Minister Amit Shah on Sunday defended the government’s decision to revoke Article 370, which gives special rights to Jammu and Kashmir, and said that it has opened the road for developments in the Valley.

“With this decision of removal of Article370, the road for development has opened in Jammu and Kashmir. The last nail in the coffin of terrorism has been put, the task of integrating Jammu and Kashmir with India has been done. Everyone is with the government on this decision but some people are opposing it,” said Shah who is on a visit to Silvassa in Dadra and Nagar Haveli.

Also Read | Detained J&K leaders Omar Abdullah, Mehbooba Mufti finally allowed to meet family: Report

Shah also slammed Congress leader Rahul Gandhi and said he should be ashamed as his criticism of the abrogation of Article 370 is being cited by Pakistan.

“Congress has opposed abrogation of Article 370. Even today, the statement Rahul Gandhi gives is being praised in Pakistan. His statement has been included in Pakistan's petition at the UN. Congress should be ashamed that their statements are being used against India,” said Shah in an attack on Gandhi.

The Congress was left red-faced after Pakistan quoted Rahul Gandhi in its letter to the United Nations on the issue of the prevailing situation in Jammu and Kashmir. In the letter, Pakistan had mentioned that even Rahul Gandhi was saying the people were being killed in Jammu and Kashmir.

Also Read | Pakistan ready for 'conditional dialogue' with India, says Shah Mahmood Qureshi

Responding to this Rahul issued a clarification on it and blamed Pakistan for creating violence in Kashmir.

“I disagree with this government. on many issues. But, let me make this absolutely clear: Kashmir is India’s internal issue and there is no room for Pakistan or any other foreign country to interfere in it,” tweeted Rahul.

“There is violence in Jammu and Kashmir. There is violence because it is instigated and supported by Pakistan which is known to be the prime supporter of terrorism across the world,” he added.

Posted By: Aalok Sensharma
