Gujarat: Police constable slits throat of his 3 sons after fight with wife

Constable was posted at the SP's office in Bhavnagar | Photo Credit: Representative Image

Key Highlights Accused identified as Constable Sukhdev Siyal Siyal surrendered before the police after murdering his sons Constable was posted at the SP's office in Bhavnagar

Bhavnagar: In a shocking incident, a policeman killed three of his sons following a dispute with his wife. The incident occurred on Sunday in Bhavnagar district of Gujarat.

The accused has been identified as Constable Sukhdev Siyal. He slit the throats of his three kids at his government quarters in Bhavnagar.

According to a report in PTI, the accused has surrendered before the police. Superintendent of Police (SP) Jaipal Singh Rathore said, "The accused had a fight with his wife after which he slit the throats of his three sons -- Khushal (9), Uddhav (5) and Manmeet (3).

The accused constable was posted at the SP's office in the district.

In a similar incident in March this year, a 45-year-old assistant sub-inspector of the Punjab Police allegedly shot dead his wife after killing himself with his service revolver. The incident happened in Jalandhar district following a domestic dispute in the.

The sub-inspector was identified as ASI Gurbaksh Singh. The Station House Officer, Ramamandi Dakoha, Sewa Singh had said that as per the preliminary investigation there were differences between the couple over settling abroad.

The wife of the police officer was identified as 41-year-old Vandana who wanted her husband to settle in Canada along with their family, but Singh was against the decision. The couple is survived by their two children aged 19 and 17.

In another incident, a Delhi policeman allegedly shot dead a couple at a temple in Ghaziabad district of Uttar Pradesh, apparently because the woman had ended her relationship with the policeman. The incident occurred in March this year. Dinesh, an assistant sub-inspector with the Delhi Traffic Police, and his accomplice Pintoo were arrested, days after the bodies of Preeti, 32, and her fiance Surendra, 26, were found in a temple in 'Sai Upwan' near the Hindan river. An FIR was lodged by the girl's father Pramod Kumar.

The police zeroed in on Dinesh as the main suspect after reports of Preeti and him being in a relationship surfaced. Later, the police examined CCTV footage and conducted electronic surveillance in the area. A week ago, Preeti had changed her mobile number and stopped meeting Dinesh, a PTI report quoted an official as saying.
